The Portugues Asia: OR, THE HISTORY OF THE Discovery and Conquest OF INDIA BY
THE PORTUGUES; CONTAINING All their Discoveries from the Coast of Africa, to
the farthest Parts of China and Iapan; all their Battles by Sea and Land,
Sieges and other Memorable Actions; a Description of those Countries, and many
Particulars of the Religion, Government and Customs of the Natives, etc.

In Three Tomes.

Written in Spanish by Manuel de Faria y Sousa, of the Order of Christ.

Translated into English by Cap. John Stevens.

Tome the First.

LONDON, Printed for C. Brom, at the Sign of the Gun, at the West End of St.
Paul's. 1695.

TO HER Most Sacred Majesty CATHARINE, Queen Dowager OF ENGLAND, etc.
Madam,
IT is not the sense of the mighty Favors I stand indebted for, that moves me
to presume to dedicate this Work to Your Majesty; for Debts to Sovereigns are
above all acknowledgement. Nor is it Protection I sue for under so August a
Patroness; the Subject carries its own Security and Defense along with it,
though perhaps the Style be not proportionable to such Glorious Matter. It is
Justice that leads me to lay this most Wonderful History at Your Majesty's
Royal Feet. To whom could I tender the unparalled Undertaking of Your Kingly
Progenitors, but to You their inimitable Offspring? To whom could I offer up
the Most Heroic Achievements of Your Forefathers Subjects, but to You the
Most Glorious of their Line? In fine, to whom could I yield up the more than
Human Conquests of Your Country, but to You the Most Admired of the Portugues
Race? These are the Motives, these the Inducements that prevail with me, not
only to hope, but even to assure my self of a Gracious Acceptance of this,
though seemingly Presumptuous, yet in reality most submissive Tender of my
First Undertaking in this Nature. A Subject so Glorious does not need the
Ornament of Retorick. The Sacred History, than which none can be more
surprising or wonderful, is delivered to us in the plainest of Language. Great
Actions are still Great, though expressed in the meanest Words: But mean
Undertakings require a florid Style to gain them something of Reputation. The
Subject is worthy Your Majesty's acceptance, though the Style may not appear
equal; that will make amends for this, and the lowness of the later will be hid
by the grandeur of the former. I would not confess a Guilt by begging Pardon; a
wilful Offense against so much Goodness would deserve no Mercy. God himself
whose Great Attribute is Mercy, does not hear our Cries, if we persist to
provoke his Wrath. Why then should I expect Forgiveness, if I knowingly
Transgressed? Yet being sensible of my own demerit, I must cast my self upon
Your Majesty's unlimited Goodness, thence to expect my Doom; which cannot fail
being happy, having its dependence on so Horoick and Truly Royal a Spirit. In
fine, Madam, I will neither be my own Accuser, nor pretend to justify or make
good my Cause; the decision of it I can leave to no more Tender or Favorable
Judge than Your Majesty, in whom my Failings may be assured to find Compassion,
from whom my Zeal may hope to reap Honor, and to whom all Increase of Glory
and Happiness is wished by,

Madam, Your Majesty's most dutiful and most obedient Subject and Servant, John
Stevens.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
I Will not tire the Reader with a long Harangue in commendation of this
History; it will, I hope, speak for it self. Nor will I go about to vindicate
the Translation; let it take its Chance and stand or fall by the Vote of the
Ingenious. My design is first, to inform the Reader, that I have reduced this
Work to a much lesser compass than the Original Spanish; yet at the same time
nothing of the Historical Part is diminished, perhaps some of the Ornament. I
have not omitted the most inconsiderable passage, nor lessned any material
circumstances; all that has been cut off is only long Speeches, for the most
part never thought of by those they are fathered upon, only added by the Author
to set out his Work; tedious Lists of Officers and Gentlemen's Names who were
present at any Considerable Actions, which Names are of no use to us; those of
the Commanders in Chief, and such as particularly signalized themselves, being
sufficient for History; and some flights and reflections of the Author, which
only serve to make up the bulk of a Volume. And thus much said may suffice as
to the bringing this Book into so small a compass. The next thing I have to
offer is, that though many of the Actions this History contains may at first
sight appear incredible, yet we must not therefore immediately conclude it to
be fabulous; for upon second thoughts we shall not only find those very things
possible but very practicable. It is hard to persuade such small numbers of
Portugueses could defeat such vast Armies, and take Towns fortified and
strongly Garrisoned; but all wonder must cease when we consider the Portuguses
were Europeans, always much superior to the Asiaticks for valor; that those
were men enured to continual Wars with the Moors, and consequently well trained
and disciplined, these raw and confused Multitudes; that though the Indians had
Fire Arms, they were far inferior to the Portugueses in the handling of them;
that the Portugueses overcame as much by Policyas by Strength, sowing divisions
among those Princes, and dividing their own Subjects from them; that the
Natives weary of their subjection to the Moors, were inclinable to change
Masters, and try whether the Portugues Yoke were lighter than that till then
they had born. To be short, every judicious Person will find reasons enough to
convince the possibility of those Actions, since it is allowed Alexander the
the Great and many others overcame innumerable Multitudes with handfuls of Men.
Besides, though the Author sets down the number of Portugueses, I believe he
does not always mention the Natives that assisted them, because the Glory of
the Conquest belonged to the former. Yet if there be any so hard of belief as
still to doubt, I will not be so positive or zealous in the behalf of my
Author, as not to grant he may have strained some points, thereby to add to the
Honor of his Nation; not so but in the main the Action is real as is
demonstrable by their Possessions in Asia, but so as the Circumstances might be
somewhat heightened, the more to raise the admiration of those Undertakings. Let
none upon this score pretend to condemn him as Romantic; for should we examine
our own, and all the Histories of the World, we should not find one which
hatred or affection has not added to or diminished. I will not be tedious, and
shall therefore say no more in relation to the Author; and but one word as to
the Translation, which is, that if the Judicious or Learned shall find any
fault with it, by any such I shall be glad to be informed of its defects, that
they may be amended in the second and third Tomes which will soon follow this,
that is my first in this Nature, after several years spent in far different
Employments.

THE PREFACE.
THE narrow Bounds of the Kingdom of Portugal could now no longer contain the
greatness of its Natives Hearts. Therefore carried on by a Glorious Boldness,
they so far extended those limits, that they infinitely exceeded the measure of
the first Matter. Great undertakings are subject to the dangers of great
disappointments. But Fortune, whose only care it then seemed to be, not to
expose them to the Eyes of the World with any disgrace, having measured their
strength and capacity, found it necessary to increase their Dominions by adding
to them at one time great part of Mauritania; then a greater of Ethiopia; at
another time that vast extent of Asia, and lastly that not inconsiderable
Region of America, called Brazil or New Lusitania. Having conquered the West,
they passed to the South, and having subdued this they went on to the East. All
they attempted with their Arms, they perfected with their Fortune, who seemed
to be listed in their Service. Such was their Conduct in the most difficult
Enterprises, whereby they enlarged themselves so as to have room to breath the
greatness of their Spirits, that what in other Nations by reason of its
immoderate greatness would have threatened ruin, in this seems a most admirable
Ornament of most various matter wherewith the Temple of the Christian Fame is
illustrated and adorned. At length these Great Spirits spread themselves over
all the Land and Seas, and to make the whole circumference of them their
bounds, overrunning that vast distance that is from the Coasts of Spain to
those of China, and filling both the Hemispheres with the Glory of their Name.
They followed the Sun from his Setting to his Rising, and equalled his Course.
The Exploits performed in this wonderful Course in the space of 233 Years are
the subject of this Second Work, which I now take in Hand, pursuant to what I
promised in the first of our Europe; the general applause that has met with,
calls on me for the performance of this. Here will be seen Actions, by how much
the more admirable, the less Credible, and indeed more truly real, than in
appearance probable. For though true, it does not seem likely, that sometimes
100 Men indifferently Armed, should encounter great Armies much better
provided. These are the Actions which may justly entitle the Performers to be
styled Heroes; a Name since given gratis to whom it was not due. For a great
number to overcome a lesser, though equal in Arms and Courage, is rather the
effect of Number than Valor, and seems to carry more of Cowardice than Virtue.
Hence it is that those who are so overcome, though they lose the Field do not
lose the Glory; but if duly weighed, merit the greater Esteem, for that they
dared encounter at so great a disadvantage. We may therefore with reason
affirm, that the Portugueses on these occasions merited admiration, either as
Conquerors or Conquered; as Conquerors, for having overcome; as Conquered, for
having dared much. This had been before their Fate in Europe against the Roman
and African Multitudes that overrun all Spain. Let us see whether the same
Fortune attends them in Asia. Without doubt it does. Soon shall we see
innumerable Multitudes flying from their small Numbers, and looking back with
amazement to see who pursues and destroys them. We shall see them drove by the
terror of the Looks, not the Number of those who press them. We shall see
Battles fought with such resolution, that neither the Victor shall rejoice, nor
the Overcome lament. In Sieges, such barbarous obstinacy, that despairing of
Victory, they will burn themselves with all they hold precious, that their
Enemies may reap no other Fruit of their Conquest but the dismal spectacles of
the Flames. We shall see not only Valor, but Rage and Despair overcome. The
toil of coming at the Enemies will be greater sometimes than that of defeating
them. We may be sometimes overpowered by Number, not overcome by Valor; for
though upon some occasions Fortune forsook all, yet few were forsaken of their
Courage. These Generous Spirits looked upon the hardships of the Campaign, no
otherwise than if they had been the conveniences of their Houses, and upon
doubtful Battles, as sure Victories. With the first they began to raise, I will
not say Forts, but Draughts of those they afterward erected. To these, and
chiefly to the Capitol of Goa shall be brought by force, or come through fear,
many Princes in Chains, and many by their Ambassadors. Nothing will appear in
that Noble City but Triumphs. Nothing less in the Triumphs, than the People and
Riches of all Asia; these in the Hands of the Conquerors, and those in the
Chains of their Captivity. But there is nothing in them we look upon with more
delight, than the Elephants loaded with Castles, and the Carriages with Guns,
which not long before were our Terror; these for their Greatness and Number,
those for their Number and Rarity. Religion, which we value above all, and
which was the chief ground of all these Undertakings, will be more exalted,
trampling upon Idolatry, for at each stroke of the Evangelical Sword fell a
thousand Idols of the Pagods; and a thousand Pagods in the Theaters of Battle.
It will appear that many Families held themselves in greater account for being
overcome by us, and in consequence thereof the Conquerors and Conquered joined
and united in the Sacred Bonds of frequent Marriages; and many overcoming those
by whom they had before been defeated, under our Ensigns; and that the
Monuments of our Victories are not now Broken-arms and Warlike Engines hanging
on Trees upon Mountains, but Cities, Islands and Kingdoms, first groaning under
our Feet, and then worshipping our Government. Some warned with the Example of
others Ruins, shall prevent their own, by accepting of our Proposals. For in
the beginning we invited all to embrace our Amity; esteeming it a greater
happiness to gain voluntary Friends, than to make forced Slaves. By express
Order from our Kings, we endeavored to heap great Riches, extend our
Dominions, and acquire Glory rather with Politic Reason, than Odious Violence.
We modestly courted those, we could invade forcibly. In fine, we shall see the
Portugues Arms not content with the West, piercing through and spreading over
the East; sailing unknown Seas, trampling Provinces and incredible
Difficulties; discovering sundry Nations, planting among them firm Fortresses
and other Buildings: And lastly, giving Honor to their Country, and Light to
the World with their Discoveries and Conquests in so remote Regions. Thus
taming various and obstinate Spirits and Humors, with Persuasions when they
prevailed, and with Valor when they refused to hearken to us, we shall of
sundry Elements compose a Body worthy those Noble Spirits that sailed thither,
worthy the Zeal of those Kings who sent, and the Magnificence of the Captains
that Commanded them. All the Actions shall be such as deserve not only to be
equalized with the most Heroic of Antiquity, but even that these should be
forgot to celebrate those, were not Mankind subject to give more applause to
what he hears, than what he sees. What is past is celebrated with Memory and
Admiration, the present is treated with Oblivion and Envy. We are persuaded the
one lessens, the other instructs us; and even in the present there are Examples
as proper for our instructions, as the most famous in decayed Antiquity. This
Book without doubt will prove it. I will answer it. As the Power of Man is by
so much the weaker, by how much God declares himself more offended at them; so
it is the more powerful, by how much he is the more propitious. His Omnipotence
seemed now to be pleased with these his Conquerors, (for indeed they were his)
so that indeed it will always be doubtful which was most to be admired, whether
their Conquering so much, being so few, or the daring Attempt, it being no
greater a Number. Such was the success wherewith they gained every thing, it
looked as if the World had chose them to be the Universal Lords. Nor did they
seem to be sent as Soldiers, with Arms to wage War, but as Leg^rs, with power
to give Laws. Who then will admire that the whole circumference of the Earth
should submit to so small a number of such Heroic Spirits, they being rather
led by Auspicious Fates, than Valiant Generals? Never had they fallen from this
height, had not their own oversights and distractions been the cause of their
fall, that Divine Goodness that had so much exalted being no longer able to
bear with them. This will oblige me to relate some things, which it were more
proper for the Honor of my Country should be buried in oblivion than
published; but the sincerity of History requires nakedness, and gives as good
an Example to Posterity, condemning vicious and base Actions, as commending the
Just and Virtuous. Fortune having been lavishly liberal to us, we had no less
than reason to suspect she could not be very durable. For Human Affairs having
no fixed point, it is plain that those who arrive at the height, must again fall
as low as the various accidents of volubility it self can carry them. As great
as the Exploits, were the Riches obtained by them, and as great as these the
Vices they ushered in. The cause of these great Evils is, that there are Men,
who not content to possess what they only could have wished, would obtain what
even in wishes ought not to be sought after. We shall see some, who coming poor
into the wealthy Indies, left them poor that they might come out most wealthy.
This is grievous, but much more to be lamented it is, that the Example of many
who came from thence without Fortunes when in its splendour, was of no force to
curb others from making vast Estates when groaning under its Calamities. The
beginnings will not be very bulky, for the greatest things never had great
beginnings. All things in their Original are small and almost contemptible. The
greatest Exploit and most glorious Victory had its beginning in the Stable of
Bethlehem.

THE CONTENTS.
TOM. I. PART. I.
CHAP. I. DIscoveries under Prince Henry, from the Year 1412. till the Year
1448. Page 1 CHAP. II. Discoveries under King Alfonso the Fifth, from the Year
1448. to the Year 1471. 19 CHAP. III. Discoveries and Conquests under King John
the Second, from the Year 1481. till the Year 1495. 22 CHAP. IV. Discoveries
under King Emanuel, from the Year 1497, when he sent out Vasco de Gama, till
the Year 1500. 36 CHAP. V. Conquests under King Emanuel, from the Year 1500
till the Year 1502. 53 CHAP. VI. Conquests under King Emanuel, from the Year
1501, to the Year 1503. 63 CHAP. VII. Conquests under King Emanuel, from the
Year 1503, till the Year 1505. 70 CHAP. VIII. Conquests under King Emanuel,
from the Year 1505, and beginning of the Government of Don Francisco de
Almeyda, first Governor and Viceroy of India, till the Year 1509. 82 CHAP. IX.
Conquests under King Emanuel in the Year 1506, and Government of the Viceroy
Don Francisco de Almeyda. 93 CHAP. X. A Continuation of the Conquests the same
Year 1506. and the Government of the same Viceroy Don Francisco de Almeyda. 104
TOM. I. PART II.
CHAP. I. COnquests in India under King Emanuel, from the Year 1506, till the
Year 1508, the Viceroy Don Francisco still Governing, and entering upon the
Glorious Exploits of the Great Alfonso de Albuquerque, and the Famous Tristan
de Cuna. 111 CH^P. II. Conquests under ^ng Emanuel, the Year 1508. during the
Government of the Viceroy Don Francisco de Almeyda, and continuing the Exploits
of Alfonso de Albuquerque. 126 CHAP. III. Conquests under King Emanuel the Year
1508 and 1509. A continuation of the Government of the Viceroy Don Francisco de
Ameyda, and Exploits of Alfonso de Albuquerque. 139 CHAP. IV. Conquests under
King Emanuel, the Year 1510, Alfonso de Albuquerque now Governing India, who
held it from the Year 1509, till the Year 1515. 154 CHAP. V. A continuation of
the Conquest of the same Year 1510, Albuquerque Governing, and King Emanuel
Reigning. 163 CHAP. VI. A Continuation of the Conquests under King Emanuel, the
Year 1511, and the Government of Alfonso de Albuquerque. 175 CHAP. VII.
Conquests in India under King Emanuel, from the Year 1511, till the Year 1513,
Alfonso de Albuquerque still Governing. 184 CHAP. VIII. A Continuation of the
Conquests of the Year 1513, the Reign of King Emanuel, and Government of
Alfonso de Albuquerque. 190 CHAP. IX. A Continuation of the Conquests, the Year
1513, till the Year 1514, the same King Reigning in Portugal, and the same
Governor Ruling India. 194 CHAP. X. From the Year 1514, till the Year 1515,
concluding with the Government and Life of the Great Alfonso de Albuquerque.
201
TOM. I. PART. III.
CHAP. I. COnquests under King Emanuel, from the Year 1515, to the Year 1518.
Lope Soarez de Albergaria, being Governor. 209 CHAP. II. A Continuation of
what was done in India the same Year 1517, during the Government of the same
Lope Soarez de Albergaria. 217 CHAP. III. From the Year 1518, till the Year
1520, ending the Government of Lope Soarez de Albergaria, and beginning that of
James Lopez de Sequeira, King Emanuel still reigning. 224 CHAP. IV. A
Continuation of the Government of James Lopez de Sequeira, from the Year 1520,
till the Year 1521, and Reign of King Emanuel. 233 CHAP. V. A Continuation of
the Government of James Lopez de Sequeira, the Year 1521, and Reign of King
Emanuel. 241 CHAP. VI. Continues still the Government of James Lopez de
Sequeira, and Reign of King Emanuel. 253 CHAP. VII. The Government of D. Duarte
de Meneses, in the Year 1522, when began the Reign of King John III. 262 CHAP.
VIII. Continues the Government of D. Duarte de Meneses, from the Year 1522,
till the Year 1524. King John then Reigning 272 CHAP. IX. The Government of the
Viceroy D. Vasco de Gama, and of the Governor D. Enrique de Meneses, till the
Year 1524, that of 25, in the Reign of King John the Third. 279 CHAP. X.
Concludes the Government of D. Enrique de Meneses in the Year 1526, King John
the Third Reigning. 289
TOM. I. PART IV.
CHAP. I. THE Government of Lope Vaz de Sampayo, from the Year 1526, to the
Year 1527, and Reign of King John the Third. 296 CHAP. II. Continues the
Government of Lope Vaz de Sampayo, from the Year 1527, till the Year 1529, King
John the Third Reigning. 310 CHAP. III. The Government of Nuno de Cuna, from
the Year 1529, to the Year 1538, in the Reign of King John the Third. 326 CHAP.
IV. Continues the Government of Nuno de Cuna, from the Year 1529, in the Reign
of King John the Third. 336 CHAP. V. Continues the Government of Nuno de Cuna,
and Reign of King John the Third. 361 CHAP. VI. Continues the Government of
Nuno de Cuna, from the Year 1534, in the Reign of King John the Third. 371
CHAP. VII. Continues the Government of Nuno de Cuna, the same Year 1536, in the
Reign of King John the Third. 388 CHAP. VIII. Still Continues the Government of
Nuno de Cuna, from the Year 1537, till the Year 1538, in the Reign of King John
the Third. 402 CHAP. IX. Continues still the Government of Nuno de Cuna, the
same Year 1538, in the Reign of King John the Third. 415 CHAP. X. Which ends
the Government of Nuno de Cuna, this same Year 1538, in the Reign of King John
the Third, and concludes the First Tome. 433
THE Portugues ASIA. TOM. I. PART I.
CHAP. I.
Discoveries under Prince Henry, from the Year 1412. till the Year 1448.

1. LIKE an Impetuous Torrent did the Mahometans spread themselves over the
Lesser Asia, after the Catholic Arms had expelled them our Provinces. The
Christian Princes busied in destroying each other, looked on their Progress,
without attempting to put any stop to the Current; when the Kings of Portugal,
as the first who had shaken off themselves the Burden of those Barbarians, and
the first who passed over to crush them in Africa (obeying the Decrees of
Heaven which required it) undertook to be the first who should stop their
proceedings in Asia.

2. Prince Henry, fifth Son of King John the First, accompanied his Father in
the glorious taking of Ceuta, which was Anno 1415. and had a considerable share
in the honor of this Victory, as well in regard of his Courage as Conduct, it
being doubtful which was most predominant in him, and therefore the more to be
admired, for that at this time he was but in the 21th year of his Age. At his
return from thence, he brought so great an inclination (being already most
skilful in the Mathematics) to discover New Lands and Seas, that he spent
above 40 years in this study, and vast Sums of Money in bringing Masters from
all parts, and Discoverers, and sending Vessels to his Discoveries. Being very
well read in Geography, and having examined many who had traveled much of the
World (chiefly the Moors of Fez and Morocco) he got some information of the
Arabs who border on the Deserts of Africa, and of the Azanagi and Kingdom of
Ialof, near the border of Guinea. That he might more wholly apply himself to
these affairs, he chose for his abode the Town of Ternacabal in the Kingdom of
Algarve, on Cape Sagres, whence the prospect of the Ocean stirred up his Hopes
and Endeavors. Going to Bed one night, with his thoughts fixed on these
Designs; in the morning (as if he had received some heavenly assurance of
success) he with all haste gave Orders for fitting out two Ships, which, and
some other, passed not beyond Cape Bojador, 60 1412.
Leagues beyond Cape Nam, then the Bounds of the Spanish Navigation. This Cape
was 1415.
so called by Gilianes, who first passed it, because it stretches it self out
so far, viz. almost 40 Leagues to the Westward, which in Spanish is called
Bojar, and thence the Cape Bojador. Its running so far Westward was also the
cause that none passed it before; as also that off of it for about 6 Leagues,
runs a strong Current, which breaking upon the Sands, rises high and makes a
great Sea. This terrified all, not considering, that keeping off at Sea they
might turn the Point. The Prince encountering the greatest difficulty, sent John
Gonzales Zarco and Tristan Vaz in a small Ship, with Orders to coast along the
Barbary shore, till they had passed that formidable Cape, discovering all the
Land, which according to the Opinions of Learned Men and Information of Arabs,
was concluded to run on till under the Equinoctial. Before they 1418.
reached the Coast of Africa, they met with such violent Storms, they doubted
not being swallowed by the Waves. The Weather obliged them not to follow their
Orders, and without knowing where they were, fell in with the Island, which
they called Puerto Santo, or Holy Haven, for such it appeared to them after the
Storm. This is a little Island, not far to the Northward of the Madera. The
Inhabitants they found neither well Civilized nor quite Barbarous, but the Soil
very fertile. The Prince joyful with this News and the hopes the Discoverers
gave him, sent them again, and with them Bartholomew Perestrello, with three
Ships, with Seeds to sow, and Cattle to stock the Place. They put in two
Rabbets, which increased in such manner in two years space, that the Corn and
Plants being destroyed by them, it was found more convenient to unpeople, than
inhabit the Island.

3. Perestrello returned home. John Gonzales 1419.
and Tristan Vaz, making another Voyage, discovered afar off something like a
Cloud, and directing their Course to it, found an Island covered with all
manner of Trees, whence they gave it the name Madera, which in Spanish is Wood.
This Island for Extent, pleasant Air and Plenty is the chief in that Western
Ocean. Each Discoverer entered a different part of the Island, and each had a
Grant of that Part from the Prince, with the Title of Captain. Tristan gave his
name to that Point where he landed, and John Gonzales took to himself the Title
of Camara de Lobos, or Den of Wolves, because of a Cave he found at landing,
which seemed to be the habitation of those Beasts. The Prince gave the Island
of Puerto Santo to Perestrello to people, which proved in vain by reason of the
vast multitude of Rabbets. The Discoverers of Madera began to settle their
Plantation, by firing part of that Wood that filled the Island; and the Flame
took such possession, that it burnt seven years continually, and was seen far
off in Smoke and Sparks like Mount Aetna; so that afterward the Island being
plentiful of Grain, the greatest want the Inhabitants suffered was of Wood,
there having been nothing else in it before. There were Churches built, and now
there is a Cathedral. King Duarte, Brother to the Prince, gave him the Island,
and afterward the Spiritualities thereof to the Military Order of Christ.

4. The Prince had spent twelve years endeavoring the discovery of Guinea, and
was now much encouraged by the discovery of these two Islands, though many
condemned his undertakings, objecting, That the Land he looked for, was only
Deserts, like those of Libia; that if any reached those Parts, they would turn
black; that King John, his Father, had invited Strangers to plant in Portugal,
so far from sending out people, of which the Country was in want; that God had
appointed those Countries for the habitation of Wild Beasts, which might appear
by that they were expelled that new Island by the Rabbets. All this time the
Prince's undertakings were not only censured, but almost fruitless, till he
sent Galianez in a Barque, who passed that, till then, Invincible Cape Boxador,
which action was then in the common Opinion looked upon not inferior to the
labors of Hercules.

5. Gilianes returned in his Barque with 1434.
Alonso Gonzales Balday, in a bigger Vessel than the former, and passed 30
Leagues beyond the Cape, where landing, they saw a great track of Men and
Camels. Without any further knowledge they returned home, giving the name of
Angra de Ruyvos to that Bay, (in English, Bay of Gurnets) because they found
there great quantity of that Fish. The next year the Design was continued 1435.
and they passed twelve Leagues farther. Here putting ashore two Men on
Horseback, who going on till the Afternoon, saw nineteen Men with Javelins, who
fled and were pursued, and some wounded, and one of the Portugueses; the first
Blood spilt in those Parts. Baldaya having notice thereof, went ashore, but in
vain, for the Moors fled; in the Cave where the Moors had been were found some
things of inconsiderable value, but esteemed as an Omen of greater advantages.
They run on twelve Leagues farther, where at the Mouth of a River they saw so
many Sea-Wolves, they judged them to be 5000; they killed many, and brought the
Skins, which being a novelty, were then had in esteem. Going farther into the
Land, they found Fishing Nets drying, but no People, and their Provisions being
spent, they were obliged to return to their Prince without any further progress.

6. Antony Gonzales was sent back to the 1440.
place of the Sea-Wolves, with orders to load his Vessel with their Skins. One
night he went up the Country eight Leagues with ten Men, and spying a naked Man
with two Darts in his hand driving a Camel, he came up and took him, the Man
with the fright neither defending himself, nor endeavoring to escape. In his
return he met a company of forty Moors, and one Woman, whom they also took in
their sight without resistance; these were the first taken on that Coast.
Returning aboard they found another Ship was arrived there from Portugal under
Command of Nunno Tristan; with this addition of strength they went ashore
again, and met people at night, and being so close that they lost the use of
their Weapons, clasped each other in Arms, and knew not whom they held, but by
being naked and clothed, and the strangeness of the Language; they killed
three and returned to their Ships with ten Prisoners. This Place they called
Puerto del Cavallero, or the Knights Port, Antony Gonzales being there knighted
by Nunno Tristan. An Arab that was on board understood these Moors; him and the
Woman they put ashore to persuade the Inhabitants to redeem the Prisoners. Next
day appeared about 150, some on Camels, some on Horseback, provoking our Men to
Land, but finding they did not, discharged a Volley of Stones at them and went
off. Antony Gonzales returned to Portugal with some Slaves. Tristan having
first careen'd, coasted on as far as Cabo Blanco, or White Cape, where though
he saw the track of People, meeting none, he returned home.

7. Antony Gonzales returns, carrying with 1442.
him the chief of the Moors he had brought, he promising to give seven Guinea
Slaves for his ransom, but once ashore forgot his promise, yet giving notice in
the Country, others came to redeem the two Young Men that were Prisoners,
giving for them ten Blacks of several Countries, and a considerable quantity of
Gold Dust, which was the first brought from those parts. Therefore a Rivulet
that runs up about six Leagues was called Rio del Oro, or River of Gold. This
and a Shield of Buck-skin and some Ostriches Eggs they brought home, all men
admiring the color of the Slaves. The Gold stirred up covetous desires, and
encouraged 1443.
Nunno Tristan to undertake again the Voyage, and passing farther, discovered
the Island Adeget, one of those of Arguim, and saw twenty Almadies or Boats
passing over from the Continent, four men in each, sitting in such manner that
they rowed with their Legs. Tristan launching his Boat with seven men, chased
them and brought fourteen aboard, and going back for the rest, they had reached
the Island. Hence they went over to another Island, which they called De las
Garcas, or Island of Hauks, because of the vast numbers they saw there, and
took some.

8. The Profit increasing, the desire of it also increased. Some came from
several 1444.
parts to Portugal to admire those Rarities the Natives brought. Lancelot the
Prince's Servant, Galianes who first passed Cape Bojador, Stephen Alonso,
Roderick Alvarez and John Diaz erected a Company in the Town of Lagos, paying
an acknowledgment to the Prince, they asked leave to pursue these discoveries,
and set out with six Caravels, whereof the first was Commander in chief;
arriving at the Island, de las Garzas, Martin Vincent and Giles Vasquez with
each fourteen Soldiers in their Boats, went over to the Island Nar, where
falling upon a Town, they killed many and brought away 155 Prisoners, all
Moors. The Captain Lancelot desiring to do the like, attacked Tider and other
Islands, where he took above forty Prisoners, which he presented to the Prince,
and was well rewarded.

9. Gonzalo de Cintra set out with one Ship, and coming to the Island Arguim,
run up 1445.
a Creek at night, intending to go ashore, but the Tide ebbing he stuck, and in
the morning 200 Moors coming upon him, he was killed with seven of his company.
These were the first Portugueses killed in these Attempts, and from the Captain
that place took name, being called Angra de Goncalo de Cintra, fourteen Leagues
beyond Rio del Oro. Antony Gonzales, James Alonso and Gomez Perez set out in
three Caravels 1446.
bound for that River, with orders to treat of the conversion of these
Barbarians, of Peace and Trade. The Proposals were not received, and they
returned, bringing back one of the People of the Continent who came voluntarily
to see our Country; and one of ours, called John Fernandez remained there with
the same design. Next Nunno Tristan made another Voyage, and brought twenty
Slaves from a neighboring Village, Dinis Fernandez in another Vessel passing
the Mouth of the River Sanaga, which divides the Azanagi from Ialof, took four
Blacks who were fishing in an Almadie or Boat. Sailing forward, he discovered
the famous Cabo Verde, and returned satisfied with this exploit, and having
killed a great many Goats in an Island.

10. Antony Gonzales, Garcia Mendez and James Alonso, though separated by a
Storm, 1447.
met again in the Islands of Arguim: Falling upon a Village they took 25 Moors,
they flying, he that ran best took most, as Laurence Diaz who took seven,
whilst others took but one, and some none. They called this Point, Cabo del
Resoate, or Cape of Ransom, because some Blacks were ransomed there. The joy
was the more for that they found John Fernandez, who was left there the last
Voyage, he was fat and in health, though rough like the Inhabitants. He told
them, that the Country being all plane and open they often lost their way, and
therefore were guided, as at Sea, by the Stars, the Winds, and by Birds. That
the Inhabitants lived miserably, feeding on a certain Grain which the Earth
produces without tilling, on some Herbs, Lizards and Locusts, all scorched in
the Sun, which is predominant, that place lying under the Tropic of Cancer.
That they used much Milk, not only as Meat, but Drink, by reason of the
scarcity of Water; and therefore when they eat any Meat they never kill the
Female, because of the Milk; those near the Sea eat some Fish. When they were
acquainted with our People, and they gave them Corn, they eat it whole. The
Land is Barren being all Sand, bears a few Palm and Wild Fig Trees, they have
no Houses but Tents, their Clothes are Skins, and the better and neater sort
wear Alhaiques, which is not unlike our Crape, and the best, some better sort
of Cloth, but none good; their Employment is the care of Cattle, their
Language and Writings the same with those of the Coasts of Barbary, with only
about as much difference as is between the Castillians and those of Gallicia;
they have no King, and live by Hords or Companies. Returning home with this
Account of John Fernandez, at Cabo Blanco they killed some Moors and took 55.

11. Dinisianez da Gram, Alvaro Gil and Mafaldo de Setubal, with each a
Caravel, landed in the Island Arguim, where they took seven Moors, and by the
help of them forty seven afterward. They ran along the Coast of the Continent
eighty Leagues, and at several times took fifty Slaves, losing seven
Portugueses, whose Boat being left dry by the Ebb in the Island de las Garzas,
they were all killed. Lancelot, who once before had commanded a small Fleet,
sailed from Lagos again toward Arguim as Admiral of fourteen Vessels. At the
same time set out from Madera, Alvaro and Dinis Fernandez and John de Castilla
and others, who all together with the former fourteen, made up twenty seven
Sail: Nine of the fourteen of Lagos came to Arguim, where Dinisianez was, who
persuaded them to destroy the Island in revenge of the seven that had been
killed, but the Moors understanding the danger, fled; so that only twelve were
found, whereof only four could be taken, the rest killed, as also one of our
men. Alvaro de Freytas returned with his three Ships. Lancelot with his sailed
to the Island Tider, landed, and finding no People, returned aboard, where
seeing some Moors from the Shore jearing our men, because they could not find
them, two of our men were so provoked that they leaped into the Water with
their Arms, and swam to shore to the Moors, who ran down to receive them.
Others of our men seeing the danger those two were in, leaped after them, and
on the shore was a sharp skirmish; many of the Moors were killed and sixty
taken. This done Suero da Costa and three more returned home. In a Village at
Cape Blanco they took nine Moors, among them a Woman, who, promising a great
Ransom, deceived Suero, for at the Island Tider the bold Woman who could swim
very well, leaped overboard and gained her liberty by swimming ashore.
Lancelot and others unwilling to return without some Loading, as light as they
came out, designed to sail to Zahara of the Azanagi and Guinea, but after some
small attempts resolved for the Island of Palma. They touched at Gomera and
were received by two Commanders Piste and Brucho in acknowledgment of some
kindness they had received from Prince Henry. They discovered to them the
design, and taking them along landed in Palma, all they got was seventeen
Prisoners, but among them was a very large Morish Woman, who was said to be
Queen of part of that Island. They returned to Gomera, and John de Castilla
dissatisfied with the small Prize, base and ingratefully carried away Captives
about twenty Islanders who were his Friends and had assisted him. Which wrong
the Prince amended by sending them back well clothed.

12. Gomera and Palma are of the number of the Canary Islands. The Canaries
were discovered for King Henry the Third of Spain by John de Betancour a
Frenchman; among them he conquered those called Lancarote, Fuerteventura and
Ferro. In them he left Masiot de Betancour his Nephew who conquered Gomera, and
exchanging them with Prince Henry for some Land in Madera, he went and lived
there. And because the Islands being twelve in number, there remained eight not
conquered, viz. Gran Canaria, Palma, Graciosa Infierno, Alegranca Santa Clara,
Roche and Lobos; the Prince sent a Fleet in which were 2500 Foot and 120
Lances, commanded by Don Fernando de Castro, who landing there, converted many
Infidels. But there being complaints made from Spain to whom that Conquest
appertained it was given over. Afterward King Henry the Fourth of Portugal
gave them to D. Martin de Ataide Count of Atonguia. And lastly, in the Treaty
between Alfonso of Portugal, and Ferdinand of Castile it was agreed they
belonged to Castile. The Inhabitants of these Islands were governed by a
certain number of Persons, they varied in their Worship, in Fight they used no
Weapons but Sticks and Stones, their Clothing upwards was Skins, the lower
part a covering made of Palm-leaves of diverse Colors; they took off their
Beard with sharp Stones, their Governors had the Maidenheads of all Women that
married, they feasted their Guests with them at their visits, the Children
sucked Goats, their common food Wheat and Barley, Milk, Herbs, Mice, Lizards
and Snakes.

13. Lancelot being homeward bound, discovered the River Ovedec, which he
called Sanaga, because a Black of that name was released there. It was then
believed to be one of the Branches of Nile, because they were informed it ran
far to the Eastward. Stephen Alonso in a small Boat went up the River, and took
two Blacks with considerable opposition made by their Father. Roderick Anez and
Dinis Diaz were here separated from the rest by a great Storm and arrived in
Portugal. Lancelot steering toward Cape Verde, went ashore upon an Island,
where he found nothing but Goats, and these words cut on the Bark of a Tree,
TALENT DE BIEN FAIR. This was Prince Henric's Motto, whereby he expressed his
designs, and gave Lancelot to understand the Portugueses had been there before;
- it was Alvaro Fernandez of Madera that was there. He stood along the Shore,
whilst Gomez Perez going up close in a Boat, threw a Looking-Glass and a Sheet
of Paper with a Crucifix on it upon the Land to some Blacks that were there,
who breaking and tearing them to pieces, poured in a Volley of Arrows, for
which our men designed to be revenged next day; but a great Storm which
dispersed all our Ships prevented the execution. Laurence Diaz got home first,
Gomez Perez put in at Rio del Oro, whence he brought one Slave, and many Skins
of Sea-Wolves, and found the people there somewhat tractable. Alvaro Freytas
and Vincent Diaz in the Island Tider took fifty nine Slaves. Diniz Fernandez
and Palacano at Cape St. Ann, took nine more; twelve of our men swimming ashore
for them. With these and such like small successes, they all returned home,
having lost one small Vessel, but the men saved.

14. Nunno Tristan run 60 Leagues beyond Cape Verde, and anchoring at the Mouth
of Rio Grande, or the Great River, he run up in his Boat, and soon discovered
eighty Blacks in thirteen Almadies or Boats, who surrounded him, and poured in
their poisoned Arrows in such manner that they killed most of his men before
they could get aboard, where he also died, none escaping without a Wound. Only
four men were left in the Ship brought her home, after two months wandering in
the Sea without knowing which way to steer. Alvaro Fernandez prosecuted the
same Voyage, and went 40 Leagues beyond Tristan, killing with his own hand the
Lord of a Village whereby was put to flight a multitude that oppressed him. At
their return to the Ship they took two Women. He came to the River Tabite,
where he was wounded, being attacked by the Blacks in five Almadies. Gilianes
and others set out with ten Caravels, carrying with them the Prisoners unjustly
seized by John de Castilla. They put in at Cape Verde, where they were beaten
and lost five men. They throve better among the Moors, and therefore returned
to Arguim where they made forty eight Slaves, and at their return in Palma, two
Women which had cost them dear, had not James Gonzales with a Cross-bow killed
seven of the Islanders, and among them their King, who lead them with a Palm in
his hand in token of his Sovereignty, and our Victory.

15. Gomez Perez deceived by some Moors of Rio del Oro, who had promised a
great ransom, was revenged by bringing away eighty Slaves the same year. Next
year set out James Giles Homen with orders from 1448.
the Prince to settle a Trade with the Moors of Meca or Messa, 12 Leagues
beyond Cape Gue, where he got fifty Blacks for eighteen he carried with him,
and returned being drove away by a storm. Here was left behind against his will
John Fernandez, he who voluntarily staid before among the Azanagi. They brought
a Lion, which was then much looked upon in Lisbon. The Fame of these Attempts
flew so, that it brought from the King of Denmarks Court a Gentleman called
Ballarte; a person capable and desirous of great Designs. He was well
recommended by his King to the Prince, who at his Suit sent him with Ferdinand
Alonso who then went Ambassador to the King of Cape Verde. They were ready to
receive him in hostile manner, but were appealed when two Blacks, who were the
Interpreters, told them our design, the chief points whereof were the showing
them the Light of the Gospel, and teaching them a more civilized way of living.
Their Farim or Governor, being informed hereof came down to the Shore, and
sent an account of our arrival to his King. Mean while they began peaceably to
trade. Some Elephants Teeth stirred up a desire in Ballarte to see one alive. A
Black offered to show him one, and treacherously slew him and some of our men,
which obliged us not to stay the coming of that King.

16. King Duarte reigned but a short time. His Son Alonso the Fifth succeeded
him, being but six years of Age; at seventeen he took upon him the Government;
Prince Peter, Brother of the Discoverer, having ruled for him those eleven
years. Because from this time the Discoveries were managed upon the King's
account; we will conclude with a description of this great Undertaker. Prince
Henry, the Beginner and Author of the South and Eastern discoveries, was of a
proportionable bigness, his Limbs gross and strong, his Skin white and fair,
his Hair strong and rough, his Countenance was terrible to such as were not
acquainted; for in the greatest heats he was more governed by Meekness than
Passion; he had a grave and graceful Gate; he was very circumspect and cautious
in his words; plain in his Person, as far as suitable with his Quality; patient
in Troubles, valiant in Danger, skilled in Learning, the best Mathematician of
his Age, very liberal, extreme zealous for Religion; he was not known to be
given to any Vice; he never married, nor was it heard that he sinned against
Continency; his Memory and Prudence were equal to his Authority: He died at
Sagres in the year 1463. and the 67th of his Age; he lies with his Father in
the most noble Church of Batalla.

CHAP. II.
Discoveries under King Alfonso the Fifth, from the Year 1448. to the Year 1471.

1. KING Alfonso the Fifth took upon him the Government, and prosecuted as his
Uncle had done, those discoveries. The first step he gave was a grant 1448.
to the Prince, that none without his leave should pass Cape Bojador; and also
the fifth and tenth of all things brought from thence. The differences between
the King and his Uncle Prince Peter, were a great stop to these affairs. Leave
was granted the Prince to plant the Islands Azores, discovered 1449.
by Gonzalo Vello; they are seven in number, their Names St. Michael, St. Mary,
Jesus or Tercera, Graciosa, Pico, Fayall, Flores and Cuervo, which lies
farthest to the Westward, as does the first to the Eastward. They differ not
much in Latitude, being about the same with Lisbon. The reason why they were so
called, is from a great number of Hauks, which they call Azores, that were seen
there when first discovered. In the last was found the Statue of a Man on
Horseback, with a Cloak, but no Hat, his Left Hand on the Horses Main, the
Right pointing to the West; there were some Letters carved on the lower Rock,
but not understood. It seemed to point out America. Because in the Islands of
Arg^m there was trading for Gold and Blacks; the King ordered a Fort to be
built in one of the Islands, and called by the same name; it was erected by
Suero Mendez, who was Commander of it. At this time also were discovered the
Islands of Cape Verde by Antony Nole a Genoese, sent by that Republic to
Portugal. He also discovered the Island 1460.
called Mayo, or May, because he arrived there the first day of that Month.
Next day he saw the other two, which he named St. Philip and St. Jacob. The
names of those not yet mentioned, are Fuego, Brava, Boavista Sal, St. Nicholas,
St. Lucy, St. Vincent, St. Antony, in all ten. They are commonly called of Cape
Verde, for that they lie 100 Leagues to the Westward of it. Pedro de Cintra,
and Suero de Costa went as far as Sierra Leona.

2. So great were the hopes of the Guinea Trade, and the returns stirred up
covetousness, so that the King farmed this Trade to Fernando Gomez for 500
Ducats, a small sum in comparison of their present greatness. He was obliged to
continue the discoveries 1471.
500 Leagues farther in five years. He fortunately discovered the Trade of Oro
de la Mina, or the Gold of the Mine by John de Santaren and Peter de Escobar.
They went as far as Cape St. Catharine 37 Leagues beyond Cape Lope Gonzales in
two Degrees and half of South Latitude. For this discovery was added to him the
Surname of Mina, and he was made Noble. Ferdinand Po discovered the Island
which he called Hermosa, or Beautiful, which name it changed for the
Discoverers. The last discovery during the reign of King Alonso, was that of
Cape St. Catharine, so called because discovered on her day. There were other
discoveries before this, as the Coast from whence was brought the first
Cochinilla, which the Italians (knowing the Value, but not the Name) call Grana
del Paraiso, or Scarlet of Paradise, they had it from the Moors of this part of
Guinea, who crossing the Country Mandinga and Deserts of Libia, brought it to
the Port Mundibarca in the Mediterranean. Now were found the Islands St.
Thomas, Anno Bueno, and Principe, all neglected, the King being wholly bent upon
Africa. How little these places were minded, may appear by this, that a Spanish
Fleet commanded by Garcia de Loaysa, Knight of Malta, arriving at the Maluco
Islands the year 1525. he found there were Portugueses there before it was
known in Portugal, and found in two degrees of South Latitude, the Island of
St. Matthew not inhabited, but with footsteps of the Portugues, several
Fruit Trees, and tame Cattle, carved on the Bark of a Tree, that our men had
been there 87 years before, and the French Motto of Prince Henry, Talent de
bien Fair. It was the custom of those Sailers to leave this Motto in all
places where they landed.

CHAP. III.
Discoveries and Conquests under King John the Second, from the Tear 1481. till
the Tear 1495.

1. KING John the Second, who succeeded his Father Alonso, considering the
Riches of the Countries discovered increased his Revenue, and finding the
Natives inclined to receive the Faith, ordered a Fort to be raised in that part
where was the Trade of Gold called Mina. To this end he fitted out twelve
Vessels laden with all Materials for the Work, from the Stones of the
Foundation to the Tiles, with Provisions for 600 Men, 500 of them Soldiers,
the rest Workmen. The Commander was James de Azambuja. At his arrival he
confirmed the Peace some time before concluded with that People. He acquainted
the Prince of it (called Camaransa) with his arrival and intention. He landed
to take possession, and set up the Portugal Colors upon a Tree; at the Foot of
it he made an Altar, and caused to be celebrated the first Mass that had been
in those parts. He prepared himself to receive the Black King, who came
attended with many of his Subjects naked, save that from their Waste downward,
hung Monkies Skins or covering made of Palm-leaves: All armed, some with
Shields and Javelins, others Bows and Arrows; some had Skins for Helmets, in
such manner they appeared more ridiculous than terrible. The Prince's Legs and
Arms were covered with plates of Gold; on his Neck a Chain, with many small
Bells, and Tags to his Beard. Before him went a great number of Instruments,
more noisie than harmonious; all that were known were Tabors, Horns and Bells.
He met the Captain with a grave and pleasing Countenance; the Captain received
him with Gravity and Magnificence. The Black took his hand in token of Peace,
the same the chief Men about him: After the Ceremonies (different in the
Nations, but all vain and impertinent) Azambuja laid open his Kings design,
which was first to instruct him in the Christian Faith, and conceal our
Covetousness, asking leave to build a House for our Men to live in, which was
to be a Fort to offend them upon occasion. I do not pretend to persuade the
World, our only design was to Preach, on condition it be believed it was not
only to Trade.

2. The Portuges Captain was heard with wonderful attention, and the proposal
of Religion admitted, but that of the House or Fort rejected; for they are
Barbarians in our conceit, but not for their own Interests. Azambuja pressed,
and Caramansa yielded and retired. The Workmen began to break a Rock for the
Work, and the Blacks who adored it (taking that as an Affront) drove them away.
Azambuja took the wisest course, and running to them, pacified them with many
Gifts, not of value, but such as pleased. The Fort finished was called St.
George, for the particular devotion the King had to that Saint. As it increased
it gained the name and privilege of a City. Azambuja remained there with 60
men, and sent back the Fleet laden with Gold. He held that Government three
years, he gave it up with Honor (a thing rare among the Portugueses) and was
honorably rewarded.

3. The King began to take the Title of Lord of Guinea. The Custom till now had
been to set up Wooden Crosses in all the new Discoveries; the King ordered for
the future to carry them of Stone with the Kings and Captains Names, the Time
when, by whom, and by whose Order erected. The first of 1484.
these was James Came, who passing Cape Catharine (the last of King Alonso's
discoveries) came to the River Congo in the Kingdom of the same Name, by the
Inhabitants called Zagre. He went up the River, and saw on both sides Blacks,
but were not understood by those he carried with him. By signs he found they
had a King, and that he resided far off. He sent him Presents (the most
powerful Arguments of Ambassadors) but finding the Men that carried them stay
long, he set sail, bringing some Blacks home with him. King John was well
pleased to see them, and dispatched again the same James Came, sending back with
him the Blacks joyful, with many Presents he gave them, but above all with the
recovery of their Liberty. The first part of his Instructions was the
Conversion of those Infidels. At his arrival he restored those Blacks to their
Prince, and received the Men he left behind, with mutual admiration. Following
on the Discovery, he ran 20 Leagues farther, setting up the Cross he called St.
Augustine, in 13 degrees of South Latitude, and another in 22. At his return to
Congo, having seen the King, he found in him such an affection to our People
and Religion, that he sent with him to Portugal some Sons of his Chief Men,
desiring they should be baptized, and being made Christians returned, and with
them Ministers to instruct them in the Faith. They were baptized at Beja, where
the King and Queen were Godfather and Godmother to the chief of them, and he
called D. John, his Heathen Name being Zacuta; the same was done by the
Nobility, with the others, whose Names and Sirnames they took. Betwixt the Fort
of St. George and Congo, is the Kingdom of Benin. The King hereof covetous of
the advantages he saw others reap by our Trade, feigned he would be converted,
and desired Priests for his instruction; but they being sent, the design was
discovered, and so the effect ceased, but not the covetousness; for those
Heathens bought Christened Slaves, and we with the same avarice sold them, after
being baptized, knowing their new Masters would again make them fall into
Idolatry. This lasted till the Religious King, John the Third, forbid it,
though to his great loss; but God who gives an hundred for one, to requite him
ordered that another Gold Mine should be discovered below that of St. George,
whence much more was gathered without a Crime, than had been before by that so
scandalous a Trafick.

4. King John was informed by the Benin Ambassador, who came to desire the
Priests should be sent them, that 250 Leagues beyond them was the most powerful
Prince of all those Countries, called Ogane, by whom the Kings of Benin for
their security were confirmed, receiving of him a Staff with a Head and a Cross
like that of Malta, all of Brass curiously wrought. An Ambassador went with
Rich Presents to solicit these Ensigns of Royalty, who never saw Ogane, because
he speaks from behind Curtains, but at their departure shows a Foot, in token
that he grants their Request. Our King imagined this Prince might be he that is
vulgarly called Prester John, by comparing these Formalities with what he had
heard reported of him. He fitted out three Ships, commanded by Bartholomew
Dias; he set up a Cross in 24 degrees of South Latitude, 120 Leagues beyond the
other Discoverers in Sierra Parda. He sailed in sight of the Bay they called de
los Vaqueros, or of Herdsmen, because of the many Cows they saw there; beyond
this they touched at the small Island Santa Cruz, or Holy Cross, so called from
one he set up: 25 Leagues farther they came into the mouth of a River which
they called del Infant, the Surname of the second Captain, who was the first
that saw it. Being about returning they discovered that so many Ages unknown
Promontory, which they called Tormentoso, or Stormy, because of a great Tempest
they met with there; but our King gave it the name of Cabo de Buena Esperanca,
or Cape of Good Hope, for the great hopes it gave of discovering the Indies.
There was set up the Cross St. Philip. The two first Ships coasting along met
the third with only three men aboard, having lost it nine Months before with
nine Men in it then. With mere joy of seeing the others (a strange, but not
unheard of death) one of the three died, the other six had been killed by the
Blacks. With various fortune observing the discovered Country they arrived in
their own, the extent of Land till then found out, being 750 Leagues.

5. Whilst these Discoverers conquered the difficulties of the Seas; Peter de
Covillam and Alfonso de Payva traveled by Land, who came first to Naples, then
to Rodes, to Alexandria, Grand Cair, then with a Caravan of Moors to Toro on
the Coasts of Arabia. Here they parted, Payva toward India and Covillam for
Aethiopia, having appointed a time when to meet again at Grand Cair. Covillam
went to Cananor, Calecut and Goa (famous Cities in the East) passed thence to
Zofala in Aethiopia, then to Aden at the Mouth of the Red Sea on the side of
Arabia, and at last to Grand Cair, where he found his Companion had died. After
these had been sent out two Jews, Rabbi Abraham of Beja, and Joseph of Lamego.
Covillam sent back the latter to inform the King of his success, with the other
he embarked for Ormuz, where having observed what was most remarkable, he left
the Jew to follow the Caravans of Aleppo, and returning to the Red Sea came to
discover the Court of Prester John, who detained him there as a Spy. But while
he was detained, traveled from Rome, Luke Mark, an Ethiopian Priest, sent by
Prester John to our King. This Priest's information revived the Kings hopes and
desires, and he was sent back with an Account of what means had been used to
settle a Correspondence, and Projects for the perfecting of it.

6. Before Luke Mark parted from Portugal, was arrived Bemoi Prince of Ialof.
He came with State, and was received accordingly, being conducted to Court by
Don Francisco Coutinno Count of Marialva. His strangeness did not cause so much
admiration, as he conceived of the Majesty and Grandeur with which the King
received him under his Royal Canopy. This was the cause of his coming. Biran
who reigned in Ialof, giving himself up to all manner of Vice, resigned the
Kingdom to his Brother Bemoi, with the reputation of delivering it to a Person
in all respects worthy of the Royal-dignity. But Cibitah the elder Brother,
envious of Bemoi's happiness, kills Biran, and seizing the Government, makes
War upon Bemoi, who with the assistance of Gonzalo Coello, sent by King John,
made some resistance. This relief was sent him by reason of the hopes he gave
of receiving the Faith. But it being suspected he only designed to make use of
the Portugues assistance, the Captain was ordered to leave him, which was a
great grief to Bemoi. He gave such excuses for not being presently baptized as
seemed sufficient, and losing soon after a Battle, he went to Portugal to seek
a more favorable turn of Fortune.

7. It was no small part of his Fortune to 1489.
be received by so great a Prince, but above all to the hopes of Eternal
Happiness, being soon after baptized by the name of John, which he took from
the King who was Godfather. Next day he gave him Arms, Purpure a Cross Or
within an Orle of Portugal. He in return did homage to the King for all the
Lands he should be possessed of. Twenty four Gentlemen of his Retinue were
baptized with him. There was great rejoicing, our People showing their grandeur
in such divertisements as were most in use then; and Bemoi with his Retinue
giving a view of their Activity in Riding, Alighting, and Mounting upon a
Speed, standing upright on the Saddle Galloping, and some in their Career took
up Stones off the Ground, and much more, worthy admiration. The King furnished
him with twenty Caravels well manned and armed, as well to forward his
Restoration as to build a Fort on the River Zanaga.

8. The Province of Ialof lies between the two famous Rivers Gambea, or rather
Rio Grande and Zanaga, so called by the Portugueses from a Prince of that Name,
whom they spoke with when they discovered it; it has other names in the several
Countries it runs through, and makes many Islands, most as being uncooth,
inhabited only by Wild Beasts. It is navigable 150 Leagues up, where a ridge of
perpendicular Rocks crosses it in such manner, that the Water falling down,
forms an Arch, under which Travelers pass dry, and pleasant to behold, but
makes a hideous noise with the fall. The Gambea, or Rio Grande, runs 180
Leagues, and carries more Water; it is not all Navigable, but runs with less
noise, though filled with many Rivers that water the Country Mandinga. Both
these Rivers flow out of the famous Niger, and may as well be esteemed but so
many Mouths thereof. There is great variety of Fish in these Rivers, and
several other Creatures along them, as Horses, Crocodiles and Serpents with
Wings; the other Beasts that abound are Elephants, Ounces, Wild Boars, and a
many more. Great are the numbers of them, and wonderful their variety and
different forms. The Waters of the two Rivers mixed cause Vomiting, yet each
asunder does not. In this part is that great Cape called Cabo Verde, by Ptolome
C. Assinarium, in about 14 degrees of North Latitude. The Country runs 170
Leagues Eastward, is most fruitful, and has many populous Cities. To Tombotu
the Mart of Mandingo Gold, resort the Merchants of Grand Cair, Tunez, Oran,
Tremisen, Fez, Morocco, and other places. This trade moved King John to build
the Fort on the River Zanaga. The 20 Caravels were commanded by Peter Vaz de
Cunna, who landing with D. John Bemoi the King, and beginning to raise the Fort
in the place assigned, either suspecting that he deceived him, or fearing to
die in that Country, basely killed the King, endeavoring with that Foul Crime
to hide another not so heinous, which was to return without finishing the Work,
and in fine he came back without any effect.

9. The Congo Ambassador being well instructed 1490.
in the Faith, was sent home with three Ships. Sono was the first Land they
made, and arrived safe at Congo. They were joyfully received by an Old Lord
called Manisono, Uncle to that King, who desired to be baptized. An Altar was
erected in 1491.
the Field, and he was admitted to this Sacrament by the name of Manuel, and
his Son by that of Antony, in the presence of 25000 of their People, this being
the first time that Sacrament was there administered. The King of Congo, Nephew
to this Lord, hearing what he had done, added to his Estate, and caused all the
Idols within his Dominions to be destroyed. The King made his residence at
Ambasse Congo 50 Leagues distant, where he received Ruy de Sousa the Portugal
Commander, on an Ivory Chair, placed on a Lofty Throne. From the Waste upwards
he was naked, the lower part wrapped in Sky-colour Damask, on the Left Arm a
Bracelet of Brass; from his Shoulder hung a curious Horse-tail, a Royal Badge
among them; on his Head a thing like a Miter, of a delicate Webb, made of Palm,
which resembles wrought Velvet. After the Ceremonies, he desired to see the
Holy Vestments: He viewed them with deliberation and respect, in presence of
his Queen, Children and the Chief of the Court. Then he gave leave to build a
Church, which was done in few days, of the invocation of the Holy Cross,
because begun the day of that Feast in May. In this Church was baptized the
King, and some of his People, there being above 100000 present, as well for
that they flocked to see the Novelty, as because they were preparing for a
Neighboring War. The King was called John, and the Queen Ellenor, in honor of
our Sovereigns. Afterward were baptized the greatest part of those had flocked
thither. The New Christian King went to meet his Enemy, relying more on his
Conversion, and the Cross in the Colors he had received from Ruy de Sousa,
than in 80000 men he had in Arms, nor were his hopes vain, he returned with
Victory, and Ruy de Sousa to Portugal with the honor of having completed one
of the most famous undertakings of this Crown, leaving in that Kingdom People
capable to labor the New Vineyard.

10. Afterward was baptized the Prince, who had been absent in the Wars, and
called Alfonso. Panso Aquitimo, the King's Second Son, would not receive the
Faith, and the Father falling off, because as a Christian he could be allowed
but one Wife, resolved to leave the Crown to the Heathen Aquitimo, in wrong of
the Prince who continued constant in the Faith. Alfonso was abroad in
banishment when his Father died, but returning to Court was received as King.
Aquitimo having recourse to the Sword, fell upon him when he had but thirty
seven Christians, as well-Portugueses as Blacks; yet under the Banner of the
Cross Alfonso overcame a vast multitude of Infidels, Aquitimo being taken and
then slain. A Gentleman that accompanied Aquitimo desired to be baptized
immediately, declaring they had been overcome by a Glorious Army that was lead
by a Cross, and not by the thirty seven Christians. Alfonso established in
peace, destroyed all Idols, and propagated the Faith with great zeal. He sent
his Sons, Grandsons and Nephews to Portugal to study. Two of them were worthily
afterward Bishops in those parts. In memory of that Victory, and of the first
Colors sent this King, as also that the Faith was first planted on the day of
the invention of the Cross; he took for his Arms, Gules, a Cross Fleury Argent
between two Crosses Pattee, charged with the Arms of Portugal.

11. The beginning of the Year 1493, 1493.
came into the River of Lisbon, Christopher Columbus, who brought from an
Island (guessed to be that of Sipango) some Men, Gold, and great tokens of
Riches. This Great Man some time before had offered his service to King John,
who having slighted him then, looked on him now with some regret, and he
provoked him with some extravagant words in revenge of the small regard made of
him. There were some who offered to kill him, as well to punish his Boldness,
as to conceal from Spain his Discoveries. But the King sent him away with
honor: Columbus was a Genoese, and learned Navigation in Portugal; he was
employed by the King of Spain, and he had sent him to the Discovery he now came
from. King John did not envy the Fortune of Spain, but feared that Discovery
was part of what the Portugueses had been so long in quest of. This caused him
to fit out a Fleet commanded by D. Francisco de Almeyda in order to oppose
those proceedings, judging he had right on his side, but it proved not so.
Several Embassies passed on both sides to agree the business, and at last came
to a conclusion.

12. Though Prince Bemoi was dead, the hopes of making a farther progress in
that Country about Zanaga died not with him. They who went in that Fleet had
not performed what they were sent for, but discovered more Land, and gained the
good will of the Natives. The Trade was afterward continued, and a good
correspondence between our King and those Princes. Peter de Evora and Goncalo
Anez went to those of Turucol and Tombotu. Roderick Rebelo, Peter Reynel, and
John Colaco and others carried Presents to Mandimansa and Temala of the Fouli,
the most warlike of all those People. The King had also correspondence with him
of the Moses, very famous in that Age; and with Mahomet Ben Manzugul, Grandson
of Muza, and King of Songo (a populous City of Mandinga) who receiving a full
account of our King said, That none of 444 from whom he was descended, had any
knowledge of more powerful Kings than four, which were those of Alimaen,
Baldac, Grand Cayre and Tucurol. At this same time the King labored to settle
a Factory in the City Huadem, 70 Leagues to the Eastward of Arguim, as well for
the Trade of Gold, as to have some intelligence of Prester John, which he
solicited by all means. Many were sent to these Discoveries by Land. But Death
put a stop to King John's farther progress in these affairs; but cannot obscure
the Glory due to him for propagating the Christian Faith in so remote parts,
building the Forts of Arguim and St. George de la Mina, which fixed the
Sovereignty of Portugal in Guinea that abounds in Gold, Ivory and all other
Riches and Plenty, and the Gate that opened a way to the most Heroic Actions
afterward performed by the Portugues Arms.

CHAP. IV.
Discoveries under King Emanuel, from the Year 1497, when he sent out Vasco de
Gama, till the Year 1500.

1. KING Emanuel inherited not only 1497.
his Predecessors Kingdom, but his earnest desire of finding a shorter passage
by Sea to the East Indies. This attempt was generally condemned by the greater
number, but carried by the more prevalent Judgments. The King being in the Town
of Estremoz, when he appointed Vasco de Gama to Command the Fleet he designed
to send. This was a Gentleman of sufficient Quality, Ability and Spirit for
such a difficult Enterprise. The King honored him expressing the great
confidence he had in him, and delivered the Colors he was to carry, on which
was the Cross of the Military Order of Christ, and on which this worthy Hero
took the Oath of Fidelity.

2. Having received Letters for the Princes of the East, among others Prester
John, and Zamori or the King of Calicut; he sailed from Lisbon upon Saturday
the 8th of July with only three small Ships and 160 men. The Names of the
Ships, St. Gabriel, St. Raphael and Berrio; the Captains Paul de Gama, Brother
to Vasco, and Nicolas Nunnez; there went also a Barque laden with Provisions,
Commanded by Goncalo Nunnez. Having passed the Seas already known to Portugues
Sailers, they discovered others, and after five Months sail, landed on the
Sands of a Bay, now called Angra de Santa Elena, because first seen on that
Saints day. Here they took one of two Blacks who were busy gathering Honey in
the Mountain, little thinking how far human Boldness carries men. This man
pleased with some Glasses and small Bells, brought some others from a Village,
in hopes of getting some of those things, and these being furnished brought
many more.

3. Fernando Veloso, a daring Young Man, asked leave to go see the habitation
of the Blacks; but he returned with more speed than he went, being pursued to
the shore, and a Shower of Arrows following as he got into the Boat. Vasco de
Gama endeavoring to appease them, was wounded in the Leg, and because they
would not hearken to him, he revenged himself with Cross-bows from aboard. The
third day being the twentieth of November, he weighed and passed the Great Cape
of Good Hope. On St. Catharines day they touched at Angra de San Blas, which is
near the Island, where are found the Birds called Soliticairos made like a
Goose, but with Wings like Batts; this is 60 Leagues beyond the Cape. Here they
exchanged some Merchandise, and observed the People garding their Cattle, some
Women riding on Oxen, and some dancing to Pipes that made no contemptible
Music. But because as they coasted in order to find some Port, they found the
Blacks appeared in greater numbers and warlike manner, he terrified them with
firing some Guns. He took all the Provisions out of the Barque and burnt it. On
St. Lucies day happened a Storm, the more terrible because it was the 1498.
first. On Christmas Day they saw the Land, which for that reason they called
Terra de Natal, or Christmas-land, as also the River they named de los Reyes,
or of the Kings, for being first seen on the day of Epiphany. Here Gama left
two Men to inform themselves of the Country, and give him an account at his
return. To this purpose he carried some Malefactors, their punishment being
changed for these dangers. After dealing for some Ivory and Provisions, so much
to the satisfaction of the Blacks, that their King came aboard, he went on as
far as Cabo de Corrientes, and without seeing the Town of Zofala, passed 50
Leagues farther, and went up a River where were several Boats with Sails made
of Palm. It was an encouragement to our Men to see these People, for that they
understood something of sailing, a thing they had not seen in all those Coasts,
and because they were not so black as the others, and understood the Arabic
Letter. They concluded them more civilized by their Habit of several Colors,
and diverse sorts of Stuffs both Cotton and Silk. They said that to the Eastward
lived White People, who sailed in Vessels like (...). This River Gama called de
Bons Sinays, or of good Signs, for the information he got of what he looked
for; though he lost some Men, and many sickned, their Gums swelling out of
their Mouths, and there was no cure but cutting, which proceeded from the
badness of the Provisions. Sailing hence they again cast Anchor among the
Islands of St. George, opposite to Mozambique, whence came several Zambucos or
Boats in jovial manner, the Music of several Instruments sounding in them. As
they came near were seen some Black others almost White, all had Persian Veils,
and were clothed with Cotton of sundry Colors. They asked our Men boldly who
they were, and what they wanted. Gama answered to the first part, and said he
would answer to the rest when he knew whose that Town was. They said the Lord
of it was Zacoeja, to whom all Vessels sent notice of their Arrival. Then Gama
replied, that his Voyage was to India, and wanted a Pilot to conduct him to
Calicut, that this was what he desired of the Xeque or Lord. He sent him some
Presents, though not of great value, valuable for their rarity.

4. A Moor who carried the advice, returned with many thanks for the Presents
with some fresh Meats, making excuses that the great distance was what hindered
the Lord from visiting him. These Lucky beginnings moved Gama to attempt
entering the Harbor, but meeting some danger he Anchored above the Town, which
lies in 14 Degrees and half of South Latitude, and is encompassed by the Sea;
the Land about it is low and unhealthy, the Houses of Hurdles, that of the Lord
and the Mosque of Mud Walls; the Inhabitants were Strangers and Moors: this
being between Quiloa, which lies above, and the Mine of Zofala below it. This
place was ever much accounted of by our Seamen, being a most secure place to
Winter in. The Natives of the Continent are Black. Here came aboard Gama three
Ethiopians, who as soon as they spied St. Gabriel painted on the Poop, sell on
their Knees, as those who had always preserved Christianity, which was preached
among them in the Primitive times, though now with some corruption. Vasco de
Gama sent other Presents to the Lord, and they concluded a Peace, which was
confirmed on our part by erecting a Cross there by the name of S^ George. But
the Barbarians having de^lly concluded this Agreement, our Men going for Wood,
fourteen Boats fell upon them, pouring in abundance of Arrows, but being
answered by our Cross-Bows and Guns, they never offered to molest us a second
time. They sailed hence the 11th of March with one Morish Pilot; he had hired
two, but the other fled. Bad Weather obliged him to come to an Anchor again at
St. Georges Island. He took in Water by force of Arms, the Blacks opposing it.
And they increasing to 2000, he fired some Cannon, which killing some, the
other with the fright fled to the Continent, leaving many in our hands.

5. The Xeque or Governor at first refused a Pilot, he they had being fled,
but fearing it might be revenged, sent another so wicked, that he run the Ships
among some Islands, which were called del Acotado, because the Pilot was there
severely whipped for this fault. This punishment instead of amendment, provoked
him to another fraud. He persuaded Gama to take the Port of Quiloa, by telling
him there were Christians there; but believing our Ships might be destroyed.
The Currents drove the Ships off, and they came to an Anchor at the City
Monbaza, which is an Island made by a River that falls into the Sea by two
Mouths: The Buildings like those of Spain; the Inhabitants all Moors, without
any mixture of Christians, as the Pilot affirmed. Our Commander sent a Present
to the King, and he deceitfully offered a kind reception. This inclined Gama to
enter the Port, but it being God's Will to deliver him, the Ships fell off, and
our Seamen making some extraordinary cry to bring them about, some Moors, who
were aboard, thought they were discovered, taking this for a signal of Battle,
they all leaped overboard, which undeceived the Commander, who sailing on, and
chasing two Boats, he took one with 13 Moors. By them he was informed that not
far off was the City Melinde, and there several Vessels from India.

6. Melinde is seated on the plainest of a Rocky Coast, encompassed with
Orchards, Palm Trees, and Woods of Fruit Trees; the Buildings great and
sightly; the Country as well stored with Cattle as Fruit; the Natives Pagans,
of Color Swarthy, of Body Strong; the Women are counted beautiful; from the
Waste downwards they wear Silks and Cottons; on the Head, Veils with
Gold-Laces. Most of the Merchants who trade here are of Guzarat, who in return
of their Spice, carry Gold, Ivory, Amber and Wax. The King is a Mohammedan, and
is served with State and Splendour. Gama gave him an account of his Voyage by a
Soldier, and how he stood in need of a Pilot. Some Presents and Complements
having passed between them, they met on the Sea, where the King was pleased
above all with the gift of the 13 Moors not long before taken. The Portugues
feared the Moors kindness was deceitful; but it proved otherwise, for the
effect of this interview was a lasting Peace faithfully observed by the
Portugueses and Moors. Here Gama discoursed with some Merchants of Cambaya, who
aboard his Ship were seen to worship an Image of our Lady; which showed there
were yet among them some footsteps of the Preaching of St. Thomas the Apostle.
He carried with him Melemo Cana of Guzarat, finding him so expert in
Navigation, that being shown an Astrolabe, he took little notice of it, as one
who was used to more considerable Instruments. With this Able Pilot Gama set
forwards, having first erected a Cross, which he called of the Holy Ghost; and
crossing that great Gulf of 700 Leagues, in twenty two days anchored 2 Leagues
below Calecut.

7. Whilst our Discoverers rejoice at their arrival in India, let us give a
general description of it, referring the particulars to the arrival of our
Ships in those parts. The Region properly called India, is that which lies
between the two noble Rivers, Indus or* the West, and Ganges on the East. Of
the first it takes Name, as does the most Ancient Kingdom of Delhi, the best
and most powerful of this Country. Hence the Persians call it Indostan. On the
South it is all girt by the vast Ocean. Encompassed by those Rivers it makes a
sort of Peninsula, almost in the form of a Lozenge, or Rhombus of equal Sides,
but not equal Angles. The two most distant opposite Angles lie North and South;
the latter is made by Cape Comori, the other toward the Fountains of the
Rivers, which though distant in the Mountains, called by Ptolomy Imao, yet
running down the Rivers come almost to meet. The distance between these Angles
in a straight Line is about 400 Leagues. The other two opposite Angles, which
lie East and West, and are distant 300 Leagues, are formed by the Mouths of the
Rivers. They encompass as much Land on their two sides, as does the Ocean on
the other two. Though all this Country be inhabited by Heathens and Mahometans,
yet they differ in their Opinions and Customs, as they are divided into several
Kingdoms, as Multan, Delli, Cospetir, Bengala, Orixa, Mando, Chitor, and
Guzarat, commonly called Cambaya The Kingdom of Decan is divided into many
Sovereignties, with Character of Kings, with that of Pale divided between both.
That of Bisnagat, to whom are subject many Petty Princes; and all the Province
of Malabar divided into small Territories, some absolute, some subject to those
already named. Had not Nature set Bounds to Human Ambition, separating these
Countries with vast Rivers, Mountains, Lakes, Woods and Deserts, inhabited by
sundry and innumerable Wild Beasts, they had all doubtless been under the
Command of one Lord. The most remarkable Bounder of this vast Continent, is a
long Ridge of Hills, which the Natives call Gate, that is, Mountains; they run
about 200 Leagues from North to South: on both sides between the Sea and the
Hill run two long, but narrow Plains for about 80 Leagues, that on the West is
called Malabar, on the shore whereof is seated the City Calicut. It was then
inhabited by Pagans, and resorted to by Mohammedan Merchants. Their Kings were
always of the Family of the Bramenes, among them esteemed most Religious and
Learned, and great Observers of the Doctrine of Pythagoras. The People is
divided into two Degrees, the Commons, whom they call Poleas; and the Nobles
called Nayres, who are valiant and skilled in the Arms they use, and always wear
Sword and Buckler; so proud, that if but touched by a Commoner, they hold it as
a great misfortune, and cleanse themselves by washing. This King of Calicut is
the most powerful of all the Coast, and therefore for distinction called
Zamori, as much as Emperor. The Kingdom took its name from the Metropolis, in
which are many Stately Buildings of the Natives, for the Merchants do not mind
it. It has no shelter for Ships, which are forced to Ride it out at Anchor in
the Road. This is the place where we left the Discoverers.

8. Gama arrived here on the 20th of May; he gave advice to the King, who was
not then in the City, but sent him a Pilot to bring the Ships to a safer place.
During this interval came acquainted with the Portugueses a Moor called
Monzayde, who lived there, and told them in Spanish he had known them in Oran,
and would be serviceable to them there. So it proved, for from that time he
passed between Vasco de Gama and Zamori, upon all occasions with great
fidelity, and at last died a Christian in Portugal. The third day our Commander
went ashore with twelve others, a Catual, or Governor coming from the King to
conduct him; they were carried on Men's Backs with such ease, that the motion,
though swift, is hardly to be perceived. Thus they were carried, many flocking
about them, to a Pagod or Temple, equal, including all its Offices, to the
greatest of our Monasteries. On the top of the Front were five Bells, and
opposite to it a high Pillar of Brass, with a Cock on the top. Within the Gate
attended four Bramens, covered from the Waste to the Knees with Cotton Clothes;
and for a Badge of their Profession each had three Threads cross his Shoulders,
hanking like a Shoulder Belt. They sprinkled them with Water, and gave Powder
of Sandal to put on their Foreheads, all with great Ceremony, and no less
Reverence than is used among us in taking the Holy Water in Church. About the
Walls were painted several horrid Figures of Monsters and Wild Beasts. In the
middle was a round Chapel of good Structure with Brass Gates; within it was
the Statue of a Woman, which by reason of the darkness could not be perfectly
discovered. The Portugueses looking upon it, and asking what it was, the
Malabars answered aloud, and with a joyful Reverence, Mary, Mary, Mary, and
prostrated themselves on the ground. Our Men did the same, judging that to be
the Image of our Lady, nor were they deceived, for it could be no other, those
People many Ages before having professed Christianity. The throng of the People
grew so great, they stopped the way, and with the eager desire of seeing the
new Guests, almost stifled them. Having gone thus 5 Leagues, they came to the
Palace, where they saw the King on a Rich Bed set out with Silk and Gold, his
Looks full of Majesty, Clothed with White Cotton strewed with Branches and
Roses of Beaten Gold; on his Head a thing like a Mitre set with many Pearls,
his Arms and Legs naked, but on them Bracelets and Rings of Gold set with Rich
Jewels. A Grave Person by his side held a Gold Plate with some Leaves of
Betele, an Herb comfortable to the Stomach, which the Eastern Princes much use,
chewing and swallowing the Juice of it. The eldest Bramen, who was next the
Bed, and whose Age, Gray Hairs and Garb were Venerable, arose, and taking Vasco
de Gama by the Hand presented him to that Great Emperor, who looked upon him
friendly, but saluted him so scantly, that the motion of his Head could scarce
be perceived, and made signs to the Bramen to make him sit down on the Steps of
the Ascent whereon the Bed stood. He heard him, and answered in general Terms;
then took the Letter sent by King Emanuel, which was writ in Portugues and
Arabic, keeping it to consult with his Ministers about the Answer, promising
it should be speedy. The substance was only to settle a friendly correspondence
between the two Crowns in order to a Free Trade, which might be to the
advantage of both. Gama was entertained in the House of a Catual, or Governor,
where the next day he endeavored to gain him and the other Ministers with
Presents, but they being inferior to their Avarice, he found next time he
spoke with them, that he had not won them; but the King seemed more pleased
than the first time, whence may appear the Good Will of a Prince is bought at a
cheaper rate, than those who would govern them when raised to their Favor. In
fine, he was content that a free Commerce should be settled between the two
Kingdoms.

9. The Moors understanding this Agreement, envious of our success, and fearing
the damage must ensue to their Trade, made many Objections against our
admittance, assuring, that we who came now suing, would settle our selves
forcibly in time to come. They bribed the Catual or Governor, and he persuaded
the King, our Men were Pirates and not Ambassadors. It was wonderful that the
King, not knowing how to proceed, because there was none could satisfy him of
the truth of this Business, he resolved to rely upon the Faith of him whom his
Ministers accused; for, as if he had known how odious a Lie, though to their
advantage, was to the Portugueses, he sent for Vasco de Gama, declaring to him
at large how he was informed his Embassy was feigned, and that he was some
banished or fugitive Person, making him great offers of a kind reception in
case it were so, and promising to rely upon his information for the credit of
the whole matter. Gama heard the King with a great deal of firmness in his
Countenance, and declared himself highly sensible of the great confidence the
King reposed in him, in a most learned Speech, with powerful Arguments answered
to all that had been laid to his Charge, and concluded with the same gravity
and staidness he had kept through his long discourse. The King who had kept his
Eyes fixed upon him all the time his harangue lasted, hoping by exterior signs
to discover the truth of his assertions, drew a conclusion from the security of
his Looks, the elegancy of his Words and gravity of his Person, that there
could no deceit be couched under such fair appearances, that the Moors
proceeded maliciously, and his Ministers were imposed upon. Then very frankly
bid him return to his Ships to land what Merchandise he brought, if any, and
while that was disposed of, he would prepare such an Answer for the King, as
should be to his satisfaction.

10. Vasco de Gama providing to return to his Ships, was detained by Order of
the Governor, and finding himself Prisoner, left seven of the twelve he had
brought as Hostages. He complained, but to no effect, the faithful Moor
Moncayde soliciting for him with all possible diligence. Gama being abroad and
finding no fair means could prevail to have his men restored, having called a
Council, it was resolved to apply force; accordingly he sent out after some
Fishermen and took twenty of them: Immediately he let fly his Sails, making
show of departing, that they might send to stay him. And accordingly it
succeeded, for the King informed of the reason why his Subjects were taken,
ordered the seven Portugueses to be exchanged for them, and sent the Answer for
our King, and excused the treachery of his People. The fortunate Gama steers
homeward, the Moor Moncayde came voluntarily with him, and some of the
Prisoners by force, who were not restored, it being thought convenient to bring
some to show, promising them they should return.

11. As he was leaving the Sea of Calicut, sixty Vessels, full of Armed Men,
set upon and pressed him, but the Cannon being well played, they went off.
Sailing along in sight of Land, he set up the Cross of St. Mary in an Island
between Baranor and Baticale, which thence took name, with admiration of the
Inhabitants. This was the sixth and last he set up this Voyage, they were St.
Raphael, in the River Bons Sinays; St. George, at Mozambique; St. Stephen, at
Melinde; and St. Gabriel, at Calicut. Whilst he was erecting the last Cross, he
writ a Letter to the Zamori or King of Calicut, by the hand of Moncayde, and
sent it by a Fisherman of that place: In this Letter he excuses himself for
carrying away those Prisoners, which he did not in satisfaction of the
Merchandise taken from him, but as an earnest that he would return with them,
when he had showed them to his Prince, and they informed him of the state of
their Country; and that in recompense he would bring a perfect account of
Spain. In this Voyage he discovered 1200 Leagues, drawing a strait Line from
the River del Infant, found by Bartholomew Diaz, to the Port of Calicut; for
in sailing it is much more. Here he found the Island, the People of Canara call
Anchediva, near the Continent, it is small, well shaded with Trees, of a
wholesome Air, and has good Water. Anche or Ange singnifies Five, and Diva,
Islands; there being so many, but the Chief has carried the Name. He was here
careening his Ships, taking water, and some respite, when a Pirat attacked him
with eight small Vessels, so linked and covered with Boughs, that they looked
like a small floating Island. He was somewhat surprised at first sight, but
perceiving the danger that approached under those Leaves, he attacked it, and
having put to flight seven, took one Vessel. The Name of this Pirat was Timoja,
we shall hear of him hereafter. The Prince of Goa, by means of a Jew,
endeavored to draw Gama to his ruin; the Jew from shore making signs with a
Cross, who being taken aboard, and put upon the Wrack, confessed he was sent
with an ill design, and repenting, was baptized, and called Gaspar de Gama.
Some of the men died whilst they were sailing acro^s the Great Gulf between
India and the Coast of Melinde. He Anchored in sight of the Town of Magadoxa,
which stands on an open Coast, but is beautiful and strong. Not far from thence
came out against him eight Boats well manned, but were soon repulsed. He came
to Melinde, and was received by that King as a Friend. Being again under sail,
the Ship St. Raphael struck and was lost, leaving that Name to those Sands. The
men were saved by the other two Ships, and they parted by a Storm near Cabo
Verde. Nicholas C^ello arrived at Lisbon, believing his Commander was there
before him, but he was burying his Brother, Paul de Gama, in the Island
Tercera. Soon after he came up the Tagus, having been out two Years, and almost
two Months. He carried out 160 men, and returned only with 55. They were all
rewarded by the King. Vasco de Gama had the privilege of being called Don,
annexed to his Family; to his Arms was added part of the Kings; he had the
Title of Admiral of the Eastern Seas, 3000 Ducats yearly, and afterward the
Title of Count Vidigueyra. Nicholas Coello was made a Fidalgo, which is Noble,
and had a 100 Ducats a year.

12. Prince Henry, the First Author of thief Discoveries, had built a Chapel
on the Banks of the River a League below Lisbon, for the convenience of
Sailers. In the same place now did King Emanuel erect a stately Church to the
same intent, and with the same name it had before, to wit, Our Lady of
Bethlehem, placing the Statue of the Prince over the Great Gate, his own and
the Queens over the lesser. This is a Monastery of the Order of St. Hierom, and
for its security was built in the Water a strong Tower called St. Vincent, not
great, but sightly.

CHAP. V.
Conquests under King Emanuel, from the Year 1500 till the Year 1502.

1. THere were Public Thansgivings through the Kingdom for the good success of
this Voyage; to these succeeded Feasts and Joyful Entertainments. And all men's
expectation being raised with the glory of the Action and hope of ensuing
Profit, it was consulted how to prosecute what was begun, and resolved, that
according to the disposition they had found in the People of those Countries
there was more need of Force than Entreaty, in order whereunto thirteen Vesses
of several sizes were fitted, and Peter Alvarez Cabral was named Admiral. On
the 8th of March the King delivered with his own hand to the Admiral the Flag
of the Cross. The Shore was covered with People, who flocked to see the Fleet
sail. It contained 1200 Men, 8 Franciscan Friars, 8 Chaplains, and a Chaplain
Major. The substance of their Instructions was, to begin by Preaching, and if
that failed, to proceed to the decision of the Sword.

2. Twelve days the Fleet sailed with a fair Gale, but at Cape Verde a Storm
arose, and one of the Vessels returned to Lisbon. In 10 degrees of South
Latitude they saw a Tawny People with lank Hair and flat Faces: They fled from
our Men, till halting all together upon ^n eminence, they were spoke to in
several Languages and by Signs, but all in vain. The Fleet passed on, and
Anchored upon Easter Eve in a Port they called Seguro, or Safe, because it
proved so to them. The People being affable, our Men landed and set up an Altar
under a Tree, where there was Mass said and a Sermon preached, to which those
Heathens were present with wonderful attention. The Admiral sent a Vessel to
advertise the King of this discovery, and erected a Cross on a great Tree,
calling the Country Santa Cruz, or Holy Cross. He also left there two
Portugueses to enquire into the Customs, Language and Product of the Country.
This is that large Province of America, called Brazill, for the abundance of
that Wood which it produces, and hither had he been drove by Storms. Having
left this Port, on the 12th of May he saw a Comet stretching its Tail to the
Cape of Good Hope, which vanished in eight days, and was the forerunner of a
terrible Storm, insomuch that the day growing dark, they could not see each
other or hear, with the horrid noise of the Winds; 20 days this Tempest lasted,
and swallowed four Ships. The Admiral arrived with only six Ships of all his
Fleet upon the 16th of July on the Coast of Zofala. He chased two Ships, the
one was stranded, the other taken, they belonged to Moors, and came from the
Mine of Zofala, commanded by Xeque Foteyma. The Admiral treated him
courteously, restoring all that was taken, because he was Uncle to the King of
Melinde, who deserved well of the Portugueses for the kind Offices Vasco de
Gama had received of him in time of need. Having quitted the Moor, he arrived
at Mozambique on the 20th of July, where he refitted and held on his Voyage.

3. Coasting along, he came to an Anchor before the ancient and noble City
Quiloa. Abraham, a Man renowed among his People, and rich with the Trade of
Zofala, then reigned there. The Admiral sent him word, he had important Affairs
to communicate to him from our King. The Answer was, that he should come ashore
and he would hear him. He replied, That according to his Instructions it was
not permitted him to land, unless to fight such as refused the Friendship of
Portugal; but that in respect to such a Prince, he would meet him in a Boat in
the middle of that Bay. This Answer was surprising, and Fear wrought more than
Kindness. Several Boats were set out on both sides, richly adorned and filled
with Music. Our Commander proposed Amity, Trade and Religion. The Moor gave
good words, but disguised ill designs. This known, a Council was held, the
Resolution was to go on, leaving the Revenge for a fitter opportunity, and thus
they arrived at Melinde the second of August, where they were received with all
kindness, not only upon account of the Friendship established with Vasco de
Gama, but also for the Generosity wherewith Xeque Foteyma had been treated.
They visited and presented each other. Ours which was considerable, was carried
by the Factor Airs Correa, together with a Letter from our King, writ in
Arabic, which was so highly prised by that King, that to the end he might keep
the Bearer ashore that night, he sent the Admiral the Ring whereon was his
Seal, the greatest security of those Kings. He told how much he was infested by
the King of Monbaca for having admitted our Friendship, renewed and confirmed
it with words and actions. Soon after our Ships sailed, having taken in two
Guzarat Pilots, and set ashore two Men in order to discover Prester John's
Country, the ancient desire of our Princes.

4. On St. Bartholomew Eve they reached Anchediva. The Vessels were washed and
tallow'd, they watered and dealt with the People by signs, and left them
satisfied. Then they stood over for Calicut, and discovered it the 17th of
September. The Natives beheld us with Pleasure and Admiration; our Cannon was
fired for joy, but struck a terror into the People on the Shore, who fled.
Airs Correa, who had this employment at Melinde, went to advertise the King
Zamori. He settled the manner how the King and Admiral should meet, which was
done with much circumspection. There were given as Hostages for the safety of
the Admiral, and such as should land with him, six of the Kings principal
Ministers of the Family of the Bramenes, whose Names he brought from Portugal
by the advice of Moncayde. The Prisoners that Vasco de Gama took, were also
returned in performance of what he had writ to Zamori, and that they might give
an account of what they had seen in Portugal.

5. The Embassy was delivered with much state, it tending only to the settling
Peace and Commerce. After much delay proceeding from Jealousy, Peace was
concluded and sworn to, and a House in the Town, with much difficulty, granted
for the convenience of Trade. Airs Correa took possion of it with sixty able
Men. The Merchants of Meca obstructed our getting lading, complaint was made to
the King, but no redress.

6. The cause of it was the enmity between two Moorish Governors, one of the
Sea, the other of the Land Affairs, the first called Coje Bequi, the other Coje
Cemireci. This last was offended that our Factor had made greater application
to the other than to him, and contrived to be revenged, as follows. He was
informed there sailed from Cochin, a City distant about 30 Leagues, a very
great Ship of Ceylon, bound for Cambaya with Elephants, who must pass before
us. He therefore told the Factor, that the King having desired one of those
Beasts, was refused it by the Owners; that if our Men would take the Ship they
would oblige the King, forward their own business, and possess themselves of a
great quantity of Spice which the Merchants of Meca had there. His design was,
that we should receive damage in the attempt, that Ship being of great bulk;
and to this purpose gave notice to the Owners, that they might be the better
provided; and in case that did not succeed, at least hereby we should disoblige
the Merchants of Cochin. The Admiral sent after the Ship, Peter de Ataide in
the St. Peter, who gave her chase, she made no account of our Vessel till some
of our Balls reaching her, she bore upon us pouring in her shot, then made
away, and was pursued and taken out of the Bay of Cananor. There were aboard
seven Elephants, whereof one was killed by a Cannon Ball, and eaten by our men.
This contrivance was of advantage to discover the Author, to terrify the King,
seeing such a Vessel taken by one that was not above the sixth part of her
bulk, and to gain the Friendship of the King of Cochin; for the Admiral
discovering the fraud, restored the Ship to the Owners, making satisfaction for
the damage. Here it was that Duarte Pacheco Pereyra gave the first marks of
that Heroic Valor, which after made him renowned in all the World.

7. This evil design turned to our advantage, but not the next; for the Ships
having been there three Months, there were but two laden, and at a dear rate;
and the Factor suspecting that the Ships of Meca laded by night, which hindered
ours, complained to the King, who ordered him to make Prize of such Boats. They
entered and found nothing, for it was a contrivance of the Moors to incense the
People against the Portugueses, and so it fell out, for the attempt being
divulged, the Rabble rises in search of the Factor and his Company, whereof
they suddenly slew forty; the others with five Franciscan Friars escaped that
Storm. The Admiral before the blood of those slain was cool, in a rage burnt
fifteen great Vessels in the Port, and battered the Town two days from the
Ships, doing great damage, and killing above 500 men.

8. Then sailed to Cochin the Metropolis of the Kingdom, of the same Name,
having by the way burnt two Ships they met belonging to Calicut. The King lived
out of Town. The Admiral sent to advertise him of his coming by a Bramen, a
Religious Malabar, one of those who wander naked, girt with Chains and daubed
with Filth, who, if Heathens, are called Iogues, and if Moors, Calandars; this
man was afterward baptized and called Michael. The King returned a favorable
answer, and permitted us to lade Spice. It was done slowly, but without
interruption. At Cranganor were found some Christians of St. Thomas, under
Armenian Bishops. Two were brought to Portugal, one died and the other
returned. Zamori of Calicut had gained the ill will of the Neighboring Princes
by his ill manner of proceeding with our men. Those of Cochin and Cananor
desiring an opportunity of breaking with him, strove to draw the Portugues
Fleet to their Ports. The Governors of Coulan, on the South of Cochin, sent to
this effect to the Admiral, he returned thanks, though the Offer was not
accepted, having already sufficient lading. He left Goncalo Gil Barbosa as
Factor at Cochin with others, to provide lading for the next Ships should come.

9. He had promised to take in some Ginger at Cananor, he went thither to
perform his word, and show he was not afraid to appear before Calicut; he found
that King well affected toward us, who sent with him an Ambassador (he of
Cochin sent two) to King Emanuel with Presents, and offer of a Free Trade.
About the middle of January the Admiral set out in order to return home. On the
Coast of Melinde, one of the Ships was drove by bad Weather upon a Bank, the
men saved. At Mozambique the rest were refitted, and one sent to settle a Trade
at the Mine of Zofala. At Cabo Verde they found Peter Diaz, and his Vessel,
which had been parted from them; he had escaped many dangers by Sea and Land,
chiefly in Port Magadoxa near Cape Guardafu. After the Admiral arrived also in
Portugal, Peter de Ataide, who had been parted, and the other sent to the
discovery of Zofala, with an account of it.

10. In March before this Fleet returned, sailed out of Lisbon four Ships with
400 men, commanded by John de Nova, an able Seaman. In eight Degrees of South
Latitude he found the Island he called of the Conception. Beyond the Cape of
Good Hope, at the place called Agoado de St. Bras, they found in a Shoe a
Letter writ by Peter de Ataide, who Anchored there after the Storm before
spoken of; it gave an account of the Voyage of Peter Alvarez Cabrall. In August
they arrived at Mozambique, then at Quiloa, having found an Island, which from
the Commander was called of John de Nova. Short of Melinde they gave chase to
two great Ships, one was taken, lightened and then burnt. At length they arrived
at Cananor; and that King desirous they should stay there, to oblige them
discovered that the King of Calicut was sending against him forty great Ships.
This which he thought would detain them, hastened their departure; for John de
Nova, lest the King should think he staid for fear, sailed on toward Cochin,
leaving ashore four Factors, to prepare Goods against his return. In the Road
of Calicut they found the Fleet ready, and falling on it lost never a Shot,
pouring it in all that day and night, and part of the next; there were sunk
five great Vessels and nine Paraos, which are small ones, the rest fled to the
City with the news. At Cochin, Nova took in his lading with speed, it being
provided by the Officers Cabrall had left there to that purpose. He returned to
Cananor and took the rest of his lading; at his entrance into that Port he took
a Ship of Calicut, plundered and burnt it; the same happened to another as he
came out. In his return having passed the Cape of Good Hope, he found the
Island of St. Helena not inhabited; it has proved since a most advantageous
place to all that use the India Trade, being provided with most excellent
Water. It lies in 15 Degrees of South Latitude, distant from Goa 1549 Leagues,
from Mozambique 1100, from the Cape of Good Hope 520, from Angola 370, from St.
George de la Mina 375, from Brazil 540. from Lisbon 1100.

CHAP. VI.
Conquests under King Emanuel, from the Tear 1501, to the Tear 1503.

1. THE Account Peter Alvarez Cabral brought, showed it was requisite either to
attempt making a great Fortune with a great Force, or else to quit the attempt.
Some were of Opinion to desist, but the credit of so great an Action prevailed;
and though many were lost, the gain of those who returned was so great, that it
outweighed the consideration of the damage. The King was inspired with the hope
of carrying on what the Apostle St. Thomas had begun, and planting the
Christian Religion in those Countries, and enlarging his Royal Titles by adding
to them, as he did, those of Lord of the Navigation Conquests and Trade of
Aethiopia, Arabia, Persia, and India, which were confirmed by the Pope.

2. The King was sensible, that to obtain a Great Name among so many, so
powerful and so distant Nations, it was requisite to show great Power;
therefore in 1502.
March he set out Three Squadrons; the first of ten Ships, commanded by Vasco
de Gama, now on his Second Voyage. The second of five Ships under Vincent
Sodre, which was to scour the Coast of Cochin and Cananor, and hinder the Trade
of the Ships of Meca, watching the Mouth of the Red Sea. The third was under
Stephen de Gama, but all subordinate to Vasco de Gama. The whole consisted of
twenty Ships, and were gone before John de Nova arrived. The King delivered to
Vasco de Gama the Flag with great Honor in the Cathedral Church, giving him
the Title of Admiral of the Eastern Seas. With him returned the Ambassadors of
Cochin and Cananor, much honored by our King. They met off Cabo Verde a
Caravel bound for Lisbon, with much Gold from the Mine. Don Vasco showed some
to the Ambassadors, and they surprised, said it did not agree with the account
the Venetian Ambassador in Portugal had given them, that the Portugueses
without the help of Venice could scarce put Ships to Sea. This was envy,
because they were like to lose their Trade with Grand Cayre.

3. The Admiral arrived the 12th of July at Quiloa, having lost two Ships in
bad Weather. He entered furiously, firing all his Canon, and battering the Town
in revenge of the ill usage others had received from that King. But he to
prevent his total ruin, came in a Boat to appease the Admiral, offering to be
subject, and pay Tribute to King Emanuel. Thus the Storm was converted into
Joy. Sailing thence he was put by the Port of Melinde, and forced to anchor 8
Leagues below it in a Bay, whence spreading* his Fleet that no Ship might
escape him, he took several, but was most severe with those of Calicut. A Ship
of great bulk called Meri, belonging to the Sultan of Cayre, most richly laden,
and full of many Moors of Quality, who went Pilgrims to Meca, fell so
unexpectedly into our hands, that she was taken without the least resistance,
and all the Goods shifted into our Ships. But when 260 Moors perceived we were
going to force the Vessel, in which, besides them, were above 50 Women and
Children, laying hold of what Weapons were at hand, they beat the Boats from
the sides; a Ship coming to her assistance was almost taken, till another
relieved it, and the Admiral coming up, the Enemies Vessel was boarded, and
after a courageous resistance taken and burnt with all that were in her, except
twenty Children who were afterward baptized.

4. The Admiral sailed to Cananor, and had a meeting with the King upon the
Shore, and Persons were appointed to confer about the business of Trade. Then
he sent a Letter to the King of Calicut, signifying to him, that the 260 Moors
burnt in the Ship, were upon account for the Portugueses killed by his People;
and the twenty Children made Christians, for one Portugues turned Mohammedan.
That this was but the earnest of revenge he would soon take upon his City. Mean
while they differed at Cananor about the Price of Spice, and at last some few
men were left there to agree the matter, and many Threats sent the King for
this usage. Then he set forward to perform what he had promised at Calicut.

5. As he coasted along, there met him a Boat, and in it four Noblemen sent by
Zamori with offers extorted by fear. Don Vasco thought they might be
advantageous; but resenting that the Proposal was to rest content with the
dustruction of almost 300 Moors and a rich Ship, in satisfaction for the loss
of the Portugueses, he returned answer, that at his arrival he would burn and
destroy the City. The Fleet spread, and took one Ship at anchor, and some
Boats. The King prepared himself, but to no purpose; for the Cannon playing,
there was great distraction and confusion. He hanged thirty Moors at the Yard
Arms; then cutting off their Heads Hands and Feet, threw them into the Sea to
be cast upon the Shore by the Tide, warning them it was but a merciful death to
what he designed for the Murderers of the Portugueses. Next, the Ship taken was
fired, and then he sailed, leaving that Prince and City in a Consternation.

6. The King of Cananor, through fear, granted all he had denied to Entreaties.
And the Admiral arriving at Cochin, and having seen the King, perceived it was
true (as he had been informed) that those three Kings had combined to make him
winter there by fraud, hoping thereby to destroy him, finding a Fleet of 200
Sail they had fitted out for that purpose was utterly lost by Storms. At length
Peace and Amity was concluded with the King of Cochin, which proved not only
advantageous then, but afterward durable. Don Vasco among other Presents, gave
him a Crown of Gold; and he besides many other things of value, sent the King a
Stone of great worth, as being a Sovereign Antidote against all Poison. This
Stone of the bigness of a Hazle Nut, is found in the Head of that Creature the
Indians call Bulgodalf. The King of Cananor understanding the good
Correspondence there was between Vasco de Gama and him of Cochin, and fearing
our Fleet would not return to his Port, declared he was as ready to comply with
the Admiral as the other, and received a satisfactory answer. Here Don Vasco
received Ambassadors, who said they came from some Christian Inhabitants of
that Neighboring Country, the Metropolis whereof was Cranganor, and they to
the number of 30000: That St. Thomas had preached to their Forefathers; that
they were subject to the Patriarch of Armenia; that they were infested by the
Pagans; that they knew he was an Officer of the most Catholic King of Europe,
to whom they submitted themselves, delivering into his hands the Rod of
Justice. This Rod was Red, about the length of a Scepter, the ends tipped with
Silver, with three Bells at the top. They were dispatched with hopes of a
powerful assistance.

7. Whilst the Ships were lading at Cochin, a Bramen of Note, with his Son and
Nephew, offered himself to Don Vasco, signifying a desire of coming to Portugal
to be instructed in the Faith, and proposing methods of reconciliation with the
King of Calicut. He found credit, because his Son and Nephew were to remain as
Hostages; and the Admiral sailed for Calicut in a great Ship, accompanied by
only one Caravel, hoping to meet Vincent Sodre, who was gone to set the
Ambassadors ashore. But he being attacked by the Moors, though he worsted them,
was gone to Cananor. The Bremen was landed, and carrying several Messages back
and forward, gave time for fitting 100 Paros or great Boats, which suddenly one
morning hemmed in the Admiral so boldly, that many offered to board him with
Fireworks to burn the Ship. It began to take fire, when cutting the Cable she
put off the Fireship, and the Boats to avoid it were discovered, but much more
by our Cannon, which being at good distance took effect. Sodre receiving advice
by the Caravel the Admiral had sent, when first he missed him, came in good
season, and all together charged the Enemy in such manner, they were put to
flight with great loss. The Hostages were hanged at the Yard Arms in sight of
the City, and then put into a Boat with a Letter for the King, desiring him to
accept of that Present in return for his Messengers contrivance. The Admiral
returned to Cochin, and being dispatched, left there in a wooden House built
for that purpose with the King's leave, a Factor and 32 Portugueses. Then
sailed with his ten Ships for Cananor; not far from Pandarane there met him
twenty nine of the King of Calicut. He sent out three Vessels to engage the two
foremost of the Enemies, which was performed with such vigor, that when the
Admiral came up, the two were taken, the rest fled, 300 Moors killed. The Booty
was considerable, the chief thing an Idol of Gold, weighing 30 pound, of
monstrous shape, his Eyes were two Emrauds, on his Breast was a very large
Ruby, and part of him covered with a Cloak of Gold set with Jewels. Sodre was
left there to guard the Coast and Factories; the Admiral continued his Voyage.
He arrived at Lisbon with nine Ships richly laden, and with public pomp
carried the Tribute he with much honor had received of Quiloa, whereof the
King ordered to be made a Custodium of Gold for the Church of our Lady of
Bethlehem, and gave all his share of such Prizes as should be taken, to the use
of that Structure.

CHAP. VII.
Conquests under King Emanuel, from the Year 1503, till the Year 1505.

1. THE King of Calicut envying the advantage he of Cochin made of our Trade,
got together 50000 men at Patane 16 Leagues from Cochin, with other
preparations for War. The People of Cochin fearing that Power, were for
delivering up the Portugueses to him of Calicut, who demanded nothing more. But
Triumpara, King of Cochin, refused, and went out with three Nephews, and small
force to meet the Enemy. At the first charge he was forsaken by some of his
Nobles, yet assisted by the Portugueses, valiantly maintained a Pass, till his
Nephews being killed, whereof one was General, he was forced to fly and secure
himself in the Island Vaipi, near to and more tenable than Cochin, which was
burnt; and he persisted in not delivering up the Portugueses; a notable example
of Fidelity in a Heathen, scarce to be paralleled among Christians.

2. Whilst the People of Cochin were beseiged in the Island, there sailed from
Lisbon nine Ships under three distinct Commanders. The first was Alfonso de
Alburquerque, the second Francis de Alburquerque, and the third Antony de
Saldanna. The three last were to cruise in the Mouth of the Red Sea against the
Ships of Meca; the others to return with their lading. Francis de Alburquerque
arrived first with more Ships than he brought out, having met with those of
Vincent Sodre, who was cruising upon the Indian Coast and distressed by Storm;
as also a Vessel that had been separated from D. Vasco de Gama. Sodre had taken
four Ships of Calicut, which he carried to Cananor, and burnt several small
Vessels; but this happened before the invasion of Cochin, to whose King he had
offered his assistance, but was not admitted; and sailing thence touched at
Zocotora and Guardafu, and on the Coast of Arabia took some Vessels of Cambaya
and Calicut. Winter coming on he took shelter in a Bay near the Islands
Curiamuria, and found the Moors of that Coast called Baduiis, who live by their
Cattle, were tractable; and after two Months they advised Sodre to seek a
better Harbor, because about that time there arose such Storms in that place
that he would be lost. He would not credit them, believing they said it only to
be rid of him, but sound they spoke truth, being lost with his Brother, and all
the men in a sudden Tempest, the other Vessels with great danger, and suffering
much through hunger and thirst escaped, met Francis de Alburquerque, and
arrived with him at Cochin. The Commander sent the King a Present into the
Island, part whereof was 10000 Ducats in Money. Then going ashore the King ran
and embraced him, crying, Portugal, Portugal; and all the People with great
cries repeat Portugal, Portugal; and the Portugueses to return the civility,
cried Cochin, Cochin. The Commander comforted the King, giving him assured
hopes in the assistance of his Ships and the others he expected. Not to lose
time, he fell upon those who held the Island of Cochin for the King of Calicut,
and killing many expelled the remainder; then passed to Vaipi, restoring that
Country to its lawful Prince. The Lord of Repelim his Lands were wasted with
Fire and Sword, and only four Portugueses lost in this action. The joy
Triumpara conceived in being restored by our assistance, moved him to grant us
leave to build a Fort in Cochin. The work was begun when Alfonso de Albuquerque
arrived, and it was called the Fort of St. James, and a Church then built,
dedicated to St. Bartholomew. 500 men were put aboard some Vessels taken from
the Enemy, who burnt Repelim after a stout defense made by 2000 Nayres. Alfonso
de Albuquerque ambitious of performing some notable Exploit by himself,
advanced against a Town, when a multitude of expert Heathens issuing, brought
him into great danger, and the more by the assistance of thirty three Vessels
of Calicut; but Francis his Brother coming up, they were put to flight, and
many killed, as were 700 in the Island Cabalam, where they thought to secure
themselves. Duarte Pacheco destroyed another Town, killing many of the
Inhabitants. As our men sailed (though victorious) spent with fatigue, fifty
Ships of Calicut met them, the number surprised them, but our Cannon being well
played, the Enemy fled. Antonio do Campo carried the news of this success to
Portugal.

3. Pepper was bought with some expense of blood. The Queen of Coulam offered
lading for two Ships, Alburquerque went thither, and settled a Trade as in
Cochin; and to manage it left there a Factor and twenty six men. The King of
Calicut perceiving our success, desired Peace, it was granted upon our
Conditions, some being put in execution, he put a stop to the rest. He loved
the Convenience, but hated the Means, and again prosecuted the War. The King of
Cochin representing how just he had been to us, desired some able Commander
might be left there with a number of men to his assistance. The demand was
reasonable, it was therefore resolved that Duarte Pacheco with his Ship and two
Caravels, and 100 men should be left there. Alfonso and Francis de Alburquerque
returned toward home. The first arrived safe, and among other things brought
the King forty pound of Pearls, and four hundred of the small; a Diamond of
wonderful bigness, and two Horses, one a Persian the other an Arab, which were
held in great esteem, being the first that were brought to the Kingdom. Francis
de Alburquerque, and the Ships under his Command were never more heard of Peter
de Ataide, who followed them, having escaped a Storm, was found with his men at
Melinde.

4. Antony de Saldanna, the last of the three Commanders, and who was sent to
cruise in the Mouth of the Red Sea, having lost Diego Fernandez Pete^a came to
an Anchor at St. Thomas. Short of the Cape of Good Hope was made famous a place
by the name of Aguada del Saldanna, or Saldannas watering place, not for any
Water he took, but the Blood of his Men shed there, endeavoring to land. At
this time a Storm had parted from him Ruy Lorenco, driving him up to
Mozambique, whence he held his course to Quiloa, where he took some small
Prizes. An ambition of doing something more remarkable, carried him to the
Island Zanzibar, 20 Leagues short of Monbaca, where he took twenty small
Vessels. Then he appeared before the Town of that name. The King of it designed
to take the Ship with a number of Paraos, or Boats; but our Long Boat going out
with thirty men, killed several, and took four Paraos. The King appeared on the
Shore with 4000 men commanded by his Son, who was killed with some others by
the first Volley. Their loss produced our safety, for one of them running from
their Crowd, with Colors bearing the Arms of Portugal, Peace was concluded,
that King agreeing to pay 100 Meticales of Gold yearly, as tributary to
Portugal. Thence he visited Melinde, whose King was oppressed by him of
Monbaca, for his friendship to us. This obliged Ruy Lorenco to stand in; by the
way he took two Ships and three Zambucos, small Vessels, and in them twelve
Magistrates of the City Brava, who, as such, submitted that City to Portugal,
with the yearly Tribute of 500 Meticales. The two Kings came to a Battle, and
parted upon equal Terms. Now came Antony de Saldanna, whereupon he of Monbaca
came to an agreement. Beyond Cape Guardafu, and in the Islands Canacani they
worsted some Moors who would hinder their watering: On the upper Coast of
Arabia they burnt a Ship laden with Frankincense, and forced ashore another
that carried Pilgrims to Meca. But whilst they sail to India, let us see what
is doing at Cochin.

5. Zamori of Calicut called ^gether the Kings and Lords of Malabar, and there
resorted to him those of Tanor, Bespur, Cotugan and Corin, and ten Lords of
equal Power, besides the Lesser. They drew together 50000 men, as well for Land
as Sea; for the Sea were 4000 men in 280 Paraos, Caturs, and Tonees, Vessels of
several sorts, with 382 Cannons to batter the new Fort; all the rest was for
the Land to attack the Ford of a River that passed to the Island; these were
commanded by Naubea D^ring, Nephew and Heir to him of Calicut, and by Elancol,
Lord of Repelim. The King of Cochin was in fear, seeing many of his Subjects
desert, but Duarto Pacheco, who commanded the Portugueses, encouraged him.
Pacheco put himself into a posture of Defense. Into the Ship he put 25 men,
into the Fort 39, into the Caravel 26, into a Boat 23, he was in another with
22; besides these, 300 Malabars attended him; the King with his Forces was to
guard the City. Thus he went to meet Zamori, and finding him quartered in a
Village, attacked it, and did much harm. There happened three fierce ingagement^
about gaining the Pass; in the first the Enemy lost 20 Paraos sunk by the
Cannon, and 180 Persons of Note, above 1000 private men. In the second 19
Paraos and 360 men. In the third 622 Paraos, and 60 fled, and 15000 men by
Land, and among them Zamori; Pacheco pursuing, burnt four Towns.

6. The Moors that were with the King of Cochin ^ve intelligence to the Enemy.
The King gave Pacheco leave to punish them. He took five, secured them, and
gave out they were hanged, which the King and all his People rese^ed. Zamori
returns and attempts another Ford. James Perez and Peter Raphael with two
Caravels and some Boats were posted, where the Lord of Repelim was to attack
with 3000 men, sustained by the Prince Naubeadarim with his men. At this time
300 Moors deserted Pacheco; he wanted Powder, and the Prince of Cochin, to whom
he sent for it, did not relieve him, for the Messenger treacherously forbore
delivering the message. But Pacheco overcoming all difficulties, killed 650 of
Zamori's men, who retired to a Grove of Palm Trees, where nine of his men were
killed so near him by a Cannon Ball, that he was sprinkled with their Blood.
After this he lost 6000 men by the Plague.

7. Great were the preparations the King of Calicut made, and the mean time
fatigued Pacheco with several stratagems and treacheries. The Bramen Conjurers
proposed the making a Powder, which being thrown in our men's Eyes, would blind
them, and so they would be easily overcome; besides they had a new invention of
Castles that were to destroy them; and the Moors of Cochin were underhand
bribed to poison the water of the Island. The Powder was looked upon as
ridiculous, but great care was taken by Pacheco to prevent the Poison. The
Castles began to appear, and were eight in number, fifteen foot high, and
placed upon two Boats each, and carried many men. Pacheco had a 160 men divided
into four parts, the Foord, the Fort, the Caravels and the Ship, and herein
consisted the principal strength of the Kingdom of Cochin; for of the 30000 men
the King had at first, there were now but 8000 left, many of the Principal Men
having deserted. Zamori had brought 80000 men, and lost 20000. Whilst the
Towers were preparing Pacheco was attacked by a number of Paraos, in one attack
he killed some men, and took five Boats; in another eight with thirteen
Cannons. Six bold Nayres offered to kill him, and in order thereto came over as
Deserters, but he having intelligence, apprehended and sent them to the King.
Zamori gave out that the Portugueses at Cochin were all killed, to the intent
those who resided at Cananor and Coulam should be destroyed; they were in great
danger, one or two killed, and many wounded. The King of Cochin, though he saw
the great danger that threatened him, was resolved to endure the utmost
miseries, rather than abandon the Portugueses, but feared those few must at
last be overpowred by the multitude of the Enemy, and the danger of those brave
men grieved him more than his own; he therefore most earnestly entreated
Pacheco to quit that enterprise, and save himself and men for some opportunity
wherein he might do his Prince greater service. But Pacheco bid the King be of
good courage, and not dishearten his Subjects with any signs of fear, but
exhort them to stand firm, and thereby they should overcome all difficulties.
And fearing lest some Portugueses, by his example, might faulter in his
resolution of dying or conquering, he went abode the Ship, and made to them a
most learned, copious and resolute Speech, which gave new vigor to them all;
but much more his speedy Orders, and Courageous Activity shown at that very
time; for scarce was the Speech ended, when the Enemy came to assail him; the
Enemies design was to burn our Ships, and therefore those Castles were drove
toward them, all the Front flaming. But Pacheco who perceived their intent,
threw over long Beams, one end whereof resting against the Ship, the other
hindered the approach of those burning Castles.

8. The Enemy appeared with 290 small Vessels, well stored with Men and
Artillery, and eight Castles, one carrying 40 men, two 35 each, and every one
of the other five 30 men, before all came the Fireworks. The Shore was covered
by 30000 men, with good Artillery; at the Head of them the Lord of Repelim,
with a vast number of Pioneers. The Fight began, the odds being almost 300
Vessels to three. At first the Artillery wrought no effect, but being continued
tore those Towers, and the Smoke being somewhat allayed, the Sea appeared
covered with broken Boats, Arms, dead Bodies, and others struggling with Death;
the Fight was renewed with great loss to the Enemy, and not one Portugues
killed. Next day Zamori returned, and was beaten off with greater damage,
having lost 18000 men in the space of five Months that this service lasted. The
King by the advice of his Bramens, retired to do Penance, and by consent of
his Council desired a Peace, which the King of Cochin granted. At this time
Pacheco received a Message from the Factor at Coulam, desiring he would come to
assist him against five Ships of Moors who obstructed his Market of Pepper.
Pacheco went with all speed, and they submitting, he took the Pepper at their
own rate, without doing them any harm. He hindered others from coming into that
Harbor, and returned to Cochin with the Glory of having struck a general
terror through all that Coast.

9. King Emanuel being informed by D. Vasco de Gama, how necessary it was to
appear with a greater Force in India, fitted out a Fleet of 13 Ships, the
biggest had yet been built in Portugal, and gave the Command of them to Lope
Soarez, and in them 1200 men. The first Land of India he touched at was
Anchediva, where Antony de Saldanna and Ruy Lorenco were refitting, in order to
cruise on the Coast of Cambaya upon the Moors of Meca. But Lope Soarez took
them along with him to Cananor, where he staid to give the necessary Orders,
and then appearing before Calicut, had some Prisoners, who were taken in the
late War, delivered to him; but because they did not give up all, he battered
the City two days, wherein he ruined great part of it, and killed 300
Inhabitants, and then sailed to Cochin at the time that Pacheco was upon his
return from Coulam. The King informed him of the damage he received from
Cranganor, a Town but 4 Leagues distant, and fortified by Zamori.

10. Lope Soarez with great secrecy provided 20 Vessels, and sailed with them
up the River, where he found 5 Ships and 80 Paraos well manned; which two Ships
of ours who had the Vanguard, burnt after a sharp engagement. Then he sailed
on, the Prince of Cochin was to join him, but came late. A multitude of Indians
and Moors covered the Shore, who with Showers of Arrows endeavored to hinder
our landing, but our Musketeers made way, and having reached the Town, it was
burnt down to the ground, and the Prince of Calicut who was to have guarded it,
fled. This Victory and another obtained by the King of Tanor against that
Prince, wherein Lope Soarez was to assist him, though the Succor came late,
produced a friendly Peace with that King.

11. Lope Soarez left Manuel Tellez Barreto with four Sail to secure the Fort
of Cochin, and set sail in order to return home, with design first to fall upon
Banane, a Town subject to Calicut. He was met by twenty Paraos, who freely
bestowed their Shot, drawing him into a Bay, where were seventeen great Ships
well-stored with Cannon, and with 4000 men. The Ships were all burnt with their
lading, which was very rich, and 700 Turks drowned, besides what perished by
Fire and Sword; this Victory cost twenty three men. It was the beginning of
January, when Lope Soarez sailed 1506.
hence, and he arrived at Lisbon on the 22d of July with thirteen Victorious
Ships laden with Riches; three were of the foregoing years Fleet; of his own he
lost Peter Mendoza, who being st^nded 14 Leagues from Aguada de S. Bras was
never more heard of. One of the other three was that of Diego Fernandez
Peteyra, who after taking several Prizes, on the Coast of Melinde, discovered
the Island Zocotora. The King placed Duarte Pacheco (who had so bravely
defended Cochin) by his side under a Canopy, and went with him in that manner
to Church, to honor his great Valor. But soon after imprisoned, and suffered
him to die miserably: A terrible example of the uncertainty of Royal Favors,
and the little regard that is had to True Merit.

CHAP. VIII.
Conquests under King Emanuel, from the Year 1505, and beginning of the
Government of Don Francisco de Almeyda, first Governor and Viceroy of India,
till the Year 1509.

1. BEfore these Discoveries, the Spice was brought to Europe with vast trouble
and charge. The Clove of Malucco, the Nutmeg and Mace of Banda, the Sandal of
Timor, the Camfir of Borneo, the Gold and Silver of Luconia, and all the other
Riches, Spices, Gums, Perfumes, and Curiosities of China, Iava, Siam, and other
Kingdoms were carried to the Market of the City Malaca, seated in the Golden
Chersonesus, whence the Inhabitants of all the Western Countries as far as the
Red Sea, brought them, dealing by way of barter; for no Money was used, Silver
and Gold being of less value there, than with them that traded thither. This
Trade it was enriched the Cities of Calicut, Cambaya, Ormuz and Aden adding to
what they brought from Malaca, the Rubies of Pegu, the Stuffs of Bengala, the
Pearls of Calicare, the Diamonds of Narsinga, the Cinnamon and richer Rubies of
Ceylon, the Pepper, Ginger and other Spice of the Coast of Malabar, and other
places Nature had enriched therewith. From Ormuz they were brought to Europe up
the Persian Gulf to Bacora at the Mouth of Euphrates, and thence distributed
in Caravans through Armenia, Trebisond, Tartary, Aleppo and Damascus, and then
at the Port of Barut upon the Mediterranean, the Venetians, Genoese and
Catalonians laded with them to their respective Countries. Such as came up the
Red Sea were landed at Toro or Sues, Towns at the bottom of that Straight,
thence went in Caravans to Grand Cayre, so down the Nile to Alexandria, and
thence shipped off. Many Princes, and particularly the Sultan of Cayre, being
great losers by this new way found by the Portugueses, they endeavored to
drive them out of India.

2. The Sultan endeavored to work his ends by a Wile, and therefore gave out,
that he was going to destroy the Temple and Holy Places of Jerusalem. Father
Maurus of Mount Sinai, fearing the execution, offered to go to Rome to the Pope
to procure an accommodation. The Sultan, who desired nothing more, gave him a
Letter to the Pope, signifying that his Reasons for destroying those Places,
were in revenge of the damage done to his Trade. The Pope sent the same Father
Maurus to Portugal. But the Purport of his Message being already known before
his arrival, the King made such Preparations, that he returned with admiration,
carrying more from Portugal to relate at Cayre, than he brought thence to
recount here. However the King gave considerable Alms for the Convent, and
answered the Pope, showing that his Intentions in those Eastern Discoveries
tended to the Propagation of the Faith, and extending the Jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome.

3. On the 25th of March sailed from Lisbon 1507.
a Fleet of twenty two Ships, eleven of them were to return with Merchandise,
and eleven to remain in India; they carried 1500 fighting men, and were
commanded by Don Franciso de Almeyda, who went to govern in India with the
Title of Viceroy, and gave great demonstrations of his Prudence and Courage.
The second of July happened a terrible Storm, which tearing to pieces the Sails
of Diego Correas Ship, carried three men overboard; two were lost, the third
cried from the Water they should have an Eye after him, for he would keep above
water till the next morning, and the next morning the Storm ceasing, they took
him up, his name was Fernando Lorenco. Don Francisco de Almeyda arrived at
Quiloa with only eight Vessels, the others were separated by stress of Weather,
and one lost, but the men saved. He entered that Port and saluted as usual, but
was not answered, whereupon he complained to the King. He at first framed
excuses, and avoided coming to a Conference, though Don Francisco attended in
the place appointed, which set him upon studying revenge. After a Council held,
it was resolved to erect a Fort in that place, as was desired by King Emanuel.
Having promised some description of all such places as we took possession of,
it will be fit to insert here that of the Country, City and Fort of Quiloa.

4. From Cape Guardafu, the most Western point of Africa, to Mocambique are 550
Leagues, a hollow Coast like a Bow when bent. From Cape Mozambique to Cape
Corrientes 170 Leagues; thence to the Cape of Good Hope 340 Leagues; hence the
Coast runs bowing to the Westward as far as the Borders of the Kingdom of
Congo; but by reason of its great length, appears to the Eye to run strait to
the Northward. Drawing a Line from the Southern borders of Congo cross the
Continent Eastward, there remains to the Southward that great portion of
Africa, to which the Barbarous Inhabitants have given no name, but was called
by the Persians Caffaria, and the Inhabitants Cafres, which signifies a Rude
People, without Law or Government; and our late Geographers call it Ethiopia
Inferior. Above this on the East, runs for above 200 Leagues that Coast which
we call. Zanguebar; but the Arabians and Persians give this name to all the
Coast as far as the Cape of Good Hope. Above Zanguebar as far as Point
Guardafu, and Mouth of the Red Sea, is that which the Arabs call Aiam, or
Aiana, inhabited by the same Arabs, and the Inland by Heathen Blacks. Most of
this Coast is very low, and subject to inundations, covered with impenetrable
Woods, which made it excessive hot and unhealthy. The Natives are black, of
curled Hair, Idolaters, so gigiven to Superstition, that upon frivolous motives
they give over the most important Designs, as it happened to the King of Quiloa
at this time; who because a Black Cat crossed him at his coming out, failed of
meeting Don Francisco de Almeyda. The Cattle, Fruit and Grain is answerable to
the wildness of the Country. The Moors who inhabit the Coast and adjacent
Islands, are little given to Tilling, and feed upon Wild Beasts, and some
loathsome things; those who live in the Inland, and have commerce with the
Barbarous Cafres, make use of some Milk. Nature has stored the Country with
much Gold, that those People might inhabit it, and our Covetousness, though at
such distance, find them out. It was Covetousness that first drew thither the
Arabs, called Emozaydii, that is, subjects of Zayde, who built two considerable
Towns, only sufficient to secure them against the Cafres. These continued so,
till great numbers of other Arabs, who were Neighbourers of the City Lacab, 40
Leagues from the Island Baharem in the Persian Gulf, came over thither, whose
first Plantation was Magadoxa, and after Brava; the former became the
Metropolis. The first Arabs separated from these, and mixing with the Cafres,
were called Baduiis. The first that had the Trade of the Mine of Zofala, were
those of Magadoxa, who discovered it accidentally. Thence they spread
themselves, but never durst pass Cape Corrientes, a Point opposite to the
Westermost part of the Island Madagascar or St. Laurence, and takes its name
from the violent Current of Water which often endangers Ships there. But along
these Coasts they possessed themselves of Quiloa, Monbaca, Melinde, the Isles
of Pemba, Zanzibar, Monfia, Comoro, and others. Quiloa was the chief of all
their Plantations, and thence many were spread, particularly on the Coast of
Madagascar. The Sea by degrees wearing away both sides, made Quiloa an Island.
It bears many Palm and Thorn-trees, and diverse Herbs and Plants; Cattle, Wild
Beasts, and Birds, much after the same manner as Spain; the Buildings also
after our manner, flat at the Top, with Gardens and Orchards behind. On one
side is the Royal Palace, built in the manner of a Fort; the Gate to the Sea
opposite to the Anchoring place, where ours at that time were.

5. Don Francisco de Almeyda, having resolved to land, was the first that
touched the Shore with 500 men. He and his Son Laurence at the same time
attacked the City in two places. Our men had enough to do to cover themselves
with their Shields from the showers of Arrows that flew, yet they advanced; but
finding the greatest damage they received was from the tops of the Houses, they
entered and gained some of them, and thereby so much advantage, that the King
fled, and set up in the Field Portugues Colors, which stopped the Current of the
Conquerors, till he had got over to the Continent with his Wives and Riches.
The City was plundered, and not one man lost in this Action, though a
considerable number of the Enemies was killed.

6. Mir Abraham now overcome, was but an Usurper, but the 44th Possessor of
that Island, of which number many were Tyrants like him. A Kinsman of this
Abraham, called Mahomet Anconii had been very faithful and serviceable to the
Portugueses; to requite him Don Francisco ordered when the City was plundered,
that nothing appertaining to him should be touched. And after all was settled,
sent for, and declared him King of that place, putting a Crown of Gold upon his
Head with much Pomp and Ceremony. It was a wonderful act of Moderation in this
Barbarian, that as soon as the Crown was on his Head, he declared, that had the
lawful King Alfudail, murdered by the late Usurper, been living, he would have
resigned that Crown to him, but since he could not do it, he desired the Son of
the said Alfudail might be sworn hereditary Prince, though he himself had
Children for whom he might covet that Inheritance. This Example in a Heathen
might confound the inhuman insolence and barbarity in Christians (at least
those who pretend to the name) who wade through Seas of Blood, ^end the most
Sacred Bonds of Consanguinity and Alliance; spoil Provinces, oppress the Good,
exalt the Wicked, make Honesty, Treason; and Perjury, Duty; and Religion, a
property to work their ambitious cursed ends, to wit, to snatch Scepters and
Crowns from the Hands and Heads where the Eternal Providence has most worthily
placed them.

7. All things being again settled, Don Francisco in twenty days raised a Fort,
the Gentlemen, Captains and he himself working at it. He put into it 550 men,
and left a Caravel and a Brigantine to cruise there. The 8th of August he set
sail for Mombaca, and arrived there with 13 Sail. The City Mombaca is seated in
an Island, which is about 14 Leagues in circumference; it is beautiful and
strong; before it is a large Bay capable of many Ships. Before he entered, two
Vessels were sent to sound the Bar, which is commanded by a Platform with eight
Pieces of Cannon, which began to play upon them that were fadoming, but they
repaid the Courtesy so fortunately, that a Ball falling among the Enemies
Powder did great harm, and they quitted the Work. The like success was against
two lesser Works, so that our Fleet entered without further resistance. Don
Francisco was told the King was prepared, and had hired 1500 Archers of the
Cafres besides his own men. He sent a message to him, but was not hearkened to,
and only answered, that the Moors of Mombaca were not to be frighted with the
noise of Cannon, like those of Quiloa. Don Francisco enraged that some men had
been wounded, attempting to burn the Ships of Cambaya in the Port, without
succeeding, landed his men and marched to the City.

8. He entered the Town the 15th of August, and drove the Enemy out at the other
end, and among them the King, whose Palace he had possessed himself of, and
planted thereon a Cross, and here received the News of the Victory at Sea, the
Ships having been burnt as he ordered. In this Action were lost five
Portugueses; of the Moors 1513 killed, and 1200 taken, whereof he kept but 200,
discharging the rest, the Ships being heavy with Plunder; after which the City
was burnt to the ground. Some of the Ships which had been separated by the
Storm, joined the Fleet here. Don Francisco dispatched two before him to carry
the News of what he had done, and the necessary Orders till he came. He set out
for India with 14 Ships, and anchored in the Bay called Angra de Santa Elena,
where he found John Homem, Captain of a Caravel, who having been distressed by
Weather had discovered some Islands, and met some of the Ships that had lost
the Fleet. Sailing thence, the first Port of India where he touched, was
Anchediva.

9. Anchediva (as was said before) is the chiefest of five Islands, where the
King had ordered a Fort to be built, which was now put in execution. Hither the
King of Onor sent Ambassadors to Don Francisco with Presents. Hither came to
meet him Considerable Men, though Merchants, assuring him of the Good Affection
of their Prince to the Portugueses. Hither the Neighboring Moors of Cincatora
brought Gifts to him. All was the effects of Fear, produced by the Fame of his
Actions. He was informed there was not far from him a Fort, strong by Nature as
well as Art, built by the Prince Sabago, and garrisoned with 800 men, being
seated on the Banks of the River Aliga and Borders of Onor; he sent his Son Don
Lorenco on pretense of a Friendly Visit to take a view of it, which he
effected, remaining there some days.

10. The Fort being finished, he put a Captain and 80 men into it, leaving a
Galeon and two Brigantines to cruise there, and then sailed to the Port of
Onor. He was ill received, and resolved to show himself as terrible there as he
had done at Mombaca and Quiloa. The Inhabitants perceiving it, amused him with
excuses till they had secured their Wives, Children and Goods in a neighboring
Mountain, and then appeared with shouts and motions, endeavoring to terrify
rather than seem fearful. Don Francisco marched by land, and sent his Son with
150 men in Boats to burn some Ships; and though innumerable Arrows flew, and
Don Francisco was wounded with one, the Town and Ships were fired at the same
time. The Wind being in our men's Faces, the Smoke of the Fire did them much
harm; but Don Lorenco taking a compass avoided it, and fell upon 1500 of the
Enemy. The confusion was great on both sides, but more on ours, our men
beginning to give ground, till Don Francisco coming up, they took heart and
drove the Enemy to the Mountain. Timoja Governor of the City, and Owner of
some of the Ships that were burnt, and a man of Graceful Presence, with
discreet words appeased Don Francisco, and stopped the ensuing ruin. He excused
his King, and in his Name offered Vassalage to Portugal. This done Don
Francisco sailed to Cananor.

CHAP. IX.
Conquests under King Emanuel in the Year 1506, and Government of the Viceroy
Don Francisco de Almeyda.

1. BEcause the Government of Don Francisco de Almeyda was the Foundation of
our Security and Conquests in India, it will be necessary here to say some
things of its Ports and Chief Places along the Sea Coasts. Asia is divided from
Europe by the River Don or Tanais, and the Euxine or Black Sea, and Streights
of the Dardanels. From Africa by the Red Sea, and a Line drawn from Suez, the
utmost Port thereof, to the Mediterranean, cross that narrow Neck of Land which
joins these two parts of the World, and is 24 Leagues in length. The different
Religions there practiced, may be reduced to four principal ones, the
Christian, the Mohammedan, the Pagan and the Jewish. That part of Asia which
makes most to our purpose, may be divided into nine parts, as it runs along the
Coast. The first beginning to the Westward, commences at the Mouth of the Red
Sea in 12 d. 40 m. of North Latitude, and reaches to the Gulf of Persia. From
the Mouth of the Red Sea to the City Aden is 44 Leagues, thence to Cape
Fortaque in 14 d. 30 m. Latitude 100 Leagues, with these Towns Abian, Ax,
Canacan, Brun, Argel, Zehel the Metropolis, Herit, Cayem, Fartach. Hence to
Curia Muria 70 Leagues, in which are the City Dolfor, famous for Frankincense,
and 20 Leagues beyond it, Norbate. From Curia Muria to Cape Ra^ Alegate in 22
d. 30 Latitude 120 Leagues, all barren and desert. Here begins the Kingdom of
Ormus, and hence to Cape Mozandan are 90 Leagues, with these Cities Colagate,
Curiate, Mascate, Soar, Calata, Orfacam, Doba and Lima, 8 Leagues from
Monbazam, which Ptolomy calls Cape Assaborum, in 26 degrees of North Latitude.
All this tract the Arabs call Ayaman, and we Arabia Felix, because the most
fruitful and best inhabited of all Arabia. The second division contains 200
Leagues, from Cape Jacques to the Mouth of Indus is called Chirman, divided into
the two Kingdoms, Macran and Madel, with these Towns, Guadel, Calara, Tibique,
Calamate, Goadel and Diul, this Coast is barren and much of it desert, because
of the shoal Water. The third contains 150 Leagues, 38 from Diul to Cape
Iaquete, thence to Dio in the Kingdom Guzarata 50, with these Towns, Cotinna,
Mangalor, Chervar, Patan and Corinar; from Dio to Cambaya 50 Leagues, and these
Towns, Madrafavat, Moha, Talica, Goda and Gundin. Between Cambaya and Iaquete
is included a part of the Kingdom of Guzarata, and the Mountain Country of the
Resboutos. The fourth contains 290 Leagues, and is the most precious part of
India, and most frequented by the Portugueses. This division is subdivided into
three parts by two Rivers that run from East to West. The first separates the
Kingdom of Decan from that of Guzarat, which lies North of it; the second parts
Decan from Canara on the South. There are other Rivers which all have their
Springs in the Mountain Gate. The chief of all those Rivers is called Ganga, or
Guenga, and falls into the Sea near the Mouth of Ganges, between the Cities
Angali and Pisolta, in about 22 degrees of Latitude. The River Bate has his
Springs in the Mount Gate, and falls into the Sea by Bombaim, parting the
Kingdoms of Guzarata and Decan. From the City Cambaya to the Mouth of this
River are 70 Leagues. From Chaul South of it, to the River Aliga, the southern
extent of Decan 75 Leagues, with these Towns, Bandor, Dabul, Debetele,
Cintapori, Coropatan, Banda, Chapora and Goa, our Metropolis and Archiepiscopal
See in India. The third district begins where Canara parts from Decan, and ends
in Cape Comori, and contains above 140 Leagues. From this River to Mount Delli
is about 46 Leagues, with these Towns, Onor, Baticale, Barcalor, Baranor, and
others of the Province Canara, subject to the King of Bisnaga. Below this to
Cape Comori are 93 Leagues, and is called Malabar, divided into three Kingdoms
which own no Superior. The Kingdom of Cananor has 20 Leagues of the Coast, in
which are these Towns, Cota, Coulam, Nilichilam, Marabia, ^olepatam, Cananor,
the Metropolis, in the Latitude of 12 degrees, Tremapatan, Cheba, Maim and
Purepatan. Here begins the Kingdom of Calicut, and runs 27 Leagues, and has
these Towns, Calicut the Metropolis in about 11 degrees 70 minutes of Latitude,
Coulete, Chale, Parangale and Tanor, the head of a Kingdom, subject to the
Zamori or Emperor of Calicut, and Chatua the last Bound of this Empire. Next
is the little Kingdom of Cranganor, which borders on that of Cochin, then that
of Coulan, and lastly Travancor, subject to Narsinga. Near Travancor is the
Famous Cape Comori, the southermost Inland of this Province of Indostan or
India, within Ganges, and 7 degrees and half of North Latitude, where ends the
Coast of Malabar, and the fourth of the nine districts I now divide the Coast
of Asia into. From Cape Comori in the West, to Cape Cincapura in the East,
which is the Southermost Land of the Aurea Chersonesus, or Malaca, are 400
Leagues; and within this interval is contained the great Bay of Bengala, called
by some Sinus Gangeticus, because the River Ganges, after watering the Country
of Bengala, falls into this Bay about the Latitude of 23 Degrees. This River is
wonderful for the abundance of water it carries, and esteemed Holy by the
Neighboring People, who imagining it conduces to their Salvation when given
over, are carried and die with their Feet in its water, which brings the King a
great Revenue, for none must wash there without paying a certain Duty. Though
this River has many Mouths, the two most remarkable are called Satigan to the
West, and Chatigan to the East, near 100 Leagues distant from each other; and
here will end the fifth of the nine Districts. This may be subdivided into
three parts, The first the Kingdom of Bisnaga contains 200 Leagues, and these
Towns, Tarancurii, Manapar, Vaipar, Trechendur, Caligrande, Charcacale,
Tucucurii, Benbar, Calicare, Beadala, Manancort and Cannameira, whence takes
name that Cape that stretches out there in 10 degrees of North Latitude; then
Negapatan, Hahor, Triminapatan, Tragambar, Trimenava, Colororam, Puducheira,
Calapate, Connumeira, Sadrapatan and Meliapor, now called St. Thomas, because
that Apostles Body was found there. From St. Thomas to Palicata are 9 Leagues,
then go on Chiricole, Aremogan, Caleturo, Caleciro, Pentipolii, where ends the
Kingdom of Bisnagur, and begins that of Orixa, the second part of this
District, and contains about 120 Leagues to Cape Palmeiras, with these Towns,
Penacote, Calingan, Vizipatan, Bimilepatan, Narsingapatan, Puacatan, Caregare
and others. Here begins the third part, which is the Kingdom of Bengala, and
extends above 100 Leagues. The sixth District of the nine begins at the East
Mouth of Ganges or Chatigan, and ends at Cape Cincapura, in little more than
one degree of North Latitude. This Coast contains about 380 Leagues to Cape
Negraes, in the Latitude of 16 degrees 100 Leagues, and these Towns, Sore,
Satatolu, Arracam, Metropolis of the Kingdom so called, and Dunadiva upon the
Point. Hence to Tavay in the Latitude of 13 Degrees 16 Leagues. This is the
bounds of the Kingdom of Pegu. From Tavay to Cincapura 220, the chief Towns
along this Coast are Martaban, Lugor, Tanacerin, Lungar, Pedam, Queda, Solongor
and Malaca, Head of the Kingdom. At Cincapura begins the seventh District, and
ends at the great River of Siam, which falls into the Sea in the Latitude of 14
Degrees, and has its rise in the Lake Chiammay, called by the Natives Menam,
that is, source of waters; upon this Coast are the Towns Pam, Ponciam,
Calantaon, Patane, Ligor, Cuii, Perperii, and Bamplacot on the Mouth of the
River. The eighth District contains these Kingdoms, that of Cambodia, through
which runs the River Mecon, whose Springs are in China; that of Champa or
Tsiompa, whence comes the true Aloes; on this borders the Kingdom of
Cochinchina; then that of China, divided into fifteen Provinces or Governments,
each of which is a great Kingdom; those on the Sea are Quantung, Fokien,
Chekiang, where ends the eighth District. The ninth begins with the Province
Nanking and continues that of Xantung and Pecheli, running to the farthest
discovered Land of the Coast of Tartary. I shall speak of the Islands that lie
along this tract as they are discovered, but the Names of the chief are these,
the Maldivy Islands, Ceylon, Sumatra, Iava, Borneo, Banda, Timori, Celebes, the
Moluccoes, Mindanao, Luconia and Iapan. Thus much of the Coast of Asia; let us
now see by whom inhabited, and what it produces.

2. Though there be many, and very different manners of Worship in Asia, as
well as sundry Nations; the chief Religions there may be reduced to these four
Heads, the Christian, Jewish, Mohammedan and Gentile. The first two, for the
most part, under the slavery of the latter. With the two latter the Portugues
waged War; their Power is thus divided. All that tract from the River
Cintacora, opposite to Anchediva toward the North and West, is subject to
Mahometans, thence Eastward, to Pagans, except the Kingdom of Malaca, part of
Sumatra, and some parts of Iava and the Molucco Islands, held by the Moors. In
that tract which is governed by these, are the following Sovereign Princes. The
Kings of Aden, Xael and Fartaque, who have many Ports of great Trade, and their
Subjects, the Arabs, are courageous and warlike. Next the King of Ormuz,
greater than the other three together; and then he of Cambaya, equal to Xerxes,
Darius, or Porus in grandeur and warlike power. From Chaul to Cin^atora
belonged to Nizamaluco and Hidalcan, two powerful Princes, not inferior to
great Kings, who maintained great Armies composed of sundry warlike Nations
well armed. The Moors of Sumatra, Malaca, and the Moluccoes were well
disciplined, and much better stored with Artillery than we that attacked them.
The Heathens were the Kings of Bisnagar, Orixa, Bengala, Pegu, Siam and China,
all (but chiefly the last) so Powerful, it is not to be expressed, and if
related scarce credible. Siam extends above 500 Leagues, and has seven Kingdoms
subject, which are Cambodia, Como, Lanchaam, Cheneray, Chencran, Chiamay,
Camburii and Chaypumo. The King has 30000 Elephants, whereof he carries out
3000 armed to War, and 50000 men only of the City Udia, Metropolis of his
Empire. The King of China alone in extent exceeds them all, and all the Princes
of Europe put together. China is above 700 Leagues in length, it has abundance
of all sorts of Metals, and exceeds Europe in Manufactures; some of their Works
seem beyond Human Wit; the Silks, Provisions and Pleasures wherewith it
abounds, are beyond computation.

3. All the Heathens of India, chiefly between Indus and Ganges, write upon
Palm Leaves (without Ink) with Wooden or Steel Pens, which easily cut the
Letters on the Leaf, whereof I have seen some in Rome curiously folded; what
they design should be lasting, they carve on Stone or Copper; they begin on the
left Hand; their Histories are fabulous. 600 years before the arrival of the
Portugueses in India, there was a King so powerful in Malabar, that the People
began their Era or Computation of Time from his Reign, as they did afterward
from our arrival. He was persuaded by the Moors that traded in his Ports, to
turn Mohammedan, and gave them leave to build Calicut. Being old, he divided his
Kingdoms among his Kindred. To the Chief he gave that of Coulan, where he
placed the Head See of the Religion of the Bramens, and called him Cobritim,
that is, the same as High Priest; to his Nephew he gave Calicut, with all the
Temporal Dominion, calling him Zamori, that is, the same with Emperor. This
last Dignity continues in the same place, the other was translated to Cochin.
Having disposed of his Dominions, he resolved to die at Meca, but was drowned
by the way. Calicut is a plain Country, well watered, plentiful of Pepper and
Ginger; all other Spice it has from its Neighbors. The People are very
Superstitious, and do not suffer those of one Trade or Profession to marry into
another, or put their Children to Learn. The Nayres who are their Nobles, if
they chance to touch any of the Commons, cleanse themselves by washing, as the
Samaritans and Jews. The Women of the Nayres are common to them all, but
chiefly the Bramens, therefore know no Father, nor is any bound to maintain
them. They are most expert at their Weapons, beginning to exercise them at the
age of seven years. They use all the ancient manners of Augury and Divination.

4. The Viceroy, Don Francisco de Almeyda, had an interview ashore with the
King of Cananor, who brought with him 5000 men well armed. He acquainted him he
came to reside some time in India, by reason of some troubles that were so
inflamed with the Zamori King of Calicut. He asked leave to build a Fort in the
Harbor, and it was granted. Having begun it, he left there Lorenco de Brito to
command with 150 men, and two Vessels to cruise upon the Coast. Being arrived
at Cochin, he received the News that the Factor of Coulan with all his men,
were killed by the Moors. He sent his Son Don Lorenco with three Ships and
three Caravels, with Orders to procure Lading, without taking notice of what
had past, but in case of denial, to revenge the slaughter. The Messenger was
answered by a Shower of Arrows, and twenty four Ships of Calicut and other
places prepared to receive ours. Don Lorenco after pouring in his Shot
liberally, burnt them all, only a few of the Moors were saved by swimming. Don
Lorenco then went to load in another Port.

5. He returned to Cochin, where his Father, according to his Instructions, was
preparing to Crown Triumpara, that King, in recompense of the Gallantry
wherewith he had defended the Portugueses against their Enemies. But he being
retired to follow a Religious Life, and his Nephew Nambead^ra left Successor,
it was thought fit to bestow the same Honor upon him. He was Crowned with
great Solemnity with a Crown of Gold set with Jewels, carried from Portugal for
that purpose. This was a security for that Prince, and a terror to others; six
Ships were now sent home richly laden.

6. King Emanuel, to secure the Trade of the Gold of Zofala, had caused a Fort
to be built at Quiloa, another at Mocambique, and a Factory at Melinde. After
Don Francisco he sent out Pedro de Annaya with six Ships to build a Fort at
Zofala; three of the Ships were to go on to India, and return with lading, the
other three to cruise on the Coast of Zofala. One of the Captains fell
overboard, and was lost; another had 16 men killed in an Island where he
landed. The others found Don Pedro de Annaya in the Port of Zofala. He obtained
leave of that King, and raised a Fort, whereby the Trade was secured, which
that King never intended, imagining that the Country being unhealthful, the
Portugueses would be obliged to quit it. Here Annaya found twenty Portugueses
in a miserable condition, after traveling with great hardships from Cape
Corientes, where they were forced to run their Ship ashore, being no longer
able to keep above water. Their Captain was Lope Sanchez, whom they would not
obey ashore, but dividing, traveled in several Companies through those unknown
Countries. They were all lost except these twenty, and five found by Antony de
Magallanes in the River Quiloame, who brought them to Zofala.

CHAP. X.
A Continuation of the Conquests the same Year 1506. and the Government of the
same Viceroy Don Francisco de Almeyda.

1. THE Kingdom of Zofala is a large tract of Land, of 750 Leagues
circumference, subject to the Monomotapa, that is Emperor of that South Part
of Africa, called by the same Name, or Ethiopia Inferior; it is watered by
these two Famous Rivers, Rio del Espiritu Santo, and Cuama, the latter
Navigable 250 Leagues. These, and many other Rivers that fall into them, have
Golden Sands. Most part of the Land enjoys a Temperate Air, pleasant, wholesome
and fruitful. In part it bears great flocks of Sheep, of the Skins whereof the
Natives are Clothed, because of the cold South Winds. Along the Banks of
Cuama, the Country is Mountanous, covered with Woods, and watered with many
Rivers, which make it delightful, and therefore the best Peopled, and the
common residence of the Monomopata. It is abundantly stocked with Elephants,
and consequenty Ivory, and Mines of Gold encompassed 30 Leagues about, with
Mountains, on the tops whereof the Air is serene and clear. They are called the
Mines of Manica 50 Leagues South-west of Zofala, there are others 150 Leagues
distant, none then much valued by their Owners. Here are some Buildings of
wonderful Structure, with Inscriptions of unknown Characters, but the Natives
know nothing of their Foundation. They believe in one God, under the Name of
Mozima, and use no Idols. Witchcraft, Theft and Adultery are most severely
punished by them. They have as many Wives as they can maintain; the Kings are
above 1000, but the first commands the others, and her Children inherit. In
their Funerals they are superstitious; their Clothing Cotton, the better sort
mixed with some Gold Threads; the Houses of Wood. The Kings Attendance is more
ceremonious than great; his Guard 200 Dogs, and is always followed by 500
Jesters. He is Sovereign over many Princes, and because they rebel, always
keeps their Heirs about him. There are no Law Suits among them; they fight a
foot; their Arms are Arrows, Javelins or Darts, Daggers and small sharp
Hatchets. The Women are so much respected, that if the King's Son meets one, he
gives her the way, and stops till she pass.

2. The Moors of Magadoxa were the first that possessed these Mines of Zofala;
after them, those of Quiloa, whose Kings were possessed thereof, till Ycuf, one
of their Governors rebelled, and usurped the Sovereignty to himself, with the
Title of King, and was the same with whom Pedro de Annaya now treated; and in
this place he built the Fort so much desired by King Emanuel, strong though of
Wood. The three trading Ships sailed toward India, under the Command of Peter
Barreto. Francisco de Annaya was ordered by his Father to secure the Coast up
to Cape Guardafu with two Ships; both Vessels were lost, and the Captains saved
in their Boats.

3. Whilst the Sea swallowed the Guard of the Coast, the Moors studied the
destruction of Peter de Annaya at Zofala. The King's Son-in-law persuaded him
to get rid of them, at such time as they were so weak, through Diseases
contracted by the strange Air, that they joined six of them to bend a
Cross-bow. The King laying hold of this opportunity, surrounds the place with
5000 Cafres, and fills the Ditch with Faggots, then gives the assault, darkning
the Sun with Showers of Arrows; but our Cannon being well played made such
havoc, that they filled with their Carcases the part of the Ditch they had not
levelled with Wood. Only 35 Portugueses, who were able to carry Arms, did all
this execution. Afterward Peter de Annaya sallied with 15 or 20 Moors and
drove the Cafres first to a Wood of Palm Trees, and then to their Dwellings,
with such consternation, that they cried, out, the King of Zofala bad called
them to fight against God. Peter de Annaya with a few men attacks the Town by
night, and entering the King's House, he stood behind the Door with a Cimiter,
and as Annaya entered, wounded him in the Neck, but was soon killed with many
more. Next day his Sons with all the Moors assaulted the Fort, but in vain, for
the fright cured many of the sick, who joining in the common defense, the Enemy
was repulsed. The two Brothers fell out about the Succession to the Crown, and
Solomon gaining Annaya, was by him Crowned; and for his own security made a
strong Alliance with, and supported the Portugueses.

2. Whilst these things happened at Zofala, in India, the Zamori of Calicut had
stirred up the Sultan of Cayre, and hoped with his assistance to drive us out
of these Seas; this was not so private but the King of Cochin had intelligence
of it, and advertised the Viceroy Don Francisco, who sent his Son Laurence with
11 Sail to prevent or put a stop to the design. As he visited some Ports, news
was brought him, that in the Road of Cananor was a Fleet of 260 Paraos, whereof
60 exceeded our Ships in bulk. He directs his course toward them, and after a
very sharp engagement they were put to flight, pursued, and some taken, but
many sunk and obliged to run aground, with great loss to the Enemy, and of his
own only five or six men; the chiefest part of the Booty was four Ships laden
with Spice. Don Lorenco had scarce time to breath after this Victory, when he
understood the Fort of Anchediva was beset by 60 Vessels of Moors and Gentiles
well armed and resolute, commanded by a Renegado. The besieged behaved
themselves gallantly, and no less the Besiegers; but having lost some Vessels
tore by our Cannon, and hearing of the relief Don Lorenco was about to bring,
they went off with all possible speed.

5. The Moors perceiving their Trade was cut off by the Portugueses, thought to
shun them by keeping out at Sea in their Voyages to Sumatra and Malaca where
they went for Spice, striking through the Maldivy Islands, and bearing away
South of Ceylon. The Viceroy sent his Son from Cochin with nine Ships to infest
that Course. But the Pilots wandering through unknown Seas, discovered the
Island Ceylon, formerly called Trapobana. They anchored at the Port Gale, where
many Moors were lading Cinnamon, and taking in Elephants for Cambaya. They
fearful of Don Lorenco's anger, presented him in the name of the King with 400
Bahares of Cinnamon. He well understood the contrivance, but thought it at that
time better to dissemble and content himself with the Present, and discovery of
the Island, planting there a Cross, with an Inscription, signifying his arrival
there. In his return to Cochin he fell upon the Town of Biramjam, which he
burnt down, putting all to the Sword, in revenge for the Portugueses killed at
Coulan, because this Town belonged to that Crown.

6. Cide Barbudo and Peter Quaresma coming with two Ships from Portugal, after
many misfortunes, arrived at Zofala, where they found Peter de Annay, and most
of his men were dead, and the rest sick. Quarisma remained there to relieve the
Fort, and Barbudo sailing toward India, found Quiloa in the same condition
whereof he gave the Viceroy an account. He sent with all speed Nunno Vaz
Pereyra to the relief of the Fort, who having repaired it, and given necessary
Orders, went on to Zofala. Nevertheless the Fort of Quiloa was afterward razed
by the same hands that built it, after having cost many Lives, all the effect
of the ill usage of the Portugueses toward the Natives, proceeding from their
unlimited Pride and Boundless Avarice.

End of the First Part of the First Tome.
THE Portugues ASIA. TOM. I. PART II.
CHAP. I.
Conquests in India under King Emanuel, from the Year 1506, till the Year 1508,
the Viceroy Don Francisco still Governing, and entering upon the Glorious
Exploits of the Great Alfonso de Albuquerque, and the Famous Tristan de Cunna.

1. THE King had resolved to send Tristan de Cunna to Command the Trading
Ships, and Alfonso de Albuquerque to cruize on the Coast of Arabia, when James
Fernandez Piteyra discoverer of the Island Zocotora in the Mouth of the Red Sea
arrived. Being by him informed there were Christians there who were subject to
the Moors, he ordered the two Commanders to direct their course thither, and
endeavor to possess themselves of the Fort, to the intent our Fleets might
afterward winter there, and so the Navigation of that Gulf might be secured.
They carried with them a Wooden Fort to be set up there, in case that which was
there were not found serviceable. On the 6th of March they sailed from Lisbon
with 13 Vessels, and 1300 Fighting-men, whereof some (being infected, the
Plague at that time raging in the City) died by the way. When they came under
the Line the Sickness left them. They had a sight of Cape St. Augustine in
Brasil, and in crossing the vast Ocean between that place and the Cape of Good
Hope, Tristan de Cuma run so far to the Southward, that some of his men
perished with Cold, and discovered the Islands still called by his Name; where
being assaulted by a Storm, all the Ships were parted, each running a different
course, till they met again at Mozambique, except Alvaro Tellez, who at Cape
Guardufu took 6 Ships so laden with all sorts of Goods, that from them to his
own Vessel he made a Bridge of Bails thrown into the Sea, over which the men
passed as on dry land. Ruy Pereyra, who fell into Matatanna, a Port in the
Island Madagascar; being informed it abounded in Spice, especially Ginger,
invited thither Tristan de Cunna. He came and anchored in a Bay which Nunno de
Cunna his Son called de Dona Maria de Cunna, a Lady he courted; others named it
of the Conception, so it retained the name of Mary, either Religious or
Profanely. Some Blacks appeared upon the Coast; he sent a Moor to speak to
them, but they hearing he spoke of Christians, had killed him, had not our
Cannon from the Ships forced them to retire. Sailing three Leagues farther,
they fell upon a Village on the Bank of a River, where, among others, they took
the Lord of it, whom they call Xeque. This man the next night carried our
Commander to another Town in a close Bay, which receives the great River
Lulangan. This was inhabited by Moors, somewhat civilized, who fearful of our
Fleet, fled over to the firm Land in Boats so overladen, that many perished by
the way. But our men encompassing the Island, took 500 Prisoners, whereof only
20 Men, the rest Women and Children, among them their Xeque or Lord, a man of
Age and a respectful Aspect. The Morning discovered the Sea thronged with Boats
with about 600 armed men, who came to release the Women and Children. The
Portugues Commander notified his designs to them, and they with very discreet
words persuaded him to restore their People. He was satisfied to understand the
Island Madagascar was peopled by Cafres, most of them Black, and produced
little Ginger, to the contrary of the account he had received. Afterward he
would have entered the Town they call Zada, but it being an unseasonable hour,
the People in a fury set fire to it, which raged so, that from the Sea it
appeared as if the whole Mountain had burnt.

2. Hence he sent Alfonso de Albuquerque with 4 Sail to Mocambique, because he
designed against some places on the Coast of Melinde, whilst he with 3 Ships
went round to Matatana, where was Clove, Ginger and Silver. One of Tristan's
Ships was lost, the Pilot and only seven men saved, this forced him to Steer
for Mocambique, but the Wind carried him to the Island Angoxa. At night he
discovered the Light of the Ship St. James, which he had left at Mocambique,
whither they both returned, and soon after arrived John de Nova, who had
wintered in Angoxa, laden with Pepper. Hence he sailed after meeting Alfonso de
Albuquerque, and sending him before to Melinde. He met two other Ships at
Quiloa, and went on to Melinde. The King obliged him to fall upon Oja, a City,
that with the assistance of the King of Monbaca infested him. The Arabs
inhabited this Country, where are seen some ancient and wonderful Structures.
Each City, and almost Village has a King whom they call ^eque; the Chief are
Quiloa, Zanzibar and Monbaca; but he of Melinde pretends to be the antientest,
deducing his Pedigree from those of Quita^, a City 18 Leagues from him, though
ruined, shows the footsteps of its former Grandeur, having been superior to
all its Neighbors, which are Luziva, Parimunda, Lamon, Iaca, Oja, and others.
The Country is watered by the River Gulimanja. George Alfonso going up this
River in the term of five days, saw on the Banks impenetrable Woods, and in the
water an infinite number of Sea-Horses. Tristan de Cunna (with seven Ships less
than he brought from Portugal, whereof one lost, some were separated by Storm,
and others sent away) appeared before the City Oja, 17 Leagues from Melinde, on
an open Shore, secured with a Wall, which hides it from the Cafres toward the
Land. He sent word to the Xeque he had important affairs to communicate with
him. Who answered, That he was a Subject of the Sultan of Cayre, head Calif of
the House of Mahomet, and therefore could not treat with People that were so
much his Enemies. Tristan considering the danger of delays, as soon as day
appeared, divided his men into two parts in Boats, one part commanded by
Alfonso de Albuquerque, the other by himself: And though the Sea seemed to
favor the Moors, who stood on the Shore to hinder our landing, they were
forced to fly to the shelter of the Walls, and not trusting to them, entered at
one Gate and run out at the other. Nunno de Cunna and Alfonso de Noronha
finding the King fled with many of his men to a Wood of Palm Trees, pursued and
killed him in the midst of them. George Silveyra perceiving a Grave Moor who
led a Beautiful Young Woman through a Path in the Wood, made at him, and the
Moor making signs to the Woman to fly whilst they fought, she followed him,
signifying she had rather die or be taken with him, than escape alone; and
Sylveyra seeing them strive who should give the greatest demonstrations of
Love, let them both go away, saying God forbid my Sword should part so much
love. The Town taken, was plundered, and then burnt with such precipitation,
that some of our men perished in the flames. The City Lamo, 15 Leagues distant,
knowing what had happened to its Neighbor, submitted to the Portugueses; and to
make it the more acceptable, the Xeque came to make the submission, and offer a
Tribute of 600 Meticales of Gold yearly, and paid the first year in hand;
Meticales are a Coin of about a Ducate value each. The Fleet went on to the
City Brava, a populous place, before conquered, but in rebellion, and
vainglorious now with 6000 armed men it exposed on the Shore. But Cunna and
Albuquerque next day landed in two Bodies, and in spite of Showers of Arrows,
Darts and Stones, scaled the Walls and routed the Moors, after washing the
Streets with their Blood, and killing so many, their number was not known; of
ours 42 were lost, not half by the Sword, but through Covetousness, for
overloading a Boat with the Spoil, they were drowned with it. These were they,
who blind with Avarice, barbarously cut off the Hands and Ears of Women to take
off their Bracelets and Earings, to save time in taking them off.

3. The City Burnt and Plundered, Tristan de Cunna set sail, and met off of
Cape Guardafu, Alvaro Tellez, who had been in a Storm with the rich Booty
before spoken of. Having discovered the Cape, he stood for Zocotora. Zocotora
is an Island 20 Leagues in length, and 9 in breadth, it lies almost East and
West, in the Latitude of 12 Degrees 40 Minutes. It is the biggest about the
Mouth of the Red Sea, but has no Ports fit for any great number of Ships to
winter. Athwart the middle of it runs a ridge of Hills as high as the Clouds,
yet not free from the Sand of the Shore, which is carried up to the very top by
the North Winds, and is therefore barren, not only of Plants but Trees, only
some small Valleys that are under shelter of those Winds. It is distant from
the Arabian Continent 50 Leagues, and 30 from Cape Guardafu. The Ports most
used by us, are Zoco, inhabited by Moors; or Calancea to the Westward, and Beni
to the Eastward. The Natives are unpolished. Those Valleys that are sheltred
from the Sand, produce Apple and Palmtrees, and the best Aloes, which for its
excellency is called Zocotorinos. The Common Food is Maiz or Indian Wheat,
Tamarins and Milk. They are all Jacobite Christians, as the Ethiopians; the Men
use the Names of the Apostles, the Women chiefly that of Mary. They worship the
Cross, which they wear on their Clothes, and set up in their Churches, where
they pray thrice aday in the Caldean Language alternatively as in a Choir; they
receive but one Wife, use Circumcision, Fasting and Tithes. The Men comely, the
Women so manly, that they follow the War, and live like Amazons; some of them
for Propagation making use of such Men as arrive there, and even bringing some
by Witchcraft. Their Clothing, some Cloth and Skins; their Habitation in
Caves, their Weapons, Stones and Slings. They were subject to the Arabian King
of Caxem. Cunna found here an indifferent sort, not ill manned or unprovided.
He sent a Message to the Xeque, 1508.
and his Answer provoked his Anger. He resolved (though it were dangerous) to
land with Albuquerque, but the first who leaped ashore, was his Nephew Don
Alfonso de Noronha; who to prove himself worthy the choice the King had made of
him to Command that Fort, if gained, advanced with a few, but brave men. The
Xeque received him with no great number, though much Gallantry, maintaining his
ground, and threatening Cunna, who, through a shower of Bullets and Stones made
his approach to the Fort, and was briskly repulsed by the Xeque, whom then Don
Alfonso struck down with his Lance. There was a sharp skirmish, the Moors
endeavoring to carry him off, and ours to hinder it, till he and eight more
were slain. The Enemy fled to the Castle, which was scaled, and those who
entered opening the Gate, gave entrance into a very large Court, presently
possessed by our men. About the inward Fort was a bloody Fight, the Moors
fighting to the last man, so that of eighty there was but one left alive,
besides a Blind Man who was found in a Well, and being asked how he could get
in there; answered, that Blind Men saw only one thing, which is the way to
liberty, and which even Blind Men covet. He had his liberty given him. We lost
six men. The Natives who had kept off, hearing of our success, came with their
Wives and Children to thank our Commander for delivering them from the Heavy
Yoke of those Infidels; and he, to their great satisfaction received them under
the protection of the King of Portugal. The Mosque was cleansed and made a
Church of the Invocation of our Lady of Victory, and many were there baptized;
in which Pious Work the Labors of F. Antony of St. Francis were very
remarkable. Cunna gave the Command of the Fort, now called St. Michael, to Don
Alfonso de Noronha, who had well deserved it by his Valor, though he had not
been appointed for it by the King; he named his other Officers, and gave him
100 men. After this he wintered, though with inconveniency, in those Ports, and
then sailed for India, and Albuquerque for the Coast of Arabia.

4. Whilst these things happened at Zocotora, the King of Calicut was arming
afresh against the Portugueses, relying on the promises of his Southsayers and
Wizards, who finding the arrival of Tristan de Cunna was delayed, assured him
of success in that lucky opportunity, and on account of a great change of
Affairs, which they said must necessarily follow, as foretold by a great
Earthquake and Eclipse of the Sun which happened, and was so great, that the
Stars appeared for a considerable time, which were interpreted as Omens of our
destruction. But the Viceroy Don Francisco showed him a greater Power than he
imagined to defend the Trade of Malabar, composing a Squadron of ten Ships,
whereof he gave the Command to his Son Don Lorenco. There remained behind at
Cananor, Gonzalo Vaz with his Vessel, taking in Water, who followed, and
meeting a Ship of Cananor with a Portugues Pass, he sunk it, and all the Moors
sewed up in a Sail, that they might never be seen. A wicked action, for which
he was broke, if that could be reckoned a sufficient puni^ment for so great a
Crime, as violating the Public Faith; such Enormities producing the Calamities
that after befell us in India. Don Lorenco lay before the Port of Chaul, when
seven Ships arrived, which taking no notice that he saluted them, stood in
without making any return. He followed them in his Boa^s, and the Moors leaped
overboard to gain the Shore, but he was so ready to receive them, that many
perished by the way. The Ships were laden with Horses, and other Goods, in the
sale whereof some of the Moors dealing deceitfully, Don Lorenco ordered them
all to be burnt, to their great admiration, because Covetousness had not moved
him to save any part thereof. Imagining he should find the Fleet of Calicut at
Dabul, he sailed thither, and anchored at the Mouth of the River, where
discovering the Fleet, and the narrowness of the place to engage, it was
carried in Council to desist, contrary to the Opinion of Don Lorenco, who was
inflamed with a desire of fighting. He passed on 4 Leagues, and a Brigantin and
Parao that had the Van, saw a Ship sailing up the River. They pursued till it
cast Anchor over against a Town, where were many other Vessels. Don Lorenco
seeing the two Vessels follow the Ship, sent after them a Galley, and they
three together began to clear the Shore with their Shot, of many Moors who
flocked thither. The noise of Cannon called upon Don Lorenco. He made haste,
but before his coming up, the others had gained the Vessels in the Harbor, and
ashore burnt a House full of considerable Merchandise. All the Ships in the
Harbor were burnt, except two they carried away laden with Riches from Ormuz.
At his return to Cochin with Victory and Spoils, he expected to be received by
his Father with joy, and applause; but he on the contrary designed to punish
him severely for not fighting the Fleet of Calicut, and was excused only,
because it appeared he was overswayed by the Votes of all the Captains,
contrary to his own Opinion. The Viceroy immediately broke, and sent them all
to Portugal. This severity much troubled his Son, and obliged him afterward,
endeavoring to restore himself to his Fathers esteem, to lose his Life with as
much Rashness as Valor.

5. The King of Cananor desiring to break with the Portugueses, was encouraged
by the Zamori, and grounded this Rupture upon finding on the Shore the Body of
a Nephew of Mamale, a rich Merchant of Malabar, which was one of those Goncalo
Vaz had thrown into the Sea sowed up in the Sail. This Action was not known
there, and the blame was laid upon Laurence de Brito, Captain of the Fort,
whose Pass that Ship carried. Brito having discovered the design, and finding
himself weak, advertised the Viceroy. The Message was delivered him at Church,
whilst he assisted at the Service of Maundy Thursday, and he immediately left
the Church, and went about taking up from every one what Provisions they had,
and shipped the men with such haste, that those who had lent their Arms to them
who watched at the Sepulcher (as the custom is) went to the Church to disarm
them. Don Lorenco was Captain, and had O^ders when he came to Cananor to obey
Laurence de Brito. But Brito insisted, that the other, as Son of the Viceroy,
and so Famous an Officer, should command; Don Lorenco was positive, he would
obey Brito, as being Commander of the Fort, and in pursuance of his Fathers
Orders. But finding Brito resolved to persist in that Courtesy, and that it
might prove dangerous, he left the Relief, and returned alone to Cochin. The
Besieged fortified and entrenched themselves, the same was done by the
Besiegers, who were 20000 strong. Much Blood was spilt about the Water of a
Well, but our men by the help of a Mine, made themselves Masters of it. The
Moors after this loss retired to a Wood of Palm Trees, to prepare Engines to
batter the Fort. Our Commander had intelligence of it by means of a Nephew of
the King of Cananor, who endeavored to gain our Friendship. He prepared to
receive them, and when they gave the assault, succeeded so well, first with his
Cannon, and then with the Sword, that he filled the Ditch with their Bodies,
which they intended to have done with Faggots. They retired to the Wood, and
Brito sending out by Night 80 men, commanded by one Guadalajara a Spaniard, who
was his Lieutenant, the Sally was so vigorously executed by the firing of some
small Pieces first, in a cold rainy Night, that the Enemy in a consternation
knew not where to save themselves, 300 were killed. But this Joy was abated by
the Magazine of Provisions taking fire, so that Hunger began to rage, and all
Vermin was eaten. The Garrison, part sick and part famished, was reduced to
extremity; but the Sea being then rough, left abundance of Lobsters when it
went off on the Point of Land where our Chapel was, which were the only relief
our men had. The Zamori sent a powerful supply to the King of Cananor, who gave
the last assault to the Fort by Sea and Land, with above 50000 men, who were
vigorously received and repulsed with great loss, not one of our men being
killed in this action. But now arrives Tristan de Cunna^ and the King of
Cananor terrified with his coming, and the defense made by Brito, sues for
Peace, which was concluded with great honor to the Portugues Valor.

6. Tristan de Cunna was upon his return home with the Merchant Ships, and the
Viceroy bore him company in order to fall upon Panane, a Town subject to
Calicut, where our Enemies laded under the shelter of four Ships of the Zamori,
Commanded by Cutiale a Courageous Moor. The Viceroy and Tristan anchored at the
Bar, held a Council, and then sent both their Sons in two Barques with several
Boats, and they in a Gally followed them. They all went up the River through
Showers of Balls sent from the Shore, which is high. The Moors run into the
Water to meet our Boats, and killed three men. But the dispute was now come to
their Trenches, which some of ours mounted, and Peter Came set upon them Don
Lorencos Colors. The Colors were flying, when the Viceroy seeing his Son Don
Lorenco climing with some difficulty, cried out Ah! Laurence, Laurence, what
laziness is that; and he very readily answered, Sir, I give way to him that has
gained the Honor. A large Moor encountered and wounded Don Lorenco, and he gave
him such a stroke, as clove his Head to his Breast. The Town being entered, all
were put to the Sword. Then all the Ships in the Haven and Docks were fired. We
lost 18 Portugueses, none of Note; of the Enemy above 500 perished. Though the
Plunder was of great value, it was all burnt to Ashes, and only the Artillery
saved. After this Victory they returned to Cananor to take in some lading, and
Tristan de Cunna set sail for Portugal. At Mocambique he met some Ships of 12
that came from Lisbon the year before. Seven were to return with lading, and
five under the Command of Vasco Gomez de Abreu, to cruise on the Coast of
Melinde, who was also to Command the Fort of Zofala. There were also two Ships
to join Albuquerque on the Coast of Arabia. John Chanoca, with his Ship, was
lost in the River Zanaga; John Gomez, and his, in another; Vasco Gomez de Abreu
was cast away with four Vessels going for Mocambique. Others, with great danger
and Storms, were driven to several places. Misfortunes, terrible, even in the
remembrance, but none sufficient to curb Human Avarice and Boldness.

CHAP. II.
Conquests under King Emanuel, the Year 1508. during the Government of the
Viceroy Don Francisco de Almeyda, and continuing the Exploits of Alfonso de
Albuquerque.

1. AFter the taking of Zocotora, on the 20th of August, Cunna and Albuquerque
parted, the former for India, the latter for the Coast of Arabia and Persia, in
pursuance of the Orders they had from the King. Albuquerque had with him 7
Sail; and 460 Fighting-men. The first place where he touched in the Kingdom of
Ormuz, was Calayate, a Town once more Populous, still Beautiful and strong, the
Buildings after the manner of Spain. He sent a Message to the Governor, who
offered him Refreshment, and established a Peace. He went on to Curiate, 10
Leagues farther, and was ill received, and storming the Town, met with a
Vigorous Opposition, but entered with the death of 80 of the Enemy, and loss of
three Portugueses; after the Plunder, the Place was burnt, and with it 14
Vessels that were in the Harbor. Hence he sailed 8 Leagues farther to Mascate,
a place stronger than any of the others, and well manned with People, who
resorted to it from all Parts, hearing the destruction of Curiate. The
Governor fearing the like disaster, made Peace, and sent great store of
Provisions, and our men went ashore for Water; but on a sudden the Cannon of
the Town began to do great execution upon our Ships, which drew off hastily,
not knowing the cause of this turn, till some time after they understood 2000
men, sent by the King of Ormuz for the defense of the place, were newly
arrived, and their Officers refused to stand to the Peace. Albuquerque had
received no small damage from the great Cannon, which was played very smartly,
but landing his men at break of day, he assaulted the Town so courageously and
fortunately, that as our men entered in at one Gate, the Moors ran out at
another. The Place was plundered, all except the Governors House, saved
because he received our men friendly, and gave them notice to retire when the
Relief came, though he was killed in the confusion, not being known. This done,
he passed to Soar, all the Inhabitants whereof fled, except the Governor, and
some of the Principal Moors, who offered it up to Albuquerque, and received it
back to hold of King Emanuel, paying the same Tribute he had given to him of
Ormuz* 15 Leagues farther is Orfucam, where he found little to do, the
Inhabitants having deserted it; he sent after them his Nephew Don Antonio, with
100 men, who having received almost equal damage to what he did, the Moors
being numerous, and fighting for their Wives and Children, returned with 22
Prisoners. The Town was plundered for the space of three days, during which
time he prepared to enter into the Harbor of Ormuz, which was the Principal
End of this Voyage, and to which these exploits were but a prelude, being small
in his esteem, though to others they might appear considerable.

2. The City Ormuz is seated in a little Island, called Gerum, at the Mouth of
the Persian Gulf, about 3 Leagues in compass, so barren, that it produces
nothing but Salt and Sulphur. The Buildings of the City are sumptuous; it is
the great Market of all Goods, brought thither from the East, West and North;
which is the reason, that though it have nothing of its own, it abounds in all
things, and is plentifully supplied from the Province M^gostam, and the Islands
Quixome, Lareque and others. About the Year 1273, King Malec Caez possessed all
the Land from the Island Gerum, to that of Baharem, and bordered upon the King
of Gordunxa, of the Province of Mogastam; this King subtly obtaining of Malec
the Island of Gerum, as a place of no worth; after he was fortified therein,
drove him out of all his Country. And translating the City Ormuz, where the
King kept his Court before, to this Island, he grew so formidable, that the
King of Persia, fearing he would refuse to pay the Tribute the other had done,
prepared to invade him. But he of Gordunxa prevented him, by imposing on
himself a yearly Tribute, and offering to do him Homage by his Ambassadors
every five years. In this Tyrant began the City and Kingdom of Ormuz,
afterward possessed by his Heirs and others* for the most part violently. When
Albuquerque arrived there, Ceyfadim, a Youth of 12 years of age reigned, and
over him his Slave Coje Atar, a man subtle and courageous. Who hearing what had
been done by Albuquerque, made preparations, laying an embargo upon all the
Ships in the Harbor, and hiring Troops from the Neighboring Provinces,
Persians, Arabians and others, so that when Albuquerque came, there were in the
Town 30000 Fighting-men, among them 4000 Persians, most expert Archers, and in
the Harbor 400 Vessels, 60 of considerable bulk, with 2500 men.

3. Albuquerque was not ignorant of the reception designed him; but to show
those People the greatness of his Resolution, he entered that Port about the end
of September, and came to an Anchor between five of their greatest Ships. For
the more terror he fired his Cannon, and the Shore was soon covered with above
8000 men. Seeing no Message came from the King, he sent aboard the biggest of
those Ships, which was of Cambaya, and seemed to ride Admiral, the Captain
whereof presently cam^ to, and was received by him with Civility and State. He
told him he had Orders from his King to take him of Ormuz into his Protection,
and grant him leave to Trade in those Seas, provided he paid a reasonable
Tribute; but if he refused, his Orders were to make War. It was doubtless no
small Presumption to offer a King the liberty of his own Seas* and impose
Conditions upon him, with that handful of 460 men against 33000, and seven
Ships to 400; but the success justified these proceedings, and verified those
Actions, which to some have appeared fabulous. The Moor delivered this Message
to the King and his Governor Coje Atar, and presently returned one Coje
Beyrame, excusing their not having sent to know what we demanded in that Port,
and promising the Governor would come next day to treat. He came not, but the
Messages continued, only in order to gain time to sortifie the City, and
receive further Supplies. Albuquerque saw into the drift, and told Beyrame, he
need only return with the acceptance of Peace as offered, or the declaration
of War. He brought answer, that City used not to pay, but receive Tribute.
Night coming on, it appeared they prepared to fight by the noise of Warlike
Instruments, and Shouts that was heard from the Walls and Ships. The Morning
discovered the Walls, Shore and Vessels covered with Armed Men; the Windows and
tops of the Houses filled with both Sexes and all Ages, as Spectators of what
should ensue. Albuquerque having held a Council, and given necessary Orders,
began to play his Cannon furiously, and was answered by the Enemy. They taking
the advantage of the Smoke, which hindered the sight, attacked our Ships with
130 Boats well manned, which did some damage with Showers of Arrows, but
received more, many being sunk, and the rest forced to retire by our Artillery.
Yet they made a second onset, but were so received, that the Sea was colored
with Blood. By this time Albuquerque had sunk two of the great Ships, and taken
a third, though with great opposition, forcing the Moors to leap into the Sea.
The mean time the other Captains had mastered other Ships, and perceiving
themselves victorious, ran along the Shore, and set fire to above 30 Ships,
which cutting their Cables, were drove flaming upon the Persian Coast, where
they burnt others that lay aground. This struck so great a terror into all that
multitude, that they fled to the shelter of the City, and Coje Atar sent to
offer all that Albuquerque had demanded. He stopped further proceedings, but
perceiving the deceitfulness of the Moor, threatened a greater effect of his
Anger in case he persisted in his Wiles. And comparing the damage, found, that
with the loss of 10 men, most of the Enemies Vessels, with vast Riches, were
either sunk, burnt or torn to pieces, and 1700 of them killed. The dead Bodies
floating upon the Water, many were seen with Ornaments of beaten Gold, which
our men fished for, and observed that many were wounded with their own Arrows,
there being none used among the Portugueses.

4. Coje Atar, considering the damage received, and what might ensue, called a
Council, where it was agreed to submit to what was demanded by Albuquerque. The
Articles were drawn, and sworn to by both Parties; their substance was, that
the King of Ormuz did submit himself to King Emanuel, with the Tribute of 15000
Xeraphines yearly (a Xeraphin is worth about half a Crown) and should assign
the Portugueses place to build a Fort. The Fort was imdiately begun, and much
advanced in few days, but Coje Atar could not bear with it. He feigned
Ambassadors were come to receive the Tribute they used to pay the King of
Persia, and therefore desired Albuquerque to give them an Answer, since his
King was now subject to the Crown of Portugal. He guessed at the design, and
bid Coje Atar send somebody to him who might carry the Answer; the Messengers
being come, he put into their Hands Bullets and Spears, telling them that was
the Coin the Tribute should be paid in. Coje Atar finding his Plot fail,
endeavored to corrupt our Men with Money. He prevailed with five Seamen, one of
them a Founder, who cast some Cannon there; and another who informed him, that
our men were not complete 460; whereby animated he studied to break the Peace,
refusing to deliver up those men, and pretending at the same time, it was
Albuquerque that broke it.

5. Albuquerque began to revenge this affront, but with little success, because
the Captains employed, opposed it. Coje Atar perceiving this, at Night fired a
Boat we were building on the Shore, and one of the Portugues Deserters cried
from the Wall, Alfonso de Albuquerque, defend the Boat with your 400 men, and
you shall meet 700 Archers. Nor was it to be admired, those vile Wretches
should offer these and other Reproaches, since some of the Captains gave
intelligence to the Enemy, and persuaded those five to desert. Albuquerque
burning with Rage, attempted to fire some Ships in the Arsenal, and failed. He
resolved to besiege the City, and having taken some that carried in Provisions,
cut off their Hands, Ears and Noses, and sent them in to the great terror of
all. There was a hot dispute about filling up some Wells that supplied the
Besieged, in so much that they were filled with Carcasses of Men and Horses,
the Captain and Guard that maintained them being all slain. The King and Coje
Atar came to second this Action, and Albuquerque was in great danger, his
retreat being cut off, but a fortunate Cannon Ball opened a way, putting the
Enemies Horse into confusion. Albuquerque in these Actions found his men ill
disposed to obey; among the rest, three Captains resolving to leave him and
sail for India, drew up a Paper of Reasons, why he ought to desist from that
Enterprise, which he gave to one of the Masons to lay under a Stone in the
Work, saying, he had answered, and would be glad to see who durst remove the
Stone to read his Answer. None replied. But offended with this, and each
fearing he should not have the Command of the Fort when built, the three put in
execution their design of quitting him. This troubled Albuquerque; yet he
resolved not to desist, though two Captains that staid with him opposed him,
desirous to accompany the others; but he used them with such severity, that
they were forced to obey him. From Baharem to Queixome sailed a Fleet with
relief of Men and Provisions. Albuquerque having pursued, and missing of it,
fell upon a Country House of the Kings, guarded by 300 Foot and 60 Horse, and
beat them out, killing 80 with the loss of one man. He returned to Queixome,
and fell upon 500 Archers sent to the King of Ormuz by him of Lara, under the
Command of his two Nephews, and slew them and most of their men, having but 80
with him, the Brothers he sent to Coje Atar as a Present. The Town was burnt,
and there being taken among the Plunder a Carpet, so big, the Soldiers were
about cutting it for convenience of carriage; Albuquerque bought, and sent it
after to Santiago in Galicia. Finding he had but few men left wherewith to
continue his enterprise, and those harrased, and Winter coming on, he resolved
to go to Zocotora, and gave leave to John de Nova to sail for India.

6. Whilst this happened at Ormuz, the Sultan of Cayre set out a Fleet of 12
Sail, and 1500 men, Commanded by Mir Hozem, to oppose the Portugueses in India.
By the way he attacked Imbo, and killed the Xeque: the same he did at Ioda, and
got great Plunder; then sailed to Diu, where Melique Az Commanded for the King
of Cambaya, whom he was to join, and treat with, in order to oppose the
Portugueses. The Timber whereof these Ships were built, was cut in the
Mountains of Dalmatia, by procurement of the Venetians, (as was said) because
the Sultan and Turk were at variance. A Nephew of the Sultan carried it in 25
Ships, with 800 Mamalukes besides Seamen. Andrew de Amarall, a Portugues,
commanded then the Galleys of Malta; he knowing that Timber was designed
against us in India, attacked the 25 Ships of the Enemy, with 600 men in four
Galleys and six Ships; and after a sharp engagement that lasted three hours,
took seven and sunk five, the rest fled to Alexandria, whence the Timber was
carried up the Nile to Cayr, and thence on Camels to Suez.

7. At this time the Viceroy, Don Francisco de Almeyda, was upon the Coast of
Malabar, and had sent his Son Don Lorenco to guard those of Cananor and Cochin,
and ran as far as Chaul with 8 Ships. On his way he took some Ships of the
Moors. Chaul is seated on the Bank of a River 2 Leagues from the Sea; one of
the chief of that Coast for Greatness and Trade, subject to the Nizamaluco, by
whose Order Don Lorenco was well received. They had some intelligence of this
Fleet of the Sultan, but gave no credit to it, till it appeared in sight as Don
Lorenco was diverting himself ashore with his Officers. They hasted to the
Ships, giving such Orders as the shortness of the time permitted, and were
scarce aboard when the Enemy entered the Harbor, with many demonstrations of
Joy; for Mir Hozem thought himself secure of Victory by surprising our Ships.
He designed to board the Portugues Admiral, and t^ rest of his Ships to board
the others. Ours were so placed, that the Enemy passed between them, and Mir
Hozem coming up with Don Lorenco, poured in Ball, Arrows, Grenades, and other
Fireworks, but was so well answered, that he gave over the resolution of
boarding, though the Portugues Vessel was much less than his. The others had
the like success, and so passed on, and Night approaching, they prepared
themselves for the next Morning.

8. Day appearing, Don Lorenco gave the signal of Battle, and endeavored to
board Mir Hozem, the like was done by the others, but only two Galleys
succeeded, which took two of the Enemy, having put all their men to the Sword.
Mean while the Cannon was furiously played on both sides. Don Lorenzo seemed to
have the upper-hand, when Melique Az, Lord of Diu, came with a great number of
small Vessels well manned, to the assistance of Mir Hozem. Don Lorenco sent two
Galleys and three Caravels to hinder the approach of that Relief. They executed
it so effectually, they obliged him to fly to another place for shelter, and
the Fight continued till Night parted them, each striving to conceal his loss
from the other. The Portugues Captains met in Council, the Result, that it was
a rashness to persist in that enterprise, Melique Az being so near with that
powerful assistance, that it was convenient to take the open Sea, either in
order to escape, or to fight with less disadvantage. Don Lorenco remembering the
anger of his Father for not fighting the Fleet of Calicut in the River Dabul,
and fearing his retreat might be termed a fearful flight, resolutely expected
the Morning, only making some motion to save the Ships of Cochin that were in
great danger. Melique Az imagining this motion was in order fly, lanched out
from his retreat, not at all daunted to see many of his Vessels torn in pieces
by our Cannon, and Charges briskly; then Don Lorenco's Ship running foul of
some Stakes that were drove in the River, made so much water, there was no
preventing her sinking, though Don Lorenco labored indefatigably till a Ball
broke his Thigh, and ordering himself to be set against the Main Mast, where he
stood encouraging his men, till another Ball broke his Back. The Body was
thrown under Deck, and followed down by Laurence Freyre Gato his Page, who
bewailed him with Tears of Blood as well as Water, being shot through the Eye
with an Arrow. After a vigorous resistance the Moors entered the Ship, and found
the Page by his Masters Body, who rising to defend it, killed as many as
covered it, and then died upon them. The Ship sunk at last. Of above 100 men
that were with Don Lorenco, only 19 escaped, in all the Ships were lost 140, of
the Enemy 600.

9. The other Captains got to Cochin (where the Viceroy was) with the News of
his Sons death, which he received with a wonderful resolution. The numbers of
men slain and taken being yet doubtful; he endeavored by all means to get some
intelligence, and at that time received a Letter from Melique Az. This Man,
born in Slavery, and descended of the Heretic Christians of Roxia, rose by
degrees to that height wherein he was then placed. The Principal Action that
advanced him was, that a Kite flying over the King of Cambaya, dunged upon his
Head, whereat in a Passion he said, I would give all I am worth that Bird were
killed. Melique Az, who was a most expert Archer, no sooner heard this, but he
let fly an Arrow, which brought down the Kite. The King rewarded this Action so
bountifully, that Melique Az came to be made Lord of Diu, a most Famous City,
which being seated on a triangular Peninsula, joined to the Continent by a very
small Istmus, is commonly reputed an Island. This man endeavored politickly to
secure himself at one time, both with the King of Cambaya, and the Portugueses,
whose Power he feared, and hated for the damage they brought to the Trade of
Din. And to this effect he assisted Mir Hozem, sent the 19 Prisoners to the
King of Cambaya, and writ to the Viceroy, condoling the death of his Son,
extolling his Bravery, and offering to ransom the Prisoners. Thus he
endeavored to appease the Wrath he knew he had provoked by assisting Mir
Hozem, which was the Cause of all our Loss.

CHAP. III.
Conquests under King Emanuel the Year 1508 and 1509. A continuation of the
Government of the Viceroy Don Francisco de Ameyda, and Exploits of Alfonso de
Albuquerque.

1. THIS same year 1508, about the beginning of April, sailed from Lisbon 17
Ships, which being all separated by bad Weather, at length met at Mozambique,
except one that was cast away on the Islands of Tristan de Cunna; these Ships
with those of the foregoing year, came together to India, and added Courage to
our People to resist their Enemies. The King ordered that Don Francisco de
Almeyda should resign the Government to Alfonso de Albuquerque, and return home
in one of the Trading Ships. But he suspended the execution of this Order,
because already engaged in taking revenge of Mir Hozem. Albuquerque pressed him
to obey the Order, Don Francisco excused himself, saying the Ships were gone,
and that he had in hand that enterprise upon the Rumes or Turks who had killed
his Son. The other answered, there were more Ships ready to sail, and he would
undertake to drive the Turks out of India* Almeyda replied, that he had taken
up the Sword, and had never resigned it to another to revenge his Wrongs.
Albuquerque offended hereat, went to Cochin; and this was the beginning of some
men's protracting the time of their Command, and others pressing them to quit,
wherein these two Illustrious Men discovered much of Human Frailty.

2. Precedent to this were the Actions of Albuquerque at Ormuz and Zocotora,
where he wintered and relieved the Portugues, who were there oppressed by
Famine. To this effect he went himself with his Ship to Cape Guardafu, and sent
Francis de Tavor^ toward Melinde, and two Vessels to Cape Fum, to make prize
of some Ships for their Provisions; they all found what they sought, and so put
a stop to the growing Evil. He then resolved for Ormuz, though too weak to
effect what he intended, yet at least to sound the designs of that King and his
Friend Coje Atar. By the way he resolved to be revenged on Calayate for
injuries done to some Portugueses. This Town is seated beyond Cape Siagro,
called also Cape Rosalgate, at the Mouth of the Persian Gulf. On the Back of it
is a Mountain, which has only some Passes, that open a Communication to the
Neighboring Country. One of these Passes is just opposite to the Town, through
which is managed most of the Trade of that Province of the Arabs call Ayaman,
because (as they say) first inhabited by Name, which signifies Plenty or
Abundance, a Son of Lot; and this Land is full of Populous Cities, Fruitful,
and of great Trade. Albuquerque no sooner arrived, but he landed and entered the
Town, some of the Inhabitants flying to the Mountains, and others being slain
in the Streets. Albuquerque staid there three Nights, upon one of which 1000
Moors entered the Town by surprise, and did much hurt; but our men gathering,
killed many, put the rest to flight, and burnt all the place. They got great
quantity of Provisions, which was most of the Booty, and arrived at Ormuz the
13th of September. Alfonso de Albuquerque presently advertised the King and
Coje Atar of his arrival, and they answered, that as for the Tribute of 15000
Xeraphins they were ready to pay it, but would not consent to build the Fort.
He therefore resolved again to besiege the Island, and ordered Martin Coello,
with his Ship, to guard the Point Turumbaca, where the Wells are; James de Melo
he posted opposite to the Island Queixome, he and Francis de Tavora lay before
the City. Thence he viewthe growth of the Fort, for Coje Atar had finished it,
making use of what the Portugueses had began, the better to oppose them. The
success was much the same as the other time, but he was in great danger
himself, and Diego de Melo, with 8 private men, being killed, he returned to
India, having taken a Ship that carried much Pearl from Baharem, and Francis de
Tavora took one of Meca.

3. The Viceroy having sent Albuquerque to Cochin, and dispatched the Trading
Ships homeward-bound, under Fernando Soarez and Ruy de Cunna, who perished by
the way, and ordered other lesser matters, he sailed on the 12th of December
from Cananor toward Diu in pursuit of Mir Hozem. He had with him 19 Vessels of
several sizes, and in them 1600 Soldiers and Seamen, whereof 400 were
Malabares. All India was alarmed at this motion of the Viceroy, but chiefly
Zamori, and Melique Az, who had used all necessary precautions to secure
himself against this danger. The Viceroy being landed with his Officers in the
delightful Island Anchediva, made to them a grave and learned Speech, touching
upon the great Actions performed, and reflecting upon the damage received from
the Turks; showed how much they were obliged to God, their King and Country, to
revenge that defect, and the death of his Son, with many more circumstances,
and concluded, that the more to terrify the Enemy it were convenient first to
fall upon the City Dabul their Neighbor. All that were present unanimously
approved of his resolution.

4. The City Dabul is one of the most noted of that Coast, by reason of its
Situation, Greatness and Trade; seated on a Navigable River, 2 Leagues from the
Mouth. The Buildings were then stately, the Inhabitants Pagans and Moors. It is
on the Boders of the Kingdom of Decan, subject to Sabayo the King, and was then
held by a Governor of his, with a good Garrison, being in fear of our Power.
Upon notice of our approach 6000 men were sent in, new Works raised, and much
Artillery planted. The Viceroy appearing before it, the Inhabitants, though
well provided, began to send away their Goods, the Governor forbid it upon
pain of death; and the more to encourage the People brought into the Town his
own Wife, who was in a Country House; this example was followed by many of the
Principal Men, whose Wives were abroad in the Country. On the 30th of December
our Fleet entered the Port. The Viceroy ordered Peter Barreto to post himself
among the Ships that were in the Harbor, and following close, endeavored to
be the first that landed; but every one being inflamed with the same desire, it
was all confusion, leaping over one another, so that all, or none was first; of
the Viceroy's Boat, the first were Fernando Perez de Andrade, and John Gomez.
The Works being high, the Shot flew over our Men. Our Cannon played not on the
Enemy because our Men were under it. The Portugueses having gained the Shore,
divided themselves in order at once to attack three Gates, which the Moors
perceiving, made so brave a resistance at all three, that the dead Bodies
caused a greater stop than the living Defendants, or their Works. The Place was
narrow, and the Confusion great' every one thronging for fear of being last.
The Viceroy cleared all by sending Nunno Vaz Pereyra to gain entrance another
way, who after a hot dispute, though the Moors came on in great numbers, put
them to flight, some retiring to a Mosque, others flying to the Mountain. The
Commander of the Enemies did all he could to hinder their flight, seeing only
ten Portugueses pursue a Multitude, who through have falling over each other,
retarded their own escape. The Fight lasted about five hours, in which time,
with the loss of 16 Portugueses, were killed 1500 Enemies, all hand to hand,
for the Cannon on neither side was played. The Viceroy remained that Night in
the Mosque; he distributed his men about the Town with Orders to keep Guard.
George de Melo and his Company, stood all Night at their Arms, expecting the
Enemy that fled to the Mountain would return. Nor was he deceived, for they by
the favor of the Night, stole into the Town, hoping to recover their Wives,
Children and Goods. Little was done till Morning, when the Viceroy gave leave
to Plunder, which was hindered by the sudden firing of the Town, so that in few
hours it was only a heap of Ashes, and therefore the Booty exceeded not 150000
Ducats. It was afterward known that the Viceroy was the cause of that
Conflagration, fearing the men, taken up with those Riches, might retard his
other Design. The Ships in the Harbor had the same end, with no small
confusion among ours, scarce able to endure the Flames so near them. The
Viceroy had laid in no great store of Provisions, not doubting to get enough
along that Coast; but very little was found here where most was expected, the
furious Flames, perhaps fiercer than expected, having devoured all. He thought
to remedy this by sending to the Neighboring Villages, but to no effect,
because all was destroyed by multitudes of Locusts, whereof they found many
kept in Pots, that were Food to the Natives, which some Portugueses tasting
found pleasing to the Palate, not unlike our Shrimps, which made them conclude
these were Shrimps of the Land, as the others of the Sea. So in some places,
particularly the Vineyards about Rome are found Crabs, not unlike those of the
Sea. So that if those Creatures came not so numerous as to destroy the Harvest,
they might be coveted as Food, not dreaded as a Plague. Such were the Locusts
the Scripture mentions the Baptist fed on in the Desert.

5. The Viceroy parted from Dabul without Provisions, hoping to get them along
the Coast. Payo de Sousa run up a River in his Gally, having seen some Cattle
upon the Shore, and hoping to take some of it; the Owners opposed, and killed
him and George Guedez. James Mendez succeeded in the Command of the Gally, and
met another passing from Diu to Dabul; this was well manned, and commanded by a
Courageous and Expert Turk, who no sooner discovered our Gally, but keeping his
men close, so that only they that rowed were in sight, he drew on James Mendez
to board him without suspecting any danger, when immediately the Turks that
were hid, rushing out had almost gained our Gally; but our men recovering
themselves, gained their Gally with the death of all the Turks, without losing
one of ours. The Chief Prize was a Noble Beautiful Hungarian Young Woman, who
was brought to the Viceroy, and by him given to Gaspar de la India, who gave
her to James Pereyra of Cochin, and he married her for her Virtuous Qualities,
so well suiting with her Birth and Beauty; Perfections seldom to be found
together in the World. Farther on they took in the River of Bombaim, a Barque
with 24 Moors of Guzarette, by whose means the Governor sent some Sheep and
Rice, whilst Cattle was brought from other places. The same was done at the
Fort of Maim; for the People terrified with what had happened at Dabul, fled to
the Mountains. The Viceroy arrived the 2d of February at Diu, which appearing
high at Sea, girt with Walls and Towers, beautiful and strong, populous and
well governed, after the manner of ours in Spain, renewed in our men the memory
of our Country, and that inflamed their Courage and Vigor. Melique Az, Lord of
this City, was absent 20 Leagues off, with his Army against the Resbuti, but
had still advice of the motions of our Fleet, which scarce anchored before the
City, when with wonderful celerity he flew thither. He had already used
precuation, that Mir Hozem might not perceive how little he was inclined to
assist him; and that he might not altogether exasperate the Viceroy, and both
of them equally feared him. The Viceroy considered the strong situation of the
Place, much improved by Art, the Courage and conduct of Melique Az, and Mir
Hozem, and the number of above 200 Vessels well manned, and furnished with all
things necessary. Having called a Council, it was resolved, that Nunno Vaz
Pereira should be the Forlorn Hope with his Ship, in which were 120
Fighting-men, most Gentlemen, and of known Valor. He was to be seconded by
George de Melo, with the like number, who was to be followed by Peter Ba^reto
de Magallanes, and he by Francis de Tavora, then Garcia de Sousa, and so the
other Vessels, carrying from 25 to 80 men each. The Night was spent
particularly on our sides, in preparing their Consciences and Arms, for the
danger was to be encountered next Morning.

6. Between 9 and 10 in the Morning, when there was Flood enough for the Ships
to swim, the Admiral gave the signal for entering the Port. On a sudden all
moved with loud Shouts, and sound of Warlike Instruments on both sides. Melique
Az his Vessels ran to hinder the entrance of ours, Showring Bullets and Arrows,
which immediately slew 10 men in James Perez his Gally, that led the way to
Nunno Vaz. Yet Nunno pierces forward, and pouring his Shot among the Great
Ships, sunk one to rights. He was in great danger between two of them, when
George de Melo came up with such fury, that running foul of one of the two, he
drove it upon that of Nunno Vaz, and thereby gave way to Sebastian de Miranda
to board it, which he performed. Then George de Melo went on to another, in
like manner the other Captains. The Viceroy in the midst of the Enemies
Vessels, gave them a sufficient diversion, that they might not hinder what the
others were acting; and though they did him some damage with their continual
Shot, he destroyed them with his, till the Paraos of Calicut fled, spreading
the News along the Shore, that the Rumes or Turks were victorious. Mir Hozem
being wounded, in despair slipped out of his Ship disguised into a Brigantine,
and thence to Shore, where taking Horse, he never stopped till he came before the
King of Cambaya, no less fearful of our Fury, than the falsehood of Melique Az,
who had assisted him with his Vessels, but not with his Person. The absence of
Mir Hozem did not discourage those in his Vessel; for being boarded, they never
yielded, but were all slain. A great Ship belonging to Melique being attempted
by some of ours, and not able to carry her, the Viceroy discharged all his
Cannon upon, and sunk her. Antony de Campo took a Galeon. Ruy Soarez, one of
the last in order of Battle, but not in Courage, running through all, placed
himself before the City, and plying most dexterously, took two Galleys, having
forced the Defendants to quit them, in such manner, that the Viceroy seeing him
at a distance, in a glorious emulation cried out, Who is that who so much
excels the rest? O that I were he! The Victory being now no longer doubtful,
because some harm was done us by the Artillery on the Shore, the Viceroy made
up to the Ships, where our Galleys and other lesser Vessels killed all that
leaped into the Sea, so that the Water was turned to Blood. This Victory was
not cheap, for we lost near 40 men. Of the Enemy above 1500 were killed. The
Ships being plundered, there were great Riches found in them; and by the great
variety of Books in several Languages, was judged, the men were of sundry
Nations; among the Books were some Latin, Italian and Portugues. The Sultan and
Mir Hozem's Colors were sent to Portugal. Of all the Vessels that were taken,
the Viceroy ordered four Ships and two Galleys should be preserved, the rest
were burned. The Victory had been more Glorious, had not the Conquered been
treated with such Barbarous Cruelty, that many, not without reason, judged the
unhappy end of the Viceroy and other Gentlemen, to be a just punishment of that
Crime. We shall soon see it.

7. Next Morning Melique Az pretending to be much pleased with the Viceroys
Victory, sent Cide Ale, a Moor of Granada to wish him joy. There was a Report
that the City was in a great Consternation, fearing the Conqueror would assault
it, and that many were filled with this apprehension. Our men finding the
Viceroy inclined to admit Melique Az his deceitful Congratulation, began to
mutter, and complain that he stopped the course of his Good Fortune, which the
Enemies began now to fear. He calling together the Principal Men told them,
that he ^ad no regard to Melique Az, but the King of Cambaya, who was our
Friend, and whose City that was; that the Town was strong and they tired; that
of 1200 men he Commanded, only 600 were able to bear Arms; that though the Town
were taken, it could not be maintained; and that they might be revenged against
Melique Az on his Trading Ships. All agreed there should be no more said of the
Assault, and should give ear to the Moor. The Viceroy received him courteously,
and told him, that two Motives chiefly brought him to that Port, the one to be
revenged on the Rumes, the other to recover the Portugeses that were taken, and
who were to him instead of a Son. The first Point he had obtained, and the
second he must gain by having them delivered to him; that he should also
deliver to him all the Artillery and Munitions belonging to the Rumes that were
in the Ships haled in, and they burned, and sell him Provisions. All this
seemed little to Melique Az, and was performed with such expedition and
exactness, that it settled a profitable Peace with the Viceroy, who left one of
the Prisoners there to load two Ships with such things as were wanting at
Cochin and Cananor. He dispatched Don Antonio de Noronha with Provisions, and
some of the Booty of the Ships, to relieve his Brother, Don Alfonso, at
Zocotora. Then the Viceroy sailed, and arriving at Chaul; that King terrified
with the late Victory, became tributary. Passing by Cananor, he was there
received with Honor, and at Cochin in Triumphant Manner; but before he had
laid aside his Fest^al Ornaments, he was accosted by Alfonso de Albuquerque,
pressing to deliver up the Government according to the King's Orders. The
Answer was, he should give him leisure to put off that Heavy Robe, and there
would be time afterward. Albuquerque pressed and the Viceroy delayed.

8. Some Gentlemen persuaded the Viceroy not to resign the Government, whilst
Albuquerque made instance to have it delivered up, Evil Spirits fomenting these
Feuds. The King of Cochin, urged by these Divisions, delayed the lading with
Pepper, two Ships that were to return home, till Albuquerque were possessed of
the Government. In fine, the Viceroy sent Albuquerque Prisoner to Cananor,
where he was courteously entertained by that Governor, who then was Laurence
de Brito, to whom in few days the Viceroy writ, that he should treat his
Prisoner as one who soon must Govern India.

9. King Emanuel being informed of the preparations made by the Sultan of Cayre
at Su^z, resolved to send a powerful Relief to India. This consisted of 15
Sail, Commanded by Don Fernando Coutinno, who had an extraordinary Power given
him, the King (as was thought) having some inkling of the disagreement was like
to be between the Viceroy and Albuquerque. Nothing of note happened him till he
arrived at Cananor, whence he carried Alfonso de Albuquerque to Co^bin,
treating him as Governor of India. Though there passed some Acts of Civility
between the Viceroy and Coutinno, the rest was not suitable; for a Ship he had
prepared to pass to Portugal was denied him, and he obliged to take another he
had no mind to. He sailed with two more on the 19th of November, and had fair
Weather till passed the Cape of Good Hope, when he said, now (God be praised)
the Witches of Cochin are Liars, who said we should not pass this Cape. Near
there he put into the Bay of Saldanna to take Water; and some men going to
exchange Goods with the Blacks, a Servant of the Viceroy treated two of them so
ill, that they knocked out his Teeth, and sent him away bloody. Some Gentlemen
looking upon this as an Affront, persuaded the Viceroy to go ashore, when they
ought to advise him to punish his Servant for abusing People where they sought
Relief. This had been Justice. He yielded, but so much against his Will, that
as he went into the Boat he said, Ah! whether, and to what end do they now
carry the 60 years? Hereby declaring, that was an Action of Raw Heads. There
went with him 150, the Flower of the Ships. They went on to a miserable
Village, and returned with some Cattle and Children, when 170 Blacks coming
down from the Mountain, whither they had fled, attacked them in defense of
their Children, casting Stakes with sharp Points, hardened at the Fire, so
furiously, that in a little time they killed 50 Gentlemen, and among them the
Viceroy, who died kneeling on the Sand, with his Eyes lifted up to Heaven,
struck through the Throat with one of these Stakes. George de Melo returned
with the wounded Men to the Ships, and when he thought the Blacks were
withdrawn, went ashore and buried the Viceroy and the rest. This was a manifest
judgment of God, that so few unarmed Barbarians should overcome those who had
done such Noble Actions in India. George de Melo carried the News to Lisbon,
where it was received with great Grief. The Viceroy, Don Francisco de Almeyda,
was seventh Son of Don Lope de Almeyda, Count of Abrantes, and of Donna Beatriz
de Sylva his Wife. He was married to Donna Ioanna Pereyra; he was Knight of the
Order of St. James; He was of a Graceful Presence, Ripe Council, and Obliging
Carryage; he was very Continent, an Enemy of Avarice, very Liberal and
Grateful. Don Francisco wore the Coat or upper Garment (which then was instead
of the Cloak used now) Black, the Doublet of Crimson Satin, the Sleeves
whereof appeared; the Breeches also Black, which were Breeches and Stockins
reaching from the Feet to the Waste, over them Boots, a Truncheon in the Right
Hand, the Left upon his Sword, which hung almost before. He was the first
Viceroy and Governor of India.

CHAP. IV.
Conquests under King Emanuel, the Year 1510, Alfonso de Albuquerque now
Governing India, who held it from the Year 1509, till the Year 1515.

1. ALfonso de Albuquerque, now possessed of the Government, prepared to fall
upon Calicut, with Don Fernando Coutinno. The Design was kept private, but
Zamori provided, as did all the Princes of that Coast when the Portugues were
in motion. They set out from Cochin with 30 Vessels and 1800 men, besides some
Boats of Malabares, who followed in hopes of Plunder. They arrived at Calicut
the 2d of January, and weighing the difficulties of Landing, consulted about
the manner; and Ordered that part of the Fleet which belonged to Albuquerque,
should be committed to the care of his Nephew Don Antonio de Noronha; and the
part of Coutinno to Rodrigo Rabelo. Every one strove to be so posted as to land
first. Our Men were at Arms all Night, and so tired in the Morning, they had
more mind to sleep than to land, though the desire of landing had kept them
from sleep; but they soon recovered, the signal being given, and the Cannon
Playing. Coutinno had 800 men, and some Fieldpieces: Albuquerque had the same
number, and besides them 600 Malabares. They marched with more Confusion than
Order, each striving to be foremost; the first that attacked the Bulwark of
Cerame were George de Cunna and Francis de Sousa; they found there 600 men, who
made a vigorous resistance, till Albuquerque coming up, they quitted it.
Albuquerque being fearful of the disorder of his men, gave notice to Coutinno,
who running with all speed to his relief, and our Colors being already set up,
judging it had rather been a contrivance of the Governor, than disorder of the
Men, took the liberty to say unto him, What means this Sir? Was you ambitious
the Rabble of Lisbon should report you were the first at taking Calicut, which
you so extol to the King? But I shall go to Lisbon and tell the King I could
have entered it with only this Cane in my Hand. And since I find no body to
fight with, I will not be satisfied till I enter the Palace of Zamori, and
dine in one of his Rooms. This said, without expecting the Answer Albuquerque
was about to make, he marched with his men toward that Palace, where Zamori
then was not. He was tired when he reached it, being above 5 Leagues from the
Shore, the Road encumbred with Palm Trees, and having marched hard, and met
with opposition by the way, he rested a while in a Plain before the Palace.
Which being then attacked, though well defended, was entered, the Moors flying
to the Mountains. Our men now possessed of the Pallance, fell to plundering,
without shame or sense of honor, and with as much disorder as if they had been
on the Shore, and their Enemy destroyed. The Enemy now reinforced, returned,
and falling upon our disordered men, put all into great confusion, killing many
under their Burdens, and doing great harm, though Vasco de Sylveyra signalized
himself, killing two of their Chiefs, whom they call Caymales. In the mean time
Albuquerque had entered the City, and fired it; and having nothing to divert
him, marched to see what Coutinno had done. He found all about the Palace
thronged with Armed Men, and that Coutinno was within in eminent danger.
Finding it best to hinder the Enemies from pressing upon him, he sent him word
he waited his coming. Coutinno answered not till the third Message, and then
returned, that Albuquerque might march, and he would follow, being busy in
gathering his men, who were dispersed about the House. Albuquerque marched, and
the Enemy pressed him doing much damage, till News was brought, Coutinno's life
was in great danger. He endeavored to return to his relief, but was hindered by
the multitude of the Enemy, who slew many of his men, and wounded him with a
Dart in the Throat, and a Stone in the Head, and in such manner that he was
carried senseless to the Shore. By this time Coutinno and many more were slain
in the Palace, and several on the way, being oppressed by the multitude, and
spent with the labor and heat, and stifled with the great Dust. Doubtless they
had all perished, if James Mendez Vasconcellos, and Simon de Andrade, whom
Albuquerque left in the City with 2000 men, had not stopped the fury of the
Enemies, and obliged them to retire. There happened as great a contest about
being the last on Shore, as had been about landing first, not considering all
their misfortune had proceeded from that foolish dispute. At last they sailed,
having lost 80 men, among them many of Note, whereof Coutinno was one.
Albuquerque being come to himself, gave out several Orders at Sea, and
dispatched the Trading Ships homeward-bound; and when arrived at Cochin, made
preparations for a third attempt upon the Island Ormuz. While he is employed
about this Business, we will give some account of what was done by two of the
Captains spoken of in the beginning of the third Chapter, which could not
conveniently be inserted before.

2. One of these two Captains was Duarte de Lemos, who, after a Storm, arrived
at the place called Medones de Oro, thence he went to Madagascar, or the Island
of St. Laurence, and thence to Mozambique, where the rest of his Squadron
joined him. George de Aguiar being lost, he took upon him the Command of the
Coast of Ethiopia and Arabia, given him by the King, that Government being then
divided into three Parts. From Mozambique he sailed to Melinde; then set out to
visit some Islands of that Coast that had neglected to pay the usual Tribute to
Quiloa since it was taken. Monfia submitted immediately; Zanzibar made
resistance, but they were drove to the Mountains, and the Town plundered. At
Pemba happened the same, the Inhabitants flying to Monbaza, leaving nothing in
their Houses; but some little plunder was taken in a Fort whether the Xeque had
conveyed such things as he had not time to secure otherwise. Lemos gave the
necessary Orders at Melinde, particularly in relation to the Factory for the
Trade of Zofala. Hence he set out with seven Sail for the Coast of Arabia; one
Vessel Commanded by Gregory de Quadra, insensibly was separated from the rest
in the Night on the Coast of Magadoxa, and carried by the Current to the Mouth
of the Red Sea, where the City Zeila is seated, and was there taken. Lemos
resolved to take a view of Ormuz, and managed the Towns of that Coast more with
cunning than force. The same at Ormuz, where he received of the King and Coje
Atar the 15000 Xeraphens, imposed on them as Tribute by Albuquerque, and was
well treated. Hence he sent to India, Vasco de Sylveyra, who was killed at
Calicut. Then he sailed to Zocotora, and gave the Command of that Fort to Peter
Ferreira, sending to India, Don Antonio de Noronha, who took a Rich Ship of the
Moors, which being manned by some Portugueses, was cast away in a Storm between
Dabul and Goa, and the men made Prisoners: His own Ship was stranded in the Bay
of Cambaya, where he and some others endeavoring to escape in the Boat, were
all lost; about 30 that remained in the Ship were taken by the Moors and sent
to the King of Cambaya. Lemos, on his return to Melinde, took a Vessel richly
laden. The Winter being passed, he returned to Zocotora, and found there
Francis Pantoja, who came from India with Provisions, and had taken a rich Ship
of Cambaya, the great wealth whereof he shared with Lemos his men, saying they
had right to it, as being taken in the Precincts of his Government. A rare
example of Bounty. Lemos finding himself unprovided for other undertakings,
sailed to India, and was received by Albuquerque with great Pomp and Civility.

3. The other of the two Captains mentioned was James Lopez de Siqueira, who
was entrusted with the discovery of the Island of Madagascar and Malaca. In the
Island St. Laurence he arrived in the Port of St. Sebastian. He run along the
Coast, making use of a Portugues as Interpreter, who had been left there, and
forced by necessity to learn the Language. He spoke with a King called Diaman.
and was by him civilly treated, but had no intelligence of any Spice or Silver,
the great end of his Voyage. Having had much trouble and no profit, he sailed
to India. Don Francisco, then Viceroy, received him well, and to assist in the
discovery of Malaca, gave him another Ship, Commanded by Garcia de Sousa. He
passed by Pedir, and that King sent him some Presents, and made him great
Offers. The same the King of Pacem; in both places he erected Crosses. At last
he anchored in the Port of Malaca, and terrified the Coast with the thundering
of his Cannon, so that all the People running to the Ships and Vessels in the
Harbor, showed the apprehension they had of their new Guest. A Boat came to
Lopez his Ship to enquire who they were; he answered, there was an Ambassador
from the King of Portugal, who came to propose such things as might be
advantageous to that City. There came back a Message from the King in doubtful
language, such as is usual when the designs are pernicious; for some foreign
Merchants, Enemies to the Portugueses, had persuaded him and his Favorite
Bandara, with the Powerful Argument of Rich Presents, to destroy James Lopez.
The third day Lopez sent Hierom Teixeyra with a handsome Retinue as Ambassador,
who was well received on the Shore, and placed upon an Elephant, so carried to
the King, from whom he returned well pleased.

4. All this was but a Bait to ensnare our People, and therefore the King gave
out he would do Lopez the Honor to dine with him in Public. He sent to invite
him, and the Invitation was accepted, till he was informed by a Friend of Iao
Utimutiraja, that the Invitation was to murder him. Then he gave credit to the
advice sent him from a Persian Hostess by Duarte Fernandez after she had
endeavored to come aboard at Night, and was not admitted by Sequeyra, judging
it some Love Intrigue, but it proved one means to save those Ships. Lopez
excused himself by counterfitting an indisposition. Another way was contrived
to carry on the Treachery, which was by offering lading of Spice, saying it was
requisite to send for it to three several places. This took so well, that 30
men were sent according to agreement, whilst a Fleet of several Vessels was
behind a Point of Land, ready to assault our Ships, at the same time the 30
were killed in the Town. Mean while a Son of Utimutiraja came to visit Lopez,
and found him playing at Draughts. He persuaded Lopez to continue his Game,
that he might the less observe him, who offered a thousand times with a Dagger
to kill him, and only waited the sign from the Town, when a Seaman, who was
Sentinel upon one of the tops seeing a throng, and hearing noise, cried out,
Sir, Sir, Treachery, Treachery, they kill our men. Lopez threw away the
Draught-board with such fury, that Utimutiraja's Son and those with him, in a
consternation leaped into their Boats: All was done that could be expected upon
a sudden, and having sunk many of the Enemies Boats, and forced the rest to
retire, and left 60 of our men in slavery, and 8 killed, they sailed, and soon
after took two Vessels bound for Malaca. Lopez arrived at Cape Comori, sent
Teixeira and Sousa with their Ships to Cochin; resolving, though ill provided,
to return to Portugal alone, being fearful of Albuquerque, because he had sided
with the Viceroy. With great hazard he arrived at the Island Tercera.

5. Albuquerque had now fixed every thing for his design upon Ormuz, dispatched
the Trading Ships, and other affairs with great expedition. About the end of
January he sailed from Cochin with 1700 men in 21 Vessels of several sorts and
sizes. Albuquerque at the River Onor, sent for the Pirat Timoja (before spoken
of) who desirous of our Friendship, and being Powerful, came presently with
much Provision. He being skilful in the affairs of Asia, Albuquerque
communicated his design to him. But he dissuaded, showing how much better it
was to attempt Goa, that was unprovided, and would be more advantageous. This
pleased Albuquerque, and hereupon calling his Captains to Council, it was
proposed to them by the said Timoja, and the Design approved of and commended
by all. Timoja furnished 12 Ships, giving out he would accompany the
Portugueses to Ormuz, to the end that Goa might be less provided. Timoja had
been dispossessed of his Fortune, and ill treated by his Kindred and
Neighbors. The desire of revenge, and recovering what he had lost, caused his
Love to our People, that it may always appear, that private Interests are the
ruin of the Country. On the 25th of February they came to an anchor in the Port
of Goa.

CHAP. V.
A continuation of the Conquest of the same Year 1510, Albuquerque Governing,
and King Emanuel Reigning.

1. TIcuari is an Island on the Coast of Canara, formed by two Mouths of the
River Gacim, its length from East to West 3 Leagues, the breadth one. There is
in it Hill and Plain, has good Water, very Fruitful, Pleasant, Beautiful and
Healthy. On the Northern part of it is seated the City Goa, which formerly was
on the South. This now in being was built by Melique Hozem, a Moor, 40 years
before the arrival of the Portugueses. The Old is not known when founded; but
some Authentic Writings have been found, wherein is mentioned, that Mantrasat,
King thereof, above 100 years before, confesses one only God, the Incarnation
of his Son, and the Trinity and Unity; whence appears they had knowledge of the
true Faith; to which may be added, that when the City was taken, there was
found in a Wall a Copper Crucifix. These might be the fruits of the Apostle St.
Thomas's Preaching.

2. About the year 1300 the Moors began to conquer India. The first that
attempted it with great Power was Xa Nosaradin, King of Delhi; with a Powerful
Army he came down from the North, conquering all the Gentiles as far as the
Kingdom of Canara. Thence he returned to Delhi, leaving Habedxa to prosecute
the Conquests, who by his Valor and Conduct became so great, that he coped
with his Master, which beginning, his Nephew Madura prosecuting, possessed
himself of the Kingdom of Canara, and casting off his Allegiance to the King,
he called the Kingdom Decan, from the sundry Nations wherewith he Conquered it,
this Word signifying so much in that Language. Too great an Empire always
threatens ruin. Mamudxa fearing this, used great industry to secure himself,
which was effectual for some time; but at length several Governors entrusted
with Provinces of this Empire, erected them into Sovereignties. The greatest of
these was he of Goa, about the time of our coming into India, called Sabayo,
deceased about the time of Albuquerque's design upon Goa; and Cufo, King of
Hidalcan, had possessed himself of the City, and put it into the Hands of his
Son Ismael. The other Princes were Nizamaluco, Mudremaluco Melic Verido, Coje
Mocadan, Abexeiapado and Cotamaluco, all great, some very great. Sabayo was
born at Saba, a City of Persia, of very mean extraction, but served the King of
Decan so fortunately, that he gave him the City Calberga. Thence he extended
his Conquests of the Pagans of Bisnagar, and after over the Island of Goa,
lately possessed by the Moors come from Onor, Melique Hozem being then Lord of
it, who defended it with 1200 men, and was killed in the defense. Goa had
several dependencies, and with these and others he gained Sabayo, became the
most Powerful of those Princes, and consequently hated of them all. He
maintained himself against all whilst he lived, sometimes by Policy, sometimes
by Force; but his death produced great alteration.

3. We left the great Albuquerque at anchor before the Bar of Goa, let us see
what he acted. It was necessary to sail up the River, on whose Bank the City is
seated; therefore he sent his Nephew Don Antonio de Noronha and Timoja to sound
it. A light Vessel leading the way, spied a Brigantine of the Moors, and giving
it chase, found they drew under a Fort well stored with Artillery and 400 men,
Commanded by Yacu Gorgi, a valiant Turk, to secure the entrance of the River.
Don Antonio seeing the other in the chase, pressed after him; and though the
attack of the Bulwark seemed difficult, they attacked, and after a stout
resistance took it, the Commander having almost lost a Hand, and not able to
stop the flight of his men, retired to the City. Mean while Timoja, not to be
outdone, took another Bulwark on the Continent, defended by some Artillery and
30 men. Then they sounded the River. Next day as Albuquerque entered the River,
he was met by Mirali, and other Chief Men of the City, who came to surrender
it, upon condition their Lives, Liberties and Estates should be secured. The
reason of this surrender was, that the Turk Yacu had terrified them with the
relation of what he had seen a few Portugueses do, and that a Iogue (these are
Religious Men among those People, esteemed Saints and Prophets) not long before
had declared, that place should soon be subject to Strangers. Albuquerque
accepted the offer, and anchoring before the City on the 17th of February, was
received on the Shore as if he had been their Natural Prince. He mounted on a
Horse, they brought him, with Rich Furniture, at the Gate received the Keys,
and went on to the Palace, built by Sabayo. He found there much Cannon, Arms,
Tackle, and many Horses. Next he gave such Orders as were to the satisfaction
of all the City, then dispatched several Embassies to diverse Kings, which
produced no effect, only showed the greatness of his Thought.

4. The Neighboring Towns depending on Goa, came instantly to make their
submission, and were kindly received. The Command of the Fort was given to Don
Antonio de Noronna; the Government of the Infidels to Timoja, and so the other
Posts to the general satisfaction. Understanding that Ships of Ormuz, and the
^oast of Arabia were lading at Baticala, four Vessels were sent thither, which
took and carried them to Cochin, sending plenty of Provision to Albuquerque.
Now our Fortune begins to frown. The Moors begin to exercise their Treachery.
Those whom Albuquerque most relied upon conspire, and after four Months revolt,
notwithstanding the most faithful Timoja blamed his confidence. They had
delivered themselves up so easily to shun their own ruin, and gain time till
Ismael Hidalcam prepared to come to their relief. So it fell out, and he came
on with great Power, sending before his great General Camalcam, with 1500 Horse
and 8000 Foot. Albuquerque disposed his men with great diligence and order to
receive him.

5. The first step was to secure the Heads of the Conspiracy, and the chief
being Mir Cazem, to whom he had given the Command of 400 Moors, and his Nephew,
they were hewed to pieces by his Guards, others were hanged in public places,
and others kept Prisoners, there being 100 convicted. This discovery, with the
punishment, terrified the City. Camalcam attempted to pass over to the Island,
having prepared Boats to that effect. Don Antonio opposed him, and took 12
Boats. Many of the Enemies were killed, many devoured by the Crocodiles,
wherewith that River abounds. Nevertheless Camalcam landed in the Island, which
was quitted by our men, and some Cannon had been lost, had not two Masons
maintained it, though our Gentry fled, till they were killed, and it brought
off. After some resistance, all retired into the City. Camalcam encamped about
it, playing his Cannon effectually; Albuquerque did what the Place permitted,
and now comes up Hidalcam with 60000 Men, whereof 5000 were Horse. Part of this
Army passed the River, and the rest was divided into two parts, one Commanded
by a Famous Officer, the other by his Mother and Women, who maintained their
Soldiers by the gain of 4000 Common Women they had with them; so that the
Women lived upon them, and they upon the Women. The siege was closed by the
coming of the King, and no place left Albuquerque to act any thing
considerable. It is prudence sometimes to yield to necessity. It was resolved
in a Council, before day to abandon the City. This was executed with great
hazard, for the way to the Ships began to be stopped by Hidalcam, and
Albuquerque had his Horse killed, yet got off without loss, after a siege of 20
days.

6. It was resolved to winter in that Sea, and to this effect drew into a Bay*
though not commodious, the best thereabouts; and because the Fort of Pangi with
much Artillery incommoded them, there was no remedy but gaining of it; 300
Portugueses were appointed for the attack. Don Antonio de Noronha, with a
Party, was appointed as a reserve, to relieve where there was most need, and
Albuquerque to guard the Shore. At the same time they prepared by Night to
appear with the day before the Fort; there marched 500 men, sent by Hidalcam to
reinforce it. They Joy of these People was so great, that those without, as
well as those within being all drunk, they mistook our Men, one side thinking
it was the Relief sent them, and the other believing it was the Garrison came
out to receive them. They were undeceived by the execution done upon them, 340
being slain, the rest rouced, with the loss of one man accidentally drowned.
The same happened at the Bulwark Timoja had before gained at Bardes. Hidalcam
hearing of this, was so terrified, that he went from the City, and his fear was
the more, because some Conjurer had told him he should be killed by a great
Shot near some River. He sent some ceremonious Messages to Albuquerque, to
discover what was doing aboard the Ships, and he answered, still adding to his
fear. By this means he exchanged those Moors he had kept Prisoners, for the
Portugueses that were left in the City at their abandoning of it.

7. Albuquerque had intelligence some Vessels were preparing to burn his Ships,
and he resolved to anticipate by firing them, and they being drove up the
Harbor, Don Antonio de Noronha was killed in this action. This man used to
moderate the Violent Passions of his Uncle Albuquerque, who immediately after
showed the effect of his rigid Severity, by hanging a Soldier because he found
him with one of the Slaves he called Daughters, that he used to give in
Marriage. And when some of the Officers asked him what Authority he had to put
this in execution, putting them under Deck, he lifted his Sword over them,
saying, That was his Commission against all that were disobedient, and then
broke them all. They all suffered much hardship this Winter, especially Hunger.
Sailing hence they discovered four Sail, which were judged to be Turks; but
coming nearer, appeared to be some of the Fleet come from Portugal.

8. This year King Emanuel had dispatched two Squadrons for India, one of seven
the other of four Ships; after them went out two Ships more, and a third to
settle a Trade at Madagascar. The four Ships under James Mendez were those
Albuquerque met at his setting out from Goa, and gave him the News of the other
Ships that were on their way, which was a great satisfaction to him, being the
better enabled to prosecute his great designs. Goncalo Siqueira with the seven
Ships arrived at Cananor, soon after Albuquerque, who communicated the
enterprise upon Goa, but was overruled by Siqueira and went to Cochin. By the
way he obtained a Victory over the Malabares of Calicut, who opposed our lading
Pepper; then he dispatched Siqueira with the Trading Ships homeward-bound, and
soon after Duarte de Lemos with four more, and then turned his view again to
the affair of Goa. James Mendez, who commanded the four Ships, and was before
inclinable to the design, now excused himself. Albuqu^ finding this, commanded
him and his Captains, upon the severest penalties, not to stir without his
Orders. It troubled them because they feared losing the opportunity of going to
Malaca, whither the King sent them; but they obeyed. Albuquerque set out from
Cananor with 23 Sail, and therein 1500 Fighting-men. He passed by Onor to join
Timoja, whom he found busied in his Wedding, being to marry the Daughter of a
Queen, and he desiring to be honored with the Presence of Albuquerque, obliged
him to land, which proved very dangerous, for a Storm rising kept them ashore
three days, and when he returned to his Ships, a Boat with 30 men was lost.
Timoja sent with him three Ships, and promised to join him at Goa with 6000 men.

9. On the 22th of November Albuquerque anchored the second time before the Bar
Calling to mind the dangers he had there escaped, and the discontent that was
among some of his Officers, he thought fit to sooth the Principals with an
obliging Harangue, and therewith won all their Inclinations. At break of day,
on the Feast of St. Catharine, the City was assaulted with great slaughter of
the Enemy that maintained the Shore, but (though it seem strange) not one
Portugues killed. The Enemy fled to recover one of the Gates of the City, and
our men to enter with them. Here the Fight was renewed, till many Portugueses
forced their way in, doing great execution in the Streets. They cleared all to
the Palace with great danger, and loss of five Men of Note; and there was a
most furious Contest begun with equal Valor on both sides. Now Albuquerque
having done what became him, came up, and Fortune appearing wholly on our side,
the Moors fled, and abandoned the City, endeavoring to get over to the
Continent, but through have and confusion perished in the River. After the
Victory it was found, that of 9000 Fighting-men who defended the Town, 6000 had
perished, and 50 Portugueses. Medeorao, who commanded the three Ships sent by
Timoja, behaved himself well. Timoja with 3000 men came too late, he was only
Witness to the Slaughter. The booty of Horses, Artillery, Arms, Provisions and
Ships was excessive, and such as was necessary for the great designs
Albuquerque had conceived.

10. Our Dead were honorably buried, those of the Enemy in the Bellies of the
Crocodiles of that River, into which they were cast. Not one Moor was left
alive in the Island. The Gentiles, who were Countrymen, were restored to their
Farms, and the Government of them given to Timoja, and after to Melrao, a
Nephew of the King of Onor. Whilst Albuquerque settled these Affairs, he
received many Ambassadors with Congratulations of his success from several
Princes of Malabar. Many of Hidalean's Officers, then, and afterward made
inroads as far as Goa, but always returned with loss. James Mendez and his two
other Captains, desirous to go to Malaca, stole away out of the Port by Night,
contrary to Albuquerque's Orders. He sent after them, and being brought back
Prisoners, he Ordered they should be sent to answer it in Portugal, and two
Pilots condemned to be hanged at the Yardarms. Some were suspicious that
Albuquerque detained James Mendez, lest he should take Malaca, which Action he
designed for himself; others said, he kept him from the danger Siqueira met
with there, that Enterprise requiring a greater Power.

11. Albuquerque providing for the safety of Goa, laid the Foundation of a
Fort, which he called Emanuel, being the King's Name. He caused the Names of
the Captains who were at the taking of it, to be carved upon a Stone; but
because every one would be named before the others, he turned down the Stone,
hiding the Names, and on what was visible put this Inscription, Lapidem quem
reprobraverunt aedificantes; and thus they were all pleased; for the
Portugueses had rather their own Praise should be forgot, than that another
should partake. He coined Money, that of Gold he called Emanuels, that of
Silver, Esperas, and half Esperas that of Copper. He married some Portugueses
to Women of the Country, gi^ing them in Portion, Lands, Houses, or Em^loyments,
the better to secure his Colony. One Night that some of these Weddings ^ere
Celebrated, the Brides were so mixed and confounded together among the People,
^at some of the Bridegrooms went to Bed to those that belonged to others, and
next Morning finding the mistake, they changed them, each taking his own, and
all equal as to the point of Honor. This gave the more occasion to some
Gentlemen to ridicule the care of Albuquerque. But he persisted with such
Constancy, that he brought to pass what he intended, which was, to make Goa the
Portugues Bulwark in India. King Emanuel was very desirous of, and recommended
to Albuquerque, with much instance, the taking the City Aden, and raising a
Fort there. He now possessed of Goa, thought time lo^ while he attempted not
something; he therefore counterfeits the carrying on this Enterprise, and sent
some Ships toward the Red Sea, when at the same time his design was upon
Malaca. He went to Cochin, having first secured and ordered all things at Goa:
Where was left for the defense of it Rodrigo de Castello Branco with 400
Portugueses and 5000 Gentiles, under Melrao to secure the Country and Revenue.
He set out of Cochin for Malaca on the 2d of May with 19 Sail and 1400
Fighting-men, 800 of them Portugueses, the rest Malabares.

CHAP. VI.
A Continuation of the Conquests under King Emanuel, the Year 1511, and the
Government of Alfonso de Albuquerque.

1. THE City Malaca, whither Albuquerque now directed his Course, is seated on
that part of Land, being a Peninsula, commonly called by the name of Aurea
Chersonesus, and upon that Channel which parts the Island Sumatra from the
Continent of Asia, about the middle of that Channel, in something more than two
Degrees of North Latitude, stretched along the Shore about a League, in the
same manner as Lisbon. It is divided by a River, and the two parts joined by a
Bridge. The Buildings of Wood, except the Mosque and Palace, which were of
Stone. It afforded a pleasant Prospect to the Sea, and was well secured with
Fortifications. The Port was filled with abundance of Ships, as being the great
Market of all those Parts. It was first built by the Celates, a People for the
most part employed in Fishing, who joined themselves to the Malayes, that
before inhabited the Mountains. They were assisted by Parisamora, submitting to
him. This Man had been great in the Island of Iava, and expelled by a Tyrant
who usurped his Lordship, fled to Cincapura, where being well entertained by
that King, he rebelled against him, and was again cast out by the King of Siam,
and so forced to wander about Malaca; a just punishment for his ingratitude. He
having increased the new Colony, gave it the name of his Fortune; for Malaca in
that Language signifies a Banished Man. The first King of Malaca was Xaque
Darxa, or as another Author says, Raal Sabu) Son of Paramisora, subject to him
of Siam, from whom his Successors revolted. The Country of Malaca is subject to
Inundations, full of thick Woods, stored with hurtful and dangerous Creatures,
chiefly Tigers, which obliges many people to pass the Nights on the tops of
high Trees, because they fetch them off the low ones with a leap. The Men are
courageous, the Women wanton. The Trade of the East and West make Malaca most
Rich and Populous. Mahomet reigned at this time, against whom the King of Siam
had sent an Army of 40000 men, most whereof perished by sundry accidents, and
partly by the treachery of Mahomet, which he practiced with James Lopez de
Siqueira; but now came Albuquerque to revenge them all. Mohomet feared the
reward of his baseness, and therefore brought to his aid the King of Pam with a
great Force, and had now 30000 men and 8000 pieces of Cannon, and yet his fear
was greater than his preparations.

2. Albuquerque sailing from Cochin, by the way he took five Ships of the Moors
bound for Malaca, off of Ceylon. The King of Pedir, in the Island Sumatra, sent
some Moors to visit him, and with John de Viegas, one of the Portugueses left
behind by Siqueira, who, with others, flying from Slavery, arrived at Pedir.
The same was done by the King of Pacem. Neboada Beeguea, of the Principals of
the Treachery of Malaca, was fled from Pedir, and being beaten and taken at Sea
by Airs Pereyra, to the general astonishment of all that beheld him, he shed
not one drop of Blood, though pierced with several mortal Wounds; but scarce
had they taken off his Arm a Bracelet of Bone, when the Blood gushed out. The
Indians discovered the Secret, saying it was the Bone of a Beast that breeds in
Iava, which has that virtue; it was esteemed a great Prize, and brought to
Albuquerque. Next they met a Vessel with 300 Moors, so resolute, Albuquerque
was forced to come up himself to take it, not without some danger. In this
Vessel was Geniall, the rightful King of Pacem, banished by the tyranny of the
present Possessor. Three other Vessels were taken soon after, whereof one gave
intelligence of the affairs of Malaca, in which Port our Fleet anchored on the
1st of July with much noise of Warlike Instruments and Cannon, terrifying all
the People that covered the Shore; for the guilt of what they had before acted,
made then sensible what this Fleet was designed for; there being no surer
foreteller of their punishment to wicked men, than their own Conscience.

3. Next day came a Gallant Moor, with a deceitful Message, from the King to
Albuquerque. He received him with great state, the greatest was that of his
Person and Venerable Beard, which had never been cut since he was at Ormuz, he
saying it should never be cut till he sat to that purpose upon the Back of Coje
Atar; so it grew to such a length, that he knotted it to his Girdle. He treated
the Moor courteously, whose Message contained, that if he came for Merchandise
it was ready. The Answer was, That the Merchandise he sought for, were some
Portugueses that were in the City ever since Siqueira went away; that having
got them, he would let the King know what more he demanded of the King and
City. The Moor at his return spread the terror of this Answer, and it was
generally agreed to buy off that danger by restoring the Portugueses, and
paying a sum of Money. Prince Alodim and his Brother-in-law the King of Pam
prevented the executing this, and made ready to defend themselves. Albuquerque
began some military execution, whereupon the King restored the Captives. Other
Messages were sent by the King in order to appease Albuquerque, who answered,
That he offered him Peace upon condition he permitted him instantly to raise a
Fort there, and repayed the Charge of his and Siqueira coming to that Port,
since his Falsehood had been the cause of all the damage sustained; and that he
must immediately return an answer, whether he chose Peace or War. The King
desired an Accommodation, but his Son and the King of Pam opposed it. At last
they all made the necessary preparations to repel the danger.

4. On the Eve of St. James the Apostle, the Signal was given for landing, with
great Shouts and noise of Guns; immediately the Portugueses leap ashore, and
mix with the Enemy. The hottest of the dispute was about gaining and maintaing
the Bridge, which Albuquerque had undertaken himself, and was vigorously
defended till the Enemies pressed, leaped into the River, where many were
killed, and many drowned. The Prince and King of Pam bravely withstood another
party of ours that would make their way to the Bridge. King Mahomet came out on
a bulky Elephant, with two more carrying Castles on their Backs, whence flew a
great number of Darts. Our men attacking the Beasts, so wounded them, that they
fled, trampling their own men, and making way for ours to join those at the
Bridge. Albuquerque then fortified himself there, and because much harm was
done with poisoned Arrows from the tops of neighboring Houses, he caused them
to be burnt. Albuquerque bestowing great Praises on his Captains for their
Valor, and perceiving they were scorched with the heat, and faint for want of
Meat, retired with them to the Ships about Night, where ten died of poisoned
Arrows. The Enemies loss was not known. The King of Pam went away, on pretense
of bringing a recruit, but returned not.

5. Whilst Albuquerque rested in his Ships refreshing his men, the King
harrased his, undermining the Streets to blow us up, and covering them with
poisoned Thorns that might gore us at coming in; he planted more Artillery in
many places, and secured the Bridge. Albuquerque sent Antony de Abreu in a
Vessel well manned, to gain it; from the Bridge flew Showers of Bullets, and
Deniz Fernandez de Melo seeing him near killed, endeavored to carry him off to
the Ships to be dressed, but he with wonderful constancy said, Though I have
neither strength to Fight, nor voice to Command, I have still life to keep my
Post. Floats of Wildfire were drove along the River to burn the Vessel, and no
remedy to prevent it, till Albuquerque effected it by gaining the Bridge; then
the Vessel had liberty to act. Our Commander enters the City through Showers of
Bullets, Arrows and Darts. Understanding the danger of the Mines which were in
a broad Street, he took another way and gained the Mosque; and at last with
vast slaughter of the Enemy, took entire possession of the City, having with
him in this Action only 800 Portugueses and 200 Malabares.

6. In nine days time all the Moors were killed, or driven out of that great
Place. It was Peopled again by Strangers, and some Malayes, to whom leave was
granted. Among them came that Powerful Native of Iava Utimutiraja, whose Son
had like to kill Siqueira. The Soldiers had three days liberty to plunder.
There were found 3000 Pieces of great Cannon; of 8000 that King Mahomet relied
upon, being with the rest retired to Bintam, where with Prince Alodim he
fortified himself. This would be of dangerous consequence, therefore
Albuquerque sent out 400 of his men, and with them went 400 of Utimutiraja, and
300 belonging to the Merchants of Pegu, these put the Prince to flight, took
seven Elephants with costly Trappings, and retired. The King now wandered the
Woods, blaming the obstinacy of his Son and the King of Pam; so the Father and
Son fell out and parted, each shifting for himself. Albuquerque instantly built
the Fort, which he called Famosa for its beauty, and Church dedicated to the
Visitation of our Lady. He Coined Money (as had been done at Goa) of several
Names and different Value, which was proclaimed about the Streets, and some
scattered among the People. By these and other honorable Actions he gained the
Hearts of the Strangers, and secured this most Important Place.

7. Albuquerque, though he saw into the Soul of Utimutiraja, knowing it
sometimes convenient to trust an Enemy, gave him the Command of the Moors who
remained in the City. But he kept private Correspondence with Prince Alodim, on
pretense to restore him, but in reality to the intent to set himself up. This
was not so private but it was discovered, and he, his Son, and Sonin-law were
apprehended, and publicly (after Conviction) executed on the same Scaffold
they had erected for Siqueira. This was the first piece of Public Justice
executed by the Portugueses in India. One Fire is followed by another. Pate
Quitir, a Native of Iava, to whom Alfonso gave that Government, took a sum of
Money of the Wife of Utimutiraja (whom he had succeeded) and a promise to give
him her Daughter, upon condition he would revenge the death of her Husband on
the Portugueses, to whom she had offered 100000 Ducats for his Life. Pate
accepted the Offer, with the same intention of seizing the City. The King of
Campar also having this design, sent to Congratulate with Albuquerque, offering
his Service, and asking the Command of Pate Quitir. But this had no effect now,
in its time it shall be related. Albuquerque received here several Embassies,
particularly from the King of Siam, who rejoiced to see his Quarrel revenged,
though by another hand. He also sent Ambassadors to Siam, to Pegu; and two to
discover the Islands of Maluco and Banda. They had all Orders to publish every
where what had happened at Malaca, and offer the Trade of that Place on better
terms than it was before. All things being ordered, the best the time would
permit, he resolved to return to Cochin, leaving Ruy de Brito Patalim to
Command in the Fort with above 300 men. The like number to guard the Sea, in
ten Ships, under Fernando Perez de Andrade. Albuquerque carried with himself
four Sail.

8. Whilst this passed at Malaca, there broke out a Rebellion of many of the
Natives at Goa, and Pulate Came, an Officer of Hidalcam, appeared before it with
a good Body of Men; he passed over into the Island and besieged the City. One
of the Principal Exploits was a Sally made by our Commander Rodrigo Rebelo, in
which was done much execution. But soon after he was killed, and with him
Manuel de Cunna, so that things were in a bad posture. To remedy this, by
Public Consent James Mendez de Vasconcellos was chose Commander.

9. Pulate Came gave some jealousy, that he designed to usurp this Territory,
to prevent which Hidalcam sent his Brother-inlaw Rotzmo Came, who overcame him
with the assistance of James Mendez, whom he drew to his Aid, and after would
drive out of the City, finding himself with a power of 7000 men, there being
then not above 1200 in the Town, whereof the third part only were Portugueses.
He laid siege, and Hunger began to press within, and some of our men deserted,
whereof part repenting, returned, which gave the first hopes to the Besieged

10. Next came Emanuel de la Cerda, left to cruize upon that Sea, and had
wintered at Cochin; then James Fernandez de Beja, who had been demolishing the
Fort at Zocotora, and receiving the Tribute at Ormuz. The abundance of
Provisions and Recruits of Men they brought, gave new life to the almost
dismayed besieged. After these arrived, John Serram, who came from Portugal the
year before with Payo de Sa, in order to settle some Trade in the Island
Madagascar, where they made several attempts to no effect. Christopher de
Brito, who was at Cananor with one great and four smaller Ships, hearing of the
condition of Goa, went thither, carrying many Men and much Provision, and
secured the Town which had suffered much that Winter.

CHAP. VII.
Conquests in India under King Emanuel, from the Year 1511, till the Year 1513,
Alfonso de Albuquerque still Governing.

1. ALbuquerque sailing from Malaca to Cochin, off Cape Timia, of the Kingdom
Aru, in the Island Sumatra, his Ship set upon a Rock, which so split it athwart
the Keel, that those in the Poop could not come at them in the Forecastle, and
the contrary; neither could the other Vessels, by reason of the darkness of the
Night, come to relieve them. Till day appearing Albuquerque was seen holding in
his Arms a Girl, Chance had conducted to him in the Confusion; Peter de Alpoem
coming up, though with much danger, saved him. The loss he most lamented was
that Bone which hindered the wounded Moor from bleeding, and some Iron Lions of
curious Work, which he had designed for Supporters to his Tomb. Some men were
lost. Albuquerque went into Alpoem's Ship, and prosecuting his Voyage, took two
Ships of Moors, which, though Rich, made not amends for his great loss.
Immediately upon his arrival at Cochin, being informed of the distress of Goa,
he dispatched thither eight Vessels with Men and Provisions, and a Promise of
his speedy coming in Person. There were then in the Town 1000 men, and the
Besiegers were 20000 strong.

2. Six Ships arrived in India from Portugal, 1512.
Commanded by Don Garcia de Noronha, who had a tedious Voyage, having spent a
whole year without touching in any Port: And though the men were tired and
sick, yet they relieved some places. The mean while sailed from Portugal to
India a Fleet of 13 Ships, whereof one perished at the Islands of Angoxa.

3. This Fleet containing 1800 men, anchored at the Bar of Goa on the 15th of
August. They presently visited the Enemy in their Fort of Benastarim, and then
Don Garcia, and George de Melo with their Squadrons passed on, carrying with
them John Machado and others newly delivered from the slavery of Cambaya.
Albuquerque rejoiced more than at his Victories to see his Nephew Don Garcia
with that Command, the great succor he and Melo brought, the Captives
released, and all things concurring to further his designs. His satisfaction
was increased by the arrival of Antony de Sadanna with the Garrison of Quiloa,
which Place being of small importance, they had quitted. At the same time came
an Ambassador from the King of Persia, and one from him of Ormuz to go to
Portugal. Albuquerque ordered the affairs of Cochin to pass to Goa, and by the
way left George de Melo in the Fort of Cananor.

4. He was received at Goa as a public Father, and being informed of the past
as well as present posture of Affairs; he visited the Fortifications, and
studied how to drive Rotzomo Came from his Works. The sixth day from his
arrival, being on an eminence with some Gentlemen viewing 4000 Moors and 200
Horse, who diverted themselves in the Field, it being Friday, which is their
Sabbath, he could not hinder our men from rushing upon them, and driving them
up to their Fortifications, where was a hot Skirmish, and our men victorious
with some Booty, having killed above 100, and lost one Captain and another man,
and some wounded.

5. Albuquerque resolving to take that Fortress from the Enemy, gave the
assault by Land and Sea, and thinking it was not vigorously carried on by Sea,
he leaped into a Boat, and came so near that a Cannon Ball killed a Canara that
steered the Vessels, dashing his Brains and Blood on his Beard. This so
inflamed him, that he promised a reward to any that should break that Cannon,
and immediately one of our Gunners directed a Ball into the Mouth of it,
wherewith it flew in pieces and killed the Canonier. This made way for our men
to come up the River and lay the siege closer, when Zufolari appearing on the
Continent with 7000 men coming to the relief of it, but finding nothing could
be done, he retired with some loss sustained by our Cannon. Albuquerque set
down before the place with 4000 men, whereof 3000 were Portugueses, in two
Bodies, one Commanded by himself, the other by his Nephew Don Garcia de
Noronha. At first we received some damage, but afterward did so much, that
Rotzomo Came surrendered upon condition to leave the Fort with all the Cannon and
Ammunition, and deliver all the Slaves and Renegadoes, which last Albuquerque
punished by cutting off their Noses, Ears, Right Hands, and Thumbs of the Left,
and sending them so maimed to Portugal. One of these was Ferdinando Lopez, who
to do Penance for his Sins, voluntarily staid with a Black in the Island St.
Helena, where he was afterward serviceable to some Ships, and began to sow that
Island.

Albuquerque endeavored to bring Rotzomo Came over to the Portugues Service,
but succeeded not. But this his Fortune terrified many Princes. The King of
Calicut concluded a Treaty with Don Garcia de Noronha, whom his Uncle had sent
to Cochin to take charge of Affairs there. Those of Narsinga and Bisa, Hidalcam
and others sent Ambassadors, to all which he answered, extolling the value of
the Portugueses Amity, and the terror of their Arms; and being dispatched, sent
after them Messengers of his own to inform those Princes, and gain intelligence
of them. Now arrived at Goa, Matthew, Ambassador from Prester John, in order to
go to Portugal; he brought with him a piece of the Holy Cross, and Letters from
Queen Helena, who Governed that Kingdom during the minority of her Son David.
The design of this Embassy was to settle Amity with our King, and ask Aid
against the Moors, who ever infested that Empire. The Ambassador said, that at
his Masters Court there were then three Portugueses, one called John, who
styled himself Ambassador of the King of Portugal, and two who said they had
been lately set ashore at Cape Guardafu to discover the Country. These were
John Gomez and John Sanchez, set ashore there by Order of Albuquerque himself,
with a Moor for that discovery.

7. Finding the Affairs of Goa in so good a posture, he resolved to put in
execution an Enterprise he had been charged with by King Emanuel. This was the
Conquest of the City Aden. He fitted 20 Ships, without acquainting any body
with the design When ready to sail he acquainted the Captains with his
intentions. The number of the men was 1700 Portugueses, and 800 Canaras and
Malabars. They set sail the 18th of February, and arrived safe at Aden.
Miramirzan, Governor of the Town, sent to complement Albuquerque, and a
Present of Provision. Several Messages passing, and no hopes of a surrender
appearing, it was resolved to give the assault.

8. The City Aden is seated on the Coast of Arabia Felix, near the Mouth of the
Red Sea, called by Ptolomy, Modocan. Over it appears the Mountain Arzira, all a
barren Rock, in many Cliffs. The Town from the Sea looks beautiful and strong.
It is rich and famous for the great resort thither of many Nations. The Soil so
scarce of Water, that it has only a few Wells and Cisterns. Even from the
Clouds it is scarce watered above once in two or three years; whence it is void
of all Trees, Plants and Orchards, the delight and pleasure of other Towns.

9. Albuquerque found the Enterprise was more difficult than it had been
represented. On Easter-Eve in the Morning our men landed with Scaling Ladders,
this being thought the proper method for gaining the place. It was doubtful who
first mounted the Wall, but several being already upon it, the Ladders,
overburdened with the multitude that pressed to get up, broke several times, so
that there was no hope of relieving those who had gained the top, and stood in
great danger, and Albuquerque was forced to order them down, making one out of
the broken Ladders, some fighting while the others came off. After four hours
engagement, they retired with great danger and loss, more sustained by the
accident than the Enemy. George Silveyra and five men were killed, some died
after of their wounds, and some with the fall from the Wall.

10. Albuquerque complying with his ill fortune, and the persuasions of his
Captains, and to save time, resolved to give over that attempt, and sail
toward the Mouth of the Red Sea. But first they took a Bulwark that guarded
the Port, where many Moors were killed, and 37 great pieces of Cannon found.

The Ships were all first plundered, and then burnt. The fourth day after their
arrival they sailed out of this Port, and arrived at the Mouth of the Red Sea,
next the Coast of Arabia, which was much celebrated with great signs of Joy by
Albuquerque, as being the first of our Nation that had entered those Seas.

CHAP. VIII.
A Continuation of the Conquests of the Year 1513, the Reign of King Emanuel,
and Government of Alfonso de Albuquerque.

1. THE Form of the Red Sea is not unlike to that of a Crocodile, the Mouth of
it is the place answerable to the narrow Neck, and the Head is that Sea which
lies out between Cape Guardafu and Cape Fartaque, and the Point of the Tail
reaches to the Town of Suez; it lies N. N. W. and S. S. E. The length of it 350
Leagues, the breadth where widest 40. The Channel is in the middle, and has
Water enough to carry the greatest Ships; but the sides ar^ shoal, full of
little Islands and Banks of Sand. No River of any note falls into it. By the
Moors it is called Bahar Corzu, that is, closed in; by others the Sea of Meca;
by us the Red Sea, from the Color it takes of the Bottom, as was experienced
by the Viceroy Don John de Castro, who caused to be taken up in some places a
matter Red, like Corral; in others, Green; and in others, White; and in each
the Water seemed of that Color, but the most is Red, and the Water taken up is
as clear as any other. There are some fisheries of small Pearl in many parts of
this Sea; it abounds not in Fish. The Mouth lies between 12 and 13 degrees of
North Latitude, and is as it were locked up by seven small Islands, the
greatest called Mehun, and Perantonomasiam Island. From the Mouth of the
straight till Suez, along the Coast of Arabia, for the first 44 Leagues, are
some Ports of small note, till we come to the Island Camaran, subject to King
of Aden. Thence to Gezan, a great Town 60 Leagues, where are seven considerable
Ports. From Gezan to Imbo 130 Leagues, all the Dominion of Meca, wherein are
good Towns and Ports; among which Ziden, a famous Town, then Ioda, much known,
and Meca 15 Leagues up the Country; 60 Leagues from Imbo, is Toro, where it is
said the Children of Israel crossed the Red Sea, which is here 3 Leagues over;
hence to Suez 40 Leagues, and there ends the Coast of Arabia. Let us now return
from Suez to the straight, where we began, running along the opposite Coast of
Egypt and Ethiopia: 20 Leagues from Suez is Grand Cayr, the vast Metropolis of
Egypt, but it lies upon the Nile, not the Red Sea; 45 Leagues from it to
Alcozer; thence 135, in which space are many Ports to the City Zuanquem; 70
Leagues farther Mazua, in a small Island, as is the other, and opposite to it
Arquico; hence 85 Leagues to the Mouth of the Sea. Behind a ridge of Mountains
that runs along this Coast lies the Empire of Prester John, which has always
preserved Christianity after their manner, and has of late been much supported
therein by the Portugues Arms.

2. Albuquerque sailing along this Sea, arrived at the Island Camaran,
abandoned by its Inhabitants for fear of his coming. Here he took four Ships
richly laden, one belonging the Sultan of Cayr, two more he had taken by the
way. From this Island he visited others, and now appeared in the Sky, visibly
to all, a Red Crols very bright, seeming to be about a Fadom athwart, and of a
proportionable length. They all knelt, and Albuquerque made a devout Prayer,
and the Vision was Celebrated with Joy and sound of Music, and Cannon, till by
degrees it was covered by a bright Cloud. He returned to Camaran, designing to
winter there, the Wind having failed him to sail to Ioda, as he had designed.

3. Here they suffered extremely by Famine, and after many died by sickness,
caused by the ill Food. Albuquerque parted hence when the Weather would permit,
which was in July, resolving to appear again before Aden, He touched at the
Island Mehun, at the Mouth of the Straight, and called it Vera Cruz, because he
erected there a very high Cross on an Eminence. He dispatched two Ships to
discover the City Zeyla, where they burnt two Vessels in the Harbor and joined
him again at Aden.

4. Albuquerque found this City newly fortified. The Cannon on both sides was
played with almost equal damage. Nothing considerable was performed, but some
Ships taken and burnt, and then sailed for India.

5. About the middle of August he anchored off of Diu; the Lord of it Melique
Az, more out of Fear than affection, sent him some Provisions, and a courteous
Message. Albuquerque knowing him, dealt cautiously, and demanded leave to raise
a Fort there; he excused himself with the King of Cambaya; at the same time
advising him to deny it if asked. However it was agreed a Factor and some
others should be left there to settle Trade; and at parting Melique treated
Albuquerque with such civility and cunning, that he after said he had not seen
a more perfect Courtier, or fitter to deceive, and at the same time please an
understanding man. Afterward leave was obtained of the King of Cambaya to
raise a Fort at Diu, upon condition he might build another at Malaca, and other
reasonable Proposals which were admitted.

6. Now arrived in India two Ships from Portugal, a third being cast away, but
the men saved, and taken up by the others at Melinde; the Captain of her was
after lost in a Boat. Albuquerque went to Goa, and sent his Nephew Noronha to
dispatch these two, and three other Ships homewards. These Ships carried an
Ambassador from Zamori to King Emanuel, he being now in amity with us, and
having permitted a Fort to be erected where it was desired. They carried also
the offers of several Princes, and many Captives taken in War, as Testimonies
of what he had acted. There went also a Portugues Jew, an Inhabitant of
Jerusalem, sent by the Guardian of the Franciscans there, to acquaint
Albuquerque, that the Sultan of Cayr threatened the destruction of all the Holy
Places.

CHAP. IX.
A Continuation of the Conquests, the Year 1513, till the Year 1514, the same
King Reigning in Portugal, and the same Governor Ruling India.

1. THat Powerful Native of Iava, Pate Quitir, who had been honored and
preferred at Malaca by Albuquerque, and at the time of his departure was in
Rebellion, improved his absence to carry on his Treason. One Night he killed a
Captain of ours, and took some Cannon, and fortified himself therewith and with
what he had before, and 6000 Men and two Elephants. Ferdinando Perez and
Alfonso Pessoa with 320 Men attacked him, one by Land, the other by Water;
after a vigorous defense, many of his men being slain, he fled to the Woods. In
his Fort was found much Artillery, Ammunition and other Riches, and all that
part where he lived was burnt to the ground.

2. Pate Quitir having received succor from Iava, and King Mahomet who lost
Malaca, begins to raise another Fort in a convenien^ place, appearing Powerful
by Sea and Land, in hopes to usurp the Dominion of the City. Ferdinando Perez
went again to oppose him, but though he fought with the same resolution, had
not the same success as before, being forced to retire with loss of three
Captains and four private men. Lacsamana, a Commander of King Mahomet, now
enters the River with many Men and much Cannon in several Vessels. Ferdinando
Perez goes to meet him with three Ships, the Fight lasted very furious the
space of three hours, with much advantage on the Portugues side. Lacsamana with
wonderful celerity that Night, threw up a notable Fortification, whilst Perez
guarded the River, fearing he should fly from him. It was thought a rashness in
their condition to attack him, so they retired to the City to consult their own
safety, but before they consulted their relief came unexpected.

3. Just then entered the Port three Ships from India with Ammunition and 150
Men. Whilst they considered how to put in execution the Orders sent by
Albuquerque, Lacsamana took all the Vessels that carried Provisions to the
Town. Hunger so pressed the Town that some fainted about the Streets, the same
Plague attended Pate Quitir in his Quarters. The Weather being fit to sail,
Ferdinando Perez set out with ten Ships and one Gally. As they sailed toward
Cincapura, the Gally going before, discovered a Sail and kept it in play till
the Fleet coming up took and found it stored with Provision and Ammunition,
designed for Pate Quitir. Perez brought the Captain and Principal Men over to
his own Ship, who resolved to kill our Men, and began to execute it, running
Perez into the Back with a Poniard; some of them were taken, others leaped into
the Sea. Being put to the Rack, they confessed there was a Son of Pate Quitir
among them, and that they were followed by three Vessels with the like lading,
which were also taken, and all carried to the City. At the same time arrived
Gomez de Cunna with his Ship laden with Provision; he came from Pegu, where he
had been settling Peace with that King. The Famine being appeased, and Men
recovered, Ferdinando Perez with his Fleet attacked Pate Quitir, and
fortunately burnt his Fort, obliging him to fly to Iava. Lacsamana seeing this
success, drew off. But at Iava a great Fleet is preparing to fall upon Malaca.

4. Iava is an Island S. E. of Sumatra, they are divided by a Straight 15
Leagues over, it is long and narrow, the length lying from East to West, is
almost 200 Leagues. All the length of it runs a Mountain (like the Apennine in
Italy) which hinders the Commerce between those People: It has some Ports and
good Cities. The Inhabitants came from China. Afterward Moors from Malaca
possessed themselves of the Coast. Pate Unuz, who was after King of Zunda, was
now Lord of the City Iapara. This Man now prepared a Fleet of 90 Sail to fall
upon Malaca; among these, some equal in bigness to our Galeons, and that which
he was to go in, greater than any of them. He had been seven years making this
preparation, and kept private intelligence with the Natives of Iava that were
in Maiaca. He had 12000 men and much Cannon. On a sudden they appeared before
the Town. Ferdinando Perez with 17 Vessels, and in them 350 Portugueses and
some Natives, met them, had a sharp engagement, and did much execution.

5. The Night parted the Fleets, and was spent in consulting what should be
done next Morning. Pate Unuz endeavored to gain the River Muar. Perez pursues
and pierces into the middle of the Enemy, playing his Cannon and Fire works
with such success, that many Ships were sunk and fired. The Fight was very
furious, till Pate Unuz fled, and was pursued in ^in, for he never stopped till
in Iava, where he preserved that vast Vessel as a memorial of his escape, and
the grandeur of his Fleet, not without reason, for a Merchant of Malaca offered
for it 10000 Ducats in case it were taken. This Victory cost some Lives and
much Blood, few escaping without some Wounds. Thus were those of Iava for ever
banished from Malaca. Ferdinando Perez laden with Spice and Victory sailed to
Cochin, in Company of Lope de Azevedo and Antony de Abreu, who came from the
discovery of the Maluccoes with three Ships. After them arrived Antony de
Miranda from Siam, to the great Joy of Albuquerque, seeing the good Fruits of
his Labor and Care for Malaca, and happy return of those he had sent to other
places.

6. King Mahomet who had lost Malaca, had not yet lost the hopes of being
restord to it. He drew near, and having tried all ways by force, resolved to
make use of a Stratagem. He ordered that Tuam Maxeliz, a Favorite of his,
should imitate the great Zopirus of Babylon. With his consent he did him some
great injuries. He then fled to Malaca with some Companions, giving out he fled
from the tyranny of his Prince. Ruy de Brito who commanded the Fort, gave
credit to him, and by Presents and Policy he gained such freedom, that he had
admittance at all times, till he came prepared to kill Brito, the King at the
same time being ready to second and bring him off; six men were suddenly slain
by his followers: Brito then opened his Eyes (for he was sleeping) and
gathering his Men, drove the Traitor out at the very time that a Party of
Mahomets came up to the Fort. The Commander of the Party Tuam Calascar
understanding the miscarriage, with a ready wit counterfeited he came to the
assistance of Brito, and retired. Now arrived Peter de Faria from the Straight
of Sabam, bringing with him Abdela, King of Campar, who no longer able to
endure his Son-in-law Mahomet, came to live under the Portugueses in Malaca.
This was in the Month of July, and George de Albuquerque was come from Goa to
Command in this City, with instructions what to do with the King of Campar,
which in effect were to give him the charge of Bendara (that is, Governor of
the Natives) till the possessed by Ninachetu, on whom for his go (...) Services
Albuquerque had before bestowed it, and now took it from him for some
miscarriages. This Heathen so much resented it, that he resolved to give a
wonderful demonstration of his Constancy and concernment. He was very rich, and
ordered in a Marketplace a Scaffold to be erected, adorned with Rich Silks and
Cloth of Gold; in the middle he placed a great heap of sweet Aromatic Wood,
and strewed the Street from his House thither with sweet Herbs and Flowers, and
hung it answerable to the scaffold. He invited his Friends, and clad himself
and Family richly. Then mounting upon the Scaf fold, whilst by his Order that
Rich Pile was fired and kindled, he made a long Harangue, protesting his
Innocence and the Zeal wherewith he had served the Portugueses, and saying he
would fly up to Heaven in that Flame and Smoke, he cast himself into that Fire,
to the great admiration of all the Beholders.

7. The King of Campar was gone home, designing to return and take upon him the
charge of Bendara, but was hindered by the King of Bintam and Mahomet. They
fitted out a Fleet of 70 Sail, and 2500 Men, under the Command of the King of
Linga; they besieged Campar, and 8 Portugues Vessels set out to shut them up,
with some Boats equipped by the Town. The King of Linga observing them somewhat
careless, on a sudden fell upon George Botello the Commander, with his Gally,
all the Fleet fol^wing him, but he was well received, his ^ally taken, the
Fleet put to flight, and the King forced to leap overboard. They took in the
King of Campar, and brought him to Malaca, where he exercised the Charge of
Bendara so excellently, that in four Months time the City was visibly improved,
many People resorting to it who had fled to Mahomet, offended at Ninachetu.
Mahomet perceiving the growth of the City caused by his Son-in-law Abdela, to
put a stop to it made use of a Fraud peculiar to a Moor. He gave out in
private, but so that it might be spread abroad, that his Son-inlaw was gone
over to Malaca by common consent, and the same was done by such as seemed to
fly from Bintam, with a design to seize upon the Fort the first opportunity,
and deliver it to him as lawful Prince. This secret (as Mahomet had designed
it) was divulged at Malaca, and had the effect he pretended; for George de
Albuquerque gave more credit to the Report, than to the Honest proceeding of
the Bendara, who was tried and condemned as a Traitor, and his Head cut off
upon a public Scaffold. The City escaped not the punishment of this Crime,
being left almost desolate by the flight of the Inhabitants, and then oppressed
by Famine.

CHAP. X.
From the Year 1514, till the Year 1515, concluding with the Government and
Life of the Great Alfonso de Albuquerque.

1. WHilst what is before related happened at Malaca, Albuquerque visited the
1514.
Important Places of his Province, and gave the necessary Orders for their
security. He dispatched Don Garcia de Noronha to Cochin, thence to encourage
the work of the Fort that was building at Calicut, He appointed four Sail to
cruize in the Mouth of the Red Sea, under the Command of his Nephew Peter de
Albuquerque, with Orders to touch at Ormuz, and receive the Tribute when it
became due, and then discover the Island of Baharem. He dispatched Ambassadors
well attended, to several Princes. James Fernandez de Beja went to the King of
Cambaya to treat about the Fort of Diu, which he had consented to before, and
now refused, induced thereto by Melique Az. The Ambassador returned with
Presents to Albuquerque, among other things a Rhinoceros or Abada, which was
afterward lost in the Mediterranean, being sent by King Emanuel to the Pope,
with other Rarities of India* John Gonzalez de Castellobranco was sent to
Hidalcan about the pretensions of Goa, to less effect than the other in the
affairs of Diu.

2. In September arrived at Goa five Ships from Portugal, under the Command of
Christopher de Brito, one was after lost, bound for Cambaya; care was taken to
dispatch the lading of the others. Albuquerque eased of these more Profitable
than Honorable Cares, prepared to set forwards, yet unresolved, whether he
should steer to Ormuz or the Red Sea, the King having Ordered both. In order to
fix a Resolution, he consulted with his Captains. It was agreed the Enterprise
should be upon Ormuz, a suitable determination to Albuquerque's desires. On the
20th of February he directed his Course thither. His Fleet consisted of 27
Sail, 1500 Portugueses and 600 Malabares and Canaras. They anchored in the Port
of Ormuz on the 26th of March. Immediately came aboard a Visit and Presents
from the King. But what best pleased Albuquerque was, that he found there
Michael Ferreyra whom he had sent to Xeque Ismael of Persia, to procure Amity
with him, whereof he brought great hopes.

3. Raez Hamet was now possessed of the Favor of the King of Ormuz, as Coje
Atar had been with his Predecesso^, both these being dead. Among other things
Albuquerque sent to demand of him the delivery of the Fort he had begun there,
and that he should send some Principal Men with the Instrument of the
Submission of that Kingdom made by King Ceyfadim. All was consented to, because
there was no power to resist. The Governor Raez Nordim came with his Nephew to
ratify all, to whom Albuquerque gave rich Presents, and by them sent the King
a rich Collar of Gold, no less valuable for the Workmanship than the Metal,
and a Standard with the Portugues Arms, to declare the Union between both
Nations. Public demonstrations of Joy were made on both sides for this
agreement, with sound of Warlike Instruments and noise of Cannon. On Palm
Sunday Albuquerque took possession of the Fort before begun, which in few days
did rise to a great height, and Albuquerque with some of his Captains went into
the Houses neighboring to it.

4. Albuquerque prepared to receive an Ambassador that came from the King of
Persia with Michael Ferreyra with Presents, on a Scaffold near those Houses;
this Audience was so long deferred to show to those of Ormuz, that so powerful
a Prince sought his Friendship. The King of Ormuz was at a Window to see this
Reception. The Present consisted of Ounces, Brocards, Precious Stones, and
Jewels of Gold, and many Silks. The Ambassador was honorably received, and the
Treaty concluded with mutual satisfaction.

5. Raez Hamet was come from Persia with a design to secure Ormuz, and deliver
it up to his King Ismael. He so far gained upon the King, that he absolutely
governed him, and nothing was done but by his direction. The better to carry on
the Enterpize, he underhand brought People into Ormuz, and was actually in
readiness to kill the King, but deferred it till a more favorable opportunity.
Albuquerque was informed of all these practices, and how much the King desired
to be delivered from that oppression; he studied, and Fortune offered him the
occasion of executing it. An interview was appointed between the King and
Albuquerque. His Evil Conscience warned Raez Hamet to shun that danger. He
proposed Albuquerque should come to the King, lest the King going should carry
him. The other insisted that the King should come to him, and carried it, upon
condition that neither Party should be Armed. Some of Raez Hamet's Men broke
the Condition, carrying hidden Arms. He was armed himself, and entering the
first with much rudeness, Albuquerque cried to his Captains, kill him, which
was instantly obeyed. The King came, and the Conference began; but was
interrupted by the noise of the People, supposing the King was killed. Raez
Hamet's Men knowing it was he who was slain, ran and possessed themselves of,
and fortified the King's House. Albuquerque would presently have scaled it, but
was hindered by the King, who with the assistance of his Governors, found other
means to expel those Enemies the City. They were to the number of 700, who all
went away to Persia. This disorder was succeeded by the Pomp wherewith
Albuquerque and all his Captains accompanied the King to his Palace, to the
great Joy of the whole City, seeing their Prince delivered from that Tyrany,
and restored to the Majesty of a King. Then Albuquerque dispatched the King of
Persia's Ambassador, sending along with him Ferdinando Gomez, with a Present of
double the value of that he had received. He was to give an account of what had
been done at Ormuz. He was well received, and brought a favorable Answer.

6. It requires a larger History to give an account of the Affairs and Kings of
Persia. Let it suffice to say, that the Valiant Prince Reigning at this time,
was embroiled in War with the Turk, which was one cause of sending this
Embassy, hoping to make an advantage of our Arms against his Enemy.

7. Whilst the Fort was building, or rather finishing, Albuquerque persuaded
the King it was for the safety of the City to put all their Cannon into the
Fort, pretending thereby to secure them against their Enemies, but in reality
to disable them from offending him. Security is a Powerful Argument where there
is Fear. The King and his Governors, though with some reluctance, consented to
all was demanded. The Command of the Fort was given to Peter de Albuquerque. So
was that Rich and Powerful Kingdom brought under the Portugues subjection,
rather to the advantage than detriment of its Natural Kings; more oppressed
before by the tyranny of their Ministers, than by the Tribute they afterward
paid. Besides the security it enjoyed, being protected by our Arms; but that
Liberty is sweeter than all other Conveniences.

8. These Affairs settled, Albuquerque applied himself to dispatch the Trading
Ships homeward-bound. He sent to this purpose his Nephew Don Garcia de Noronha
with most of the Fleet to Cochin, staying behind himself to conclude such
affairs as required his Presence. Soon after he fell sick, and the Disease
increasing, was persuaded for the recovery of his health, to go to India, which
he consented to, to the great grief of the King, who looked upon him as a
Father. By the way he met the News, that there were arrived in India 12 Ships
from Portugal, who brought Orders for him to return home. Lope Soarez, who
Commanded them, being appointed his Successor; hearing this, he cried out, Lope
Soarez Governor of India; this is he, it could be no other. D^ James Mendez
and James Pereyra, whom I sent Prisoners for heinous Crimes, return, the one
Governor of Cochin, the other Secretary? It is time for me to take Sanctuary
in the Church, for I have incurred the Kings displeasure for his Subjects
sakes, and the Subjects anger for the King's sake. Old Man fly to the Church,
it concerns your Honor you should die, and you never omitted any thing that
concerned your Honor. Then lifting his Eyes and Hands to Heaven gave God
thanks a Governor came so opportunely, not doubting he should die. He was
seized with a profound Melancholy, and arrived at Dabul, almost in the Arms of
Death, and there writ these last Lines to the King. This is, Sir, the last
Letter which I write to your Highness, now under the Pangs of Death, of many
that I writ full of Life, because mine was then free from the Confusion of the
last Hour, and employed in your Service. I left in that Kingdom a Son, called
Blas de Albuquerque, I beg your Highness will make him as great as my Service
deserves. As to the Affairs of India, it will answer for it self and me. Upon
the Bar of Goa (which he called his Land of Promise) he gave up the Ghost on
the 16th of December, in the 63d year of his Age, in his Perfect Senses, and
like a Good Christian. He was buried in a Chapel built by himself at the City
Gate, and called Sennora de la Sierra, or Our Lady of the Mountain. He was
Second Son to Goncalo de Albuquerque, Lord of Villaverde, and of Donna Leonor
de Meneses, Daughter of Alvaro Gonzales de Atayde, first Count of Atouguia. He
had been Master of the Horse to King John the Second. Of a moderate Stature,
his Countenance pleasing, and venerable by the Beard which reached below his
Girdle, to which he wore it knotted; that and his Complexion very White; his
Picture shows his Breeches, Double^, Cloak, Cap and Coif all Black, with Gold
Trimming; the Wastcoat striped with Green Velvet, with small Spots like Studs.
It was doubted whether he was a better Man or Officer. When Angry, his Looks
somewhat Terrible; when Merry, Pleasant and Witty. He was twice before Ormuz,
twice before Goa, and twice before Malaca, three Famous Islands and Kingdoms in
Asia, whereof he gloriously Triumphed.

9. After a long resistance made by the People of Goa, his Bones were brought
to Lisbon, and buried in the Church of Our Lady of Grace. He was the first had
the Title of Governor of India, as Don Francisco de Almeyda the first of
Viceroy.

End of the Second Part of the First Tome.
THE PORTUGUES ASIA. TOM. II. PART III.
CHAP. I.
The Government of the Viceroy D. Anton. de Noronna from the Year 1564, till
1568, in the Reign of King Sebastian.

1. WE concluded the Second Part with the Arrival at 1564*
Goa of the Viceroy D'Anton. de Noronna. His good Service in India preferred
him to the command of Ormur, and his wise Conduct there to the Government of
India.

2. With him went four Ships, and he was received with a general Satisfaction.
He immediately sent Relief to Cananor, which was Besieged, giving the Command
of the Land to D. Antony de Noronna, and that of the S^a to Goncalo Pereyra
Marramaque with a good Fleet. D. Francis Mascarenas, who was there with a
Squadron before, delivered it to him, and went away to his Command of
Mocambique: This was occasioned by that Morish Woman spoke of in the end of
John de Mendoca his Government.

3. Peter de Silva and Meneses, had the command of seven Ships given him to
secure the Boats that brought Provisions to Goa, whereof their was a scarcity.
About the River Cannaroto he lost sight of three of his Ships by stress of
Weather, and after found them increased to six, for the three had met and taken
as many of the Malabars, and were sailing after their Admiral. Returning to the
Place where they were dispersed, between the Islands and the Continent, they
met the More Murimuja with seventeen Paraos well provided to meet all dangers.
He instantly made to our Ships, and after the discharge of Cannon on both
sides, they boarded, and having received some damage, the Portugueses sunk two
and took five, one of them being Murimujas who was killed; the others flying,
were pursued to the River Pudepatan, where three Paraos and above fifty
Almadies or great Boats came to their Relief. Ou^ Cannon repulsed them, and
they run up the River: Of the Enemy five hundred were killed, and three
Portuguses.

4. The Viceroy being in care for Cananor, sent thither D. Paul de Lima
Pereyra, with four Ships. Being at Anchor in the Bay of Bate^ala, the Malabar
Pyrat Canatali came upon him with seven Paraos loaded with Booty taken on the
Northern Coast. Paul seeing him come, sets out to meet him. After the usual
Salutes with their Cannon, Canatale with three of his Ships lays D. Paul's
Galliot on Board, the others did the like to the other three, whereof two
shamefully fled, the third stood by it till he was sunk. Now all the Enemies
force fell upon D. Paul, who, with fifty Men he had, did things behond belief,
killing above two hundred Mores, but with the loss of thirty Portugueses. D.
Paul was so wounded, he was forced to sit down and gave order to make to the
Enemy, who was drawn off. Canatale, who was preparing to fall on again, seeing
the Galliot beyond Expectation make at him, stood away; D. Paul returned to
God, being in no condition to reach Cananor.

5. There our Men were much straightened by the number of the Enemies who were
Masters of the Field. Andrew de Sousa made a good resistance, till he dying,
and D. Antony de Noronna succeeding him, with the relief he carried, in several
re^counters they killed above Two thousand Mores, and cut down Forty thousand
Palm Trees. This is the greatest harm can be done that People, because those
Trees are their princi^l Sustenance. The City enraged hereat, ^ll'd together
all the Neighborhood to the number of Ninety Thousand, to take Revenge* They
had the boldness to assault and scale the For^ with such confidence of carrying
it, that they had beforehand divided the Booty. Nic^aripo a Nayre did us great
Service, advising D. Payo de Noronna then commanding there, to put the Men and
Riches of the Town, as not tenable, into the Fort. All was drawn in, except D.
Antony de Noronn^ and his Men, who said he would live and die by those Walls,
and staid accordingly. The Men all prepared themselves for Death, and stood at
their Arms all the last night.

6. By break of day the Enemy attacked the Works with great cries, and above Two
thousand of them entered the City. In one place Emanuel Trava^s with Thirty Men
did great Execution upon them. D. Antony appeared in all Parts, Thomas de
Sousa, Gasper de Brito, and the two Betancores, made great slaughter at their
Posts. The Field was so covered, that never a Bullet was lost. The Enemy began
to give back, when two Cazices brought them on again. The assault lasted till
Sunsetting, then the Enemy retired to their Camp, with a resolution to
protract the Siege. About Five thousand of them were killed.

7. At this time came Gon^la Pereyra with his Fleet, and was a great
encouragement to them all; and after him Alvaro Paez de (...) to succeed D.
Payo. They both prosecuted the War, and utterly destroyed the City of Aderrajao
who commanded at the Siege, and cut down a great Wood of Palm Trees with
considerable slaughter to the Enemy, and without losing one Man. This was the
end of that Siege.

CHAP. II.
Continues the Government of D. Anton. de Noronna.

1. THE Tyrant Raju disturbed the Peace of Ceylen, resolving to make himself
Master of the whole Island: He gathered a numerous Army, and the better to
surprise the Portugueses in Columbo, gave out, his design was upon Cota. He
encamped between the two Forts and alarming Cota, imagined they were unprovided
at Columbo, and suddenly attacques it by Night, so that above Two thousand Men
mounted the Walls, but were as soon thrown down by the Commander James de
Ataide and his Men. The Assault was renewed, but at length the Enemy, having
lost Five hundred Men, retired; Raju resolved to carry both places by Famine,
since he could not by force. At Cota he attempted to drain the Ditch by turning
away the River, and had compassed it, had not Peter de Ataide with some
Musketeers obliged his Workmen to give over, killing Three hundred of them. It
is said, a Cloud miraculously hung between our Men and the Enemy, which
concealed the former from the latter, but not them from us, so that they fired
at a Mark without being seen.

2. But now Provisions began to fail in Cota, and they fed on things loathsome.
Ataide thinking to take some of the Enemies Elephants that were in a Wood hard
by, sallied out with Eighty Men, but being overpowered with a multitude was
forced to retire, having lost two. Raju knowing how famine raged, had corrupted
not only the Natives, but some Portugueses. Luis Carvallo, rather through
Despair than good Will, discovered the Treason; and Ataide, without taking
notice he knew it, gained the Hearts of the Conspirators, by favoring and
cherishing them. The little Silver he had he coined and distributed among them.

3. George de Melo commanding in the Island Man^r, easily persuaded the King of
Candea, as being an Enemy to Raju, to invade his Country now he was absent,
thinking by that means to draw him from the Siege. He sent Five thousand Men,
and with them Thirty ^gueses commanded by Belchior de Sousa; they destroyed all
as they went, and ^tterly fa^ed the great City Chilao, yet Raju (...) stirred.
On the contrary he prepared (...) Assault Cota by Night. A Chingala Woman
appeared at the foot of the Bastion Prea^ desiring to be carried to our
Captain* (...) discovered to him Raju's design, and (...) the saving of the
City. Some believed (...) Woman was an Angel; the truth is, she was Mistress to
one of our Soldiers, and ^ing her Lover's danger, made this disco^. There is
nothing so ^d, but at some^ does good.

4. Pe^ de Ataide sent Antony de Silv^ to (...) to order James, as soon as he
hear^ C^on (...) at Night, to sally with his Men, and fall upon the back of
Raju's Army, that would be then busy in the Assault. George de Melo was
already come thither from Manar with One hundred Men, seeing the Project of
Candea take no effect. In the dead of Night the Enemy attacks the City on all
hands, and finds those of Cota ready to receive him: Yet killing some of the
Defendants, they enter the Works in one place, thither the King and Peter have,
and with incredible bravery drive them out again. Stephen Gouzales, Captain of
the Innamos, with Seven Men did the like upon the like occasion.

5. At this time came from Columbo the other Ataide and Melo, who by reason of
the darkness of the Night, could do no more but fire the Enemy's Camp, and
return to their Fort, lest if he succeeded here, he should immediately attack
it. Raju in Person with the Flower of his Army attacks the Bastion of Preacota,
where he found Fifty Soldiers, that seemed to him to be Fifty thousand by the
harm they did him. These Men afterward declared, That they saw in the Air a
beautiful Woman, who with her Vail covered them and received therein the
Enemies Bullets and Arrows, whereof many returned upon and killed them. By her
side was a venerable old Man with a General's Staff in his hand. This was
supposed to be the Blessed Virgin and St. Joseph. Raju in the Morning seeing
this great disappointment fled to Ceytavaca, leaveing above Two thousand Men
dead.

6. Peter de Ataide fearing he might return, and being quite destitute of
Provisions, caused Four hundred of the fattest Men that were killed to be
salted, and a Mulato tasted them eating up a Liver. F. Simon of Nazareth urged
the unlawfulness of this Food, and Ataide pleaded necessity: But no use was
made of it; for it being known that Raju was not in a Condition to return,
Provision soon came from Columbo. Thus ended this Siege of four Months, the
last forty Days whereof, there was scarce any thing to eat. The Portugueses
alone obtained this Victory, for all the King's Men deserted. Those were not
above Three hundred, some sick and old.

7. What Raju had designed we now did our selves; for it being difficult and
troublesome to maintain Cota, it was judged expedient to demolish it, and
remove the King to Columbo, where he was no less tormented with the
Covetousness of the Portugues Commanders, than he had been before with the
Tyranny of Raju. This was performed by James de Melo, who went to succeed Peter
de Ataide in that Command.

8. Three thousand Mogol Horse appeared ^ore the Fort of Damam, where John de
Sousa commanded, he sent advice to the Viceroy and the neighboring Places, and
began to fortify. His greatest Confidence was in the Palisade made of the
Plant Leobera (that is, Milk) which is not be assaulted, because when struck it
casts out drops like Milk, (from whence it has the name) which if they touch
the Eyes infallibly blind. Trestan de Mendo^a Commander of Chaul came with Two
hundred Men. The Viceroy sent four Ships: They marched out to fight the Enemy,
who was encamped three Leagues off, who fled at the first sight, leaving a rich
Booty in their Camp.

9. The Bassa of Ba^ora, during the Government of the Count de Redondo,
desiring the Turks might have a free Trade at Ormuz, had made some overtures of
Peace, and the Count thinking it a Matter of too great Concern to be transacted
without the great Turks Concurrence, sent Antony Teyxeyra a Gentleman
sufficiently qualified Ambassador to Constantinople. He entered the Palace this
Year, scattering gold Coin. The Grand Signior to receive him was seated on the
ground sewing Caps, which his Grandees bought at excessive Rates. The
Ambassador told him, That the Bassa had proposed a Peace to the Viceroy, and a
free Trade for the Subjects of the Turkish Empire. The Great Turk, without
lifting up his head from stitching, answered, I ask Peace of no Body: If the
King of Portugal desires it, let him send some Great Man of his Court, and he
shall be heard. The Ambassador brought a Letter containing this Answer to
Portugal, and it was thought fit not to reply to it, because they found the
Turk did not speak like a Tailor.

10. D. Ferdinand de Monroy, a Spanish Gentleman, was out with two Ships and
four Galliots, to intercept the Fleet bound from Achem to Meca; he lay in the
Chanel of Cardu among the Maldivy Islands. Peter Lopez Rabelo in his Ship met
one of those they waited for of great force and value, and after a long fight
they both took Fire, and were entirely consumed. The Captain and some Mores
were saved in a Galliot that followed him, and James Ferreyra de Padilla who
commanded it, was very insolent with D. Ferdinand about the Distribution of the
Mores. D. James Pereyra, who set out afterward upon the same design with five
Galleons, and six small Vessels, had yet worse Fortune. Being deceived by the
Mores* at those same Islands he went to wait for the Fleet at the Mouth of the
Red Sea: As he returned without doing any thing, a violent Storm that lasted
eight days swallowed up two Galleons, whereof his was one; the others were
dispersed, and put in where Chance guided them, almost Four hundred Men were
lost.

11. At length the War of Cannanor ended, for that King wearied out begged a
Peace, which was concluded to our Advantage. The concluding Acts of this War
were, the taking several Malabar Vessels by Gouzalo Pereyra Marramaque; the
slaughter of many Mores that opposed Emanuel de Brito, who conveyed the Ships
from Malaca, China, Molucos, Pegu, Bengala, and Coast of Coromandel trading to
India, when he was taking Water at Mount Delii; and several other Rencounters
in which we were successful, except in one, where D. Lope de Moura was killed.
I will conclude with a remarkable Accident. Calisto de Sequeyra a most expert
Marksman, dug a hole in the Field, and lying close did not miss a shot; the
Enemy a long time could not perceive whence that harm came, till another well
skilled in the same Art among them found it out, and placing himself in the
same manner the other had done, they both aimed at one another so exactly, that
both fell down dead.

12. Brama King of Pegu being told by Astrologers he was to marry a Daughter of
the King of Columbo, sent to demand her, and he had never a one; but his
Chamberlain had one the King esteemed as his own: They both agreed to put her
upon him, as really the King's. And the Chamberlain the more to oblige the King
of Pegu, seeking thereby to cast off the Portugues Yoke, feigned he had that
Tooth which was taken at Iafanapatan and burnt at Goa, and would give it in
Dowry with the Bride. The Ambassadors easily crediting what they desired, took
the Bride and the Tooth without acquainting the Portugueses, and sent advice to
Brama, who received the Wife first, and then the Relick, with the greatest Pomp
that ever has yet been heard of. Many Galleys were fitted out, but that which
was for the Queen was covered with Plates of Gold, and rowed by beautiful young
Women richly clad and brought up to this Exercise, so that they were more
expert then Men. They were of those Women who there live without Men in
separate Quarters by two and two like Man and Wife A new sort of Amazons.

13. The King of Candea understanding the deceit of this Marriage, and envying
that great Fortune, acquainted Brama therewith, offering him a true Daughter
and Tooth, and affirming, both that of Columbo and the other of D. Constantin
were Counterfeit, and the true one was in his Hands. If the Daughter was not
more real than the Tooth, he was even with the King of Columbo. Brama
considering it was as bad for a Prince to own himself cheated as to be so, gave
ear to the Ambassadors, but not to their Information. The King of Candea missed
his aim, and discovered his ill Affection. Two things are here worthy
consideration, the one that the Portugues Commanders, through their Avarice,
exposed that important place to evident danger of being lost, had not Brama
being undeceived, grown cold; the other, that had D. Constantin sold the Tooth
as he was advised, there had not now been two set up to be adored by so many
People.

14. The Trade of India was this Year at a very low Ebb, by reason of the
Desolation of the Kingdom of Bisnagar, whose Riches are equal to its great
extent, which is from the Borders of Bengala to those of Cinde. The Kings of
Decan, Nizamaluco, Idalca, and Cutubixa, jealous of that Grandeur, entered into
a League to suppress it. They took the Field with Fifty thousand Horse, and
Three hundred thousand Foot: The King of Bisnagar met them with double that
Power, and his Age was double, being Ninety six Years old. He had the better at
first, but Fortune turning to the other side, he lost his Head, and they
remained Victorious. They spent five Months in plundering Bisnagar, and yet
they were not the ^rst, for the Natives in three days time had carried away One
thousand five hundred and fifty Elephants loaded with Money and Jewels worth
above One hundred Millions of Gold, and the Royal Chair for great Days that
could not be valued. Notwithstanding all this, Idalxa found a Diamond as big as
an ordinary Egg, on which the late King's Horse's Feather used to be fixed; and
another, though not so large, yet of an extraordinary size, besides other Jewels
of incredible value. That Crown was divided between the Sons and Nephews of the
deceased.

CHAP. III.
Continues the Government of D. Anton de Noronna, in the Reign of King
Sebastian.

1. THE beginning of this Year Gonzalo Pereyra Marramaque sailed for Amboino
1567.
with One thousand Men in Twelve Ships, Ambassadors from that Island having
represented in how great danger those were who had newly received the Faith. D.
Emanuel de Noronna sailed for Banda, and was stabbed by the way by the Purser
of his Gally, whom he had affronted with a Cane. Great Men may command, but not
abuse the lesser, for the small have Honor as well as the great. No Man,
though never so little, owes any submission in Point of Honor to the greatest,
and in point of Condition he owes no more than he pleases to impose upon
himself. Alvaro Paez de Sotomayor (the War of Cananor being ended) sails for
the Coast of Malaba^ with twenty Sail: James Lopez de Mesquita with three for
the Molucos; D. George de Meneses Barroche for the Red Sea with four Galleons,
one Gally, and four small Vessels; Lisuarte de Aragon for Ceylon with one Ship;
D. Leonis Pereyra for Malaca with six; George de Moura for the North with the
same number; D. Francis Mascarennas for Olala to suppress that Queen, who was
about to refuse her Tribute; for this use Twenty-seven Ships were allotted, and
John Peixot^ went before with eight of them.

2. The Viceroy was fitting a good Fleet in order to follow those that were
gone before to Olala, designing to build a Fort at Mangalor, to curb Bucadevi
Chantar the Queen. The Fleet consisted of seven Galleys, two Galleons, and five
small Vessels, and carried about 3000 fighting Men.

3. The Viceroy anchored in the Bay of that City called Mangalor and Olala,
seated on the Banks of a River that washes both sides of it not far distant
from the Sea, whence was to be seen a Wall wherewith the Queen had fortified
her self, within which and the other Works were Thirteen thousand Men with
sufficient Cannon. The Viceroy divided his Men into six Battalions, and landed
on the 4th of January. At night the Portugueses sitting to supper, and to play
with many lights, and the same security as if they had been at Goa, the Enemy
laying hold of the Opportunity sallied in a body of Five hundred, followed by
Fifteen hundred, fell upon and put them into such a disorder, they scarce had
time to take their Arms. D. Francis Mascarennas who had the advanced Post,
fared worst; and though he fought well, lost several Men, most perhaps killed
by our own Fire, for through the darkness and confusion no body knew what they
aimed at. D. Luia de Almeyda relieved him with his Men, who all slipped away to
nine, that behaved themselves with incredible Valor.

4. On the Eve of the Epiphany they gave the Assault, and being as desirous of
Revenge as entering the City, soon forced their way and fired the Town, at the
same time cutting down the Palm Trees. The Queen fled to a Mountain. Of the
Enemy Five hundred were slain, about Forty of the Portugueses. The Viceroy
immediately laid the Foundations of the Fort, giving it the name of St.
Sebastian, because the first stone was laid upon his day, and that day chose in
Honor of our King then Reigning. By the middle of March the Work was finished
with a Church and other Conveniences. He gave the command of it to his
Brother-in-Law Antony Pereyra with 300 Men, and Ammunition for six Months, and
returned to Goa. Afterward in the time of D. Luis de Ataides Government, the
Queen sued for a Peace, and purchased it by a new imposition of Tribute, and a
sum of ready Money.

5. The King of Achem had now entered into a League with many Princes of the
East, and the Turk, who desired to get footing in India, not doubting with this
united Power of carrying Malaca: He Imbarqued with his Wife and Children as if
he had gone to take Possession of, rather than to Besiege that City. On a
sudden he appeared before it with 450 Sail, 200 Brass Cannons, and 20000 Men.
D. Leonis Pereyra was at that time on the Shore celebrating the Birthday of
King Sebastian, with a certain Exercise used among Portugueses on Horseback,
and perceiving some of the Company were surprised at the sight of the Fleet, he
ordered the Sport to continue, drawing down nearer to the Shore, that the Enemy
might not imagine they could disturb his Pastime.

6. Afterward he gave the necessary Orders, and making a review, found he had
Fifteen hundred Men, whereof only Two hundred were Portugueses. The King of
Achem began with Complements, and shows of desiring accommodation, but all
tended only to discover what was the Condition of the Town. D. Leonis who
understood him was wary, and carried it on with dissimulation. At length the
King perceiving no artifice succeeded, and that he advanced but slowly,
resolved to put the whole Event upon on^ furious Assault. After the Discharge
of the Cannon, above two hundred scaling Ladders were laid to the Wall with
great Shouts on both sides. D. Leonis had also distributed his Men in their
several Posts. The Priests had undertaken to defend one, but no sooner did the
Enemy attack, than they fled to the Church.

7. In the heat of the Action a Party of ours sallies out upon the Enemies
Works, making a great slaughter; among the rest was killed the King of Aru. Our
Men retired with one Cannon, and loaded with Muskets, Cimiters, and Heads of
all sorts of People that composed that Army, having lost but one Portugues and
six Malayes. The Enemy encouraged by the King who looked on, mounted our Works,
and were as soon thrown down by the Defendants. The King in a rage stamped and
blasphemed, and seeing three days furious Assault had not gained a foot of
Ground, he utterly despaired of Success; therefore with great Secrecy Shipping
off all his Army and Train, except Four thousand Men that were killed, he set
sail, firing the Ships that were to spare by the loss of those Men. This great
Success cost us but three Portugueses.

8. The Commander, D. Leonis, bestowed not only Praises, but Money and Jewels
on all that had signalized themselves, to the value of 15000 Crowns. The
Viceroy receiving advice of the danger the City was in, sent to its relief John
de Silva Pereyra with Men and Ammunition in seven Ships, but he came when the
Siege was raised. So the King of Ujantana our Neighbor with sixty Sail, who
visited our Captain in the Fort, and was received with Royal Magnificence,
rejoicing at our Success not without trouble that he had no share in it.

9. The Viceroy offended at the Insolence of the Natives of the Island Salsete,
who persecuted the new converted Christians, fitted out a Fleet against them
without letting his design be known. When those of Sal^te least thought of it,
he fell upon them, and destroyed 200 of their Idolatrous Temples. Because we
have sometimes mentioned this Island, without speaking of an ancient and
wonderful Structure that is in it, it will not be amiss to say something of it
here.

10. In this Island is a high Mountain, winding about which are 3000 Cells with
each of them a Cistern all cut out of the solid Rock. Under the same Mountain
is a way cut through the same Rock, with such Cells on the sides, which is said
to go as far as Cambaya, which, if so, must run under the Sea. F. Antony de
Porto, a Franciscan, resolving to enquire into this Secret, got Company,
Provision, Torches, and great quantity of strong Packthread, and fastening an
end at the Mouth of the way, traveled seven days through it. Then finding no
end, and the Provision growing short, he returned by the help of the Thread,
having as he believed traveled fifty Leagues to his great admiration, but not
satisfied. The Gentiles said, this was the Work of Bimilamansa, who (...) 300
Years before was King of all that is between Bengala and the Mogol's Country.
Formerly a Learned Man of those Parts affirmed, this and some others were the
Works of the holy Prince Iosaphat.

11. The Affairs of the Molucos were not at all successful. We left Gon^alo
Pereyra Marramaque on his Voyage to Amboyna, he joined with the Kings of Bacham
and (...), set out for the Island Cebu, where some Spaniards had settled under
the Command of Michael Lopez de Lagaspa a Biscainer, and a Man so valiant and
subtle, that he amuzed our Captain, till he got together his Men that were
dispersed, and then expelled him the Island with shame, for that if attacked at
first, the Spaniard had been utterly defeated. To add to this Misfortune, he
lost almost Three hundred Men by a Sickness natural to that Country.

12. Hence he passed to Amboina or Ito, for it is called by both Names, a most
beautiful and pleasant Island, abounding in Fish, Flesh, and Fruit of all sorts
and delicious taste. It is inhabited by two sorts of people, the Ulimas, who
are native Mahometans, and have three Towns; the Ulensivas are Heathens, and
have four. Our Captain found the Natives assisted by Six hundred of the
Islanders of Iava, and well fortified under the Command of Gemiro Governor of
those Islands. He attacked them with such peril, and was so vigorously opposed,
he seemed rather to fight for Life than Victory.

13. At length the Portugueses prevailing, were in danger of being overcome by
their great Disorder in plundering. The Captain rectified all by firing the
Booty, and many of the Men were scorched, whose Covetousness overcame the fear
of the Flames. The Enemy retired to a Mountain, and there compounded only for
Life, laying down their Arms. But the People of Amboina having been the first
among those Islands who admitted the Portugueses offering Subjection to our
Crown, Lands, and leave to erect a Pillar in their Metropolis with the Royal
Arms of Portugal, and finally embracing our Religion, and contracting Marriages
with us, it will be convenient to look a little back in order to proceed in the
relation of these Affairs, and particularly of one wonderful Passage, that may
serve as an Example to such as pretend to Plant Colonies.

CHAP. IV.
The End of the Government of the Viceroy D. Anton. de Noronna.

1. THEY who know with what kindness the People of Amboina at first received
us, will be earnest to understand the Cause why now they are become our mortal
Enemies. The worst is, they had so just a Cause, which was thus. The People of
Curon (I suppose this should be Ceram) became implacable Enemies to those of
Amboina, on no other account but that they received the Portugueses, admitted
their Religion, and contracted Marriages with them. Hereupon they resolved to
expel not only the Portugueses, but even the Natives out of the Island,
accordingly on a sudden came uponthem with a great Power. Those of Amboina had
been ruined, but that the Portugues stood by them, and to be short, utterly
defeated their Enemies.

2. The People of Amboina, to show their Gratitude to those who had defended
them, invited them to a splendid Entertainment. The Wives of those who made the
Feast came abroad to see the Portugueses entertained. One of these (doubtless
he was drunk) was so charmed with the Beauty of one of those Women, or so
blinded with Lust, that leaping suddenly from his Seat he catched her in his
Arms with such insolence, after being three times admonished without desisting,
that if Genulius, a Man of great Authority, had not interposed, the Portugueses
had there been all cut to pieces. And well they had deserved it; for it appears
they did not hinder or obstruct so insolent and public a lustful Extravagancy,
which openly in the sight of the World, durst force a Hand to those Parts,
which even with consent are not touched but in private, and without Witnesses.

3. Those People burned with the desire of Revenge for the affront they had
received, and looked upon as most heinous. Nor could Genulius appease them, but
by expelling the impudent Guests, which he desired as much as any, looking upon
himself equally concerned in that Injury: and knowing it was a new offense
every time the injured saw him that gave the wrong; he therefore reproaching
them with the hainousness of the Crime, and showing how greatly they were
favored in having their Lives spared, ordered them instantly to depart the
Island, and never more presume to set their feet upon it.

4. The People overturning the Tables with furious Countenances, gave them to
understand they would by force execute what Genulius had directed, if the
Portugueses doubted doing of it by fair means. There was nothing to do but
submit, so they went away to their Ships full of shame; their general Confusion
paying for the Impudence of one in which all had a share, because none reproved
it.

5. Scarce had the Portugueses left the Shore, when those of Amboina prescribed
the same Laws to the People of Atire and Tavire, that the Curons, or Cerams,
had done to them before. That was, they threatened them with War if they
received the Portugueses into their Ports: But those People answered, That they
were Christians, and as such would admit to their Ports and Houses the
Portugueses, though it were with hazard of their Lives.

6. They of Amboina were so irritated with this Answer, that falling suddenly
upon them, they routed and put to the Sword most of the Inhabitants of those
two Places, bringing under their Subjection those Towns that had submitted to
the Crown of Portugal; such as refused were reduced by Fire, and Sword, and
Slavery. They were not content to put to Death those who were constant in the
Faith, unless they did it with barbarous and cruel Tortures. One may serve as
an Example of all their other Barbarities.

7. A little King of Elate was taken, who because he would not renounce the
Christian Faith, was tied to a Stake, and Pans of Fire being set before him,
they cut off pieces of his Flesh, broi^ed and eat it in his sight: Some they
made him eat, and asked whether he liked it? He with much patience answered he
did, and was pleased to do that for Christ, who had suffered for him: That if
after he was dead, they would put a piece of his Flesh into a new Pot, within
twenty four hours they would find it converted into Oil, in testimony of the
Truth of the Christian Doctrine, and, in fine, that the Portugueses would
revenge his Death.

8. They continued the Torments till he died, and then to try what he had said,
put a piece of his Flesh into a new Pot covering it, and the Twenty four hours
being expired found it full of most sweet Oil. They were astonished, but did
not repent; and soon after the Prophecy was fulfilled by their Ruin.

9. Goncalo Pereyra (as was before said) coming thither defeated them and their
Succors they had from Iava and other Places, and reduced them, notwithstanding
they fortified themselves in the Mountains. In this Action five Portugueses
were lost, and Pereyra left D. Duartes de Meneses to command there.

10. At this time James Lopez de M^squita, a most wicked Man, commanded at
Ternate. Aeyro King of that Island, who had been so unjustly treated by D.
Duarte Deca, had always carried himself respectfully to the Portugueses without
any Merit of theirs, but was now at variance, because they killed his Nephew.
He began to revenge it, killing three of them, because they refused to do him
Justice. This difference was composed by some well meaning Persons, and the
King and Mesquita solemnly swore to the Reconciliation. But it being all deceit
in the latter, before six days were expired he murdered the King as he visited
him. This was done at parting, he waited on him to the Door, and his Nephew
Martin Alfonso Pimentel stabbed him by the Unkle's Order.

11. When this King the last time Embraced that false Friendship, he took to
witness of his sincerity the Scutcheon of the Portugueses Arms, which represent
the Wounds of our Savior. As he was stabbed, he laid hold of a Cannon about
the place where those same Arms were, saying, Ah Gentlemen, why do you thus
kill the best Subject your King my Master has? Neither these words, nor the
sacredness of the Place, it being hallowed Ground, assuaged their fury. There
they stripped and cut him in pieces, which being salted and put into a Chest
were cast into the Sea in sight of his Queen and Daughters, who begged only for
leave to bury him. Such was then the Portugues Government, that these and other
the like Cruelties and Villainies passed unpunished by them. But God did not
so, who first with shame deprived them of those Dominions, and afterward of a
Prince of their own. Gui Chil Babu, Son to the deceased, succeeded him in the
Crown, and just desire of Revenge for such inhuman Oppression. He fortified
himself, and entered into a League with all the Neighboring Princes against us,
beginning the War with the slaughter of some Portugueses, and persecution of
the new converted Christians in all those Islands. But this happened later, we
shall see it in its proper place.

12. The Viceroy ordered D. Luis de Almeyda in the Spring to Cruize in the Sea
of Suratte, to examine what Ships sailed there without our Passes. He had six
Ships with him, and was joined by fourteen more, they took three great Ships
richly laden, and brought two of them to Damam, one having foundred at Sea.
This was the last public Action of the Viceroy. He embarked to return home
and died in the Voyage. It was ordered in his Will, that his right Arm should
be cut off, and preserved, to be buried with his Uncle D. Nunno Alvarez at
Ceuta, and that the Body should be cast into the Sea. It was accordingly
performed, and some observed that the cutting off this Arm was the Execution of
the Sentence he had given against himself, when a Relation prevailing upon him
to sign an unjust Paper, he said, The hand that signs such a thing deserves to
be cut off. Such is the force of Affection, it makes a Man do the very thing he
abhors.

13. D. Anton. de Noronna was a Man of a good Disposition, Judgment and
Inclination. He was Viceroy the term of four Years the 11th of that number, and
twenty-third of the Governors, the first of that Name, and third of the
Surname.

14. During the Government of D. Anton. the Ships that came from Lisbon to
India were, in the Year 1565 four, in 1566 four more, and four in 1567.

15. This Year our great Poet Luis de Camoens was at Zofala. Being very poor in
India, where he served sixteen Years, Peter Barreto who was going to Command at
Zofala promised him great things, and Camoens finding nothing came of them,
after waiting long he resolved to come for Portugal in a Ship that had touched
there, in which was Hector de Silveyra and other Gentlemen. Being about to
depart, Peter Barreto who had made those Promises not to prefer him, but divert
himself, demanded Two hundred Ducats he said he had spent upon him; and those
Gentlemen paid the Money and brought him away. So it may be said, Luis de
Camoens his Person, and Barretto his Honor, were at once sold for that Money.
He arrived at Lisbon the Year 1569, when the Plague raged in that City; so that
famous Man always flying one Plague fell into another.

CHAP. V.
The Government of the Viceroy D. Luis de Ataide, Count de Atouguia; from the
Year 1568, t^ 1571, in the Reign of King Sebastian.

1. To D. Anton. de Noronna succeeded with the same Title of Viceroy D. Luis de
Ataide, Count de Atouguia, a Person meritorious of this Government, or of a
greater, if ever any greater was committed by a Prince to one single Person. He
was the first who carried Orders that a Gentleman should be bare when they
spoke to the Governor, and be seated on a Chair without a Back. He was the
first also sent by King Sebastian after he was out of his Minority.

2. With him went five Ships with a great number of Men, and great part of them
of Note. He arrived at Goa in October, and was received in the City with a
general Satisfaction of all Men. Though he found the number of Shiping but
small yet in few days he set out so many Sail, as caused admiration; and good
Squadrons were sent to several Expeditions.

3. Luis de Melo de Sylva went in February with thirteen Sail to relieve D.
Leonis de 1569.
Pereyra at Malaca, the News of his Success not being yet come to Goa, Alfonso
Pereyra de la Cerda sailed toward the North with six in November: And Martin
Alfonso de Miranda with thirty six to scour the Coast of Malabar, infested with
Pirates. The Natives were o^ with a considerable Strength, and lost five great
Vessels, many Men and much Ammunition; but Martin being wounded with a Cannon
Ball was carried to Cochin, and died there. D. George de Meneses set out with
two Galleys and five small Vessels to seek the Pyrate Canatale, whom he found
not; but discovering many Vessels in the River Carapatan he made to them, and
came up himself with a Gally in which 180 Mores fought so desperately, that
none being left alive but a Father and Son, the former killed the latter, and
stabbing himself leaped overboard.

4. Ayrez Tellez de Meneses set out with seven Sail, and D. Paul de Lima
Pereyra with eight for the North. In the River Banda near Goa he found four
Catures, or Barges of Malabares, who after losing many Men escaped. Then he
held on his Voyage, which was to relieve Rostumecan, besieged by the Mogols in
Baroche, which place he had Usurped, laying hold of the Confusions of Cambaya,
since the Death of the King Badur in the Sea of Diu. Itimican now held that
Government in his Hands by great Subtilty and Artifice, having persuaded the
Guzarates, that a young Man his own Son was the last King's, and therefore he
secured that Crown in him for himself.

5. Whilst Ayrez Tellez sailed, D. Peter de Almeyda Commander of Damam went to
Suratte, to call to an account Agaluchem Lord of that Town, by the same Title
as Rostumecan, for loading two great Ships without the Viceroy's leave, the
Ships were taken, and valued above 100000 Duccats. As Almeyda had done, Tellez
began to play his part, which was to force the Mogols from Baroche. He
performed it effectually: But Rostumecan being out of danger, forgot his
Promise to the Viceroy, which was to become Tributary to us. So easy it is to
make promises in danger, and to break them when delivered.

6. D. James de Meneses on the Coast of Malabar did such Execution, that Zamori
was not in a condition to relieve Agaluchem, who sent from Zuratte to beg his
assistance, being distressed by Nunno Vello Pereyra, who was come from Damam to
clear the Bay of Cambaya of Enemies. He burnt two Villages and some Vessels,
and brought away many Prisoners. Then with 400 Men he pursued a Body of Mog^ls
who were fled to a Mountain (called Parnel) almost impregnable by Art and
Nature, and three Leagues distant from Damam. Nunno neither knew the strength
of the place, nor number of the Enemies, who were above 800, and so began to
Mount that difficult ascent, whence great Stones were rolled down to hi^der the
Passage. But the Soldiers climing upon Hands and Feet, reached the first
Intrenchment, which after a vigorous opposition was entered. Then they assaulted
the Fort, where both Parties fought desperately. In some places they came so
near as to lay hold of one another's Weapons. Antony de Fo^seca was lifted up
by his Lance which some of the Mogols held, and he never quitted it but
laughed. Being afterward asked what he laughed at, he said, To think the
Barbarians believed they could get the Lance out of my hands. At length they
let him fall. Nunno Vello seeing he strove in vain, retired after losing seven
Men, having killed above thirty of the Enemy, and taken much Provision, fifty
Horses, some Camels and Oxen, with which he drew off not without danger, being
pursued by 500 of the Enemy, whereof 100 where Horse.

7. He consulted this Affair with Alvar^ Perez de Tavora who had the Command of
Damam; the result was, that Nunno marched with 100 Portugues and 50 Morish
Horse, 650 Foot, half Portugues, half Mores. They went up the Mountain with
great Labor, through ways never before trod, carrying three pieces of Cannon.
They met with considerable opposition, five Cannon playing upon them from the
Fort, and some Horse breaking out of the Woods; so they lost eight Men, six
killed and two taken. Three days were spent in climing the Mountain, being got
to the top Nunno planted his Cannon, and battered the Work with such fury, that
the Enemy the sixth Night abandoned it. The Fort was razed.

8. The great importance of the impregnable Fort of Azarim, moved the Kings of
Coals and Sarcetas to attempt the gaining of it. They entered the Country of
Bacaim, in which it is, and after doing great harm, set down before it; but
Andrew de Villalob^ who commanded there, bravely defended it till the Viceroy
sent Relief. Being then Eight hundred strong they fell upon the two Kings, and
not only forced them from the Siege, but following into their Countries put all
to Fire and Sword, and returned Victorious. The Viceroy now sent out D.
Roderick de Sousa with six Ships from Cambaya; Peter Lopez Rabelo and Giles de
Goes with two Ships and three Galleons for Aden; D. James de Meneses with
twelve Galleys and thirty small Vessels for Malabar; Peter de Silva de Meneses
with thirteen Sail for Bracalor. Bracalor is a new Fort between Goa and
Malabar, upon the Mouth of a River. The Viceroy offended at the King of Tolar
designed to possess himself of it, and agreed with him that commanded to betray
it. Peter de Silva going to take possession of it, by the way entered the River
Sanguise, which runs through the Lands of Hidalen, where he burnt two Towns and
some Vessels. The Commander of Bracalor according to promise delivered up the
Fort by Night, and our Men falling upon the Town, killed and took above Two
hundred of the Inhabitants. The Kings of Tolar and Cambolim came up that Night
with 1500 Men, and the next with 5000, in a hot Engagement they lost many Men,
and we five. The place not being judged tenable, was quitted with Honor,
bringing away twenty Cannon, and a great quantity of Ammunition and Arms.

9. Mem Lopez Carrasco sailing for Sunda with only one Ship, and only forty
fighting Men in it, passed in sight of the Port of Achem at such time as that
King in person was setting out against Malaca with 20 Galleys, as many
Galleons, and 160 other Vessels. Carrasco finding it impossible to shun them,
resolved to sell his Life as dear as he could. The whole Fleet attacks them,
and tears all their Rigging to pieces, Night parted, and Morning brings them
together again, three Galleys board them and are beaten off. The Fight lasted
three days; the King having lost forty Vessels and many Men returned into his
Harbor. As much of our Ship got to Malaca as was hid by the Water, all that was
above being shattered to pieces; and thus for that time was Malaca delivered of
that trouble.

10. Miran, a King between the Mogul and Cambaya, designed to possess himself
of the Crown of Cambaya, to which he thought he had the best Title, since it
had been usurped from the lawful Heirs upon the Death of Badur. He treated
about it with the Viceroy, offering him at present a sum of Money, and
afterward some Towns, if he would assist him in gaining that Kingdom, and
expelling the Tyrant Himican. The Viceroy admits the Proposals, sends an
Ambassador of his own with the Kings, and makes such diligent* Preparations,
that on a sudden the Sea of Goa was covered with 140 Sail. To amuze the Enemy
he gave out the Design was against Malabar. Whilst an Answer could come from
Miran, the Viceroy, to keep his Men out of Idleness, sailed toward the Rivers
of Bracalor and Onor, whose Banks are peopled by Canara's, who at the
I^stigation of the Malabars, refused to pay the Acknowledgments due to the
Portugueses.

CHAP. VI.
Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Luis de Ataide.

1. WHilst the Viceroy was busy in these Preparations, four Ships from Lisbon
arrived opportunely at Goa. D. Paul de Lima with one Galleon and six Ships, and
Martin Alfonso de Melo Commander of Bacaim meditating Revenge against the Kings
of Cole and Sarcetas, got together One hundred and thirty Horse, and Eight
hundred Portugues Foot. The Enemy had Four hundred of the former, and Two
thousand of the latter, yet were put to flight, and even in the flight cut off
Emanuel Pereyra and all his Men. So much is an Enemy to be feared even when he
flies. The Cities of Darila and Varem were destroyed, and all the Countries
about them. D. Paul in his return took two Ships of the Enemy, though forsaken
by some of his own Vessels, and those that left him had afterward the
Impudence to boast of the Victory. The Viceroy received D. Paul with much
Honor; and one of those that had forsaken him coming to kiss (as was the
Custom) the Viceroy's Cloak, he said to him, Keep off, go kiss your Mother's
hand.

2. In November the Viceroy set out of Goa with above One hundred and thirty
Sail, some of them were Tenders, and some Merchants: In the fighting Ships were
Three thousand Portugueses besides Indians. He entered the River of Onor, and
landed Two thousand three hundred Men, not without opposition. The place seemed
impregnable both by Art and Nature, yet our Men with great difficulty beginning
to ascend the Hill, notwithstanding the Bullets that fell from above, soon
discovered the People flying out of the City, and the Queen of Guarcopa
retiring to the Inland, as despairing the Fort could hold out, though
Garrisoned with Five hundred resolute Men, and well stored with Artillery and
Ammunition.

3. The City which was rich and beautiful was first Plundered, and then reduced
to Ashes. Our Forces sat down before the Fort, and battered it without
intermission four days, without the least molestation from a Body of the
Natives who came to hinder their Progress: Which the Besieged perceiving,
surrendered upon condition to march away without Arms. The Booty was small, the
most considerable part of it Cannon and Ammunition. The next day being St.
Catharines, a place was cleansed to say Mass in. The Command of it was given to
George de Moura with Four hundred Men, half of them Portugueses.

4. Here the Ingenier Simon de Ruan fought alone with thirty of the Enemy till
he fell as was thought dead, but as they put him into a Shroud a small motion
was perceived, and soon after, to the admiration of all Men, he recovered. In
this Action we lost twenty Men. Next the Viceroy passed to Bracalor, which is
much like the other in strength and situation. The Landing was somewhat more
difficult, being obstructed by 11000 Men, but at length Two hundred of them
being killed (with the loss of nine on our side) our Men possessed themselves
of a Work which much dismayed the Enemy.

5. Those in the Fort, before the Viceroy could besiege, abandoned it. Soon
after the Kings of Tolar and Cambolim attack the Fort on a very dark Night, but
found Peter Lopez Rabelo who commanded it with Two hundred Men so ready to
receive them, that they lost Three hundred, killing only five of his, and
despairing of any Success, concluded a Peace with the imposition of a greater
Tribute than they paid before. The Viceroy had an interview with those two
Princes and the Queen of Cambolim, and they parted very good Friends. Above a
Month was spent in building a new Fort in a convenient place, which was the
midway between the City and the Mouth of the River. The Command of it was
given to Antony Botello, who spilt the first Blood in this Action.

6. The Viceroy was in great care, that he received no answer from Miran. But
there is no security in humane Policies. Miran thought to tie the Mogol to his
Interest, by marrying his Brother to the Mogol's Sister. But scarce did the
Brother, assisted by his Father-in-law the Mogol, see Miran march toward
Cambaya, when he enters his Kingdom with a great Power; and Miran having notice
hereof, was forced to stay to secure a certainty of his own, rather than to go
to a doubtful Purchase. The Viceroy was much concerned at this News, and having
no present Employment for so great a Fleet, divided it into several Squadrons,
and sent them upon different Expeditions. D. Peter de Casto had one to secure
the Ships trading to Goa; Ferdinand Tellez, who not not long before had taken
some Ships of the Enemy, went with another to the North. Of his Squadron were
Ruy Diaz Cabral, and D. Henry de Meneses, who being separated from him, met
fifty Sail of Malabars, and rashly fell upon them. Ruy Deaz and seventy Men
they both commanded were all killed; D. Henry from among the dead was carried
into slavery, and after ransomed. D. Emanuel Pereyra and John de Silva Barreto
came too late to prevent this Misfortune, but not to put the Enemy to flight
after receiving and doing much harm.

7. The Viceroy resented this loss not so much for its greatness, as because it
was the first time Fortune had frowned on him. He went to Mangalor, twelve
Leagues to the Southward, to appease some Disturbance that lessened the King's
Revenue, and was prejudicial to Trade. This proceeded from the Enmity between
the King of Bangu^ and Queen of O^la; the Dominion of the latter lies to the
South, and that of the other to the North of that Place. The Viceroy being
better received at Mangalor than he expected, had a meeting with those two
Princes, and agreed their Differences. In his return to Goa, he left with
Antony Botello Commander of Bracalor for the Security of that Place, six
hundred fresh Men; and Antony Cabrall at Sea with three Vessels well provided.
At Onor he added to George de Moura Five hundred Men, and left on that Sea
Francis and Rocque de Miranda, Brothers, with six Ships, who with Fire and
Sword destroyed some Towns and Ships, because they rebelled as soon as the
Viceroy had turned his back.

8. At the end of this Year arrived at Goa five Ships from Portugal. The Queen
of Guarcopa who was fled to the Mountain, rather for fear than good Will, came
now to an Accommodation.

9. In those Seas were left D. James de Meneses with Forty two Sail; Luis de
Melo de Silva with fifteen; Vincent de Salda^na with eight; D. John Coutinno
with Four; and D. Francis de Almeyda with Two Galleons: The first of these
carried Fire and Sword all along the Coast of Malabar, to the Terror of all
that Empire. The strong Towns of Coulete, Ti^acole, Capocate, Padrarigale,
Panane and Calicut felt this fury. Above 1000 Heathens were killed or made
Prisoners, above Sixty Vessels taken, and many more sunk and burnt. We lost but
four Men in all those Actions.

10. Zamori thought to put a stop to the Ruin of his Country by offering
Proposals of Peace, but no Ear was given to them. The Weather effected what
that did not, it being no longer practicable to lie upon that Coast. Luis de
Melo disappointed the Artifices of the Queen of Guarcopa, who treated of Peace,
and prepared for War. He burnt many of her Towns, ravaged the Country and
demolished her Fort of Sanguise. Vincent Saldanna in the Sea of Mangalor did
his Duty, securing our Ships that traded that way. D. John Coutinno did the
same about Cambaya, Cochim and Chaul. D. Francis de Almeyda disabled and put to
flight at Diu six Malabar Galliots that attempted the entering that ^ort to burn
the Ships that were in it.

11. In the beginning of Winter the Viceroy fitted out two Squadrons to relieve
Onor and Daman, fearing the Mogol designed against the last, and the Queen of
Guarcopa against the other. His greatest care was for On^r, hearing the Enemy
had attempted to des^roy ou^ Men by Treachery, bribing some Ca^raes who were in
it, to poison our Men with the Fruit of the Herb Du^uro, whose quality is such,
it makes Men forget all things, and renders them wholly insensible, even of
Wounds. The Treachery was discovered, and the Conspirators hanged over the
Walls in sight of them that employed them, who then betook themselves to open
force, having failed in this private Practice. At that time entered the Port a
Galley and three other Vessels with a Body of choice Men for the Relief of the
Fort.

12. The Wickedness of the Portugueses in killing the King of Ternate, began to
be punished: That King's Son and Heir had commenced his Revenge, as was said
before, and now sent his Uncle Calacinco with twelve Galleys to Amboina. He was
near taking our Fort, whilst the Commander of it D. Duarte de Meneses was
consulting far off with Goncalo Pereyra about the manner of maintaining it, but
Baltasar de Sousa who supplied his place defended it well. Baltasar Vieyra
saved it, killing with a Musket Shot a Caciz of Note, upon whose Death the
Enemy withdrew to the Island Varenula, and had they not retired, they had
carried the Fort before Pereyra and Meneses could come to relieve it.

13. They being come, Pereyra puts to Sea with six Sail. One of them commanded
by Lawrence Furtado being hard set by the Enemies Admiral, Furtado leaps into
it and kills the old Commander, and the Galley was taken, two other were also
taken, and the Enemy fled to other Islands, not thinking themselves safe at
Varenula. Above Nine thousand Men were killed in these Expeditions.

14. Whilst this happened at Amboina, the Fort at Tornate was so close
besieged, that our Men wished for Vermin to feed on, having eaten all that
could be found. The King perceiving the besieged did not treat of a Surrender,
joined with the King of (...) door, gave so furious an assault, that he (...)
twenty Portugueses and entered the Tre^es. The next Night they had as good
success. Luis de la Mo defended his Bastion with great Bravery, and Belchior
Vieyra for this time delivered the Fort, killing Beneuoa General of Tidore, at
which sight his Men fled. Pereyra hearing of this Posture of Affairs, left
Sancho de Vasconcelos to command at Amboina, because D. Duarte was dead, and
hasted to Ternate with three Vessels that rowed, and One hundred Men. At Bacham
where the King was our friend, he increased to fourteen Sail.

15. The Confederate Kings set out to meet Pereyra with fifty Coracoraes, which
are great Galleys. Pereyra receives them, and they fought with much bravery:
The King of Tidore attacks our Admiral Galley, but being almost killed, drew
back with his Galley quite disabled. The Enemy gave way, and Pereyra came to
the Fort, and brought fresh vigor with that Success. But those of Ternate were
so intent upon Revenge, that they continued the Siege five Years, and our Men
were forced to abandon the Fort. The King of Tidore received those that would
stay with him, the rest dispersed into several Countries. We shall see in time
how they were expelled Tidore: And it is rather a wonder they continued there
so long, being guilty of such Villainies, than that they were at last drove
away. But great Storms threaten India now, and our Viceroy is preparing to meet
them.

CHAP. VII.
The dangerous Sieges of Goa and Chaul; and first of the foremost, continuing
the Government of D. Luis de Ataide, and Reign of King Sebastian.

1. ALL humane Grandeur is subject to Envy. The Princes of Asia seeing 1570.
the vast increase of the Portugues Power, resolved to give it one fatal Blow;
and to this purpose entered into a League, which was five Years in forming and
concluding, and carried on with wonderful secrecy.

2. These Princes were Hidalcan Alecdaxa, Nizamaluco Xaoxem, and Zamori. Their
Design to extirpate the Portugueses in India. To this effect they raised
powerful Armies, and made so sure of the success, that they had before hand
divided their imagined Conquests. The first was to have Goa, Onor, and
Bracalor; the second, Chaul, Damam, and Bacaim; and the third, Cananor,
Mangalor, Cochim, and Chale. Hidalcan had assigned his principal Men Offices at
Goa, and some Portugues Women that were cried up for Beauties. The King of
Achem was at the same time to make an attempt upon Malaca. In fine, those
Princes broke out like impetuous Torrents, covering the Fields with multitudes
o^ Men. Hidalcan marched to besiege Goa, Nizamaluco to Chaul, without any
respect to the Peace which had been no way infringed.

3. The Viceroy upon this occasion showed an undaunted Spirit. It was generally
agreed Chaul should be abandoned, for the greater security of Goa, but the
Viceroy resolved the Enemy should have nothing but what was dearly bought. He
immediately sent D. Francis Mascarennas with 600 Men in four Galleys and five
small Vessels to the Relief of Chaul. Among these went many Gentlemen of Note,
to serve as private Soldiers. They set out about the end of September.

4. Next the Viceroy applied himself to provide for the defense of Goa. He
posted Ferdinand de Sousa de Castellobrance, an old Soldier in Asia, in the
Pass of Benastarim with 120 Men; D. Paul de Lima at Rachol with 60, and thus in
other places he distributed 1500 Natives of the Island. There were not complete
700 Portugueses in it, these he reserved to relieve where ever the greatest
danger threatened. The City he put into the Hands of the Dominicans, Franciscans
and Clergy, who exceeded not 300, assisted by 1000 Slaves. Captain John de
Sousa with 50 Horse was to be ready to appear wherever there was occasion. D.
George de Meneses, ^rnamed Barroche was to keep the River with 25 Sail. At the
same time the Viceroy caused Ammunition and Provisions to be brought from all
Parts, the Works to be repaired, and about the middle of December he took his
Post upon the Bank of the River.

No sooner was he there, than several Bodies of Men appeared coming down the
Mountain Gate, and encamping at Ponda, commanded by Norican, Hidalcan's
General. About the end of December he advanced, and encamped over against the
Pass of Benastarim, pitching his Master's Tents, who spent eight days in coming
down the Mountain by reason of the greatness of his Army. At night he lighted
so many Fires to discover the Paths of the Mountain, that at a great distance
the multitude of his men could be seen. Being come to Ponda he covered those
vast Plains with rich and costly Tents.

6. This Army consisted of 100000 fighting Men, besides an infinite number of
Followers; 35000 Horse; 2140 warlike Elephants; 350 pieces of Cannon, most of
an extraordinary bigness, and some great Barques brought upon Mules, to be
lanched for all occasions upon the River. The chief Commanders of this
multitude were, Norican called Hener Maluco, of such quality, that he never
appeared with his Prince but in the Field; Rumercan and Cogercan, who for their
quality had distant Quarters on the edge of the Water. The Army encamped in
such manner, it looked rather like a regular City than a Camp. Their order of
Battle was thus: Hidalcan at Ponda with 4000 Horse, 6000 Musketeers, 300
Elephants, 220 Cannons; Cogercan, Rumercan, and Mortazacan near the Mouth of
the Channel Ganja with 3000 Horse, 130 Elephants; and nine Cannons. Norican
opposite to the Island of John Lopez with 7000 Horse, 180 Elephants, and eight
great Cannons. Camilcan and Delirracan facing the Pass of Benastarim with 9000
Horse, 200 Elephants, and 32 battering Pieces. Solomon Aga on a height above
Benastarim with 1500 Horse, and two Field Pieces. Anjozcan opposite to the
Island of John Bang^l with 2500 Horse, 50 Elephants, and six Cannons.
Xatiarviatan in sight of Sapal with 1500 Horse, 6 Elephants, and 6 Cannons.
Danlatecan, Xatiatimanaique, Chitican, and Codemenacan facing the Pass of
Agacaim with 9000 Horse, 200 Elephants, and 26 Cannons. The rest of the Army
covered the Mountains capable to strike a Terror into the boldest Spirits.

7. The Viceroy viewed all the Posts, offering his Person to the greatest
danger. The ranging of the Enemies Army caused him to alter his first method,
being now reinforced with some men come from several Parts, he posted his men
thus: The dry Pass which he had designed for himself, he committed to D. Peter
de Almeyda, and D. George Deca with 120 men, and went himself to that of
Benastarim, where Ferdinand de Sousa de Castellobranco was with the like
number, taking to himself the Command of one of the lesser Posts there, rather
than remove that Officer. D. Michael de Castro not far from Madre de Dios with
150; James Barradas on the point of the dry Pass with 60; D. Peter de Castro
toward Benastarim with 120 maintained at his own Charge; James de Azambuja
hard-by with 50; Francis Pereyra a little farther with 20; Vincent Diaz
Villalobos at Sapal with 60; next Gaspar Fernandez with 50; then D. Luis de
Almeyda, D. Ferdinand Monroy, and D. Martin de Castellobranco with each 60;
Francis Marquez Botello with 50; Alvaro Mendoca between the Viceroy and Pass of
Mercantor with 10; a little farther Simon de Mendoca with 120; Emanuel Rolim at
St. John's Pass with 100; In the Pass of Marque the City placed 80; John de
Sousa with his 50 Horse went from Agacaim to the Bar, to receive and execute
his Orders; Baltasar Lobo de Sousa at Pard^ with 50; Peter Alvarez de Faria
near him with 80; Vasco Perez de Faria at Necra with a Company; Damian de Sousa
at Bachol with the like Body; and Francis de Silveyra at Norva with 30.

8. Several Vessels with small Guns were to run along the River to relieve all
these Posts. Thus the number of the Viceroy's Men was not above 1600, and he
had but 30 Cannons in all those Posts. This was the force we had to oppose that
great Power, the like was at Chaul.

9. For Nizamaluco set down before it at the same time, as Hidalcan did before
Goa. They two being suspicious of each other, kept time in their Preparations,
Setting out and Marches. But that we may not confound the Actions by mixing
them, we will first relate those at Goa, and then proceed to Chaul. The Cannon
began to play, the flashes whereof enlightened the Night and the smoke darkened
the day. The Enemy spent their first Fury on the Fort and Works of Benastarim,
and did great harm, but could not perceive it; for whatever they ruined by day
was repaired by night. They poured in showers of Bullets, for only in Alvaro de
Mendoca his Post 600 were found, some of them of two Spans diameter; we could
not answer with the like number, but could see we did great execution. And our
Vessels sailing nimbly about, plied their small Guns with good effect.
Ferdinand de Sousa de Castellobranco one night by the help of a great number of
Torches that went before spied an Officer of the Enemies crosing, a height
opposite to him with young Women a dancing before, Sousa desirous to untune
their harmony, caused a Cannon to be so luckily levelled at them, that the
Officer, some of those that lighted, and two couple of the young Women were
seen to fly into the Air.

10. This was the time for the return-Ships to sail for Portugal, and every
Body advised the Viceroy to stop them, because they would carry 400 Men that
might be a great help in the present distress. But the Viceroy ambitious of
making his Glory the greater, by conquering the greater difficulties, answered,
There was want of them in Portugal, and he trusted those that remained were
sufficient for the work he had in hand. So the Ships set sail.

11. Hitherto the Portugueses did much more harm than they received, having
killed many of the Enemy, and among them some of Note, and lost no number nor
any person considerable, only some were dangerously wounded. D. Francis de
Sylva being wounded with a Cannon Ball so that his Guts hung out, continued
encouraging his Men holding them up with his hand. Peter Homem de Silva losing
much Blood at three Musket Shots he had received, and being persuaded to go
off, said, It could be no matter of moment since he felt it not. Our Vessels
did good Service; and the Enemies were not idle, carrying their men from one
place to another. Our men had the boldness often to land and attack the Enemy
in their Posts, and still brought away Prisoners, the heads of those they
killed, Colors and Arms. D. George de Meneses Barroche in his Vessels, and D.
Peter de Castro by Land with 200 Portugueses made such a slaughter, that the
Viceroy to animate the City, and show them what was done abroad, sent them two
Carts loaded with Heads. Gaspar Diaz and his Brother Lancelot running up the
Country one night a League and half with 80 men, burnt two Villages and many
Farm Houses, and brought away many Prisoners, heads of the ^in, and of Cattle.

12 Another time these two Brothers with 130 men, attack the Quarters of
Cogergan and Rumergan, and making a great havoc, destroyed all they had
provided in order to pass over into the Island of John Lopez. In this Action
Francis de Cunna Coutino, Servant to the Viceroy, going alone before the rest,
came so close up to 500 Mores, that he threw two Grenades among them, which
did some execution, and retired without hurt. The Enemy admired the smallness
of our number, and greatness of our Actions; but was more surprised when he
heard, that in the heat of all this fury, the Viceroy had ordered D. James de
Meneses who came from the Coast of Malabar with his Squadron, to return
thither; and D. Ferdinand de Vasconcelos to go with four Galleys and two small
Vessels to destroy the City Dabul, to show Hidalcan, whose it was, how little
account he made of all his Power. D. Ferdinand burnt there two great Ships of
Meca, and many small Vessels; then landing fired some Villages, and had done
the same to the City, had not his own Captains opposed it.

13. He returned to Goa, and attacking the Quarters of Angoscan, a principal
Man among the Enemy, three Miles distant from the Viceroy, entered them with
great slaughter. But his Men with the success falling into Disorder, the Enemy
rallied and fell upon them, killing some, the rest fled leaving their Captain,
who, weakened with loss of Blood, and tired with the weight of his Arms, could
not get into a Boat, but fought in the Water till he fell down dead. His Ensign
Augustine Fernandez died honorably with his Colors in the left hand, which he
bravely defended with the right. Forty were killed, their Heads with the
Colors were carried to Hidalcan. The Viceroy immediately sent Barroche with
100 Men more to burn D. Ferdinand's Vessel taken by the Enemy, which he
performed, bringing away the Cannon that was left in it by the Enemy, believing
no Body durst come where it lay.

CHAP. VIII.
Continues the Siege of Goa, and Government of D. Luis de Ataide.

1. AT this time Zamori made Proposals of Peace to the Viceroy, either to amuse
him while he went upon other designs pursuant to the Articles of the League, or
else hoping to gain some advantage in that pressing Conjuncture. The Viceroy
gave him to understand he would not yield the least point for fear, and
continued firm in this resolution, notwithstanding Hidalcan had prevailed with
the Queen of Guarcopa to declare War at Onor: That Prince was astonished to see
him send relief thither, when he thought there was not force to supply Goa. The
Viceroy at this time also relieved Marramaque at the Malucos, and Francis
Barreto at Mocambique.

2. The grand design of Hidalcan was to get over into the Island, in order to
it his General Norican began to lay a Bridge over the River with a vast number
of Workmen. The Viceroy falling upon them made a great havoc. There was a
Report that Hidalcan designed to pass over to the Island in Person, and
carnestly desired a fine Horse the Viceroy had, for which he had before offered
a great Sum of Money. The Viceroy sent it him for a present, assuring nothing
should be more pleasing than to see him come over to Goa. Hidalcan accepted of
the Horse, and caused him to lie upon silk Quilts under Canopies of Cloth of
Gold, to be covered with embroidered Dammask, and his Trappings to be adorned
with massy Gold, and his Provender was mixed with Preserves and other Dainties.
The Horse enjoyed it not long, being killed by a Cannon-Ball. At this time such
a violent Storm of Rain fell, that most Posts were abandoned; the Viceroy
desired to take a Standard that was left in one; a French Gunner with only one
Man went over in a Boat to fetch it, and were both killed.

3. It was now the beginning of March, and the Siege had lasted two Months,
without abating any thing of the Fury. Many of our Buildings were ruined by the
Enemies Cannon, many of them killed by ours. Antony Cabral run up the River
Chapora with four Vessels, and landing fifty Men, burnt four Villages, and
above fifty Sail, bringing away some Booty. D. Paul de Lima with forty Men did
as much at Rachol. The Viceroy laying hold of a Rope at the Pass of Benastarim
to draw a Cannon, others refusing for fear of the many Bullets that flew, one
hit him upon the Arm, and only pierced the sleeve without doing him any harm.
Afterward being in the Church of Santiago, the Roof of it was beat down and
hung over his head, Emanuel de Sousa Coutinno stepped up to save him, by
receiving the Blow, but he acknowledging the Kindness reproved the Action.

4. The Viceroy used all possible means to have Intelligence from the Enemies
Camp. He bribed some Renagado Portugueses that served there, but what is more,
he corrupted Hidalcan's most beloved Wife, and by her means knew the King's
secret Thoughts, which he could not conceal from her.

5. Hidalcan now began to consider the damage done by so few Men to so numerous
an Army, that now the Portugueses increased in strength by the arrival of
several Squadrons that had been abroad, among which James de Meneses returned
victorious from Achem, and Luis de Melo de Silva from Malabar. He desired
Peace, but was loath to propose it. The Viceroy who knew his Thoughts ordered
it so, that a Treaty was in a manner set on foot, so that no body could discern
who was the Author of it. Yet at length Hidalcan stooped to make the first
Proposals. But still the Siege was carried on, and April was began. Seven
hundred Mores attack a Pass, Two hundred Portugueses at first opposed them, but
seeing they were relieved, fled in such Disorder, that neither their Officers
nor the Viceroy could rally them. Their two Captains were killed.

6. The Action of D. James de Meneses relating to Zamori, shall be referred to
the Chapter of Chaul; that of Luis de Melo is fit for this place. He set out
with Fourteen Sail in search of the Fleet of Achem, and met it near that Port;
it consisted of Sixty Sail well Manned and provided with Cannon, commanded by
the King's Son and Heir. Melo and he met first, and our first Shot killed him
and several of his Men. The Fleets met and fought resolutely on both sides; but
the Enemy was utterly destroyed, three Galleys and six small Vessels taken, all
the rest sunk but one. We lost not one Man; of the Enemy Twelve hundred were
killed, and Three hundred made Prisoners. Melo returned to Malaca with the
Vessels and Cannon he had taken, and thence sent some Men to the Malucos, and
came to Goa with Fifteen hundred, and Vasco Lorenco de Barbuda whom he found at
Cochim preparing to bring some Relief.

7. These Commanders being come to Goa, took their Posts. Meneses executing his
Office of Admiral was carried off wounded, at such time as Three thousand of
the Enemy began to enter the Island of John Lopez. Antony Fernandez de Cale
with One hundred and twenty Men met and put them to flight, killing a great
number.

8. During this time, before Winter came on, several Attempts were made upon
the Enemies Quarters and Inroads into the Country always with success. One
Night One hundred and fifty Men beat the Enemy out of a Post at Benastarim and
after another at Angoscan, ruining all the Works they had raised. They did the
same at Xatiar^ao, Chatigan and Rachol, burning Villages demolishing the Works,
and killing very many.

9. Hidalcan, though almost in despair, began to plant Gardens, and other
Works, as if he designed either to take Goa, or live in that Field: He resolved
to enter the Island with Nine thousand Men at the Pass of Mercantor, which was
not guarded, because the River is wide there. Our Men hearing a Drum, which
never beats but when that Prince marches in Person, run thither, and saw him on
the other side encouraging his. Advice being brought to the Viceroy, he sent
several Parties and followed himself. In spite of all opposition Five thousand
Men got over under the Command of the Turk Soliman Aga, Captain of the Guard.
Fresh Men still flocked to the Viceroy, till he was Two thousand strong. All
the Posts which extended two Leagues were in Action.

10. All the Thirteenth of April, from Morning till Night the attack lasted,
and from the next Morning till the Day following. Hidalcan all the while
looking on, cursing his Prophet Mahomet, and throwing his Turbant on the
Ground. Of the Portugueses scarce Twenty were killed, of the Enemy almost Four
thousand, and among them Soliman Aga; Hidalcan's Brother-in-Law, and other
Persons of Note, some Colors, and Plunder were taken.

11. F. George de St. Lucia a Dominican and Bishop of Malaca, foretold this
Success to the Viceroy. Hidalcan raged, and in public vowed not to stir
thence, but in private wished a conclusion, but used not the means. He proposed
a Pence, and despaired of concluding it upon the Terms he offered; one of them
was the Surrender of Goa, as if the Portugueses had all this while tought for
any thing but to keep it. Our Viceroy treated with Norican about killing the
King, offering him either the Crown of great Power in the Government. Norican
admits the Proposals, and as the blow was ready to be given, the Treachery was
discovered, he secured, and so the other Conspirators desisted. This was about
the end of April.

12. The treaty of Peace failing, the Siege went on, but not with the vigor as
before. The Enemies Cannon ruined our Buildings, ours their Men, and Parties of
ours burnt all the Country. Sebastian de Resende with only four Men attempts a
Post of the Enemies, and killing some, would have brought away one alive, but
he making much opposition, Resende was forced to kill him. Lancelot Picardo and
others with forty Men did great execution. Antony Fernandez with thirty falling
upon Rumercan's Quarters where there was eighty, killed eighteen, and retired
without any damage received. The Viceroy leaning one day on a Page, a Ball took
away his Prop. Being at rest one night he heared a great Noise, and instantly
came abroad, and a Bullet hitting him on the Breast, fell at his feet without
doing the least hurt.

13. Hidalcan to divide and weaken the Viceroy, again persuades the Queen of
Guarcopa to attack Onor. She consents, and joining Three thousand Men of her
own to Two thousand sent by him, besieges the Fort. It was the middle of July,
the dead of Winter there, when the Viceroy received Advice thereof. He sent
instantly Antony Fernandez de Chale with two Galleys and eight Vessels, and
what Men they could contain: Antony in five days enters that Port, and joining
with George de Moura commanding there, falls upon the Enemy and puts them to
flight, killing many, and bringing all the Cannon into the Fort. About this
time Zamori broke out in another place, but that requires a particular Chapter.

14. The Viceroy underhand endeavored to stir up other Princes to invade
Hidalcan's Dominions, by that means to draw him from the Siege. Both
endeavored to hide their desire of Peace. Hidalcan made appear as if he
resolved not to stir, and the Viceroy as if he valued not his lying there. In
fine, the whole Winter was spent, and toward the end of August, when Summer
begins, and the Enemy might better keep the Field, the number of Tents was seen
to decrease, then the Men, and lastly the Cannon vanished, without coming to
any accommodation, after a Siege of ten Months, wherein the Enemy lost Twelve
thousand Men, Three hundred Elephants, Four thousand Horses, and Six thousand
Oxen, part by the Sword, and part by the Weather. Thus Goa was suddenly
delivered. Let us now see what was done at Chaul by Nizamaluco, the second
Chief of this League.

CHAP. IX.
The Siege of Chaul.

1. NIzamaluco keeping time with Hidalcan, set down before Chaul at the same
time the other did before Goa. His General Faretecan invested the place with
Eight thousand Horse and Twenty thousand Foot; and on the last day of November
the Enemy broke ground with a horrid noise of warlike Instruments.

2. Luis Ferreyra de Andrade, a Man well deserving such a Post, commanded at
Chaul, and labored long under great Wants of all Necessaries, supplying those
Defects with his and his Men's Valor, till D. Francis Mascarennas came to his
assistance with Six hundred Men in four Galleys and five small Vessels, and
some Barques loaded with Ammunition and Provision.

3. The Fort of Chaul is seated in about 18 degrees. of N. Lat. on the Bank of a
River, not twelve Miles from the Mouth of it. There were in it but fifty Horse,
and a small number of Foot. The first bold Action done here was by Sebastian
Gonzales de Alvelos, who passing over a small Creek alone, challenged any of
that number of Enemies, and none durst answer him. Then Alexander de Sousa went
over with fifteen Horse to discover the Enemy, and stayed so long till 5000
came upon them, among which they killed a considerable Officer. At this time
Faretecan was marching down the Mountain Gate with 8000 Horse, a great number
of Foot, and twenty Elephants; he sat down before Chaul, and began to plant
Cannon.

4. Faretecan desiring to do somewhat before his Prince came, set the Castles
upon the Elephants and tied Syths to their Trunks to give an Assault. All
turned to his Loss, for he was repulsed by Sea and Land, and forced to retire
as far as the Church de la Madre de Dios, or Mother of God, where his men
rallied.

5. Here it is said some Miracles were seen, as that a Bullet hitting a
Soldier on the hand, rebounded from it as a Ball struck with a Racket. The
fight lasted three hours with great slaughter of Mores, and loss of three
Portugueses.

6. The Enemy having lodged themselves about the Town, it was thought
convenient to demolish all the Buildings that were any thing distant. Nothing
remarkable happened till after December. Some Mores being then gathering Fruit
in an Orchard, Nunno Vello went out with five Soldiers, and killing one of
them, others came on still till they made up Six thousand, and ours increased
to two hundred; who behaved themselves with such bravery, they drove that
multitude, killing One hundred and eighty, with the loss of two.

7. Nizamaluco came before Chaul in the beginning of January with the rest of
his Army, which now together consisted of 34000 Horse, 100000 Foot, 16000
Pioniers, 4000 Smiths, Masons and other Trades of sundry Nations, as Turks,
Coracons, Persians and Ethiopians, 360 Elephants, an infinite number of Bufalos
and Oxen, and forty pieces of Cannon most of a prodigious bigness, some
carrying Balls of 100, some 200, and even 300 weight, and had Names answerable,
as Cruel Butcher, Devourer, Orlando Furioso, and the like. Thus 150000 Men so
well provided, planted themselves before a Town that had only a single Wall, a
Fort like a House, and a handful of Men. Faretecan lodged himself in the
Vicar's House near the Chapel of the Mother of God with 7000 Horse and twenty
Elephants. Agalascan in the House of James Lopez with 6000 Horse; Ximirican
between that and upper Chaul with 2000, so the City was beset from Sea to Sea.
At the same time 4000 Horse ravaged the Lands of Bacaim. The King took his
Quarters at the farther end of the Town; thus the space of two Leagues was
covered with Tents.

8. The Portugues^s at first being but few, and the Works inconsiderable, had
no particular Posts, but were wherever the danger threatened. Soon after the
News of the danger of Chaul being spread abroad, many Gentlemen flocked thither
with supplies of Men, so that in a little time there were 2000 Men in the Town.
It was resolved to maintain the Monastery of St. Francis, and it was committed
to Alexander de Sousa. Some Houses were also judged fit to be defended. Nuno
Alvarez Pereyra with forty Men had those on the Shore, those between the
Misericordia and St. Dominick D. Goncalo de Meneses, others near Nunno Vello
Pereyra, and so in other Places.

9. Mean while it was generally voted at Goa, that Chaul ought to be abandoned,
but the Viceroy resolutely opposed, and was seconded by Ferdinand de Sousa de
Castellobranco. He immediately sent thither D. Duarte de Lima and Ferdinand
Tellez de Meneses with their two Galleys, and some Men in four other Vessels.
Let us see what was done at Chaul whilst they are under Sail.

10. Nimirican had promised Nizamaluco he would be the first man should enter
the Town, in order thereto he vigorously attacks the Posts of Henry de Betancor
and Ferdinand Pereyra de Miranda. They bravely made good their Ground, and
being relieved repulsed him, killing Three hundred of his Men, seven of ours
were lost. The Enemy turn their Cannon upon the Monastery of St. Francis where
we had some Pieces, and both sides striving to burst or dismount the opposite
Guns; the Gunners were so dextrous, that Bullets were seen to meet by the way.
On the Eve of St. Sebastian a Party of ours sallied upon some Houses where the
Mores had fortified themselves, and killed a great number without losing one
Man.

11. Nizamaluco enraged at the last repulse desired Revenge, and that same
night attacks the Fort of St. Francis with Five thousand Men. The Mores thought
to surprise ours, but were soon undeceived by the Execution done among them.
The attack lasted very furious the space of five hours. The Portugueses
suspected the Enemy worked under the Wall, and could not see by reason of the
darkness, but Christopher Curvo three several times put half his Body out of a
Window, with a lighted Torch in one hand, and a Buckler in the other, to
discover what was doing. The noise was very great, and those in the City
fearing for those that were assaulted, sent them Relief though with great
hazard. The Morning discovered the Fort stuck with Arrows, and under it above
Three hundred Mores slain, without the loss of one Portugues.

12. Next day the Enemy repeated the Assault, and continued it five days with
great resolution, with as great bravery were they received by the Portugueses,
who often fallying covered the Field with dead Bodies and took several Colors.
However it was at last judged expedient to quit that Fort, and withdraw the Men
into the City, lest the losing of it should prove more prejudicial than the
defending it could avail. Seventeen Men were killed in it. One of these being
on a high place to give notice when the Enemy fired their Cannon, said to those
that were below: If they should now fire Raspadillo (that was a Cannon eighteen
Foot long so called) without doubt they would send me all in pieces to sup with
Jesus Christ, to whom l commend my self, for the Gun points at me. Scarce had
he spoke the words when he was torn in pieces by a Ball from that Cannon.

13. The Mores being possessed of the Fort and Monastery of St. Francis, fired
a whole Street, but attempting to gain some Houses lost Four hundred Men. Three
of them challenged a like number of ours, who thinking it a disparagement to
answer them upon equal terms, only two went out, which were Gomez Freyre and
Luis del Valle, who carried a great Hanger. The Mores refused the odds, and one
of them withdrew. Valle with the advantage of the Hanger overcame his
Adversary, and then assisted Freyre to kill the other. So both sides might be
said to be conquered, the Mores losing their Lives, and ours their Honor by
taking the Advantage.

14. Chaul being now straightened, Ruy Goncalez de Camara was sent to Goa for
Relief; which he brought in two Galleys. At this time appeared here, and before
Mangalor, the Malabar-Ships, sent by Zamori, pursuant to the Articles of the
Consederacy. But our Method being to relate what each of the Confederates did
separately, this shall be referred to another Chapter. Let us see one of the
bravest Actions that has been heard of, performed by Stephen Perestrelo,
Commander of the weak Fort of Caranja.

15. It was said, above 5000 of Nizamaluco's Horse marched into the Lands of
Bacaim. They resolved to attempt some of our Garrisons; and being beaten off at
Acarim and Damam, went and sat down before Caranja, where Stephen Perestrelo
was, with only Forty Men, Caranja is a small, inconsiderable Work, between
Chaul and Damam, on the Edge of the Water, and is, in some measure, an Island,
being encompassed by small Brooks. As the Enemy sat down before it, Emanuel de
Melo came with Thirty Men. Being now Seventy strong, Perestrelo falls upon that
great Number, with such Success, that after covering the little Island with
dead Bodies, the rest fled, leaving their Cannon, and a considerable Quantity
of Arms and Ammunition.

16. But to return to Chaul: The Moors furiously battered it with Seventy
Pieces of large Cannon, for the space of a Month; the least that was spent
every Day being 160 Balls. They made great havoc among the Houses, in which
many were killed; one single Ball slew six Persons that were eating together;
others fell into the Ships, and failed not o^ Execution there. This Battery
began against the Bastion of the Cross, and was carried on to the Place where
Peter Ferreyra and Mem Dornelas were posted, levelling all with the Ground. The
Besieged worked incessantly to cover themselves; but the Enemy's Gunners were
so expert, they mounted their Balls so, that they fell among those that thought
they were within Shelter. Augustine Nunez found an Expedient to avoid this
Danger, which, though thought difficult at first, was afterward their only
Security.

17. Our Commander seeing the Battery on the other side of St. Dominick never
ceased, thought fit to attack the Enemy's Quarters opposite to it. Alexander de
Sousa and Augustine Nunez undertook it with One Hundred and Twenty Men, and,
though vigorously opposed, drove the Enemy thence; killing many, and firing the
Works.

18. John Alvarez Suarez, an Officer of the Revenue, hearing the Danger of
Chaul, fitted out a Vessel at his own Charge, and came thither with some
Soldiers; where he behaved himself beyond what was expected of one, whose
Business seemed to be only the Pen, though now he converted it to the Sword.

19. Coming now at the time of the Attack of those Works, he was one of the
first that mounted. Ferdinand Casqueiro hearing the Moors play at Tables in an
House, ran in, and killed two of them, driving the rest from the Sport. The
Work was levelled with the Ground, without any Loss on our Side. Among the Arms
taken in this Action, was a Cymiter with this Inscription, JESUS SAVE ME.

CHAP. X.
Continues the Siege of Chaul.

1. THE Enemy attacked some considerable Houses, and were repulsed, with Loss
of one Man of ours; but we having undermined that of Hector de Sampaio, to blow
it up, they ran furiously, and set their Colors upon the Top of it. This
incensed our Men, and there followed an obstinate Dispute in the House, till
some Fire accidentally falling into the Powder, it blew up, killing Forty Two
of our Soldiers: Some escaped so disfigured, that their own Friends mistaking
them for Moors, ran out to kill them.

2. The Moors escaped here unhurt, and set their Colors upon the Ruins of the
House, and upon that of Xira, which they took next. Ximirican assaults by Night
the Bastion of the Cross, with Six Hundred Men; but Ferdinand Pereyra opposed
them with Thirty; and Henry de Betancor seconding him with some others, they
beat them off, and took five Colors they had planted upon the Work. Betancor
fought with the Left Hand only, having before lost the Right: And Dominick del
Al^ma being lame, caused himself to be brought out in a Chair.

3. April was now begun, and the Enemy seemed resolved to continue there all
the Winter, and were raising new Works. Alexander de S^sa and D. Goncalo de
Meneses were appointed to sally upon them. Their Soldiers understanding it, ran
out without Orders, to the Number of Two Hundred, and furiously drove the Enemy
from their Works, which, their Captains coming up, they ruined. Above Fifty
Moors were killed, and some few Portugueses.

4. Nizamaluco perplexed with so many Losses, gives a general Assault with his
whole Army, at once attacking all our Pos^s. There was scarce any of our Works
that the Moors did not enter, and plant their Colors; and with the same Vigor
and Fury were repulsed, and drove out of them. In the Morning above Five
Hundred Moors appeared slain, and Four or Five Portugueses. This was the
Posture of Affairs, when some Supplies came from Goa, Diu and Bacaim, being
above Two Hundred Men, and a sufficient Quantity of Ammunition.

5. Two other Dangers now terrified the Besieged: The on^ a troublesome, though
not mortal Disea^e; being great Swellings all over their Bodies, which deprived
them of the Use of their Limbs. The other, that Nizamaluco solicited the King
of Sarceta, and some Rebels of Camb^a, to fall upon the Portugueses in other
Places; by that means to hinder Relief coming to them. But neither of them gave
ear to him. This Prince seeing he must finish alone what ^e had undertaken
alone, fell to battering (...) House of D. Nunno Alvarez Pere^ra, (...)
continued it for the Time of Forty Two Days. He assaults it wi^h Five Thou^
Men: The Defendants at first were but ^ty; soon after, Twenty more came to
their Assistance; and some others also after that. We lost but One Man, and
killed above Fifty Moors. One being taken, and brough^ to the Captain, told
him, above Five Thousand had been killed during the Siege.

6. The House of Nunno Vello was battered and assaulted Thirty Days, with much
the same Success; only this Difference, that we lost Ten Men. Only Thirty
Soldiers sustained these furious Assaults, till it being judged no longer
needful to defend the House, it was agreed to blow it up. The Enemy hastily ran
to possess themselves of it, setting up their Colors at such time as part of
the Building flew into the Air, doing good Execution though not so much (...)
was expected. But what this fell short, was made up by another Mine, and by the
Valor of D. Francis Mascarennas; who falling upon those that escaped the Mine,
put them to the Sword, and came off much hurt. In like manner, the House of
Francis de Mel^ was quitted, after they had been defended to Admiration.

7. The Summer was now almost spent: There were thrown into the City above Six
Thousand Cannon-Balls, some of a prodigious Bigness; and Nizamal^co was making
Preparations to lie there the Winter. Above Two Hundred Portugueses, fear^g the
Ruin of the City, had deserted; but instead of them, Three Hundred came from
Goa, which put Chaul into somewhat a better Posture. On (...) 11th of April,
Ruy Goncalez de Camara ^ell upon Five Hundred Moors, in an Orchard, with such
Success, that only Fifty of them escaped. He took Five Colors, and lost only
Two Men, but had many wounded.

8. Fortune could not be always favorable to the Besieged, sometimes they must
meet Disasters. The Moors enraged at that Loss, played their great Cannon
incessantly: A Chance-^all from one of them, lighting upon one of the Galleys
that brought the Relief, sunk her downright, with all that was in her, being
^rty Men, and Goods valued at Forty Thousand Ducats. The Moors did not lo^
rejoice a^ this Accident; for Ferdina^ ^ez fallying the next Day with Four
Hundred Men on the Side of St. Francis, obtained another (...), equal to that
of Ruy Goncalez, and brought away some Ammunition, Arms, one Piece of Cannon,
and other Booty. Nizamaluco beheld this Action, and mounting on Horseback,
offered to come down in Person, with a Lance in his Hand; then changing it to a
Whip, in a Rage threatened his Men, and upbraided them as Cowards.

9. Our Men were now so accustomed to Danger, nothing could terrify them; and
they seemed to court Death, as if she had not been busy enough about them.
Some of our Soldiers being employed, levelling the Enemy's Works we had driven
them from about St. Francis, and being more handy at the Sword than Spade, drew
upon themselves a great Number of Enemies, whereof they killed above Two
Hundred, not without Loss on our Side.

10. D. John de Lima, Francis de Sa, and D. Nunno Alvarez went out to discover
some Mines it was thought the Enemy was carrying on. They executed their
Command, entering those Quarters, where they put all that were in them to the
Sword. In these two Actions we lost Six Private Soldiers, and D. Luis de
Gastellobranco, who having lost one Leg, offered the other; D. John de Lima,
who seeing a Moor miss several Shots he made at him, stood still till he was
killed; performing his Promise made on his Brother D. Duarte's Grave, that he
would soon follow him; Anthony de Fonseca, he who hung by his Lance at Parnel,
and laughed at the Enemy; Francis Barradas, and Ruy Pereyra de Sa, and Five
other Gentlemen of note.

11. After the King had made it appear he designed to continue the Siege all
the Winter, and all Things were on both Sides disposed in order thereto,
Faretecan made some Overtures of Peace, but without any visible Commission from
his Prince, who caused him to be apprehended, not for acting therein without
Orders, for, doubtless, he had private Instructions; but upon suspicion that he
was corrupted. It was no wonder if Nizamaluco desired a Peace, after lying
before a Town Seven Months, without any Success, but losing as many Thousand
Men. Nor was it strange the Portugueses should wish it, having already lost
above Four Hundred of their own, besides Indians. But the Hopes of Peace being
extinguished by the Imprisonment of Faretecan, George Pereyra Coutinno went out
with his Ships, and, without any considerable Loss, burnt Three that belonged
to Nizamaluco.

12. It was now the Beginning of June, and the Attacks and Batteries were
carried on with such Vigor, as if they then began. The first Attempt was upon
D. Nunno Alvarez his House, which was lost through Carelessness. Yet after it
was taken, some Gentlemen attempting to recover it, lost at least Twenty
Portugueses, without doing any considerable Execution. Next, the Enemy
possessed themselves of the Monastery of St. Dominick, where great Slaughter
was made. At D. Goncalo de Meneses his House it was well fought, but to our
great Loss. In all the other Quarters, the Cannon-Balls ^lew like Hail. Let us
come to the last Assault.

13. The Batteries never ceased from the End of May, till the End of June;
Nizamaluco resolving to make a Breach fit for his whole Army to try its
Fortune. On the 28th the Elephants appeared loaded with Castles, and the
Castles full of Men. A valiant Moor, well mounted, walked leisurely before all
our Works, within Musket Shot, and never altered his Pace; notwithstanding
above Five Hundred Shot was made at him, and his Horse wounded, he went off
unhurt. The whole Army expected the Sign to move, but it was not given because
our Cannon killed an Officer of Note, which the King took as an ill Omen, and
put off the Assault till next Day. Six of our Men venturing out of the Works,
drew a great Multitude of the Enemy within reach of our Shot which was so well
bestowed, that One Hundred and Eighteen fell down dead, and above Five Hundred
were wounded, with out doing us the least hurt.

14. The next Day about Noon the King gave the Signal to fall on; and the whole
Body of Men and Elephants advanced with horrible Cries, and Noise of Warlike
Instruments. Agalascan attacked James Suarez de Albergaria, John de Silva
Barreto, Roderick Homen de Silva, and Laurence de Brito, in their Posts.
Faretecan and Sujatecan fell on the Quarter of the Misericordia. Misnarr^,
Captain of the Guards, on that of Ruy Goncalez. D. Francis, our Commander in
Chief, being to relieve wherever the greatest Danger pressed, planted himself
opposite to the King with part of his Men, having distributed the rest where
there was need.

15. The Day was darkened with Smoke, at Times lighted with Flames; the
Slaughter and Confusion was great on all Sides. Some of the Enemy's Colors
were planted on our Works, but soon taken, or cast down, with those who had
boldly set them up. The Elephants, made drunk by the Nayres, that they might be
the more fierce, being burnt and wounded, ran madly about the Field. One much
valued by the King, being fired in the Flames, ran into the Water, and swam
over the Bar, where one of our Vessels killed him with a Cannon-Shot. In fine,
The Assault ended with the Day, the Portugueses remaining Masters of all their
Works, after killing above Three Thousand of the Enemies; among which, one was
the Son of Agalascan, and many more of Note.

16. This Action cost us but a few private Soldiers, and Eight Gentlemen. D.
Henry de Meneses being lame, having his Legs burnt, caused himself to be
carried in a Chair. Laurence de Brito took a Colors. Goncalo Rodriguez Caldera
and Hierome Curv^ would not leave their Posts, after receiving many dangerous
Wounds. In fine, All did more than mortal Actions; it would be a Lessening of
others to commend some, and we cannot particularize them all.

17. The Moors asked Leave to bury their Dead; which being granted, as they
drew them off, they asked the Portugueses, What Woman it was that went before
them in the Fight, and whether she was alive? One answered, Yes; for,
doubtless, she was immortal. And they replied, Then certainly, it was the Lady
Marian. So they call the Blessed Virgin. Many said they saw her at Lawrence de
Brito's Quarter, so bright, that she blinded them. And some who went to see her
Image in the Churches, were converted, and staid in Town.

18. Nizamaluco was desirous to treat of Peace, but was not willing to show it:
Our Commander wished as much as he, and was as backward in making it appear. At
length both Sides abated, and a Treaty was set on foot: Faretecan and Azafacan
were Commissioners for Nizamaluco: Peter de Silva, and Meneses, and Anthony de
Teyve, for our Commander in Chief; and D. Francis Mascarennas Baroche, for the
Captain of the City. The Substance of the Accommodation was a League Offensive
and Defensive between Nizamaluco and King Sebastian. This Agreement was
celebrated with great Joy, and sending of rich Presents on both Sides. All this
might have been done, without so much Effusion of Blood. Nizamaluco raised his
Camp, and returned home.

CHAP. XI.
The Proceedings of Zamori upon this Occasion, and during the Government of D.
Luis de Ataide.

1. ZAmori the third Chief of this League, who was to act by Sea as Sovereign
thereof among those of India, performed his Part very coldly. After Goa and
Chaul had been Besieged a Month, he instead of putting his Fleet to Sea, sent
to treat of Peace with the Viceroy, either by this means to amuze him, or else
to gain some Advantage upon his pressing Necessities. For few Princes follow
the Dictates of Honor, when opposite to their Interest. This Affair being
proposed in Council at Goa, it was unanimously agreed to accept of a Peace
though upon hard terms. But the Viceroy who had resolved to loose all or
nothing, said, He would make no Peace unless upon such Terms, as he might
expect in the most flourishing Condition.

2. Zamori seeing this Design fail, set out a Fleet about the end of February
under the Command of Catiproca Marca. He soon appeared before Chaul with
twenty-one Sail, and a great number of Men, whereof above One thousand were
Musketeers, and passed by Night through all our Galleys and Galleons that
filled the Port without opposition. The Entrance was defended against only two
Paraos, whereof one got in, the other not. The Malabars with reason boasted of
this Action, and Nizamaluco's Men rejoiced at the Success.

3. Nizamaluco was much pleased at the arrival of the Malabars, posted the 1000
Musketeers, and then persuaded the Officers to attack our Ships, which were
under the Command of Leonel de Sousa. A great number of Calemutes, which are
small Vessels that King made use of, were crammed full of Men to accompany the
twenty-one Malabars, every one going as to a sure Victory. They set out with
great eagerness, bearing down upon Lionel de Sousa, and fled with the same
precipitation seeing him make at them. Yet for all their haste our Galleys did
considerable execution among them. Nizamaluco, who from a height had been
looking on, did all he could to persuade them to try their Fortune again, but
to no purpose; for after twenty days they stole away by night out of that
Harbor with the same good Fortune they came in.

4. The Queen of Mangalor thinking to make some Advantage of these Confusions,
and hearing: that Catiproca was near with his Fleet, represented to him how
easily our Fort might be surprised, and offered to defray the Charge. He
accepted the Proposal, thinking to regain the Credit lost at Chaul.
Unexpectedly he applies scaling Ladders, and some of his Men mounted Some
Servants of D. Antony Pereyra, who Commanded there, awaking, and seeing the
Enemy, threw out of a Window the first thing came to hand, which was a Chest of
their Master's full of Silver, and with it beat down those that were upon the
Ladder. Pereyra waking with the noise, threw down those that had mounted, the
other fled carrying away the Chest aboard the Ships. As they passed before
Cananor, D. James with his Squadron fell upon and totally routed them. D. James
follows them up the River of Tiracole, and not one Ship of them escaped,
Cutiproca was killed, and his Nephew Cutiale taken, as also D. Antony's Chest
recovered.

5. Zamori did not fulfill the Articles of the League by sending this Fleet, for
every one had promised to undertake something in Person; till now D. James de
Meneses had obstructed him, scouring that Sea, burning many Towns and Ships,
and taking many which he carried to Goa. Toward the end of June, when D. James
was gone, and Hidalcau and Nizamaluco were about drawing off, Zamori fate down
before the Fort of Cbale with 100000 Men, most of them Musketeers. This place
is but two Leagues from Calicut, that Prince's Court, and was then held by D.
George de Castro. The Enemy planted forty Pieces of Brass Cannon, and girting
the place round thought they had shut out all hopes of Relief. Some was sent
from Cochim under the Conduct of D. Antony de Noronna, who could not put it
into the Place, for the furious Batteries of the Enemies Cannon. Francis
Pereyra de Sousa coming from Cananor with extravagant Bravery, conquered the
difficulty, but the Relief was small because the Vessels were so. As soon as
the Viceroy had advice, he sent D. James de Meneses with eighteen Sail to carry
Supplies to the Fort. He with great difficulty got to Chale about the end of
September, when the Besieged were reduced to the last Extremities, there being
at least Six hundred Persons in the place, whereof not above Seventy that could
bear Arms.

6. It seemed impracticable to attempt the putting in any Relief, for the mouth
of the Harbor was very narrow, and all the Hills about it were planted with
Cannon. But our Commander resolved to surmount all Difficulties: A great Vessel
was filled with Provisions for two months, and fifty Soldiers put into it.
James de Azambuja went before in his Gally, and Antony Fernandez and D. Luis de
Meneses covered it with their Vessels. They pierced with incredible Courage
through Showrs of Bullets, and Ferdinand de Mendoca, Nephew to D. James, run in
all the Supplies, whilst Francis de Sousa with his Men killed above Five
hundred of the Enemy, who endeavored to obstruct it. This done, they retired
through the same Dangers with loss of forty Men. As they were cutting off a
Soldier's Leg he asked whether the Succor was got in, and hearing it was,
Then, said he, let me die in God's Name, for I cannot die more honorably.

7. Though it was not possible to bring the ^ss People out of the Fort, as was
designed, yet the putting in of Relief was an Action scarce to be paralleled,
for the great hazard and difficulty that attended, and vast Power that opposed
it.

8. The King of Achem, the Fourth of these great Confederates, whose thoughts
were always employed against Malaca, did not in point of time answer the
Covenants of the League, but we shall see him at length in the Government of D.
Antony de Noronna performing what he so long delayed. The Queen of Guarcopa and
others, as has been related, made up what was wanting in him.

9. This was the end of that mighty League; this the Government, Valor and
Fortune of our Viceroy; who opposing all the united Power of India,
re-established the Portugues Reputation, so much decayed; For which he deserves
an everlasting Fame.

10. D. Luis de Ataide Lord of Atouguia was of unquestioned Valor, had great
Experience in Military Affairs, to which he had applied himself from his Youth,
and of a Spirit so free from the Infection of Avarice, that as others brought
from Asia to Portugal heaps of Treasure, he brought four Jars of Water from the
four famous Rivers, Indus, Ganges, Tigris and Euphrates, which were preserved
many Years in his Castle of Penicbe.

11. After serving in Europe and Africa he went over to India, and served
there, and at the Age of twenty-two, was Knighted at Mount Sinai by the
Governor D. Stephen (...) Gama. Returning to Portugal he went A^ bassador to
the Emperor Charles V. and was in that Battle in which the Emperor defeated the
Lutherans under the Landtgrave and Duke of Saxony; where he behaved himself so
well, that Charles V. offered to Knight him, and he said, He had already
received that Honor at Mount Sinai, and was therefore sorry he could not admit
it then. The Emperor in the hearing of all answered, He more envyed that
Honor, than he rejoiced in his Victory.

12. At his arrival at Lisbon King Sebastian caused him to be received under a
Canopy, yet afterward (like King Emanuel and Duarle Pacheco) very much
slighted him. We shall see it when he is made the second time Viceroy, being
the first that was so twice. D. Antony de Noronna succeeded him now: He was the
Tenth that had this Title, and of Governors the Twenty-fourth: The First of
the Name and Surname, the Third Count that had that Post: He was of the larger
size, had a good Mien, his Complexion white.

CHAP. XII.
The Government of the Viceroy D. Antony de Noronna, from the Year 1571 till
1573, in the Reign of King Sebastian.

1. KING Sebastian thinking the Government of India, as it was then extended,
too great a Burden for one Man, divided it into three Parts: The first from
Cape Guardafu to the Island Ceylon, which is that of India: The second from
Cape Corrientes to Guardufu, which is Monomotapa: The third from Pegu to China,
which is that of Malaca. The first was given to D. Antony de Noronna, with the
Title of Viceroy; the second to Francis Barreto, and the third to Antony Moniz
Barreto, both styled Governors. Though it may alter things as to point of time,
I will speak of them in distinct Chapters, beginning with D. Antony de Noronna.

2. He set out from Lisbon with five Ships, and was followed by two more. They
arrived at Goa the beginning of September safe as to the number of Ships, for
none was lost; but not so as to Men, 2000 dying at Sea of sickness of 4000 that
set out. D. Antony came before Hidalcan had raised the Siege, and thereby
obtained part of the Honor of obliging him to quit it. Hidalcan lest
Commissioners to conclude the Peace with the new Viceroy. It was proclaimed
with great Joy on the 13th of December, and so the Year and the War ended
together.

3. The first care of the new Viceroy was to send Relief to Chale in two
Galleys, one Galleon and four Ships, and after them two Galleys and t^ee other
Vessels. But these were soon applied to other uses; D. James de Meneses coming
from Chale, he sent him back with 1500 Men, who came too late, the Fort being
already delivered to Zamori upon Conditions. This surrender was made contrary
to the plurality of Votes by the Commander D. George de Castro, overcome by the
Prayers and Tears of his Wife and other Ladies that were there, without
considering that he was Eighty Years of Age, and ought rather to choose an
honorable Death, than a short term of infamous Life. Nor was this all his
fault, for the Provision had lasted longer, had not he put it into his Wife's
Hands, and she into those of her Slaves. Thus she was the first Eve among the
Portugueses of India that tempted her Husband to a Crime of this nature, this
being the first place so delivered by them to the Enemy. And the Viceroy could
not but lose more Honor by loss of Chale, than he could justly pretend to by
the raising the Siege of Goa.

4. D. James gathering the People that came out of Chale, and were under the
Protection of the King of Tanor, left them at Cochin, Then dividing his Fleet
with Mathi^ de Albuquerque, they cleared the Sea of Pirates and secured the
Coasts; next they took and demolished a Fort built by a Nayque subject to
Hidalcan, at the mouth of the River Sanguicer. Here was killed Antony
Fernandez. Chale, a Malabar, who for his Valor and Conduct had often the
Honor to Command many of the bravest Gentlemen that were in India at that
time. He was of the Order of Christ, was carried to Goa, and there buried with
greater State than any till that day, that had not been Governor of India.

5. When the Viceroy accepted this Command in Portugal, so much lessened by the
Division of Governments, his great aim was to get an Estate, being poor, and
having Children. He thought India might mend his broken Fortune, and that
Antony Moniz Barr^to would be satisfied with less than was ordered to fit him
out for the Government of Malaca; he was deceived, for Moniz was not satisfied
with what could be done, nor was India in a Condition to give what was promised
him in order to go to Malaca, nor Malaca in a posture for a Man, who looked
upon his Reputation, to go thither with that Title without a considerable
Force. The one would not go with what was given him, and the other could not
give more. Difficulties hard to be composed.

6. Moniz resolved not to go to Malaca, and writ to Portugal that the Reason
was, because the Viceroy would not furnish him with what was requisite, as not
desiring he should go. Malicious Whispers are generally grateful to Princes and
great Men. Those who governed King Sebastia^ (unhappy Kingdom, whose King is a
Child!) without any other Information besides this Gentleman's, which all
tended to his own Advantage, committed the weakest Act that has been heard of:
Moniz himself will shame them and himself, as shall appear in its proper place.

7. The Viceroy, after fitting out several Squadrons as usual, and receiving
four Ships from Portugal, two whereof were lost in their Return, was obliged to
make ready a considerable Succor for Damam, threatened by the Mogol, on account
that that Place and Ba^aim both belonged to the Kingdom of Cambaya, whereof he
was now possessed; and by this Means Sultan Mamud, Heir to the late King of
Cambaia, was left to the Tuition of three Great Men, Alucan, Itimitican and
Madremaluco. Each of these envying the others Fortune, strove to make himself
Master of the young King: And he finding all their Aim was Power, fled from
Madremaluco, where he thought himself in danger, to Itimitican, and totally
lost himself. They were all three bad, but this was the worst of all.
Therefore, considering the young King might flee from him, as he had done from
the others, he resolved to lay aside all Shame, and betray him. Gelalde (...)
Hecbar Taxa, King of the Mogols, was now in great Power; to him he offers to
deliver the King; by which means, with a small Army, he might possess himself
of that Kingdom, whereof he should be Viceroy, as a Reward of his Treachery.
Hecbar agreed, set forward with a good Army; and at the City Amadaba, the
Traitor delivered up his Prince to him; and so the Mogol, without drawing
Sword, was seated in the Throne of Cambaia.

8. Hecbar not satisfied with what he had got, resolved to recover the Lands
and Towns of Bacaim and Damam. This Design being known, D. Luis de Almeyda,
Commander of Damam, gave Advice to the Viceroy; who immediately sent some
Succors, and prepared to follow in Person. He set out from Goa the Latter End
of December, with nine Galleys, five Gallions, eight Galliots, and ninety other
Vessels.

9. The Viceroy being come into the River of Damam, struck such a Terror into
the Enemy, who was encamped two Leagues off, that the King immediately sent an
Ambassador to the Viceroy, to treat of Peace. The Viceroy received him in his
Galley with great State, and firing all the Cannon of the Fleet; and having
heard his Proposals, sent back with him Anthony Cabrall, who concluded the
Peace to the Content of both Parties. The Viceroy returned to Goa, and the
Mogol settled himself in the Possession of the Kingdom of Cambaya, cutting off
the Head of the Traitor Itimitican, a just Reward of his Villainy.

10. The Inhabitants of (...) were offended at the Fort lately bui^t by us
there; they besieged it to the number of 6000. Ruy Goncalez de Camara, who
commanded there, gave Advice to the Viceroy, and provided to make a good
Defense. Five Sail came immediately to his Relief; then twelve more, under the
Command of D. George de Meneses, who by the Way destroyed the Town of the
Naique of Sanguicer, with great Slaughter of the Enemy, and Loss of two Men.
Without the Bay of Bracalor he took a Ship of Meca; and entering, found all was
safe, with the Succor of the first Ships.

11. D. Henry de Meneses sailing to the Northward with one Galley and seven
other Vessels, near the Islands of Angerula, eight Leagues from Chaul, took two
great Ships belonging to Hidalcan; but a Storm arising, they were all drove
ashore, and taken by Malabars, who carried them to Hidalcan; and he, because
the Ships were taken after the late Conclusion of Peace, (though the Fault was
theirs, for answering with their Cannon, when they were required to show
Portuguese. Passes, as had been agreed) caused D. Henry, and all the
Portugueses then at his Court, to be put into the Castle of Bilgam; and it cost
some trouble to release them, and appease that Prince.

12. It was the Middle of October when the King of Achem (though late, yet
pursuant to the great League before spoke of) appeared before Malaca, with
almost 100 Sail, 7000 Men, and a vast quantity of Ammunition. He landed the
same Night of his Arrival, and suddenly set fire to the Town of Iller; which
had been burnt to the Ground, had not as sudden and violent a Shower of Rain
quenched it. John Bandara, Captain of the Horse, ran with more Zeal than
Discretion to succor the Town, and was killed.

13. The Enemy attempted to burn our Ships; but failing in this, and other
Designs, he sat down before the City, resolving to carry it by a regular
Siege, having at first thought it would not cost him that Trouble. The City was
in a miserable Condition, very poor, without Men, unhealthy and out of heart,
having suffered much by Shipwrecks, Sickness and Famine, not without deserving
it; for Malaca was (I know not whether it is) the Portuguese Ninive in Asia.

CHAP. XIII.
The Siege of Malaca, with other Occurrences, and End of the Government of D.
Anthony de Noronna.

1. MAlaca had, in a manner, no Hopes of Defense; the Enemy incessantly
battered the Walls, and cut off all Provision from coming to it: There was
nothing within but Misery, and Calling upon God for Mercy, without deserving it
by any other Action, but because they implored it. So cas^e it is to appease
the Divine Wrath.

2. So it happened; for in this Extremity, accidentally came into that Port
Tristan Vaz de Vega, with one only Ship, in which he sailed for Sanda, to load
with Spice. The Be^ged earnestly ^ntreated him to assist them, and he could not
but give ear to their Entreaty, though it seemed a Rashness to engage a Fleet
of an Hundred Sail with Ten, whereof Nine were almost rotten, and unrigged.
Among these were distributed 300 Soldiers, as naked as hungry. The Captain, who
might repose much Confidence in his own Valor, acknowledging, in such Cases
there ought to be no Trust but in God, gave the Example, and caused all his Men
to confess, and prepare themselves for Death.

3. About the End of November he sailed, and discovered the Enemy's Fleet in
the River (...). He gave the Command of his own Ship to Emanuel Ferreyra, and
went himself into a Galliot with his Sword in his Hand, to encourage the Men,
seeing him expose himself to the greatest Danger with them. The Signal being
given, and the Cannon furiously discharged, our Captain lays the Enemy's
Admiral on Board, makes great Havoc among 200 Men that were in her, beats down
her Flag, and she getting loose, shows him her Stern.

4. Mean while, Ferdinand Perez, with only thirteen Men, in a small Vessel,
took a Galley. Ferdinand de Lemos runs his Ship with such force against
another, that he overset and sunk her. Francis de Lima having taken another,
burnt it, to be at leisure to return to the Fight, that still continued.
Emanuel Ferreyra, who was in Vega's Ship, sunk three Vessels, unrigged others,
and killed many Men. To be short, Every one fought to admiration, the whole
Enemies Fleet fled, except four Galleys and seven small Vessels that were burnt
or sunk; 700 of the Enemy were killed and taken, of ours only five were slain:
Our Ships waited three days to see if the Enemy would return, and then carried
this joyful News to Malaca, where it was scarce believed.

5. Let us see what was doing at the Malucos. Whilst Goncalo Pereyra
Marramaque, our Admiral in those Seas, carried Relief to Ternate from Amboina,
this Fort was Besieged by the Fleet of Ternate, sent by the King either to stop
Pereyra from going to relieve our Men whom he held in great Distress, or if he
were gone to possess themselves of those Islands. They being too late to stop
him, besieged the People of Ulate in the Islands of Iliacer. They had been
forty days shut up, when D. Duarte de Meneses with Sancho de Vasconcelos, who
commanded at Sea, came to their Relief. They of Ulate encouraged with this
Succor, fell upon the Besiegers and put them to flight. They presented our
Captain with Baskets of Heads, and he returning to Amboina, found D. Duarte
dead, and succeeded him in that Command. The Command of the Sea he gave to
Simon de Abreu, called Papabierro, that is Sword-swallower, because, being
concerned in many Duels, he always disarmed his Adversary.

6. Being abroad with his Squadron he met that of Ternate, and there began a
furious Battle, but the other Vessels in the heat of the Action forsook him,
and he overpowered by the Multitude was killed, and 25 men with him. Autony
Lop^z de Resende, who went not off with those Cowards, came to succor him, but
it being too late; the Enemy offered him Quarter, and he refused it, saying, He
bad rather die as his Commander had done. The Admiral of Ternate attacks, him,
and he taking a Cannon upon his Shoulder (I suppose it was a little one)
ordered a Soldier to give fire to it, so succesfully, that it broke the
Admiral's Leg. His Men thought him dead, and whilst they were busy about him
Resende had time to make his escape, having lost four Men in this great Action.

7. The little King of Atua, a new Convert, who had fought bravely, was
betrayed to Reboanje, Commander of the Ternatenses, who offered him his Life if
he would renounce the Faith, and threatened him with a new sort of Martyrdom if
he refused: He continued firm; and being hung by a Rope between two Vessels,
Reboanje's Galley run with all its force at, and tore him to pieces.

8. John de Silva succeeded in the Command of the Sea. All our Men seeing so
many misfortunes befall us in those Islands, were for quitting them: Only Sancho
de Vasconcelos protested he would not abandon the Christians of those Islands,
affirming, if no Body would bear him Company he would stay alone and defend
them with the Natives, They were all ashamed, and yielded to his Resolution.
They quitted Ito, and fortified themselves upon the Point of Rosanive, where
the Land makes a Bay of four Leagues in Length, and three Leagues over at the
mouth, and runs up still narrower like a Pyramid; on one side of the Point is
the pleasant and plentiful Town of Rosanive, the Inhabitants thereof and the
neighboring Places were our Friends. There the new Fort was built, the Atives
and Tavires laboring at it with great Fidelity to the Portugueses, by whom
they were reduced to the Faith, which they firmly adhered to. John de Silva
went to Malaca for Succor, which was granted him by Francis de Costa commanding
there, and was cast away in the Bay of Tapara, where the Men were made Slaves.

9. Though these were lost, yet some Supplies came to Amboina, sent by the
Viceroy. Our Enemies at Atua falling on a sudden upon the Portugueses, killed
five and an Italian ^esuit. Mascarennas fled into the Woods, whence he was
brought out at the end of eight days almost famished. Sancho gathering our
Friends, fell upon Atua, and killed not only the Children at their Mother's
Breasts, but the very Beasts. In the Island (...), twelve Leagues distant, he
did the same, some of the Natives retiring to a Mountain.

10. At this time time arrived at Goa four Ships from Portugal, under the
Command of D. Francis de Sousa, who as soon as he landed, went to the
Archbishop D. Gasper, and delivered to him a Letter from the King, and other
Papers. Scarce had that ancient and learned Man seen them, when without any
consideration, he committed a great weakness, putting those Orders in
Execution; for there being several Circumstances that ought to be weighed by a
Person of his Years and Profession, he instantly with great disorder called
together several persons appointed for this extravagant Action into the Church*

11. The Orders were read by a Crier; they contained, That D. Antony de Noronn^
should be deposed from the Viceroyship, and that Antony Moniz Barreto should
immediately succeed him with the Title of Governor. All Noronna's Crime,
whereby he merited to be thus deposed, was, that he gave not to Moniz what was
not in his power to give; and all the Merit of Moniz, that he promised that
which afterward he could not perform. D. Antony returned to Portugal, though
slighted, not inglorious; for extravagant Injuries done by Superiors, are
rather Honors than Affronts to the Person that receives them: Yet he not well
considering it, died for Grief, as did his Wife and Brother-in-law; and that
Minister (...) State who was the cause of their Death, by crediting so slightly
the Information of Antony Moniz, being sensible of the wrong he had done, broke
his Heart: And King Sebastian hearing of the Death of D. Antony, declared he
was sorry it happened before (...) had made him reparation of his Hono^ D.
Antony was a Man of great Honor, Si^ cerity and Prudence, and who, according
to the Rules of the World, deserved his ill Fortune. His Visage long and
disagreeable, his Body large and gross. In the number of Viceroys he was the
11th, in that of Governors the 25th; the 1st of the Name, and 4th of the
Surname; he held the Government ^wo Years, and deserved to hold it many.

CHAP. XIV.
The Government of Antony Moniz Barreto, from the Year 1573 till 1576, in the
Reign of King Sebastian.

1. SCarce had the Bishop concluded that Act so misbecoming the Pastoral Staff,
1573*
when he took out another Order, wherein Goncalo Pereyra Marramaque was
appointed to succeed Antony Moniz Barreto in the Government of Malaca, and in
default of him D. Leonis Pereyra was named. The latter succeeded, for the other
died after relieving of Ternate. This done, that Pharisaical Caba^ broke up,
and hasted to carry the News to ^he Viceroy, who received it with such
unconcernedness as might well put them all out of Countenance.

2. Advice is now brought, that Malaca ^s again in danger, the King of Achem
being again before it, assisted by the Queen of Ia^a. The new Governor orders
D. Leonis Per^yra to be gone to his Government to ^ccour that place; D. Leonis
demands of ^im what he had before demanded of D. A^tony, and he returns the
same answer No^a had given him, without remembering what he had writ to the
King, or considering he had now less reason to refuse D. L^onis, than Noronna
had to deny him, for then India was threatened by all the Power of the East, and
was now delivered of that danger. D. Leonis, to take all manner of excuse from
him, would have been satisfied with much less now, than Moniz demanded before:
But even that was not given him, and he came away for Portugal; where that was
his Justification for not taking upon him that Command, but was not esteemed an
Offense to deprive Moniz of the Government, as it was with less reason in the
Case of D. Antony; whereby it appears, the Will of Ministers of State makes the
Crimes or Merit of such as depend on them.

3. This Year passed without any thing remarkable, and about the end of it
arrived six Ships from Portugal: They carried an Order for Trying and Executing
D. George do Castro, for delivering up the Fort of (...) to Zamori. He was
taken into Custody, and with him his Wife Donna Felipa, who, though really guilty
of the Crime, was not liable to undergo the Punishment. He suffered for her,
and all that were in fault, having his Head cut off upon a Scaffold in the
Market Place of Goa; and it was observed, that others who were as much to blame
as he, did not only escape unpunished, but were rewarded; and it is yet more
remarkable, that a Year after a Commission was sent from Portugal, for D.
George de Castro to serve in another Post.

4. Scarce did India begin to breath, after so many Troubles, and particularly
Malaca, when the Queen of Iapara sent to Besiege it, her General Quiaidaman
with 15000 chosen Natives of Iava, in almost 80 great Galleons, and above 220
smaller Vessels. Tristan Vaz de Vega was come back thither from Sunda after the
late Victory: By common Consent, and with much Justice, he was chose Commander
of that Place, D. Francis Enriquez his Predecessor being dead. He gave Advice
of the danger to the Governor Antony Moniz, and he to all the neighboring
Places, promising to requite whatever they should do in order to relieve the
Besieged; whereby such Succors came into them on a sudden, as put them into a
good posture of Defense.

5. Mean while Moniz demanded of the Chamber of Goa to lend him 20000 Pardaos
to fit out a Fleet, and finding them backward, offered his Son Duarte Moniz, a
Boy of eight Years of age, as a Pledge; the Chamber gave the Money, and took
the Pledge.

6. Whilst this Fleet was fitting out, the General of Iava began to act in the
same manner the Ring of (...) had done, attacking Iller; and D. Antony de
Castro coming with only ten Men to defend it was killed, as Bandara had been
the last Siege. The whole Army landed and lodged themselves ^ound the Town.
Vega sent John Pereyra and Martin Ferreyra with 150 men to beat the Enemy from
a Post; they killed 70 of them, levelled their Works, and brought off seven
Pieces of Cannon. Pereyra afterward burnt above 30 of their Galleons, and some
great Engines they had framed to attack a Bastion. Ferdinand Perez de Andrade a
d^ Bernardin de Silva burnt their Palisades. In all these Actions we lost 15 or
20 me^. The River being thus cleared, Pereyra with our Vessels besieges the
Besiegers, and at In takes the Provisions that were coming to them; whereupon
in great Consternation they Imbarqued and went off by night. P^reyra pursues
and cuts off their Rear: Almost half the 15000 perished by Fire, Sword, and
Sickness during the Siege, which lasted three months, and the pursuit of three
hours.

7. The King of Achem and Queen of I^para took it by turns, for when he left
the 1575.
Port she came in, and he now comes in (...) she goes out. He came now with 40
Galleys, some Ships, Galliots and other Vessels, to the number of 100, with a
great Train of Artillery. Tristan Vaz ordered John Perey^ in a Galley,
Bernardin de Silv^ in a Caravel, and Ferdinand de Pall^res in a Ship with each
40 Men to go out to guard the Provisions that were coming, and whereof the City
was in great want; the Enemy falls upon them, and in an instant beat all three
to pieces; 75 Men perished by Fire; Sword and Water, 40 were taken, and only
five saved themselves by swimming, the three Captains fought to their last
breath. John Pereyra promised s^ to do, to one who seeing all lost offered hi^
a Boat in which he might have escaped. Only 150 men remained in Malaca to
defend it, and of these 100 were sick and aged. Want of Men and Ammunition
caused them to be very still in the City. The Enemy not knowing the Cause,
imagined they had some cunning Stratagem in hand, and in a panick Fear raised
the Siege, when they might have carried the Town, contenting themselves with
their success against the three Captains. They came into the Port in the
beginning of January, and went out about the latter end.

8. The Priests, Women and Children had cried loud with sighs and tears,
imploring the Mercy of God, which at length they obtained: Next to God the City
was saved by Tristan Vaz de Vega's Courage, being ready upon all Occasions; and
by his liberality having spent above 20000 Ducats, wherewith he has purchased a
never-dying Honor. The Succors the Governor sent came too late.

9. D. John de Costa, Admiral of the Malabar Seas, cruized there victorious
with two Galleys and 24 other Vessels. He fell upon the Town of Gaipar, near
Bracalor, then in Rebellion, killed 1500 of the Inhabitants, burnt the Town,
and cut down the Woods. Thus the King of Tolar, grown haughty, was humbled. In
the River of Chale he destroyed an Island belonging to Zamori. Above that his
City of Parapangulem could not escape its Ruin. The Heir of the Crown coming to
the Relief of it, was killed with 200 Moors. At Cap^cate 300 were ^ain, with
the loss of two on our side. At Mount Delii, the Town of Nilachiram was
consumed to Ashes. Between these Actions, several Vessels were taken, which
supplied the Galleys with Slaves, and the Fleet with Provisions.

10. Let us now see our Dominion in the Molucos drawing to an end. New
Commanders were still sent to ruin all by their Avarice, with strength to
maintain the Fort: D. Alvaro de Ataide was now there, and Nanno Pereyra under
Sail to succeed him. The King of Ternate continued the Seige, and the place was
almost famished. It looked as if God had undertaken the Revenge of his Father's
Death, and assisted him to starve that Garrison; for no Succor was sent
thither, but perished. Of all Marramaque his Squ^dron not the least Vessel
returned to Goa; four Ships that went with Antony de Valadares and Lacerda were
cast away in several places, and he got thither alone, and after him Francis de
Lima with a Galliot. These were comforts to the Besieged, but no perfect Cure.
The King of Ujantana, our Friend, supplied the Enemy with Arms. Sancho de
Vasconcelos coming from Amboina to succor the Besieged to small effect, found a
Galleon of his loaded with them in the Port; and a Portugues Ship at Banda in
danger of falling into the hands of those People: For, seeing the decay of ou^
Affairs on that side, every one strove to hasten our Ruin. Belchior Botello
going with one Galleon to relieve the Fort, was ca^ away on the Sands Solocos,
Another in which D. Alvaro was going, away, after resigning that Command to
Nunno, was beat to pieces in the Harbor. The great Ship of Lionel de Brito came
when there was no Fort there^, and was lost afterward. Other Supplies, a great
deal of Cannon, much Merchandise and Ammunition, and above 2000 Men designed
thither, perished all by lamentable disasters. The Murderer of that innocent
King was stabbed by the People of Iava, rather as Executioners of God's
Justice, than Enemies to the Portugueses. Goncalo Pereyra Marramaque, who
consented to the Murder, died for mere Grief of so many Misfortunes, as he
sailed for Amboina, and was cast into the Sea.

11. In ^ine, our Dominion in that Island came to a dishonorable Period; for
those who had so insolently treated the Ternatenses, were forced to beg their
Lives of them, delivering up the Fort to the King, who treated them better than
they deserved.

12. The King entering the Fort, protested before the Portugueses, he did not
take possession of it for himself, but in trust for the King of Portugal, and
would deliver it to whoever he should appoint, as soon as the Murder of his
Father was punished. I believe they never demanded the Fort, because they would
not oblige themselves to do Justice. This was the second Place we lost after
this manner in Asia. The loss of this Place was not punished as that of Chale,
the C^ime being the same, only with this difference, that the Tears of the
Women extorted the one, and the Persuasions of Jesuits the other. The arrival
of that Ship, with sufficient Supplies was a testimony of the Guilt. But both
places being lost for want of Relief, they ought rather to have been Executed
who did not relieve, than they that surrendered them. It was a good answer of
the King of Persia to a Portugues Ambassador, when asking, How many Governors
of India the King had beheaded? the Ambassador said, None: Then replied the
King, The Dominion of the Portugueses in India will not last long.

13. Our Affairs at Amboina were not in much better a posture; for though
Sancho de Vasconcelos did more than could be expected of his force, yet it was
less than was requisite, it was but rising and falling. He defeated two Fleets
of Ternate, killed their Commanders, and Cachil Tidore; the People of Amboina
slew Maladam, and many more, and eat them; for they use to eat those they kill
in the Church. By his Order Alexander de Mattos destroyed the Island Iamam, but
at length the Natives killed him and all his Men; but afterward D. Henry,
Uncle to the King of Tidore, coming with Two hundred and fifty Men, slew Two
thousand of them. Two Natives of those Islands, as big as Giants, killed with
their own hands, the one above Twenty, the other above Thirty Men. San ho
returned again, and entered the same Town.

14. The People of Amboina designed privately to Murder Sancho de Vasconcelos.
He suspecting that Ruy de Sousa, a new Convert, and the principal Man of
Rosanive, was the Author of that Conspiracy, sent friendly for, and then
secured him by the advice of some Portugueses, not without the help of the
Jesuits, believing it was for the better, and they ruined all: For Sousa
escaping out of Prison, did what he never had designed, joining our Enemy, and
killing a good number of our Men, which put our Affairs into a desperate
Posture.

15. This Year F. Peter de Alfaro with three Companions entered the City of
Quantung, and perceiving he did not profit much there, returned to Macao, where
he built the Church. He was a Spaniard, and seemed to foresce, that what
belonged now to the Portugueses only would soon belong to his Nation. A token
of his Sanctity is, that perishing by Shipwreck, he was afterward found on the
Shore upon his Knees.

16. This Year concludes with the arrival of four Ships from Portugal. Since
there is no Account to be found of what our Governor acted the next Year till
D. James de Meneses succeeded him, let his Government end here, and I will go
over to the Relation of what was done these very Years, in Monomotapa, by the
Governor Francis Barreto, and his Successor Vasco Fernandez Homem. Antony
Moniz Barreto was a Man deserving of that Post he obtained, though he got it
not fairly, and was one of the best Governors of India, the Twenty-sixth of
that Number, and Second of the Name and Surname.

CHAP. XV.
The Government of Francis Barreto in Monomotapa, beginning in the Year 1569,
in the Reign of King Sebastian.

1. SInce, by reason of the Disagreement between Antony Moniz Barreto, and the
Viceroy D. Antony de Norronna, and D. Leonis Pereyra, the Government of Malaca,
one of the three into which that Dominion was divided, took no effect, let us
go over to the other of Monomotapa, which was erected, though it lasted not
long. When Francis Barreto returned to Portugal, after having been Governor of
India, he was appointed Admiral of the Galleys: He exercised this Command at
the time of that memorable Action of Pennon, by which he gained great
Reputation. Being come back to Lisbon, and the King resolved to make that
Division of Governments, he named him for Monomotapa, with the additional Title
of Conqueror of the Mines there. The great inducement to this Conquest, was the
Information and Experience of the vast quantity of Gold found, particularly at
Manica in the Kingdom of Bocaranga.

2. The Doubt was, whether it were proper for a Man who had been Governor of
all our Dominions in Asia, and this Southern Part of Africa to accept of this,
which was the least considerable part into which it was divided, but the danger
and difficulty of it made amends for the greatness. Three things prevailed with
him to accept of it; the first, that he was poor; the second, that he thought
it no lessening to take a less Command in Obedience to his Prince; and the
third, that it was allowed him, in case the Viceroy and he met at Sea, their
Power should be equal in all respects.

3. In fine, Francis Barreto submitted to his King's Command, and the Desires
of his Country, and sailed from Lisbon in April, 1569, as Captain, General, and
Governor of that Conquest, with three Ships. He carried One thousand Landmen,
and might have had more, if the Vessels could have contained them; for the
noise of Gold drowned the thoughts of danger, and nothing raises Men like the
thoughts of gain. Among these were many Gentlemen and old African Soldiers.
Being come to Mocambique, he went to subdue the King of Pate, who was revolted
from us.

4. Barreto had Orders not to undertake any thing without the Advice of Francis
de Monclaros, a Jesuit, who was the cause of the ill Success of this
Enterprise. So great an Error it is to subject a Soldier to a religious Man: So
indiscreet a Presumption for a religious Man to undertake what does not belong
to his profession: There were two ways to the Mines, the one through
Monomotapa, the other by Zofala, Barreto was for this, Monclaros for the other,
and carried it, notwithstanding, all the Votes to the contrary, and so the
first step they gave was to their ruin.

5. Now the Governor enters upon this Conquest, let us say something of its
Climate, quality, and extent. The Coast from Cape Delgado to Mozambique, is in
the form of a bow; it begins in 9 degrees of S. lat. and ends in 14 d. 3 m. in
which space are the Islands Pajaros, Mesa; one at the Mouth of the River
Paudagi, Mocoloe, Matemo, Queriba, Cobra, near the River Menluane, Quisve, and
Cabras, or Del Acotado. Then follow the Rivers, M^cutii, Mucululo, Situ, Habe,
Xanga, Samoco, Veloso, Pinda, Quizimaluco, Tintagone. Between these last are
the Bays of Xanga and Fuego, and the Sands of Pinda. From Mocambique to the
Port of the Bay of Cauea, in 21 degrees and half of S. lat. The Continent runs to
the Westward, gathering the Waters, where appears the Parcel de Z^fala, the
dangerous Scylla, and Caribdis of those Seas, into which falls these Rivers,
Moeugo, Bayones, M^ge, Mojuncoale, Sangage, Ambuzi, (here lie the three Islands
of Angoxa,) Monca, Macolonga, (with three other Islands) Tondamaje, Corombeca,
Quesungo, Loranga, Chimani, Mogundo, Mafusa, (between the last are the Ports of
Quilimane, and Luabo, with the Island Chimgoma,) Tendicalu, Quiloe, Sabam,
Bagoe, Miave, Zofala, (with the opposite Island called Inbansato) Quiloane,
Mambony, Molimon, Quilamancohi. Between Cape B^siqua in 32 degrees. of S. lat. and
Cape Correntes in 23, is the great Bay of Sau^a. Into this Bay falls the River
Inhambane, where is the Trade of Ivory. From these names I infer the Language
of those People, cannot be harsh, being mostly compounded of the soft Letters,
L. and M.

6. The Empire of Monomotapa from the Mouth of Cuama in the East, runs 250
Leagues, is divided by the great River Zambere, which falls into that of Chiri,
running through the Country of Borero, where are many other large Rivers, and
on their banks many King's, some absolute, some Subjects of Monomotapa; the
greatest of the first is Mongas, bordering on C^ama and Zambere, which falls
into the Sea, between Mozambique and Zofala, to the S. E. by four Mouths. The
first that of Quilimane, 90 Leagues from Mozambique. The second Cuama, 25 to
the Southward. The third Luabo, 5 Leagues lower, and the fourth Luaboel, 15
more to the South. Between them are fruitful and large Islands, whereof one is
60 Leagues in compass. The River is Navigable, the same number of Leagues up to
the Town of Sena, inhabited by Portugueses, and as many more to Tete, a Colony
of theirs also. The richest Mines are those of Musapa, called Anfur, the Ophir
where the Queen of Saba had her Riches, when she went to Jerusalem. In these
Mines has been found a lum^ of Gold worth 12000 Ducats, and another of the
value of 400000. It is not only found among Stones, but grows up within the
bark of several Trees to the top, where the branches spread. The Mines of
Mancbica and Butica are not much inferior to these. There are many others not
so considerable. There are three Fairs or Markets, whither our People Trade for
this Gold, from the Castle of Tete on the River Zambeze, 120 ^ngues from the
Sea; the first is Luane four Days journey up the inland. The second Buento
farther distant, and Masapa the third, yet farther of. This Gold was purchased
for Cloth, glass-beads, and other things of no value among us. At Masapa
resides a Portugues Officer appointed by the Commander of Mocambique, by
consent of the Emperor of Monomotapa, but upon condition, not to go into the
Country, without his leave upon pain of Death: He is Judge of the differences
that arise there. There are Churches of the Dominicans at Massapa, Bocuto, and
Luanze.

7. The Original, number and time of the Reign of the Kings is not known; it is
believed, there were several in the time of the Queen of Saba, and that they
were subject to her, for thence she had her Gold. In the Mountain Afur, near
Masapa, are seen the ruins of stately buildings, supposed to be Palaces and
Castles; in Process of time, the Empire was divided into three Kingdoms,
Quiteve, Sabanda, and Chiganga, this last the most powerful, as possessing the
Mines of Manchica, Butua, and others; its believed, the Blacks of Butua of the
Kingdom of Chicanga, are those that carry the Gold to Angola, because it is
thought there are but 100 Leagues distance between those two places; this
Country bears Rice, and what we call Indian-wheat, has abundance of all sorts
of Cattle, Fowl, and Gardening: Their chief care is Pastorage and Tillage; this
Empire is divided into 25 Kingdoms, which are Mongas, Baroe, Manica, Boesa,
Macingo, Remo, Chique, Chiria, Chidima, Boquizo, Inbanzo, Chiruvia, Condesaca,
Daburia, Macurumbe, Mungussi, Antiovaza, Cbove, Chungue, Dvia, Romba, Rassini,
Chirao, Mocaranga, and Remo de Beza; there are many Lordships, that have not
the Title of Kings.

8. The Emperor has a great Palace, though of Wood; the chief Apartments of it
are three, one for himself, another for his Wife, and a third for his menial
Servants; it has three Doors into a Court, one for the Queen, to go in and out
at, another for him and the Servants that attend his Person, and are Sons of
his Noblemen; the third for the Cooks, who are two great Men and his Relations;
and the under-Cooks who are also Men of Quality. None of these must be above 20
Years of Age, for till that Age, they do not believe they have to do with
Women, and if any do, they are severely punished; after that time, they are
preferred to great employments: Those within Doors, are governed by a Captain,
and those without by another, as formerly in Spain, the Alcalde de los Donceles.

9. The Principal Officers about the King are, Ningomoxa Governor of the
Kingdoms, Mocomoaxa, Captain General, Ambuya great Steward; to him it belongs
when the Mazarira or the King's Principal Wife dies, to name another in her
stead, but it must be one of the King's Sisters or nearest Relations;
Inbantovo, the head Musician, who has many under him, and is a great Lord;
Nurucao, Captain of the Vanguard; Bucurumo, which signifies the King's
Right Hand; Magande, the chief Conjurer; Netambe, the Apothecary that keeps the
Ointments and utencils for Sorcery; Nebono, chief Porter. All these Offices are
executed by Lords; there is no delicacy in Cookery used; they only Eat boiled
and roasted, they Eat the same as is usual among us, with the addition of mice,
which they esteem as good as Partridge or Rabbet.

10. The King has many Wives, only nine called great Queens, which are his
Sisters, or near Relations; the others the Daughters of Nobles. The chiefest is
called Mazarira, and Mother of the Portugueses, who often present her, because
she sollicites their business with the King; and he sends no Ambassador to them
without some Servant of hers; the second is Inahanda, that sollicites for the
Moors; the third Nabuiza that lives in the same Apartment with him; the fourth
Navemba; the fifth Nemangore; the sixth Nizingoapangi; the seventh Nemongoro;
the eight Nessani; the ninth Necarunda, each of them lives apart, with as great
state as the King, and have several Revenues and Kingdoms for their expense. As
soon as one dies, another succeeds in place and name; they have power to reward
and punish, as well as the King; sometimes he goes to them, sometimes they come
to him; there are many Women waiting on them, of whom he makes use as he
pleases.

11. The Principal People of Monomotapa, and whereof the Emperor is, are the
Mocarangi, not warlike, nor furnished with any other Arms, but Bows, Arrows,
and Javelines; they have no Religion nor Idols, but acknowledge one only God,
and believe there is a Devil, that he is wicked, and they call him Muzuco: They
believe their Kings go to Heaven, and call them Muzimos, and call upon them in
time of need, as we on the Saints. They speak of things past by tradition,
having no knowledge of Letters. They give Ear to the Doctrine of Christianity;
the lame and blind they call the King's Poor, because maintained by him with
great Charity; and if they travel, the Towns they go through are obliged to
maintain and furnish them guides from one place to another. A good example for
Christians.

12. Every Month has its Festival Days, and is divided into three Weeks, each
of 10 Days; the first Day is that of the New Mood, and the Festivals the fourth
and fifth of each Week: On these Days they put on their best Apparel, the King
gives public Audience to all, holding a Truncheon about three quarters of a
Yard long in each hand, as it were leaning upon it; they who speak to him lie
prostrate, this lasts from Morning till Evening: If he is indisposed, Ningomoxa
stands in his place, no body can speak to him, or go to Court, on the 8th Day
of the New Mood, because it is held most unlucky.

13. On the Day the New Mood appears, the King with two Javelins runs about in
his House, as if he were Fighting, the great Men are present at this pastime,
and it being ended, a pot full of Indian wheat, boiled whole, is brought, which
he scatters about the Ground, bidding them Eat, because it is the growth of the
Earth; they know how to flatter, for every one strives to gather most, knowing
that pleases him, and they Eat it as savourly, as if it were the greatest
dainty.

14. Their greatest Holy Day, is the first Day of the Moon of May, they call it
Chuavo: On this Day all the great Men, which are a vast number, resort to
Court, and there with Javelins in their Hands run about representing a Fight;
the sport lasts all Day, then the King withdraws, and is not seen in eight Days
after, during which time, the Drums never cease beating. On the last Day he
orders the Nobleman he has the least affection for to be killed; this is in the
nature of a Sacrifice he offers to his Muzimos, or Ancestors; this done, the
Drums cease, and every Man goes home. The Mumbos Eat Man's flesh, whereof there
is a Public Butchery. Let this suffice for the Customs of this Empire, for it
would be endless to relate all.

CHAP. XVI.
Continues the Government of Francis Barreto in Monomotapa.

1. SUch was the Country whether the Governor Francis Barreto was now going,
he set out from Mozambique with more Vessels than he brought and more Men,
Tools, Camels, Horses, and other necessaries for War, and for the work of the
Mines; having Sailed Ninety Leagues, he went up the River Cuama, called by our
first discoverer De las buenas sennales, he came to Sena, or Fort St. Marcalis,
as F. Monclaros desired, and repaired the Town Inaparapala, which is near to
another of the Moors, they being always professed Enemies to the Christians,
began to undermine our designs, as they had formerly done in India; they
attempted to poison our Army, and some Men and Horses began to Die, and the
cause being discovered by one of them, they were all put to the Sword, and the
Chief of them torn to pieces at the mouths of Guns, except one (called Mahomet
Iame) who affirming the Blessed Virgin had appeared to him, and commanded him
to become a Christian, by the name of Lawrence; he had the favor to be
strangled. The discoverer was pardoned.

2. Barreto sent an Ambassador to the Emperor, who for the more honor admitted
him to his Presence, not as other Ambassadors were treated at this Court, which
is to go without Arms, barefooted, on their Knees, and when they come near,
prostrating themselves on the ground. The effect of the Embassy was to desire
leave to punish the King of Mongas who was in Rebellion, and go on to the Mines
of Butua and Manchica: The first part was a piece of flattery, to obtain the
second, because the Lands of Mongas lie between Sena and the Mines, and it was
necessary to make way with the Sword. He consented to all, and offered One
hundred thousand Men; Bareto accepted not of them, because he would give him no
share in the Honor gained in that War, and thinking thereby to oblige him the
more.

3. He marched ten Days with Twenty three Horse, and Five hundred and sixty
Musketeers, (enduring much by Hunger and Thirst) for the most part along the
River Zambeze, over whose most rapid stream hang pieces of the high Mountain
Lupata, ninety Leagues distant from the Ethiopian Sea. At the end of this
tedious march, they began to discover part of the Enemy, and soon after saw
the-Mountains and Valleys covered with Armed Men, the Governor was not daunted,
seeing it was hard to discover the end of that multitude, he drew up, and gave
the Van to Vasco Fernando Homem, he had the Rear, and between the bodies was
the baggage, and some Field pieces; when they came to charge, he removed the
Canon to the Front and Flanks, the two unequal bodies advanced, the Enemy in
the sorm of a Half Moon; before they engaged, an old Woman advanced and
scattered some Powder toward our Men, having persuaded the Enemy (she was a
notorious Witch) that that Powder alone would gain the Victory.

4. Barreto understanding the superstition, having seen the like in India,
ordered a Gunner to level a ^iece at her; which was so well performed, the old
Woman was torn to pieces; the Cafres were astonished, believing her immortal.
Barreto rewarded the Gunner with a Gold Chain; the Enemy advance without order,
either through ignorance, or relying on their multitude, and clouds of Arrows
and Darts begin to fly, but our Musketeers killing them by Hundreds, they
turned their backs, many were killed in the pursuit, and then our Men ordered
to halt; the Governor marches to the City Mongas, and meets another multitude
like the former, which in like manner was put to flight, above Six thousand
Cafres were slain, and two of our Men, and the Governor was sorced to alight
and lead his Men; the City was entered without opposition, being abandoned, our
Men entrenched, and in the Morning discovered an Army as great as both the
former; the Cafres were again routed, and begged peace in the King's name. The
Governor received the Messenger with such Majesty, that he was astonished, and
could not speak; being come to himself, and having delivered his Message,
Barreto promised he would see the King, and mat ters should be adjusted.

5. The next Day our Men marched and encamped in a convenient place where
Ambassadors came from the King to treat of Peace. It happened one of our Camels
broke loose and came so near the Governor, that he stoped him till they came up
that were in pursuit of him; ^e Cafres having never seen such a Beast, admired
it stopped at the Governor, thinking it some submission it made to him, and
began to ask some questions. He making his advantage of their ignorance, told
them, he had many of those Beasts that only fed upon Man's flesh, and having
devoured all that were killed, that Beast came from the rest to desire he would
not make Peace, because they would come to want Food; they astonished hereat,
earnestly entreated him, he would desire the Camels to be satisfied with good
Beef, and they would instantly bring them a great number. He granted their
request, and marched on. He was in great distress for Provision when news came
his presence was required at Mocambique. He gave the Command of the Forces to
Vasco, and departed^ The cause was this,

6. Antony Pereyra Brandam, who at the Molucos had committed Crimes that
deserved the severest punishment, in Portugal was condemned to banishment into
Africa; he desired the Governor he might be permitted to go with him to
Monomotapa; he did it, and being come to Mocambique, gave him the Command of
that Fort. Brandam, though Eighty Years of Age, and under such obligations,
resolved to secure himself in the Fort, and defame Francis Barreto with false
informations sent to the King: the Original Papers fell into the Governor's
Hands, who being come to Mocambique, showed them to him, and he falling down
and kissing his Feet begged Pardon; Barreto lifted up and forgave him, then
giving the Command of the Fort to Laurence Godino, returned to prosecute his
design.

7. Our Governor being come to the Fort of Sena, F. Monclaros came out in a
great rage to tell him, he should desist from that Conquest, with which he had
imposed upon the King, that no more Men might be lost, for he should be
answerable to God for what had, and should die. It was most certain, Barreto
was not the promoter of that Conquest, and Monclaros was in fault for all the
miscarriage that had been committed; Barreto took this insolence so much to
Heart, that he died within two Days without any other Sickness, breathing out
his Soul in sighs. Doubtless the Jesuit had more to answer for his death, than
he, for the miscarriages the Jesuit was guilty of.

8. King Sebastian much resented this loss, and particularly expressed it by
the honorable Reception he made to his Body when brought to Lisbon. So this
great Man having escaped so many Bullets among the Indians, so many Darts and
Arrows among the Cafres, and the Malice of a Villain, fell by the Words of a
religious Man.

CHAP. XVII.
The Government of Vasco Fernandez Homem in Monomotapa, in the Reign of King
Sebastian.

1. THE Governor Francis Barreto being dead, an order of the King's found among
his Papers was opened, by which Vasco Fernandez Homem his Major, was appointed
to succeed him. The Persuasions of F. Monclaros, who now disliked the Conquest,
so far prevailed with him, that forgetting his Duty he returned to Mocambique.
There some understanding Persons, and chiefly Francis Pinto Pimentel his
Kinsman, represented this Affair in such manner to him, that he returned to
Monomotapa. Being now delivered of that religious Man, who went away to
Portugal, he set out by the way of Zofala, as Francis Barreto would have done,
that being the properest Road for the Design in hand: He marched directly
toward the Mines of Manchica of the Kingdom Chicanga, bordering by the Inland
with that of Quiteyve, the next in Power to Monomotapa. With him was the same
number of Men, and sorts of Instruments his Predecessor had. To oblige the King
of Quiteyve, he Complemented and sent him Presents, and though these are the most
efficacious means to make all things easy, that Prince grew so jealous of
these Solicitations, that he received all very coldly.

2. The Governor not making much account of his Answer, marched into his
Kingdom. Several Bodies of Cafres attempted to stop his Passage, but were
routed with great slaughter. The King seeing he did not prevail by force of
Arms, had recourse to Policy. He caused all the People and Provisions to be
withdrawn from the Towns and Country, so that our Men suffered extreme want
till they came to Zimbaoe his Court, whence he was fled, and had fortified
himself in inaccessible Mountains. Vasco burnt the City, and marched on to
Chicanga, the King whereof rather through fear than love, received him with
exterior signs of Affection, and gave him free passage to the Mines. Our Men
marched to them, many believing they should gather Gold by handfuls; but seeing
the Natives with much difficulty gathered but little in a long time, and not
being expert at that work, and that to make any thing of it, more Men and
Materials were requisite, they returned the way they came, and parted Friends
with that King.

3. Though they obtained not what was sought this way, yet the ease wherewith
they came to the place designed, evinced how great an Error it was to impose F.
Monclaros as Director to the late Governor, who, only to follow his own
extravagant Humor, lead him a way so dangerous and tedious. Vasco returned to
Quiteyve, and that King did now for fear what he refused before, permitting the
Portugueses to march to the Mines of Maninnas, only upon condition they should
pay him Twenty Crowns yearly. Vasco passed thence to the Kingdom of Chicova,
bordering upon Monomotapa to the Norward along the Inland. The cause of
undertaking this March was, the Account he had of rich Silver Mines. Having
encamped, he ask the Cafres for the Mines and they seeing it was in vain to
resist, and fearing the discovery of the Mines would be their Ruin, scattering
some Ore far enough from the Mines, showed it, telling them, there they were.

4. By this means the Cafres got time to escape; for our Men giving credit to
them let them go, perhaps not desiring they should see what Treasure they got.
The Governor caused all round about to be dug, and after much labor it was no
wonder he did not find what was not there. Provision growing scarce, and
finding no Fruit of his Labor, he marched away, leaving Captain Antony Cardoso
de Almeyda with Two hundred Men, and Necessaries to continue there some Days,
to examine into the Truth of that so much coveted Corner of the Earth.

5. Vasco being gone, Cardoso suffered himself to be again deceived by the
Cafres, who had before imposed upon him. They offered, since he could not find
a Vein there, they would show him a place where he might; and leading him the
way of Death rather than that of the Mines, killed him and all his Men, after
they had defended themselves with incredible Bravery. This may convince those
who affirm, numbers of Cafres would fly from a Gun, as not having before seen
them, since here Two hundred Men fighting with them for their lives, were all
slain by their Darts and Arrows.

6. This was the end of that Government, scarce begun sooner than ended, and
possessed by two Governors, who no sooner saw, but they lost it. The first killed
by rash words, the second expelled by a prudent, not barbarous, Stratagem.
However the Peace and Trade with the Emperor of Monomatapa continued. These
Actions of Francis Barreto and Vasco Fernandez Homem, were in the time of the
Government of D. Luis de Ataide, D. Antony de Noronna, and Antony Moniz
Barreto; but we could never exactly find when the first died, and the last
desisted.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Viceroy Ruy Lorenco de Tavora, and the Government of D. James de
Meneses, from the Year 1576 till 1578, in the Reign of King Sebastian.

1. IN the beginning of this Year sailed 1575.
from Lisbon Ruy Lorenco de Tavora, to succeed Antony Moniz Barreto, with the
Title of Viceroy of India, and four Ships: He died at Mocambique, and was the
first that came short, being appointed for that Government. The Ships arriving
at Goa, the Royal Patents of Succession were opened, and D. James de Meneses
there present was the Person named in the first. So he was rather Successor to
Antony Moniz, than Ruy Lorenco. However, since he was designed for it, we will
reckon Tavora the Twelfth of the Viceroy's, and Twentyseventh of Governors, and
First of the Name and Surname.

2. D. James de Meneses having held this Command near two Years, there is no
doubt but there happened more remarkable Passages than I here relate, but I
could find no more, having used all possible endeavors to get some farther
Memoirs of his Time. Certain it is there are some, but our Portugues Gentlemen,
though they make no use of, keep them as close as Misers do their Treasure. The
little I could gather is thus:

3. As soon as D. James took upon him the Government, he fitted out several
Squadrons for the usual purposes. At that time some Captains were upon the
Northern Coast upon their own account, as D. Hierome Mascarennas, D. James and
D. Antony de Silveyra Brothers, and Francis Pessoa. They anker'd in the River
of Dabul, that City being then at Peace with us, and were received by the
Tanadar Melique Tocan with feigned kindness. He proferred to furnish them with
what they wanted, and invited them home to dine with him, having Men ready to
murder them in the height of their Merriment. All things succeeded as he
desired, for they put themselves into his Power unarmed, except Mascarennas,
who forboding some Treachery stayed in the River. Those that accepted the
invitation were killed, except a few who fled to the Shore, and the Murderers
after them had like to have entered Mascarennas his Vessel, but that he and
those few that were with him laying hold of Arms repulsed the bloody Assassins.
Mascarennas carried the news of this Disaster to Goa.

5. Toward the end of this Year arrived 1577.
the Ships that sailed from Lisbon the beginning of it; they were six in
number, two set out first under Mathias de Albuquerque, appointed to Command at
Malaca, and four after.

5. As soon as the Governor was informed by D. Hierome de Mascarennas of the
Villainy committed by the Tanadar of Dabul, he dispatched D. Peter de Meneses
with a small Squadron to Revenge that wrong, ordering him to lay wait for the
Ships of Meca, and do all the Mischief he could on the Coast subject to
Hidalcan. Meneses met two great Ships of M^ca, and after a sharp dispute forced
them a Shore, where the Sea running high they beat to pieces. This was the
posture of Affairs when in August arrived D. Luis de Ataide Count de Atouguia,
to take upon him that Government the second time, which D. James de Meneses
then quitted, having been the Twenty-eighth Governor, the Second of the Name,
and Third of the Surname.

CHAP. XIX.
The Count D. Luis de Ataide is the Second time Viceroy of India; he set out in
the Year 1577, and Governs till 1581, and is the last sent out by King
Sebastian.

1. WHEN King Sebastian had resolved (though he designed better) to bury the
Glory of his Kingdom in the Sands of Africa, he appointed D. Luis de Ataide
Count de Atouguia, General of his Forces: But soon after, not able to conform
his Youthful Heat to the prudent Circumspection of the Count, that he might
have a plausible Color for removing him, he again constituted him Viceroy of
India, pretending there was need of such a Man there; as if he had not much
more need of his Conduct himself.

2. The Count well understood the drift of this Change, but not willing to
disgust the King, took no notice of it. He desired to have along with him Nunno
Vello Pereyra, a Man more Expert than Fortunate in Military and Sea Affairs, as
will appear hereafter, and John Alvarez Suarez, a Man versed in the Revenue,
and who had given good Proof of his Courage, as was related in the Siege of
Chaul. D. Luis had a prosperous Voyage, and was received at Goa with great Joy.

3. His arrival at Goa was about the end of August: The first thing he did
after receiving the Sword, was the spreading the News that King Sabastian would
infallibly that Year go over into Africa, where he was already killed when this
was given out. The Viceroy foreseeing that disaster, and the ill Consequences
might arise from it, fitted out such a mighty Fleet, as struck a Terror into
all the neighboring Princes, who measure their own safety by our Power. The
design of this Fleet he never revealed to any Man.

4. Amidst these greater Cares he forgot not the less, but sent Supplies to D.
Peter de Meneses to enable him to act the more vigorously against Melique the
Tanadar of Dabul. The Viceroy in Person carried on the War against Hidalcan
along the River of Goa, whether his Dominions extended; and he no longer able
to endure it, proposed a Peace, promising the Traitor Melique should be for
ever banished Dabul, and all his Dominions. The Peace was concluded, and our
Forces withdrew. At that time arrived at Goa three Ships from Portugal, and
were the last sent sent by King Sebastian. When these came to India, two
Caravels set out from Lisbon with the News of the King's Death, one bound for
Goa, the other for Malaca.

5. Henry the Cardinal succeeded in the Throne, and from amidst those Ruins
dispatched five Ships for India, fearing lest the loss of King Sebastian being
known, new Troubles might arise, if those Dominions were not timely supplied.

5. The Viceroy understanding that Melique Tocan, contrary to the Articles of
the Peace concluded the Year before, continued at Dabul publicly exercising
his Office, and was ready to Launch a great Ship to Trade to Meca, he resolved
to show how much he resented that wrong, and to that purpose sent thither D.
Paul de Lima Pereyra with ten Sail.

7. D. Paul coming to the Mouth of the River found all the Shore fortified, and
a great number of Cannon planted in all convenient Places: He forces his way in
through all the Batteries, and sees Six thousand Horse, and great number of
Foot covering the Shore, and pouring showers of Bullets and Arrows upon him;
nevertheless he attempts to burn two Ships belonging to Hidalcan, but finding
it impossible to come at them for the number of the Enemy's Cannon, he runs up
the River, and spent some days in burning all the Towns along the Coast.

8. The Enemy calls in to their Aid Cartale and Mandaviray, two Malabar Pirates
who were in the Sea of Chaul with five Galliots: To these Melique joins other
five Sail he had ready with Five hundred Turks, Persians, and other resolute
Men. The Shore was covered with People that came to see this Action. D. Paul
prepared to receive them, and after the Discharge of the Cannon they came up
board and board, and hand to hand.

9. D. Paul boarded the first Galliot, they were ten to ten, though the Enemy
had the advantage of the bigness of the Vessels and number of Men; but our
Captains following the Example of their Admiral, behaved themselves so bravely,
that only one of the Enemy's Galliots escaped, the rest were all taken. We lost
but two or three Men in this Action, which was as fortunate as any we performed
in Asia.

10. Having taken this Revenge of Melique for his Crime, and of Hidalcan for
winking at it, D. Paul sailed out of the River through the same Dangers he came
in, losing one Man. Being come to Goa with Nineteen Sail, whereas he went
thence with only Ten; the Viceroy came out to receive him, and in the hearing
of all that were present, said, What is it you mean, D. Paul, will you with
such Acts of Bravery provoke my Envy to poison you? Thus Heroes praise great
Men, and at the same time upbraid those who enviously Rail at noble Actions.

11. The Emperor of Ceylon had some time since by his Ambassadors desired King
John III. to send him some Religious Men of the Order of St. Francis, to
instruct him in the Christian Religion: They being come to him he recanted. F.
John de Villa de Conde was this Year at his Court, and had several times
confuted the Bramenes disputing of Religion. Yet they refusing to yield
themselves overcome, he offered with a lively Faith, that he and one of them
should be cast into a River full of great Crocodiles, or into a great Fire, and
that his Religion, who came out unhurt, should be allowed to be the true. They
refused, and the Franciscan immediately reaped the Fruit of this Victory,
baptising D. John Parea Pandar King of Cota, in the same Island.

12. The Kingdom of Angola is near Monomotapa, whereof we lately spoke, and
therefore will relate what happened there this Year, because it is a remarkable
Passage. Paul Diaz undertook to War with that King, who had treacherously
killed a number of our Men: This Captain with only two Galleys did Wonders on
the Banks of the River Coanza, till he fortified himself in an Island formed by
this and the River Lucula. Then joining the King of Congo and other Princes
with only 150 Portugueses he several times defeated the Enemy. But the most
remarkable is the Battle wherein that King had a Million of Men, which were put
to flight in such Confusion they killed one another.

13. At the beginning of this Year, when the Ships sailed for India, our
Kingdom, by the Death of the old Cardinal, King Henry, was under the Direction
of five Governors, who dispatched them. They were four, whereof one was forced
back to Lisbon, the last sent under a Portugues Government, and the last our
Viceroy saw: For he having done no more than what is related, or if he did,
having left no memory of it, died the beginning of the Year, having in some
manner foretold it For some time before leave being asked of him to bury his
Cousin Antony Rotello by his Brother D. John de Ataide, he refused it, saying,
He had long since designed that place for himself.

14. At the end of his first Government something was said of his Qualities and
Merit, and I have referred it to this place to speak of his undaunted Courage,
as a virtue most peculiar to him. Some Proof of it has been given in the former
Part of his Life, I will now give another Instance. At the attack (as I think)
of Onor he sailed in a Brigantine, sitting on a Chair, and a famous Musician by
him playing upon a Harp. The Enemy's Cannon from the Fort reached the Vessels,
and grated the Musicians Ear; D. Luis, who was pleased to hear the Music,
seeing him give over, as if he had not seen the Cause, asked him, why he left
off; the Musician told him; and he stretching out his hand, said, I pray let
nothing disturb thee, go on with that Tune, for it is a very good one.

15. One of the Gentlemen that were standing behind him, seeing this was too
great a Contempt of Danger, said, Tell that Man, if he happens to be killed,
all will be lost: And another answered, Do not tell him so; for if he be
killed, here are Men enough fit to succeed him.

16. D. Luis this second time governed the Term of two Years and seven Months,
and may be reckoned in the number of Viceroys the Thirteenth, in that of
Governors the Twenty-ninth; the First of the Name and Surname.

CHAP. XX.
The Government of Ferdinand Tellez de Meneses, who was named by the Governors
of Portugal, upon the Decease of the Cardinal King Henry, in the Year 1581.

1. THE Ships dispatched by the Governors of Portugal the last Year, carried
new Patents of Succession. In the first was named Ferdinand Tellez de Meneses.
The Bishop of Malaca, D. John Ribeyro Gayo, was President at this Ceremony,
which was celebrated with such Demonstrations of Joy, as if there had been no
Memory of their fresh Subjects of Tears.

2. Whilst the Affairs of Portugal were in this miserable Condition, those in
the Kingdom of Visapor were no better, the Succession being uncertain upon the
decease of Hidalcan, who died without Heirs in the 23d Year of his Reign, and
50th of his Age. He studied less to have Wives to get Children, than young Men
instead of Wives. A Youth of 18 Years of Age, who had more Honor than to
consent to such Baseness, killed him as he was endeavoring to allure him to
his brutal Appetite. Abraham, Son of Xatamas, one of two Brothers not long
before slain by him, succeeded in the Throne. Qui^balechan, a powerful Man,
conspiring with others, enters Visapor with Forces, and seizes that Prince. Not
long after the Ethiopians (who are the Guard of those Princes) did the same
under three Heads, chose by themselves to this purpose, who were Acalachan,
Armichan, and Delarnachan. This last secures the other two, and takes all the
Power into his own hands. Our Governor kept a watchful Eye over all these
Proceedings, knowing the Happiness of our Affairs, depended much upon the Event
of those.

3. At this time were brought to India new Instructions from the Governors of
Portugal, and Philip the Second then sworn King, and First of the Name there.
The Governor was ordered to tender the Oath there. Ferdinand Tellez performed
the Ceremony with great Solemnity in the Church of Goa on the third of
September.

4. The Captains then commanding our Forts there were at Goa, D. Tristan de
Meneses; at Zofala and Mocambique, D. Peter de Castro; at Ormuz, D. Gonzalo de
Meneses; at Damam, Martin Alfonso de Melo; at Bacaim, D. Emanuel de Almada; at
Chaul, D. Ferdinand de Castro; at Cananor, George Toscano; at Cochim, D. George
de Meneses Baroche; at Columbo, Emanuel de Sousa Coutinno; at Tidore, James de
Azambuja; and at Malaca D. John de Gama.

5. The Governor understanding that four Galliots of Malabar Pirates were
harbored in some of the Rivers about Goa, immediately sent Mathias de
Albuquerque with ten small Merchant Ships that were the readiest at hand, after
them. He found them in the River Carapatan; three of our Vessels that were
foremost falling violently upon them, forced the Malabars to leap into the
Water, and by that time Albuquerque came up, each of them had taken one.

6. There were at Mazulopatan two Ships of the bigness of ours that Trade to
India; one belonging to the King of Achem, loaded with Ammunition, designed, as
was believed, against Malaca; the other to the King of Pegu richly laden. The
Governor sent Goncalo Vaz de Camoens with four Ships to seize upon them: The
first of the two had notice of it, and went off, and Goncalo Vaz being informed
of the great Force of the other, by the consent of his Men left that Design,
and went over to the Coast of Pegu, where the Malabar Pirates took one of his
Ships Commanded by Francis Serram, and a Galliot of Ferdinand de Lima. They
came to the Mouth of the River Negraes, just at such time as the Ship they
feared to Encounter at Mazulapatan was entering. They could not in Honor avoid
engaging her, though they were but two Galliots: After a desperate Fight, which
lasted almost two days, the Ship was sunk, our Men having first rifled her with
such covetousness, that our Vessels had sunk, had not the Captain thrown many
of the Goods overboard.

7. The Galliots setting out again, were for some time carried about by the
Weather, it being the beginning of Winter, till about the place where they sunk
the Ship, they discovered the Prince of Fegu with a Fleet of 1300 Sail,
designed for the Conquest of the Kingdom of Arracam. The Prince desired to meet
with these Galliots, having advice they were thereabouts, and that his Father
would be as much pleased with taking of them, as the Conquest of that Kingdom.
Sixteen of the best Sailers advancing, began to play their Cannon, and were as
well answered, till they came to Board. After a sharp Engagement, three of the
Enemy's Ships were disabled, some entered, many Prisoners and 18 Pieces of
Cannon taken; then our Men seeing all that Multitude was coming upon them,
making all the Sail they could and plying their Oars, got into the Port of
Arracam. The King rejoicing for the share he had in this Success, and well
pleased that Goncalo Vaz made him a present of some of his Subjects taken in
the great Ships, gave liberty to some Portugueses he had long kept in Prison.

8. About this time three Turkish Galleys set out of the Port at Moca, sent by
the Bassa Mirazenam to plunder Moscate, having Intelligence from Moors living
there; that the Town was Rich, and unprovided of Defense. Alibec, a Turk, used
to Robbing undertook this Design. Mirazenam was born at Otranto of Christian
Parents, and was Governor of all that Part of Arabia Felix and Petrea, which
the Natives call Ayaman, he resided in the City Cana, the Center of Arabia
Felix. 60 Leagues North of Moca, and as many from Xael. Cana is built upon a
Hill, encompassed with a good Wall, and thought to be the Foundation of Cham
the Son of Noah, and to have been the Court of the famous Queen of Saba. The
Province is most fruitful, called by the Ancients, Siria Mumifera, because it
produces Frankincense, Myrrh, and Storax.

9. Alibec being before Mascate, landed his Men, ordering those that remained
in the Galleys to enter the Port, and as soon as they were in to play their
Cannon furiously, that so the Inhabitants being employed on that side, he might
come in upon their Backs. It succeeded as he desired; for most Men saved
themselves by flight, but few their Goods, and he in an instant entered and
plundered the Town. James Machado going out to bury some Treasure, was killed,
and himself and Money deprived of Burial.

10. Let us in some manner describe the situation of this Town: Extend the
right Hand with the Palm of it down, stretch out the Thumb from the
forefinger, and separate that from the middle Finger, keep that close to the
other two. The space between the middle and fore-fingers, is a Bay called
Seabo, running up as the hand represents. The distance between the Thumb and
Forefinger is another Bay, not so deep, along the Shore whereof the Town is
bailt, shut in by two Mountains; one rises at the point of Seabo next that part
where the three Fingers are together, it has only one Path that leads to
Mascate so narrow, that two Men cannot pass it abreast. This way Alibec come
into the Town, no Body imagining he would attempt it, for four Men with one
Cannon might maintain it against the Universe.

11. Let us not deny any Man the Honor that is due to him: They that fled from
Mascate to Mataro, a Town a League distant, not thinking themselves safe there
went to Bruxel, a Fort four Leagues up the Inland, belonging to Catani, Head of
a Hord of Arabs. This place at that time was commanded by an Officer of his, a
Man so Just and Honorable, that hearing the Misfortune of those People who
came to him for Refuge, (for in great Dangers the lesser is a Refuge) he went
out to receive, comfort, and entertain them. This was much, but what follows is
more; His Men seeing the Portugueses come loaded with Riches, advised him to
make use of that Opportunity, and not show too much Weakness or Pity. And he
fearing, lest Covetousness should make them Disobedient, labored with soft
Expressions and sweet Words, to dissuade them from their wicked Design.

12. They all submitted themselves to their Officer's Reasons, and, with kind
Usage, much comforted the Disconsolate Portugueses, who continued there till
Alibec being gone, they returned to Mascate, always relating and admiring how
honorably that Moor treated them, without suffering the least wrong to be
offered to their Persons or Goods.

13. The News of the Ruin of Mascate being brought to Ormuz, The Commander, D.
Goncalo de Meneses caused the Galleys to be closely watched, and Ships to be
fitted out immediately to follow them. He made Luis de Almeyda Commander in
chief, giving him a Galleon, a Galley, and six other vessels, with Four hundred
good Men. But he not observing the Orders of Meneses that were to follow the
Galleys, fell into the Coast of the Naytaques, where they intended to Surprise
the beautiful and rich City Pesani. But Francis Machado having given the Alarm,
by falling upon some People that were passing in two Boats, the Inhabitants all
fled.

14. They plundered the City without Honor or Danger, and after burnt it and
near Fifty Sail that were in the Bay. The very same Fate attended the City
Guadel, not inferior to Pesani, and that of Teis of the Abindos, a barbarous
and fierce Nation, the last of Gedrosia, on the Banks of the River Calamen, the
People of it join with the Naytaques in their Piracies.

15. All these Things were begun, though not absolutely transacted, when D.
Francis de Mascarennas arrived in India with the Title of Viceroy, being the
first sent by our first King Philip, who was second of Spain. Ferdinand Tellez
left the Government in a peaceable Condition, and the Sea of Goa well furnished
with good Ships. He was the last Governor appointed by the Portugues Authority,
in Number the Thirtieth, held it Six Months, the First of the Name, and Fourth
of the Surname.

The End of the Third Part.
THE PORTUGUES ASIA. TOM. II. PART IV.
CHAP. I.
Of the Gods, Surpestitions and Opinions of the Asiaticks, particularly the
Indians, and among them the Malabars.

1. I Have purposely omitted giving so particular an Account and Description of
the People and Countries mentioned in this History, as will be expected from
me, to avoid interrupting the series of Affairs, and connection of Matter,
reserving it still for a more proper place. The grand Revolution of the Kingdom
of Portugal now brought under a foreign Prince, puts a Period to the
Proceedings of our own, that we may begin again with what was transacted under
our new Sovereigns. Here then it will not be amiss to give the Curious the
Satisfaction of some further Information touching the Indians, Ethiopians,
Chinese and Iapans, but still with my usual brevity, dividing among them this
Fourth Part of this Second Volume. As Asia is divided into several Empires, so
it is inhabited by many very different sorts of People, and each People
distinguished by very opposite Customs. Yet those that are of one Belief, agree
in the essential Part, though they differ in Form. It is so in India, as well
as any other considerable Portion of the World, and therefore the Malabars, one
of the Nations thereof, may inform us of the Religion and Government of all the
rest.

2. As to the Frame of the World, they believe it had a beginning, and will
have an end; but then begin again, and in that manner will be everlasting; that
all things after having increased, diminish; that in the beginning as One
thousand and Animals were produced One thousand died, but now for One thousand
produced One thousand and one die; that the reason why more die is, because the
heat of the Sun increases; that in the end, a violent Wind shall dissolve all
things; that nothing shall then remain but the Deity Ixoreta, as in the first
Chaos; that he shall be reduced to the bigness of an Egg, and this to the
quantity of a Dew drop, scarce discernable; that after it has sounded like a
Cricket, it shall increase by the same measure it diminished, and shall produce
within it self the five Elements, (for they reckon the Heaven the fifth) that
their increasing shall burst the Egg in the middle; that there shall appear in
it seven shells put together like an Onion; that the Egg being divided into two
unequal parts, the biggest will be the Heavens, and the lesser the Earth; that
the Gods were and shall be so formed again.

The Egg being open, the Deity will be placed in the upper part, on the Earth
will appear a Mountain of Silver, on the top whereof will be seen the
instruments of Generation (which they call the true Ixoreta or Deity, the true
God and Causa Causarum) because all things in the World proceed from the Union
of the instruments of Generation; therefore they particularly adore the
noblest, that it is the Male, and place its Image in their Pagods, and on their
ways. This they reign to have three Rines, from which proceed the three Gods,
Brama, Vist^, and Givem, or Ixora.

4. Of the superior and inferior productions, this is their Opinion. Ixora with
this instrument of Generation, which was of a prodigious bigness, plowed up the
Earth for the space of Seven hundred thousand loxenas, each of these when
greatest, is four Leagues, and when least a League and a half; from the
Furrows sprung seven Seas and seven Lands, the ridges were the Mountains, the
furrows, the Vales and Waters. Then from Ixoras back came the Woman called
Cbati, (this has some resemblance with Eve's being made of Adams Rib,) and was
separated from it by virtue of some words, and they resolved to have
copulation. The length of the Generating Instrument (called Linga) wherewith
Ixora had plowed the Ground hindered; he cut it into eighteen pieces, whereof
were made the Weapons they use, as the Spear, Sword, Bow, and Buckler. Then
Ixora with his Finger opened the way of Generation in Chati, which shed much
Blood; he received it in his Hands, and throwing it up into the Air, suddenly
of it were produced, the Sun, Moon, Stars, Roses, Flowers, Sweet-herbs, and
Snakes, which they use in their Ceremonies, both being then fit for Copulation,
by them the World was Peopled, the Beasts and Devils produced, and Heaven
filled with Spirits, which they say are Thirty three Millions.

5. The Heaven is fixed upon the Earth, not the Earth, the Center of it. The Sun
and Moon move like the Fish in the Water, by Day from East to West, by Night
they run about the Northward, not under the Earth, but along the edge of the
Horrizon; they doubt whether the Earth be supported upon a Bulls-horns, or upon
the Snake called Ananta; their Paradize is in some Mountain. The Snake Bassagui
fighting with the Wind, would not let it pass, but Ixora commanding her to give
it way, the Wind flying the more impetuous for having been detained, tore up a
Mountain, which falling into the Sea, formed the Island Ceylon. Other Islands
are encompassed with Seas they call of Sugar, Milk, Butter, and Sweet-Water.
Happy the Sailers that could find such pleasant Seas.

6. The Bases or Grounds of the Elements are of several matters, that of the
Earth of Copper; that of the Water of Silver; that of the Fire of Gold; that of
the Air of a Precious Stone; that of Heaven of another Stone of more value:
They are Gods and move, on the first waits the Bird Anam; on the second
Guereram, on the third a Cart; on the fourth an Ox; on the fifth a Horse.

7. There are seven large Subterranean dwellings, called Padalas, where live
People who have no other light but that of certain bright Stones, which Snakes
have in their Foreheads. One Day of ours is a Year in Heaven, and one of our
Years, Three hundred and sixty five there. The Days of the Week (as among us)
take their names from the Planets, and one of them is a Festival. They believe
the transmigration of Souls.

8. The God Givem, or Ixora, is of the color of Milk; besides the usual two,
he has one Eye in the Forehead, which being of Fire, consumes all things; his
Body of such a length, that Brama, though he endeavored it, could never find
the beginning or end of it. The other Brother Vistnu, who is God of the
Transmutations, converted himself into a Hog, and turned up the Earth with his
snout, but could never find his Feet. He is so thick that the Snake that girts
the World, cannot encompass one of his Arms, ^e has Sixteen Hands, all employed
with Deer, Chairs, a Guitar, a Bell, a Basin, a Trident, a Rope, a Hook, an Ax,
Fire, a Drum, Beads, a Staff, a Wheel, a Snake; on his Forehead, a horned Moon;
his Apparel skins of Beasts, laid down with Snakes; he has two Wifes, the
Goddess of the Water, and Chati, who has already dyed One and twenty times; and
because every time she dies, he puts one of her Bones upon his Neck, he now
wears One and twenty Bones there. Having shared his Body with his Wife, and she
hers with him, he is half Man half Woman; his care is to finish all things,
Bram^ to Create, and Vistnu's to govern them.

9. The God Ixora lives in Calaya, a most delicious Mountain for Woods,
Gardens, Fountains, Birds and Nymphs, among them there is nothing but Harmony.
The desert parts of it are inhabited by Ri^is, Hermits, much esteemed for
sanctity, in a private and most precious Tabernacle, is the Silver Rose with
two Musical white Nymphs, and among them the Linga, or Eternal God, placed on a
Lion of inestimable value, and invisible.

10. Brama and Vistnu envying Ixoras's greatness, set themselves against him;
he said if they could find his beginning or end, they should be his Superiors.
Vistnu looked for his Feet and Brama and for his Head; the first was deterred
by a Snake, the second dissuaded by Roses; he bribed them to testify he had
seen his Head, which they did. Vistnu sensible of the fraud, turned them into
Beasts, and cut off one of his Heads, of his Blood sprang a Man with Five
hundred Heads, and One thousand Hands. Ixora did penance for this crime, and
traveling, came to a place where they threw several Beasts at him, he catched,
^ead them, and clothed himself with their Skins; being overpowered, Vistnu
came to his Aid in the shape of a beautiful Maid, and his Enemies were
astonished at her form: Ixora having to do with her, a Son was born, Ixora and
Vistnu differed about whom it should belong too, and a Heavenly Spirit
reconciled them, taking it to himself. He bred him an expert Archer, and kept
him as his guard against Sagatracavaxem, the Giant of Five hundred Heads, and
One thousand Hands, sprung from Bramas Head, cut off by Ixora. This pilgrimage
of Ixora gave the Original to the Pilgrims, called Iogues, who wander about
living upon Charity, wearing Periwigs, and strewed with Ashes.

11. Ixora has four Children, the first has the Face of an Elephant; the second
of a Monkey; the third is Superbenia, with six Faces and twelve Arms; the
fourth a young Woman called Patracali. The Father and his Wife Chati converted
into Elephants, begot a Son with an Elephant's Head and four Arms, he is
wonderful big, and rides on a Mouse. The first fruits of all that is sowed are
offered to him.

12. The Bramones who are the Masters of their Ceremonies, abstain from Fish,
Flesh, Eggs, and Wine, of other things they Eat and Drink without measure, they
celebrate the Aniversaries of their Dead with great Banquets; they are so much
afraid of the Moon on the fourth Day after the full, that they shun seeing even
the reflection of her in the Water.

13. Chati washing her self in the time of her courses, produced a Man. Her
Husband cut of his Head, which rolling to the foot of his Mountain Calaya,
brought forth the Tree on which grow the Coco's, which therefore have the
resemblance of Eyes, Nose and Mouth. But the Wife complaining Ixora cut of an
Elephants Head and put it to the Body, which remained Man and Elephant. Then
both converting themselves into Monkeys, begot one, but she ashamed to bring it
forth, desired the Wind to translate it to another Womb, and it was removed to
that of the Wife of the Heavenly Spirits. She was delivered of, and Ixora gave
him great power, calling him Anuman. This is the Reason the Indians adore
Monkeys.

14. Patracali Ixoras's Daughter is black, she has eight Faces, and sixteen
Arms, great round Eyes, Hogs Teeth, two Elephants for pendants, she is clothed
with Snakes, her Hair like the Peacocks Tails, has several things in her hands,
particularly Arms, the Devil Medala waits on her; she seeing her Father could
not overcome the Giant Daridabaxada, Conquered him by Policy. Ixora to deliver
her from Enemies, sent her to live invisible among Men. At Sea she overcame
some Fishermen, and landed at Coulam, and married the Prince of Coulett, who
being falsely accused of stealing the Queen of Pande's Bracelets, was impaled.
Patracali brought him to Life, caused Sacrifice to he offered to him, and thus
freed from the bands of wedlock, remained a Virgin.

15. Ixora in a passion threw his Wig on the ground, which became an Armed
fierce Man, who cut off the Head of Lecxaprazava King of the Peringales, and
the Hand of the God of Fire, and the Sun's Teeth. Ixora put on a Goats-head
upon Lecxaprazava's Shouldiers instead of his own.

CHAP. II.
The Metamorphoses or, Transformations.

1. THE God Vistnu is black, he has four Hands, and always lies sleeping on his
back in the Sea of Milk; yet so he governs the whole World; his Bed is the
Snake Ananta, which has five Heads; on four he lays his Hands, on the other his
Head; the Snake asked him, in case she had more Heads, what he would lay on
them. Then One thousand Heads sprung out from her, and as many Hands from him
to lay on them. He has two Wives, Laexemi and Pumedevi, the first scraches his
Head, the other his Feet.

2. Vistnu was born or transformed nine times, into a Fish, a Tortoise, a Hog,
halfa Man, half a Lion, a Bramen, Siriparexi Rama, Siri Rama, Belapader, and
Siri Christna, and is to be born the Tenth time. In the first shape he overcame
Breniacxem in the bottom of the Sea, taking from him the Law he had stole from
the heavenly Spirits. In the second he reconciled the Difference between the
celestial and infernal Spirits, about parting the Ambrosia from Poison, and
giving this to the latter, and that to the former. With Ambrosia he cured King
Devaindra, who being Cursed by Rixi for lying with his Wife, was covered all
over with Privy-Members, which were converted into Eyes.

3. The Sea is salt, because the great Raxi Ag^ssia having drunk it all up, at
the request of Vistnu pissed it out. That there might be no Thieves in the
World, he appointed Guards; these were Indra, King of the higher Spirits; Vani,
God of Fire; Pidarpati, King of the Devils; Varuna, God of the Water; Maril,
God of the Wind; Cabera, God of Riches, and other Persons of Note. The
Malabars, in their Poems, make a Jest of this, because they are all Theives.

4. Mave^, Lord of the World, kept Mankind in such plenty, that none remembered
God. Vistnu in one of his Changes remedied this, and then from the Water which
washed one of his Feet came the River Ganga, which therefore is the Purgatory
of such as when they die are washed therein. Venus endeavoring to hinder the
Reformation of Mankind, lost an Eye.

5. The Bramenes are the Masters of the Indian Religion, and proceed from
Fishermen; because the Malabar Churches were delivered to Fishermen, upon
condition they should always wear some mark of their Trade. This is the cause
they wear about their Necks some threads of their Nets. This is the Original of
those Threads they wear, never before mentioned by another Writer.

6. Vistnu turned himself into Siri Rama, and his Snake Ananta, Chocra and
Buzio into Men. Siri Rama killed Tarb^ga Wife to R^jada, that was a Man-eater,
and had the Face of a Lioness, and wore two Elephants as Pendants, her
Clothing Snakes, her Weapon a Trident; she lived in a Mountain of Bones of the
People she had eaten. Siri married the Daughter of King Genega, and went to do
Penance for killing Tar^ega. His Wife went with him, and he obtained of Rixi
Anisoya, that he should be always Victorious, and his Wife appear Beautiful to
him. They went to Ceylon, where Churp^naga Sister to Ravena King of that Island
being a Widow, asked Siri Rama to get her a Husband, he bid her choose among the
Heavenly Gods, and she liked none of them, but Lacxena Brother to Siri Rama,
who despised and cut off one of her Breasts, of the Blood whereof sprung the
Leeches.

7. Her Brother Ravena for Revenge ^ole Siri Rama's Wife Sida. The manner of
looking for, finding, and recovering her is so tedious, preposterous, and
foolish, as well as the foregoing part, it is not worth the strickest Curiosity
to read it. What follows is little better, but something of this monstrous
Medley is fit to be related, to show the prodigious stupidity of these Opinions.

8. Siri Rama having found his Wife, and seeing she was very Beautiful said she
had wronged him, and lain with his Enemy. He threatened to kill her, and she
offered to Purge her self by Fire; and kindled one so fierce, the heavenly
Spirits could not endure it, she stripped her self naked, and walked seven
times round it, then turning to the East, said, When Ravena stole and would
have taken me by the hand, I doubt whether his Shadow touched me. Afterward in
the Island Ceylon seti^ ^e under the Tree Axogani, he fell at my feet to
overcome me, and I doubt whether the Crown he had on his head touched them.
There was nothing more that I know of between me and him. Then she threw her
self into the Fire, and could not be seen for some time; then the God of Fire
came out, and bidding Siri Rama hold out his Hands, dropped Sida upon them,
assuring him her Honor was unstained.

9. This done, Siri Rama placed Bixivem on the Throne of Ceylon, and went
himself to possess that of Aioddia, after he had spent Fourteen Years in these
Affairs. The Princes, People, Celestial Spirits, and Dancing Women received
him. The Queens prevailed with Sida to show them the Figure of Ravena, she drew
him with Chalk on a Board, which shook as Siri Rama sat on it; not knowing his
Enemy's Picture was thereon. The Queens told him, Sida had painted him, and he
again jealous, though she was with Child, ordered Lecxena to carry her to a
Mountain, and there kill her. He carried, but left her there alive. She was
delivered of two Sons very like Siri Rama, who seeing them, and knowing she was
not dead was satisfied. He went to fetch her, but could not; for Pumi Goddess
of the Earth opened it and swallowed her up. His Sons succeeded him in the
Crown of Ajodda.

CHAP. III.
Other Metamorphoses, and the Consequences of them, of the God Brama, and the
Foundation of Pagods; an Account of the famousest of them.

1. VIstnu turned himself into his younger Brother Siri Christna, who was born
very beautiful. At the hour of his Birth the Palace was filled with Brightness,
though it was Midnight; the Doors flew open, and the Fetters fell off that
held Bassudever. He arose and took the Child to carry it to Amparhi, and by the
way the Waters of two Rivers divided themselves, that he might pass dry.
Camusem consulting Diviners about the Birth of this Child, which was the first
Quarter of the Moon, on a Thursday in August, the Sun being in Leo, and the
Moon in Taurus, in the time of Minabixam, they answered, Siri Christna would
govern the whole World, and would kill him in the Sixteenth Year of his Age.
They advised him to send a Woman that had venomous Milk, that sucking her might
be his Death; but the Child, instead of her Milk, sucked out her Soul, and she
died to the astonishment of his Mother Axoda, who was present. Thus he escaped
other Dangers from his Enemies, and at Seven Years of Age, was skilled in all
Sciences, and among other Extravagancies defloured the Maids he played with.

2. His Mother whipped, and causing him to open his Mouth to discover whether
he smelt of some Butter 'twas said he had eaten, she saw within Heaven and
Earth and her self. She frighted, bid him shut his Mouth, but he would not till
she promised him Figs or Sugar, and other things, and that she would carry him
to the River to make Pipes to play upon. He, to be revenged on the Women,
watched a Bath where they came, and enjoyed them all.

3. He went afterward to fight the Snake Caliga that was Nine Leagues long,
had Eyes like two Suns, and lived in a Lake made of the Venom she cast out of
her mouth. The Snake finding she could not overcome him, perceived he was the
God Vistnu, and begged his pardon. Camused caused a Woman turned into a Snake
to swallow him, and he swelled till he burst her. In fine, Camused was killed,
and Siri Christna's Parents placed on the Throne of the Kingdom of Madure. This
done, Vistnu turned into Siri Christna, married 16108 Women, and lying with
them all in one day got as many Sons. This is counted the greatest Action of
this God.

4. Betele is a Plant, the Leaves whereof powdered with Lime and Areca the
Indians chew and suck to preserve the Teeth, strengthen the Stomach, and
provoke Lust. It is so like our Ivy, that an Ambassador of Hidalcan in Lisbon
made use of it instead of Betele, mixing it instead of Areca with Cipress
Apples, and said the Virtue was the same. Argionem being upon a Tree Degastri,
one of the Wives of the Celestial Spirits came and carried him up in her
Chariot, where he found this Plant, and stole a Stock of it which he planted on
Earth. This is the reason the Indians believe this Plant came from Heaven, and
that it cannot thrive unless he that Plants steal it.

5. The time of Siri Christna's Death drawing on, he gave signs to know it by,
which was, that when he expired the World should be inverted from what it ought
to be, and is the time of Culi, which now is. Their Writings say, all will come
to Confusion. But Vistnu coming to the World again, shall kill all for their
Wickedness, except two Kings, who till then shall be doing Penance for the love
of Vistnu. These are Mara of the Sun's Charge, and Divappi of the Moon's.

6. Darmaputrem, one of the hundred Brothers, descended into Hell, where he saw
one encompassed with great Treasures, and perishing with hunger: He asked the
reason, and the other answered, That it was because he had not given Alms while
he lived in the World; but that once he showed a poor Man the House where the
Rice was kept that was given for Charity, pointing at it with his Finger. Then
Darmaputrem bid him put that Finger with which he had pointed into his Mouth,
which he doing thought he tasted all the Dainties in the World. Darmaputrem and
others returning into the World gave great Alms, whereby after Death they
purchased Paradise. This proves the Malabars believed Heaven and Hell, and a
Reward and Punishment for good and bad Works.

7. Brama is the antientest God of the three, he resides in the Rose that
springs from Vistnu's Navel, though he lies in the milky Sea. He descends
through the hollow stalk of the Rose to Vistnu's Belly, where are the Ideas of
all things, and where he produces these by looking on those. He has four Heads,
which are the Original of four Laws; and because Ixora cut off the fifth Head
for the Lie he told, he lost the fifth Law, which is that of God, and therefore
the Bramenes want it. He dies and comes to Life very often; an artificial Day
of his contains 120000 Years of the Celestial Spirits. He has two Wives, but
never had Children by them.

8. Among the Malabars are four sorts of Nobility, Bramene, Exastri, Baestri,
Chadra. The first they say proceed from Brama's Face; the second (being Kings
called Coilas) from his Arms; the third from his Thighs, which Race they say is
extinct; the fourth from the Feet, called Nayres. The Bramenes have the name,
because descended from the Face, and are much honored by the Kings who are not
Bramenes, and may sit down before them.

9. Though they attribute the Production of all things to Brama, he acts only
in the most perfect, giving others the lesser power. Sometimes he grants so
great Power to others, that he is in great danger of them, and forced to fly.
Vistnu converted into a Nymph, delivered Brama from one of those Dangers. Ixora
seeing that beautiful Form of his got him with Child. He was delivered of two
Children, the one at the Mouth, the other at the Thigh. One was called
Chartava; the other Ayapem, who lost his Birthright by drinking too much Wine,
and it being put to his choice, whether he would be the Lowest among Angels, or
Chief among Devils, he chose the latter, and was constituted such. Ixora gave
him Privilege to converse with Men and be serviceable to them, and he came in
the Shape of a Nayre to the Court of the King of Pande. He lived in Malabar and
turning Physician, in which he was successful, had Temples dedicated to him His
chief offering is Whelps, because he is a Hunter. So ancient a Custom it is for
Doctors and Whelps to go together. They say in this Age of Brama all Men have
Monkey Faces, and in the next they will be Horse Faces. The contrary is seen
among us; for outwardly we appear Men, and inwardly are Brutes.

CHAP. IV.
A Continuation of the same Matter.

1. BEfore they build a Pagod they sow the Ground with Kidney-beans, when they
are green they turn in a greyish Cow to seed on them, and where she Dungs, they
believe is the place for the Pagod, placing on the very spot a Pillar, and on
the top of it the Idol, to whom it is dedicated: Then they build the Walls,
which are never of great extent, but rich, as being black Marble well carved,
covered with Copper Plates, with Globes of Gold, or gilt. The inside is set
thick with monstrous Images with many Heads and Arms, and girt with Serpents.
Then they build a square Wall about it, on each side of it is an entrance with
a sumptuous Portal, with Histories of their Gods carved about them. They are
covered in the same nature as the Temples. Underneath are Heads of Elephants,
Bears, Lions, Tigers, and other wild Beasts with terrible Eyes and Teeth. It is
thought these things are to terrify those that resort thither, and move them
to give Alms; though their Poet Palcanar laughs at it. Those who go to visit
the Idol enter the enclosure, but not the Temple. The Inhabitants of Pande,
Subjects of Bisnagar, are singular in these Works.

2. The most famous Pagods are, that of Rettora built by Cheram Perimal living
at Cranganor, who placed in it the Statue of a Man ten Cubits in length, lying
on a Snake with five Heads in the Sea of Milk. The Temple was covered with
Plates of massy Gold, but because they were subject to be stole he put them
into the Treasure of the Pagod, and instead of them placed others of Copper.
The Idol is still covered with pure bright Gold that shines like Fire; his
Crown is of an inestimable value, and has many precious Stones, in the Forehead
three Rubies that exceed all price, on his Feet Buskins valued 200000 Ducats.

3. In the Treasure, besides the covering Plates there laid up, there are nine
Boats of Gold set with rich Stones, each big enough to contain three Men; the
same number of Kettles of the same Matter, each deep enough to hide the Bramene
with the Idol upon his Head, many Pots, Peacocks and Cocks of Gold and Silver,
and an infinite quantity of Co^. These are useless Vessels, those that are of
use and the same Metal are kept more at hand. At the entrance of the Pagod
hangs a Gold Candlestick so big, no Man can lift it from the ground, and with
the continual smoke looks like Ebony. Several Idols and Candlesticks that stand
before the principal Idol are of the same Metal. In fine, the Treasure is
unmeasurable, if we may believe a Bramene who turned Christian, and had many
good Qualities that show he merited Credit.

4. The Revenues of this Pagod are incredible, and very many live on them. The
enclosure is of Marble six Yards high, and above one in thickness; it is about
half a League from the Shore, a beautiful Way leading to it. At each of the
wonderful Gates can enter at once four Elephants with all their Furniture. It
is guarded by 1000 armed Men: The Coast is dangerous, which secures many great
Men who keep their Treasures there.

5. The Pagod called Comori, from which that famous Point of Land takes name,
is also remarkable. Comori Pagod, signifies, The Church of the Virgin. It is
like the other in Structure, but not in Riches, because they trust them not
there, since our Fleets Sail upon those Coasts. The Pagod is dedicated to a
Virgin Daughter to a Shepherdess, that was changed for a Son of Davagni Sister
to the Giant Maveli, who killed all her Children, because he was told one of
them would be his Death. He thought to kill this Virgin, and she giving him a
kick flew through the Air into the Desert to the place where the Pagod now
stands on the Shore, having been formerly 60 Leagues from the Sea. She after
flew a great Giant by the help of the God Vistnu, and set his Head on a Rock
that now appears in the Sea, and is above 400 Fathom round. In the very place
where the Virgin sat after this Victory, was erected the Pagod.

6. The Pagod of Trivate is more ancient than that of Rettora, but poor, having
been plundered by the Nayque of Madure. It is not much frequented. This Temple
was instituted in memory of the Giant Naragecoguerpoli, who by destroying the
World provoked the God Vistnu; and still came to Life again, though overcome
and killed by him. Vistnu, to end the dispute, laid him on the ground and sat
down upon him. This is what is represented in the Pagod.

7. That of upper Cranganor has an Idol on whose Head one of the Bramenes gives
several strokes of a hammer every day. For they think if this were not done, he
would by this time touch the Stars with his head. In the Frontispiece are
several Images in the Portugues Habit, whence is concluded either that Work was
finished after their arrival, or such a Habit was formerly used there.

8. That of Canari in the Island Salsete, is bigger than all the others, and
exceeds them in sumptuousness of building. It seems to have taken the name from
some Builder of that Country, or from Canara King of Bisnagar, the grandeur of
the Work requiring so great a Founder. It is dug out of a Mountain that looks
like one solid Stone, and is black Marble. The Body is very high, the Isles
low, but altogether of a vast bigness, somewhat dark, as dug out of the middle
of a Mountain. Among at least 3000 Habitations that are cut out about it with
each a Cistern by the Door, there are some large Rooms, and one of an
extraordinary bigness, in which it is said are read Lectures of all Sciences. We
have already spoke in the Second Chapter of the Second Part of this Tome, of
the Way cut under this Mountain said to run as far as Cambaya, of the
Franciscan that attempted to discover that Secret, and the Princes that are
believed to have made it.

9. The Pagod of Maliassa is in the same Island. At the foot of a Mountain is a
Portal of a moderate bigness: The two Pillars that support it are in the Shape
of Giants well carved. There are other Figures like those of Angels among
Christians. This leads into a large Porch, and on the left hand is the Gate of
the Pagod through which the Water runs: Then follows a great Apartment, after
that other little ones, and then a strait way, all dug out of the solid
Mountain.

10. The Pagod called of the Elephant, because the Figure of one stands upon a
Rock at the entrance of it, is in one of the many Islands of the River Bombaim
between Bacaim and Chaul. It is like the others, in that it is cut out of a
Mountain, but exceeds them much in curious work. The first entrance is into a
spacious Room supported by vast Pillars in the form of Giants curiously carved.
It has three Isles: The Pillars are all composed of Figures of the same height
as the Temple: On one of them is the Giant Briareus with his hundred Hands; on
another the God they call Mahamurte, who has three Faces to one Body, on his
Head a Pontifical M^tre, though of Marble, wrought to admiration. In a Chapel
is the Angel turning our first Parents out of Paradise. Pa^ipbae and the Bull
are there also: On one of the Walls is a sort of Altar, and over it are carved
many wild Beasts, the most remarkable one with seven Heads. Some Soldiers
attempted to enter an Apartment that is very dark, and being fearful took
Lights, but were drove out by a multitude of Bats that were frighted at the
Light* There are Galleries with rich carved Work of Men and Women, most of them
in very immodest Actions and Postures. This (they say) was the Choire of their
Ceremonies. Their are other Buildings to be admired for their Greatness and
Structure, and two remarkable Sepulchers.

11. To conclude, the Pagod dedicated to the Monkey is so great, that only the
Cloister in which they shut up the Cattle designed for Sacrifices, has 700
Columes of Marble nothing inferior to those of the Roman Pantheon.

CHAP. V.
Of the Officers, Rites, Ceremonies, Burials, and other things.

1. EVery Pagod has a Cook who dresses the Rice that is offered for himself,
for the Idol, and for those who offer. The last divide their share with their
Neighbors, who esteem it as a Holy thing. A great Poet of theirs laughs at them
for offering more Food to the statue, seeing it has not Eaten the last, and
they answer, though he does not Eat, he smells it.

2. The Kings and Nobles every Day use a ceremony (called Tevaram, that is
Divine Ceremony,) which is with many Prayers to offer Rice, Coco, and Butter,
all burnt in honor of their golden Idols, of which they have a number
answerable to their Estate; so that some have above 1000; this sacrifice is to
obtain Riches for themselves, revenge and destruction of their Enemies: Many
have in their Houses familiar Devils, which they call Cutichates, every Day
they offer something to them, they get by them; and some have 300 of them. They
make them enter into the bodies of those they would be revenged of, whereof
they make great advantage, for many pay to be delivered from them. By the help
of them converted into the shapes of Beasts, they hurt People and infest whole
Towns: There are those living, who have seen the Town of Cranganor burnt by
this means. At Pudiangale near Calicut, a Woman had one of these, and saw it in
the shape of a Cock, a Monkey, and a little black Boy with a Truncheon in his
Hand: these are not punished in Malabar, but their Kings make use of them in
danger: The very Heathens observe that all those who follow that course live
and die miserably.

3. In sickness they consult Wizards, not Doctors; they say a Devil causes the
Disease, and bringing him into the Sick Man, make him tell the Reason of
molesting him; then they promise him something to go out again, and he does it.
They think the Smallpox is Cured with an offering to Patracale, who they
affirm causes them. The Gout they believe is caused by ^ive she Devils like
Sows, tothem they offer Food fit for such Beasts, that they may transfer the
Disease to their Enemies.

4. They adore and offer Sacrifice to venomous Snakes, that they may not hurt
with their Poison. The Lawyers on the first Day of September do the same to
their Books.

5. Their Baths are used rather to cleanse the Soul than the Body; they know
the ten Commandments, but think not themselves bound by them. It is a great Sin
if a Nobleman is touched by one that is not such, though he be never so great
by learning, by the Sword, or by Virtue: And even Riches there cannot prevail
to gain this point. The King of Travanco^ being resolved to become a Bramene,
though not of that descent, was told, he must first be bore of a Cow; be made
one of Gold so big, that going into it, he was born out of it; he offered it to
the Bramenes with a great Snm of Gold, and obtained the dignity, but not
Hereditary.

6. They purge themselves from venial Sins, by putting their Heads under Water,
one of these is a Nobleman touching a Plebean, and to prevent it, the latter
cries as he goes, Po, po, po, that is, have a care; another is, touch^ng the
Dead or their Friends within fifteen Days; another, to touch Meat with the
right Hand when they Eat; another, to touch them so touched, or their Houses or
Wells; to touch another with the right ^and whilst Eating; to touch a grain of
Rice fallen as it is taken up; to touch a drop of Water disturbed by one not so
noble Mortal Sins are not forgiven, so he who commits them* remains subject to
Death, and the Lord of the Earth as long as he lives. The mortal are these, To
use Pots touched by Men de^led; to Eat Rice before Purification, to Eat it
boiled by a Man of base race; to have to do with a Woman of that sort; to Eat
Rice into which is fallen the least grain out of another Man's plate.

7. Their bathing is thus, They believe the stone of the bath is the God Brama;
the lips of it Vistnu, and all together Ixora. When they go in, their nakedness
is covered with a rag or leaf; in the Water they write Om with one Finger, and
throw Water over it with three, believing the three Gods bathed there. Then
dividing the Water, dip their Heads, and after cast up some toward eight parts
of the World, offering Water to the eight Guardians thereof. They call upon
Siri Pagod, and wash their Faces three times; they also cast Water up toward
Heaven, offering it to the Sun, then wash their Hands and Feet: On the Palm of
their left Hand they put Ashes of Cowsdung and sprinkle it, and believe the
left Hand is the Earth, the right Heaven, and and the Palm the place of
Generation; laying one Hand upon the other and shutting them close, they say,
Let the end of the World come.

8. This they do in imitation of Ixoras's Egg, and think the upper Hand when
opened, represents Heaven, the lower the Earth; with the right Thumb they write
upon the Ashes, Iara, that is the Fight that was in the Egg between Fire and
Water. Then that all their limbs may be sanctified, they touch with their Hand
the principal parts of the Body, from the privy parts to the crown of the Head,
and the Ears, Elbows, Knees, and great Toes: They hold their hands as if they
gave something to two Spirits (who they say attend on us writing our good works
on the right Hand, and the bad on the left,) the same they do to the eight
Guards of the World, turning about. The last ceremony is to rub the Forehead,
Shoulders and Breast with Ashes taken with two Fingers and the Thumb of the
right Hand, in honor of the three Gods.

9. The bathing called Titan, performed in the Sea, is very solemn; before it
they perform a ceremony, in which they offer (...), (a sort of flowers)
prostrating themselves three times on the ground* once in reverence to the
Pagod, once to the Sun, and once to the Sea. The chief places they resort to
for this bathing, are three on the Coast of Travancor, (viz.) Bacora, Rettor^,
and (...); the Days appointed are the first of each Moon, chiefly those of July
and January, but if the New Mood fall on a Wednesday, it adds so much to this
devotion, that the Mountains and Valleys can scarce contain the multitude of
Pilgrims that resort from above Five hundred Leagues distance, of all Sexes,
Ages, and conditions, and all a foot. Above all others, the Ganga of Bengala,
is held in veneration for this washing.

10. Ashes of Cows dung is their chief Purgation, powdering their Forehead,
Shoulders and Breast with it; the more of it their Iogues, or Religious Men,
have upon them, the more Holy they are reputed; they carry it in purses to
recompense the Alms that are given them: The Reason they esteem this Powder is
this, Ixora was sanctified by the Ashes of Gevelinga, Vistnu desiring to
partake of this blessing, and impart it to Mankind, carried a Cow to (...),
where she got a mouthful of that dust; Vistnu took her dung in which was that
Ashes she had Eaten, and burning it made more Ashes, which he shared with Man.

11. They also dissolve the same dung and sprinkle their Houses and Highways
with it, to purify them; with this is the way daily sprinkled through which
Zam^ri goes from his Palace to the Pagod, and his Table cloth, and a Gold
dish, on which the Meat is brought. As soon as they see a Cow piss, they run
and catch it in their hands, drink part, and sprinkle themselves with the rest,
and believe themselves most pure; besides the Law that forbids killing a Cow,
it is so great a Sin, that it requires much Alms and other good acts to expiate
it. Oxen are not so much valued, though many Princes think themselves descended
from a Bull, because all Men being destroyed, and only Women left, one of them
had carnal Copulation with a Bull, and brought forth a Boy, who was the
restorer of Men.

12. Their manner of swearing is laying a Hand upon a Sons head, if the swearer
has one, or else upon a Cows; to clear themselves when accused of any crime,
the party puts his Hand into boiling Butter, or Oil, then it is wrapped and sealed
up in a cloth; if on the third Day after it appears found, he is cleared, if
otherwise, found guilty, the accuser, if the party be cleared, makes
satisfaction with a Sum of Money. They make another Trial in the River that
runs from Cochin to Cranganor, where is the Pagod of the Crocodil. The Brame^es
by their sorceries bring one of them to the shore, the person accused leaps
upon his back, if he is carried over safe, they account him innocent, if
devoured, guilty. Both these Experiments have been made use of in presence of
our People of late Years.

13. They have yet another manner of Trial, which is by putting the Hand into a
pot full of Adders, to fetch out a Ring, thereby the more to provoke them. If
they sting, the party is guilty, if not, clear. This is used in Cranganor,
Mangalor, and other parts of Canara. A King of theirs coveting a most plentiful
Wood of Coco's that belonged to a Poor Woman, took it from her by force, and
ever after it bore none but hollow empty Coco's; there are some living who are
Eye witnesses of this wonder.

14. They have several Fasts, one called Egadezi, which is kept the eleventh
Day of every Moon, on this Fast they Eat nothing but Fruit: That called
Giveraseri begins by Night in February, and they neither Eat, D^ink, nor Sleep,
in Twenty four Hours. They walk round the Pagod rehearsing stories out of their
Scripture: If any happen to shut his Eyes, overcome with sleep, he washes
himself as often as it happens, and continues his former exercise. In the morning
they offer some Money to the Idol: The Fast Tirivadira belongs only to the
Women. That for the Dead, which the kindred of the Deceased keep, lasts a Year,
during which time they do not Eat, Fish, Flesh, Eggs, drink Wine, or chew
Betele.

15. The Fast Masa Upasa is the most religious of them all, and few account
themselves so happy as to observe it. He that does, begins the last Day of
October, he washes himself, puts on clean clothes, and visits the Pagod of
Vistnu. On the first of November he goes round it One hundred and one times,
(the devoutest One thousand and one) at each turn in the nature of a Prayer,
repeating the name of Vistnu, One hundred and one times: This must be done
every Day of November, and the ten first of December. He must Eat only Eggs and
Milk, not look upon Women, he must think on nothing but that name, and praises
of it. Next Year he must do the same, beginning the first of December, and
ending the tenth of January, so he must go on every Year till twelve be over;
and then begins again the first of November, and fasts the forty Days; after
this he is canonized sor a Saint, in such a manner, that only the sight of him
is forgiveness of Sins.

CHAP. VI.
Continues the same Subject.

1. IN matters of Matrimony they have several customs. The Bramenes may have as
many Wifes as they can maintain, though they be not of their Race; but the
Bramene Women can have but one Husband, and must not mix with the Nayres, on
pain of losing their quality. They consult Foretune-tellers about a happy time
to Marry; they choose a Husband of their own race born under the same Planet,
and the same Day of the Moon, as themselves, to which purpose the times of
Nativities are punctually observed. The Bramen that does the duty of Priest, is
called Odicon, or Curical; he for four Days sacrifices in a Den Rice, Butter,
Cows, and such like things; he lights a lamp, and sets aside a portion of Rice
for Garapatii, and for the Epicurean Elephant, that he may not disturb the
Feast. The Bridegroom ties about the Brides neck, a thread on which hang three
little pieces of Gold, in honor of the three Gods; this is called Tale, and is
the mark of a Married Woman. Hence among the Malabars Matrimony is called Quo
Fa, which signifies binding; if the Husband dies first, the Woman throws away
the thread, or Tale, in token of liberty.

2. The Priest takes the couple by the Hands and says some Prayers, then they
go to feast; they do not lie together till some happy Planetary Conjunction,
when that happens, they go to the door of the Room which is half put too, and
therewith the Priest say some Prayers, and withdraw; the next Day they go to a
Cauldron of Water, in which are live Fish, and each holding the end of a cloth,
draw it through like a Net, the Fish taken they lay respectfully on their
Heads, with the right Hand; if many be taken, they believe they shall have many
Children, and the contrary.

3. If any dies a Maid, they cause some poor Man of the family, (an unheard of
beastliness) to deflour her though very young; him they pay well for so doing,
and as soon as done, throw stones at him till he runs out of reach. Those of
the family Exastri, and the Kings that are not Bramenes, make no Royal
Marriages, so their Wifes are not Queens, but Concubines, called Natiaras, and
all of them may have Gallants. Therefore the Sons do not inherit, but the
Nephews born of Sisters. Of their manner of Marrying we have spoke before.

4. The Tale among the meaner sort of Women, serves to tie them to one Husband,
and among Ladies, to turn them loose to all lasciviousness. Only the Bramenes
have liberty to lie with all sorts of Women, from the meanest to the Queen. The
others if they have to do with inferiors are killed, if Women, sold. The
Nayres differ not from the others, in the manner of their Weddings. Among the
meaner sort as Tradesmen, one of them puts the Tale upon the Young Woman, who
is thereby capacitated to follow whom she pleases, or be taken up by whoever
likes her. Among Silver-smiths, Black-smiths and Founders, four Brothers, or as
many as there are, keep one Wife between them, and have particular Days
assigned for each, that the inheritance may not be confounded. Till a Maid is
licensed by the Tale, she may be abroad among Men, and ^one dare presume to
meddle with her.

5. The Bramenss of the North do not only celebrate their own Weddings, but
those of Beasts and the Elements. In our Age there was a great Man of that
Family, who spent above 15000 Ducats at the Wedding of a Bull and a Heifer.
There was also a Baneane who making a Well in the Village Calegam for the use
of Passengers, and resolving to Marry this Water with some other, despised all
that was near, and Married it to the River of Suratt, above 30 Leagues distant,
and spent above 5000 Crowns in the Wedding.

6. The Chatines Marry as the Bramenes, but their Widows cannot throw off the
Tale, because they must not Marry again, nor keep a Gallant: When they want
Heirs, they adopt one, by drinking to the adopted, who pledges in Coco-milk
dyed with Safran. If he is a Man they give him one of the names of the Sun, if
a Woman, of the names of Gods Wife.

7. The cause the families do not mix, is because the Bramenes descended from
the God Bramasface, those of Chatrier (that is Kings) from the right Hand,
those of Vaixer from the Belly; those of Chadrer, (they are the Nayres) from
the Foot. At first they used to mix, but afterward the Bramenes obtained a
privilege of King Cheraman Perimal to the conrrary; hence they are so much
superior to others, that they are polluted by coming near as well as touching
them; they must not Eat with those of a lower race, nor any thing dressed by
them, nor out of any Vessel of theirs; if any of them Marries, or has to do
with inferiors, they burn on his Forehead a mark like a daws soot, and his
kindred making a statue like him of straw, and the Herb Dorpe, burn it with
ceremonies, as if it were a dead Man. The Bramenos loose their birthright of
their Family, by Eating Fish, Flesh, or Eggs; and by Drinking Sura or Orraca,
by stealing or killing another Bramen, provided it is not in War^ among the
other Families, there are diverse customs about being defiled.

8. Saniade or Saniassi is a dignity greater then a King, of which only the
Bramenes are capable, the elect is installed by another Saniassi in this
manner. The Image of the elect is made in Straw and burnt, to show he is dead
to the World; then the Master leads him to a Bath, cuts of his Corombi, and
dips him 72 times, then takes off his piece of Net, the mark of a Bramene,
clothes him in red, and he can never after wear white, only on his back a Fota.
He delivers him a rod with a piece of the same cloth, and a straw Hat; for
three or four Days he is under the Masters tuition, must not Eat Fish, Flesh,
chew Betle, nor so much as look upon a Woman, and if accidently he meets one,
he puts his Hat over his Eyes, and goes on till she is out of sight. He is to
take what is given him without complaining, lives in or near the Pagod,
succeeds and is Heir to his Master. He bows only to the Idol, and even the King
and Bramenes do to him, all his defense is in curses, so much dreaded, that
every one endeavors to appease him; he is not to handle Money; none can carry
his Hat when he goes a foot: If he does any thing contrary to his institution,
the Bramenes accuse him before the King; if convicted, they stain him with
Safran and depose him, but he buys it off with bribes.

9. They use no ceremony with those that die under the Age of 7 Years; those
that are above this Age, are burnt toward the South from their Houses, where
lives Iemen King of the Devils, that he may the sooner carry away the Soul. For
mourning they shave their Heads and Beards, which they do not cut for a whole
Year after, nor have to do with Women: Lie 15 Days on a mat, and enter not into
the Pagods; the 15 Days expired, they cast the Ashes into the Sea, if near, if
not into some bye place, and plant a Fig Tree where the funeral pile was; then
they wash and put on clean clothes, cast out all Earthen Vessels, and one comes
to purify the House, sprinkling it with Cows piss and Milk.

10. Every Day of the Fast, he that purifies the House puts a little Rice upon
a Fig leaf, which the Rooks Eat, or if they fail, which is looked upon as a
great misfortune, it is cast into the Water for the Fish. The Anniversary is a
Feast at which there must be no Poor. On the Coast of Coromandel, Goa, and
Cambaya the Women burn themselves with their Husbands, unless such as have
sucking Children. I^ any refuse, the relations hold it as an affront to them,
and force her. 300 burnt themselves with the Naique of Madure. The manner of it
is thus, The Woman is carried on Men's shoulders to the Pagod, in her best
attire* and anointed with Sandal, after praying to the Idol, she dances all the
way to the place; where her Husband was burnt, and casts her self into the
Fire; the relations standing round with forks to keep her in, and making a
noise with several iustruments that her cries may not be heard and move
compassion.

11. The Original of this Custom was from King Pandues Wife, who voluntarily
burnt her self with him, and it is upheld to secure the lives of the Husbands;
it having been observed, that more died by means of the Wifes, then by
Sickness. The Saniade or Saniassi is not burnt, but buried whole in the Pagod
where he serves; they make a hole and seat him in it upon the bench he used
before he is quite Dead, with a little Rice, and some without for the Idol,
then cover him with Clay without any farther ceremonies, believing he is
suddenly gone to Heaven.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Empire of Aethiopia, and first of the Kingdoms and Provinces into which
it is divided; of the Progress of Christianity therein, and of the Product of
the Land.

1. EThiopia was the Second of our Three great Discoveries (which were India,
Ethiopia, and China) and therefore shall be the Second described. The Reader
may be assured of its Truth, as being delivered by an unbiassed and learned
Person, that spent a considerable time there, traveling and examining into the
Truth of things, and being an Eye witness of the greatest part.

2. The City Danoas was the Metropolis of this Empire, seated on the top of a
Mountain: The Country about it is divided into Districts, some mountainous, but
all fruitful. Three Miles to the Northward is Ogara so fertile, that the green
and ripe Fruit hangs at once upon the Trees. Westward is Dambia, not inferior
to the other; then Amfras, where our Patriarch resided, and had Lands. Next
follows Dara and others, till you come to the Nile.

3. In all these Divisions are many Monasteries and Churches, with Priests and
Friars. Ethiopia kn^w not the Sacrament of Confirmation. The Country Tacussa
was best disposed to receive Christianity, because many Portugueses lived
there, and that of Gorgorro by the Labors of the Jesuits who had a Church
there. So the Heathen Ago^s gave ear to our Doctrine; these are a warlike
People, and possess a plentiful Country. The Damotes, though more polite,
received not the Gospel so well, till being overcome in a Battle by their
Prince, they submitted and entertained the Religious Men, and there are now
theremany Churches and Mo^asteries.

4. The Kingdom of Gojao was the first that admitted the Observation of Lent,
and kept the Catholic Holy Days. It contains a great number of Monasteries,
among them those of Gonge and Salalo are famous. The Jesuits had three
Residences here, Colela, Sarca, and Neb^sse. The first two have good Churches
finished, the third one very magnificent begun. The Stone they are built of is
blew, so light it is more like Wood, but yet hard. The Kingdom of Bagamidri
received some Catholic Fathers, and there are still Christians there.

5. The Kingdom Amora began to incline to Christianity at the time the Emperor
rejected our Doctrine. The Viceroy ^da Christos and many of the People
continued firm. The Faith was not spread into the Kingdoms of Narea and Zemen,
or Provinces of Abargale, Bora, Saloa, Casta, Bugua, Orejate, Sarte, Anubas,
Sera and others.

6. It took most root in the Kingdom of Tigre, which being the chiefest of
Ethiopia, the Description of it will serve to illustrate what relates to all
the others. The Kingdom of Tigre is almost round, its extent One hundred
Leagues North and South from the Borders of the Amaceus to those of Enderate,
with the same distance East and West from Dangali at the mouth of the red Sea
to the River Tacasse near Semen. It is divided into several Governments, called
Xumetes, and the Governors Xumos, some of them in some cases not subject to the
Viceroy, but immediate to the Emperor. In Sire, Enderata, Agamea, Serave and
some others, the Xumos must be Natives of the Province, and of certain Families
to which those Commands are peculiar. Their Lawsuits are like ours in Europe,
there lies an Appeal from the Judge to the Viceroy, and from him to the
Emperor, except in some Cases, in which the Judge finally determines.

7. The Governments are sold, and he that bids most carries them. A Governor is
declared, by putting on him the Cab^ya, tying a red Ribband about his Head, and
he walking about the C^tama, or Court, a Crier proclaims; We have made this our
Slave Governor of the Province of Bugna (or any other.) Then he returns to
Court, and takes his leave of the Emperor, having first laid aside the
Ornaments used at this act, for the same serve all upon that Occasion. Then he
sends a Servant with such a Riband, to make it known in the Town where the
Governors reside. The Viceroy of Tigre for his Place pays Three hundred Oqueas
yearly, which is about Two thousand Ducats. The Barnog^ (corruptly Barnaga^)
which signifies King of the Sea; for Bar is the Sea, and Nogus a King, pays Two
hundred. The Xumos or Governors according to the value of their Commands, there
being no set Rates, but all pay.

8. Along the Coast of Moss^a Northwards is the Country of the Dobeytas,
subject to the Turks; Southward lie the Xios; up toward the ^nland near
Enderata and Ojerate the Dob^s, all Mahometans subject to the Emperor. Next
those are the Dorbeytas, Christians only in name, Rebels to the Empire,
defended by their inaccessible Mountains. The Mamps^s follow their Example, and
have been often attacked without success. Along the same Coast are these
Provinces; Cantiba the Upper and Lower, Seraoe, Salicit, Sama, Tedexerez,
Torates and Galas: Westward is Sire, and its Desert on the Banks of the famous
River Tacasse bordering on the Cafres; then Nader and Addit. From the West
Southward Tamben, Gralta, Sart, Ojerate, Enderata, the Bugnas, Dobas, and Sera
a plentiful Country peculiar to the Queens. Turning again to the West Senafe,
both Mambarata's, Agamea, Ambacenete, B^ the greater and lesser, Gala, and many
other Governments. The Center of all is Tremona between the famous Church of
A^cum, where the Emmperors are Crowned, and the Famous Monastery of Abb^
Guarima. In each of these Divisions there is a Fair every week, and several
Custom Towns, as Barava, Ser^, Sir^, that yield a considerable Revenue.

9. There are two Winters, the first of the Sea, and reaches about two days
Journey up the Inland, beginning at Massua, and ending beyond the Monastery of
Brizan. It begins in December and ends in March. From that place forward
toward the Inland it is Summer. The second Winter begins near the famous
Church Asmara near Bizan, where the first Winter ended, and reaches over all
Ethiopia. The Commencement of it is in June, as in India and Coast of Arabia,
but not so severe. It Rains the Afternoons only with Thunder and Lightning
before, which gives notice to Travelers and Shepherds to get to shelter; for
soon after fall flashes of Fire, and such Hail as kills all it meets.

10. There are also two Summers, the first temperate, the other insupportable,
for the burning Wind, which they call Urur, strikes down People, and sometimes
they rise no more. In some Places, as Marebo, Tacasse, Nor and others, as soon
as Winter expires, pestilent Fevers Rage, proceeding from Vapors the Sun
exhales from Bogs. Though the Roads are full of Woods, mountainy and lonesom,
they are not so much infested with Highway-men as in Europe.

11. There never was the Plague in this Kingdom, and when it happens in the
other Provinces, it kills not many, because there are no great Towns. Such as
are Infected, or fearful, go from the Towns into Cottages about the Mountains,
and if any dies, he is burnt together with the Cottage, no Body daring to bury
him. The People are long lived, and know not what the Pleurisy or Stone is:
They have abundance of good and wholesome Springs. From them and what the Country
about most produces the Provinces take name. There are also hot Springs
doubtless Medicinal, if they knew the use of them. The Cattle drinks of them,
and thereby becomes larger and fatter. They have other Springs and Rivers
esteemed miraculous.

12. As there are two Winters and Summers, so the Product of the Earth is
twofold: They have abundance of Wheat and Barley, Pease, Lentils, Beans,
Kidney-beans, Indian-wheat of several Sorts, Hemp, whereof they make no use,
Nuga, an Herb with yellow Flowers whereof they make Oil, Zufo for the same use,
and serves to die Cloth of a Saffron color; Aja, a Grain between Wheat and
Rye, but has a scattering Ear, a particular sort of Grain whereof they make
Sava answerable to our Beer, though not so clear, yet serves to make them drunk.

13. They have white Rose-trees, white and red Lil^es very beautiful, Jasmin
wonderful for smell and greatness, Hony-suckles, a certain odoriferous Flower
that dies by day, and recovers at night. Their Hills, Valleys, Meddows, and
Shores are covered with variety of Flowers of of all Colors. All sorts of
Herbs are there abundantly produced, and some but little Ginger.

14. For Fruit Trees they have the Tamarine, Peach, Pomgranate, Ancoy a sort of
Pear, Fig, Orca like the Fig* the ^e of bigger bulk, but the Leaves less;
another sort of Fig Tree, called Muss, which grows like a Body of a Tree
covered with Leaves so big, that a Man may wrap himself in one of them; out of
the top shoots one only Branch on which are the Figs, on each of them, whatever
way cut, appears a Cross, for which reason it is concluded to be the Fruit
forbidden our First Father Adam, and the cause of his Fall. There are wild
Tamarins, the Fruit whereof is not eaten. Vineyards there are none, but some
wall Vines whereof they make no Wine, but Reasins. There are Lemmon-trees sweet
and sour, Cedars and Ebony-Trees. They have also Cotton, whereof are made
course Clothes for the common Sort, and is used as all other things instead of
Money, of which i^ this Country there is none.

15. They Plow their Ground only superficially, not cutting deep, and their
Plows in many places are drawn by Men and Women, most of the Plow-shares are of
Wood. Their chief Stocks consist in Cattle, and some Men possess from two to
10000 Head of great Cattle. Some of them divide their Herds by the Colors, and
those that have Horns from those that have none, for there are naturally many
here without them; none of the Bulls are fierce. There are many Goats, and it
is reckoned a shame to drink their Milk; no less quantity of Sheep, some of
such large Tails, as are equal to one of the Quarters; they make course Cloth
of the Wool for the Poor. They have all other sorts of Beasts and Fowl in
abundance.

16. The Conntry abounds in Butter and Honey, the best of the last is that of
Enderat^ and Agamea. The Bees, for fear of Theives, are kept within Doors, with
holes through the Walls for them to go out. There are wild Bees, and of their
Liquor is made the Wine most in esteem; both Men and Women glory in being drunk
with it. Where these swarm, there resorts a little Bird that loves Honey, and
fearing the Bees, goes out to meet Passengers, and attracts them with his Note,
and leaping from Tree to Tree to the place where the Honey is; the People
knowing this, follow him, take the Honey, and he remains satisfied with what is
left.

17. It is certain there are gold Mines here, but not made use of, lest they
should provoke the Turks and other Nations to covet the Country. They lie
Eastward, and on the right hand of the way from Maigoga to Tamovem. On the top
of a neighboring Mountain is to be seen a Wall, believed to have been a Fort
to defend the Mines; though they are stopped up, some Gold is taken about the
Skirts of them. There are other^ in other places, but none known of Silver in
this Kingdom, in that of Semen there, are, and those so rich, that two Parts in
three of the Oar are pure Metal, they are also stopped up. In Tigre there are
Mines of Lead, and many of so good Iron, that they make thereof all sorts of
We^pons without Steel, whereof they have none In Senafe there is abundance of
pure Sulphur, and as much Saltpeter at Gralta.

18. Between Baraoa and Massua, there is abundance of a sort of bright Stone
which opens in Leaves like Izinglass, and being burnt turns to a white Powder
like Ceruse used by Painters, but not with Oil, for that turns it black.
Between Dangali and Senafe is a great Mine of Salt of great value, because
there is no other there but what is made with Seawater between Massua and
Defalo. The Salt dug out of the Mine is cut into Bars about a Span in length,
and between two and three Fingers broad and thick, which serve for Money in
other Parts. Not far from it in a Mountain is a sort of Salt that is a Cure for
some Diseases.

19. The Empire of Ethiopia has never a good Seaport Town, because it reaches
not to the Sea, only some little Part of the Kingdom of Tigre. The Port Baclur,
the first within the mouth of the Red Sea belongs to the King of Dangali a
Mohammedan, and is not considerable, being incapable of great Ships. The Port
Defalo between that and Arquico where the Turks have a Fort is yet worse. The
best Port on the Coast is Arquico, where the Turks have raised another Fort:
Between it and Defalo are two large Bays, where any Ships may ride.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Laws Customs and Religion of the Empire of Ethiopia.

1. IN Ethiopia there are no written Laws, but ancient Prescription is
preserved by Memory, and often proclaimed at the Courts of Kings and Governors.
There are no Prisons. When a Man is accused, they fasten a Chain to his right
hand, and to the left of the Accuser, or one of his Servants, and so they
continue till Sentence is given, so that it is as dangerous to accuse as be
accused. When a Man is condemned to death, they deliver him over to the Party
aggreived, to kill him as he pleases, without allowing the least time for
preparation.

2. The Witnesses may be accepted against, and such as are allowed give their
Evidence Viva voce, for nothing is writ. They have a sort of Judges called
Umbares, which they hold to be descended from those sent by Solomon with the
Queen of Saba, and her Son David, when she returned from Jerusalem.

3. The rich wear Shirts of Bo^eta lined with the same, or another sort of
Linne, they reach to the Ankles, the Sleeves long and close to the Arm with
abundance of gathers, the Neck high and stitched, with silver and silk Buttons
of several Colors, and Loops of the same instead of Buttonholes. Others wear
them blew, and all gir^ themselves with silk or Linen Scarses; they use no
Belts, but such as are fastened to their Swords, which they seldom wear; their
Breeches as long as the Shirt and narrow; from the mid-thigh downward of
Velvet, Damask or Satin, upward of Linen, because of the heat. Over all they
wear Cabayas, which are like Sheets (called also Fotetes) thrown over their
Shoulders, to do Reverence to any Body they open these, for they wear nothing
on their Heads; but if they do Reverence to the Queen or Prince, they let fall
the Fotete to the waste. If any wear Veils on their Heads they do not take them
off.

4. They wear Periwigs, which they call Gatonas, made of sundry shapes, some
like the brims of a Hat one over another, some round, others like Horns, and so
other sorts. It is a Trade to make them, and they spend a whole day in ordering
one; they are ointed with Butter whereon the Dust settling makes them look
monstrous.

5. Some over their Clothes hang carelessly ^certain Skins like Sables with
little Bells of Gold or Silver; about their Necks gold Chains with Crosses,
Bracelets of the same Metal, and Silver Rings. The poorer sort cloth much in
the same Nature, but with Apparel of less value. For the most part they go
barefooted; or if they wear any thing, it is only a sort of Buskins so straight
the Foot never goes to the bottom, and so they drag them. The meanest sort of
all wear Cow. Hides either with or without the Hair, dressed as soft as any
Cloth.

6. The Women of great Quality, as the Oisoros, that are of the Blood Royal,
and others wear Shifts of Silk, or rich Indian Linen, they cover the whole
Body, very close at the Wrist, but the rest of the sleeve so wide it hangs down
to the ground. They use Bracelets of Gold and Silver, Necklaces of Glass of
several Colors, from the Shoulders downwards they are covered with silk Veils
of several Colors, or white as the Men, and they let them fall like them when
they make Reverence; they put nothing on their Heads, their Hair hanging in
many breadths, or loose and divided, fastened to the Skin ointed with Butter,
the ends are knotted. Men and Women to avoid discomposing this so tedious
dress, when they sleep rest their Neck upon sticks so framed, that the Head
lies hollow: They always carry Bodkins of Ivory, Ebony, or other things well
wrought to scratch themselves with, and are always stuck in the Hair.

7. Round their Eyes and Lips they lay Color, makes them rather blew than
black. The Brides on the Marriage-day die their Hands blacker than they are
naturally; for as among us whiteness is beauty, so blackness among them: They
wear Rings on their fingers, on the little one they let the Nail grow so long,
it exceeds all the ^ther fingers, in their Ears great Rings of Gold or Silver.

8. Their Weapons are Firelocks, which they have from the Turks, Darts of
several sorts, Maces, Slings, Swords, Hangers, Poiniards, and for the defensive
Coats of Mail, Helmets, and Bucklers of Bufalo and Sea-Horses Skins. The
warlike Instruments, Trumpets and Kettle-drums, the Musical Tabors, great and
lesser Guitars, the first of five, the others of three strings.

9. They love Feasting, and make more account of the Wine than the Meat; the
Tables round; for Table-cloaths Cakes of Bread of several sorts of Grain,
generally three cover the Table, and sometimes one. Their Food much the same as
ours. When they wash their hands, every one wipes on the Cloth he wears, and
when they eat on a piece of Bread. The greatest Dainty, without which the Feast
is not complete, is Beef just killed and eaten raw, and for the more delicacy,
instead of Mustard, dipped in the Excrement of a certain Gut of the same Beast.
The Desert is parched Pease and other Grain. Whilst they eat they drink little
or nothing, but as soon as dinner is done they go to another place to drink, in
which they spend more time than in the former. The drink is Sava, or Beer, and
that Liquor of Honey beforementioned: They drink and talk, till being
hotheaded they go out brandishing their Swords, and promising to kill all the
Master of the Feast's Enemies. The Feast is esteemed most splendid, whence most
come out drunk. The Women go to Feasts with their Husbands, and the Oisoros
without them if they please.

10. The Sons of Women of the Blood Royal, that is those Oisoros, can never
inherit the Crown, nor they marry with Men of the Family, though removed a
hundred Degrees. In this they agree with the Chinese. All Men descended from
the Male-Line can pretend to the Crown, and he that is descended from a King
that Reigned 200 Years ago, has as good a Claim as the Son of the last. The
Oisoros Women pay no Reverence to any Body, not to their own Husbands. In this
particular we have many Oisoros among us.

11. There can be no fixed Callendar of their Festivals, for they are many
according to every Man's Fancy; those universally received are Saturday and
Sunday in every week, six days of every month, one of the most holy Trinity,
another of our Savior, one of Our Blessed Lady, one of St. Michael, one of the
Apostles, and one of a Saint they call Guebramanisascodust. Easter they keep
fifteen days; all the Festivals of the Year they observe according to the old
Style, on the Feast of the Epiphany they also celebrate the Baptism of Christ,
and Men and Women repeat their Baptism in some River or Pool.

12. They add more Days to the Lent than we do to make up the forty, because
the Saturdays as well as Sundays are kept holy. Their way of Fasting is only to
eat after Sun setting till the rising. Throughout the Year they fast Wednesdays
and Fridays. They dre^s their Herbs with Oil of Nuga, having none of Olives,
and have little Fish, which must be such as has Scales, for in most things they
retain somewhat of the Jewish Customs.

13. The Weddings are celebrated with Trumpets, Tabors and Dancing. Some live
together upon promise of Marriage, if they have any Children. The Women are
common to the Husband's Brothers and Relations, and the nearer of kin the more
free to this beastliness. If the Wife knows the Husband has to do with another
Woman, she recovers of her forty of every Creature she has upon the ground, as
Forty Cows, Sheep, Goats, or any other thing; and if she will, the Husband is
fined for her use many Clothes which are delivered to her, for the Wives have
their Goods apart. Adultery is not punished with death.

14. In their Funerals they use the same Music and Dancing as in the Weddings,
to signify it is the same thing to die as to be born. All the difference is
the People that follow the Corpse wear white Ribbands tied about their
Foreheads, and go without Priest or Cross. Instead thereof they carry the dead
Man's richest Goods before him. It is a great token of Grief to shave their
Heads (at the Death of their Kings all men are obliged to it) but yet a greater
to accompany the Corpse naked from the Wast upwards.

15. Their Mourning is a black Cloth died in a certain sort of mud, for they
have no other dying. If a Man be found dead and the Murderer not known, the
Country is fined to make satisfaction to the Relations. The same if any Cattle
be lost; the Country People are obliged to maintain the Viceroys and other
People when they travel. When two meet after a long absence, their salutation
is kissing commonly the Mouth, sometimes the Cheek, or Shoulder. The Women
neither spin nor so, the Husbands mend the Clothes; the Poorest Woman would be
ashamed to wash her own Clothes, the Men do it, and the Women bring the Water.

16. They have many Churches, I will say somewhat of the chiefest, that of
Accum is the principal of all Ethiopia for its antiquity, and because the
Emperors must be Crowned in it and no other. It stands in the middle of one of
their greatest Towns. Near Accum are the Caves where the Holy King Cabeb and
his Son did penance. They are buried in the Church of St. Pantalion, which
stands on the top of a high Mountain; Pantalion was one of the 9 Saints, they
say went from Rome to Preach the Gospel in that Country.

17. The famous Monasteries of Abbagarima and Aleluya and the Church of Accum
stand in the form of a Triangle, a Days journey distant from each other. In the
Center is Tremona; Abbagarima took name from its founder, who was one of the 9
Saints, and Son of a King of Rome, called Isaac, as the Son also was; but the
Ethiopians called him Abbagarima, which signifies, a Man prodigious for
Miracles; they feign that there was a way under ground from this Saints Cave to
Rome, and that he used to travel it.

18. The Monastery of Aleluya sormerly the habitation of many religious Men,
^ow of very few was founded by Abba Samuel Disciple to one that was so to Abba
Arragavi, one of those 9 Roman Saints and Preachers. The religious of these
Monasteries are of two sorts, those of Abba Tula Aymanot and those of Abba
Stateus the founders. They live not in community, but every one where he
pleases with Servants; they observe no noviceship, nor make any vow, such as
will Marry and have 2 or three Wives; most of them have Mistresses, and think
it no sin. Such as do profess Chastityare much esteemed, all their business is
to gather Riches, and get Governments. Their Habit is white Shirts, or striped
with several colors, over them, a black Scapulary before, a narrow round hood
of the same color; they never take it of, not even when they consecrate,
Cloaks or Mantles as every one can afford, the Poorest or most observant wear
Cow hides, like the meanest of the People. All carry crosses in their Hands;
the Masters who are not Married bigger then the others; but they want not for
Women even of those they call Nuns.

19. The Nuns make no Vow, live where they will, and wear hoods like the
Fryars^ sometimes they retire into Deserts, where they say the religious Men
follow them. The Men are well read in Scripture, the Clergy lead much the same
life, but must not Marry twice, if they do, they are excluded the Church. The
Abugnas who give the Holy Orders scarce do it gratis. They use no ceremonies,
nor examine those who are to be ordained; they pay more respect to the Altar
stone on which they lay the blessed Sacrament, then to the the Sacrament it
self; their Chalices are made of Tin, or Copper, very large, that they may hold
much Wine for the People to whom it is given in little spoons. The Priest to
say Mass puts nothing over his clothes, but as it were a piece of a Casula
which hangs behind and covers his back. The Thuribels have bells to make a
noise, they use no Mass book, but say the Mass by Heart; they assist at it with
a confused noise their Chalice clothes are black and dirty, so rags for other
uses, their bells of stone.

20. In the Country of Barnagassa toward Arquico is the famous Monastery of
Birau, corruptly called Vizan or Vision. It is of 200 Years standing, had once
500 Friars, now not above 40. There is a great Church with 3 Isles. sustained
upon 12 Pillars, built and dedicated, as they say to the Blessed Virgin before
her birth; about half a League from it, is the Church of St. George, possessed
by the last Patriarch; near this Church is a large Cave cut out of the Rock,
where are kept with great veneration, and even Heathen Sacrifices, some dead
bodies they call Saints, and not dead Men, for they say, they rest there, and
if any offer to lift the clothes that cover them, to see what is under they
hinder them saying, Do it not for they will wake.

21. There are many other ancient remarkable Churches; those most admirable
which are curiously cut out of Rocks; those lately built are, that of Dancas,
those of Nebesse and Tremona, of Gorgorra, Colena, and Sarca; most of the
Ancient ones are round; Men and Women go not to the same Church, but each Sex
to their own apart.

22. Their errors in Faith are many, the chief, that they baptize without
saying any thing, or if they do, use not the words instituted by the Church: In
confession they use no form of absolution, others absolve without hearing the
sins, giving unreasonable Pennances. They say God is like a Man, that the
Divinity was born of the Blesied Virgin, that there is but one nature in
Christ, that the Holy Ghost proceeds not from the Son, that there is no
Purgatory, that the Souls are given by the Parents, not by Heaven, that till
the Day of Judgment none goes to Heaven or Hell, even the Blessed Virgin. They
Eat not Swines Flesh, Hare, Rabbet, or Eel; Saturday they keep better then
Sunday, no Woman in the time of her courses enters the Church; nor 40 Days
after she is delivered of a Son, and 80 of a Daughter, nor those who have had
carnal Copulation the Day they had it. If any one enters the Church when they
are communicating, he must receive without confessing, though he be loaded with
sin, they had no knowledge of the Sacrament of confirmation, nor extreme
unction. There is no punishment for errors in matters of Religion.

CHAP IX.
Of the Nature of the Country of Ethiopia, of its Towns and the Kings it has
had, and of the entrance and expulsion of our Doctrine.

1. ALL this Country is divided by vast Mountains, so high, that they appear as
if they had been heaped one upon another, of strange figures on which they
build impregnable Castles; some are difficult of ascent, some almost, and
others quite impossible to be ascended; they are beautified with variety of
Trees, and inhabited by a rebellious People, that have much of the nature of
their habitation.

2. Their Cities and Towns are small, but the ruins of great ones are to be
seen. In Accum they appear to have been very sumptuous, for there are Obeliscks
of black stone, some ruined, some standing, two whereof are above 40 Yards
high. It is believed the Court of their Kings was there kept for some Ages
after the famous Queen Saba. I will here give a particular account of the City
Adem, though on the Coast of Arabia, because it was in a manner, and is the
inlet into Ethiopia.

3. About 30 Leagues from the mouth of the red Sea, a point of the Continent
runs into the Sea, making a small Peninsula covered with vast Hills and Rocks
that do not produce the least Plant; on the top of one is a square Fort with
Towers; thence runs down toward the Bar a wall with Bastions, the last of them
at the foot of the Mountain. Hence the wall turns along the foot of the Hill,
till it joins the lower Fort, making a sort of Circle. This work though it
appears formidable at Sea, can do no great harm to the Ships, byreason of its
great height, to remedy which fault, there is a Platform raised near the
Water. In all the works there are about 12 large, and 20 lesser pieces of
Canon, and 600 Soldiers armed with good Firelocks, Swords without shells,
Cimitars, and Tucks.

4. In a bottom at the foot of the wall and Mountain, lies the City, not the
third part of what it has been, girt with a wall and Towers at convenient
distances; it is divided rather into lanes than streets, there are wells the
Water whereof is brackish, but used when Rain Water fails, the inhabitants are
Arabs and strangers, Moors descended from those who were once masters of it,
and Jews who are in all parts of the World and here live meanly.

5. Provisions are brought from the inland on Camels; their Money pieces of
Eight, and another of the same value called Cabres or Xamies. There are no
Thieves, and therefore no Locks to the Doors; their weapons Swords, Semiters,
Poniards and Bucklers hanging by straps about their Necks. Their cloth ing
black, the better sort wear a thing like a like a shirt down to the Ancles; the
Poor a clout tied about the waste, reaching half way down the thigh; the
Gallants add a Fota or loose cloak hanging down, or under the Arm, only the
Xarises wear Veils on their Heads. The Women use the same sort of shirt or
cassack as the Men, except that before it reaches only to their Knees, and
behind sweeps the Streets with a train a Yard long. The best sort wear a kind
of silk Petticoat of several colors, they cover themselves to the Knees with a
kind of Veil, and have only one Eye uncovered in the street.

The Arabs easily took this Town from the Turks, and it might as easily be
taken from them, if any would attempt it by way of surprise. A Portugues
Gentleman, after being possessed of it, shamefully quitted it.

7. The Emperors of Ethiopia since the Queen Saba (or Maqueda for she was so
called) are these, her Son Solomon, Amna, Sahacam, Baremgabo, Sabacio, Thoasca,
Adona, Ausayo, Omacio, Cboa, Luvo, Antata, Bahaca, Savads, Adina, Gotolea,
Sasalea, Elgabul, Bautaul, Bavares the first, Bavares the second, Mahase,
Nalque, Baisol, in whose time Christ was born; Chempas Gado, Bhur Sagad, Grima,
Casar, Sarado, Cucii Bacheon, Sargay, Zeray, Sona Aogad, Gheona, Gaya; Macugna,
Safa^da, Agdar, Abraha, and Cabaha, who Reigned together, in whose time went
thither a Patriarch called Minatas and Pantale^, who we said Preached the
Gospel there. H^pba, A^sid, Anci, Arada, Asadadora, Amamid, in whose time two
Christian Kings sailing through the red Sea, landed with some religious Men,
and Reigned there, and then the descendants of the former were restored, and
were Saba, Thazena, Caleb, Gabra, Masael, Constantine, B^gar, Zansagad, Frey,
Senay, Adoraza, Aidar, Madai, Calaudamo, Grima Affar, Zergaza, Digna, Micael,
Bud Gaza, Arma, Asbanani, Digna, Zana, Ambusao, Demo, Delnaad, hitherto the
line of Saba; those that follow are of another branch, Himnamale, Agba, Acheon,
Bhar, Sagad, Hesta, Sarad, Cama, Asgad, Vda^ Arad, Anda Cheon, Caifa Arad, Vd
Doma, David, Theadros, Isac, Andreas, Astbinavi, Anda Jesus, Bad Linavi, Iarai,
Acob, Beda M^riad, or Zeriaco, Hescander, or Alexander he that Peter de
Covillam saw when Vasco de Gama was discovering the Indian Sea, Andacheon or
Nant, David, Oena Saged, whom D. Christopher de Gama went to assist; Claudius
or Athana Saged, to whom went the first Ambassador from Portugal. In all 86
Emperors from Queen Saba, till the Year ^600, or thereabouts.

8. We have already, at the time it happened, spoke of the introduction of a
Catholic Patriarch into this Country, and shall in its proper place, in the
third Tome, speak of the banishment of them. It is very remarkable that this
Emperor, who so joyfully received an Apostical Prelate, and submitted to the
Holy See, should after be so cruel an Enemy to it; and that these People who
called themselves Christians, were the backwardest in receiving the true
Catholic Doctrine; the chief cause hereof, is their great inclination to
Judaism, as descended from Solomon's Son. Therefore they so rigarously adhere
to Circumcision, that not only the Men but Women are Circumcised; they observe
strictly the Saturday; they take the liberty of being divorced only for their
pleasure, and have several Wives, without regarding whether they have been
their own Father's Brother's, or other Men's. This obstinacy is not a little
helped by the Pontifical Power usurped by their Emperor; and by a Prophecy they
have, that the Franguis or Europeans shall become Masters of their Country, and
they fear the Preaching the Faith may be an Introduction to it. They have also
another Prophecy, that they, assisted by the Franguis, shall destroy the House
of Meca, which they desire as much as any other Christians. But let this
suffice for Ethiopia.

CHAP. X.
Of the Islands of Japan.

1. WE have already in the Eleventh Chapter of the First Part of this Tome
spoke of the Situation, Extent, Names, and some other particulars of these
Islands, which will be needless to repeat, and shall therefore proceed to what
has not yet been related.

2. The Country, though not void of large Plains, is very mountainous, some so
high they are much above the Clouds. Two are most remarkable; that of
Fiyenoyama four Leagues from Miaco, and that of Letchu which continually casts
out terrible Flames, and among them sometimes the Devil comes out to persuade
the People to cast themselves in there, affirming, it is the shortest cut to
Heaven. About this Mountain are many Silver Mines: The Fields are watered with
many Rivers, which together with the Summer Rains and Winter Snow make them
Fruitful, if the continual Wars did not hinder all Tillage, which is the Reason
that Land is undeservedly accounted barren. It bears Rice and Wheat, of which
they do not make Bread, but use it after their own manner, all sorts of Fruit
usual among us, and many others, abundance of Wood both on the Hills and
Plains. It is plentiful of all sorts of Cattle, and abundantly furnished with
Fish. Their Water is thin, the Air wholesome; the Natives are generally
long-lived, and vigorous to the last; they apply themselves to the use of Arms
at 15 Years of Age, and give it not over till sixty.

3. Their Countenance is agreeable, wellshaped, generally large, and they value
the greatest Bodies, very strong, and inured to Labor and Hardship: As soon as
born they dip the Children in the Water to make them hardy, and as soon as
grown to any strength the Boys hunt wild Beasts in the Woods. They are more
ready at Handy-crafts than the Europeans, and their Count^y People more
polished; this makes them the more tenacious of the Christian Faith, because
they admit it not till sufficiently convinced.

4. Honor is no less Worshipped among them than their Idols, and they will
endure any thing rather than abate in any point of it; this makes them very
courteous, they show the same civility to Friends and Enemies, they never
swear, Princes punish Subjects and Masters Servants in such manner, as neither
has cause to complain, all Differences, though between near Relations, are
composed by a third hand to avoid Animosities. To speak ill of the absent, is a
Crime to them unknown; so is Play and Theft, and no less begging or borrowing.
Poverty, nor any other Misfortune that depends not of the Will, is not looked
upon as disgraceful, for they will no way allow Honor to depend upon Fortune.

5. Withal there is no Faith among them, even between Father and Son, but it is
a Disgrace for a Man to be open-hearted. Hence it proceeds they commonly Murder
one another in their Embraces, Subjects do the same to their Princes, and
Servants to Masters. Thus Rebels are caressed by their Sovereigns, for all
their study is convenience; Mothers instead of suckling strangle their
Children; some kill themselves to save receiving an Affront; and the Sick have
no Relief, for all fly from them, and when dead throw them like Beasts on a
Dunghill. They are not only given to Women, but much more to Sodomy.

6. If two happen to lie together, each lays his Head at the other's Feet.
Neither Men nor Women wear any thing on their Heads, only the great Men when
they travel go under an Umbrello; they mount on Horseback on our off-side.
Instead of bowing when they meet, they draw back their Foot out of the slipper
more or less; when the Inferior sees a Superior he sits down. They, value
precious Stones no more than Straws; any piece of Antiquity they esteem at
extravagant Rates of what sort soever. The King of Bango gave 13000 Crowns for
a Vessel among us not worth a Groat. They have the same value for any draught
of a famous Master, or for a Blade of a Sword or Hanger.

7. Their Mourning is white, and their festival Apparel black, the same is used
by the Chinese. The Men varnish their teeth, the Women their hair. Our Music
to them is ungrateful; they delight in those Instruments that make most noise:
Their Fish they eat raw, and hate Milk or any thing made of it, calling it
unconcocted Blood. Beef or Mutton is never eaten but in the utmost Extremities,
as loathsome Vermin among us; the Wheat they make like the Italians into
Vermicheli, or Macaroli, and drink Water boiled with the Herb Cha hot, sipping
it; this I believe is our Tea. The Service of their Tables differs from ours;
the Vessels are all of Gold or Porcelane, for the Silver is all coined into
Money. Our sweetest Perfumes are loathsome to them. What would make us sick is
the Diet of their Sick, as Fish salt and raw, Limons and other acids. Bleeding
is not used, for they say it is a madness to lavish the Treasure of Life, so
they call the Blood. Their Purges are sweet and pleasant, the others, they say,
and with reason, do but heap misery on the Patient.

8. Though there are many Kingdoms, the Language is the same; but so various,
it sounds like many; for they have great variety of Words upon all Occasions:
those that are used in serious Discourse serve not to jest, those that are for
great Men are not for the meaner, those for the old are not for the young, the
same are not for Men as for Women. In Writing they have fourteen different
sorts of Characters, all varying not only in form but signification. The Gentry
learn to read and write till twelve Years of Age in the Monasteries of the
Boncos. There is one sort of Character to write to Princes, another to Nobles,
another to the meaner sort, and another for Books, of which they have great
plenty in Prose and Rhyme very elegant and ingenious: Every Character is a
Word. Some of our People that understand the Language of Iapan and Latin,
avouch the former to be much more copious, beautiful, soft, and complete in all
particulars.

9. All their Buildings, because of the Earthquakes the Island is subject to,
are of Wood, but of such Structure, they are no way inferior to the finest in
the World. They are whitened with a Plaster made of shells of Fish, which
preserves the Wood from the Weather, and makes the Cities appear most beautiful
at a distance. The Tiling is black and of such a nature it will last Five
hundred Years. The Curiosity within it not to be parallelled. Hangings are not
used, but all the Walls curiously painted with Landskips or Histories of their
Ancestors. The floors are covered with fine Mats, and such as go on them wash
their Feet first. There are no Chairs nor Bedsteads. On the Beds there are few
Clothes but what they wear by day, but some have coverings of the same Straw as
the Mats wrought with Gold.

10. The Poor eat as they can, but always with decency; the Rich with such
state of Servants, Music, Plays, and variety of Dishes, that a whole night is
spent in a Supper. They use as many Tables as Dishes, about a span and half
high, because they sit on the ground, each Table about half a yard square
curiously wrought of Cedar inlaid with Gold and several Colors. There are no
Napkins nor Table-cloaths, because they never touch any thing, but feed
themselves with little Cipress sticks so artificially that never any thing
drops. The Meat is heaped in the Dishes like Pyramids strewed with Gold, the
Fowl whole, the Beaks and Talo^s gilt. Their Entertainment is generous and
friendly, but so ceremonious, it were better to endure hunger than their
Complements.

11. All the clothing is Silk, thin in Summer, more substantial in Winter, and
a set time for all People to alter their Dress. They take many Wives, and are
easily divorced, yet Adultery is a capital Crime, and the Woman's Relations
resent it as hainously as the Husband. The Children are bred as has been said,
and at Fifteen have their Sword put on by the Bonzos with much Ceremony. Every
Man is so absolute over his Children and Servants, he may punish and kill them
without being liable to any penalty for it.

CHAP. XI.
A further Account of Japan.

1. TILL the Year One thousand there was but one Monarch over all Iapan, he was
called Huo, or Dayri. He had two Cucabo's, or Generals of his Army. At that
time one of these killed the other, and rebelled against his Prince. Civil Wars
ensuing, several Kingdoms were erected. Every Lord of a Province called himself
Ia^ta, that is King. They have four sorts of People, as among us, the Bonco's
or Clergy, the Nobility, Gentry and Commonalty, these two last pay great
respect to the Nobles, who are called Tonos, and, as among us, have the
Distinctions of Dukes, Marqueses, Earls, etc. The chief Trade is Silver and
China Silks. In Mechanics they are excellent. Their Cutlaces are so tempered,
they cut through our Armor as if it were Wood. Their Lances are longer and
lighter, their Muskets and other Arms perfectly good, as is their Powder,
their Horse Furniture curious beyond expression. Printing among them, as well
as the Chinese, is very ancient. All the Land is the King's, and he gives
Parcels of it to Noblemen and Gentlemen to serve him in War and Peace, and they
give Portions of it to their Servants.

2. The King has power to recall his Grants, and take back his Lands at
pleasure, and hereupon it is not counted infamous in the Subject to forsake his
Prince, and go over to his Enemy for Profit: So it often happens that Kings are
dethroned, and private Men set up. But this does not only happen in Iapan.

3. No Prince is more difficult of access than those of Iapan; all Business is
done by way of Petition. The People when they see the King, rather adore than
reverence him. There is no Prison or juridical proceeding against Criminals,
every King, T^, or Master of a Family punishes without any of our Forms. The
Punishment is commonly inflicted by Surprise, for none will receive it without
resisting. When the King punishes a great Man, he causes his House to be beset
with armed Men, and as an Honor gives him leave to kill or defend himself. If
he defends himself, there is a Battle between those that are to execute him and
his Family; if he kills himself, he makes a cross Wound with a Dagger, and
throws it into the Air, to show he fears neither Heaven nor Earth. When they
are grown in Years, and have Sons of the Age of Eighteen, they give their
Estates to them, reserving only some small thing to live upon, and this they do
not for love, but to prevent being turned out and dispossessed by them. There
is nothing among them but what is purchased and maintained by force of Arms,
and so dividing them into five parts, not above the ^th dies a natural Death,
the other four by the Sword.

4. In the Reign of Dayri sole Monarch of the Island, there rose a Bonco with
the name of a Prophet, and introduced Sodomy among them, since which time they
have never been free from Rebellions, which are the Destruction of Iapan, to
prove God could better endure Idolaters than Sodomites. Of their several sorts
of Opinions in Religion enough was said in the Eleventh Chapter of the First
Part of this Tome, and somewhat shall be hinted out of a Hebrew Canon in the
last Chapter of this same Tome, touching the Preaching of St. Thomas the
Apostle in this Island. Bonco is a common name for all the Ministers deputed to
the Service of their Gods, as well Camies as F^oques. Though these differ in
Condition and Profession, they agree in three Particulars; the first, a
counterfeit Chastity, for it is not lawful for them to Marry; the second,
Abstinence from all sorts of Fish and Flesh; and the third, Shaving their Head
and Beard, in token they contemn the World.

5. Some live in Towns, and have the Charge of the Varela's or Temples of the
Idols, others in great Monasteries. There are also Monasteries of Women, whom
they call Biconies, who also profess Chastity, and observe it as ill as the
Men. It is wonderful that though both of them be extravagantly Debauched,
Proud, Covetous and Cruel, yet on account of their Profession they are held in
great Veneration. They had once an infinite number of stately Temples, and even
at the time St. Francis Xaverius went thither, he found Five hundred that had
escaped the Fury of their Wars. In one of these is that prodigious Altar on
which stand Fifteen hundred Idols of the common Stature of a Man, all gilt and
orderly placed in nine rows round a principal one, to whom they seem to make
their Court. Every one of these has three Heads and above forty Arms, which the
Boncos say represent the Power of their Deities. The Silver and Gold Lamps and
other rich Gifts presented by Kings and Lords when they go to War, are
innumerable. All the City Hara is full of Temples; in one of them is the Idol
Xac^ of gilt Metal, and so big, that a Pigeon standing upon its head, can
scarce be seen by those who stand at its feet.

6. In these Buildings there are wonderful Columns of Cedar: In one of them
there are Ninety-eight of a vast height, and near twenty-three foot in compass,
so wrought that none of them could cost less than Five thousand Ducats. The
Porches are Forty Foot high, and twenty-five in breadth, on sides of them are
Statues of a monstrous higness with Maces in their Hands, threatening the Devil
who lies at their Feet, as St. Mi^el the Archangel is painted among us. A^ is
kept extraordinary clean: In the City Miaco all things more Majestic. The
Gardens belonging to these Houses are surprising, adorned with variety of
Flowers, many whereof seem rather the work of Art than Nature. The Parks,
Ponds, Fountains, Birds of several Colors, and variety of wild Beasts not to
be molested, are impossible to be described. The Sons of the principal Men put
themselves into these Convents. The Color of their Habits differs according to
their several Sects. They wear Beads, and keep Choir, where they sing in the
manner of our Psalms; Mati^s at midnight, other hours at break of Day, and
others at Sun rising. They are called together by Bells, whereof they have
great number, and of extraordinary grandeur. They are rung at certain hours of
the day for the People to pray, and they do it in the Evening as we Vespers.

7. Their Galleries before their Cells, their Refectories and other Offices are
very large and orderly. The funeral Ceremonies are very stately. They grant
Indulgences for the Living and Dead, and for the latter Habits which they say
carry them directly to Heaven. There is a commemoration of the Souls departed
in the great Feast of their ^amies and F^toques. They Preach in large Pulpits,
and the People is called with a Bell. The Preacher is clothed in majestic
Garments with a gold Fan in his Hand, and moves the Audience with an affected
Gravity and Modesty, takes his Text out of their Scripture, and discourses
thereon so efficaciously, that the Hearers burst into Tears, calling upon
Ami^da and Xa^a, and leaving very consideral Alms, the chief aim of the Bonzos
passionate Discourse* They study in several Colleges founded by their Kings.

8. They have also a military order, which they call Ne^goros, consisting of
two sorts of Bonzos. One (the fewest in number) keep a Choir, and have charge
of Idols and Temples; the other follow the Wars, serve any Prince for pay, to
the number of Thirty thousand, and are absolute in their own Conquests. Some of
them have Estates of Sixty thousand Ducats a Year. Every day they carry five
Arrows to the public Magazine of Arms. They profess Chastity, and admit no
Women into their Towns, but make no scruple of committing Sodomy.

9. Over all these Religious Professions is a head Bonzo called Zaco, who (in
the same nature as the Pope) has the disposal of all their Church Dignities,
orders all Matters of Religion, and grants Dispensations. The Monasteries choose
their Superiors. The Cities have Tundos, answerable to our Bishops, to them all
the Bonzos are subject, and they grant Power to the Superiors of them to
dispense in lesser Matters. The Pontifical Chair is at Mi^co, is vastly rich in
Revenues, and is in continual War with the Laity about the Succession.

10. Besides those spoke of, there are some remarkable Buildings in Iapan, but
I will only touch upon one Fort. Six Leagues from Ca^goxima in the Kingdom of
Some, there is a vast high mountain all of one solid Rock. On the top of it is
artificially cut out a Castle with all Apartments equal to any great Palace,
defended by ten Bastions, and they encompassed by a large deep Ditch, the whole
of one entire piece, as being cut out of the very Rock, in the same manner, as
if it had been formed of Clay or Wax. We have already and shall again in its
place speak of some such Works in India. Let us now go over to China.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Great Empire of China, and first of its Situation, Division into
Provinces, of its Product, Arts and Commerce.

1. THE Island Hainan, the Southermost part of this Empire, is in 19 degrees* of
North Lat. and the Tartar Wall the utmost Northern bound, in some places
exceeds 41 degrees. The extent from East to West no less, so that it is not much
inferior to all Europe in greatness. On the South Coast are abundance of small
Islands so near the Continent, they seem to be all one Body.

2. This vast Empire is divided into Fifteen Provinces, each of them formerly a
large Kingdom. Most of the Nine they call the Southern Provinces are watered
with such large Rivers, that in some of them the opposite Shore is out of
sight; they are all Navigable, and such multitudes of Vessels upon them, as
seems incredible even to those that are Eyewitnesses. A Passenger in less than
an hour counted above Three hundred in only an arm of the River M^mquim. They
are curiously built, for round the outside are Galleries for the Sea^n to Sail
them, without incumbring the middle, so that they are more like Pl^asure-houses
than Boats, and that also in respect of their Painting, Gilding, and the
Spaciousness of their several upper and lower Apartments. Those of Hang^ (...)
all the others.

2. The 6 No^ (...) being nearer to our Latitude* (...) of the ^me (...), the
are (...) others* and more healthy; yet (...) are ^lly long lived in all of
them, ^d there are many vigorous old Men; it is so well Peopled, that not only
small Towns, but Cities are in sight one of another, and where the Rivers are
much frequented, (...) a continued Town. They have greater and lesser Cities,
Towns, and Castles, which they call Fu, Che^, (...), (...), the Villages are
innumerable; they are all guarded throughout the Kingdom by ^ight, as if they
were upon a Frontiere; the streets are watched with great diligence.

4. The multitude of People is unexpressable; it is difficult going in the
Towns by reason of the concourse, and the Roads are as usually among us, upon*
Fairs. According to their general lists there are near 60 Millions o^ Men wh^h
(...) ^uchs, Women and Children a^ ^erable. The common buildings (...) ^o
^ghtly, and lasting as ours, but (...), and clean. They (...) a^ C^ram with
great Art in their structures; C^aram is a sort of var^ that distills from
certain Trees, it mixes with all colors, and is most beautiful as may be ^en
in many things brought from thence. They build no upper ^oors, looking upon the
low to be more convenient; all neat People have Gardens with Flowers and small
Trees; in the North they use such as bear Fruit, if they have much ground, they
plant great Trees, raise Mounts, on which are kept Fowl, as Cran^ and Swans,
and Beasts; as Deer and others. They also make Ponds in which are black and red
Fishes with gilded Scales.

5. They first frame the Roof of the Ho^, then set it upon Pillars, each of
them of only one piece of Timber, varnished with (...) for the most part black;
then they build the Walls of brick, and a sort of plaste^ like lime which is
very hard; they say that formerly they built after our manner, and have still
rules of Architecture only observed in public buildings, as Palaces and the
like; they have many Towers of several forms, all beautiful, from 5 to 9
stories high, with winding stairs and others, and galleries without; their
Household stuff is various, curious, and very cheap.

6. This Kingdom being of so great an extent and consequently lying under so
many several Climates, produces all sorts of Fruit^ that the whole Earth
affords. Their common sustenance i^ ^ce, and Wheat, whereof they have such
pl^y, that a Pico of either of them, is sold for 5 Royals, and when dearest for
7. A Pico is a Hundred and a quarter weight of ours. The Northern Provinces
make most use of Wheat and Barley, the Southern of Rice; all other sorts of
Grain is plentiful, the Poor use it for Wheat* and it serves to feed Cattle.
The comm^nalty feed on Herbs all the Year, and no other Medicines a^e found in
the Apothecaries Shops.

7. Every Village affords abundance of Meat, the commonest is Pork, Beef is
sold without bones, wild Foul and Beasts not so usual, they have of all sorts
except Rabbets; they have Nighting^ls that sing like ours, but are much bigger;
and ano^ ^ort very beautiful and of delicious (...)* they have ^lso all those
sorts of birds we see painted on their works; they breed infinite quantities of
tame Foul, the Geese so nume^* they are in vast stocks about the Fields. What
is (...) of their hatching Eggs by art is true, (...) it is done only in Summer.

8. As for savage beasts they have many, as Tigers, Wolves, etc. but not hurt^*
Elephants are brought from abroad; of tame Cattle they have all the same sorts
as among us, and use not Oxen for plowing as in India, but Bufalos. Horses are
plentiful but not good; they formerly used Coaches, now Chairs. Their way of
Traveling is in Litters, on Mules, or in Chairs carried by 4, 6, or 8 Men,
according to every ones ability; they are bigger than ours. In the Cities of
Peking and Nanking, Horses stand in the Streets bridled and ^addl'd, to be
hired to go about the Town.

9. Fish is not so plentiful in the Northern Provinces, because there are not
many Rivers, but much comes from the South salted, and otherwise preserved:
Their best fruit is in the Southern Provinces, the best Oranges those of
Quantung; in Xeni there are most Grapes, whereof they make Reasins, but no
Wine. In the North they make Drink of (...), (...) ^e South of Rice only, it is
p^ant to the sight, smell, and taste, and among them Drunkenness is accounted
no shame. There are two pleasant and strange fruits, the Sucu, a red Apple like
an Orange of excellent taste, and is preserved hung up. The Lequias of the
bigness of an ordinary Pear, shaped like a Heart, in color like a Strawberry,
the inside Pearl color, in the middle a core very pleasant, but not to be kept.

10. They have all sorts of Flowers, many unknown to us, and keep them all the
Year, some grow in the dead of Winter, when the leaves are fallen off the
Plants: these are called Lamui, and are more agreeable to the smell than sight,
being yellow like wax.

11. Their Apparel, Beds, and other furniture, is made of Woollen, Linen, Silk,
and Cotton, of which they have abundance, and work it curiously; China supplies
strangers with the richest commodities of the East, as Gold in thread, beaten,
an^ in bars, Rubies, Zasires, Pearl, Musk, Silk raw, and wrought; Porcelane,
Quicksilver, Copper, Tinn, Tortoise-shell, Vermillion, Salt Peter, and
Sulphur, Sugar and other things of less value. Their gilding either for use or
curiosity is well known; the vilest things are not lost among them. The Kingdom
is rich, but not private Persons; there are not so many rich Men as in Europe,
nor so many Poor; few possess very much, many have plenty, and scarce any want.

12. Money is scarce as may appear by the price of all things, Servants wages,
hire of Workmen, and allowances to Ministers of State. A pound of Mutton is
worth a half penny, a Pidgeon not a farthing, a Man's wages not above a Crown a
Year; some things alter the Prizes but all are reasonable, and much about these
rates.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Provinces into which China is divided.

1. THis vast Empire is divided into two parts, the Northern, and the Southern,
and they into 15 Provinces. To the Southern part belong 9, which are Quantung,
Quansi, Yunnan, Fokien, Kiangsi, Suchuen, Huquang, Chekiang, and Nanking.
Quantung is the most Southerly, and lies between 20 and 25 degrees. of lat. it is
large and Rich, and abounds in Wheat and Rice, of the latter, though differing
in kind, the Earth gives two crops a Year. Here is much Sugar, Iron, Copper,
and Ti^, all which are wrought with great perfection, as also the works of
Charam and gildings brought to us. The People are very ingenious at
handicrafts, easily imitate what they see, but are not good at invention. Our
Merchants repair twice a Year to the Capital City Quangcheu, 75 Leagues distant
from Macao, and Macao is 18 from the Islands, and is about 5 Leagues in
circumference. This is the most frequented Port of the whole Kingdom. The
Portugues alone export hence Yearly, 53000 Chests of Silks, 22000 bars of Gold,
each weighing 12 Ounces, 7 Picos of Musk, which is 8 Hundred and three
quarters. Pearl, Sugar, Porcelane, China wood, Reubarb. and other lesser
commodities in vast quantity. The Island Haynan belongs to this Province, about
it is a great Fishery of Pearl, it is well Peopled on the Northern Coast, on
the Southern is a Town that owns no subjection to any body. It produces several
sorts of precious Wood.

2. On the N. E. side of Quantung lies the Province of Quang^, between 23 and
27 degrees. of lat. it differs not from the other in any thing considerable. That
of Yunnan to the Eastward in the same lat. is the farthest from the Center of
China, it is large but not rich, its principal Commodity being Amber for Beads,
and such uses. Here contrary to the custom of all the rest of the Kingdom, the
Women go abroad to buy and sell. On the other side of Quantung to the E. N. E.
is the Province of Fokien between 24 and 28 degrees. of lat, it is for the most
part Mountanous; the Natives contrary to the general Law, travel and trade
abroad: It yields Gold, Sugar, Hemp, and Paper of several so^ts; the goodness,
plenty, and cheapness of it very remarkable. Printing here is very ^eap, and as
Ancient as shall be mentioned hereafter, it is not done with loose letters as
among us, but cut in Wood, so that the Original remains; there are an infinite
number of Printing Houses, every one may Print what he pleases without a
License, and notwithstanding this liberty, they never publish any scandalous or
immodest Book. This Province lies on the Sea, and thence are exported infinite
quantities of Merchandise for Manila, Iapan, and the Island Formosa, which is
in sight; the Dutch trade here.

3. The Province of Kiangsi lies North of Quantung, between 25 and 30 degrees. of
lat. It is hemmed in with great Mountains, from which fall two Rivers, one
running to the Southward, all the way Navigable; another to the Northward,
which after running through great part of this Province, receives another great
one coming from the Province of Huquang, and is the famous Kiang. The feet of
these Mountains are adorned with good Cities at convenient distances for
travelers, and carrying of goods, which are generally on Men's backs, and the
concourse is incredible; the Innkeepers give an account of all that comes in to
their Houses, and are obliged to give two Meals to all such Passengers, having
other ways to be paid; every Man carries his own Bed, for the lodgings find
nothing but bedsteads. In the Customhouse, which is here very great, they do
not visit the goods, but take everyMans word, and the Duties are very easy; a
traveller that is no Merchant, is Custom-free; the strangers that come to
Macao, pay according to the Tunnage of their Vessels without searching.

4. This Province is so populous they miscal it Laocha, that is little Mice,
because they spread all over the Kingdom, serving all sorts of Trades,
particularly Tailors; they are very Poor; the Province has abundance of Rice
and Fish; it is famous for large Soles, but more for Porcelane. The Clay it is
made of, is only found in one Village, and in another place the Water to work
it, for if they use any other, it proves not so good. In this work there is
none of the mystery generally represented to us, it is mere Clay, but of a most
rare quality; it is wrought after the same manner, as ours, in the same time,
and of all colors. This Province Fokien and Quantung meet in an Angle formed
of many Mountains, among which is a small Kingdom, the King whereof owes no
obedience to him of China; they allow the use of Physicians in sickness, but of
no Lawyers in their suits. If any scarcity happen, they go a Robbing in the
nature of open War.

5. The Province of Suchuen is much in the same Latitude, and has nothing
singular; that of Huquang is in the same lat. more plentiful of Rice than any;
has much Oil, and Fish in its great Rivers, and Lakes like Seas. The Province
Chekiang lies between 27 and 32 degrees. upon the Sea, is plain and fruitful, and
watered with many Rivers, some whereof run through the Towns; it is much Richer
than the others, particularly in Silk, which is exported only from thence.
Hangcheu is the Metropolis, the most populous of China, so delicious and
pleasant, that it is a Proverb, Glory in Heaven, and Hangcheu on Earth. Three
things make it most famous, the Lake called the rarest in the World, about two
Leagues in compass, beset round with curious Palaces, and they with delightful
Hills, the Water runs in at one end, and out at the other, across it are set
Dogs of Stone for People to go over upon, many Vessels ply about it, some very
large, being built for pleasure and feasting, with Kitchins fore and aft, in
the Midship rooms with Tables, above floors for Women, the windows covered with
close nets, that they may not be seen, all painted and gilded; the abundance of
Meat in them is wonderful, in these many spend what they have. The second thing
famous, is the Silk, and man ner of working it; the third, the worship of their
Idols, and magnificence of their Temples.

6. The last of these 9 Southern Provinces is Nanking, between 29 and 36 degrees.
of lat. the best in the whole Kingdom. It permits no Foreign Trade, the
Merchants, to enhance the value of their goods, say, they are of Nanking; in
only the Town of Xanham, it is said, there are 200000 loomes for Cotton, which
yearly yield the King 450000 Ducats. The Court long resided here, and all the
tribunals and privileges of a Court still remain in the capital City called
(as my Author will have it,) Ymthienfu, but I find it is by all others named
Kiangning. This City is the best in the Kingdom for sumptuous buildings,
spacious streets, trade, and abundance of all things; it has twelve stately
Gates well defended with Canon, without the walls runs another, at a great
distance much ruined; the outward circumference will take up a Horseman two
Days journey, traveling a good pace, the inward is 6 Leagues; between the two
walls are buildings and tillage, the crop whereof is appropriate to the
Soldiery that reside within, to the number of 40000 In one quarter of the Town
is a Mount and thereon a sphere of a vast bigness, of curious workmanship, but
stands not on a frame; there is also a rare Tower 7 stories high with all
appurtenances made of Porcelane, a most wonderful work. The River runs by the
foot of it, called according to my Author Yamcuquiam, by all others I find it
named Kiang; but Yamcuquiam signifies Son of the Sea, because it is one of the
greatest in the World, and may perhaps for brevity generally be called Quiam or
Kiang; it has great store of Fish.

7. The Northern Provinces are 6, their names Honan, Xensi, Xansi, Xantung,
Peking, and Leav^ung. The first lies between 33 and 37 degrees. of lat. and
produces the most delicious fruit, which is prodigiously cheap, so that One
hundred of Apricocks is worth about half a Farthing. A Prince lives here in as
great state as the King.

8. The Province Xensi lies to the Eastward of the last in near the same
Latitude; it is large but dry, as the three next to it; bears little Rice, much
Barley, common and Indian Wheat. Their Sheep are shorn three times a Year,
Spring, Summer and Autum, but the first shearing is the best. The Wool serves
for Hats and such like work, but is not fit to spin. The Goat's Hair is spun,
and of it they weave Stuffs richer than of Silk, but it is only of a sort of
Down that grows next the Skin under the long Hair. This Province yields Musk,
which grows in the Navel of a Beast like a little Deer, the Flesh whereof is
eaten. The Purses brought hither are not all the same in which it grows,
because the Musk mixed with other Drugs is too much to be contained by them
only, and so Purses are made for it of the Skin. Scarce any Musk comes over
pure. Here is also some Gold gathered, but in Rivers, for the Mines of it and
Silver are not open. Most of the Rhubarb in the World seems to come from hence;
for that which is brought from Persia cannot be of the Prod^ct of that Country,
because none that have traveled there relate they ever saw this Herb grow
there. It grows high and bears Leaves bigger than those of Cabbage, requires
much care, and grows not wild, as some would have it.

9. This is a Province of great Trade, for the numerous Caravans, some of above
One thousand Men, which repair to its two Western Cities, Socheu and Xancheu.
In them come Ambassadors from the Mohammedan Princes to the King of China, every
three Years is an ordinary Embassy, and every fifth one extraordinary, they
always bring Presents. The Princes are, the Turk, the Arabs, Camul, Samar^an,
and Tarsan, but none of them, except the last, know any thing of these
Embassies or Presents, the Merchants do it at their own cost for the more
security of their Trade. The Present consists of a quantity of precious Stones,
Three hundred and forty Horses, Three hundred small Sparks of Diamonds, some
sine Blew, Six hundred Knives, and as many Files. The King returns for each
Horse two pieces of Cloth of Gold; Thirty of yellow Silk, Thirty Pounds of
Cha, Ten of Musk, Fifty of a Medicine called Tienyo, and Fifty of Silver.

10. Cha (which I suppose to be our Tea) is the Leaf of a Tree like Myrtle, in
some places bigger than others, they dry it in Iron Pots over the Fire, and so
it runs up together. There is of it from a Ducat the Pound to less than a
Halfpenny, such is its variety. It is their common drink steeped in hot Water,
with it they treat Strangers, and relate many Virtues of it.

11. The Province of Xansi lies between 36 and 42 degrees. of Lat. the many
Mountains make it barren, therefore bears little Wheat, less Rice, and most of
Indian Wheat; it supplies the Kingdom with Resins. Here are Wells of Fire for
the use of Houses, like those of Water in other Parts. They make small Mouths,
and over them boil any thing. They have Coal-Pits as in England. The Province
of Xantung lies between 35 and 38 degrees. of Lat. it is poor, subject to Locusts,
and often to Famine. It bears a sort of Apples which is carried over most of
the Kingdom.

12. The Province of Peking between 36 and 42 degrees of Latitude, is now
honored with the Court in the City of the same name, but more properly
Xunt^ienfu, or Xuntien; the Moors call it Cambalud. The People (as all those of
the North) are not so ingenious, but more laborious and warlike. The Land dry
and healthy, but barren; yields Indian Corn, but little Rice or Wheat. The Rice
used at Court comes from Nanking, it is pleasant only boiled in Water without
any other Addition. The King keeps One thousand Sail that trade to the South
for Provisions. This Province sends abroad no Commodities but Pensils and
Persumes. The City is not so large as Nanking, but far exceeds it in
populousness: The Walls are so thick, twelve Horsemen ride abreast on them;
they are guarded with as much care in Peace as War. At the Gates are Officers
to receive the Duty of all things brought in, and that belongs to the Queen.

13. The Magistrates of this City have but very little State in their Persons
and Houses, only the chief of them can go in Chairs, the others on Horseback.
All People have their Faces covered along the Streets to avoid the Dust, but
more to save the Ceremonies to Mandarines. The Cold is more violent here than
could be expected in that Latitude. The River and Lakes are froze over, so that
they bear. They use a sort of Stoves that conveys the heat underneath which
serve in their Gardens, and anticipate the Spring.

14. The last Northern Province is Leaotung, famous for a precious Medicinal
Root it produces, which adds strength and vigor to such as are in Health, and
gives great comfort to the Sick. This being the Tartar Frontier, is much
ruined, and in part possessed by them. Along it runs that so famous Wall for
the space of Three hundred Leagues, of great Renown, but little use; for
notwithstanding it the Enemy breaks in at pleasure. In all these Provinces
there are Four hundred forty four Cities, and Eleven hundred and fifty Towns of
Note; the others are not to be numbered. Thus much of the Soil, Product and
Division of China.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the People of China, their Customs, Inclinations and Studies.

1. THE People of China are white, the more Northward the whiter; both Men and
Women suffer their Hair to grow to its full length; it is generally black, and
they therefore called by some Nations, The black haired People. Their Eyes are
commonly black and small, their Noses little, they look upon ours as deformed,
their Beards thin, the black esteemed most beautiful; it is never cut, but they
had rather it should all fall off than one hair of the head. They take great
pains in dressing it, and have many Barbers who never cut but only serve to
order it.

2. They are handsomest whilst very young, particularly in the South. The Women
of (...) are counted the most beautiful, thence the great Men have their
Concubines. The Men, as they grow above twenty-five Years of Age loose their
Color, but not so much of their Features, yet grow ugly; they are well made,
strong, and inclined to Labor. In Tillage they are very industrious, sometimes
plowing with a Plow of three Coulters that makes as many Furrows, and on it
carry a Tray with a hole, through which Kidneys-Beans drop, and the Ground is
sowed at once; other Grain is sowed after Plowing. Often he that drives a Beast
loaded carries a burden.

3. Nothing that can be of use is lost. There are often seen many Vessels
laden with only was for Candles taken out of the heart of a Rush. Others that
carry nothing but Paper for Privies, which must have no Letter upon it,
esteeming it a Sacrilege to put any such to that use. They are naturally
Merchants. About the Street is fold by Retail, whatever is by Wholesail in
Shops. Children sell small things that no Age may be idle. In matters of trust
they are most faithful, but in selling the cunningest of Cheats. They will dig
out the Flesh of a Fowl, make it up again, and fell the Skin and Bones as an
entire Bird; they counterfeit Gammons of Bacon, so that it is hard to discover
the Fraud. In fatning, coloring and patching up of old, lame and unsound
Horses, none equal them.

4. They are much addicted to Chimistry, and believe he that finds the way to
make Silver, has a sure Receipt for to live long. Old Men they think have found
out this Receipt, and therefore some will maintain them only in hopes to learn
it, and others make themselves gray only to get a maintenance that way.

5. They are affable and courteous, treat Strangers with Civility, give them
the upper-hand, lend them Money upon Pawns, but without Use, though they exact
it from their own Kindred and Friends, even in Prisons; where the Scum of
Nations is, they show Compassion toward them. All that are condemned to Death
are beheaded, or strangled, any other Death is accounted Cruel; when many are
condemned, only four or five die, the rest remain in Prison. Humility and
Chastity are Virtues held in great account. They raise triumphant Arches in
Honor of Chaste Women, and bestow public Encomiums on them.

6 Where they use Ceremony it is endless, but among Friends and Kindred none is
used. They are so grave and staid, that no Accident whatsoever can discompose
Men of Quality; so that mortal Enemies meet at Feasts without altering their
Countenance. They lessen themselves to extol Foreigners, and commend all the
Works of Europe, even to undervaluing their own. Their curious Workmanship may
be seen by what comes from thence, which is never the best or curiousest. They
are incomparable at working of Ivory, Ebony, Coral, and Amber, and most
exquisite in Gold and Silver. A gold Chain of their making has been seen that
had Three hundred Links, and did not weigh seven Ounces, their Gold thread is
not so fine as ours. No Vessels of Sive^ are used, but only porcelane; they
have learned to make Clocks to stand on Tables.

7. They are of most ready Wits, whereof I will give one Instance. A Visitor
General being long in a Province without executing his Employ, a Friend of his
enquiring into the Reason, found he had lost the Seal, without which no
Business could be dispatched; and, knowing the Governor was his Enemy, he
advised him to set Fire to his own Palace at Night, and when the Governor came,
as of course he must, to see it put out, then to deliver to him the Box in
which the Seal is kept, saying, He could in that danger only trust him with the
Royal Seal: That if it was the Governor who had caused the Seal to be stole, he
would certainly restore it, because of the trust reposed in him, which if he
did not, the World would believe it was lost in his Custody; this was put in
Execution, and next day the Governor restored the Box with the Seal in it.

8. Their Clothes, as was before said, are made of Woollen, Linen, Silk, or
Cotton. Two hundred Years before Christ they wore short Sleeves (as the Iapans
descended from them still do) and the fashion lasted while the famous Family of
Honan, for Four hundred Years, then it was altered to what is used to this Day,
is the same throughout the Kingdom, and cannot be changed without the King's
leave. The Habit reaches from the Neck to the feet open before, even to the
inward Garments without Buttons; but folding over, the Sleeves large and open
like those of a Monk's Cool. For a Band they wear a piece of white Taffety a
handful broad, which the better sort as soon as soiled throw away. Young Folks
wear all Colors, the Commonalty and all Servants black, old Men grave Colors,
such as are or have been Governors on Festivals the finest red. The ^ich change
Apparel four times a Year, the poor sort twice.

9. Till seventeen Years of Age they wear the short Hai^loose, the rest knotted
on the top of the Head. After that Age it is put into a Net of Horsehair with a
Cap over it; that of the Lawyers square, the others round; it is made either of
Silk or Horsehair, but in Winter of Felt. Much Ceremony is used at the time
they first put on the Net. The Rich wear Shoes of Silk, the Poor of Cotton,
differing from ours in fashion and costly; Leather is only used for Boots,
which are rare. In the same manner the Rich wear Stockins of Damask, or other
soft Silk, the meaner Sort of Cotton, but all white. Breeches are common to Men
and Women. The latter dress their Hair with Flowers, natural or artificial,
except the common Women, who are not allowed to use them, nor to live within
the Walls.

10. The Apparel of Men and Women is the same in all other Points; but these
have Feet less than can be imagined, and to make them so, they swath them hard
from their Infancy. The Custom was taken from a Queen, who having deformed Feet
endeavored by that means to bring them into shape.

11. The Women are very retired, none of any Age is seen in the Street, no Men
visit them in their Houses, nor presume to enter into their Apartments.
Servants have admittance only whilst very young, Brother or Father-in-law on no
account. The ordinariest. Women go abroad in Chairs. If they happen to go a
foot on account of any Pilgrimage, they cover their Faces: If they travel in
Boats, they pass by each other, without speaking one word. Yet in some parts of
this great Empire, Women go abroad, but such as are of Quality always after
this manner.

12. The Language is thought to be one of the 72 of Babel; by their Books it
appears to be of Four thousand Years standing. It is called Quenhra, or the
Language of Mandarines, because as they spread their Command they introduced
it, and it is used through all the Empire, as Latin in Europe. It is very
barren, and as it has more Letters far than any other, so it has fewer Words,
for there are not above 326 that absolutely differ, and of those that only vary
in accent and aspiration 1228; most end in Vowels, the rest in M and N: They
are all Monasyllables, all indeclinable, as well Verbs as Nouns; so contrived,
that often a Noun serves for a Verb, and the contrary, and sometimes for an
Adverb. Thus it is easier to be learned than Latin. It is most compendious, and
therefore the most grateful to the Chinese. It is rather sweet than harsh, and
spoke as they do at Nanking pleasing to the Ear, very full of respectful Terms.
To bid one take a thing in his hand, among us we repeat the Verb take, which
they do not, each word signifies the Verb and Manner, Nien, is to take with two
Fingers; Tco, to take with them all; Chua, with the whole hand downwards; Tcie,
with it opened upwards. So in other Verbs: A Man's Foot they call Kio; a Birds,
Chua; a Beasts, Thy.

13. They use a different Style in Writing and Speaking; the Letters are as
ancient as the Language. They all know them, but not all by the same Name. The
Author of them (they say) was Fohi, one of their first Kings; at first they
were fewer in number, plainer, and in some measure like what they expressed:
There are now four sorts of Letters. The ancient still used in Books and by
Lawyers, but only for Titles and Seals instead or ^ts. The second called
Chicum, the most generally used. The third Taipie, little practiced but on
Fans, in Letters and Prologues. The fourth, a sort of short hand.

14. There are Sixty thousand Letters; But they use Abbreviations, so that it is
enough to know Ten thousand to write, read and be learned. If they meet any
that is not known, they turn to a Book like our Dictionary, and find it: Only
nine strokes serves to form all this multitude of Letters, but several Letters
and perfect Figures are joined to signify different things. This stroke --
stands for one, crossed with another stroke it stands for ten, another stroke
being drawn under the lower point it signifies the Earth; with another at the
top, a King; adding a prick on the left hand between the two first points, a
precious Stone; with Dashes before, a Pearl; and all Letters that signify
precious Stones, must have this last mark; all that signify Trees must have
the Letter that is for Wood adjoined, and so of other things.

15. Good Writing is valued above the best Painting. All written Paper is
looked upon as Sacred; if it lies on the Ground they take it up carefully. The
manner of Writing is downwards from the top to the bottom, and from the Right
toward the Lefthand, as the Hebrews and all the People of the East. If a word
of Respect, as your Lordship, or the like, fall in the middle of a Line, they
write not forward, but begin the next Line, because it is not esteemed Manners
to join any word to those; if they write the Name of God, it is set above the
rest of the Line.

16. They once writ on the Rine of the Barks of Trees, with Iron points, as
also on Plates of Metal, which now are highly esteemed. Paper has been invented
among them Two thousand Years, and is of so many sorts, and so plentiful, that
there is as much in China as all the World besides, for goodness none to
compare to it. The most usual in Printing, and plentifullest, is made of a Tree
(called by them Cho, by the Indians Bombo) made in the same manner as ours, but
the best is of Cotton Rags. Instead of Pens they use Pensils of several sorts
of Hair, but the Hares is best: There are no Inkhorns but Stones on which the
Ink is ground, as Colors among us; it is also sold in Rags in the nature as we
have Spanish Wool, but the best is Lamp-black, and they that make it are not
accounted Mechanics.

17. Printing has been used by them Sixteen hundred Years, we said before it
was all carved on Wood. The Author writes his Book in the size it must be
published, and every Leaf is pasted on a Board, and graved exactly as he writ
it, therefore they write and print only upon one side of the Paper, so that
every Leaf consists of two, for the Books are sewed along the edges of the
Paper, not the middle as we do, the Blanks remain within, and the two Leaves
pass as one; the best Wood for this use is Pear Tree. When they would have the
Paper black and Letters white, they are carved in Stone, because in the Stone
the Letters are cut into the Superficies, and in Wood they make the
Superficies. That manner of Printing is only used for Epitaphs, Paintings,
Trees, Mountains, and such like things, which are preserved with respect, and
are lasting Memorials.

CHAP. XV.
A Continuation of the same Subject.

1. FRom their Childhood they apply themselves to study, the first Books they
read are Morals, then the classick Authors which are entirely learned by Heart,
next the Masters exposition, who looks not on the Book when he teaches. The
Coppies for writing are laid under the Paper, and the learner draws by it, the
Paper being transparent. From letters they proceed to composition, such as are
approved of are Printed every 3 Years, and learners study them. There are no
Universities, every Master reaches all that is requisite for a man to know, as
well in learning, as manners and behavior. The Disciples of quality never go
any where without the Master; there are many Schools for the common sort, but
no Master can take more Scholars than he can teach himself, for he is not to
trust to another. Their Days of recreation are the first 15 in the Year; and
some others, but few in the 5th and 7th Moon. The Masters that serve in great
Houses Eat at their patrons Table.

2. They have large and stately Halls, richly adorned, where they examine
students, whereof there are great numbers in every City and Town, but chiefly
in the Metropolis of Provinces, where they take their Degrees. These buildings
for the most part are all of the same form, some bigger than others, but all
large; the greatest of our Palaces is not equal to the least of them, in every
one is an infinite number of little rooms, where such as are to be examined,
compose each by himself, with a Soldier to attend him, that the more learned
may not help the ignorant. The Hall of Quantung which is the least, has 6000 of
these Cells and the number of students is greater.

3. There attend all the time of the examination, Prefidents, Magistrates,
Examiners, Clerks, and all sorts of Trades, and all that are there are
maintained ind yet and lodging the whole time upon the public charge. The
Order and disposition of all things is much to be admired, formerly Gentlemen
were not admitted to take any degree, because not employed in the Government,
but they perceiving that only the learned rose, obtained though with
difficulty, to be admitted to both; such as are any way infamous, cannot take a
degree: The degrees are 3 answerable to o^ of Bachelor, Master of Arts, and
Doctor; the Chancellor goes about the Town^ ^d Cities to examine the first, the
second is done in the Metropolis of each Province, once in 3 Years, in each of
these Acts there are above 7000 students, and above 1500 take the degree of
Master of Arts. The Doctors are only made at Court, on a sudden a Bricklayer or
Tailor is set up in state, the marks of this dignity are given them and are a
Cap, Gown, Tassels, and Boots, all put on with much Ceremony. The King defrays
the whole charge, and every one that takes this degree, stands him in 1000
Ducats.

4. Of those that go to the Court to take their degree, 350 are admitted to
that of Doctors; the marks of that honor (except the Boots which are the same
in all) differ very much in the value, besides those mentioned, they have a
girdle, they wear them all in the employments they get, and the last is still
richer, as they ^e preferred. There is another examination at which the King
used to be present, now a Colao supplies his place; after it they go to salute
the King, who is on his Throne, and gives with his own hand, a premium to each
of the three first presented; the first of the 3 is superior over all the
others, and has a particular name, as has the second and third; this is so
great an honor, that soon after the whole Kingdom knows them by those names,
and their degree of honor is equal to our Dukes. Out of the 350 are chosen 25,
who have Palaces assigned them, and are subject to the Colao that is president
of the great College, of him they learn the speculative part of Government.
Hence they are preferred to employments superior to Viceroy ships, only such as
are of that College, are admitted to the supreme dignity of Colao: when one of
these 25 Doctors is made a Mandarin, (especially if he be one of the three
presented by the King) there is erected to him in his own Country a triumphal
Arch all of Marble, and very stately, with his name on the front.

5. Nothing can be said distinctly of their Sciences, because in reality they
know no distinction. Three of their Kings were the masters of the ^oral and
Speculative learning, under my^ical numbers and Symbols, they were also the
Legislators. Above 1000 Years before Christ, two other Kings composed the book
called Yequim, being a comment upon those Symbols; then followed Philosophers,
like the Stoics. The most famous Confucius composed 9 Books, which are
esteemed (chiefly 5 of them) like our Holy writ, many Doctors comment upon
them; he flourished 500 Years before Christ, and aimed at the Reformation of
Mankind; and is held in veneration as the universal Master, and a Saint, with
Temples dedicated to him. The Government of the City where he was born, remains
in his Family; the immediate successor has the title, revenue, and state of a
Duke; they are all as soon as born held in great veneration.

6. The 5 principal Books are, Yequim that treats of natural Philosophy, fate
and predictions; the second, Xoquim of Chronology; the third, Xiquim Poetically
discourses of the Nature of things and Human Affections; the fourth, Liquin of
Divine Worship; the fifth, Chun^icu, Examples of good and bad Kings. There are
4 other Books of the same Author, and another called Mencu, that treat of
Physics and Morals; out of these is taken a subject for the compositions of
such as are examined; there are also 9 Books of Comments upon those, but only
one of them is established by Law.

7. They consider 3 principal objects in the World, Heaven, Earth, and Man, and
accordingly their learning is divided into 3 Sciences; that of Heaven treats of
the Original of all things; that of the Earth, of its position, product and
variety; that of Man, of his manners and affections, to whom they ascribe 5
Moral Virtues, Piety, Justice, Policy, Prudence, and Felicity, respecting 5
Orders of Persons in the Commonwealth, Father, and Son, Husband and Wife, King
and Subject, elder and younger Brother, and friends among themselves.

8. They have rules of Grammar, understand Rhetoric, are well skilled in
Arithmetic, and have knowledge of Geometry, but know nothing of Dialectica,
and Algebra; Astronomy is a profession only allowed to two Persons to study,
one in each Court, and they leave it hereditary to their Sons; they reckon 5
Elements, Water, Metal, Fire, Wood, and Earth, and appropiate to them as many
Planets, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn. The Zodiac they divide into 24
Signs, the Year into 12 Moons, and 354 Days, making a Bissextile every three
Years of 13 Moons and 383 Days; it begins with the next Moon to the 5th of
February. Their Music consists all of one sound, the Bonzes sing after the
manner of our plain Song, their Instruments are of several sorts, for the most
part noisy, and some like ours, such as are played upon strings, have them of
Silk.

9. Poetry was always much esteemed in China; all that was published of this
sort, used to be sent to the King, they never write any thing reflecting, or
immodest, nor have any letter to express the private parts, so that they are
never mentioned in any writing, their Verses are in Rhyme. Their Painting was
without Oil, or shadows, till they knew and imitated us, and draw well by the
life. Their skill in Physic is the greatest, they have ancient Authors that
treat of it, ours are there unknown; bleeding, Cupping, Sirrups, Glisters,
Issues, nor Potions, are not used there, but only Pills. All the Medicines are
simples, as Herbs, Roots, Fruit and Seeds, all dry, and therefore their
Apothecaries have no pots; the Doctors write no receipts, but bring along with
them a case with all Medicines in good order, and compound them before the
Patient; their judgment in the Pulse is singular, they ask no questions of the
Sick, but give themselves an account of the Disease, and apply the Remedy;
their Cures are singular, not but that there are some ignorant among them.

10. In ceremonies they are impertinent, the manner is to bow the Head to the
ground, if to a greater Person, they kneel and bow in like manner, in some
cases they rise again and repeat it at least 3 times, commonly 4, to the King
9. Particular garments are used for visiting, unless among familiar friends; if
they meet, and one has the garment on, and the other not, he immediately puts
it on, for a servant carries it; it is generally black, Doctors, Magistrates,
and Gentlemen that wear the habit of Doctors, are excused from wearing of it.

11. The King when he does reverence to his Idols or Mother, holds before his
Face a piece of Ivory, a span and half long, and about 4 Fingers broad, all
that speak to him use the same ceremony. If two Mandarines in the street cannot
avoid meeting without stopping their Chairs, they join their hands, and carry
them leisurly to their Heads bowing them, which is done as soon as they see one
another, and repeated till they be passed by; if one be inferior to the other,
he stops the Chair, or in case he be on Horseback, alights and makes a profound
reverence; if they are not Mandarines, they make the usual compliments, if
common People they join hands, carry them to the Forehead shaking. Servants in
great Houses do not bow to their Lords, but at the new Year, or when he has
been absent, their sign of respect is to stand upright with their Arms hanging
down; Mandarines servants speak to them on their knees, to give or receive any
thing with one hand is not courteous betwixt equals, and very rude from
inferors to superiors.

12. In their visits they use the Thie, which is a long piece of Paper made
like a Fan, the breadth is proportionable to the quality of the Person from one
to 16 sheets, the Colaos use the least; only one line is writ upon it, and
contains 9 letters between friends, among others 6, or 7, the purport of them
to this effect, Your great friend and perpetual Disciple of your Doctrine,
(here enters the name) kisses your hand, and comes to do you reverence. This
Paper is in a purse of the same, and that in another made close and curious.

13. The visiter himself carries this Paper and gives it the Porter, who
delivers it to his Master; if he receives the visit and not the Thie, he is not
obliged to pay it, but if it is left only with the Porter, he pays the visit.
Great Men, as Colaos, Mandarines, and Viceroys seldom visit ^y body, but as
they pass by the Doors, leave their Thies; when they will not receive visits,
they set up a Paper over the Door specifying, they are not in Town; all visits
are made in the morning, and they always treat with Sweetmeats or Fruit, or at
least Drink that is Cha.

14. When any one is to absent himself for a time, all friends visit and
present him, and he is bound at his return to send presents to all that sent
him any; they never visit the Sick, but inquire at the Door of their Health;
the Person visited sets the Chairs himself, and wipes them with his sleeve, all
the visiters do the same with his. If there be no distinction of superiority,
they take their places according to Age, the Person visited the last; as soon
as seated, the Cha is brought and they all Drink. When one speaks of himself,
it is with great humility, if they speak of the Son to the Father, they do not
say your Son, but the Noble Son; if of the Daughter, the precious Love; if they
inquire about the Sick, they say, How goes the illustrious Sickness; speaking
of themselves they do not say, I, but the Scholar, the Disciple, and Persons
of mean profession, as a Carryer, they call The great Rod; the Person visited
waits upon the visiter to the street, and they part with impertinent
Ceremonies, then send Messages to and fro, as if they had not seen one another.

15. They often send presents of Shoes, Stockins, Linen, Porcelane, Ink,
Pencils, and Eatable things of the best. With the present goes a Thie, being a
list of the things sent; it is no ill manners to send back all or part; some
only send the list of things they design to present, naming very many, as
knowing all will not be accepted, and he it is sent to, marks down what he will
accept of, others send all the things which are only hired, and so restore what
is sent back and pay for the rest; he that receives is obliged to return a
present.

16. They use many banquets, which are very costly and last long. There are
neither Napkins nor Knives on the Tables, because they Eat as was said of the
Iaponeses, but sitting on Chairs and at high Tables and round them hang cloths
in the manner of Pulpit cloths, Dinner is at 7 in the morning, Supper at
Evening or Night; upon these occasions the Rooms are adorned as our Churches on
Holidays; all the time of Eating, there is Music and Plays acted, some will go
to four or more Feasts in one Day; they seem to be of the Opinion of let us Eat
and let us Drink, for to morrow we shall Die.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Marriages, Burials, Ceremonies, Sacrifices, and belief of the Chinese.

1. THE Chinese have used an indissoluble form of Marriage, by joining of
hands for above 3000 Years; they also allow of Concubines, which are taken
after another manner, and commonly bought. They may part when they please, but
till they have Children, are servants to the Wife, their Children call^ Mother;
and do not put on Mourning for them. When the Man dies, the Wife and Children
retain the command of the House, and if she di^ the Concubine succeeds; Widows
may marry again, but are more esteemed if they do not. In choosing Wives they
have respect to good qualities, but for Concubines, beauty ^or good humor.

2. They cannot marry into the Fathers kindred, though many degrees removed,
nor with any of the surname, for fear of kindred, but may with the Mothers, if
not near related. Maids seldom marry with Widdowers; there are Matchmakers: The
Bridegroom sees not the Bride till she is brought home to him, nor knows her
name till made sure; Portions are not used, nor does the Husband buy the Wife,
as has been falsely reported of them. On the Wedding Day the Brides goods are
carried in procession, and she at the end of it in a Chair, locked up, and the
key sent before to the Bridegrooms Mother, for he goes on Horseback well
attended to fetch her, if by Night, they carry many Lantherns on long Poles,
the Inheritance is divided between the Male issue without respect to those by
the lawful Wife above the others, yet there are some noble Families where the
eldest inherits.

3. The Funerals of the Chinese are very costly, they bury all in Coffins,
according to every ones ability in value, some cost 1000 Ducats, the Coffins
are made of thick planks, varnished with Charam, and adorned with gilding,
unless some that are made of precious Wood; most of them keep their Coffins by
them in the House.

4. No body is buried within the Cities; without there are sumptuous Templ^ for
their use, with Country Houses about them in places appointed by their
Astrologers, the Tombs are covered with polished Stones, and Beasts carved
before them, especially the noble ones, as Elephants and Lions, and elegant
Epitaphs upon them. Where ever a Man dies, he must be carried to his own place
of burial: When one is given over, they carry him into an outward room to die
on a pallet Bed, but some that are of great quality die in their Alcoves. The
Son as raving with grief, pulls down the curtains upon the Dead body, then it
is put into the Coffin with the robes of his dignity, and so closed, that no
ill smell can come out. It is laid in a great room hung with Mourning and a
Picture of the Dead Man, the Children sit round upon the straw and in Mourning,
the Women are weeping behind Curtains, many Ceremonies are used while the Corpse
lies there.

5. The Coffin lies sometimes 2 Years in the House for want of Money; the
Funeral Pomp is thus, First, there are carried great statues of Men and Beasts
made of painted Pastboard, Pyramids, and other things in triumphal Chariots,
adorned and curiously wrought with Silk; if it be a Person of Quality, all
those things are burnt when the Coffin is interred, but the common sort only
hire them; after this sollow Bonzos singing and playing on Music, then other
Bonzos who never cut Hair nor beard, and live single in communities; these also
play on several sorts of Instruments, next another sect of Bonzos, who cut
their Hair, praying; after them the friends and relations, then Sons and
Grandsons in deep Mourning, and barefooted, with little Truncheons about half a
yard long in their hands, on which they lean so, that their Heads hang down
near the ground; next them comes the Coffin on a thing so big, it is carried by
50 Men, with a curious Pall over it, and about it many Lanthorns on Poles; the
last is a multitude of Women in Chairs, who are heard to cry.

6. The Mourning is of such course Hemp, it makes the Men look monstrous, Sons
for their Fathers wear it 3 Years, and in all that time sit not on Chairs, but
little wooden stools, nor dine on a Table, touch Flesh, drink Wine, lie on
Bedsteads, go to Feasts, go abroad unless in a close Chair, go to examinations,
nor can officiate any public Employ, and finally (they say) they abstain from
Women; Mourning for a Wife lasts a Year, there are for relations of 5 and of 3
Months, and for friends of 3 Days. Every Town has a public place of buryal for
the Poor, some save the trouble, burning the Dead and burying the Ashes; these
in the Province of Suchue are put into pots close stopped and thrown into
Rivers.

7. The Funeral of the Queen Mother in the Year 1614, was very magnificent; to
omit the Mourning and lesser circumstances. The King with his own hand strewed
on the body, Pearls to the value of 70000 Crowns, and laid on the sides of it
50 bars of Gold, and 50 of Silver; all Persons of quality of both Sexes came to
worship her; all Magistrates were ordered to their Tribunals, and to fast 3
Days; the Officers of the Revenue to provide wax perfumes, Images and and other
necessaries to be burnt, the expense in only these small things amounted to
30000 Ducats; the Royal Golledge was commanded to write Poems fit for that
occasion, 1000 Men were posted at each of the nine Gates of the City, thence to
the place of buryal, which was 12 miles, a lane of Soldiers to be made, 3000
men carried the Coffin, 1000 accompanied it, 40000 guarded the buryal place,
while the Ceremony lasted, the ways were repaired and railed in, that no body
might cross them; at every 20 paces was laid a basket of yellow Earth to be
spread about when the Coffin went by; many Tents were set up to rest by the
way, and provisions for all that attendance that, amounted to 80000.

8. After many Ceremonies, the Coffin was placed on a Triumphal Chariot with
many lights and perfumes; the King accompanied it to the 8th Gate of the
Palace, great was the order and silence observed, the journey was so
Ceremonious, it lasted 3 Days. At last the Coffin was removed to a more costly
Chariot, they sacrificed a Bull, Aromatic Wine, Perfumes, and many Garments to
the Earth, imploring its tutelar Spirits to receive the dead body graciously.
The Ceremonies lasted long, the King favored all that assisted at them, eased
the Kingdom of Taxes, set open the prisons, all as an Oblation of filial Love.

9. The Chinese follow 3 sects which they endeavor to reconcile; the 2 first
natural, the third Idolatrous. The first of the 2 followed by the Lawyers is
Ancient, adores no Idols, ownes a superior Power, that can punish and reward,
but allows it no Temples, Sacrifice, Prayers, or Ministers, speak honorably of
it as of a Divine Being, attribute nothing indecent to it, but being blind in
their Faith, worship Heaven, Earth, and Man. Only in the two Coorts, there are
Temples dedicated to Heaven and Earth, where the King in Person sacrifices, and
in his absence the Masters of the Rites; in all Cities there are Temples of the
tutelar Spirits, where the Mandarines sacrifice, as they do to the Spirits of
Rivers, Mountains, and 4 parts of the World. There are also Temples of famous
Men, and public benefactors in which are their Images; they ask nothing for
the next life, but happiness in this, in fine, all tends to the Government,
Concord Plenty, and Exercise of Virtue.

10. The second Sect is of the Taucus, the Author of it Lautu, a Philosopher
who they say was 80 Years in his Mothers Womb, and lived in the time of
Comfufius; this Sect has many followers, who live together, do not marry, let
their Hair grow, wear ordinary Clothes, only instead of a Cap they wear a small
Crown which holds the knot of their Hair at the top. They own one great God,
and others lesser but all Corporeal, allow of Heaven and Hell, the Felicity
with the body, and even in this World; they feign, that through certain
excercises, Men become young again; they say and believe any thing that comes
into their fancy, they have Music and good Instruments, and are therefore
called to Funerals and Sacrifices; they pretend to Sorcery, and promise Rain,
which always fails to their shame.

11. They also pretend to lay Devils that haunt Houses, and are as successful
as in the other; their chief study is a quiet and long Life, but more for the
long, which they endeavor to purchase at any rate.

12. The third Sect, (as its Author) is called Xaca, he is said to be son of
Maga, and a dream, for that she dreamed she conceived looking upon a white
Elephant, was delivered of him through her side, and died immediately. Xaca did
penance for this misfortune on the snowy Mountain, and had there in 12 Years 4
Masters, became learned in the Science of the first causes, and had many
Disciples who spread his Sect through all Asia. This Doctrine was brought into
China about the Year of Grace 63, at the instance of the Emperor Hamin; the
followers of this Opinion once amounted to three Millions, now they are but few.

13. Their Priests wear neither Hair nor beard, adore Idols; believe there is
Reward and punishment in the next Life, and live in community 500 together;
they are called to Sacrifices and Burials, and wear a sort of Copes, Eat no
Flesh, Fish, Eggs, nor drink Wine, have large enclosures in Villages, and live
under a superior; others live in Caves, Dens, and on Rocks, some do most rigid
penance. Some lock themselves in narrow Houses, or rather boxes of Wood full
of spikes, the points inward, and live in these a Month without being able to
lean for the spikes, or Eating; only Drinking Cha. But others affirm, they go
in provided with lumps of Beef hard baked, which they dissolve in that hot
liquor, there is another sort called Vagabonds, that are generally villainous
fellows, guilty of all crimes especially Robberies. There are also Nuns of
these Orders, their Heads shorn, they are but few, and not enclosed.

14. They believe the transmigration of Souls, that they descend and pass
through nine Hells, then return to be Men at best, or else beasts like Men, or,
what is worst of all Birds. The wisest of them direct all their study toward
the Prima causa; after the last death, they believe there is neither reward nor
punishment.

15. Of Transmigration, they believe if a Man was courteous, he becomes Man
again, if subject to passion, a Lion; if cruel a Tiger; if unchaste, a Hog; and
if given to stealing, a Bird of Prey. From these proceed many other Sects; it
is a Proverb of these three Sects, that the Lawyers govern the Kingdom, the
Taucus, the Body, and the Bonzot the Heart.

16. In their Sacrifices are offered a beast like a Goat, Swine, Oxen, Cocks
and Hens, all sorts of Fish, chiefly the Barble, Rice, Grain, and Wine. If the
King sacrifice, the offering is divided among Mandarines, if great Men, among
their Relations, if ordinary People, they Eat it among them. All other things
offered are burnt, as Silk, leaves of Gold and Silver, cut Paper, Candles,
Perfumes, etc. there are no Priests appointed for this, every one does it for
himself.

17. The Chinese are great admirers of virtue, and have a sort of Commandments
written in their Houses, much of the same nature as ours. There are strangers
in China, who differ in point of belief, but not considerable. We have already
mentioned those barbarous Inhabitants of a part of the Island Hainan, and
others in the Mountains of Quantung, Hucheu, and Quiangsi, these follow the
Opinions of the rest of the Kingdom. In the Province of Yunnan there is a large
tract of Land inhabited by a People differing in language and customs, having a
King of their own, but tributary to China; In some parts there are Mahometans
who have their Mosques, but ill observe their law. Tney marry their Sons to
Chinese Women, but the Daughters only marry among themselves, because Women
follow the opinion of the Husbands, and these never change. Their first coming
into China was about 800 Years since being called in by a King to assist him in
his Wars, and having served well, such as would, were allowed to ^le there.
There are Jews in the Province of Honan, and in the Metropolis of it, Caifumfu;
they have a neat Synagogue, which shall be described hereafter. For want of
Priests they are become very ignorant In their law, and many be^ Mahometans and
Pagans.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Original of the Kingdom of China, the Palace and Government of it.

1. THere is no certain account of the Original of this Kingdom, though their
Histories begin at the Universal flood. The first three Kings are esteemed
Saints; since that time the succession has been in 22 families; this now
reigning, has continued 300 Years; the first of it did all that was possible to
secure his line; he abolished all Royalties, forbid under severe Penalties, any
of the blood Royal to have any hand in Government, and gave all the power to
Lawyers who were to attain it by learning and virtue; the Monarchy continues as
he left it.

2. They reckon Years from the beginning of the last Reign, the first actions
of it are coining of Money, Crowning of the Queen, giving her and the
Concubines names, offering great Sacrifices, giving Alms, treating Magistrates,
setting open Prisons, turning the Ladies out of the Court, taking in new ones;
all the states acknowledging the King, giving him a new name. He is styled
Emperor, the Courtiers call him Son of Heaven, and pay him a respect more than
Human.

3. The reason the Ladies are turned out of Court is because many are old, and
the deceased may have had to do with the young, and therefore the successor
must not venture coming where he has been; beautiful Maids are sought for this
purpose all over the Kingdom, and the Fathers strive to marry them off, that
they may not be carried to Court.

4. The Women turned out, are all sold at the Palace Ga^ to the best bidders,
who take them for (...); none but mean People buy them, their Faces and hands
are covered, and the buyer sees them not till he carries them home, and takes
them for better for worse.

5. There are about 3000 of these Women, who live in four Palaces; one King
tired with choosing, was drawn in a Chariot by Goats, and wherever they
stopped, he took up, another chose by the Pictures of the beautifullest.

6. Formerly the Kings were more familiar with their subjects, and visited the
Kingdom, giving public Audience; this custom decayed by degrees, and the
common way of doing business is by petition, but still the King gives some
public Audiences Monthly, and at the four seasons of the Year goes to
sacrifice in a Temple without the City.

7. The first that introduced this retirement was Vamlie Grandfather to him
now reigning, he did it because he was very gross, and would not lessen the
Royal Majesty, since his time they are not so often seen as formerly. The
Temple the King goes to at Peking, is round, all of Marble, and a beautiful
structure; that of Nanking is long, and has five Isles, born up by many
columns, all plain except the Pedestals to show the rarity of them, for that
being many in numbers, very high and thick, and all exactly alike, each is made
of one Tree. To these Temples there are many Gates adorned with gilded Iron, in
them many Altars with Images of the Sun, Moon, Planets, Spirits, Mountains,
Rivers, and other things, to signify he, to whom they sacrifice there, is Lord
of all. All the rest of the Year besides the times of these sacrifices and
audiences, the King continues in his Palace, and is seen by none but
particular persons.

8. Some will judge the Kings of China live a confined Life, but their Palace
is a City consisting of many Palaces, Orchards, and Gardens enclosed within a
wall of a vast circumference; there is one Palace for the King, Queen, and
small Children, another for the Queen Mother, another for the Sons that are
married, another for the Queens, four for the Ladies, another called the cold
Palace for the old Men; Apartments for Eunuchs, Servants, Mathematicians, and
Priests, an infinite number of Courts, or Cloisters, and lesser Apartments for
all that live within, which are above 17000.

9. The structure of the Palace is sumptuous, much after our manner adorned
with curious Carving, Painting, and Gilding. A River runs through the Gardens
which are adorned with artificial Mounts, and they covered with delightful
variety of birds and beasts. All is encompassed by two walls distant from each
other, the circumference is about 4 Miles, that of Nanking about five; there
are 4 Gates that look to the four quarters of the World, and have strong guards
of Elephants and Soldiers, of these 3000 always do duty in one of the Courts.

10. Next to the Empress, are six Queens, who upon public occasions, sit on as
many Chairs somewhat below the two Imperial Thrones, then there are 30 that
have particular honors allowed them; the last in degree are the Ladies. If the
Empress has a Son, he takes place of all others, if not the eldest of any of
these Women; there are 12000 Eunuchs, with their proper Officers. The President
who answers our Secretary of State, may come to the King without asking leave,
another who is supreme Judge of the Eunuchs, is also Captain of the guard of
3000 Horse and 6000 Foot, the Eunuchs have all the best Employments, and are
for the most part married.

11. In the Court most go on Horseback, few in Chairs, except the great
Eunuchs. The Father of the King now reigning, had a most insolent favorite
Eunuch, upon the Kings death he killed himself, but was dragged and torn to
pieces by the rabble, and the King seized his vast Treasure. Many Fathers geld
their Sons to make them capable of this sort of preferment.

12. No Criminal can escape Justice in this vast Empire; their submission to
the King is worthy Admiration; every Body speaks to him on their Knees with the
Ivory (already mentioned) before their Mouths. The King's Garments differ not
from those of the Subjects in form, but in the costliness, and being
embroidered with Dragons which none can wear but he, his Wives, and the Royal
Family. It is not easy to know the real value of the King's Revenue, but it is
reckoned above One hundred and fifty Millions of Ducats yearly; Fifty-five are
for the King's Expense, the Ninety-five for his Ministers, Examinations, Works
and Presents.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Royal Marriages, Nobility, Counsels, and Government of China in Peace
and War.

1. WHEN there were many Kings in China, they married into those Royal
Families. Now there is but one, and he is forbid by Law marrying out of the
Kingdom; he must of necessity marry a Subject. The Great Men will not give the
King their Daughters, because they must be first searched, even in those Parts
none but a Husband may see, and if not liked they are sent back. Therefore in
the Choice, they have no regard to Birth, but Youth, Beauty, good Inclinations
and Parts.

2 Such a one being found, two old Women strip her stark naked, and axamine as
well inward as outwardly the Parts not to be named, then put her into a heat to
discover whether her Sweat be offensive. All things answering expectation, she
is carried to Court in State, and there instructed in such manner as she may
deserve to be called Mother of the Kingdom; for that is the Style they give
their Queens. Some of them have proved incomparable.

3. No such care is taken in marrying the Princes. The P^incesses choose one of
Twelve Young Men o^ Eighteen Years of Age, placed so as they may be seen
without seeing the Princesses: But the Husbands are treated ^o impertinently by
the Princesses, that the Nobility avoid them; so that commonly their Husbands
are no better born than the Kings Wives.

4. The Nobility were of another Nature when there were Titles and Lordships.
Now all depends upon Learning, which makes any Mechanic a Gentleman; the want
of it renders a Gentleman base. This is the reason their Nobility is not of
long standing; for the Sons of Learned Men being left rich, do not study, and
consequently have no Employments, and the Family perishes. Yet they have five
sorts of Nobility. First, the Blood Royal thus preserved, the Prince inherits
the Crown, the other Sons live in other Cities with Titles, but must not stir
thence. Their eldest Sons succeed them, the others marry the best they can, and
so their Children as long as the Family lasts. The Daughters (not looked upon
in case of Inheritance) marry with Gentlemen. The second sort consist of those
who have Titles, but no Dominions, and are inferior to some Magistrates. The
third, the Magistrates. The fourth, the Students, who aim at Degrees. The
fifth, those who live upon their Estates, or Merchandice, who if not very rich,
are looked upon no better than the Commonalty.

5. The Government is in the Hands of six Councils, so highly respected, it is
scarce credible. Each of them has a President and two Assessors, this is the
next Dignity to that of the Colaos. So that a Viceroy of a Province is happy,
if after his Government expires, he reaches to be one of those Assessors. Many
more Officers belong to each of these Courts; the first is answerable to our
Counsel of State, the second to that of War, the third is of Ceremonies, the
fourth of the Revenue, the fifth of the public Works, the sixth of Criminal
Causes. There are also nine other Courts; the first like our Chancery, the
second the high Stewards, the third the Master of the Horses, the fourth the
Master of the Ceremonies of the Court; the fifth, of particular Rites; the
sixth, of the Petitions given the King; the other three of lesser Matters.
Every City has its own particular Council, each Metropolis of a Province five
distinct Tribunals. Each Town has a private Court.

6. The great Mandarines are carried about Town in Chairs adorned with Ebony
and Gold by four Men, with others by to relieve them; before the Chiefest go
Men by Pairs with long Staves, always crying out, two others follow these with
Tables, on which is writ the quality of the Person carried, after these go six
scattering Bamboes, with which they use to bastinade Offenders and others with
Fetters and Chains. Near the Chair a Man with a sil^ Umbrello three times as
big as those we use, ^two just before the Chair carry a small Box with the
Royal Seal, on one side a great Fan that shades all the Chair, behind go the
Pages and other Attendance on Foot and Horseback.

7. When one of these goes by, all things are taken from the Windows, the
Images of Funerals are lowred, the People stop on the sides of the Streets,
there is no noise, and he passes without moving his Eyes. When he goes to any
City, the ancient Men receive him at the Gate on their Knees. The King bestows
Honor on Magistrates Mothers as they rise; and when they die, buries them with
Pomp, and assigns them stately Palaces while living.

8. The Prisons are large, and commonly near to the Palaces of the Mandarines
they belong to; they have no Grates to the Street; the Dungeons are terrible;
the other Part is in Rows sustained by Pillars with Planks along for Beds,
where every one lies with Fetters on his Hands and his Feet, as it were in the
Stocks; over them all run long Chains, so that they cannot turn. The lesser
Criminals are more favorably dealt with, but all fare hard; for the Prisons
serve to punish as well as to secure Men. The Prisoners have much to do at
their Entrance with the Keepers about their Fees, for they pay none at going
out.

9. Their Punishments differ not much from ours, but whipping is used before
all other Penalties; the Lashes are given on the bare Buttocks and Thighs, as
well to Women as Men, and that before the Tribunal, or in the Street when the
Crime is done there; no Body values the Shame, but only the Smart. They also
have several ways of Racking.

10. Military Science is very ancient among the Chinese. They had tedious Wars
with their Neighbors, conquered the Island Ceylon, and subdued One hundred and
Fourteen Kings. They always entertain a vast number of Soldiers; in Nanking
there are Forty thousand, in Peking Eighty thousand, all over the Kingdom above
a Million, but they are all Cowards. Yet of late Years they beat the Iaponeses
out of Corea, and the Tartars out of the Province of Peking. They use foolish
Reviews, in which, like our Boys, they represent Tartars and Chinese, and the
former are always beaten.

11. Gunpowder is of most ancient standing among them; of it they make curious
and costly Fireworks; they have some Cannon, but no Skill in the use of it,
only shoot at random. Their most usual Arms are Lances, Arrows and Cutlaces.
There is a sort of Back and Breast Pieces Proof against Arrows. Their Civil
Government is very just, because bad Ministers are severely punished, and the
King hears Complaints against them. Thus much may suffice for the Affairs of
China.

CHAP. XIX.
The Division of the Dominions the Portugueses do, or have possessed in those
Parts, commonly comprehended under the general Name of India: Some Remarks on
the Customs and Religion of those People, with some Account of the Christians
of St. Thomas, and of the Island of Ceylon.

1. THE Portugues Dominions generally comprehended under the Name of India,
though dispersed along the Coasts of Asia. and Africa may well be divided into
five Parts. The first containing the Islands of that vast Ocean, as those of
Maldivia, the King whereof, being a Christian, with his Wife and Family resided
at Cochim; that of Ceylon, in which we have the Town of Columbo, and a Right to
the Kingdoms of Iafanapatan, Cota and Candea by Donation from their natural
Kings; the Island of Manar, with its Fort and Fishery of Pearl; Eastward, the
Sovereignty of all that Archipelago, the Moluco Islands, and that of Macao on
the Coast of China.

2. The Second Part lies from Cape Corrientes to the Mouth of the Red Sea,
Peopled by Moors along the Coast, and the Inland by Idolatrous and Brutal
Cafres.

3. The Third is divided from Persia by the Persian Golph, inhabited by Moors
of different Opinions.

4. The Fourth contains the Kingdom of Ormuz, and neighboring Parts that Trade
thither, especially Baharem, so famed for the Fishery of Pearl, that draws all
Mankind thither.

5. The Fifth is called India within and without Ganges. All that lies between
Indus and Ganges which is above 550 Leagues along the Coast, is inhabited by
two Nations, Pagans and Mahometans, who for above three Ages have been
possessed of that Tract called Indostan.

6. In this Fifth Part is included the principal Part of the Portugues
Patrimony. It begins at Diu, a City not inferior to many famous in Europe, and
was once the Metropolis of Cambaya. Almost opposite to it is Damam, both which
almost shut up the Mouth of the Bay of Cambaya, and extend their Command
Twenty-four Leagues, in which space are many Villages that yield a considerable
Revenue.

7. From the River of Agacaim to that of Bombaim, are Eight Leagues, and in
that space the City (...) ^th its Forts and Villages, as (...), Agacaim,
Bandora, Tana, C^a, and opposite to it, the Island Salsete, whose wonderful
Structures prove it to have been the Metropolis of that Country and Court of
Princes. The Dominions of Cambaya once extended thither. The next is Chaul, a
Place of Importance. Then the Capital of our Empire, that is the Island
Goema^e, which sig^fies, Happy Land, corruptly called Goa; and Trissuari
(signifying Thirty Villages, for so many it contains) which on the Continent
commands the Lands of Salsete and Bardes. There follow on the Coast of Camaran
toward Cape Comori, the Towns of Onor, (...) and Mangalor; then in Malahar,
Cananor, Cranganor, Coulam, and the chief Port of our Fleets Cochim. Turning
the Cape, appears the Pearl Fishery, and above it the Cities Negapatan, St.
Thomas and other Towns if not Subject to, at least Inhabited and defended by
Portugueses.

8. The Exterior India begins at the River Ganges, and reaches to China and
C^bodia, and is terminated by the River Mecom. It is inhabited by Heathens
worse, if possible, than the others. Here the Portugueses have the rich City of
Malaca, Metropolis of that Kingdom, and the greatest Place of Trade of all
those Eastern Provinces.

9. Something has been already said of the Manners of all these People, we will
add somewhat in general of India, whereof much relates to the greatest Part of
Asia. Those Heathens have a Book they believe in, and esteem as we do the Holy
Scripture. It is writ in Verse, (as they say that understand it) pleasing and
ingenious, but it seems strange to us there should be any Harmony in Verses
composed of Seventy-five Syllables, for so many an Author say they contain.

10. They believe in one God Creator of all Things, yet allow other increated
Gods; that there is Heaven and Hell, and that the Souls of such as die in Sin
go into Beasts, and stay there till being purged, they go to Eternal Rest. They
esteem Cows as properest for this Transmigration. When one is dying, they bring
one to him, and put the Tail into his Hand, that when his Soul departs, it may
be near the Door it is to enter at.

11. They allow no Free Will; and some are of Opinion, That the Souls return
from Hell into other Bodies till they merit Heaven; and that there is an
indifferent Place without Reward or Punishment for such as live indifferently.
The Sins they esteem most heinous, are Murder, Theft, Drinking of Wine, taking
away another Man's Wife. The First is wiped off with Pilgrimages; the second
with Alms; the third with Fasting; and the fourth with Sacrifices; some are of
Men, the greatest of Cows. Some will lie down under the Wheels of the heavy
Carts of their Idols, which crush them to pieces. Others wear irons with Spikes
that run into them. Others hang themselves on a Hook, and there sing Verses to
their Idols.

12. They maintain Hospitals, where they look after sick Birds and Beasts, and
send Men abroad to bring them in, but have no Com^assion for Men, saying, Those
Afflictions are sent them for their Sins. There are Men employed to buy Birds
or other Creatures, only to restore them to their Liberty. They believe God has
five Regents that govern the World, and every one of them a Wife, those are
called Xadaxivam, Rudra, Maescura, Visnu, and Brabema; the Wives, Humani,
Parvadi, Maenomadi, Lacami, and Exarasvadi. The first governs the first Heaven,
where are all the Planets; the second, the Fire; the third, the Air; the
fourth, the Water; the fifth, the Earth. Brahema, Visnu and Rudra are the
Chief, and form a Body with three Heads, called Mahamurte, signifying, the
three Chiefs. Hence it is inferred, the Indians had some knowledge, though
imperfect, of the Blessed Trinity.

13. They are much addicted to Witchcraft and Superstition, and believe there
are Fourteen Worlds, and that this we live in is an Image of that in Heaven.
Their several Families touch not one another, not eat together. Tradesmen
cannot marry out of their own Trade. The most renowned Families among them are
the Raja's, an ingenuous People that rather lose their Lives than their Arms in
Battle. The Bramenes, who contend for Precedence with the Raja's. The Chatines,
which are the richest Merchants. The B^lalas, or Country People, held in such
esteem, that Kings marry their Daughters to them, saying, They are the Public
Substance. From these four Roots ^pring One hundred ninety-six Branches divided
into Valangas, that is, of the Right Hand, and Elanges of the Left, but none of
these are honored as the other four.

14. Let us say somewhat of the Christians of St. Thomas. Four Leagues from
Cochim, on the Malabar Coast, is the City Cranganor, almost encompassed by a
River, inhabited by Christians, Gentiles, Mahometans and Jews. The whole
Kingdom takes Name from the City; it has a great Trade, is frequented by
Merchants from Siria, Egypt, Persia and Arabia, by reason of the plenty of
Pepper brought thither. At the arrival of the Portugueses in India, it was
governed in the form of a Commonwealth, but subject to Zamori, whom they cast
off, seeing him weakened by our Arms.

15. Their Heathen Rites are the same with those of the other Malabars. The
Christians called of St. Thomas, who inhabit from this C^ty to Coromandel and
Meliapor, the place, where that Apostle was buried, have Churches like ours in
Europe; on the Altars and Walls Crosses painted, but no other Images; no Bells;
the People meet on Sundays to hear Sermons, and other Service Their head Bishop
resides in Chaldea, has twelve Cardinals, two Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops
and other Prelates and Fathers.

16. The Priests are shorn in the form of a Cross, they consecrate leavened
Bread, and Wine made of Rasins for want of other, Baptize after Forty Days,
unless there be danger of Death; instead of extreme Unction the Priests bless
the Sick, use Holy Water, bury after our manner; the Relations and Friends eat
together eight Days while the Ceremonies last. If there be no Will the next of
Kin inherits; the Widows recover their Portion, but forfeit it if they Marry
within a Year.

17. They have all our Holy Scripture in Hebrew and Caldaick with Expositions,
which they Read in Schools; their Divines interpret it well, chiefly the
Prophets, which they study most. They observe the same Lent and Advent as we
do. O^ the Eve of the Resurrection they neither eat nor drink, and keep that
Day with great Solemnity; as also the Sunday of Pastor Bonus, in remembrance
that on that Day St. Thomas felt our Savior's side; they observe our very
Festivals, as Sundays, the Feasts of our Lord, Lady and Apostles, and have the
same Bissextile or Leap Year as the Latins. Both they and the Gentiles keep
the Feast of the Apostle on the first Day of June. There are Monasteries of
Monks and Nuns clothed in black, and religiously observe their Rules. The
Priests observe conjugal Chastity, and marry not a second time. There is no
Divorce allowed beween Man and Wife.

18. In the Year 1544 came to Cochim, Jacob a Caldean Bishop of Cranganor,
where being dangerously sick, he sent for the Treasurer Peter de Sequeyra, and
told him, Necessity had obliged him to pawn two Copper Plates with Characters
engraven on them, which were Original Grants and Privileges bestowed on the
Apostle St. Thomas by the Sovereigns of those Countries, when he Preached
there; that he desired him to release them, least they should be lost if he
died, for if he lived he would take them out himself. This Prelate found the
only way to lose them, in trusting the Portugueses; for Sequeyra paid the Two
hundred Royals they were pawned for, put them into the Treasury, and they were
never more heard of.

19. The Governor Martin Alfonso de Sousa, after long search for some Body that
could understand them, had found a retired Jew on the Mountain, who said they
were writ in the Caldean, Malabar and Arabian Languages, and the Substance of
them was, That the Prince then Reigning of his free Gift granted to Thomas at
Cranganor, such a Parcel of Ground to build a Church; for the Maintenance
whereof he assigned the Fifths of Merchandise.

20. Very much might be said of the Island Ceylon, but I will only add a little
to what is already said. About five hundred Years before Christ, a Heathen was
King of Tenac^rii, and lorded it over a great part of the East. He banished his
Son and Heir Vigia Raja for his depraved wicked Life. The young Man took Ship
with 700 Men like himself, and put into the Port of Preature, between
Triquilimale and Iafanapatan in the Island Ceylon, then not inhabited, but
abounding in delightful Rivers, Springs, Woods, Fruittrees, and sightly Birds
and Beads; whence the new Planters gave it the name of Lancao, which signifies
Paradise, and is still held the delight of all the East.

21. The first Town they built was Mont^ta opposite to Manar, whence they
traded with Cholca Raja, the nearest King on the Continent; he knowing who this
Prince was, gave him his Daughter to Wife, and Women for his Companions, with
them he sent Laborers and Workmen to forward that Plantation; the Prince when
he saw his Power increase, styled himself Emperor of the Island* Strangers call
these People Galas, that is banished Men, because their Original was such.

22. Vigia Raja dying without Children, left the Crown to his Brother, in whose
line it continued 900 Years, the fruitfulness of the Island and fame of its
excellent Cinnamon, drew thither the Chinese, who marrying with the Galas,
brought another rac^ which to this day are called Chingalas, grown very
powerful, and most fit for Courtiers, being most subtle and false.

23. The first line being extinct, the Kingdom fell to Dambadine Pandar Pracura
Mabago, who was treacherously taken by the Chinese, after restored, and then
slain by Alagexere, who in his absence had usurped the Crown; this usurper held
it 10 Years, and dying without Issue, and two Sons of Dambadine, who were fled
for fear of the Tyrant, being found the eldest succeeded, his Name was Maha
Pracura Mahago, he gave to his Brother the Dominion of the four Corlas, and
settled his Court at Cota, which he built to that effect, by a Daughter married
to Cholca Raja of the ancient blood Royal, he had a Grandson who succeeded him.
Afterward the line failing, Queta P^rmal King of Iafanapatan, inherited and
called himself Bo^negaboa, that is, King by force of Arms, for that he had
overcome his Brother, King of the Corlas.

24. His Son Caypura Pandar succeeded him, and the King of the Corlas having
killed him, possessed himself of the Crown, and took the name of Iavira,
Procura Magabo; these two Brothers were of the blood Royal, and the King Maha
Procura had given them those two Crowns; after the Tyrant, Reigned his Son
Drama Procura Magabo then living when Vasco de Gama discovered India;
afterward about the Year 1500, that Empire was divided between three Brothers,
into so many Kingdoms. Boenegababo Pandar had Cota; Reigam Pandar had Reigam;
and Maduze Pandar had Ceitavaca.

25. In the Country of Dinavaca which is the Center of this Island rises that
vast high Mountain called Pico de Adam, because some believed our first Father
lived there, and that the print of a foot still seen upon a stone on the top of
it, is his; the Natives call it Amala Saripadi, that is the Mountain of the
footstep. Some Springs running down it, at the bottom (...) a Rivulet, where
Pilgrims wash, and believe it purifies them. The stone on the top is like a
Tombstone, the print of the foot seems not artificial, but as if it had been
made in the same nature as when one treads in Clay, which makes it be looked
upon as miraculous.

26. The Pilgrims of all sorts who come from as far as Persia and China, being
washed, go up to the top, near which hangs a bell which they strike and take
the sounding of it as a sign of their being purified, as if any bell being
struck, would not sound. The opinion of the Natives is, that Drama Raja Son of
an ancient King of that Island, doing Penance in that Mountain with many
Disciples, when he was about to depart at their instance, left that print there
as a Memorial; therefore they respect it as a relict of a Saint, and generally
call him Budam, that is Wiseman.

27. Some believe this Saint was Iosaphat, but it is more likely it was St.
Thomas, who has left many Memorials in the East, and in the West, in Brasil and
in Paraguay. The natural Woods in this Island are like the curious Orchards and
Gardens in Europe, and produce Citrons, Lemmons, and sundry sorts of delicious
fruits; it abounds in Cinnamon, Ginger, Cordamom, Sugar, Canes, Honey, and
Hemp; of Metals, Iron, whereof they make the best Firelocks of all the East; of
precious Stones, Rubies, Zafires, Cats-eyes, Topaces, Chrisolites, Amethists,
and Berilus; of valuable beasts, Civet-Cats, and the noblest of the Elephants
of all the East; there are excellent Rivers abounding with variety of Fish. All
round it are Ports fit for the largest Ships,

28. In all parts of India there are Prodigious Wizards. When Vasco de Gama
sailed upon that discovery, some of them at Calicut, showed other People in
basins of Water, the three Ships he had with him. When D. Francis de Almeyda
the first Viceroy of India, was coming for Portugal; some Witches at Coehim
told him, he should not pass the Cape of Good Hope, and there he was buried. At
Mascate there are such Sorcerors, that they Eat a thing inwardly, only fixing
their Eyes upon it; with their sight draw the entrails of any Human body, and
so kill many. One of these fixing his Eyes on a Bateca, or Water-Mellon, sucked
out all the inside, it being cut open to try the experiment, was found hollow,
and he the more to satisfy the beholders, vomitted it up.

29. To conclude the description of these parts of Asia, let us say something
of the most exquisite production of Nature it affords; doubtless the most
wonderful thing in the World is, a Tree there growing, of which alone are built
Ships and Houses, the one loaded, the other stored with all things necessary
for Human Life, and on it alone, Men may feed and cloth themselves; having
seen no particular account hereof, I will be the more plain in describing it.
The Tree is about 50 foot high, on the top grow the leaves like that of a Palm
or Date-tree in shape, but more large and beautiful, it bears about 50 of them,
and among them about 12 clusters, each containing about 50 of those we call
Cocos, as big as good Pumpkins, so that one Tree sometimes produces 600, never
less than 400 of them.

30. First on the outside is a thick tough shell or rhine, as is over the
Walnut-shell, though not of that nature, then a hard shell, and within it a
sweet kernel; that outward rhine is spun, and of it all manner of tackle and
cordage is made, of the inward shell Porrengers, Salts, Flasks, Spoons, and
other curiosities, besides being burnt, it is a pleasant sort of Cole, to this
shell sticks the kernel which is hollow, white as Snow, about an inch thick,
juycy and sweet as Almonds, it serves to season several things, as Milk and
Sugar with us, and Eaten alone, is pleasant, strengthening, but hard of
digestion; within that hollow is about half a pint of most pleasant Water,
which at certain times congeals and forms a substance like an Apple, (called by
the Indians Pango) of a delightful taste, as is the conserve of Sugar, of the
same Tree, and this same is the seed that produces the Tree.

31. To make Wine, Sugar, Vinegar, and other things of this Coco, they suffer
not the cluster to grow, but bind the branch hard, when green, with cords made
of the same Tree, cut the end of the branch, and put it into a Vessel, into
which it bleeds like a Vine. This liquor is called Sura and a great quantity of
it is gathered; to make Wine they distill it, some is stronger, some weaker, as
our Brandy, the hottest they call Orraca (and we corruptly Rack) to sweeten and
color it, they put in Raisins, and it is a plentiful and precious Commodity in
all that part of Asia; Vinegar is made only by leaving that liquor some Days in
Earthen Vessels; Sugar by boiling it to a consistence, with this Sugar they
make good preserves, one of the kernel of the same Coco grated.

32. Oil is made of the Coco's prepared and ground; it serves not only to burn,
but to Eat, dress Wounds, cure Colds, and purge, it is a considerable
commodity; that mass of Coco which has been so pressed or ground, is excellent
food for Cattle; so that of the Wood, Leaves and Shells of this Tree is made
the Ship, Sails and Rigging, without any other material, and of the Fruit,
Liquors and Preserves are made to load it: Of the Leaves are also made Brooms
and Baskets; of the Wood, Darts and Lances not much inferior to Iron; it also
bears a a sort of Down that serves instead of Tinder. When any of these Trees
is cut down, they take off the Head, called Palmito, which is of an excellent
taste, like to that of our Cardoons. It is therefore not to be admired, that
the Indians take much pains to raise a Wood of these Trees, and are so much
troubled to have them destroyed in time of War.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Memory there is of the Preaching the Gospel of Christ in all Asia and
its Islands, particularly by the Apostle Saint Thomas in those Parts mentioned
in this History, and of the Extirpation and Reparation of the same.

1. FOR the better understanding of what follows, it is necessary to run over
the Position of these Countries. Off from the Island Zocotora appears on the
Coast of Africa the Empire of Ethiopia, divided on the East from Asia by the
Red Sea, beginning on the North at the City Suanquem, and ending on the South
almost at the Mouth of the Red Sea. Between that Sea and the Persian Golph lies
that part of Arabia, which is most Fruitful and best Peopled. Ten Leagues from
this Shore, and three from that of Persia, just within the Mouth of the Gulf,
is the Island Gerum, and in it the City Ormuz, a Kingdom more famous for its
Trade than extent. From thence runs along the Coast of Caramania subject to
Persia for the space of Two hundred Leagues, to the City Diul seated on the
Westernmost Mouth of Indus, which River makes one of the sides of that
Continent which is properly called India, and is in the form of a Lozenge.

2. Of its most distant Angles, the one lies North between the Fountains of
Indus and Ganges on Mount Imaus; the other South, and is the famous Cape
Comori, the distance between these two Angles is Four hundred Leagues. The
other two Angles which lie East and West, at Three hundred Leagues interval
reach the Mouths of the same two Rivers. This vast Continent, called by the
Natives Indostan, is divided into several Kingdoms and Dominions, as are (to
begin at the Mouth of Indus where we left off) the Kingdoms of Gurzarate or
Cambaya, Decan, Bisnagar; those of Malabar, viz. Canor, Calicut, Cranganor,
Cochim, Porca, Coulam and Travancor, reaching to the Point of the Cape in 7
degrees. 40 min. of N. Lat. From the Cape, the Coast runs again toward the North
till the Mouth of Ganges, where taking a great round it makes the Bay of
Bengala, and runs again toward the South, to the other famous Cape of
Cingapura, the Southernmost of all the Eastern Continent. Opposite to Cape
Comori is the Island Ceylon, that of Sumatra to Cingapura: But beginning at
Cape Comori, Two hundred Leagues of the Coast belong to the Kingdom of
Narsinga, or Bisnagar, the rest to those of Orixa, Bengala, Pegu and Siam.
Beyond Cingapura are those of Cambodia, Tsiompa, Cochinchina, and the Great
China.

3. The Islands of this great Archipelago are innumerable: But not to mention
those opposite to Indostan, there are Iava, Timor, Borneo, Banda, the Molucos,
Celebes, Mazacar, Sunda, Lequia, and those of Iapan, without speaking of many
more of Note. It is certain the Gospel was in the time of the Apostles Preached
in many of these Provinces, if not in all. For the Ethiopians value themselves
upon receiving it from a Servant of Queen Candace baptized by Saint Philip, and
from the Evangelist St. Matthew. There is no doubt but Arabia and Persia
flourished with many Saints and Martyrs, and the People of Bazora, where Tigris
and Euphrates fall into the Sea, have a Tradition that the beloved Disciple
preached to them. But the most singular Apostle of those Parts of Asia was St.
Thomas, the memory of whom is still preserved in Cranganor, Coulam, and
Meliapor, with evident Testimonies that he traveled over all those Countries,
even as far as China, whence he returned to the Kingdom of Coromandell, where
he ended his Preaching with his Life.

4. Christianity being now utterly corrupt in some Parts of Asia, and quite
lost in others, the Portugues Arms, accompanied by Apostolical Ministers, went
thither to restore it. The first who Baptized in that Part of Asia was F. Peter
de Cubillones of the Holy Order of the Blessed Trinity, and Confessor to the
first Discoverer, Vasco de Gama.

5. The most successful Laborers after him were in India the Vicar Michael
Vaz, and James de Borba, and other Religious of the Order of St. Francis. In
the Moluco Islands, Captain Francis de Castro, who converted five Kings in the
Island Mazacar. Captain Antony de Payva, who in the same Island Baptized two
Kings and their Courts in one Day. Others are named in their proper Places in
this History, and will doubtless be Recorded in the Book of Life.

6. This was the Estate of Christianity in Asia, when its new Apostle St.
Francis Xaverius, of the Society of Jesus came thither. He traveled more than
is credible, and did more than human Works. He was born of a Noble Family at
Pamplona in Navarre in the Year 1497, studied and taught Philosophy and
Divinity at Paris, whence he went Companion to St. Ignatius Loyola, followed
his Rule, and received Holy Orders at Venice.

7. He came to Portugal in order to pass into India in the Year 1540, and the
Reign of King John the Third, who sent for him and a Companion from Rome. He
had the Dignity of Apostolical Nuncio in the East; and during the Voyage, and
in India, was called Holy Father. He Preached in the Island Zocotora, at Goa
and Travancor, where he was persecuted. It cost him no less Pains to reclaim
the Portugueses, debauched with the Riches of Asia, than to convert Infidels.
In the Island Ceylon he Converted the King of Candea, went thence to the
Moluco's, and gained many Souls. After several times traversing the Islands,
India, and other Parts, he went to Iapan, and, with the Prince's leave,
Preached at Cangoxima, and suffered many Afflictions, then went to Firando,
Yamanguchi and Miaco, where with great pains he planted the Faith. Then he
returned to Malaca, after converting the King of Bungo, who soon after died a
Christian, being called Francis in Baptism.

8. Next he prepared to go into China, and died at the Entrance of it in the
Island Sancham, in the Fifty-fifth Year of his Age, and the Eleventh of his
Preaching, having first foretold the Day of his Death, which was the second of
December about midnight: His Body the Year following was translated to Goa. He
had the Gift of Languages and Prophecy, and was Canonized by Pope Gregory the
15th, in the Year 1622. He had many Disciples and Companions, who wrought and
endured much, and were held in opinion of sanctity.

9. We have already spoke of the first entrance of Christianity into Ethiopia,
India, Iapan, Persia, and Arabia, and of its restoration by the Portugueses;
now we will say somewhat relating to the same in China; there are still
undeniable testimonies that St. Thomas spread the Evangelical Doctrine there,
and though no footsteps of it appeared, the same had happened in all India, had
not Thomas called Cananeus an Armenian Christian, about the Year 800 come to
Mogodover or Patana, who renewing the Apostles Churches, and building others,
resettled the Christian Religion, and gave occasion to the mistake (because
both had the same name) in believing they were all the work of the sormer. The
same happened in China, as shall be made appear; the time Christianity was
forgot in both places, differs not much, for as it appears, Thomas-Cananeus
re-established it in India about the Year Eight hundred, so it is plain by what
shall be said, that about the Year Seven hundred it began again to take footing
in China.

10. Let us first speak of the ancient and then of the modern testimonies. In
the Caldaick Books of the Indian Christians still remaining at Cranganor, and
particularly in a breviary, there is a lesson to this purpose; By St. Thomas
the Errors of the Idolatry of India were abolished; by St. Thomas the Chinese
and Ethiopians were converted to the Truth; by St. Thomas etc. by St. Thomas
were spread in all India, the rays of the Doctrine of Life; by St. Thomas flew
to the Chinese the Kingdom of Heaven. And again in an Antiphon, the Indians,
Chinese, the Persians and Islanders, those of Siria, Armenia, Grecia, and
Romania, in commemoration of St. Thomas, offer adoration to thy Holy Name.
Among the Islanders may well be reckoned the Iaponeses; in the summary of the
Synodical Constitutions, and Chapter of those that are Canonical, there is a
Canon of the Patriarch Theodosius, in which are these words, So also the
Bishops of the great Province, as are most of the Metropolitans of China. When
the Portugueses entered India, the Governor of the Malabar Mountains, called
Iacoh, styled himself, Metropolitan of India and China; Paulus Venetus a true
Historian in all points, that can now be proved, assures in his time, there
were in China many Christians who had sumptuous Churches, and names the Cities
in which they were. The Fathers of the Society of Jesus had an account of
People who worshipped the Cross. The cause why the Christians and their
Churches were quite extinct, and no footsteps of them remains, is that they
having favored the Tartar when he invaded China about Three hundred Years
since, he being overcome by the Chinese, many of them were killed, the rest
fled, and all that had been theirs was totally extirpated.

11. In the Year 1625, digging for a foundation near Siganfu, Metropolis of the
Province of Xensi, there was found a flat stone above 9 spans in length, 4 in
breadth, and one in thickness; one end of it goes off sharp like a Pyramid, on
it is cut a Cross, the ends of it adorned with Flower de luces like that found
in the Tomb of St. Thomas the Apostle, about it are Clouds, and at the foot of
it three lines, each containing three Chinese Letters, all the superficies of
the stone is full of those Characters, and the edges, only that on these are
some Sirian Characters, containing the names of the Bishops then in being. The
Governor of the Town set it up there, under an Arch within the enclosure of a
Temple. The three first lines have these words, A Monument in Praise and
Eternal Memory, of the propogating the law of light; and Truth come from Judea
into China. Then over the rest of the writing is this Title; the Prologue made
by the Priest of the Kingdom of Judea called Quimein.

12. The Substance of the Inscription is this: That the most Spiritual,
Incomprehensible and Eternal is without beginning or end; That the beginning is
three and one without having a beginning. Lord Olooyu; That he formed the four
Parts of the World in the figure of a Cross; That he framed all Creatures and
Man; That Man perverted from his Innocence, fell into the Snares of Satan; That
hence sprang Three hnndred sixty five Sects; That some assigned Divinity to
Creatures, and others believed all was a mere nothing; That all was full of
Errors and Confusion; That then the Messiah, concealing his Majesty by becoming
Man, appeared to the World; That an Angel coming to declare the Mystery to a
Virgin, she brought forth the Holy; That a Star appeared, denoting his Birth,
and those of the Kingdom of Pozu went to offer him Tribute, all suitable to
what the Twenty-four Saints had said; That he proposed to the World the most
pure Law, and filled it with Light and Virtues, opening the way to Life, and
shutting that of Death; That he overcame the dark Seat, and the Devil was
destroyed, and Man made capable of ascending to the bright Seats; That at noon
Day he ascended into Heaven, and there remained Twenty-seven Books of the Holy
Scriptures; That he opened the Gate of Conversion by the Water that purifies;
That his Ministers used the Holy Cross, and stayed not in one Country, nor had
Servants, nor looked for Riches; That they seven times offered Sacrifice of
sweet Odor, wherewith they helped the living and dead; That every seven Days
they offered and purified the Heart to receive the Holy Innocence; That no
proper Name could be given to the true Law, and for want of another they called
it, The Law of Light; That in the Year of Chinquon Kieica, there came from
Judea a Man of great Virtue, called Olopuem, with the true Doctrine; That this
was received throughout all the Kingdom, and Churches erected; that afterward
some change of Affairs happening, it grew weak, but in the Time of the Great
Tam, the Holy Gospel returned to China; That in the Year of Ximbie, the Priests
John and Paul redressed all, and new Churches were erected; That in the Reign
of the Great Tam, the second Year Kienchum, on the seventh day of the Month of
Autumn, this Stone was set up, Kincin Governor of the Church of China being
Bishop.

13. By this venerable Piece of Antiquity it appears, that the Christian Faith
was planted in China about the Year Six hundred thirty-one. From it also may be
inferred, that St. Thomas first Preached there, but that Christianity being
almost forgot, those Priests of Judea and Kings of China restored it, as has
been shown it happened in India. So that what the Portugueses, assisted by
other European Religious Men now perform, is a second Re-establishment of the
Faith.

14. About the Year 1543, Fernan Mendez Pinto had this following Information in
China. He was Traveling from the City Mindoo to that of Peking, and seeing by
the way the Ruins of another, was informed, that about Two hundred Years before
it was a most flourishing Place. That a Holy Man coming thither raised some
dead to life, and Preached of Jesus Christ, and his Vicar upon Earth; that the
Heathen Priests designing to burn him, he quenched the fire, making the sign of
the Cross over it; that they stoned him to Death, and being thrown into a
River, the Stream stood still five days, the holy Body being born upon the
Superficies all the time; that this occasioned the Conversion of many People,
of which there was a great number in that Province. Further upon a Mountain was
a Stone Cross, which this Writer saw some People Worship, pronouncing these
Words: Christ Jesus; Mary conceived him being a Virgin, brought him forth a
Virgin, and remained a Virgin. These were Disciples descended from a Weaver,
called John, in whose House that Holy Martyr was entertained. They preserve a
Book of his Life, which says his Name was Matthew Escandel, by Birth an
Hungarian, and had been an Heremite on Mount Sinai. That History related, that
he being taken out of the River and buried nine days after, the City was
swallowed up with Four thousand Bonzos, who only durst stay in it, the People
having abandoned it, by reason of the Earthquakes that happened before.

15. At the same time the same Writer found in the Cities Sampitay and Quiangsi
of China, many Christians who had been converted Twenty-five Years before,
which was Sixty Years before the Jesuits entered China, which is now One
hundred and fourteen Years since. And this is the Reason those Fathers found
some Monuments of Christianity, but so obscure that little could be made out by
them.

16. The same Feruand Mendez relates, That in the City Timplan, the Court of
the Emperor of Caminam, a Borderer on China, he found most ancient Monuments of
the Christian Faith, and some account of the Holy Scripture. Those People said,
That the Creation of the World was the work of the Will of the Creator; That he
was not visible, nor to be felt; That there were Eighty-two thousand Moons
since the Earth was separated from the Water; That on Earth God had created a
most delightful Garden, and placed therein the first Man called Adda, and his
Wife Baragom: That he forbid them the Fruit of the Tree Hisaforam, and they
transgressing this Command, all Men became liable to the Punishment of that
Guilt: That the Man broke the Precept, being deceived by the Woman, and she by
the Serpent Lupantoo: That for this Disobedience they were cast out of that
delightful Place: That by reason of the Sinfulness of Man, God had drowned the
World; That only one just Man with his Family escaped in a Wooden House, and by
them Mankind was restored: That God would punish the Wicked, and reward the
Good: That one John, a Disciple of Thomas Modeliar, (a Servant of God, whom the
Citizens of Digun killed, because he preached that God became Man, and suffered
Death for the Sins of Men) had Preached the same in that Country, and lost his
Life for so doing. Thomas Modeliar is the Apostle St. Thomas. The People of
Calaminam own the Blessed Trinity; when they Sneeze they say some Words that
declare it, and they make the sign of the Cross.

17. The last Testimony was discovered in the Year 1635, but the thing in it
self is at least as ancient as the Stone already spoken of. Some Heathens
passing through a Street in a Village near the City Civenche^ of the Province
of Fokien, by Night saw Lights on some Stones that lay there, and turning them
up, found on that part which had lain next the Ground Crosses carved. A Jesuit
examining into it, caused the Stone on which the greatest Light appeared to be
fixed in a decent place, as a Monument of the Miracle, and of our Religion in
those Parts.

18. We shall speak of what was done by the Religious of the Society of Jesus
in order to the Reparation of Christianity in this Empire in the proper place,
and Third Tome of this our Asia. They entered upon this undertaking in the Year
1579, which was the the last under our Portugues Princes who yet expired not
without this Glory. In the Year 1583, they Founded the first Church at Xauking.
The rest of their Proceedings we refer to the Third Tome, beginning under the
Spanish Monarchs, as this has ended with the Portugueses.

The End of the Second Tome.
The Portugues Asia: OR, THE HISTORY OF THE Discovery and Conquest OF INDIA BY
THE PORTUGUES; CONTAINING All their Discoveries from the Coast of Africa, to
the farthest Parts of China and Iapan; all their Battles by Sea and Land,
Sieges and other Memorable Actions; a Description of those Countries, and many
Particulars of the Religion, Government and Customs of the Natives, etc.

In Three Tomes.

Written in Spanish by Manuel de Faria y Sousa, Knight. Of the Order of Christ.

Translated into English by Capt. John Stevens.

Tome the Second.

LONDON, Printed for C. Brom, at the Sign of the Gun, at the West End of St.
Paul's. 1695.

DEDICATED TO HER MOST SACRED MAJESTY, CATHERINE, QUEEN DOWAGER OF ENGLAND, etc.

THE PREFACE.
WHen Almighty GOD, the only Founder of Empires, is so pleased with a People,
as to possess them of a New one, He generally Endows the first Founders with a
wonderful proportion of Heroic Virtues, as Sincerity, Magnanimity, Valor,
Majesty, and an almost more than Mortal Staidness: The solid Foundations to
support the greatest Monarchies. Such Founders rarely exceeded Three in Number.
Let the Learned (by the help of this not yet Vulgar Remark) seek Foreign
Examples; it shall be my Care only to show those of my own Country. The Kingdom
of Portugal was founded by Three Heroes, (HENRY, ALFONSO, and SANCHO) most
visibly adorned with a^ those Virtues which merit to erect Imperial Thrones,
and from them to Command many Kings, many Princes, and many Nations. Their
Successors began to decline. The Dominion, the same Distributer of Power was
pleased to give them in Asia, was also founded on Three, as appears in the
beginning of this Work: They were DUARIE PACHECO, D. FRANCISCO DE ALMEYDA, and
ALFONSO DE ALBUQUERQUE. Scarce had they one Successor who did not manifestly
decline, or at least had a mixture of Valor and Timerousness, of Moderation
and Covetousness, with that unhappy distinction, that still the Timerousness
and Avarice were most predominant. No Living Creature puts away his Young Ones,
till they can shift for themselves: So Almighty GOD, when He erects Monarchies,
cherishes them with particular Care, till they gather strength, and then (though
He does not wholly abandon) puts them into the hands of Men, that they may
perceive the difference between the Divine and Human Care. Let an unbiassed
Judgment here reflect upon the Exploits of the Portugueses in gaining this
Asiatick Crown, and it will appear that only PACHECO could have forged it with
that fiery Heart, which melted the Arms and Riches of the obstinate Zamori;
That only ALMEYDA could have filed and polished it, by applying his own and his
Son's Sword, which brought it into form by humbling the Turkish Pride; And that
only the Great ALBUQUERQUE, giving the finishing strokes, could have set in it
the most Precious Jewels of Goa, Malaca and Ormuz. For they so far removed from
their Country, that they had not only lost sight, but even the hopes and memory
of it, entering with a few indifferent Vessels and a most inconsiderable number
of Men, where scarce a Tree offered them a secure shade, amidst Numerous and
well Armed Squadrons and Castles, and through showers of heavy Ball and
poisoned Arrows; by the force of their Swords opened deep Trenches, raised high
Walls, and secured to themselves famous Cities and large Countries. Let those
who have since acted less, having so good a ground to perform much more, not
take it ill if we say, That the Bounds of our Dominions in India, are almost
reduced to what they were in the Beginning. It is true, some of the Successors
(a few among so many) added something to the Foundation; but it was an
inconsiderable Copy of the Great Original. It is also true, others valiantly
desended that ^dation, but it was an indispensable Duty. Let not timorous
Spirits call this a Rash Judgment, which the Brave will only style Unbiassed;
or say, We endeavor to lessen the Merits of Hero's; our only Design, is to
show the Ways and Means the Giver of Crowns takes to frame and deliver them to
Mortals; and how far less capable they are to Maintain, than He to Form them.
The Divine Providence gave a sufficient Demonstration hereof in the erecting
this Empire, and they no less in diminishing of it. Hereof we have seen much
already, and shall see yet more; yet not without singular Acts of Valor: That
it may be manifest the Cause of our Ruin is, That the Souls are not always the
same; for the Hearts always are.

THE CONTENTS.
TOM. I. PART I.
CHAP. I. THE Government of the Viceroy D. Garcia de Noronha, from the Year
1538, till the Year 1540, in the Reign-of King John the Third, Page 1 CHAP. II.
Continues the Government of the Viceroy, D. Garcia de Noronha, p. 8 CHAP. III.
The Government of D. Stephen de Gama, from the Year 1540, till the Year 1542,
in the Reign of King John the Third, p. 6 CHAP. IV. Goes on with the Government
of D. Stephen de Gama, p. 24 CHAP. V. Sundry Exploits of Captain Antony Faria,
from the Year 1540, till that of 1542, during the Government of D. Stephen de
Gama, p. 31 CHAP. VI. Continues the Exploits of Antony de Faria, p. 37 CHAP.
VII. Continues still the Exploits of Antony de Faria, in the Government of D.
Stephen de Gama, and the Year 1642, p. 44 CHAP. VIII. Concludes with the
Actions of Antony de Faria, p. 47 CHAP. IX. Continues the Government of D.
Stephen de Gama, and contains the Actions of his Brother D. Christopher in
Ethiopia, p. 54 CHAP. X. The End of the Government of D. Stephen de Gama, p. 63
CHAP. XI. The Government of Martin Alfonso de Sousa, from the Year 1542, till
the Year 1545, in the Reign of King John the Third, p. 67 CHAP. XII. Continues
the Government of Martin Alfonso de Sousa, p. 76 CHAP. XIII. Continues the
Government of Martin Alfonsa de Sousa, p. 81 CHAP. XIV. The End of the
Government of Martin Alfonso de Sousa, and of the First Part of this Tome, p.
86
TOM. II. PART II.
CHAP. I. THE Government of D. John de Castro, from the Year 1545, till the
Year 1548, in the Reign of King John the Third, p. 95 CHAP. II. Continues the
Government of D. John de Castro, and Siege of Diu, p. 103 CHAP. III. Continues
the Siege of Diu, the Governor D. John de Castro comes in Person to its
Relief, p. 109 CHAP. IV. Continues the Government of D. John de Castro, and
Reign of King John the Third, p. 117 CHAP. V. The End of the Government D. John
de Castro, p. 125 CHAP. VI. The Government of Garcia de Sa, from the Year 1548,
till the Year 1549, in the Reign of King John the Third, p. 132 CHAP. VII. The
Government of George Cabral, from the Year 1549, till the Year 1550, in the
Reign of King John the Third, p. 140 CHAP. VIII. Continues the Government of
George Cabral, p. 143 CHAP. IX. The Government of the Viceroy D. Alfonso de
Noronha, from the Year 1550, till 1553, in the Reign of King John the Third, p.
150 CHAP. X. Continues the Government of the Viceroy, D. Alfonso de Noronha,
p. 563 CHAP. XI. The Government of the Viceroy D. Peter de Mascarenhas, from
the Year 1554, till 1555, King John the Third still Reigning, p. 174 CHAP. XII.
The Government of Francis Barreto, from the Year 1555, till 1558, in the Reign
of King John the Third, p. 178 CHAP. XIII. The End of the Government of Francis
Barreto, p. 186 CHAP. XIV. The Government of the Viceroy D. Constantin de
Braganza, from the Year 1558, till 1561, in the Reign of King Sebastian, p. 190
CHAP. XV. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Constantin, in the Reign
of King Sebastian, p. 198 CHAP. XVI. The End of the Government of the Viceroy
D. Constantin, p. 207 CHAP. XVII. The Government of the Viceroy D. Francis
Coutinho, Count de Redondo, from the Year 1561, till 1564, in the Reign of King
Sebastian, p. 215 CHAP. XVIII. The Government of John de Mendoza, for six
Months of the Year 156^, in the Reign of King Sebastian, p. 222
TOM. II. PART III.
CHAP. I. THE Government of the Viceroy D. Anton. de Noronha, from the Year
1564, till 1568, in the Reign of King Sebastian, p. 241 CHAP. II. Continues the
Government of D. Anton. de Noronha, 245 CHAP. III. Continues the Government of
D. Anton. de Noronha, in the Reign of King Sebastian, p. 253 CHAP. IV. The End
of the Government of the Viceroy D. Anton. de Noronha, p. 260 CHAP. V. The
Government of the Viceroy D. Luis de Ataide, Count de Atouguia; from the Year
1568, till 1571, in the Reign of King Sebastian, p. 267 CHAP. VI. Continues the
Government of the Viceroy D. Luis de Ataide, p. 273 CHAP. VII. The dangerous
Sieges of Goa and Chaul; and first of the foremost, continuing the Government
of D. Luis de Ataide, and Reign of King Sebastian, p, 281 CHAP. VIII. Continues
the Siege of Goa, and Government of D. Luis de Ataide, p. 289 CHAP. IX. The
Siege of Chaul, p. 296 CHAP. X. Continues the Siege of Chaul, p. 304 CHAP. XI.
The Proceedings ^f Zamori upon this Occasion, and during the Government of D.
Luis de Ataide, p. 313 CHAP. XII. The Government of the Viceroy D. Antony de
Noronha, from the Year 1571 till 1573, in the Reign of King Sebastian, p. 319
CHAP. XIII. The Siege of Malaca, with other Occurrences, and End of the
Government of D. Antony de Noronha, p. 325 CHAP. XIV. The Government of Antony
Moniz Barreto, from the Year 1573 till 1576, in the Reign of King Sebastian, p.
3^ CHAP. XV. The Government of Francis Barreto in Monomotapa, beginning in the
Year 1569, in the Reign of King Sebastian, p. 34^ CHAP. XVI. Continues the
Government of Francis Barreto, in Monomotapa, p. 349 CHAP. XVII. The Government
of Vasco Fernandez Homem in Monomotapa, in the Reign of King Sebastian, p. 354
CHAP. XVIII. Of the Viceroy Ruy Lorenzo de Tavors, and the Government of D.
James de Meneses, from the Year 1576 till 1578, in the Reign of King Sebastian,
p. 358 CHAP. XIX. The Count D. Luis de Ataide is the second time Viceroy of
India; he set out in the Year 1577, and Governs till 1581, and is the last sent
out by King Sebastian, p. 361 CHAP. XX. The Government of Ferdinand Tellez de
Meneses, who was named by the Governors of Portugal, upon the Decease of the
Cardinal King Henry, in the Year 1581, p. 367
TOM. II. PART IV.
CHAP. I. OF the Gods, Superstitions and Opinions of the Asiaticks,
particularly the Indians, and among them the Malabars, ^5 CHAP. II. The
Metamorphoses, or Transformations, p. 383 CHAP. III. Other Metamorphoses, and
the Consequences of them; of the God Brama, and the Foundation of Pagods; an
Account of the famousest of them, p. 387 CHAP IV. A Continuation of the same
Matter, p. 392 CHAP. V. Of the Offices, (...), Ceremoies, B^rials, and other
things, p. 398 CHAP. VI. Continues the same S^ct, p. 405 CHAP. VII. Of the
Empire of Aethiopia, and first of the Kingdoms and Provinces into which it is
divided; of the progress of Christianity therein, and of the Product of the
Land, p. 4^2 CHAP. VIII. Of ^he Laws, Customs and Religion of the Empire of
Ethiopia, p. 421 CHAP. IX. Of ^he Nature of the Country of Ethiopia, of its
Towns and Kings it has had, and of the entrance and expulsion of our Doctrine,
p. 431 CHAP. X. The Islands of Japan, p. 435 CHAP. XI. A further Account of
Japan, 441 CHAP. XII. Of the Great Empire of China, and first of its Situation,
division into Provinces, of its Product, Ar^s and Commerce, p. 448 CHAP. XIII.
Of the Provinces into which China is divided, p. 453 CHAP. XIV. Of the People
of China, their C^stoms, Inclinations and Studies, p. 463 CHAP. XV. A
Continuation of the same Subject, p. 472 CHAP. XVI. Of the Marriages, Burials,
Ceremonies, Sacrifices, and Belief of the Chinese, p. 481 CHAP. XVII. Of the
Original of the Kingdom of China, the Palace and Government of it, p. 490 CHAP.
XVIII. Of the Royal Marriages, Nobility, Counsels, and Government of China in
Peace and War, p. 494 CHAP. XIX. The Division of the Dominions the Portugueses
do, or have possessed in those Parts, commonly comprehended under the General
Name of India: Some Remarks on the Customs and Religion of those People, with
some Account of the Christians of St. Thomas, and of the Island of Ceylon, p.
499 CHAP. XX. Of the Memory there is of the Preaching the Gospel of Christ in
all Asia, and its Islands, particularly by the Apostle Saint Thomas in those
Parts mentioned in this History, and of the Extirpation and Reparation of the
same, p. 513
THE Portugues ASIA. TOM, II. PART I.
CHAP. I.
The Government of the Viceroy D. Garcia de Noronha, from the Year 1538, till
the Year 1540, in the Reign of King John the Third.

1. IN the Month of November D. Garcia de Noronha the Viceroy began 1538.
to take upon him the Administration of Affairs in India. He had set out of
Lisbon with 12 Sail, and Arrived with 11, and in them three Thousand fighting
Men; many of Note. One of the Ships was never heard of, which was esteemed a
Judgment; because it was full of Malefactors taken out of Gaols. whose
Punishment was changed into Transportation.

2. Though this Fleet was fitted out chiefly to oppose the Turks, who now
oppressed India; yet the Viceroy suffered them to batter Diu, without
relieving it farther, than with the hopes of Relief. Antony de Sylva Meneses
was the second that was sent thither with 24 small Vessels, and came late; yet
contended with the Great Antony de Silveyra for the Honor of that Victory: So
much he valued, having been only a Witness of it. The Viceroy was ready to
Sail for Diu with a Fleet of 160 Sail of several sorts, and in them five
Thousand fighting Men and a 1000 Pieces of Cannon, when the Advice came that
the Turks had raised the Siege. He was overjoyed (it is not known for what) and
discharging the Merchant-Ships that were ready to attend him retained Ninety.
With these he set out for Diu, but sailed so slowly, that it appeared as if
some ill Omen threatened his ruin there, since he avoided not only seeing of it
in danger, but even now in Peace. Its quiet was disturbed by Lurcan and Coje
Zofar, who ranged about with Fire and Sword. The Viceroy heard of this at
Dabul, and sent against them Martin Alfonso de Melo with his Galley, and the
Vessels that went with Antony de Sylva. He went; but being hard set by the
Enemy, was forced to take shelter under the Fort. The Viceroy at the same slow
rate removed to Bacaim, nothing moved with the News he received from Diu. It
was murmured, he either consulted his Safety or his private Interest. But when
least expected, he Steered thither on the first of January; when a Storm
rising, which lasted eight days, dispersed the Fleet into several Ports; two
Galleys, and some other Vessels, perished.

3. The first thing the Viceroy attended to, was to hear D. Gonzalo Vaz
Confino, who came with five small Vessels from Onor, whither he had been sent
by the late Governor Nuno de Cuna upon this occasion. One of Solyman's Galleys,
that had been at Diu, was forcod into that Port; and 'twas thought that Queen
(then a Widow) violated the Peace concluded with us by protecting it. Goncalo
Vaz calling her to account, she Answered, The Gally was there against her Will
she not being in a condition to binder it; but should be glad it were taken by
our Vessels. The Captain attempted it, and after a sharp Engagement was forced
to desist, having lost 15 Men, and among them his Son James. He suspected the
Queen had assisted the Enemy, and refusing some Refreshment she sent for the
wounded Men, returned some rash Words mixed with Threats. The Queen cleared her
self, and again offered Peace, which was concluded, and some Portugueses left
in that Port, to observe what the Queen did toward expelling the Turks.

4. We will conclude this Year with the memory of the Arrival of six Ships at
Lisbon from India, rather for the Bones than the Riches they carried. In one of
them was the Body of the Great D. Vasco de Gama, which the King caused to be
laid in his Tomb, with the greatest Magnificence that has been seen in this
Kingdom.

5. This Year Peter de Faria the second time was made Commander of the famous
Fort 1539.
of Malaca. Immediately resorted to him Ambassadors from the Neighboring
Kings, to congratulate and confirm Peace with us. The first was of the Bataas
in Sumatra, upon the Ocean where the Island of Gold was imagined to be, and
which we earnestly desired to discover; but that Design being later, we will
then speak of this Embassy. The second was of Aaru in Sumatra; both demanded
Assistance against him of Achem. Faria had not yet taken possession of the
Command, which still D. Stephen de Gama held for a few Weeks. One excused
himself, because his Power was expiring; the other, because he had not yet
commenced. Whereas both ought to join in relieving that King, as well because
his Fidelity merited it, as because his Kingdom lay between Malaca and Achem,
and served us for a Bulwark. Gama was most in fault, being in possession, and
much pressed by Faria to grant it. But we shall soon see him more blameable,
refusing then what he now urged should be granted. Such the Inconstancy of Man.

6. Afterward Peter de Faria sent that King some Relief; but it was
inconsiderable and came late. The King of Achem sent against him his
Brother-in-Law Heredim Mahomet with 160 Vessels, all of Oars, and 12000
Fighting Men. He from the Mouth of the River Puneticam battered Aaru's
Fortifications, but to no effect; so he Landed and entered the Works: But was
again beaten out, with loss of Men and Canon. The Besiegers persisting some
days, lose 3000 Men. They bribe an Officer of the Besieged, who treacherously
led the King to a dangerous place, where he was killed by a Musquet-Ball. The
Enemy enters the Works, and putting all (even the Sick) to the Sword, flew
2000. The Body of the dead King was carried to Him of Achem, who caused it to
be cut in pieces and boiled in Oil.

7. The Queen of Aaru, who was in a Wood, hearing the Death of her Husband,
would have burnt her self alive; but being hindered, with about 300 Men fell
upon the Achems, who were plundering the City, and slew 200. Being too weak to
proceed, she returned to the Woods, and from thence made Excursions; but not
able to hold out, went over to Malaca with about 600 persons in her Retinue, in
16 Vessels. Peter de Faria sent his Son Alvaro, who had the Command of the Sea,
to receive her upon the River with pomp and grandeur.

8. Faria treated her with much Respect; but kept her four Months with only
Promises of Succor, till she Despairing, publicly reproached him for this
Neglect, and he without any regard gave no other Answer, than Turning his Back.
Private Interest drew away the Commander from the performance of what he owed
to a Royal Matron, who for her Husbands sake deserved our Aid, for her
Misfortunes our Pity, and for her Merit. Respect.

9. The afflicted Widow went to the King of Ujantana, then at Bintam, who
scandalized at Peter de Faria's Proceedings, offered Assistance, and Married
her, to have the better Title to pretend to the Kingdom of Aaru. He sent his
Ambassador to Achem, to demand that Crown as his Right by Marriage. The Tyrant
would not hear the Ambassador, nor receive the Present he brought, which is the
greatest Affront among those Princes; but sent a Letter full of Reproaches,
saying among other things, His Letter had been writ upon the Wedding-Table.

10. The King of Ujantana provoked by this Affront, immediately set out 200
Sail under the Command of his Admiral Lacxemena, who Anchored before the Fort
of Puneticam, and carried it at the first Assault, killing 1400 Achems, and
their Commander Morat Arraez a Turk.

11. By this time Heredim Mahomet was Sailing that way with such another Fleet,
and in it 12000 Fighting Men. The two Fleets met, and after a sharp Engagement,
Heredim being killed by a Canon-Ball, his Men dismayed, and most of the Fleet
was taken by Lacxemena, most of the Achems slain, and only 14 Vessels got off.

12. The King of Achem caused the 14 Captains to be Beheaded, because they
fled, and the Soldiers Beards to be cut off, and that upon pain of being sawed
alive they should ever wear Women's Habit, with a sort of Tabor in their Hands;
and whenever they affirmed any thing upon Oath, they should say, As I hope to
see my Husband safe; or else, As I hope to see the Children I have bore
prosper. This was put in Execution, and let it not seem strange; for in the
time of King Sebastian, two Gentlemen for Cowardice were Condemned either to be
Beheaded, or walk the City of Lisbon with a Spinning-Rock at their Girdle, and
one of them chose this last.

13. But above 20 years after this, in 1564, 1564.
the King of Ujantana possessing Aaru without apprehension, he of Achem
furiously fell upon and took Him and his Women, and put them all to death with
barbarous Torments. The Kingdom of Aaru he gave to his eldest Son, who after
died before Malaca, as shall appear in its place.

CHAP. II.
Continues the Government of the Vice Roy, D. Garcia de Noronha.

1. LEt us return to our Viceroy, whom we left at Sea. After the danger and
loss above related, he entered the Port of Diu with 50 Sail. He applauded, as
was due the Bravery of Antony de Silveyra, repaired the Fort, and delivered it
to James Lopez de Sousa, to whom the Command was given by the King. Let it
suffice once for all to note, That these Commands are always given by the King,
and so many Successors named, that many of them are in their Graves before they
succeed in the Post. A Treaty of Peace was set on foot, and concluded little to
our advantage; which the Common Vogue (I know not whether Infallible)
attributed to Covetousness.

2. Ruy Lorenco de Tavora, Commander of Bazaim, was close shut up in his Fort
by the Forces of the King of Cambaia, who were Masters of the Field, after
having done all that could be expected from him. The Viceroy sent to his
Relief Tristan de Ataide, late Commander of Malaca, with a Galeon and 3 Barques
well Manned. The two being joined, repulsed the Enemy with very considerable
loss of Men, Baggage and Reputation. Mean while the Viceroy prosecuted the
Works at Diu, and sent Martin Alfonso de Melo to Command at Ormuz, Peter de
Faria to Malaca the second time, and Michael Ferreyra a Gentleman of Worth, 70
years of Age, with 12 small Vessels and 400 Men, to assist the King of Cota in
Ceylon against his Brother Madune Pandar, King of Ceitavaca, who distressed
him. Ferreira did great damage in several Towns, abandoned by the Inhabitants.
In the Port of Putulam he surprised Pate Marcar's Fleet, consisting of 16
Paraos, and easily gained them; and with the same Success carried the Works and
Cannon ashore, though defended by 2000 Men. He Anchored in the Bay of Columbo
with the Ships, Cannon and other Booty. Then he marched to Cota; thence toward
Ceitavaca at the head of the Army of the King he Relieved, destroying all
before him; and seeking Madune, who had 6000 Men, saw them fly to the shelter
of the Woods. Thence he sent to beg Peace, which was granted upon Condition he
should send the Heads of some Morish Officers, especially Pate and Cunale
Marcar. He opposed this Condition as much as he could, but there being no other
Medium to appease his Adversary, consented, and killing them two and others,
sent 9 Heads upon as many Spears, a Present so acceptable to Ferreyra, that he
presently made Peace between him and Cota, and went off himself with Honor.

3. The same time the Viceroy sent Ferdinand de Morales with a great Galeon,
laden on the Kings account, to Trade at Pegu. As soon as arrived at that Port,
the King won him with Promises and Favors, to aid him against the King of
Brama, who invaded that Country with such a Power, that the two Armies
consistssed of two Millions of Men and 10000 Elephants. Morales went into a
Galliot, and Commanding the Fleet of Pegu, made great havoc among the Enemies
Ships. Brama came on by Land like a Torrent, carrying all before him, and his
Fleet covering the River, though as great as Ganges. With this Power he easily
gained the City and Kingdom of Pegu. Ferdinand Morales met the Fleet with his,
in respect of the other scarce visible, at the Point Ginamarreca, where was a
furious, bloody and desperate Fight. But the Pegu's overpowred by the Brama's
deserted Morales, who alone in his Galeot maintained himself against the
Enemies, performing Wonders with vast slaughter of them, till oppressed by the
Multitude he was killed. But the memory of his Bravery still lives among those
People.

4. The cause of this Revolt of Brama, who was Tributary to Pegu, was this:
Above 30000 Brama's labored in the King of Pegu's Works, this being one
Condition of their Vassalage. The King used to Visit them with his Women,
because they delighted to see Foreigners and the notable Works, and never
carried any other Company. The Laborers (what Wickedness would not they in
Idleness invent, who thought so much in their Labor) resolved to rob the
Queens or Concubins, and suddenly murdered the King, stripped them and fled to
their Country. Dacha Rupi, Heirto the deceased, was not only deprived of Means
of Revenging this Villainy, but even of maintaining himself, for many of his
Subjects rebelled. Para Mandara, King of the Brama's, desiring to enlarge his
Empire, and seeing that his Pickaxes and Shovels had opened a Way to his
Cimiters and Standards, rushes out with that Violence, and over-runs the
Kingdoms of the Lanjoes, Laos, Iangoma's, and others, that like his were
Tributaries to Pegu. Thus this Tyrant possessed himself of his ancient Kingdom
of Ava, that extends two Months Travel at ordinary Journeys, and contains 62
Cities. On the N. E. a Months Journey, is that of the Turks, containing as many
Cities, which the King of Pegu had taken from him of Cathay. The Kingdom of
Bimir lies West of Ava, of the same extent, and has 27 populous Cities. North
of this that of Lanjam, of equal greatness, has 38 Cities, and great store of
Gold and Silver. On the East is that of Mamprom, as great, but has only 8
Cities; on the East it borders on Cochinchina, on the South with Siam,
afterward conquered by Brama; and East of this is the great Kingdom of
Cambodia. All the Inhabitants of these Kingdoms are Pagans, and the most
Superstitious of all the East. They believe in one only God; but in time of
need have recourse to many Idols. Of these they have some dedicated to the
secret acts and necessities of Nature, in the same form they are performed.
They hold the Immortality of the Soul; are zealous in giving Alms, and bear
great Reverence to their Religious Men. These are very numerous, follow a Rule,
and keep a Choir much like ours; they live upon what is given them that day,
without keeping any thing for the next; they eat neither Fish nor Flesh,
because they kill nothing that has Life; their Clothes are yellow Cassocks and
Cloaks, with Hats of oiled Paper; they observe Lent and Easter after the
Christian manner. Whence may be inferred, That these are some Remains of the
Doctrine of St. Thomas the Apostle, though mixed with many Errors. The People
are all white, the Women very beautiful. Their Bodies are all wrought Blue with
hot Irons down to the Knees. In general, they are not only not Civilized, but
very Brutal.

5. The Viceroy being at Goa, D. John de Albuquerque, a Spaniard, presented
him King John's Patent, by which all the Conquests from the Cape of Good Hope,
to India, were made subject to his Diocese, with liberty to erect the Church of
St. Catherine of that City into a Cathedral. The Patent was obeyed, and thus a
Spaniard was the first Prelate of the Conquests; as if Spain had now taken the
Power in Spirituals, it was afterward to possess in Temporals. At this time
the Guzaratas straightened Ruy Lorenco de Tavora in Bacaim. He sallies with 350
Men, and put them to the rout. Coje Zofar comes on with his Men, and puts him
into a dangerous condition. George de Lima, Commander of Chaul, having Notice
hereof, sent 100 Men with speed, with which assistance the Enemy was repulsed,
and time given to repair the damage received.

6. Four Ships arrived in India from Portugal, to return with Merchandise. In
one of them the Great Antony de Sylveyra imbarqued. The Flag-Ship perished in
her Return, and was never heard of; but Silveyra arrived safe at Lisbon, and
had scarce Anchored, when the Great Men of the Court came aboard to Conduct him
to the King and Princes, who with Joy waited to see and honor him: And no
wonder, since all the Christian Princes visited him by their Ambassadors, led
by the admiration of his Glorious Exploits. The French Ambassador had his
Picture drawn, which was hung up in the Gallery of Fame among the other Hero's.
He was of a middle Stature, strong built; of a clear Judgment, ready Wit, a
great Heart, and very Liberal. His Liberality did as much at Diu, as his
Valor; for it is vain for a Miser ever to expect to purchase Glorious
Victories: Yet this Virtue was prejudicial to him in Portugal; for the King
having appointed him Governor of India, was dissuaded by some, who said, That
Empire was too little for his Bounty.

7. The late success of our Arms, chiefly in Cambaya, terrified all the Eastern
Princes, our Enemies; so that Nizamaluco and Hidalcam immediately sent their
Ambassadors to confirm the last Peace concluded with them. Zamori, to obtain
the more favorable Reception with the Viceroy, took Emanuel de Brito,
Commander of the Fort of Chale, for his Mediator. Brito promised his Interest,
and accompanied the Ambassador China Cutiale, who came to Goa with a splendid
Retinue. The Viceroy received him with Courtesy and Grandeur. The Peace was
Concluded much to our Credit. Had not the Viceroy fallen sick, he designed to
go to Calicut, to perform the Ceremony of Swearing to the observation of the
Articles; but sent his Son D. Alvaro to this purpose, under the Direction of
discreet Men, because he was young. They came to Panane with a numerous Fleet,
where that Prince expected them, accompanied by the Kings of Chale and Tanor.
They met with great demonstrations of Joy; the Peace was sworn, and lasted 30
years, which was one of the greatest Blessings we enjoyed in India.

8. About the beginning of January this Treaty was Concluded, and the Viceroy
sent toward Cambaya, D. Peter de Castellobranco, with 14 Sail, who returned to
God without any Action of Note. John de Sepulveda coming from Ormuz, and
hearing that Ruy Lorenco de Tavora was straightened by the Enemy in Bacaim,
relieved him with diligence; and they forced the Enemy to leave the Field.
Antony Carvallo, with 8 small Vessels, went to seek some Pirates that coursed
between Baticala and Anchediva. They fled; but being overtaken, were destroyed,
their Ships burnt, and the Country laid waste. Carvallo returned with Honor to
Goa, where the Viceroy growing so weak, he could not attend the Government, he
proposed a Worthy Person might be chose to supply his place, and then said, It
should be no other than his Son D. Alvaro. This surprised all Men, being a
violation of the Public Liberty of Choice: And might have proved of dangerous
Consequence, had not his Death prevented it; for sometimes it is expedient One
should dye for the good of the People.

9. The Viceroy being dead, the first Patent of Succession was opened, and
Martin Alfonso de Sousa was therein named, who not long before was gone to
Portugal. The second being opened, named D. Steven de Gama, who lived
Indisposed without the City. All rejoiced at the Election, as few were grieved
at the Death of the Predecessor, who nevertheless was honorably Interred. His
Picture represents him in the ancient Habit of Portugal^, all Black lined in
Crimson. He was the Third Viceroy, and Eleventh Governor, but first of the
Name, and held it a Year and seven Months. His Son D. Alvaro came to Portugal,
and brought with him two Ambassadors of the King of Cota. He desired of King
John, That in case he had no Son, his Grandchild might be sworn King. To this
effect the Ambassadors brought his Image in Gold, which held in its Hand a
Crown set with Jewels, for the King to Crown the Statue with. The King did it
publicly, with much solemnity, and the Ambassadors returned well pleased, as
dispatched to their Prince's satisfaction.

CHAP. III.
The Government of D. Stepen de Gama, from the Year 1540, till the Year 1542,
in the Reign of King JOHN the Third.

1. DOn Stephen entered upon the Government the beginning of April; he was Son
of D. Vasco de Gama. The first thing he did, was to cause all he had to be
publicly Valued, that it might not be thought afterward he had got his Estate
by that Government; at the end whereof it was found considerably diminished.
The first Act was hard to be imitated; so the second, which was, That he
advanced a great Sum to the Public, seeing the Treasury exhausted. Next, he
refitted the Fleet, which was laid up. The care of Temporals did not lessen his
attention to Spirituals; so he founded the College of St. Faith, for the
Heathen Youths that are Converted: This was the second College erected in that
Empire, and the first at Goa; and the first Rector of it was that singular
person the Vicar General Michael Vaz. He sent his Brother D. Christopher, young
in years, but not in ability, to attend the Repairing the Ships at Cochin. He
sent Advice to several Commanders, in order to be in a readiness to oppose the
Rumes, who, it was said, were Sailing toward our Coasts. D. Christopher set
out with 600 Men against the King of Porca and a Caymal of his, because they
had robbed Sebastian de Sousa coming from Maldivia, and refused to make
Restitution. He marched up the Country, slew many of the Enemy, and routed the
rest; Beheaded the Caymal, and laid the Country waste; which produced an
advantageous Peace, and an Agreement between this King and him of Pimienta.

2. Being advertized, That the Rumes could not set out this Year, he attended
other Affairs. Emanuel de Vasconcelos was sent with 20 Sail to the Coast of
Malabar; and Antony de Castelobranco with 30 to Cambaya. Scarce were they gone,
when 4 Ships arrived from Portugal. They carried new Orders from the King, as
dangerous as they were new; for whoever deprives Men of the hopes of
Advancement, takes away their Courage. Such were these, being the sullen
thoughts of Ministers, who thinking all too little for themselves, think every
thing too much for others. The Ships being sent to Cochin, to load and return
home; D. Stephen prepared to set out for the Red Sea, in order to burn the
Turkish Galleys at Zues; but first he sent some Commanders to the Post assigned
them.

3. When Badur, King of Cambaya, made over the Lands of Bacaim to the
Portugueses, he took them from Bramaluco, a brave Man, to whom he had before
given them. He thought the death of the Viceroy D. Garcia, furnished him a
convenient opportunity to regain them by surprise. He set out of Damam, in the
dead of Winter, with 300 Horse and 5000 Foot. Ruy Lorenco de Tavora, Commander
of that Fort, considering if the Enemy once took footing, it would be hard to
remove them; sets out with 650 Portugueses, the later number were Horse and Men
of known Valor. The Foot he divided into four Battalions, and reserved to
himself the 50 Horse and about 400 Blacks. Hearing the Enemy was lodged in the
Village Baylam, two Leagues up the Country, he resolved to surprise him at
Noon, when they use to Bathe. Half a League from the place he halted to Rest
the Men; and the Enemy having Intelligence thereof, came on with such diligence
and secrecy, that they had put them to the Sword, had not Ferdinand de Silva,
who led the Van with much Bravery, given a check to their Fury. Antony de
Sotomayor relieved him, already wounded in the Leg, was himself wounded and
lost some Men; but did great Execution. This gave Tavora time to make ready,
whose furious coming up made great havoc. Our Men turning Back to Back, and
facing the Enemy round, did Wonders. Ruy Lorenco, with his Horse ranging about,
did them great harm, till falling on their Flank many were slain, the rest fled
without hopes.

4. Next, he resolved to take a Great Ship of Bramaluco's, that was newly
finished in the Dock of Agacaim. He marched thither by Land, and D. Luis de
Ataide went by Water. The latter by force of Arms made his way to the City, at
such time as the other was reducing it to Ruins; breaking through a Multitude
of Enemies, who endeavored to stop his Fury, each of them lost six Men. D.
Luis Landed, and both together cleared the Field, unpeopled the City, and then
set Fire to it. The Ship was carried to the Port of Bacaim, and for many years
Traded to Lisbon. Bramaluco sued for Peace, and he being a suspected Subject of
Cambaya, our Governor treated with that King, and by this means secured the
former Peace, and obtained a Grant of half the Customs, whereof only the Third
part was offered before.

5. Let us now return to the Fleet, in which the Governor was to sail. His
great Liberality brought him more Men than he desired, whereof he chose the
best. The Fleet consisted of 80 Sail of sundry sorts and sizes, and carried two
Thousand Men.

6. While this Fleet was fitting, the King of Achem falling upon the King of
the Bataas unexpectedly, made a great slaughter of his People, killing among
the rest three Sons he rather adored than loved The King desirous of Revenge,
sent his Brother-in-Law Ambassador to Peter de Faria, then Commanding at
Malaca. The Embassy was to confirm the Peace before concluded, and desire
assistance of Arms and Ammunition; and the better to obtain it, sent him a rich
Present, and offered a free Trade in his Dominions, which abound in Gold,
Pepper, Benjamin and Camphir. Faria, who was intent upon Profit, as well as his
King's Service, plentifully supplied him with Arms and Ammunition, offering his
utmost assistance, and entertaining the Ambassador with splendor. The King of
Bataa attacked his Enemy with Resolution; but was beaten after having almost
gained the Victory, and retired with great Grief to his City Panaaju. Here he
dispatched Pinto, sent thither by Faria to Trade, who narrowly escaped being
lost in the River Parles of the Kingdom of Queda, by reason of the Revolution
had then happened in the City of that Name, the Court of that Prince, who had
murdered his Father and married his own Mother. The first he denied, and
pretended he had done the latter in Honor to her, having refused many
considerable Matches. Pinto brought News of the Island del Oro, or of Gold, the
great motive of his Voyage.

7. But now our Governor enters the Red Sea with his Fleet. He found most of
the Islands and Cities abandoned, the People having had notice of his coming.
The chief Island was Macua* The principal City Suanquem, in about 19 Degrees of
North Latitude, well built and rich. The King, who was fled a League up the
Country, entertained the Governor with shows of Peace, that he might not
destroy the Island. But the greatest damage was, that hereby he prevented the
burning the Ships at Suez, gaining so much time as carried thither the News of
this Design. The Governor in Revenge, marched with his Brother D. Christopher
and 1000 Men, made a great slaughter, was Master of the Field, and took a great
Booty: Then turning to the City, it was plundered, and private Men got four or
five thousand Ducats each; then it was burnt to the ground. The Waters being
shoal, the Governor resolved to go over to Alcocer, and other places, with
only sixteen Catures or Barges, the rest of the Fleet he sent to Macua, under
the Command of Lionel de Lima. There was a great dispute about who should go
with D. Stephen, and he had much difficulty to compose it. They set out of the
Bay for this Reason called De los Agraviados, or Of the Offended. Many
Gentlemen went in the Barges as private Soldiers, accepting any place so they
were admitted; such was their desire to be in this Action. The number of Men
was Two hundred and fifty. At Alconcer, which is in the Latitude of 25 Degrees,
they did the same as had been done before at Suanquem. Crossing over to Tor or
Toro, they took some Vessels of the Enemy. The Turks at first opposed the
Landing, but some being slain, fled and abandoned the City, in which nothing of
Value was found. The Governor would not burn it in reverence of St. Catharine,
and a Monastery found there with Religious Men under her Invocation, which at
their Instance he visited. To his great glory, he was the first European
Commander that took that City, where he Knighted several, who held this Honor
done them there in great esteem; and it was afterward envied by the Great
Emperor Charles the Fifth, as shall appear in its place. Our People, and those
Religious testified great Regret at parting. They are of the Greek Church, and
of the Order of St. Basil. The City is in the Latitude of 28 Degrees, and is
thought by Learned Geographers, to be the ancient Elana.

8. The Governor went over to Suez, and after many brave Attempts made by
several to sound and view the Harbor, which all failed, he resolved in Person
and in open Day to discover the Galleys. He saw them, and desiring to do
something considerable, Landed; the Enemies Shot flew from the Town, and 2000
Turkish Horse broke out of an Ambush; some few whereof were killed by our
Canon; but our Men obliged to Retire, much grieved that this Voyage was
disappointed. The Governor returned to his Fleet at Macua, where he found the
Severity of Emanuel de Gama had caused a Mutiny, which gave occasion to 80 Men
to run away with a Ship, designing to go over to Ethiopia. They were met by a
Captain of the King of Zeila, and after a vigorous Resistance, most of them
killed. On a Gallows hung five, whom Gama had Executed, for concealing the
design of the other 80; they at Execution summoned him to answer before the
great Tribunal, and he within a Month run Mad, and died.

CHAP. IV.
Goes on with the Government of D. Stephen de Gama.

1. AT this time Grada Hamed, King of the Country, called by some Geographers,
Trogloditis, vulgarly Adel; having submitted himself to the Turk, to obtain
Assistance of Men, casting off the Obedience he owed to the Emperor of
Ethiopia, began furiously to overrun that Country with a Powerful Army. To
excuse his Ambitious Designs, he laid hold of the Opportunity his Sovereigns
tender years offered, and in a small time made himself Master of such part of
Abassia, that the Emperor Atanad Sagad, or Claudius, was obliged to retire
toward the Kingdom of Goiame, and his Mother Saban, or Elizabeth, with the
Barnagais, got into the rugged Mountain Dama, a place naturally impregnable,
which rising to a prodigious height over a vast Plain, on its Top forms another
almost Round and about a League over, in which is an indifferent Town, with
Fruit and Cattle that maintains it. On one side only is a painful Ascent, till
near the Top; from thence People are drawn up on Planks with Ropes, and in like
manner let down.

2. The Queen reduced to this condition, hearing D. Stephen was in the Red Sea,
sent Barnagais Ambassador to him, to desire his Assistance against that
Tyrant, who overrunning her Kingdoms destroyed the ancient Churches, and
carried away Slaves the Religious Men and Priests. The Ambassador was heard,
and received a favorable Answer. It was Resolved in Council to send Relief,
and D. Christopher named Commander in Chief, of Four hundred Men it consisted
of. He had with him eight Fieldpieces, many small Firearms, and plenty of
Ammunition. D. John Bermudez, the Patriarch, much desired by that Emperor to
introduce the Roman Ceremonies, accompanied them. The two Brothers D. Stephen
and D. Christopher took leave on the shore, never to meet again: Let us conduct
the one into India, and then return to the other.

3. About July the Governor was taken in such a violent Storm, that a Galliot
sunk down right, a Barque was lost, and all the Fleet scattered. Many Religous
Vows were made in the danger; but that of a private Soldier was pleasant, who
Vowed he would marry D. Isabel de Sa, Daughter to D. Garcia de Sa, after
Governor of India, and the applauded Beauty of all those parts, which
afterward gave pleasant matter of Discourse. At length the Governor arrived
at Goa, and perceiving the Ships did not come from Portugal, and that he was
exhausted with the charge of the last Fleets, he loaded the Goods, provided for
the Ships expected, on four Galeons, and sent them away. Peter de D. Castello
Branco, late Governor of Ormuz, Commanded one of these Galleons, and was taken
by the French near the Islands Azores.

4. Nizamoxa desired to possess himself of the Forts of Sangaca and Carnala,
held by two Subjects of Cambaya, on the Frontiers of that Kingdom, and
formidable for their strength and situation. The Commanders Nicoda Amorgin, and
Atridican being absent, he assaults and enters them. The Owners had recourse
for the Recovery of them to D. Francis de Meneses, Commanding at Bacaim,
promising to hold them of us, if restored. He went in person with Three hundred
Portugueses, a party of the Natives, and each of the Proprietors, Two hundred
Men. They scaled the Fort Carnalia, and the Defendants in a pannick Fear
abandoned it, some throwing themselves down the ^ocks, where they were beaten
to pieces. Those of Sangaca, quitted it before it was demanded. D. Francis left
the Moors in possession with Portugues Garrisons. Nizamoxa in a Rage sent 5000
Men, who ruined all the Country about. The Owners despairing of maintaining
themselves against that Power, resigned their Title to those Forts to the
Portugueses, and were received into Bacaim by D. Francis, who sent Supplies to
the Forts, and resolved to maintain them.

5. Nizamoxa sends 6000 Men more, 1000 of them Musketeers, and 800 Horse, well
Armed. They beset Sangaca, and gave several Assaults that Day, wherein many of
them were killed. The Portugueses stood all Day and Night at their Arms, and
with much difficulty sent Advice to D. Francis at Bazaim, who came to their
Relief with 160 Portugueses, 20 Horse and some Naiques, with 2000 Indians. Don
Francis received a Letter from the Governor of Chaul, giving an account of the
great Strength of the Enemy; and some of his Men coming to hear the Contents of
it, he read quite the contrary to what really was in it, and marched on. A
small Party of the E^my attacked the Van, to draw them into two Ambushes, each
of which contained a Thousand Men. Some of the Portugueses fled. D. Francis
with his twenty Horse resolved to keep a Pass, and he with some Gentlemen
killed several. Those of the Ambush coming on, the Portugueses were forced to
fight Back to Back. Those who at first fled fell into the second Ambush, and
endeavoring to shun it returned to the first, with whom the others were
engaged. The Moors thinking this had been a fresh Relief, fled; our Men took
heart, and struck such Terror into the Enemy, that running to Cangaca, they
raised their Camp, leaving all the Ground about the Fort strowed with all sorts
of Weapons and Ammunition. D. Francis returning from the Pursuit, found they
had slain about 500, and lost 20 Men. He stored the Forts, and went back to his
Command.

6. I shall relate a thing scarce Credible, but most true: In this Action a
Giant-like Portugues of prodigious Strength, called Trancoso, seeing a Moor
well wrapped in a large Veil falling from his Head, laid hold of him thereby,
as if he had been a Buckler, and so carried him before his Breast, received
upon him all the strokes of the Enemies Weapons, and thus continued, making him
his Shield till the Fight was ended.

7. However, considering the keeping of those Forts was of greater Charge and
Danger, than Advantage could be made of them; and because Nizamoxa, our
Confederate, offered for them 5000 P^rdao's, besides the 2000 he paid before,
the Governor resigned them up to him, to the great Regret of D. Francis de
Meneses, who had gained and maintained them with so much Honor. The Garrisons
marched out with all the usual Ceremonies.

8. When this happened the Governor was at Chaul, in order to Visit the Northern
Forts, he furnished them with all Necessaries. Being returned to Goa, he
provided the Loading for the Ships that were detained at Mocambique, and
received Ambassadors from Xeque Ismael of Persia, the Kings of Calicut and
Cambaya, about important Affairs, and were answered to their satisfaction.

9. Peter de Faria, who Commanded at Malaca, had received some Information of
the Affairs and Seat of the Island del Oro, or of Gold, which was said to be in
the Sea of the River Calandor, in five Degrees of South Latitude, 150 Leagues
from the Point of Sumatra, encompassed with great Banks of Sand and strong
Currents. He advertized the King, who sent to that Discovery and Conquest
Francis de Almeida, that died by the way. One James Cabral of Madera succeeded
him, and the Governor Martin Alfonso de Sousa displaced him, to give that
Charge to Hierom de Figueredo. He set out in the Year 1542, with 80 Men in
three Ships, and laying aside the Enterprise, through Covetousness, went in
search of some Ships of Meca on the Coast of Tanaucarim, took them, and in them
a rich Booty; but refusing them their shares, they tied his Hands and Feet and
left him on the Sands at Gale, in the Island Ceylon. Thus for that time was the
King disappointed of that Discovery.

10. The King of Aaru, as well as he of the Bataas, was first Victorious
against him of Achem, then beaten and killed. He had also received supplies of
Arms and Ammunition from Peter de Faria. This King of Achem's Design was to
Conquer this Kingdom, which hindered his passage to Malaca by Land, being now
convinced it was impossible to take it by Sea.

11. Some time after Faria sent his Factor Pinto with a Present and Letter to
the King of Patane, desiring him to procure the liberty of five Portugueses,
then Slaves at Siam, to his Brother-in-Law. He was also to deliver Goods of the
Value of Ten thousand Ducats to his Factor at Pam. They had made up Fifty
thousand Crowns in Diamants, Pearls and Gold, and were ready to Sail next day,
when a sudden Confusion happening that Night, they lost all. There resided in
that City an Ambassador from the King of Borneo, with his Wife. He catched the
King of Pam lying with her, and killed him. The Death of the King being noised,
the People ran about, not so much for Revenge, as to Rob. About Four thousand
Men were presently butchered; the two Factors being robbed, and some of their
Companions killed, escaped and fled to Patane. They, and other Portugueses,
asked leave of that King, to make Reprizal on three Vessels belonging to the
Merchants of Pam, which came richly laden from China, and were then at Anchor
18 Leagues off in the River Calantam. He consented; they set out to the number
of 80 in Three Ships, and after a sharp Engagement, took and brought the
Vessels into Patane. The Prize was worth above Three hundred Thousand Ducats.
The People of Patane pressed the King to take them from the Portugueses; but he
urged the Fifty thousand Crowns ought to be made good. The Merchants accepted
the Condition, paid the Money, and continued their Voyage.

CHAP. V.
Sundry Exploits of Captain Antony Faria, from the Year 1540, till that of
1542, during the Government of D. Stephen de Gama.

1. WHile what is above-related happened the Three years last past, Antony de
Faria and Sousa, did Actions deserving Eternal Fame; which I shall relate
without affection to our Kindred, but with my usual sincerity.

2. Peter de Faria, Commander of Malaca, sent his Kinsman Antony de Faria and
Sousa, to the King of Patane, to treat of important Affairs, and preserve the
Peace, which was very beneficial to that place. He carried with him Goods to
the Value of Twelve thousand Ducats, and finding no Sale for them there, sent
them to the Port of Lugor, in the Kingdom of Siam, a place of great Trade,
where he was informed they would go off to great advantage. He committed this
Affair to Christopher Borallo, who being come to an Anchor in the Mouth of that
River, was surprised by Coja Hazem, a Moor of Guzarate, in a Vessel well stored
with Artillery, and Manned with 80 Turks and Moors. This Coja was a sworn Enemy
to the Portugueses ever since Hector de Silveyra took a Ship of his in the Sea
of Diu, killing his Father and two Brothers, and had kept his Oath, robbing and
murdering all he met.

3. Borallo thought himself happy that he escaped falling into the Pirates
hands, leaving his Vessel and swimming ashore. He carried the News to Antony
Faria at Patane, who Vowed, never to desist till he had destroyed that Moor.
This was the Motive that led him to all those brave Actions. He fitted a small
Vessel with 50 Men, and sailed from Patane on Saturday the 8th of May.

4. He steered North-East, toward the Kingdom of Champa, to examine that
Coast, and saw the Island Pulo Condor, in the Latitude of 3 Degrees, 20
Minutes, then to the Eastward rounded one six Leagues from the Continent of
Cambodia. Entering the Port of Bralapisam, he found there a Vessel of the
Lequii, that had on board an Ambassador from the Prince of the Island Lossa,
in the Latitude of 36 Degrees, to the King of Siam. As soon as this Vessel
spied ours, they weighed Anchor and sailed. Faria sent after them a Chinese
Pylot with a Civil Message, who brought back this remarkable Answer: We return
Thanks; The time will come when our Nation shall have commerce with that
Captains in real Friendship, through the Law of the Supreme God, whose Clemency
is boundless, since by his death he gave life to all Mankind, and remains an
everlasting Faith in the House of the Good: We confidently hold this will be
when half the Times are past. He also brought a rich Cimiter in a Case of
beaten Gold, the Hilt and Scabbord of the same set with some Pearls of value.
The Captain would have made some Return, but the Vessel could not be overtaken.

5. Thence he Coasted to the River Pulo Cambier, which divides the Kingdoms of
Cambodia and Tsiompa. At the Town Catimpar^, he was informed that great River
had its beginning in the Lake Pinator (260 Leagues Westward in the Kingdom of
Quitirvam) encompassed with high Mountains, about which were 38 Towns, 13 of
them considerable, one whereof was Xincaleu, where was a Gold Mine which
yielded yearly 22 Millions of Crowns It belonged to four Lords, who had
continual Wars about it. At Bauquerim, another Mine of the best Diamonds.
Treasures (according to the disposition of that Country) might be easily
conquered by us.

6. Coasting along still, he Anchored in the Mouth of the River Toobasoy,
fearing to go up it. Suddenly they spied a great Vessel, to which making signs
of Peace, they received a rude Answer. Night coming on, it was thought fit to
expect the Day; but in the Dark they discovered first one, then three Vessels,
and Counterfeiting, they leapt 40 out of the first Vessel, boarded them, who
were all slain, and their Vessel taken, the others burnt. A Black that was
taken declared, He was a Christian and Slave to Gaspar de Melo, whom (with 26
Portugueses) that Pyrat had taken and dashed out their Brains, and that he had
left another large Vessel richly laden in the Port with only a few Seamen.
This Pyrat was found to be Similau, and he (with the other Prisoners) were put
to the same Death they delighted to give to others. As soon as Day appeared he
took the other Vessel, and found the Booty in Silver only amounted to 60000
Ducats, besides other Goods.

7. Thus increased, he goes on to the River Tinacoreu, or Varela, where the
Siam and Malaca Ships, Trading for China, barter their Goods for Gold, Calamba
and Ivory, with which that Country abounds. He Anchored off of Tayquileu, a
small Town; the Inhabitants called them the Bearded People; not but those
People have Beards, but theirs are short and thin, ours then were at their full
growth, and some reached to the Waste. By them the Captain was informed, that
River was formerly called Tauralachim, that is, Great Stock, to express its
Greatness; it is deep for Eighty Leagues up to Moncalor, then shallower and
wide, where is a Country for Eight days Journey Unpeopled, by a multitude of
Birds, 40 years before the great Kingdom of the Chintaleuho's. In the middle of
it is the great Lake Cunabetee, or Chiamay, whence spring four great Rivers. It
is 180 Leagues in compass, beset with Mines of Silver, Copper, Tin and Lead.

8. Hence he directed his Course for the Island Hainan, passed in sight of
Champiloo, in the Latitude of 13 Degrees, and at the entrance of the Bay of
Cochinchina. Farther on he discovered the Promontory Pulocampas, whence is seen
the Point of Hainan: Westward is a River, up which Borrallo was sent in a small
Vessel with 16 Men, who discovered at least Two thousand Sail, and a large
Walled Town. On their Return they saw a large Vessel at Anchor. The Captain
thinking it was Coja Hazem, fell upon and took it: But among the Prisoners he
found an ancient Christian of Mount Sinai, who told him, it belonged to Quiay
Tayjam a Pyrat, who had killed above a Hundred Portugueses, and now laid hid in
the Fore-Castle with six or seven others, who were all killed there. In that
Vessel were found 70000 Quintals or Hundred weight of Pepper, much other Spice,
Ivory, Tin, Wax and Powder, all valued at 60000 Crowns, besides good Cannon,
Baggage and some Plate. In the Hold were nine Children, the biggest about nine
years of Age, loaded with Irons and starving with Hunger.

9. Coasting along the Island Hainan, he met some Fishers of Pear^, whom he
used courteously. They told him, the Island belonged to the King of China.
Hence he went to the River Tana^quir, where two great Vessels suddenly fell
upon Faria; both which, after a long Dispute, he took, having killed 80 of
their Men, and lost 14, whereof one Portugues. After a while they heard
lamentable Cries in the Hold of one of those Vessels; where they sound
seventeen Prisoners, two of them Portugueses, One of which said, those Vessels
belonged to Necoda Xicaulem, who after turning Christian at Malaca, and
marrying a Portugues, had killed her and many more of her Country. His Body
being found, was cut in pieces. The Booty was valued at 50000 Crowns. One of
the Vessels was burnt, for want of Men to sail it; in both were seventeen Brass
Guns, most of them with the Arms of Portugal.

10. He Anchored forty Leagues farther at C. Tilaumere, where came up with our
four Vessels four others, in which was the Bride of a Noble young Man, who had
promised to meet her there with a like number of Ships, and this mistake
brought them to our Vessels. Three of them were taken, and in one of them the
Bride. Some Seamen were chose, the rest set ashore. They came to Mutipinam, and
found it a most convenient place to sell their Prizes. The Governor of the
City somewhat obstructed the Sale, so they were obliged to hasten it; the Goods
were paid for in Silver uncoyned, and amounted to Two hundred thousand Crowns.
This was the beginning of the Year 1541.

CHAP. VI.
Continues the Exploits of Antony de Faria.

1. ANtony de Faria sailed on in search of the Port of Madel, in the Island
Hainan, and by the way took some Prizes. Here he met Hinymilau, a bold Pyrat
and a great Enemy to Christians, whom he delighted to put to cruel Deaths. They
had a bloody Fight with, and at length took him. He gave a bold Relation of the
Cruelties he had exercised against the Portugueses, and was therefore with four
more immediately killed. The Prize was valued at 70000 Ducats.

2. This Action struck such a Terror into many of those that were there in
that River, that they sent a Message to Faria, offering him 30000 Crowns to
take them into his Protection, calling him King of those Seas, and desiring of
him Passes for their safe Trading therein. He received the Money, and gave the
Passes by only Writing, of which in Twelve days time a Servant of his got 6000
Ducats. The Governor of the City offered to make him Admiral of those Seas for
the King of China, with a Pension of 9000 Crowns, if he would serve. Such a
Name had he already got in those parts.

3. They run all along this Coast without any remarkable Occurrence, only saw
many, though not large Towns, and a very fruitful Country; and were informed,
there were there Mines of Silver, Tin, Saltpeter, and Brimstone. The Soldiers
now weary of looking after the Pyrat Coja Hazem, demanded their shares of the
Prizes, to be gone. They agreed, and directed their Course for the Kingdom of
Siam. By a furious Storm they were wrecked upon the Island De los Ladrones,
where of Five hundred Men, only Eighty six got ashore naked; of these Twenty
eight were Portugueses. Here they were fifteen days almost without any thing to
eat. A Bird flying over them with a Fish, dropped it, and afterward they saw
many others, that frighted at their Shouts, let fall their Prey; this, and a
Deer they found killed by a Tiger, kept them awhile, but some died with Want.
Being thus in despair, because the Island was not Inhabited, they discovered a
small Vessel making to the shore, where they cast Anchor, and presently Thirty
Men landed; some carried Wood and Water, and others diverted themselves. They
were Chinese. Our Men agreeing together upon a sign, run furiously, and
possessed themselves of the Vessel, and with the same swiftness put to Sea. The
Chinese were astonished at that unexpected Misfortune, and our Men overjoyed,
finding in the Vessel good Provision and much Silk. In the Barque they found
only an Old man and a Child, whose Father was left ashore.

4. Sailing for Liampo in Port Xamoy, they took a Vessel of Chinese, and went
to the Island Luxitay, where they stayed fifteen days, went over to the great
Vessel, and Refitted the small one, and then went on. Upon the Coast of Lamau
they discovered a great Vessel, which as it came near began to fire Fifteen
great Guns it carried; but coming closer, they discovered Crosses and Portugues
Habits on both sides; so they hailed each other, and the Vessel appeared to
belong to Quiay Panjau, a Chinese, and great Friend to the Portugueses, whereof
he had Thirty Soldiers aboard. He came to Farias's Vessel, and brought a
present of Amber, Pearls, Gold and Silver, worth Two thousand Ducats. After
other Discourse our Captain told him he was bound for Liampo, to furnish
himself with Necessaries, in order to attempt the Mines of Quamjaparu, where he
was told he might get a Treasure. Quiay Panjau offered to accompany him,
demanding for himself only the Third part of what should be taken; which was
agreed.

5. At the River Anay they Refitted, and came to Chincheo; where Faria hired 35
Portugueses he found there. Putting to Sea again, he found eight Portugueses
naked and wounded in a Fisher-Boat. They told him, the Pyrat Coja Hazem had
taken their Ship in the Port of the Island Cumbor, that it was worth Two
hundred thousand Ducats, and that they with difficulty had escaped in that
condition. Faria was overjoyed to hear News of that Pyrat, and turned eight
Leagues back to Layloo, to provide for the Fight. There he changed his Old
Vessels for New, provided Arms, Ammunition and Men, paying generously for every
thing. He had in his four Vessels Five hundred Men, whereof 95 Portugueses, 40
Pieces of Cannon, 160 Muskets, 6000 Darts, other Arms and much Ammunition. In
a day and half he came to the Fisheries, where Coja Hazem had robbed those
Portugueses, and was informed by Fishermen, that he was two Leagues off in the
River Tinlau. To be sure, he sent one to discover him.

6. Before Day began a most furious Fight, and the Pirates four Ships were
reduced to great streights, when four small ones came to their relief. One of
our Cannon was so well pointed, that it sank the first of them downright, and
killed some Men in another. The Fight was renewed, and Coja encouraged his Men,
till Faria boarding, gave him such a Cut over the Head as struck him down
without sense, and with another stroke Ham-strung him, that he could not rise.
His Men gave our Captain three Wounds; but he being relieved, the Victory was
complete; it cost 43 Men, eight of them Portugueses. Of the Enemy almost 400
died, above half drowned, leaping over to save themselves.

7. Faria Landed, and buried his dead. He found in a House 96 Men left there by
Coja Hazem to be cured; these, though they cried for Mercy, he destroyed,
firing the House. Here he performed a most Magnanimous act, which was, That he
restored the Portugues Ship to the Owners, and gave liberty to the Slaves,
paying their Masters, as he had Vowed when he went on this Design. What booty
remained to him was worth 100000 Crowns.

8. Sailing hence that Night, rose such a violent Storm, that Faria's Ship and
another were cast away, and most of the Goods of the others was thrown
Overboard, to the Value of Two hundred thousand Ducats. One hundred and eleven
Men were lost, the Eleven Portugueses. Thirteen that escaped drowning were
carried Prisoners to Nauday, where Faria with the five remaining Vessels came
to an Anchor. He offered the Governor of the City Three thousand Crowns for
the Prisoners. The Answer was such, as obliged him to resolve to hazard all, to
obtain by force what he could not effect with Courtesy and Money Our Men were
fearful of the greatness of the Enterprise; but he so encouraged them, that
they resolved to follow him. He had in all 470 Men, 60 of them Portugueses; out
of the whole he chose 300 for this Action, which happened the beginning of the
Year 1542.

9. After sending another Civil Message, to which the Governor answered by
hanging the Messenger, he Landed; as they marched, Twelve thousand Foot and an
hundred Horse came out of the City to meet them; our Musketeers killed at
least Three hundred of them, and pursued the rest to a Bridge that led into the
City. The Governor was within on Horseback with Six hundred Men, maintaining
the Pass till killed by a Shot; at that sight his Men fled; Faria pursues them
with great slaughter till they run out at the other end of the Town. The City
being plundered, he that got least was Rich; the remainder was consumed to
Ashes. Our Victorious Captain returned, carrying the Prisoners he had
recovered, and many beautiful Women. He lost eight Men, one a Portugues, and
many wounded. Now he prosecutes his Voyage toward the Mines.

10. The Course was to Pulo Hindor, an Island not inhabited, where he designed
to Winter and take some Rest; it was fifteen Leagues off. About the Islands of
Commolem he was attacked by two great Ships, in which were Two hundred Resolute
Men, Commanded by the Pyrat Premata Gundel, a mortal Enemy to the Portugueses,
to whom he had done great harm; but thought now these had been Chinese
Merchants. One of the Pirates boarding one of ours, Quiay Panjau came to his
Relief with all his Sails abroad, and run so furiously foul of the Pyrat, that
they both sunk down right. Quiay and most of his Men were saved by the care of
our Men. The Pyrat himself had boarded Faria, who was in danger of being lost;
but at length was Victorious, killing 90 Moors that had entered his Ship. Then
he boarded the Enemies, and put all to the Sword. This cost us 17 Men, five of
them Portugueses, above forty were wounded, and Faria himself had two great
Cuts and a hurt of a Spear. The Prize was valued at 120000 Ducats. They staid
20 Days in the Island Buncaleu, to cure the Wounded men. Thence they steered to
the Gates of Liampo, which are two Islands three Leagues distant from the City
of that Name, built by the Portugueses, who there Governed in the nature of a
Commonwealth.

CHAP. VII.
Continues still the Exploits of Antony de Faria, in the Government of D.
Stephen de Gama, and the Year 1942.

1. ANntony de Faria being Anchored at those Gates of Liampo, sent to ask leave
of the Inhabitants to enter the Port: They returned a courteous Answer, praying
him to defer it six days, till they had prepared a House to entertain him. The
term expired upon Sunday Morning, when he hoised Sail and went up accompanied
with many Boats sent from the Town to receive him, with Three hundred Townsmen,
who saluted and welcomed him, the River resounding with the noise of Musical
Instruments.

2. About Two hundred Ships then in the Port were placed in two Lines, and made
a Lane, through which as Faria passed, all the Cannon of the Vessels and ashore
were fired. Some Chinese seeing this great Reception, asked Whether that was
the King of Portugal's Brother, or near Kinsman; and were Answered, He was his
Smiths Son; which so surprised them, they concluded the Kingdom of Portugal to
be the greatest in the World. From his Ship Faria went into a Barge shaded with
a Natural Chestnut Tree, the Fruit hanging on the Boughs, and was seated on a
Silver Chair placed upon six Steps adorned with Gold. On the sides were six
beautiful Maids richly clad, who sang and played sweetly; and thus he was
carried to the Key.

3. Where was a richer Chair carried upon Men's shoulders, covered with a rich
Canopy; about it 60 Halberdeers, and before it went 16 Men mounted on fine
Horses, before these eight with Silver Maces, all in most rich Attire. Faria
long refused to be thus carried, but was forced to subm^, and in this manner
came to a large Scaffold, covered with fine Tapistry. There he was placed on
his Chair, and received the Complements of the Magistrates in the Name of the
City, and of others for the Gentry. He received them standing, and returned
their Courtesy with great Civility.

4. From the Key to the City, which was a considerable distance, was a Lane in
nature of an Arbor of Chestnut, Pine and Laurel Trees, the Ground strewed with
Flowers; at distances many Perfumes, several Companies of Dancers, and
multitudes of People all the way. At the Entrance of the Town was a Castle
built for this Occasion. On the Front of it, the Arms of the Faria's, which are
Sanguin, a Tower Argent, in Base a Man torn to pieces. Faria being come hither,
was received by a Reverend Old man (attended by four Mace-Bearers) who after
some Ceremonies made a long Speech in praise of his Family, and concluded
extolling his own Actions, and welcoming him to that place.

5. The Speech ended, the old Orator in the Name of the City, offered him five
Chests full of Silver Bars, to the Value of Twenty thousand pieces of Eight,
which he could not be prevailed with to accept of; but returned his Thanks, and
promised to endeavor in part to deserve the Honors they did him. Then he went
on foot through many sightly Arches to our Ladies Church, where (under a
Canopy) he heard Mass, and a Sermon of his own Praises.

6. Hence he was conducted by above a Thousand Portugueses, to a large place
that was before the House, provided for his Entertainment. This place was
shaded with variety of Trees set, as if they had grown there, the Ground
strewed with Flowers and sweet Herbs. In the middle were three long Tables
richly covered, and Side-boards. Faria being seated, all departed, but about 80
who were to Dine there, and 50 Soldiers. At a distance stood the Halberdeers
to keep off the People. As soon as seated, the Music began to play.

7. Presently eight beautiful Maids appeared playing on Instruments and
Dancing, eight others stood by him singing. The Dishes were brought by fine
Women, and set on by Men. The Plenty and Costliness was great. After Dinner
they went to another place, where there was a Bull-Feast, and some wild Horses
among them; at the death of every one followed Dancing, Music, and other
Divertisements.

CHAP. VIII.
Concludes with the Actions of Antony de Faria.

1. HEre Faria continued five Months always entertained with great splendor,
and had Dogs and Horses to go a Hunting, that place being stored with all sorts
of Game. The time being come to set out for the Mines of Quamgiparu, the
Chinese Quiay Panjau, who was to accompany him in that Voyage, was snatched
away by a violent Sickness. All things were in forwardness when the Chinese,
Similau, dissuaded Faria from that Enterprise, representing the great
Difficulties, and proposing other Undertakings much more easy, and no less
beneficial. Among the rest he said Great things of the Island Calempluy, where
were the ancient Monuments of the Kings of China, and in them great Treasures.
To this he soon gave Ear; for Covetousness is of great force to persuade, even
in a Man so generous and understanding as he was. Happy if he had returned to
India, satisfied with his past Victories and Triumph.

2. About the middle of May he set Sail with Similau in two Galliots, in which
were 146 Men, 52 of them Portugueses, and among them the Priest James Lobato.
Next day they discovered the Islands of Nanguitur, and then entered Seas till
then unknown to Portugueses. Crossing a Gulf of 40 Leagues, they discovered
the high Mountain Nangalaci, and held on their Course Northward. At the end of
Ten days they Anchored in a River where they saw White People, like the
Chinese, but differing in Language, and could never prevail to have any
commerce with them. After Eight days sailing they entered the Straight of
Silcapaquim, in which they spent five days in sight of many populous Towns. But
this Course appearing dangerous, they steered another by the advice of Similau.
This was up the River Humhepadam, which they entered, and to the West saw the
Mountain Fangus, and thirteen days after the Bay Buxipalem, in the Latitude of
30 Degrees, which produces Fish, Serpents and Crocodils of wonderful sorts and
greatness, and many Sea-Horses. Farther on they came into the Bay of Calindam,
girt with high Mountains covered with Trees, from them four great Rivers fall
into the Sea.

3. Next they sailed under Botinasora, a Mountain abounding in Lions, Abada's,
Tigers, Ounces, and other wild Beasts; then Gangitann, the habitation of the
Gigahui, a wild Gigantick People, some ten, some eleven Spans high, of which
they saw fourteen of both Sexes: They have good Complexions, being white and
red; but ill Features. Faria gave them some Porcelane Dishes and Silk, for
which they appeared thankful, but could not be understood, and brought some
Cows and a Deer. At length they came into the Bay of Nanking, and within six
days to the great City Pamor whose Bay was almost hid under Three thousand
Vessels. Fearing Danger here, they stood off and came to Tanquilem, where
Similau and Thirty six Chinese Seamen run away for fear; because our Captain
weary of the Voyage, and finding he could give no good Account where they were,
had threatened to kill him. He was not so ignorant; but terrified with the ill
Usage of the Portugueses he knew not what he said, and they feared either he
knew not the Coast, or designed to betray them. It was a great Error, to
believe him at Liampo, and use him ill at Nanking, where they had most need of
him. In fine, They gave themselves for lost, not knowing where they were, till
some of the Natives informed them, they were but Ten Leagues from the Island
Calempluy, which made them repent the wrong they had done Similau.

4. Turning Cape Guinaytarau (after a tedious Voyage of two Months and a half)
they discovered in the middle of the River the Island. It is plain, and to
appearance four Miles in compass. It was then Night: Next Morning Faria went
about it with his Galliots, and saw it was enclosed with a Wall of Jasper
Stone, which were joined so close, it appeared all of a piece. It rose about 19
Foot above the superficies of the Water, and was terrassed within. The Top of
the Wall was a massy Twist: Upon it were Brass Rails, and at distances little
Columns, on which were the Statues of Women with Balls in their Hands, all of
the same Metal. At some distance from these appeared several Figures of Iron of
Monstrous shape, that seemed to give one another their Hands. Farther yet were
several curious Arches of Stone of many Colors: Within was seen afterward a
delightful variety of small Woods of Orange Trees; among which were 366
Chapels, dedicated to the Gods of the Year. On one side a great Building, not
all of a piece, but divided into seven parts, all over glittering with Gold.

5. In the Evening the Captain entered the Island at one of its eight Gates,
with sixty Men, four of them Portugueses. Entering one of the Chapels, they saw
an Old Man, in appearance an hundred years of Age, who with the fright of
seeing them fell down; but recovering, and seeing the Soldiers take out the
Bars of Silver out of the Tombs, he rebuked the Captain, giving him Advice to
be saved. Faria courteously took his leave, having Information what was in the
other Chapels, and resolving next day to plunder them all, he retired to his
Ships with the Silver taken in this, which was a considerable quantity.

6. About Midnight there appeared Lights upon the Top of the Great Building,
and Bells began to ring throughout the Island. Faria was advised to be gone,
being they were discovered; but he returned to the Island with only six Men,
and could see no more than what he had from his Vessels. Being returned aboard,
all protested he ought to retire, and he no longer able to withstand the
Mutiny; said, He was obliged in Honor to see what he fled from; and went
ashore again with the same six Men. He entered a Chapel and found two Old Men,
whom he brought away with some Candlesticks and a Silver Idol he found, and
immediately left that place. He understood by the Old Men, that the Alarm was
given, and the Island would soon be relieved; that the first Hermit had given
Notice. Then Faria found, how much he had erred in not bringing him away, as he
was Advised.

7. He went away in a Passion, that he should lose that Treasure through his
own fault; and having sailed almost a Month, one Night, being the fifth of
August, there arose such a terrible Storm; that his Galliot was swallowed up,
as was guessed by those in the other by the miserable Cries; for they could not
see it. A few days after the other also perished, only fourteen of them
escaping. Thus ended that brave Commander; doubtless a just Judgment for the
Robbery he designed to commit.

8. No less Unfortunate was the End of the City Liampo, where this Captain had
been so Nobly received, and was the effect of a base and insatiable Avarice.
Lancelot Pereyra, a Judge of that City having lost a Thousand Ducats by the
Chinese, went out with a Body to rob and plunder others, as if this might be
done though they have been the Debtors. This barbarous, hellish Action, brought
the Governor of that Province with Threescore thousand Men upon that City,
which in four hours time was burnt, with Eighty Ships that were in the Port;
Twelve thousand Men killed, of them a Thousand Portugueses, and three Millions
of Gold lost. Scarce any thing was left, but the bare Memory of Liampo; but it
appeared that whatever the Portugueses gained by their Valor, they lost by
their Covetousness. It was admirably said of one of those we call Ba^oarians,
hearing the Actions of the Portugueses in Asia celebrated: His Words were
these; Let them go on; for whatever they gain as Courageous Soldiers, they
will lose as Covetous Merchants: They now conquer Asia, Asia will soon conquer
them. Who was most Barbarous; he that said this, or they who did what he said?

9. Liampo had above Three thousand Inhabitants, all Catholics, and almost
half Portugueses. Those who escaped that Storm, though quite discredited among
the Chinese, obtained leave with great Presents, in the Year 1547, to Settle
in the Port of Chincheo; where there was a Village, which began to flourish
with a rich Trade; but came to the same End as the other, as shall appear the
Year 1549.

CHAP. IX.
Continues the Government of D. Stephen de Gama, and contains the Actions of
his Brother Don Christopher in Ethiopia.

1. WHilst this happened in India and China, Don Christopher de Gama marched
through Ethiopia, led by that Barnagais, who came as Ambassador from the Queen
Mother, to desire favor of the Governor D. Stephen. The Heat the Men endured
was excessive, though they lay by the Day, and marched by Night. A Week was
spent in passing over a Rugged Mountain, whence they descended into a most
pleasant Plain Country, watered by many Rivulets. Through this they marched in
two days to the City Barua, Metropolis of the Province Barnagasso; though
damaged by the late Invasion, yet of sightly Buildings, divided by a great
River, encompassed with good Villages and Country-houses. At the Gates they
were received by several Religious Men singing a Litany, one of which made a
Speech to Welcome them, and extol their Generosity in coming to their relief;
after which our Men visited the Church, and Encamped.

2. Don Christopher sent Advice of his Arrival to the Emperor, who was far
off; and to the Queen Mother, who was near. He desired of her, to leave that
Mountain and put her self under his guard. Barnagais was sent to Conduct her
with two Companies of Portugueses. She came with a great Retinue of Women and
Servants. Our Men were drawn out to receive her, and the Cannon fired. The
Queen sat upon a Mule, whose Trappings reached the ground, and she was hid by
Curtins fixed to the Saddle; her Clothing was white, on her Shoulders a short
black Mantle with gold Fringes; and from her white Head-Cloaths fell a Veil
that covered her Face. Barnagais led the Mule, his Arm naked, and a Tigers Skin
upon his Shoulders, (a Token of Respect) a Lord on each side in the same Garb.
She opened the Curtains to see the Portugueses, and lifted her Veil to be seen
by D. Christopher. The Reception on both sides was Courteous. Afterward D.
Christopher went to Visit Her, and by Advice of the Ethiopians it was resolved
to Winter there, and expect the Emperor's Answer.

3. The Answer came, expressing his Joy for the Arrival of the Portugueses, and
desiring D. Christopher to march the beginning of Summer. It was put in
execution: Some Light Horse led the Van to discover; then followed the
Artillery, next the Baggage; after it the Queen, guarded by fifty Portugues
Musketeers. D. Christopher brought up the Rear; Barnagais and his Officers
made up the Flanks. In eight days they came to the Mountain Gane, of most
difficult ascent; on the Top of it was a City, and on the highest Cliff a
Chapel, near which a House, hung round with Three hundred embalmed Bodies,
sewed up in Hides, which being rent with Age showed the Bodies white and
incorrupt. Some were of Opinion they were Roman Conquerors of that Country;
others, and among them the Patriarch, supposed them to be Martyrs. At the sight
of the Portugueses, many of the People resorted to the Queen.

4. Don Christopher marched on to the Mountain Canete, well Watered and stored
with Cattle, impregnable by Nature, and yet strengthened by Art. Formerly the
Emperors were Crowned here; now it was held for the Tyrant by a Thousand Men,
who at times came down to Ravage the Country. D. Christopher, contrary to the
Advice of the Queen and her Counsel, resolved to assault that Den of Thieves.
He divided his Men into three parts, and led the one himself, and boldly
assaulted the Three Passes that led to it; but were forced this day to desist,
by reason of the great Stones the Enemy rouled down upon them. Having heared
Mass on Candlemassday, they returned to the Assault, playing their Cannon, and
lost some Men by the Stones thrown down; yet they came to the first Gates and
broke them open, making their way with much slaughter and loss of three Men to
the second Gates. Those who were within these and the third Gates, seeing so
few of our Men, opened them, and the Portugueses as freely rushed in; where was
a hot Dispute, till D. Christopher and the others coming up, pressed the Enemy
so hard, that many of them threw themselves headlong down the Rocks. Many Women
and Children were taken, and there was a considerable Plunder. The Queen and
her Retinue went up with a general Admiration; the Ethiopians having always
held that Fort to be impregnable. The Patriarch blessed a Mosque, dedicating it
to our Lady, where Mass was celebrated with great Joy to both People.

5. The Mountain being provided, and garrisoned under the Command of an
Ethiopian, the Army marched. As they entered the Country of the Rebel Iarse, he
submitted himself to the Queen, and brought his Men to her Service, thinking
nothing could withstand those who had conquered Nature; in such Esteem did they
hold the taking the Mountain. The King of Zeila came on now, covering the
Plains and Hills with his Numbers, and joyful to have to do with our Men. D.
Christopher Encamped in good Order near a Mountain, both Armies in sight. Palm
Sunday and Monday were spent in Skirmishing with equal Loss, only the
Portugueses had so much the Advantage, that the Enemy retired to their Works.
D. Christopher was forced to move his Camp for want of some necessaries,
chiefly Water. The King of Zeila perceiving their motion from the higher
Ground, came down to encompass our Men, who marched in good Order, pouring
their Shot in upon the Enemy: Who pressing on, D. Christopher ordered Emanuel
de Cuna with his Men to face them, who performed it so successfully, that he
obliged a Body of Turks to retire, after losing many of their Men. They
rallied, and coming on again had somewhat distressed him, till D. Christopher
came in person to their Relief, fighting with such Resolution, that he felt not
he was wounded in the Leg. The King himself came on, thinking to put an end to
the days Action, and it turned to his loss; for our Cannon cut off many of his
Men. D. Christopher was in danger of being slain, but still lost no Courage,
and the Fight continued till the Tyrant was struck down by a shot which pierced
his Thigh. His Men furled their Colors, and fled with him, as they thought
dead, though he was alive. This Victory cost eleven Portugueses, two of them
Men of Note. The Queen her self with great alacrity tended Don Christopher and
all the wounded Men.

6. After a Weeks respit, the Army marched toward the Enemy, who was Encamped
at no great distance, and came to meet them, carrying their King in an open
Chair. It was Resolutely fought on both sides. A Turkish Captain with fifty
Horse thinking to recover the Honor lost the other day, Charged in the midst
of our Men, and was entirely cut off. D* Christopher mounting on Horseback, led
his Men with such fury into the Heat of the Battle, that he obliged the Enemy
with great slaughter to turn their Backs. The King had infallibly been taken,
had there been more Horse to pursue him. Eight Portugueses were lost in this
Action: The Victorious Army marching down to a pleasant River, found it
possessed by the Enemy, who immediately quitted it, the King flying at the
sight of our Men.

7. The King sent an Embassy to the Bassa of Zibit, acquainting him with his
Distress: He mollified by Presents, sent him almost a Thousand Turkish
Musketeers. D. Christopher Wintered in the City Ofar, expecting the Emperor.
Here a Jew proposed, That if he wanted Horses and Mules, he would show him a
Mountain not far off inhabited by Jews, where there was store of both. The King
of Zeyla had a Garrison of Four hundred Men there. D. Christopher having
enquired into the truth of this Information, marched with two Companies of his
own, and some Ethiopians, to the Foot of the Mountain, which is twelve Leagues
about. In the Ascent some Moors, who guarded the Passes, were killed. On the
Top met him the Captain with all his Men. D. Christopher immediately rnnning
at, struck him down dead with his Lance. Our Shot being poured in among the
Moors, they soon quitted the place and fled, leaving many dead. Great quantity
of Horses and Mules were found, and about eight Thousand Jews, who lived in six
or seven Villages on that Mountain, were brought under Obedience. There was a
Tradition, That these Jews dispersed about Ethiopia and Nubia, are descended
from some of the dispersion of the Ten Tribes.

8. The Jew, who led our Men, astonished at their Valor, was Converted and
Baptized, and by common Consent appointed Governor of that Mountain, which
being called before Caloa, was after known by the Name of the Jews Mountain.
The second day after D. Christopher returned to the Army; the King of Zeila
appeared now more bold with the increase of the Turkish Musketeers. D.
Christopher's Youth now transported him as well as his Valor: For whereas he
ought to have retired to a Mountain till the Emperor joined him, it being
impossible to withstand so great a force, he never considered it till it was
too late. On the 29th of August the Turks gave the Onset, and were repulsed by
D. Christopher, who lost four Men and went off wounded in the Leg: Emanuel de
Cuna did the like Service, with loss of three Men. Francis de Abreu fighting
like a Lion was killed, and his Brother Humphry going to fetch him off, fell
down dead upon him. D. Christopher returns like a furious Tiger, and performed
Wonders, till a Musquet-Ball broke his Arm; a courageous Soldier carried him
off. He was scarce dressed, when he heard Fonseca and Vello were killed, and the
Enemy entered the Works. He caused himself to be carried where the greatest
Danger was: But the Tyrant being now undoubtedly Victorious, some of our Men
fled, as did the Patriarch and the Queen on Fleet Mares, each taking a
different Way, he for fear and she by choice. D. Christopher sent after and
obliged her to come back, because her absence brought utter Ruin. But at length
seeing all lost, in despair he grasped his Sword in the Left Hand and said, Let
who will follow me, for I am going to dye amidst the Enemies. He was drawn from
that Resolution by mere force, and carried out of the Field with only fourteen
Men, and the Queen and Barnagais among them, seeking some place of Refuge. The
Night being dark they lost the Way; but the Queen and Barnagais hit it better,
taking up a Mountain. D. Christopher wandering with his Companions, fell into
the hands of the Enemy, who carried him to the Tyrant, who coveted no greater
Prize. The Victors cruelly run, hewing those that had any Life left them, which
moved one to set fire to a quantity of Powder that was in one of the Queens
Tents, and blew up all that were about it.

9. The King overjoyed that D. Christopher was taken, caused him to be brought
to his presence, and said, What would you have done with me, had I been
defeated? He Answered: I would cut off your Head, and divide your Body, and the
Limbs should be set up in Public places for a Terror to other Tyrants. The
King caused him to be buffeted with his Slaves Buskins, his Body to be bathed
in melted Wax, and his Beard wove with waxed Threads, which were fired, and he
led through the Army. Being brought back, the King himself cut off his Head;
his Body was quartered and set upon Poles. It is said, Where the Head fell
there gushed out a Spring, the Water whereof drank cured many Diseases: The
same hour, the Air being calm, a Tree was tore out by the Roots in the Garden
of certain Religious Men; and afterward the same Hour the Emperor having
vanquished this Tyrant, caused his Head to be struck off; the Tree that was
then dry, re-planted it self in the same place, and was covered with Leaves.

10. Most of the Portugueses that were taken, perished in Slavery or Dungeons.
Alfonso Chaldeira, with Thirty, followed the Queen. Emanuel de Cuna, with
Forty, got to Barnagasso, and was well received. Others followed the Patriarch;
they made up in all One hundred and thirty: Whereof Ninety (because Cuna with
his Forty Men were too far off) went to the Emperor, who then drew near, and
very much lamented the slaughter of that Body, and loss of such a Commander.
What those Portugueses did in the Service of that Prince afterward, does not
belong to this place; because the Affairs of India, whence we have made a long
digression call upon us.

CHAP. X.
The End of the Government of D. Stephen de Gama.

1. THe Governor D. Stephen perceiving the Ships from Portugal stayed long,
and guessing they were at Mozambique, resolved to make use of the Merchandise
they brought. To this purpose he sent Luis de Mendez to Vasconcelos, in a
Galley, to give Orders about it, and to Advertize him, Whether a Successor was
sent him in those Ships. He guessed not ill; for Martin Alfonso de Sousa sent
to succeed him with five Ships, was detained at Mozambique by the Weather, and
a tedious Sickness.

2. This Fleet was happy, in that it brought over to India one of the first
Fathers of the Society of Jesus; as well in respect of Time, as that he was one
of the Chief in Piety and Virtue. This was the Famous St. Francis Xaverius, who
labored much, and was very successful in converting those Infidels.

3. St. Francis was the first that had in the East, the Dignity of Apostolic
Legate in all Asia. But because we shall hereafter have occasion to touch upon
his great Virtues, and wonderful Actions, let this suffice here as to the time
of his coming.

4. Most of them that enter upon the Government of India, look upon it as no
small happiness, if they can send off their Predecessor with Disgrace, and
therefore endeavor to come upon them by way of surprise. Martin Alfonso
desiring to compass that, commanded Leuis Mendez not to acquaint D. Stephen,
that he had found him at Mozambique. But Mendez, who was D. Stephens Kinsman,
and resolved to do his Duty, sent a man to carry him Advice. Martin Alfonso
heard of it, and imprisoned him. He met with bad Weather in his Way to Goa, and
light upon James Suarez de Melo, called the Gallego, who flying a Sentence of
Death he had incurred, was passed to India, and with 120 Men in two Vessels,
was become a Pyrat. Him Martin Alfonso received and pardoned, because he
pretended he could say much against D. Stephen. Much he might have said that
was honorable, very little to his Discredit. What ought to have procured him
severer Punishment, was the cause of his favorable Reception. Let us remember
this Suarez, endeavoring to Rise more than was due to him, by these hellish
Contrivances; and we shall hereafter see him rise to the highest pitch, and
then cast down to the depth of Misery.

5. Martin Alfonso de Sousa being come to an Anchor in the Port of Goa, sent
Advice of his Arrival to D. Stephen at a very unseasonable Hour, being the dead
of Night, and that in such manner, as well signified the Ill Will he bore him.
Which obliged D. Stephen to send an Answer unworthy of them both, and to make
him a very uneasy Visit, when he resigned up the Government to him. Martin
Alfonso sound nothing to lay to the Charge of D. Stephen, as those desired, who
set him upon it; for he being a Gentleman of much Honor, could never desire it
of himself.

6. But whereas he ought to have checked himself, finding nothing against him,
he grew the more obstinate: For it is Natural to men in the wrong to persist,
and believe they take Wing when they are deepest stuck in the Mire. He vented
his Malice in allowing him the worst Conveniences for his Voyage, and D.
Stephen was so disgusted at these Proceedings, that he never saw his Face after
he resigned the Sword to him. At length he Arrived in Portugal; for his Enemies
had no power on the Seas and Winds, and was received with general Joy of the
Court, and with Favor by the King; who offering him a Wife, he refused her,
and thereupon (as others for Accepting) was put out of Favor. He obtained
leave, and went to live at Venice; for Portugal was always ready to despise or
banish Great Men. The Emperor Charles the Fifth persuaded him to return to his
Country, assuring him of his Prince's Favor. He returned and found none; for
Princes are more fixed in punishing a little omitted to please, than in
rewarding much done to serve them.

7. This is what D. Stephen did in India; this the Reward he had for Governing
it well. He was of a middle Stature, thick and strong, a thick Beard and black
Hair, his Complexion ruddy. He was very Liberal, and not a little Positive, but
not without cause: A great Horseman. In the number of Governors the Twelfth,
first of the Name, second of the Surname, and held it two years and a Month. He
made an Inventory of what he was worth when he entered upon the Government, and
so when he left it, and was found 40000 Crowns the worse, the full Value having
been 200000. On his Tomb is only this Epitaph, HE THAT MADE KNIGHTS ON MOUNT
SINAI ENDED HERE. So much did he value the Honor of that Action, and not
without Reason.

CHAP. XI.
The Government of Martin Alfonso de Sousa, from the Year 1542, till the Year
1545, in the Reign of King JOHN the Third.

1. THis Chapter must begin with what happened in the time of both Governors,
one ending and the other commencing. Homaum Paxa, King of the Mogols
prosecuting his Ambitious Designs of enlarging his Empire, undertook the
Conquest of the Kingdom of Patane, then possessed by Xa Holan, whom Fortune had
once much favored, and now seemed to neglect. Nothing withstood the Mogol,
till he came to the City Xamanea, before which he fat down. His Enemy encamped
a League off on the other side of Ganges, and entertained him with continual
Skirmishes, generally with equal Loss. Homaum still pressed, and Halon
despairing of removing him by open Force, had recourse to Stratagem, wherein he
was singular. He endeavored to protract the Time the best he could, till the
Season that Ganges overflows, which generally drowns all the Plain for the
space of eight Leagues. Mean while he dug vast Ponds to receive the River, and
then dammed it up; and as the Floods began to swell he broke the Damms, which
caused the Waters to spread abroad with the greater violence. ^us all on a
sudden, when the Mogol least thought of it, they gushed out upon his Army, and
before he imagined it swallowed up 50000 of his Men, and an infinite quantity
of Baggage.

2. Homaum, by the help of a Carrier, escaped upon a Mule; and the Queen, who
was with Child, on an Elephant. The Queen was delivered of a Daughter, and
fearing her Husband should hate her because it was not a Son, she changed it
for one the Wife of a Cornaca had then brought forth. Cornaca's are the Men
that govern the Elephants. Some said the Child, thought to be changed, was got
on the Queen by the Cornaca, there being a suspicion he had had to do with her
upon the Elephant. There is no need of disputing the Possibility of the thing;
for on the Elephants are Castles, those Castles loansom, and Solitude and
Idleness produce wanton Thoughts. Queens are Women, and Women have ready Wits.
However it was, Homaum esteemed the Son as his own, and he was called Gelaldim
Hacbar. As to his person, he was more like the Cornaca, than Homaum; but the
Endowments of his Mind were equal with the Greatest of Men. This Prince, when
he came to the Crown, being offended at the Innundations of Ganges, prevented
them by drawing it into several Channels, and built there a Palace of such
Wonderful structure, that Ten thousand Men spent Thirty years in the Work.
Homaum being come to the City Delhi, clothed the Carryer in Royal Robes,
entertaining him with a splendid Train, and made him sit three days in the
Regal Throne; during which time he enjoyed the whole Revenue of the Crown, and
had the full power of Government. From this time forward a Mule was stamped
upon all his Coin, that even the Beast might not pass unrewarded.

3. About the same time Antony de Mota, Francis Zeymoto, and Antony Peixoto,
sailing for China, were thrown by a Storm among the Islands of Nipongi, or
Nifon; by the Chinese called Gipon, and by us Iapan. In one of these they were
well received, and had the Honor to be the first that discovered them, though
accidentally. They lie far Eastward of all India, opposite to China, between 30
and 40 Degrees of North Latitude. They are many; the Principal, Nipongi, or
Iapan, in which is the City Meaco, the Imperial Court. According to the
Natives, the Length of the Island is 366 Leagues, according to our computation
One hundred less: It is divided into Fifty six Governments. The Chief Islands
about it are Cikoko, Tokoesi, Sando, Sisime, Bacasa, Vuoqui, Taquixima and
Firando. The Japans have the vain Pride to esteem themselves descended from the
Gods. They say a great Giant made the World of a Cocks Egg, and of the Earthly
part a Woman, who engendring with a Crocodile brought forth a Man, from whom
they descend. And the Family of the Conguis among them to this day wear Tails
like those of Crocodiles hanging at their Breeches in token, they are the
immediate Line. The truth is, they are descended from a Chinese Prince, who
being banished passed thither; but they are so vain, they would rather descend
from a Cock and a Crocodile, than from the Chinese. In Matters of Religion
they have several Sects: That of the Xexuni, who deny the Immortality of the
Soul, and is followed by the Nobility; it is not only in Iapan they follow it:
That of the Foccenxuni, who adore the Sun, and allow a Second Life: The
Xodexuni, that adore the Idol which they think saves them, if they name it:
That of Xocoxu, who believe there is a Reward for the Good, and Punishment for
the Wicked, and is followed by the Country People: That of Xamabuxe, the
Professors whereof adore the Devils, and converse with them so familiarly, that
when one would be Revenged of another, he orders them to enter into him; they
call them with a Horn. Their Priests are called Bonzes: But above all they
adore an Idol called Seuto, who lives in Heaven, and is the beginning of all
things. Parricide and Treason, they hold as sins that cannot be forgiven. Pity
this Doctrine should not be held among those that pretend to be Christians.

4. Fernan Mendez Pinto, in his Travels, appropriates this Discovery to
himself; Saying, He came to the Island Tanixuma (which I suppose to be
Taquixima, one of those about Iapan) with his two Companions Christopher
Borallo and James Zeimoto; not by way of Shipwreck; but designedly, in the
Service of a Pyrat, who had taken them up when cast away. Both Relations
mention three Names, one of them is the same in both, and both agree upon the
same Year 1542. I will say something I find in that Author, because it is rare
and worthy Admiration.

5. Nautaquim was then Prince of that Island, and seeing the three Portugueses
he stood amazed, and uttered these mysterious words: Let me dye, if these
(meaning the Portugueses) be not the Chinchicogies our ancient Records speak
of, who flying over the Waters, shall come to be Lords of the Lands where God
placed the greatest Riches of the World; and it will be very fortunate for us,
if they come as Friends. Let us return to India.

6. The first thing the Governor did, was lessening the Soldiers pay; for
saving of Charges is a great means to gain the Favor of Princes: And Ministers
never express their Zeal, by retrenching their own large Allowances; but by
cutting off the small ones of the Poor. This caused great Discontent among the
Commonalty. However Two thousand Men were raised, and imbarqued in Seventy
Vessels of several sorts, with which the Governor set out for Batecala, a City
seated on the Banks of a River upon the Coast of Canara, well built and
encompassed with a fruitful Country. The occasion of this Voyage, That the
Queen refused to pay her Tribute, and entertained Pirates in her Port to the
detriment of the Public.

7. The Fleet entered the Port, and the Queen seeing so great a force, and that
the Governor demanded the Tribute, and delivery of the Pirates Ships that had
retired thither and fortified themselves; she designed to hold him in hand till
the time came he must go to Cochin. This Artifice was soon disappointed; for he
Landed with Twelve hundred Men in two Battalions, the Command of one he gave to
Ferdinand de Sousa and Tavora, and ordered Twenty light Vessels to go up the
River and attack the City by Sea. The Governor marching through a Wood, was
met by a Body of Musketeers: Our Men made no halt, but drove them before to
the Gates, and entered with them, not without great opposition, the Queen her
self with much Bravery encouraging her Men. A Portugues Soldier being beset by
Two hundred of the Enemy bravely defended himself, till another envious of that
Honor came up to him, and both Back to Back kept their Ground; at length a
Party of our Men, fell upon the Enemy, and with great slaughter of them rescued
the two.

8. It was Night when our Men possessed themselves of the City. In the Morning
they not only plundered the Portugueses that were there; but falling out about
the Booty had such a Battle among themselves, that all were hurt, and none
enriched. The Enemy who perceived this from a Hill, pours in a shower of
Arrows; the Governor Orders all to march to Revenge it; but those who are
grieved by the lessening their Pay, Answer, That the Gentlemen who are Rich may
march; for they only came to make up by Plunder what they are unjustly deprived
of. Garcia de Sa went out with a sew Lances, and after some Retreats
reciprocally on both sides, almost all the Portugueses were put to shameful
flight, running to their Ships in such haste that some were drowned.

9. The Governor hearing this, run to them with Reproaches, crying out, He did
not know them, and thought they were not the same he left two years before in
India. This seemed a Reflection upon his Predecessor; but they with as loud
Voices undeceived him, Answering, That the Men were the same, but the Governor
was not; that this was the fruit of lessening their Pay, to give Gratuities to
those who knew better how to beg, than deserve them. He retired to the Ships,
and resolved the next day to burn the City, and destroy the Country. The City
run with the Blood of all Living Creatures of both Sexes, and all Ages, before
it was burnt; then the Country was laid waste, and all the Woods cut down. This
caused such a general Terror, that whereas before throughout India, it was
commonly said, Beware of Batecala; they afterward changed it to Beware of
Martin Alfonso. The Queen no longer able to resist, submitted, and purchased
Peace with a heavier Subjection; for generally they draw on themselves a
greater burden, who proudly throw off that they have.

10. Martin Alfonso abhorred that so many Men quitting the Service, turned
Merchants; to prevent this, and considering the vast Frauds of the Custom-House
at Malaca, he sent new Orders thither. He lowered the Customs of Strangers to
invite them to Trade there, and raised them to the Portugueses, to lessen their
desire of Trading thither. The first succeeded well; for the Customs after that
amounted to much more than before. The second took no effect. Much of the same
nature was what he did at Ormuz, and therefore we will mention it in this
place. That King was in Arrears for Tribute Five hundred thousand Ducats, which
he refused not to pay, but was not able; for from Twelve thousand that
Albuquerque at first imposed on him it was raised to almost One hundred
thousand; so that the King from a Tributary was become a Slave, not having a
competent Maintenance left him. Martin Alfonso finding he was not able to pay
the Debt, proposed to him to make over the Customs for payment: He to be rid of
Oppression submitted, and as before he was a King without a Revenue, now he had
some he seemed no King; for the Custom-House is the support of that Crown. No
doubt it was a Judgment for the Wickednesses of the Portugueses, in taking from
that King what was his due, that the Persians, whose it had been, should take
it from them. The oppressed King making Virtue of Necessity, resigned his Crown
with Praises of him that took it from him; for the Instrument began with these
vain Preambles: I command all to obey this Supreme Instrument, that it may be
understood that between me and my Lord (meaning King John the Third) who in
greatness reaches to Heaven, and has Power over all the circumference of the
Earth, and in Grandeur is equal to the King of China, Great King of Justice (as
if any Justice were now done him*) Greatest of all Kings in the World; Key of
the Treasure that is on Earth, that is, Virtue and Nobility, of whom is learnt
the Wisdom of Reigning, brightness of the Sea of Kingdoms, etc. Could any man
wronged flatter him, that injured him more? It is certain, He who gave the
Praises, deserved them better than he that received them.

CHAP. XII.
Continues the Government of Martin Alfonso de Sousa.

1. ABout the End of this Year arrived in India four Ships from Portugal;
another came out with them, but was put back. At the same time D. George,
Commander of Ternate, was at Variance with the Spaniards, who under Ruy Lopez
de Villalobos had invaded the Portugues Bounds. Villalobos was at Zagala, a
Town of Camafo, inhabited by Renegado Christians, and from thence held
Correspondence with the King of Gilolo. D. George protested against him, for
intruding into what he had no right to, according to the late Capitulations. He
sometimes Answered, He was forced thither by Storm: Otherwhiles, That he was
within the Limits of Spain. D. George sent Iayme Lobo with 50 Men in two
Galiots, believing this a sufficient Force, because the Spaniards were spent
with Misfortunes. He had Orders to assist Geliato de Gomo Conora, who besieged
a Fort of his own that was in Rebellion. Iamye went to Momoya, where he
gathered many of the Natives, then Christians, and passed over in Parao's,
which Landing they took up and carried about half a League to a Lake, there
launched them again, an^ wasted over to the Fort Geliato, besieged. The Enemy
seeing the Portugues Relief, offered to Capitulate; but the Portuguess,
covetous of Plunder, refused. The Morning appearing, they could not Land but
man by man, and that in several places; which the besieged perceiving, fell
upon those who were ashore, and with considerable damage forced them back to
their Vessels. The Enemy had Hooks hanging at their Arms, one stuck in the Face
of a Soldier, which drew him along till another came and with his Dagger cut
it out. D. Ge^rge sent 30 Men to the Relief of these, who found near the Lake
three Portugueses set upon Poles. Iayme returns to the Fort; which the besieged
abandoned, and it was dismantled.

2. Being able to do nothing against the Spaniards, he returned to Ternate.
Villalobos went over to Gilolo, was well received by the King, fortified
himself, and sent a Messenger to D. George, to tell him, He was within the
Spanish Bounds, and demand restitution of the Artillery he had taken, and the
Spaniards that were with him. D. George granted the last, and sent Advice to
Goa and Portugal. Villalobos dexterously began to draw near, and plant himself
in Tidore.

3. Jordan de Freitas set out from Goa in April, to succeed D. George in that
Command, and take possession of the Island Amboyna, whereof he had a Grant from
Tabarija King of Ternate, w^o had been unjustly sent Prisoner to Goa by Tristan
de Atayde, was there Baptized, and now sent back by the Governor Martin
Alfonso to be restored to his Crown. Frey^as being come to Malaca, and
considering that King would not be easily admitted by his Subjects, for having
changed his Religion, left him there, designing to take his Brother, which
would make his Re inthronement the more easy. At Ternate, D. George delivered
him the Fort; he Treated with Villalobos, and they agreed upon a Truce for
eight Months, in which time they might consult their Superiors; and during
this time there was to be no Correspondence between them. The Spaniards fell
out among themselves in such manner, that many of them went over to the
Portugueses at Ternate. F. Hierome of St. Stephen, Confessor to Villalobos,
affirmed, He was Excommunicated for entering the Portugues Limits; but he
remained obstinate.

4. Freytas, sent along with D. George, who was going to Goa, Aeiro the present
King, to make room for him he had left at Malaca, not knowing he was since
dead, and had made the King of Portugal his Heir. His Mother and Father-in-Law,
who had been with him, went to Ternate with Ferdinand de Sousa, who carried
Relie^ to that Fort. Freytas received them in Mourning, and then took
possession of the Kingdom, the Government whereof he committed to the
Father-in-Law and Mother, till other Orders came from Portugal. Afterward the
Governor D. John de Castro sent back Aeiro with the Title of KING, to prevent
the Disorders that happen by many Heads. This last belongs to the Year 1545;
but I insert it here, not to break the Series of these Affairs.

5. About this time in Ethiopia, the Emperor marched against the King of Adel,
or Zeila. He was followed by the Portugueses who escaped the former Defeat,
except 40 who were with Emanuel de Cuna in Barnagasso, who being sent for could
not come time enough. Those with the Emperor were Ninety, by whose Advice he
marched toward the Enemy, giving them the Van of his Army, for the great
Opinion he had of their Valor. In the Province Ambea, at the Foot of the
Mountain Oenadias, they met Seven hundred Horse and Two thousand Foot, led by a
Captain of Zeila, to join the King. Fifty Portugues Horse advanced to attack
them, the foremost Antony Cardosa, who killed the Enemies Captain the first
stroke of his Lance; the others following his Example, slew many; when
Barnagais first, and then the Emperor coming up Charged furiously, and killing
Eight hundred put the rest to flight, who went rather to terrify the Tyrant
with this Relation, than Reinforce him.

6. He was a League off with his Army in Battalia; it consisted of two Bodies
of Foot, Three thousand Men in each; he marched in the Front with Five hundred
Horse. The Emperor met him with the like Number, and in the same Order. The
Portugueses, who were the Forlorn of this Body, Charged the Five hundred and
slew many, losing two. The Emperor in person behaved himself bravely, till the
Enemies Horse fled to the Wings of their Army. The King was wanting in nothing,
showing his Son, Ten years of Age, to stir up his Men to fight. The Fight was
renewed, and the Emperor in great danger; but a Portugues shooting the King in
the Belly killed him, and his Horse carried him about hanging, being tied to
the Saddle. Only a few Turks chose rather to dye, than fly, and made a great
slaughter of Ethiopians. John Fernandez, Page to the Unfortunate D.
Christopher, at two strokes of his Lance killed the Turkish Commander. In fine,
Few of the Enemy escaped by flight, the King's Head was cut off, and his Son
made Prisoner. The Emperor acknowledging how great a share the Portugueses had
in this and the late Victories, did them great Favors. Cuna returned to Goa
with 50 only; the rest stayed and married with Women of the Country, whose
Progeny still continues there.

7. At Goa, the Governor heard the 1544.
Complaints of the King of Ormuz, brought hither by D. Pedro de Castellobranco,
by Order of Martin Alfonso de Melo Iusarte, Commander of that Fort. The Kings
Complaints against him were most just, having been used as the meanest of
Madmen, whereas his Madness was no other, than the Avarice of those would make
him so. They endeavored all they could to hinder his Restoration; but seeing
him Reinthroned, they poisoned him, and what caused his Imprisonment and was
the cause of his death was not punished. After this Injustice followed the
Justice executed upon Hierome Diaz a Portugues Physician, of Jewish extraction;
he was burnt for Heresy.

CHAP. XIII.
Continues the Government of Martin Alfonso de Sousa.

1. ABout forty Leagues off, to the Eastward of the Moluco Islands is that of
Macacar, rich and plentiful of Rice, Salt, Fish, Flesh, Fruit and Grain, and
yields Sandal, Wax, Ivory and Gold. The People hardy and good Seamen: The Soil
pleasant and well Watered, and has good Towns and Villages. Some Portugueses
hearing the Cstristian Faith was received there, went thither, and among them
Antony de Payva, that went as a Merchant, not a Preacher; but proved more
Preacher than Mercahnt. He had before had some Discourse with one of the Kings
of the Island about Religion, who seemed well pleased therewith. Returning now,
he arrived in the Kingdom of Supa, and had so much Discourse with that King,
who was 70 years of Age, that he was very near being Converted.

2. However, the King remained dubious, and Payva sailing thence went to the
Port of Sian; the King whereof, on account of the grateful Conference they had
before, received him with kindness. The Discourse of Religion was renewed, and
Payva at large explained all Points to him, and at the same time urged the
absurdness of the Adoration of Idols.

3. The Conference ended, the Sky till then being serene, there arose a Storm
of Thunder, Lightning and Rain, which was esteemed as a Heavenly Confirmation
of the Truth of what Payva had said; and he laying hold of that advantage,
urged the King to embrace the Faith. He was inclinable; but his Subjects, and
the Moors that Traded there, obstructed him. He demanded time to Consider. At
this time arrives the King of Supa, and hearing he of Sian had desired time,
said, A work so good ought rather to be put in execution, than delayed; that he
was only sorry for the Time he had lost, but would atone by being the first,
and desired to be immediately Baptized. All stood amazed, and there being no
Priest, the Ancientest of the Portugueses performed the Function; and he was
Christened Luis. Then the Queen, and many that came with him, were Baptized,
which was celebrated with the Guns and Warlike Instruments of both People. He
of Sian moved by this Example, was Baptized with his whole Family.

4. Mean while the Governor fitted out a Fleet of 45 Sail, in which were Three
thousand Seamen and Soldiers. The design was kept secret, and was to rob the
Pagod of Tremele, which is twelve Miles up the Inland of St. Thomas Meliapor,
in the Kingdom of Bisnagar: For which he had express Orders from King John,
upon pretense India was wasted; as if any pretense could justify such a
Robbery. Nevertheless the Design was discovered, or (as others say)
disappointed by contrary Weather; yet the Governor was persuaded to plunder
other Pagods, where it was thought there was no less Treasure.

5. He took the Advice; and by the way sent to the King of Iasanapatan, in the
Island Ceylon, either to submit and pay Tribute to the King of Portugal, or
provide to ^ppose that Fleet. The King was so unprovided, he thought it a
happiness the Governor was so content, and agreed to ^ay Four thousand Ducats
yearly. The King called Grande, near Cape Comori, for ^ear, sent him a Present.
He went on to ^he Pagod Tebelicate, near Calecoulam, not^ithstanding we were at
Peace with that ^ing, and entered it with a few of his Confidents; they brought
two Casks so heavy, they loaded many Men: It was said they carried Water; such
as were not easy of belief, affirmed it was pure Gold and Precious Stones. The
truth was never known. Some Writings declare, there was only a Pot of Gold
found, in which the Idol was bathed, valued Four thousand Crowns, which King
John Ordered to be restored, much admiring this Action of Martin Alfonso, as if
it had been a greater Crime to rob at Tebilicare without his Order, than at
Tremele with it. However it was, whilst the Portugueses marched to their Ships,
the Pagod and Town flamed, and Two hundred Nayres set out to Revenge this Loss,
Commanded by the Keeper of the Pagod. They appeared on an Eminence over our
Men, who marched through a Defilee, and poured their Shot and Arrows upon them,
which killed Thirty. The Governor had been in danger, had he not dismounted
Our Men being got into the open Field, put the Nayres to flight.

6. No danger terrifies Avarice. They went on to another Pagod. Out of it was
taken a Chest, which was publicly opened, and some Silver Money that was in it
distributed; but of so little value, that many believed thence proceeded the
Liberality. The Governor returned to Goa, where four Ships arrived from
Portugal, soon after his departure, expected him. Five had set out from Lisbon,
but one was forced back by a Storm.

7. The Governor had not returned so soon to Goa, if D. Garcia de Castro had
not sent to hasten him upon a sudden emergency; which was thus: Acedecam, Lord
of the Lands about Goa, designing to depose Hidalcan, prevailed by dint of
Presents and Promises with D. Garcia, to deliver up to him Meal Can, Brother
to Hidalcan, pretending he held the Kingdom wrongfully. This gave Hidalcan just
cause of Complaint, and drew on no contemptible danger. The Governor heared
both Parties, and ^ough both used equal Arguments, offering equal Advantages to
the Crown of Portugal; the Governor inclined more to Acedacan, who offered the
Kingdom of Concam, then possessed by Abraham, a good Man and our Friend, whose
Revenue was above a Million. It was the more valuable for being near Goa.

CHAP. XIV.
The End of the Government of Martin Alfonso de Sousa, and of the First Part of
this Tome.

1. THe Governor Armed in defense of Meal, and to possess him of the Crown
Acedecan offered him. This was a notorious act of Injustice, and Martin Alfonso
being led by Interest, and naturally so haughty that none durst Advise him,
Peter de Faria resolved to do it, encouraged by his Quality, the great Offices
he had born, and his great Age, being 80 years Old. Late at Night he repaired
to the Governor's Tent, and having prepared him to hear, laid before him all
the Motives that could persuade, to desist from so unjust an Undertaking, with
much submission, gravity and discretion.

2. Martin Alfonso submitted to Faria's Reasons. As soon as Day appeared, the
Governor pretending other Causes, gave over the Design and returned to the
City, securing Meal Can. At this time died Acedecan, the Promoter of this
Discord; and Hidalcan came down the Mountain-Gate with a powerful Army,
reducing his Rebels, and in few days recovered the Kingdom of Concam, which not
long before we had hoped to possess, if not dissuaded by the Experienced Faria,
to whom Martin Alfonso confessed he owed his Life and Honor: For had he gone
to Concham, it was much to be doubted whether ever he had Returned. Hidalcan
still fearing Meal Can, offered for him, if he were delivered to him, the
Lands of Salsete and Bardez, valued at Fifty thousand Ducats a Year. It had
been a breach of Trust, to deliverup a Man that had put himself into our
protection. Therefore the Governor Answered; If what was offered were given,
he would send him where he should not disturb Hidalcan. He admitted this
Condition, and performed on his part; but had not entire satisfaction from us;
for Meal was carried from Goa to Cananor, and from Cananor to Goa, in the Eyes
of Hidalcan, as the Politic said, To keep in Awe; but the State Critics said,
It was a Bait to draw Presents. Some were sent soon after.

3. Hidalcan had moreover granted to the Governor upon this Treaty, the vast
Treasure Acedecan had laid up when he Rebelled, and which at his Death fell
into the hands of Cojecemazadim, and was worth Ten Millions of Ducats. He
persuaded the Governor it was not above a Million, and delivered so much to
him. One Record says, He sent almost half of it to Portugal in Bars of Gold:
Another, That he applied Two hundred and fifty thousand Ducats to the Kings use
in India; if we may not take into this Account, One hundred thousand given by
Hidalcan upon the late Accommodation. But if these did make up the Sum, he
afterward discharged a good Conscience, discharging the King of some Debts.

4. Hidalcan gave him Notice of the great Fraud used in delivering the
Treasure, persuading him to recover the Remainder of Cojecemazadim, who was at
Cananor. He used Means to take him; but not succeeding, resolved to endeavor
it in person. He fitted out Twenty four great Ships, and many Vessels to row,
and without saying any thing what he intended, landed at Cochin. Putting to Sea
again, he steered several Courses, and Anchored at Mount Delij. At Night,
without making it known to the Fleet, he went into a Barge with five or six
Gentlemen, and ordering three of the lightest Vessels to follow, came with
incredible speed to the Fort of Cananor, where James Alvarez Tellez Commanded.
He spoke to him without being known to any other, ordering him to endeavor to
secure Cojecemazadim, or Pocarale Aderrajam, who Governed him. Then he returned
to the Fleet, and with it to Goa, all men admiring the Voyage and Preparations,
without seeing the Design or Effect of them. Tellez could not take Zemazadim,
for he was upon his Guard; but he ordered Henry de Sousa, Commander in Chief of
Malabar, to take Pocarale. He attempted it, and many coming in to his Relief,
Pocarale and a Brother of his were both killed. This enflamed the King and
People against the Fort, and though they were appeased, yet the Hatred to the
Portugueses for this Action was not extinguished; but raised one of the
greatest Storms we weathered in India.

5. The King of Xiraz caused some Disturbance at Ormuz, appearing in the
Neighborhood with a considerable Power; but he soon drew off, coming to
Agreement with that King. Sultan Mamud, King of Cambaya, aimed at the Recovery
of Diu, not forgetting the Death of his Uncle Badur, and being troubled to have
us so near Neighbors. One of the dishonorable Articles of Peace, which the
Viceroy D. Garcia had admitted was, That the Kings Subjects might build a Wall
between their Town and our Fort. The Wall was raising, and displeased Emanuel
de Sousa and Sepulveda, who commanded there, because it looked like somewhat
more than a bare Partition, which was the true intent of the Articles. He
fortified himself, then beat off the Workmen, threw down the Wall, and made use
of the Materials. The King was heinously offended, and at the instigation of
his great Subject Coje Zofar, he began secretly to stir up that Great Part of
the World, with Letters to the several Princes, to unite and expel the
Portugues, not only Diu, but all Asia.

6. Let us see what happened while this Storm was rising. Hidalcan pressed the
Governor, either to restore what he had given him on that score, or else to
send away Mealeacan. The Governor endeavored to please him with Artifice,
rather than Performance, and to this effect sent John Fernandez de Negreyros
Ambassador to him. Him, and all the Portugueses that were in his Court, the
King put in Prison, keeping them as Hostages for the performance of what was
before agreed, and now demanded. This was a great Provocation to the hot Nature
of Martin Alfonso; but submitting to Necessity, he began to appease Hidalcan,
assuring him, That as soon as the Season would permit, Meal should be sent to
Malaca. Three Ships Arrived now from Portugal of five that sailed thence; one
was forced back, and another Castaway on the Coast of Melinde, the Men saved.

7. This Year the Tartar entered China, and besieged Peking. A great part of his
numerous Army, which consisted of almost Millions of Men, Threescore thousand
of them Horse, marched to the City Quamsi and plundered it, killing above
Threescore thousand persons of all Sexes and Ages, and then went on toward
Peking. By the way, the Fort Nixiancoo defended it self so bravely, that the
General Nanticor thought it impregnable, having lost Three thousand Men before
it. Among the Prisoners taken at Quamsi were Nine Portugueses, one of them
called George Mendez, offered, if he might have his and his Companions Liberty,
to put him in a way to take the Fort. The General admitted the Proposal, and by
this Man's Advice took it with the slaughter of above Two thousand Chinese and
Mogols. He went on to Peking, and in pursuance of his Promise obtained of his
Prince the Portugueses Liberty, and did them great Honors, endeavoring with
large Gifts to detain them in his Service. George Mendez stayed, and was
afterward allowed a Pension of Six thousand Ducats. These Accidents often
cause the Portugueses in Asia, to forget their Country and sometimes their
Religion. This was when they came to Tuymican, the Tartar's Court, whither he
retired after the raising the Siege of Peking, which lasted almost seven
Months, with the Loss of Four hundred and fifty Thousand Men, most destroyed by
Pestilence, besides Three hundred thousand that deserted to the Chinese.

8. Four small Vessels, with One hundred Portugueses in them, cruised upon the
1545.
Coast of Tanauzarim, and were much dreaded, having (among other Prizes) taken
three great Ships. The Maritim Towns complained to their Sovereign, the King of
Siam; and he sent out against them Heredim Mahomet, a Turk, with a Royal
Galley, four Galliots, and five other Vessels that Rowed, in which were Eight
hundred Men, Three hundred of them Janissaries, the rest Turks, Greeks, Achems,
Malabars and Mogols; all brave Men. A poor King of the Neighboring Island,
Pulohinor, who was newly Converted, gave our Men notice of the Danger. They
left the Port and run up a Creek, both because it was more hid, and for that at
the Mouth of it were some Ruins, that might serve instead of a Fort, to defend
themselves. The Turk missing them in the Port, thought they were fled to some
of the Neighboring Islands, and sent the Ships and Galliots in search of them,
staying behind with only the Galley. They who were upon the Watch, fell upon
the Galley at Night, and destroyed Three hundred Men that were in her, and the
Admiral, with loss of only One Man. Of the other Nine Vessels, three were
Castaway and six were taken by our Men; with great slaughter of the Enemy, and
only two killed on our side.

9. The Governor dispatched the homeward bound Trading Ships, whereof one was
Castaway at Zanzibar. Those from Portugal arrived in India, and brought him a
Successor, which he so earnestly desired, that a few days before being at Mass
with James Silveyra, who was coming for Portugal; he said to him at the
Elevation of the Host; Speak to the King, to send one to succeed me, for I dare
not Govern India, because Men are so changed from Truth and Honor: Or else I
swear by that Sacred Host, and by the true Body of Christ I behold in it with
the Eyes of Faith, That I will open the Patents of Succession, and resign the
Government to whoever is named therein; and desire his Highness, not to expose
such a Subject as I am, to the danger of having his Head cut off. This was the
Condition of India, almost past hope of Recovery: For if the Governor was
tolerable, those that were governed were intolerable; and the contrary. Martin
Alfonso had served well in Brasile and India, in other Posts. He was Violent in
his Undertakings, a great discoverour of Men's Humors, and knew better than
many to save what was superfluous, and spend what was necessary. He instituted
those Officers of the King's Revenue, that are called Surveyors, in India. He
was of a handsome and large Stature, his Complexion white, his Beard
Chestnut-colour. He Governed three years and four Months; was the 13th had the
Title of Governor, and first of the Name.

The End of the First PART of the Second Tome.
THE Portugues ASIA. TOM. II. PART II.
CHAP. I.
The Government of D. John de Castro, from the Year 1545, till the Year 1548,
in the Reign of King JOHN the Third.

1. ABOUT the latter end of August, or beginning of September, Arrived 1545.
at Goa six Ships from Portugal, Commanded by Don John de Castro, who went to
Ease Martin Alfonso of the Government. Immediately (as is Customary in India)
Complaints were carried to the New Governor against the Old. The chief, the
Crying-down the Value of Money; which was immediately restored to its former
Value. This gave occasion to Martin Alfonso to go away dissatisfied, and the
other to remain so upon the manner of his Discontent, falling out after having
very well agreed. These Governors, and their Governments, seem to resemble the
Soul and Body, which never part without great struglings.

2. Don John began his Government as is usual, sending Commanders and Officers
to several Forts and Towns. Bernardin de Sousa went to succeed Iurdan de
Freytas, at Ternate, carrying with him the King Aeiro, to hold that Crown till
other Orders came from Portugal, it being left to our King by the deceased
Tabarija, as was said before. Ferdinand de Sousa and Tavora, who was sent
against the Spaniards, Commanded by Villalobos, reduced him to a necessity of
surrendering himself, and continuing at Ternate till the Season of sailing for
India, where he and his Men might either remain in the Portugues Service, or
return in their Ships to Europe. This Difficulty surmounted, Sousa resolved to
take Revenge of Catabruno, King of Gilolo, for the Injuries he did the
Portugueses and New Converts since he Tyrannically usurped the Crown, killing
his Lawful Sovereign.

3. Sousa consulted his own Men, and the new Guests, who approved of his
Resolution, and Villalobos offered to bear him Company. They made up Four
hundred Spaniards and Portugueses, and Fifteen hundred Ternatenses. Coming to
an Anchor in the Port, they found the Tyrant ready to receive them, well
fortified and provided with Cannon. The Christians began to batter them; but
received more damage than they did. Sousa perceiving there was no way, but by
giving an Assault, gave the first of the Attack to John Galvan and Bernard de
la Torre, the first a Portugues, the other a Spaniard, who sticking in the
Thorns the Tyrant had designedly strewed about, and scarce able to move, stood
as a Mark to the Enemies Bullets and Arrows. Catabruno Charges them with Three
thousand Men. Sousa comes to their Relief, and the Fight was desperate; for
both Spaniards and Portugueses did Wonders. Night parted, and Morning brought
them together; the Dispute was hot, till Galvan being killed his Men were put
in disorder; all our Body came to their Relief, and brought them off, forcing
the Enemy to retire to their Works. Our Captain seeing no likelihood of
prevailing, returned to Ternate; whence he went to India with the Spaniards, as
had been Agreed, only Villalobos excepted, who died in the Fort.

4. Coje Zofar, at Cambaya, now his Princes Favorite, kept a fair
Correspondence with the Portugueses; but with the natural Perfidiousness of a
Moor. He persuaded the King a second time to endeavor the shaking off the Yoke
of the Fort of Diu, and to this effect drew together a great Number of Men; yet
had more hopes to succeed by Policy, than strength. He agreed with an Infamous
Portugues, called Ruy Fre^re, to poison the Cistern, fire the Magazine, and
upon a Sign given admit him into the Fort. An Ethiopian, a Turk and a Woman
Slave, discovered the Treachery. Coje Zofar was astonished to see his Design
discovered, and began to Complement D. John Mascarenhas, Commander of the Fort;
pleading, That the Cause of breaking the Peace had been, because they
obstructed building that Wall, which D. Garcia de Noronha had so weakly
allowed, and Emanuel de Sousa had courageously beat down. Coje Zofar dissembled
while he gathered a great Power, and D. John perceiving the Danger that
threatened him, prepared to meet it, and gave Advice thereof to the Governor
and Neighboring Commanders.

5. A considerable number of Men was already drawn together in the City Diu,
and among them Five hundred Turks, sent from Mecha by the King of Zibit. D.
John assigned every Man his Post, and placed an Officer with 30 Men in each of
the four Bastions; his Lieutenant over the Gate with Twenty, another with the
like Number in a small Work; reserving Fifty for himself to be wherever the
greatest Danger called. This was the Number of Men he had, and thus ordered,
when Coje Zofar came on with all his Power, resolving to attack the Bastion of
the Sea, with three Castles built upon a Ship of prodigious bigness, well
stored with Cannon to batter the Wall. Within the Castles were Two hundred
Turks, who were to distract the Desendants by pouring in continually all sorts
of Artificial Fireworks. This Design succeeded not, for our Commander having
notice of it, sent Iacome Leite to burn that Ship. He took twenty Men in two
Vessels, and though he set out by Night, was discovered; yet did not desist,
but courageously went on and set fire to it; then retiring, saw a great part of
it fly into the Air, with most of the Turks, the Remainder casting such a
Flame, as at a distance discovered the Enemies Army running in Batalions to
quench the Fire. Iacome seeing them in Clusters, let fly his Cannon and killed
many of them. In this Action he had seven Men wounded. He went on to the Mouth
of the River, and took from the Enemy some Vessels of Provision, with which he
returned to the Fort, much admired of all.

6. Coje Zofar began to build the Wall, that had been before beat down, which
could not be hindered, though our Cannon killed many of the Workmen; but was
brought to such perfection, that he planted ^hereon Sixty great Cannon, besides
many small, and one of such extraordinary bigness, that it shook the whole
Island, and made pieces of the Fort fly; it was managed by an expert French
Renegado. At this time arrived D. Ferdinand de Castro, Son to the Governor,
sent by him with some Relief of Men. Mascarenhas wanted some Intelligence from
the Enemies Camp. James de Anaya Coutino, a Gentleman of Note and Man of great
strength, knowing of it, at Night putting a Helmet on his Head, with a Sword by
his side and Spear in his Hand, let himself down the Wall, and lying close at
some distance from the Fort, discovered two Moors, who being come up to him, he
killed the one with the Spear, and taking up the other in his Arms run with him
to the Gate of the Fort, and calling threw him in, to the great admiration of
those that beheld it. This was much; but what follows is more: He had borrowed
the Helmet he carried, and promised on the word of a Gentleman to restore it,
or dye. In this Scuffle it fell off, and he mist it not till the Owner asked
for it. He said nothing; but letting himself off the Wall again, went to look
for, found and restored it. Nothing could be more brave; nothing more
honorable.

7. The King came from Champanel with Ten thousand Horse, to see (as Coje Zofar
said) that place taken. This caused an extraordinary Motion in the Army, and D.
John desired to know the cause of it. Six of our Men sallied out at Night and
fell among sixty Moors, who were all asleep, whereof they killed some, and the
rest waking at the Noise, as also some that were not far off, our Men were
forced to retire, leaving two dead; the four brought a Prisoner with them, who
informed our Commander of what he desired. This Action incensed the King and
Coje Zofar, so that they renewed the fury of their Batteries, and did much
harm. The Renegado Frenchman was struck dead by a chance Dart, and the Gunner
who succeeded him being Ignorant, did more harm to his own Party, than to us,
which was some Revenge. All the Neighborhood resounded with the Noise of the
Cannon and Cries of dying Men, when a Bullet of ours falling in the Kings Tent,
sprinkled him with the Blood of one of his Favorites who was near him, and
beaten to pieces. This so terrified the King, that he instantly fled, leaving
the Command of the Horse to Iuzarcan, a Valiant Ethiopian.

8. Coje Zofar pressed the Besieged, and there was great slaughter and
destruction on both sides; the more visible and dangerous in the Fort, by
reason of its little Compass, and the small number of Men. Mascarenas appeared
wherever there was danger, as hoping to gain no less Honor than Antony de
Silveyra had done there a few years before. He was no less Fortunate in
couragous Women; for those that were in the Fort encouraged the Men; assisted
and relieved them at the work. And when the Turks entered the Walls, one of them
hearing they were got into a House, run in with a Spear and fought till
Mascarenas came and put them all to the Sword.

9. Coje Zofar omitted nothing that could be devised to fill the Ditches, and
lay open the Fort. All industry was used on our side to repair the Breaches.
The prime Gentry did the Duties of private Soldiers and Masons, the Walls and
Bastions were ruined at Night, and repaired by Morning. Coje Zofar was
astonished to see all he destroyed restored. Coming on in a Rage with fresh
Men, a Cannon Ball took off his Head and right Hand, whereon he leaned it. Thus
he fulfilled his Mothers Prediction, who being at Otranto, still persuaded him
to be reconciled to the Church, and perceiving she prevailed not, superscribed
her Letters to him thus: To Coje Zofar my Son, at the Gates of Hell. His Son
Rumecan succeeded him as well in Wickedness, as the ardent desire of taking
that Fort. He took upon him his Father's Command, and inherited his Fortune.
Our Commander was obliged to send fresh Advice to the Governor at Goa, and the
Captains of the Neighboring places. A Priest was the Messenger, who run very
great danger, the Sea at that time being scarce Navigable. But then Portugal
had some Decij, and some Reguli: Now it has only the grief of wanting them.

CHAP. II.
Continues the Government of D. John de Castro, and Siege of Diu.

1. RUmecan now gives a General Assault, he and Iuzarcan attack the Bastions of
St. John and St. Thomas, where they found a most vigorous Resistance, and so
many were killed that the Defendants seemed rather a raging Plague, than Men.
Yet at length, Valor was forced to give way to Numbers, and the Enemy mounted
St. Thomas's Bastion: But Despair administering Fury rather than Valor, the few
Portugueses rush upon the multitude of Enemies, and making a wonderful
slaughter, throw headlong from the Wall such as had escaped the Sword, so that
the Dead lay in heaps.

2. Rumecan thinking Mahomets displeasure was the cause of this Misfortune,
spent this Night in Prayers and Processions. In the Morning, thinking he had
attoned, he renewed the Assault: After mounting the two Bastions he was forced
to retire, having lost almost Two thousand Men, and among them the Ethiopian
Iuzarcan, General of the Horse: An Uncle of his of the same Name succeeded him.
In this Action seven Portugueses were lost. Several other Assaults were given
with like Success. In one of these the Fire was so close and furious, that
several who were clad in Cotton, which soon took flame, ran and dipped themselves
in the Water, and so returned to their Posts. Those who wore Skins escaped
better. Our Commander taking notice of this, caused some gilt Leather,
wherewith his Rooms were hung, to be made into Coats for the Soldiers. Another
time D. John and D. Peter de Almeyda, with One hundred Men, sallied to destroy
a Mount raised by the Enemy to overlook the Fort, and effected it, killing
Three hundred Moors. Martin Botello another time went out with Ten Men, to take
some Body to give Intelligence; and falling upon Eighteen put them to flight
all, except a bold Nubij, who standing all the Eleven, wrestled with Botello;
and he finding it hard to overcome him whilst he could touch the ground with
his Feet, like another Hercules with Anseus, ran with him in his Arms to the
Fort.

3. The Attacks were still renewed, the Defendants spent with Labor, and above
all with Hunger, feeding even upon nauseous Vermin. A Crow taken upon the dead
Bodies was a D^nty for the Sick and sold for five Crowns, the Ammunition was
almost spent, and now the Enemy gives a hot Assault with fresh Men, Ten
thousand having newly joined them. They entered St. John's Bastion, and retired.
Scarce had they left it, when it blew up, and in it 73 of our Men, ten whereof
came down alive. James de Sotomayer fell into the Fort with a Spear in his
hand; a Soldier in the same manner fell among the Enemies, and was killed by
them. It was no Fable, that Armed Men were seen in the Air this bout. Our
Captain Mascarenas foreseeing the danger, had ordered them to quit the Bastion;
but one Reynoso protested, he would accuse them of Cowardice, if they did. The
one Commanded prudently, the other Advised courageously; yet was guilty of
Disobedience.

4. Thirteen thousand of the Enemy attack the Breach they had made; only five
Soldiers withstood them till Mascarenas came with fifteen more. The Women
assisted the Men, and ran even to brave Death. The Priest, who was returned
from carrying the Advice to the Neighboring places, appeared encouraging all
with a Crucifix lifted on high. The Actions done here were incredible; but
Night coming on the Enemy retired, having lost Three hundred Men. Mascarenas
spent all the Night in repairing the Damages received.

5. The Enemy daily renewed their Attacks with the same success, and held out
by means of their vast Numbers. Rumecan fell again to Mining, and pierced the
very Rocks that stood in his way; but met not with such success as he had done
the time before; for D. John perceiving his Work, countermined it, and it flew
all back upon the Besiegers, killing many of them. D. Alvaro, the Governors
Son, sent with Supplies, seemed to sail in opposition to the Seas and Winds,
through Storms almost incredible: Yet they all arrived at Bacaim, and Antony
Moniz Barreto, with 8 Gentlemen, got first into Diu, who though so few, by
their Bravery were no small comfort to the besieged. One of these, called
Michael Darnide, a Man of prodigious Strength, Barreto refusing to take him
into his Boat, leaped into the Water with his Musket in his Mouth and swam
after him, so he was obliged to take him up.

6. Next came Luis de Melo and Mendoca with nine Men; then D. George and D.
Duarte de Meneses with seventeen; after them D. Antony de Ataide, and Francis
Guillerme, with fifty each; and lastly, Ruy Freyre, Factor of Chaul, with
Twenty four. All together fell upon the Enemy, then possessed of some of our
Works, and among them the Bastion Santiago. The Dispute was hot; yet the Enemy
set up their Colors on the Walls. Antony Moniz Barreto made good his Post with
only two Soldiers, and was going to quench his Flames in the Water; but one of
the two, who was in the same condition, detained him, and both did things
worthy admiration. Antony Correa sallied out with Twenty Men to discover the
Enemy, and saw Twelve Moors sitting about a Fire; he exhorted his Men to fall
upon them, but they seeing him go on, fled; however he went on thinking to take
one that might give Intelligence: He fell on and behaved himself bravely; yet
he was taken and carried to Rumecan, who Examined him about the posture the
Fort was in, which being then very miserable, he represented so powerful, as
drove him into despair, and moved him to cause the unfortunate Prisoner to be
dragged through the Streets, and his Head cut off, which was set upon a Pole
next day in sight of the Fort.

7. The Enemy had now lost Five thousand Men; the Besieged Two hundred, and had
not so many more left, and not above half them able to do Duty, when D. Alvaro
arrives with the Supplies, which consisted of Four hundred Men, and a
sufficient quantity of Ammunition, having by the way taken a Ship of Cambaya
richly laden. The Joy of this Relief was soon allayed; for the Soldiers that
came with D. Alvaro, fearing the Mines, proposed to meet the Enemy in open
Field: But the Governor prudently refusing, they broke out into open Mutiny in
contempt of all Military Discipline, scarce known, or at least not respected by
the Portugues Nation. D. John seeing himself in danger of perishing in the Fort
by his own Men, chose rather to dye in the Field among the Enemies. He sallied
with almost Five hundred Men in three Bodies. At one heat they gained the
Enemies advanced Post, forcing them to retire to their Works. Those who
insolently forced their Commander to this Extravagancy, stood heartless at the
Foot of the Trenches, seeing others mount who had said less. D. John seeing
them in this posture, cried out, Whether it was thus they had promised to
fight? Where was now that Boldness that obliged him to come into the Field?
Where the Threats, that they would fight the Enemy without him? Behold your
Commander you accused of Cowardice, calls you to the danger: And who is there
follows me of those that would have led me hither? Within the Walls you were
fierce, and now in the Field timorous. Your Courage suits with your Tongues;
for those who said much, always acted little. They ashamed to be thus justly
upbraided, took Heart and mounted: The whole Army came down upon them, and the
Portugueses having done wonders, were forced to retire in disorder. This was
the time the Enemy had possessed himself of the Fort, had not Mascarenas with
his Prudence and Valor prevented Mojatecan, who with Five thousand attempted
to enter, and was valiantly opposed by Luis de Sousa in St. Thomas's Bulwark.
Threescore Men were lost in this Action: D. Alvaro de Castro was mortally
Wounded in the Head. This was the fruit of that insolent Disobedience.

8. The Moors had taken the Cannon of the Bastion Santiago, when Vasco de Cuna
and Luis de Almeyda brought a fresh Relief. The latter immediately went out
with Payo Rodriguez and Peter Alfonso in three Caravels, and as soon returned
with two great Ships of Meca and some other Vessels, whose Loading was worth
Fifty thousand Ducats. At the Yard-Arms hung many Moors, whose Heads were then
cut off, as was the Captains, who was a Janizary and offered Three thousand
Ducats for his Ransom.

CHAP. III.
Continues the Siege of Diu, the Governor D. John de Castro comes in Person to
its Relief.

1. NOw begins the Month of November, and the Siege had lasted eight Months,
when the Governor D. John de Castro covers the Sea with a great Fleet of all
sorts of Vessels for the Relief of Diu. All Goa admired the Constancy wherewith
he received the News of the Death of his Son D. Fernando; for though he highly
resented it he dissembled his Grief, and dressing himself gayer than ordinary,
went in Procession, to give God Thanks, That Diu was still in the possession of
the Portugueses; and then went to a public Feast, which is an Imitation of a
Fight, wherein they use Canes instead of Lances.

2. The Fleet consisted of above Ninety Sail, besides three of the Ships that
then came from Portugal; and several Gentlemen that came in them, went in other
Vessels.

3. The Governor being come to Bacaim, waited the coming up of the Vessels
that were scattered, and the mean while sent D. Emanuel de Lima to scour the
Coast. On the Coast of Damam he took several Ships, and cutting the Moors that
were in them in pieces, threw them into the Mouths of the Rivers, that the Tide
carrying them up, they might strike a Terror in all that Coast. Entering the
River of Suratt, after a vigorous Resistance made, he destroyed all that
belonged to the Town called, Of the Ethiopians. The same was done at the City
Ansote, not far distant, without sparing Beauty, the finest Women of the
Bramens and Baneans being slaughtered. So in other Neighboring Towns; and then
D. Emanuel withdrew, leaving an Universal Terror all along that Shore.

4. The Fleet appearing in the Sea of Diu, the Enemy stood amazed, though they
had just then received a supply of Five thousand fresh Men sent by the King.
The Governor went privately into the Fort, and afterward Landed his Men. He
proposed in Council, Whether it was fit presently to march out and fight the
Enemy? The Question was debated, till the Experienced Garcia de Sa put an end
to it, saying, They ^ught to fight. They marched in this order: D. John
Mascarenas, Commander of the Fort, led the Van, consisting of Five hundred Men:
D. Alvaro led as many: Don Emanuel de Lima, the like number. The Governor led
the rest, which were One thousand, and a Body of Indians. Among the Men were
some Portugues Women in men's Clothes, to assist the Wounded. In the Fort was
left the Lieutenant with Three hundred Men. That Night they fixed their Arms,
and next Morning prepared their Souls. The Governor appointed Rewards for
those who first mounted the Enemies Works.

5. At Break of Day, on the 11th of November, this small Army marched out to
attack the numerous Forces of the Enemies, who were well entrenched and
provided with Cannon. Our Men gave the Onset with much Bravery, and some fell.
Two Gentlemen, who had Challenged each other, now agreed he should be owned as
Victorious over the other, who first mounted the Enemies Works; both honorably
strove for this Glory, and both died gloriously in the Attempt. At length our
Men mounted the Works; such was each man's eagerness to be the first, that it
could not be known who really was so. Payva having lost a Leg, fought on his
Knees till he was killed. The Tanadar cut down a Turk, and stooping to make an
end of him, was slain by another Turk. Francis de Azevedo was killed, after
having made a great slaughter.

6. The brave Mascarenas and D. Alvaro de Castro, having taken a Bulwark, make
themselves room in the Field. The Governor comes up and enflames the fight. He
orders his Ensign to fix the Colors on the Enemies Works, and is immediately
obeyed by him. Twice was the Ensign thrown down, and twice he remounted. Our
Men encouraged by the Governor, press forward, and the Enemy gives way. The
Portugueses enter their Works pell-mell with them, and Rumecan comes on with
the whole Body of his Army; but after a hot dispute retires, leaving his
Enemies Masters of his Works.

7. Rumecan joins Iuzarcan, who on the other side was worsted by Mascarenas.
The Governor marches out of the Works to meet them, giving the Van to his Son
D. Alvaro. The Portugueses were much distressed, when F. Antony del Cazal
appeared before them with a Crucifix on the Point of a Lance, encouraging them
with godly Words. They take Courage, and covering the Field with dead and
wounded Men, put Rumecan to flight; but he rallying, forced the Portugueses to
retire in great disorder. The Governor exposing himself to admiration, renewed
the Fight, and restored good Order: At this time a Stone broke a^ Arm of the
Crucifix, and the Priest calling upon the Men to revenge that Sacrilege, they
fell on with such fury, that having done incredible Execution, they drove the
Enemy to the City, who still gave way, facing us. The first that entered the
City with them was D. John, then D. Alvaro, and D. Emanuel de Lima and the
Governor, all several ways, making the Streets and Houses run with Blood. The
Women escaped not the fate of the Men, and Children were slain at their Mothers
Breasts, one stroke taking away two Lives. The first part of the Booty was
Precious Stones, Pearls, Gold and Silver; other things, though of value, were
slighted as cumbersom.

8. Rumecan* and his General Officers, rally their Men, and appear again in the
Field with Eight thousand. The Governor and his Son, and D. John Mascarenas
encompass them, the Fight was bloody; in the heat of it Gabriel Teyxeyra
killing the Bearer, took the Standard of Cambaya and dragged it about the
Field, proclaiming Victory. George Nunez, from among the Dead, brought out
Rumecans Head, and presented it to the Governor. Others took Iuzarcan, who was
Wounded. Our Men were left absolute Masters of the Field. Of the Portugueses
One hundred were killed, others say only Thirty four; of the Enemy Five
thousand, and among them Azedecan, Lucan and other Men of Note. Free Plunder
was allowed, some were enriched; many got much, and all were satisfied. There
were taken many Colors, forty Pieces of Cannon of an extraordinary bigness,
which with the lesser made up Two hundred, and a vast quantity of Ammunition.

9. Many particularly signalized themselves in this Action. The Governor
played the part of a Soldier, as well as a General. D. John Mascarenas, after
a Siege of eight Months, did more (with respect to such Merits) than all. D.
Alvaro de Castro, of whom it is enough to say, He did like his Father. The
Ensign Barbado, who being several times thrown down, as often mounted the
Works. F. Antony, who with the image of Life, banished the fear of Death. And
many more, as well of those who were killed, as they that survived. The Enemy
confessed, that one day during the Siege they saw over the Church of the Fort,
a beautiful Woman clothed in White, from whom proceeded such Rays that blinded
them; and this Day, in the Field, some Men with Lances, who did them the
greatest harm. The King in a Rage for this Loss, caused Twenty eight
Portugueses he had in Custody, to be torn to pieces in his presence.

10. Whilst the Governor was employed in 1547.
Repairing the damage received, D. Emanuel de Lima by his Order scowred the
Coast of Cambaya with thirty Ships, extirpating all the Towns on that shore.
The City Goga, one of the Chief of that Kingdom, was taken without any
resistance, the Inhabitants flying to the Mountains. It was plundered and
burnt; then pursuing the Inhabitants, they were found at Night about a League
off asleep, and all put to the Sword. All the Cattle in the Fields were either
killed or Ham-strung. The City Gandar had the very same fate. The same was done
in several other Towns, and with many Ships along the Coast of Baroche.

11. Great was the Joy at Goa, for the News of what had happened at Diu, carried
thither by James Rodriguez de Azevedo, by whom the Governor desired the City
to lend him Twenty thousand Pardao's for the use of the Army, sending a Lock of
his Whiskers in pawn for the Money. The City returned the Pawn with Respect, and
sent him more Money than he demanded; and the Women their Pendants, Necklaces,
Bracelets, and others Jewels. The Governor punctually restored all, as it was
sent; being the day before supplied by a rich Ship of Cambaya, taken by Antony
Moniz Barreto on the Coast of Mangalor.

12. The Fort being Repaired, and put into a better condition than it was
before the Siege, and Five hundred Men into it, and D. George de Meneses with
six Ships upon the Coast, and the City better inhabited through the good Usage
of the Governor to the Moors, he sailed for Goa, and arrived there on the 11th
of April. He was received with loud Acclamations, and a splendid Triumph
prepared by the City, in imitation of those of Rome. The City Gates and Streets
were hung with Silk, the Windows thronged with fine Women; all places resounded
with Music and noise of Cannon, and the Sea was covered with Vessels richly
adorned. The Governor entered under a rich Canopy, where taking off his Cap,
they put on his Head a Crown of Laurel, and a Branch of it in his hand. Before
him went the Priest with the Crucifix, as he carried it in the Fight, and next
to him the Royal Standard. Then Iuzarcan, his Eyes fixed on the Ground, perhaps
that he might not see his Prince's Colors dragged and ours flying, and among
them Six hundred Prisoners in Chains. In the Front the Cannon, and all other
sorts of Arms in Carts, very delightful to behold. The Governor walked upon
Leaves of Gold and Silver, and rich Silks. The Ladies from the Windows
sprinkled him with sweet Water, and threw Flowers on him. Our Queen Catherine
hearing the Relation of his Victory and Triumph, said, D. John had Overcome
like a Christian, and Triumphed like a Heathen.

CHAP. IV.
Continues the Government of D. John de Castro, and Reign of King JOHN the
Third.

1. SCarce was the Triumph over, when the Governor sent James de Almeyda
Freyre with One hundred and twenty Horse, Eight hundred Foot, and a Thousand
Indians, to drive out of the Lands of Salsete and Bardes, some Troops sent to
Hidalcan to possess themselves of them; because the Conditions upon which he
delivered them were not performed. The Enemy appeared at Cowlij to the number
of Four thousand, who fled at the News of our approach. So the Lands were
recovered without drawing Sword. Hidalcan sent the same Troops again, with Nine
thousand more, and a Company of Renegado Portugueses, Commanded by Gonzalo Vaz
Coutino, who flying the punishment of his Crimes, defended himself by
committing greater. James de Almeyda marched again with the same Force as
before; but being too weak, was forced to quit what before he had regained. The
Governor marched in Person with Three thousand Men in five Batalions. Francis
de Melo joined them with about Fifteen hundred. The Enemy hearing of it, though
so numerous, retired to the Fort of Ponda. Our Army followed, and D. Alvaro de
Castro, who led the Van, took a Ford defended by Two thousand Musketeers. The
other twelve or thirteen Thousand were drawn up in good Order about the Fort;
but fled, after receiving our first Fire, leaving the Fort so clear, it
appeared they had no design to maintain it.

2. The Victor never wants Friends. Cidoca, King of Canara, sent to
Congratulate D. John de Castro upon this Victory. He proposed a New League with
Portugal; which was concluded upon Honorable Terms, as always happen to those
who are sent to. This Kingdom of Charnataca, corruptly Canara, had no Sovereign
Prince till the Year of Grace 1200. It began then in Boca a Shepherd, who
styled himself Rao, that is, Emperor, a Title that contiued in all his
Successors. This King, as a Memorial of the Defeat given to the King of Delij,
built the famous City Visajanagar, corruptly also called Bisnagar. The Crown
continued in his Line till usurped by Narsinga, from whom this Kingdom took
that Name, as also that of Bisnagar, from the City. Afterward King Melique
sent also to ratify and confirm the Peace with us, rather through Hatred to
him was defeated, than Love to the Conquerours.

3. D. George de Meneses, who was left in the Sea of Cambaya with six Ships,
was informed that Madremaluco, Son-in-Law to Coje Zofar and Lord of Baroche,
was gone from thence with all the Garrison. Baroche is a City seated in the
highest part of those Plains, encompassed with a strong Wall, very populous and
well built. Meneses marched by Night, and at Break of Day had entered the
Houses, killing many asleep, and the others as they awaked. Such as escaped
with the Fright, they knew not whither they ran, leaving Wives and Children
behind only to save their own Lives. The City could not be maintained, and
therefore was plundered and burnt, and the Cannon that could not be carried
Aboard, were burst. To D. George's Surname was added that of Baroche.

4. The Governor was informed, the King of Cambaya would come upon Diu with a
greater Power than before, and with all diligence prepared to relieve it. The
City of Goa advanced Money for this Enterprise, and the Women again sent him
their Jewels by their little Daughters, complaining he had not made use of them
the last time, and desiring he would now: But he sent them back with Presents.
The Fleet consisted of 160 Sail.

5. They sailed to Bacaim, and thence to Suratt, where D. Alvaro, who set out
eight days before, had taken a Work, killed some Moors and got Cannon. Next,
they entered the Port of Baroche, whence they discovered the King of Cambaya
covering the Plain with 150000 Men, and 80 Cannon in the Front; the Army made a
Semicircle and covered a League of Ground. D. John boldly leaped ashore, not
only to show he feared him not, but with design to fight him. The most
Experienced Officers dissuaded him, representing it was a rashness for 3000 to
attack 150000; that it was enough that he had Landed, and drawn off with as
much leisure, as if Victorious. He was forced against his Will, to submit to
the Advice of his Elders. He went on to Diu, and giving the Command of that
Fort to Luis Falcam, because D. John Mascarenas was returning to Portugal, he
run like an inundation along the Coast of Por and Mongalor. The beautiful and
strong Cities of Pate and Patane were abandoned by the Inhabitants, and by us
destroyed, near Two hundred Vessels burnt in their Ports, and a rich Booty
taken. The same happened to Dabul, but with some opposition. This was done in
revenge for Hidalcan's ravaging the Lands of Salsete and Bardes.

6. Calabatecan, his General, had lately possessed those Lands with Twenty
thousand Men. The Governor went to meet them with Fifteen hundred Horse and
Four thousand Foot; but the Enemy scarce heard them, when they fled to the
Mountains of Cowlij, leaving their Tents and Baggage for haste. Our Army
rested, and at Break of Day marched to give a good Morrow to Calabatecan, who
slept not, but came down with Two thousand Horse to maintain the Ford. But
Almeyda passing with a few Horse, struck him down with his Lance; yet he rising
nimbly had killed our Captain with his Cimiter, had not his Page again cast him
down with a stroke of a Lance. He again rose, and was again beat down by
Almeyda, and cut to pieces. His Arms, Horse and Furniture were of such value,
that the share of George Madera, one of those that killed him (being the
Cimiter, Dagger, Chain and Rings) were worth Eight thousand Crowns. The Moors
and Christians fell to it desperately; but the former knowing their General was
killed, soon fled, losing almost Three thousand Men.

7. Soon after the Governor marched to the Coast, where he left neither Town,
Wood, nor Flock or Herd of Cattle that could be seen, but what he destroyed
with Fire and Sword. He was so pleased with this Success, that he entered Goa in
manner of Triumph, giving the best share of it to his Son D. Alvaro. These were
rather demonstrations of Joy, than Triumphs; if otherwise, the Triumphs were
too many.

8. Sometime before F. Antony del Padron (the first Commissary of St. Francis
in India) with some Companions had entered into the Island Ceylon, and Preaching
had wrought no small effect along the Coast. F. Pascalis was so well received
by the King Iavira Pandar of Candea, that desiring to become a Christian, he
was only deterred for fear of his Subjects rebelling, and therefore desired
assistance of the Governor in case of any Commotion. Antony Moniz Barreto was
sent to this effect. Mean while the King of Cota persuades Iavira, That he
should no sooner be a Christian, but the Portugueses would deprive him of his
Kingdom. The King giving Credit to this wicked Device, resolved to kill all the
Portugueses sent to his assistance. But the better to execute it, feigned
himself still of the same Mind. Barreto (it is not known how) had Intelligence
of the Design, and finding more danger in Returning to the Ships, than going on
to Ceitavaca, where that King was our Friend, he caused those One hundred and
twenty Men he had Landed to burn all they had, except some little Provision, to
let them know they were to save nothing, but their Lives. Three days they
marched, fighting with Eight thousand Men so fortunately, that they arrived at
Ceitavaca without losing one Man: To the great Honor of their Captain.

9. Our irreconcilable Enemy, the King of Achem, about this time sent against
Malaca a Fleet of sixty Sail, and in it Five thousand Land-men; among which
were Five hundred Orobalones, commonly called, Of the Gold Bracelets; because
they wear them, and are very brave; but his best Regiment was of Turks and
Janissaries. This Body was Commanded by a Valiant Moor, who had the style of Dr.
King of Pedir. He Landed by Night at Malaca, and found nothing but some Geese,
which he took to show his Prince, as a Testimony of his Landing: But those Fowl
alarming the City (as formerly the Capitol,) caused all to be in readiness,
which was but little, the Town being then very scarce of Men.

10. However, the Enemy was forced to retire and imbark, having burnt two Ships
of ours that were ready to sail. Without they took seven Fishermen, and cutting
off their Noses Ears, and Feet, sent them to the Commander Simon de Melo, with
a Challenge writ with their Blood. The Challenge was made a Jest of, because
there was no Force there to Answer it. But the Great St. Francis Xaverius, who
was zealous for the King's Honor, as well as the Service of God, being there
then, he disapproved the Jest, and advised to meet the Enemy at any rate. The
Governor and others excused themselves, urging there were in the Port but
eight small Vessels, which, as being rotten and unfit for service, lay aground.
This was true, but the Cause of it was the Neglect and Avarice of the
Government.

11. The Great Xaverius took so much pains, that he prevailed with some
Merchants to fit out those Vessels, prophetically promising two Galliots would
come to their Aid. The time prefixed was near expired, when they appeared
sailing for Patane, and came into Malaca, though they had not designed it. The
Saint went aboard, found they were Commanded by James Suarez de Melo, called
the Gallego, and his Son Baltasar; he persuaded them to have a part in that
Action. These Ten poor Vessels being fitted and manned with Two hundred and
thirty Men, sailed to find out the Enemy under the Command of D. Francis Deca.

12. Being about to return Home, after two Months spent in search of the Enemy,
they found him in the River Parles, and Engaged upon a Sunday Morning. The
Fight was desperate; our Men behaved themselves with incredible Bravery, and
had a most complete Victory, killing Four thousand of the Enemy, sinking
several of their Ships, and taking most of the rest, whereof they carried away
but Twenty five, for want of Men, and burnt the rest. Three hundred Pieces of
Cannon were taken, and almost a Thousand Muskets. This Victory cost us but
Twenty five Men, some say, only four.

13. At the time of this Fight St. Francis was Preaching at Malaca, and
pausing, on a sudden related all the particulars of it to his Auditory, who
were in great Care for those Ships, having had no News of them in two Months.
His Prediction was verified a few days after by their Arrival.

14. In September arrived five Ships from Lisbon: Six set out, but the one was
Castaway at Angoxa, the Men saved and distributed amongst the other Ships.

CHAP. V.
The End of the Government of D. John de Castro.

1. THe Governor began this Year with the utter destruction of the Coast
subject to Hidalcan. He had the same Fleet as before, and began in January at
the River Charopa, two Leagues from Goa. He spared neither Living Creature,
Vegetable, nor the very Stones; but burnt and slaughtered all as far as the
City Dabul, which was reduced to Ashes, the Inhabitants being fled with the
best of their Goods. Hence he ran in the same manner to the River Cifardam,
which parts this Kingdom from that of Melique.

2. The King of Campar, who had taken the City Adem from the Turks, being
threatened by them, had recourse to the Portugueses, submitting himself to our
King; and to this effect D. Payo de Norona was sent to him with a Supply by the
Commander of Ormuz. D. Payo behaved not himself as he ought to have done on
this Occasion; for the King marching out to fight the Turks, by whom he was
beaten and slain, and having left him to guard the City, he (over-fearful of
Treachery) retired to his Ship, and returned not though he saw the Town
Assaulted. Some Turkish Galleys came and besieged the place, and D. Payo having
promised the Prince assistance left him, carrying away the few Portugueses he
had brought. Emanuel Pereyra resolved to stay there, and Francis Vieyra, who
was raising Men at Campar, made his way in. Both behaved themselves bravely;
but the Turks entering by Treachery, the Prince and one of his Brothers were
killed; the Portugueses with another retired to Campar, to expect the Succors
were to come from India.

3. D. Alvaro went with Three hundred Men in Thirty Vessels, loaded with
Ammunition. The Governor was overjoyed with the News of the submission of
Adem. But this Joy was soon allayed by a dangerous Fever, and a violent Mutiny
raised for want of Bread. Emanuel de Sousa and Sepulveda prudently appeased it;
and the Governor being recovered, caused his Hand to be cut off who Beat the
Drum to Call the People, and two others of the Chief, to be imprisoned.

4. D. John de Ataide, or Meneses, sent before by D. Alvaro to Adem, entering
boldly as believing it to be in the possession of D. Payo, lost two Vessels and
all the Men that were in them, who were either killed or made Slaves by the
Turks. Noronha met D. Alvaro at Canequirim, and earnestly labored to represent
how great the Danger was that obliged him to quit that place. But the dead
Kings Ambassador and his own Silence, when accused, were Witnesses against
him. He came afterward to Goa, and one of his Servants having taken a Hen from
a Slave, the Slave was complaining at the Door they would not restore it: When
a Portugues passing by told him; Leave off, for in that House they love Hens:
If it were Adem they would soon part with it, but not a Hen. Now in Portugues
by a Hen they signify a Coward, as well as the Fowl; and the word Adem
signifies a Duck, and was the name of the place he quitted. D. Alvaro finding
the posture of Affairs so changed, desisted from the Enterprise.

5. He had Orders, as soon as he concluded at Adem to go to Caxem, that first
being laid aside, he went to the second. The King of Caxem impatiently expected
his assistance against the Turks, who had taken his Castle of Xael. They
assaulted it, and those within (being only Thirty) offered to surrender upon
Honorable Terms. The Portugueses against the Inclination of the King and D.
Alvaro, refused to give any Conditions, and wrongfully detained them that came
to Treat. Pride and Injustice seldom go unpunished. The Portugueses attack the
Fort, and the Besieged turning their Submission into Rage, died courageously,
killing Five hundred Portugueses: The rest returned in Triumph to Goa, which
was no ways grateful to the Governor; and it is thought the Cowardice at Adem,
and Rashness at Xael, were two great Causes that carried him to his Grave, for
all he endeavored to dissemble it.

6. The News of the Victory at Diu being brought this Year to Lisbon, the King
resolved to send a greater Fleet than usual to India, and to Honor D. John
with unusual Favors; for they were the first that any Governor of India
received from his Prince, for good Service performed. The Fleet consisted of
seventeen Sail. D. John had the Government continued to him with the Title of
Viceroy, a Present of Money, and his Son D. Alvaro made Admiral of the Indian
Seas.

7. D. John was almost dead when these Bounties reached him, and he died of a
Disease that nowadays kills no man, though it did formerly; for even Diseases
dye. It was grief for the miserable estate India was reduced to, without any
means of redressing it; and the Actions of some Gentlemen, among them that of
his Son at Xael. He publicly begged pardon of many for Writing against them to
the King, that it may appear, even Great Spirits purchase Favor by mean
Whispers.

8. D. John find ing himself unable to manage the Government, appointed a
Council of select Persons to supply his place. And when he saw there was no
hopes of Life, he called them before him, and some others, and said, Though he
neither hoped nor desired to live, yet while he continued in that condition
something must be spent: That he had nothing, and desired that they would order
something out of the King's Revenue, that he might not dye for want. Then he
ordered a Mass Book to be brought, and laying his hand upon it, his Eyes lifted
up to Heaven, swore, That he had no way made use of the Kings, or any other
man's Money: That he had not drove any Trade, to increase his own Stock; and
desired that this Act of his might be Recorded. Soon after he gave up the Ghost
in the Arms of St. Francis Xaverius, on the 6th of June, in the 48th year of
his Age, having Governed two Years and eight Months. In his private Cabinet was
found a Bloody Discipline, and three Royals, which was all his Treasure.

9. He was buried in the Church of Saint Francis. In the Year 1576 his Body was
brought to Portugal, and laid in the Church of Bemfica of the Dominicans, on a
Hill not far from Lisbon. He is painted Crowned with Palm-branches, and
clothed in Red. He was a great Latinist, and well skilled in Mathematics.
Being desirous to know why the Red Sea appears of that Color, he made Men Dive
to the bottom and bring up what they found, whereof he writ a Treatise.

10. D. John Governed without suffering himself to be overruled by Pride, as
others did before and after him. He asked nothing for himself as a Superior;
what the Necessities of the Government required, he asked as an Equal. He
valued Men according to Merit, not Fancy. He so much loved every one should
look like what he was, that seeing a fine Suit of Clothes as he passed by a
Tailors, and being told it was his Sons, he cut it in pieces, saying, Bid that
young man provide Arms. He was the 14th in the number of Governors, and may be
accounted the 4th Viceroy, and first of the Name.

11. It is fit something should be said of this Great Man's descent and first
Actions. He was born the Year 1500, and was Son of Alvaro de Castro, Governor
of the Chancery, and of D. Leonor de Noronha, Daughter of D. John de Almeyda,
Count of Abrantes. In his Youth he served in Tangier, and returning home had a
Commendary, valued at 500 Ducats a year conferred on him, which was all a man
of his Birth and Merits was ever worth. In those days the Revenues were small,
and Men great; afterward the Revenues grew great, and the Men little. A Great
Soul then did much with a little; now they do nothing with a great deal. The
Year 1505, when D. Francis de Almeyda went first Vice Roy of India, his Salary
was but 15000 Royals a year. D. Constantine fifty years after, because he was
of the Blood Royal, had 40000. Now they have 100000. See who performed the
greatest Exploits in that Post.

12. He served afterward under the Emperor CHARLES the Fifth, in the
Expedition of Tuniz, and refused his part of a Present in Money that Prince made
to the Portugues Officers, saying, He served the King of Portugal, and of him
expected his Reward. After this he commanded a Fleet upon the Coast, and was
sent with another to the Relief of Ceuta, which joining with that of Spain; the
Spaniard hearing the Moors were drawing near, would draw off to Consult
concerning the manner of giving Battle; but D. John refused to stir. The Moors
not knowing the Fleets were parted, retired, and D. John remained with the
Honor of this Action.

13. When the Viceroy D. Garcia de Noronha went to India, D. John was Captain
of one of his Ships. Being ready to go aboard, the King sent him a Grant of the
Command of Ormuz, and 1000 Ducats a year ^ll he was in possession of it. The
last he ^ccepted, because he was poor; and refused ^e first, saying, He had not
yet deserved it. ^e went to Suez with D. Stephen de Gama, and up to Mount
Sinai, where his Son (...). Alvaro was Knighted. Being returned to ^ortugal, he
lived retired in a Country-^ouse he built near Cintra, giving himself
altogether to his Studies. Thence he was called by the Advice of the Infant D.
Luis, and sent Governor to India.

CHAP. VI.
The Government of Garcia de Sa, from the Year 1548 till the Year 1549, in the
Reign of King JOHN the Third.

1. THE first Patent of Succession being opened, named D. John Mascarenhas who
after the long Siege of Diu was gone for Lisbon, to seek the Reward which now
he missed in India. The second named D. George Tello, absent also. In the third
was Garcia de Sa, a Person well versed in the Affairs of India. At his first
Entrance upon the Government he gave sufficient Tokens of his Zeal for the
Public, and used some Liberality to gain the Hearts of the Soldiers, much
dejected with the lessening their Pay.

2. He received an Ambassador from Hidalcan to Treat of Peace, which was
concluded much to our Advantage. About the beginning of August came in eleven
of the seventeen Ships sent from Portugal this year: The other six were arrived
before. In this Fleet were the first Fathers of the Order of St. Dominick, that
went to build a Convent at Goa; they were six, and their Chief F. James
Bernardez a Spaniard, and a Learned and Pious Man.

3. The Governor sent Martin Correa de Silva to Diu; hastened the departure of
the Trading Ships, and sailed for Bacaim with some Men in thirty Vessels,
designing to gain some advantage over the King of Cambaya. He was disappointed;
but it was some satisfaction that he had Advice there, That the King of Tanor
being Converted, desired succor against such as should rebel upon his change
of Religion. Garcia de Sa, the Governors Nephew, was sent with Threescore Men
of Note, who had good success, as shall appear in its place.

4. At this time the Governor splendidly received the Ambassadors of Zamori,
Canara, Nizamaluco, Cotumaluco, and other Princes, who came to confirm the
former Peace. At last Sultan Mamud, King of Cambaya, made Overtures, tired with
ill success, and the Peace was established to our Credit.

5. The Spiritual Conquest was now very successful. Xaverius erected Churches,
and Converted many among the Patava's, and two Kings with a multitude of People
in Malaca. John Soarez, Vicar of the Fort of Chale, converted the King of
Tanor, with his Queen and Children. He desiring to see the Offices of the
Church solemnly performed at Goa, and be confirmed by the Bishop, came to the
City, was nobly received, and departed well satisfied, promising to make his
Subjects follow his Example. The Persuasions of Zamori wrought no effect upon
him now; but afterward it seems they prevailed, for we shall see him in Arms
against those who received him with such Honor.

6. One Bislald, an Ethiopian and Favorite of the King of Ormuz, rebelled
against him at Manojam. The King sent against him a good Body of his Men,
supported by 120 Portugueses, to which were afterward added 1000 of the first,
and 180 of the latter; but all to no purpose, for he still kept himself out of
reach. D. Emanuel de Lima finding he could not do any thing by open force,
resolved to reach him by Craft. He agreed with a Gallego, That he should
counterfeit he fled from him, and getting into Baslala's Camp, kill him the
first opportunity. The Gallego soon performed, and all was quiet.

7. This Year we shall see a bloody War between Pegu and Siam, for an Elephant.
The King of Siam had a white Elephant, a Beast coveted by all the Princes of
the East. The King of Pegu demanded it by way of Superiority; and he of Siam
refused it, not so much for the value of the Beast, as for the manner of
asking. He of Pegu entered his Dominions, and reduced him to desire a Peace upon
any Terms, so the Elephant were not comprehended. They agreed the King of Pegu
should have the Siam's Daughter and a Noble Woman every year, as an
acknowledgment: But the latter not performing, the other returned with 1500000
Men, 4000 Elephants, and an incredible Train; with him came the Kings that
depended on him, and James Soarez de Melo with 180 Portugueses. Above two
Thousand Workmen went before, who every Night set up a stately Wooden Palace,
richly painted and adorned with Gold. He made a prodigious Bridge of Boats over
the rapid River Menam, a League over, to pass his Army. In his Way was a narrow
Pass, where the Siamite had raised a strong Wall, guarded by 25000 Men. James
Soarez was sent to gain it with 30000, which he performed with some loss to
himself, but utter destruction of the Enemy. At length he sat down with his
wonderful Army before the City Odia, the Court or the King of Siam, who was
within with 60000 Men, and 4000 Cannon, some of a prodigious magnitude. Odia is
eight Leagues in compass, about it a strong Wall, and round that a wide and
deep Water.

8. The Battery began. In the Town were 50 Portugueses, Commanded by James
Pereyra, who behaved themselves to admiration. The King of Pegu endeavored to
corrupt them with Bribes; but they rejected all his Offers. The King
astonished, despaired of gaining by the Sword, what could not be bought with
Gold, and removed to the City Camambee, where were the Siamites Treasures; the
Place strong, and defended by 20000 Men. After many Attempts this vast Power
was forced to march off without doing any thing.

9. Xemindoo rebelled against the King of Pegu, who sent James Soarez with Two
hundred Portugueses to suppress him. He followed him to the City Cevadi; and he
slipping by, got into Pegu, because the City sided with him. The Queen fled to
the Castle, where she was defended by twenty Portugueses, till the King came
and put the Rebels to flight. The Army entered the City, and put to the Sword
not only Men, Women and Children, but even the Beasts; nothing escaped, but
what was within the liberty of James Soarez his House, which the King had
ordered should be exempted; above Twelve thousand saved themselves therein. The
Plunder was unaccountable, James Soarez alone got above three Millions. At his
Intercession the King pardoned a Portugues, who had furnished Xemindoo with
Ammunition.

10. Though the King escaped the hands of Xemindoo, he could not the Villainy of
Ximi de Zatan, (Ximi is equivalent to a Duke, and he really was one of Satan's
creating) who murdered him in the delightful City Zatan. The Traitor was
immediately proclaimed King, and falling among the murdered Princes Men, killed
three of those that belonged to James Soarez, who fled to the City Ova, and
afterward at Pegu was reconciled to this New King, till Xemindoo, who fled
before, came on again with a powerful Army. Ximi commanded James Soarez, and
his Portugueses, to march with him against the Enemy; but before he came
thither, the punishment of his great Insolences reached him, as shall be seen
hereafter.

11. Zatan was taken and Beheaded by Xemindoo, who gave out it was for the
killing of Soarez, as if the murder of the King had not been a more justifiable
Motive. Thus the first Rebel possessed himself of the Crown, till Mandaragri,
the late Kings Brother-in-Law, claimed it in right of his Wife; and coming to a
Battle, gave him such a total Defeat, that Xemindoo fled to the Mountains,
where he married a poor Fellows Daughter. He discovered himself to her, and she
revealed it to her Father, at such time as great Rewards were proposed to such
as should discover him. The Father-in-Law delivered him up to the King, who cut
off his Head.

12. The King not thoroughly satisfied with the People of Pegu, built not far
from it another great and strong City. Then he marched with an Army of 1600000
Men, and overrun many Neighboring Kingdoms. But another Rebellion breaking
out at Pegu, the Queen was forced to fly to the Castle, chiefly relying upon 39
Portugueses, who defended her till the King came and vanquished the Rebels.
Then the King sent an Officer to bring those Men, who had defended the Queen,
to his presence. He brought him some Moors of Note; but the King knowing the
Portugueses were the Men, said in Anger, I sent you for Men, and you bring me
Cowards; Go, bring me Men. The Portugueses being brought, he bid them ask
whatever Reward they would, and they with the Surprise doubting, the King
loaded them with Riches, Praises and Honors.

13. Now were the Inhabitants of the City Chincheo, the second Portugues Colony
in China, in a flourishing condition, and seemed to have forgot the sad Fate of
Liampo, destroyed through their Wickedness and Avarice. Airs Coello de Sousa
came thither to be Judge of the Orphans, and Proveditor for the Dead; his
Intention being to rob the Living and Dead, his Countrymen and Strangers. He
committed many Villainies to lay hold of 12000 Ducats, belonging to an Armenian
Christian, who died there, and 8000 more of some Chinese Merchants, upon
pretense they belonged to the dead Man. These and other Insolences provoked
the Chinese to do, as they had done at Liampo; to wit, to raze the Town, and
destroy all the Inhabitants. Only Thirty escaped of Five hundred Portugueses
that lived there. These, and some others they gathered, went over to the Island
Lampazau; and afterward, in the Year 1557, obtained of the Chinese that of
Gaoxam, where they built the City now called Macao, as shall be seen in its
place.

14. Our Governor studying some Means to relieve the great Wants of the
Soldiers, was suddenly snatched away by Death, about the beginning of July. He
was much regretted for his Prudence, Affability and Integrity; for being
Seventy years of Age, and having born considerable Offices, he was forced to
give all he had to Match two Daughters, and yet the best part of their Portions
was their Beauty, and that He was their Father. He had a graceful Presence; a
comely Countenance, always Smiling, without lessening his Gravity: For it is not
necessary to be like a Statue, to appear like a God. He was of the first
Quality of his Country: His Beard very white and full, falling upon his Breast:
Governed a Year and a Month, and was the 15th in that Rank; the second of the
Name, and first of the Surname.

CHAP. VII.
The Government of George Cabral, from the Year 1549, till the Year 1550, in
the Reign of King JOHN the Third.

1. THE Patents of Succession being opened, there was found in the first 1549.
George Cabral, a Gentleman by Birth, and of known Worth, who not long before
was gone to take possession of the Command of Bacaim. He received the News with
small signs of Joy, an ill token for him that expected the Recompense of
carrying it: But he being a generous Man, did not lessen the Reward. It was not
want of desire to Govern that made him dissatisfied; but that he feared another
coming soon from Portugal to succeed him, he should lose the great Advantages
he might have made of the Command he was in, and which he was to hold four
Years. With him was his Wife D. Lucretia Fiallo, who had double Pretensions to
be vain, as a Woman, and as a Beauty, and had now a third, in the News of being
Wife to the Governor of India; so she laughed to see her Husband doubt,
whether he should receive what was offered.

2. Cabral revolved a thousand Thoughts with himself, not knowing whether to
admit or refuse the Government, and these Cares so disturbed him, that he could
not Rest at Night. His Wife finding him so dubious, and fearing to be
disappointed of the Pride of sitting, though never so short a time in the
Throne of India, took him one Night to task, and using all Arts of an ambitious
Woman's Tongue, and the Allurements of that place, prevailed with him to lay
aside all Doubt, and accept of the Honor offered, which he had seemed averse
to, and which she so ardently desired.

3. He admired her efficacy in Persuading, no less powerful in the beauty of
her Language, than that of her Person. Though he always thought her a Woman of
Sense; (for Beauty and Folly are not always inseparable) yet he could not but
conclude, the desire of Greatness is a great matter of Eloquence. Who could
resist a resolute Beauty? Had it been to draw on Mankind another Universal sin,
he must have been an Adam to that Eve; much more to accept of a Command for
which he was sufficiently qualified. In fine, The New Governor sailed to Goa,
in this only Governed by his Wife; for India might vie with her in the desire
of seeing him possess that Throne many years: For Cabral deserved to have been
long continued in that Post, and India was obliged to his Wife for the short
time he held it. Women are not always hurtful: But in those days there were
some Beautiful and Gay without being quite Mad.

4. At our Governors coming from Cochin, there was not a right Understanding
between that King and him, because he ordered Francis de Silva to attemp to
Plunder the Pagod of Palurte, which was disappointed, and he lost three
Portugueses; and the Loss had been greater, but that the King was then absent.
This was the Cause that three Ships set out for Portugal late, and ill Laden.
Now came the News, That above 100 Sail were fitting out at Suez, to transport
Turks into India. The Governor applied himself to provide for such a Storm, he
acquainted the Chief of our Towns. Goa offered much, Chaul 30 Sail, Bazaim 20.
Whilst these Preparations were making, F. Antony Criminal, an Italian Jesuit,
preaching at Cape Comori, received the Crown of Martyrdom at the hands of a
multitude of the King of Bisnagar's Subjects, who assaulted him as he Preached.
He was run through with three Lances, and then his Head cut off. King John was
so mightily delighted with this Exploit, that he immediately sent Advice to
Baltasar de Faria his Ambassador at Rome, to communicate it to the Pope, who
received it with due applause.

CHAP. VIII.
Continues the Government of George Cabral.

1. ZAmori, and the King of Pimienta, were joined in a League against him of
Cochin, which threatened that State with dangerous consequences. The Governor
set out to prevent them with a Fleet of 90 Sail; but returned to Goa without
doing any thing, because the Season was unfit. He only consulted with the King
of Cochin about the manner of carrying on the War against those Confederates,
since they could not be brought to a Peace.

2. The Weather being seasonable, the King of Pimienta took the Field at
Bardela with 10000 Nayres, the King of Cochin did the same with his Men, and 600
Portugueses, Commanded by the rash Francis de Sylva, Captain of that Fort. The
Armies being drawn up in sight, the King of Pimienta, at the Request of Sylva,
gave him a Meeting between them. Sylva pressed for an Accommodation, which the
King condescending to upon reasonable Terms, was broke off by our Captain; who
having more natural Strength than natural Reason, acted more like a Brute than
a Man. The Armies charged each other Courageously, and the King of Pimienta was
carried off Wounded, and died before he knew the event of the Battle. His Men
fled, and were pursued into their City with great slaughter; the Royal Palace
was fired, which among them is the hainousest Affront; whereupon they Rallied,
and fell upon the Victors with such Fury, that they obliged them to retire in
great disorder. Sylva discharged some few that stood by him, and rushing into
the thickest of the Enemies, was killed. Above fifty Portugueses were lost
here, which abundantly countervailed for our Victory.

3. Five thousand Nayres, all sworn to Revenge the death of their King, or dye,
entered the Country of Cochim, killing many, and forcing others to fly to the
Fort. The Commander of the Fort, Henry de Sousa, marced out, and finding them
engaged with the Indians, who fought desperately, killed Five hundred. Two
strange and contrary Accidents happened upon this occasion: One was, a Man that
lay dying arose, and taking a Lance did great Execution among the Enemies, and
perfectly recovered his health: The other, a Man in perfect health, who fell
down dead with the Fright.

4. All the Joy of this Success vanished at the sight of Zamori, who came
attended by the Princes of Malabar, with 140000 Men. He Encamped with 100000 at
Chembe, ordering those Princes (who were eighteen in number, and among them the
King of Tanor, lately so fond of us and our Religion) with the other 40000,
whereof 5000 had devoted themselves to pass over into the Island Bardela. Our
Governor, upon the first Advice, prepared to meet this Storm. He sent before
Emanuel de Sousa and Sepulveda with four Ships, and Orders, That having joined
those that were at Cochim, he should shut up those Princes in the Island till
he came, being resolved to follow at his Heels. Sepulveda did his part, and the
Governor his, for he sailed immediately; the Cities of Goa, Chaul, and Bacaim,
furnishing what they had offered for the Expedition against the Turks, which
came to nothing. The Fleet consisted of above 100 Sail, and almost 4000
Landmen. The first Execution was at Tiracole, where many Houses, Ships and
Goods were burnt. Coulete suffered the same Fate, after a vigorous Resistance,
which cost the Lives of many of them, and sixteen of ours. At Panane the same,
and we lost eight.

5. Our Governor Landed at Cochim, and found that King with Forty thousand
Men; he had himself Six thousand, Two thousand having joined him there. The
Island being beset, and Signal given to fall on, those within began to waive a
white Flag, for a Parley. It was concluded, those eighteen Princes should put
themselves into the Governors hands, upon promise of Life. He finding they
delayed, resolved to fight them the next day, but was hindered by a great Flood;
yet he concluded he might put his design in execution the day after. But what
security is there in human Felicity? Cabral was almost in possession of one of
the most glorious Actions that had been seen in India, when the sudden Arrival
of the Viceroy D. Alfonso de Noronha ravished this Honor from him, no^
suffering him to proceed, nor concluding himself what was so well begun. On the
contrary, he suffered all those Princes to escape with their whole Army.

6. St. Francis Xaverius seeing how many great Enterprises were disappointed
through the malice or Envy of the Governors, wrote a Letter to the King,
acquainting him therewith, and advising to punish such Miscarriages with
severity, whereby they might for the future be prevented. But Ministers serve
as they please; Saints advise well, and Princes Eyes are never opened.
Commonly, the want of due Punishment is the cause of public Calamities.

7. Whilst George Cabral was at Cochim, waiting to embarque in the Ships that
were bound to Portugal, one Night about the middle of February there was a
Report, That Eight thousand sworn Nayres would enter the City. Cabral run to
the Gates, with Emanuel de Sousa and Sepulveda, in order to march out and meet
them at Break of Day; but was hindered by the Council of the City. He stayed
with a competent Number of Men to guard the Town, and sent Sepulveda with
Fifteen hundred Portugueses and the Natives. They found those desperate Men in
a Neighboring Town, acting all that Rage and Malice could suggest. They
Charged them; the Fight was very desperate, fifty Portugueses were slain, and
above a Thousand of the Amouco's or devoted Nayres, the rest fled.

8. Let us see what was done during this time by the Captains, sent by the
Governor to several parts. The King of Cota had asked Succor against his
Brother Madune Pandar, King of Ceitavaca, who endeavored to expel him his
Kingdom; he offered in requital for the Relief, to pay a greater Tribute than
before. Caralea Pandar, Prince of Candea (not following the Example of his
Father, who was bent against the Religious Men, who made him a Christian)
desired to be Baptized, and fled with the Priests to a Fort, from whence he
sent to beg the Governor's assistance. Both these places being in the Island
Ceylon, he sent thither D. George de Castro with six hundred Men. Madune scarce
saw him, when he raised the Siege he had laid to Cota, where his Brother was.
The King of Cota and D. George followed him; and he so fortified the Passes,
they were forced in some places to fight their way through showers of Bullets,
Stones and Arrows, with some loss of Men, and no small slaughter of the Enemy.
Being come in sight of the City Madune met them, and there ensued a bloody
Battle desperately fought on both sides. At length Madune was obliged to ^y to
the Mountains, and leave his Brother in possession of that great City,
singularly adorned by a Pagod of wonderful magnificence. The Plunder was very
considerable. Madune implored his Brother's Mercy, who had little reason to
show him any; yet did, and left him possessed of his Kingdom.

9. D. George did not meet with the like success at Candea, whither he went
after this Victory. The Enemy came unexpectedly upon him with Forty thousand
Men in a narrow Pass, whence he could not escape, and killed Eight hundred of
his Men, half of them Portugueses. He got away with more grief for this Loss,
than honor by the late Victory. For it is certain, we are more sensibly
grieved at Misfortunes, than pleased with Success.

10. Bernardin de Sousa, at the Maluco's, continued the War against the King of
Gilolo, and drew off with a rich Booty, after destroying some Towns on the
Coast with Fire and Sword. At this time came Christopher de Sa to succeed him
in that Command.

11. George Cabral imbarqued well pleased with his good success against the
sworn nayres, and was well received in Portugal for his great Merit, contrary
to the Custom of this Kingdom. He was generally esteemed one of the best
Governors of India. He was the sixteenth of that number, and held it a year
and four Months. His Person was graceful, his Countenance pleasing, of a ruddy
Complexion, his Beard a dark Chestnut.

12. This Year was born at Goa (the Father and Mother were Canara's) a hairy
Monster like a Monky, with a round Head and only one Eye in the Forehead, over
it grew Horns, and on the sides Ears like those of a Kid. As the Midwife
received it into her Hands, it cried out with a loud Voice and stood upon its
Feet. The Father locked it up in a Hen-Coop: It got out, and seizing upon the
Mother, had like to tear off one of her Nipples. The Father catching it again,
poured scalding Water upon the Head and killed it, and could scarce cut off the
Head, it was so hard. He burnt it; and the thing being known he was punished
for killing it, and the Body was exposed to public view in the City.

CHAP. IX.
The Government of the Viceroy D. Alfonso de Noronha, from the Year 1550, till
1553, in the Reign of King JOHN the Third.

1. DOn Alfonso de Noronha was taken from the Government of Ceuta, to be sen^
to that of India, and more Favors conferred on him than on any of his
Predecessors; as if this Post of it self were not as great a Favor for him, as
for others. Thus we see Princes bestow the very same Places on some as Rewards,
which they give to others as a step to Merit: The fault is not in the Gift, but
in him that bestows it. But it seems, the King in part balanced this Favor by
assigning him a Council, by whom he must of necessity be Advised in India.

2. He had Orders to send back into Portugal all the New Christians, that is,
Converted Jews, who had gone from hence with their whole Families; and it were
better they had been banished both places. He was also to take cognizance of
those Ancient Christians, who disturbed such as were converted from Paganism.

3. Don Alfonso set out of Lisbon with four Ships; one had been sent before* to
give Advice why the rest stayed, and D. Alvaro de Gama (Son to the Great Vasco)
sailed so late, it was never expected he would get thither; yet he overtook the
others, the Seas being favorable to all that descend from his Father; for it
was never known any of them was Castaway. The Viceroy was received at Goa
with the usual demonstrations of Joy, proceeding rather from the hatred they
bear him that lays down the Sword, than love to him that takes it up.

4. He immediately sent Advice of his Arrival to all Parts, and dispatched
Commanders to several Forts, and for Sea. Luis Figueyra was sent to the Red Sea
with five Vessels, where they met the Turk Cafar with five Galliots. Figueyra
attacks Cafar's Galliot, and was slain, much admired by the Enemy for his
Valor. The four subordinate Captains stood looking on and saw him killed,
without coming to his Relief. One of them, Gaspar Nunez, ashamed of what he had
done, went away with all his Men into Ethiopia, and was never more heard of.
Soveral, another of them, met one of those Galliots, fought, and they parted
upon equal Terms. After he met the other two, and they all returned with
disgrace to Goa.

5. The Arabs of Catifa delivered up to the Turks the Fort of that City, which
highly offended the King of Ormuz. The Turks had also expelled his Kingdom the
King of Bacora, who yet kept the Field with Thirty thousand Men, in hopes to
recover his Kingdom with the assistance of the Portugueses. To this effect he
sent an Embassy to the Viceroy, offering leave to build a Fort in his Harbor,
and other Advantages to the Crown of Portugal. D. Antonio de Noronha, Nephew to
the Viceroy, was sent to assist these two Kings, with Twelve hundred Men in
nineteen Vessels. Being come to Ormuz, they marched with Three thousand of that
Kings Men, and set down before the Fort of Catifa. Four hundred Turks that were
in that Garrison behaved themselves bravely; but finding it in vain to resist,
fled by Night, and being discovered were pursued and routed. The Fort was
taken, and the Captain of Ormuz not daring to maintain it, it was thought fit
to be razed. A Mine was made, which taking fire before the time, and blowing
up, the Work buried 40 Portugueses.

6. After this Victory Noronha sailed to the Mouth of the River Euphrates, in
order to relieve the King of Bacora. Here a cunning Bassa persuaded him, he was
sent for to be delivered up to his Enemies; whereupon he returned Inglorious to
Ormuz, where being come he understood the Deceit, but it was too late.

7. The Viceroy had sent D. Garcia de Meneses to Command at Ternate, at the
Request of that King, who could not endure Jordan de Freytas, that sent him
Prisoner to Goa. The Affairs of Malaca hindered Meneses from going thither.
Bernardin de Sousa, who had scarce resigned that Post to Christopher de Sa,
returned, with Orders to continue there, in case the Spaniards encroached upon
those places. Sa refused to admit him, because the Spaniards were quiet, and
his Order conditional; but Sousa pressed to be restored, because he had not
made so much of that Command as he expected. At length Sa, to prevent Mischief,
submitted. Sousa immediately sets out with 180 Portugueses, and sails for
Gilolo, to destroy the Fort was raising there. The King of Ternate, and Prince
of Bacham, followed with 5000 Men.

8. The King of Gilolo courageously expected the coming of his Enemy in the the
Fort, with 1200 Men and many Pieces of Cannon. Baltasar Veloso led our Van; the
Prince of Gilolo breaking out of an Ambush with Four hundred Men, fell upon and
distressed him; but Veloso, though seventy years of Age, made such havoc among
the Enemies, they were forced to fly. Our Captain received some damage,
continues his Battery, and sits down to besiege the place. He cut off their
Water, which obliged them, after a Siege of three Months, to Capitulate, and
Peace was concluded upon these hard Terms, That the King should lose this Title
and be styled Governor, and pay Tribute. The Portugueses entered the Fort in
his presence, committing many barbarous Enormities, and laid it even with the
ground. It is no small Credit to those of Gilolo, that they held out four days
after all their Provision was spent. On our side Three hundred Men were killed,
eighteen of them Portugueses; there were more wounded. Ferdinand Macha^ saying,
He should be killed here, said the Office of the Dead for himself; and le^t it
might be thought Cowardice, went Dancing up to the Enemy; he died of his Wounds
soon after the Surrender. The King also died for Grief, and his Son
C^chilguzarate succeeded him. Bernardin de Sousa being jealous of the Fort of
Tidore, went over to it; and that King fearing greater damage, agreed it should
be demolished.

9. Sultan Halaudim, that King that Peter Mascarenas expelled Bantam, and D.
Stephen de Gama from Ujantana, resolved now to try his Fortune against Malaca.
He had a great Power at Sea, and was assisted by the Kings of Pera, Pam and
Marruaz, and the Queen of Iapara in the Island of Iava. About the beginning of
June the Fleet of these Confederates put to Sea, consisting of above Two
hundred Sail. The King of Ujantana had sent an Ambassador to D. Pedro de
Silva, Commander of Malaca, whose chief business was to discover what Force was
in Malaca. D. Pedro, on the other side, was privately informed by Laximena, the
Embassadour's Father, of the King's design, which was to surprise Malaca by
giving o^t, His Preparations were against Achem. He had like to compass his
Ends, for the time was very short to provide. The King entered the Port, and
burnt what Ships were in it, and at the same time possessed himself of the
Suburbs. Then he entrenched, planted his Cannon, and began to batter the Fort
furious and successfully, and at length reduced the Inhabitants to feed upon
such things as are loathsome.

10. D. Garcia de Meneses sailing for the Maluco's, put into Malaca with his
Caravel, where he had a hot Dispute with Lacxemena, the Kings Admiral, who had
betrayed his Masters Counsels to the Portugueses, and was then killed by them,
with his Son, and his Ship sunk. But D. Garcia did not long survive this
Honor; for attempting to gain a Gun that did much damage to the Town, he was
killed, and with him above thirty Portugueses, brought by D. Pedro de Silva to
rescue him. Mean while several Portugues Ships came into the Harbor from
diverse parts, the News of the danger Malaca was in had reached. The Enemy
endeavored to oppose them, and Gomes Barreto conducted them in with safety.

11. The Enemy resolved to Assault the City, and the Commander D. Pedro having
Notice of it, provided to receive them. Scarce did they begin to mount their
Ladders, when there fell on them a Storm of great pieces of Timbers, Stones and
Granado's, so that in an instant above Eight hundred of them lay dead under the
Wall. This obliged them to retire to their Works, and they resolved to starve
the City. Our Commander fearing the Consequence of this Resolution, was advised
by an unknown Soldier, (who before at the Assault promoted the throwing of
Beams) to send abroad some Ships, and give out, They were going to put those
King^ Countries to Fire and Sword. They believing it, left the Siege, which was
prosecuted by the Queen of Iapara, with the Men of Iava, till Giles Fernandez
de Carvallo coming unexpectedly with Two hundred Men, there ensued a bloody
Fight; and at length the Enemies were put to a shameful flight, having lost
above Two thousand Men, many Ships, and all their Cannon and Ammunition,
whereof was a great quantity, and it was of great consequence to the City. What
the Enemy could not execute by force when present, they did by perfidiousness
after their flight. They poisoned a Well, whereof our Men drinking, above Two
hundred died, to the great terror of all, till the Cause was known.

12. The Affairs of Ceylon were now in a very turbulent posture; for Madune,
contrary to the Agreement, distressed the King of Cota, who had recourse to
Gaspar de Azevedo, Commander of Columbo, and he (with the King's Men and 100
Portugueses) defeated the Enemy. But the King of Cota being killed by a
Musket Shot, he of Ceytavaca renewed his Pretensions. The success was not
answerable to his expectation; for the New Prince, assisted by the Portugueses,
gave him a total Rout. At the beginning of September the Viceroy prepared to
go in Person to remedy these Disorders. At the same time arrived from Portugal
five Ships, and soon after two more. One was forced back to Lisbon by ill
Weather. The Viceroy set out the beginning of October, with 3000 Men in 70
Sail.

13. The first thing he did after his Arrival at Ceylon, was to put upon the
Rack some Subjects of that King he went to succor, that they might discover
where their Princes Treasure was buried, as if he had been an Enemy, or had
sent for him to make him his Treasurer. In the second place, he searched the
Dead Man's Palace, and found 80000 Ducats. Thirdly, He demanded 200000 Ducats
for his Charges, which was immediately granted. And, Fourthly, he took the
Field with his Three thousand Portugueses, and Four thousand of the Kings Men.
The King of Ceytavaca met them with a like Number; but soon fled into the
Mountains, followed only by 100 Men. His City was plundered, and the Booty very
considerable. The Viceroy turned over the Earth, and dug up the Foundations of
Buildings, to discover hidden Treasures. One was found, consisting of many Gold
and Silver Idols of a large size, and other things. One half of right belonged
to the King we pretended to Relieve, according to Agreement; but the Wants of
India permitted no performance of Promises. Had the Indian broke his Word with
the Christian, he had been a Barbarian. I know not what a Christian is, that
breaks his with the Barbarian: Perhaps wiser Men know. It appeared we went in
search of hidden Treasures, not to Relieve distressed Kings; when this King
desiring Five hundred Portugueses might be left with him, to prevent his
Enemies making Head again, he was left without any, because there was no more
hopes of Treasure. But we shall soon see the King of Cota revenged by the King
of Portugal, that it may appear the Actions of Kings are Divine, when they are
their own.

14. Mean while Don Antony de Noronha scoured the Sea of Calicut, making great
havoc in it, and along the shore. The Viceroy returned to Cochin, bringing
with him a Kinsman of the King of Cota, who was become a Christian; went to
Portugal, where he was received with Honor, and sent back to India, and died
in the Faith. The Viceroy found the dispatch of the Homeward-bound Trading
Ships, was retarded by the Prince of Chembe, he resolved to punish him, and set
out with a Fleet that contained Four thousand Men. Thirty thousand were
gathered from Calicut to oppose him, and some endeavored to hinder the
Landing, but were soon put to flight.

15. Our Men landed and marched to the City; the Enemy met them, and there
followed a bloody Battle, in which we lost forty Men; but the Enemy was put to
flight, and the Viceroy satisfied with ravaging the Country, returned to
Cochim, and dispatched the Ships for Portugal. In them went an Ambassador from
Nautaquim, Prince of Tanixumaa, or Taquixima, one of the Islands of Iapan, and
a rich Present; he desired Five hundred Men to conquer the Island Lequio, and
in return offered to pay Tribute. The Ambassador was one James Gomez de
Almeyda, who was lost in the Unfortunate Ship in which Emanuel de Sousa and
Sepulveda was Castaway, with his Wife D. Leonor de Albuquerque and Sa, who
being put ashore at the Cape of Good Hope, endured incredible hardships, and at
length died miserably, giving occasion to sundry Relations that are spread
about the World, which being in part false, I will here give a brief Account of
the whole Matter.

16. They got ashore at the Cape of Good Hope, to the number of Five hundred
and thirty Souls; and at first marched in good Order, with Colors and a
Crucifix on high, designing for Mozambique. They began their march the 3d of
July, and about the end of it several were left behind Famished, and among them
a Natural Son of Emannel de Sousa. D. Leonor marched afoot; for those who had
carried her were no longer able to support themselves. At the end of three
Months and a half they came to the Cottages of Oinhaca, a little Prince on the
Banks of the River Del Espiritu Sancto: This good Old Man entertained them with
great kindness, offering to relieve them till some Portugues Ships came to the
Neighboring Shoars, whereof his People had always Notice. He also warned them,
That further on was the Little Prince Ofumo, who would do them all the harm he
could, if they proceeded on their Journey. Emanuel de Sousa following his
Destiny, went on; but seeing that of Five hundred and thirty Persons, he had
but One hundred and twenty left, and that his Wife D. Leonor could hardly go
farther, taking her turn with the Slaves in carrying her little Children, he
began to show some signs of Distraction, which was an incredible Grief to his
Wife, who doted on him. Being come to Ofumo's Country, forgetting the Warning
Oinhaca had given, he trusted him, and resolved there to wait for Portugues
Ships. Ofumo designed to rob him, but feared his Men's Arms. He persuaded him to
deliver them up, and he should have all Necessaries abundantly provided;
pretending his Subjects did not supply him for Fear. Notwithstanding all
Persuasions to the contrary, he delivered them, and had scarce done it when he
was robbed of all his Jewels, and only their Clothes left them. At this he run
quite Mad, and his Wife taking him by one hand and her son in the other, her
Slaves following, and some few Men, they went on till the Cafres fell upon and
stripped them. D. Leonor endeavored to defend her self to no purpose, and with
hazard of her Life, till her Husband persuaded her to choose the lesser Evil;
but she thought it less Ill to dye, than be seen Naked by any, but her Husband.
As soon as she was stripped, she made her Slaves stand about her, and sitting
down on the Sand, made a Hole, where she covered her self to the Waste: Then
looking upon the Pylot, Andrew Vaz, said, You see how God permits, as a
punishment of my sins, that my Husband, Children and I perish in this miserable
manner. If you get to Portugal, or India, give an account of it. The Pylot not
able to return an Answer for grief, went whatever way Chance guided him.
Emanuel de Sousa had run to the Wood, to gather some wild Fruit for his Wife
and Children, who were perishing with Hunger, and returning found one dead, and
her with the other scarce alive. He buried the dead Child, and returned for
more Fruit, but too late; for when he came they were both dead. After pausing a
while, he made a Hole and buried his Son, and then his Wife; after which he ran
into the thickest of the Wood without once looking back. Three of his Slaves
got to India, who gave this Relation, as others who reached Mocambique did, of
other Passages. Among these was Sebastian de Sa, who in this Misery experienced
two Notable things: One, That the Gravity even of a Portugues Gentleman (as he
was) must yield to Misfortunes; for he, to oblige the Cafres to give him some
Sustenance, played the Antic, or Buffoon. The other, That this sort of Life is
the surest in the World.

CHAP. X.
Continues the Government of the Viceroy, D. Alfonso de Noronha.

1. THE Great Turk offended at what we had done at Caxem, or Catifa, and
attempted at Bacora, studied Revenge; and to execute it set out Pirbec, an Old
Pyrat, with Sixteen thousand Men in strong Galleys and other Vessels. D. Alvaro
de Noronha, Commander of Ormuz, concluded this Storm threatened him. He sent
some to discover the Enemy, and among them Simon de Costa, who met Pirbec's Son
sent also before in a Galley to discover. Our Barque slipped under his very
Oars so swiftly, that two of the Men were left hanging at them; the Galley
pursues, but Simon scattering Money among his Men, may be said to have got off
with Golden Oars. The young Man raged that this Prize should escape him; but
was somewhat appeased when he met another Barque, in which was the Wife of John
de Lisboa, Commander of Mascate, and those of some other Portugueses that lived
there, with two Old Men, all sent away to Ormuz for fear of the Enemy. The
Women were secured, and the Men put to the Oar.

2. The Enemies Fleet came before Mascate, which held out almost a Month
against that great Power; but was forced to submit and capitulate. Pirbec broke
the Articles, putting the Captain and sixty Men to the Oar; some of them were
afterward ransomed. This done, Pirbec goes on to Ormuz* D. Alvaro de Noronha
had Nine hundred Men in that Fort, and in it was the King, his Wife, Children,
and the Chief of their Court, who had taken Sanctuary there. He laid up
Ammunition for a long Siege, and secured forty Sail that were in the Bay, among
them one of those that the year before went from Portugal. The Turk being come
to an Anchor, presently Landed and Encamped. He Entrenched, raised Batteries,
planted much Cannon, and played it furiously without intermission for a whole
Month. Finding he sustained much Loss, and labored in vain, he plundered the
City and went over to the Island Queixome, whither many considerable Men of
Ormuz had withdrawn themselves; here he got a great Booty, and retired.

3. Before Pirbec departed from Ormuz, he offered our Commander to ransom the
Prisoners taken at Mascate, and sent him as a Present the Wife of John de
Lisboa, the two Old Men, and the two Soldiers that hung to the Oars of his
Sons Galley. D. Alvaro received the two last, and sent back the others with
some Presents, and this Message; That the Present was in return for the Men he
received: That the Old Men he sent, because they had not rather those to lose
their Lives, than Liberty; and the Woman (though Innocent) to punish her
Husbands guilt, by seeing her return into slavery. This Proceeding was no ways
justifiable; and Pirbec to show he did not again receive what he had once
given, ordered them to be left upon the Shore.

4. The Governor informed of the danger that threatened Ormuz, but not of its
deliverance, with great diligence fitted a Fleet to go in Person to relieve it.
All Ranks vied in aiding him toward this Work, at such time as six Ships
arrived from Portugal, it being the beginning of September. He sailed as far as
Diu, and hearing Ormuz was out of danger, returned to Goa. At this time D.
Duarte Deca sailed for Ceylon, to succeed D. John Enriquez, deceased; with him
went St. Francis Xaverius, carried by the desire of making a Spiritual Conquest.

5. A bold Turk, by Consent of Zamori, scoured the Seas with fifteen large
Vessels well Manned. He fell upon Punicale, where Emanuel Rodriguez Commanded
with seventy Portugueses. The Fight was sharp, till Antony Franco taking the
Enemies Colors, they fled. The Turk enraged sent again Fifteen hundred, who
put all our Men to flight, except the Captain and seventeen, and these made a
desperate resistance; but at last were obliged to quit the Town and fly to
Bisme Naique, a Subject of Canara, who made them all Slaves. The Turk, after
plundering the Town, returned to his Ships Victorious. The News being brought
to Coc^im, stirred up a general desire of Revenge. Whilst things were debating,
Giles Fernandez de Carvallo offered himself to go, and bear all the Charge,
desiring only Shipping. All was provided with great diligence, and he set out
in search of the Enemy; but by ill Luck Lawrence Coello fell into their hands,
and was slain with all his Men, having fought bravely, Carvallo being no way
able to come to his Relief, by reason of the contrary Wind.

6. On the 15th of August he fell upon the Turks with great Fury, and was
received with no less Courage. The Fight lasted some hours with much bravery;
all the Enemies Ships were boarded and taken, but much shattered; many killed
in them, and others swimming to the Shore. Then Giles Fernandez went to ransom
the Prisoners, and restored Emanuel Rodriguez, not only his Liberty, but also
Goods of great value the Turk had taken from him at Punicale.

7. At this time the two Brothers, D. Alvaro de Ataide and D. Pedro de Silva,
at Malaca, were at Variance about that Command; the former was most to blame,
endeavoring to Remove the other before his time. James de Melo Coutino and D.
Duarte Deca acted worse in Ceylon; for, after the Example of the Viceroy,
having taken Money of that Prince to assist him with each fifty Men against his
Enemy, the King of Ceytavaca; the first after demanding more Money, sent but
Twenty; the other after receiving his, sent none, and because he refused, more
increased the Feud he ought without any Bribe to appease. Melo had secured that
Princes Father by D. Alfonso his Order; upon pretense of Suspicion; in reality,
because he owed him 12000 Ducats of 100000 he promised on account of being
succored. Deca, instead of mending this Fault made it worse, keeping the Old
Man with more rigor, and much more when he heard he was converted to the
Faith, which might hinder his wicked Designs. A wicked practice of many
Portugueses, who hindered the Conversion of many Souls, because it was an
obstacle to filling their Purses. The Prisoners Wife bribing the Guards got him
out, and set him at the Head of a Body of Men she had in readiness to revenge
this Outrage. He began to act successfully, till his Son appeased him. This
year departed this Life St. Francis Xaverius, and the next was brought to Goa
with great solemnity.

8. At Constantinople Pirbec's Head was cut 1553.
off, for going beyond the Commission he received from the Turk,
notwithstanding he made him a Present of all the Riches he carried. At the same
time Moradobec set out by that Prince's Order with fifteen Galleys, to prevent
the harm the Portugueses might do in revenge for what they had received.
Moradobec was the Captain that lost Catifa, and desired to recover his
Reputation. On the Coast of Persia, D. James de Noronha met him with his Fleet.
They saluted one another with showers of Bullets and Arrows. In the height of
the Engagement the Wind calming, left our Galleons without motion. That of
Gonzalo Pereyra Marramaque was far distant from the rest. The Turk laying hold
of this opportunity besets him with his Galleys, tears all his Rigging and
pierces him in a thousand places. However Pereyra stood firm, and did much
Execution among the Enemies, but receives more harm; for almost all that was
above Water of the Galleon was torn in pieces. The Gentlemen, Soldiers and
Seamen fought with incredible Courage, and appeared wherever there was
occasion, though weakened with several Wounds.

9. The Captain was always where the greatest danger threatened, and the Turks
never durst board him. Our Admiral raved that he could not relieve and share
with him in that Honor, and after making his Vows to Heaven, without being
heard, even railed at Providence, stamped and tore his Beard for madness. He
sent some Boats, but they could not reach the Galleon, because the Galleys
compassed it round. Toward Night the Wind began to freshen, and the Admiral to
move. The Turk not daring expect him, retired. The Admiral came up to the
Galleon, admired the Bravery; but scarce knew the Men, they were so disguised
with Wounds, Blood and the Smoot of the Powder. He embraced every one, and
bestowed due Praises on them.

10. Pereyra his Galleon and Men were not in a condition to proceed, so they
were sent to Ormuz with some Barques. The Admiral pursued the Galleys, which
kept close in with the Shore. Our light Vessels forced a Ship that had been
taken by Pirbec to run aground; the Men leaped Overboard to save themselves
and were killed. The Ship was taken and brought off, and our Admiral returned
to Ormuz, having in vain endeavored to overtake Moradobec, who run up the
Euphrates, where there was not Water for our Galleons. At this time arrived in
Goa only one Ship from Portugal; four set out thence, one of them was forced
back, the other two came later. In the first Ship went our admirable Poet Luis
Camoens, to try if he could advance his Fortune by the Sword, which had been so
little favorable by the Pen.

11. Now comes the King of Cota's Revenge (as was promised before) for those
Wrongs done him by the Portugueses. One of the Orders Fernandalvarez Cabral,
Captain of the Ship newly come from Portugal, carried, was, That all that had
been exacted from that King, should be restored; Which, though slowly, was
executed. Another, That Bernardin de Sousa should be Imprisoned for what he had
done at the Maluco's: He was Imprisoned, but not long. And another, That the
Viceroy should no way employ D. James de Almeyda Commander of Diu; for that
the King had struck him out of his Books, never to ^e received into Service:
This also was put in execution. Almeyda's Crime was, That he had seemed to
undervalue the Kings Favor, refusing some Grace offered him. The Viceroy was
concerned, that the differences between the Kings of Pimienta and Cochi^ grew
daily greater. Toward the End of November, the Viceroy sailed with a good
Fleet to assist the latter, who was our Friend. He was met at Sea by D. James
de Noronha and his Fleet, with whom came Goncalo Pereyra Marramaque, who was
received with much Joy, for his great Bravery in the late Action with the
Turks. It was agreed, after some Consultation, to land in the Islands called
Alagada's, belonging to the King of Pimienta. The Natives in crowds opposed our
Men landing with showers of Arrows; but the Cannon made way. After a vigorous
Resistance all was destroyed with Fire and Sword; only one Man was lost on our
side.

12. Gomes de Silva was left to prosecute the War, which he did so successfully
that the King sued for Peace, which was concluded to our advantage, and he was
satisfied with the restitution of the Islands, his Wife, and the People taken
in them. The Viceroy dispatched the Ships for Portugal. That of Ferdinand
Alvarez Cabral was Castaway at Aguada de S. Blas; some of the Men got ashore in
Boats. After a tedious Journey by Land, Cabral and D. Alvaro de Noronha, with
his Family, were drowned in a River. The Viceroy sent his Son D. Ferdinand,
with a good Fleet to the Red Sea. He attempted to gain the Fort of Dofar, but
was repulsed with loss of seven or eight Men; so he returned without any effect.

14. At Diu arose New Troubles on account of the death of the King Sultan
Manaud. He was bred with Poison (like Mithridates,) that none might hurt him.
When his Women were near their time, he opened them to take out the Children.
He was one day hunting a Deer with some of them, and falling off from his Horse
hung by the Stirrup; the Horse dragged him, and one of the Women running cut
the Girts with a Cimiter; in requital he killed her, saying, A Woman of such
courage, had enough to kill him. A Page, in whom he had great confidence,
murdered him; for Tyrants always dye by the hands of those they trust. A Child,
accounted his Son, succeeded him. The Nobility offended at the Insolence of
Madre Maluco, who with the Title of Governor managed the Affairs of the Crown,
rebelled in several parts. One of these was Abixcan at Diu, who suffering his
Men to Affront ours, obliged D. James de Almeyda to enter the City with Five
hundred Men, killing a great number, and plundering their Houses. Abixcan,
though late, saw his Error, and came to Composition; and was afterward more
submissive than had been at first desired of him.

14. D. James de Noronha succeeded Almeyda in that Post, in pursuance of the
Kings Order beforementioned. The Moors forgetting their Fault, and the
Punishment they had incurred, relapsed again. Noronha with Six hundred Men so
refreshed their Memories, that they abandoned the City. Cide Elal, who
Commanded in the Castle that was in the City, offered to defend himself; but
seeing our Men begin to scale it, submitted to march away without Arms. The
Castle was demolished. Scarce was it done, when Abixcan appeared with Four
hundred Men. Ferdinand de Castanoso advanced to meet him with One hundred and
twenty; but Three hundred of the Enemies Horse obliged him to retire in such
disorder, that on a sudden he found he had but seventeen Men left. He posted
himself where the Horse could not come, and the Three hundred Enemies
dismounting beset the 18, who back to back defended themselves till they were
all killed, their Hearts cut out, and carried to the General.

15. D. James de Norona marched on with the rest of the Men, ignorant of what
had happened; but so impatient to engage with Abixcan, that he could no way be
dissuaded from pressing forward. Meeting the Three hundred Horse, he fell on
furiously and put them to flight; but Abixcan coming on with his Cannon, D.
James was forced to retire, rather losing than gaining Reputation in this
Action. Common Convenience brought them to an Accommodation. Noronha this day
lost by his Rashness, what he often deserved for his Valor; for the Factor
endeavoring to stop his fury, and saying to him, He ought to consider the
King's Fort would be lost. He Answered in a Passion, No matter, when I am gone,
all is gone. This saying was remembered when he was in election to be Viceroy
of India, and deprived him of that Post; because it was thought, so great a
Trust could not with safety be reposed upon so rash a Man.

16. The Great Turk hearing Miradobec was come off worse than the Unfortunate
Pirbec, and Alechelubij making great boast of what he would do, gave him the
Command of fifteen Galleys. D. Ferdinand, who was come out of the Red Sea, went
after them. On the 25th of August he had sight of them near Mascate.
Alechelubij not daring to give Battle, endeavored to get off with all his
Galleys; but six of them could not escape, being taken by our Caravels.

17. D. Ferdinand put into Mascate, refitted the Galleys, bought the Slaves,
and appointed them Captains. Alechelubij pursued by some of our Vessels was
drove into Suratt with seven of his nine Galleys, and there shut up by D.
Hierome de Castellobranco, Nuno de Castro and D. Emanuel Mascarenhas. The other
two were pursued by D. Ferdinand de Monroy and Antony Valadares, till they were
beaten to pieces on the Coast of Damam and Daru.

18. But because one is coming to succeed our Viceroy, let us say somewhat of
him. He was modest, easy, and not active, which was the Cause his Government
answered not expectation. As to his Person, he was of a middle Stature, a
graceful Countenance and agreeable Behavior; his Complexion swarthy; his Hair
black. In the number of Viceroys he was the 5th, in that of Governors the
17th, and held it four years, the second of the Name and Surname.

CHAP. XI.
The Government of the Viceroy D. Peter de Mascarenhas, from the Year 1554
till 1555, King JOHN the Third still Reigning.

1. DOn Peter de Mascarenhas was of one of 1554.
the best Families of Portugal, and had born the most considerable Offices in
the Kingdom, and was 70 years of Age when named Viceroy of India. He set out
of Lisbon with six Ships, one of them was drove back, and that in which he
went, as soon as he Landed at Goa, sunk downright. In these Ships were Two
thousand Landmen. The first thing the Viceroy did, he appointed his Nephew
Ferdinand Martinez Admiral, to the great dissatisfaction of all Men. Martinez
had 32 Sail given him, and Orders to bring to Goa the 7 Turkish Galleys that
were blocked up at Suratt. Caracen, Commander of that place, would not permit
it, and gave good sufficient Reasons for his refusing; so by consent of both
sides they were taken to pieces, and the Turks fled into the Woods and
Mountains: The late Viceroy D. Alfonso de Noronha now failed home with the
Trading Ships; whereof that Commanded by Belchior de Sousa was lost, with all
the Men.

2. The Great Turk (as it were) foreseeing the Fate of Alechelubij, immediately
sent after him Zafar, a Janizary, to take upon him the Command of the Galleys:
But too late; for he only came time enough to hear the News of their
Destruction. He took four Merchant Ships of ours bound for Ormuz, and returned
rich to Suez. About the same time Gemes de Silva took several Prizes in the Sea
of Calicut.

3. The Viceroy sent F. Goncalo Rodrigues, and Bro. Fulgentius Freyre, of the
Society of Jesus, to persuade the Emperor of Ethiopia, to redress the Abuses
introduced among his People in Matters of Religion, and with them went James
Diaz, well versed in the Affairs of that Empire. The Emperor could not be
moved to admit our manner of Baptism, and abolish Circumcision; the Priest
continued at his Court, but to no effect. In February set out Emanuel de
Vasconcelos with three Galleons, and five small Vessels, to discover what Zafar
was doing at Suez. He spent some time under Mount Felix, and returned without
doing any thing. With him went the Famous Luis de Camoens, who finding no
employment for his Sword, exercised his Pen.

4. Some great Subjects of Hidalcan at this time, Treated with the Viceroy
about making Mealecan, who had lived long at Goa, King of Visapor; and
assisting to support him in that Title. In Return, they offered to make over to
the Crown of Portugal the Lands of Concan, worth a Million of yearly Revenue. A
great Bait for our Avarice. The Profit was considered, but not the
Difficulties, and Peter de Faria his Advice to Martin Alfonso on the same
occasion was now forgot. We shall see in its place, how much more proper it had
been to consider the Difficulties, than the Profit. The Offer was admitted, and
Meal immediately Proclaimed King of Visapor; and his Wife and Children left at
Goa as Hostages for the performance of our Hopes. Three thousand Portugues
Foot, and Two hundred Horse, marched with a Body of the Natives of the Island.
After a small Resistance they took the Fort of Ponda, and sent Advice to the
Viceroy, who set out with the New King, and at Ponda delivered him to his
People that there waited for him. He left D. Antony de Norona to Command the
Fort with 600 Men.

5. The Viceroy returned so sick to Goa, that he died in a few days; and it
was believed if he had continued in that Government some years, he had
re-established Truth, Justice and Honesty in India. It is a mark of his
Justice, That he gave no Employment to any of his Servants; because he would
not deprive them of it to whom it was due by Merit. A Friend of a
Court-Favourite, complaining he did not dispatch him after serving Three years;
He Answered, I am now busy about those that have served twenty, fifteen, ten
or five years; as soon as I come to those that have served three, I promise
I Will remember you.

6. D. Peter Mascarenas had such an awful Presence and majestic Deportment,
that no Body before him durst do or say any thing undecent. He is famous on six
several accounts, any one whereof might give another a Name after death: He was
a Valiant Soldier, a Wise Commander, a Magnificent Ambassador, a Singular
Tutor, a Just Viceroy, and what is best of all, a very Good Christian. He was
Tall, and though lean, Graceful; his Complexion brown: His Gravity no ways made
him intractable. Of Viceroys he was the 6th, of Governors the 18th; held it
ten Months, and was the second of the Name and Surname. He is Buried in the
Church of Alcazar do Sal, where he had built a Tomb worthy of him.

CHAP. XII.
The Government of Francis Barreto, from the Year 1555, till 1558, in the Reign
of King JOHN the Third.

1. FRancis Barreto succeeded D. Peter Mascarenas with the Title of Governor.
He was a Gentleman of Merit, and qualified for this Post, and had gained much
Esteem, being Commander of Bazaim. His Government began with a Fire kindled by
a Squi^, which burnt Ten the finest Vessels in India, notwithstanding he used
the utmost diligence, and promised great Rewards to save them: Yet this Care
saved the rest of the Fleet. He soon repaired this Damage, building others no
less beautiful.

2. He went to Ponda, to carry on what his Predecessor had began, by Installing
Mealeacan King, and appointed Officers to receive the Revenues about Ponda,
leaving D. Ferdinand de Monroy in that Fort, and sending D. Antony de Noronha,
who had it before, to receive the Revenues at Concam. Xacolim Aga, who was
gathering the same for Hidalcan, with Seven thousand Men prevented him. The
Governor sent a supply of Ammunition to Noronha, which he no sooner received,
but he marched to Cural^, of which he took possession, (the Commander of it
being fled) and with Kindness attracted the Natives to come and inhabit the
Town and Country, leaving Portugues Officers to look to the Revenue. Then
hearing that Xacolim continued gathering the Rents, he went to find him. By the
way he met two Ships, in which was Xacolim's Wife, Children, and Goods of
Value, which he fearful of some danger sent to Cambaya. Noronha easily made
himself Master of all.

3. Not far from Achara he halted, and designed to pass the Night. Xacolim sent
a Thousand Men to surpize ours; but they were upon their Guard, and D. John the
Morisco falling upon them killed Seventy, and put the rest to flight; after the
Pursuit he returned to D. Antony. They marched together to meet Xacolim, who
was drawn up in good Order on the other side of a River. After a vigorous
opposition our Men forded it, and there ensued a bloody Battle, in which D.
Antony and Xacolim met, and having tried each other parted. In this Action were
lost 24 Portugueses, above 1000 of the Enemy were slain, the rest fled. Our Men
proceeding, gathered the Revenue.

4. Mean while Meal was solemnly Proclaimed King at Visapor. He enjoyed it not
^ong; for there were some of those who ^et him up, that designed to betray him
to Hidalcan, who offered great Rewards for him. He succeeded not this way; but
did, purchasing Fifteen thousand Men of the King of Bisnagar, that were so
successful, they killed the Chief of those had made Meal King, and took him
Prisoner. Hidalcan immediately sent Forces to recover the Lands where D. Antony
was employed. The Governor hearing of it sent him Orders to withdraw, as also
to Ferdinand de Monroy, who was at Ponda. They unwillingly obeyed, remembering
how prudently Peter de Faria had before dissuaded this Undertaking.

5. This year sailed from Lisbon five Ships, one of them was Castaway at the
Island Tercera, and another at the Islands beyond Madagascar. The Captain of
this last left about Four hundred of his Men on that Shore, and in his
Longboat got to Goa. These Four hundred who were left, built a small Vessel
and arrived at Cochim. In the other Ships went the Bishop D. Belchior Carnero,
a Jesuit, and some other Religious Men, sent by the Pope to the Emperor of
Ethiopia. D. Alvaro de Silveyra was now made Admiral of a Fleet of 21 Sail,
provided for the Sea of Calicut, and against the Queen of Olala, who refused to
pay her Tribute. He overrun all those Coasts with Fire and Sword, destroying
many Towns and Ships, and all things that stood in the way; particularly the
City Mangalor, and a sumptuous Pagod. Zamori sensible of his Losses, desired
Peace, which was concluded. Silveyra returned Victorious.

6. Let us return to Ceylon. Tribuli Pandar having made his Escape (as was
related) out of Prison, fled to Balande. Madune subtly exasperates him
against the Portugueses, and sent him Six hundred Chingala's, with whom and his
other Men he was so succesful, that he reduced the Towns of Paneture, Caleture,
Maca, Berberi, Gale and Beligam, to the last Extremities, destroying our
Churches, and killing many Christians, Converted by the Religious of St.
Francis, who first Preached there. Now comes Alfonso Pereyra de Lacerda to take
upon him this Command: Madune, who before had assisted Pandar, now offers to
aid Lacerda against him. He accepts the Offer. The King sent his Son Raju by
the way of Caleture with an Army. Lacerda sent Ruy Pereyra with Two hundred
Men, and Antony de Spinola with One hundred two other ways to assault the City
Palandu, where Tribuli was. They beset the Town at one time, and after a
vigorous Resistance the Portugueses entered it; the King fled, his Wife was
taken, and many of his Men killed. The Portugueses returned Victorious, and
Madune obtained one of the Ends he had proposed to himself, which were either,
That the Portugueses should destroy Pandar, or he them.

7. The beginning of this Year sailed John Peixoto with two Galleys for the
Red Sea, 1556.
to discover what was doing at Suez. He found all quiet, and being loath to
return without doing something, he Landed before Day in the Island Suanquem,
with the King whereof we were at Variance. It being a dead time of Night, he
found all asleep, and might say (as a Prince who killed a Man that was
sleeping) that he left those Islanders as he found them; for many were killed
before they awaked, others after. The same fate befell the King in his Palace.
Peixoto returned to his Galliots, carrying Slaves and Booty without receiving
the least damage. Next day, keeping along the Coast he destroyed several Towns,
and returned to Goa, having purchased as much Honor with two small Vessels, as
others with many. He brought away F. Goncalo Rodriguez, whom he found at
Arquico, much dissatisfied that he had not prevailed with the Emperor of
Ethiopia, to admit of the Rites of the Church.

8. The King of Bacora, oppressed by the Turks, made now the same Offers to the
Governor, he had done before to the Viceroy D. Alfonso de Noronha, in case he
would assist him to throw off the Turkish Yoke. The Conditions were admitted,
and neither this time did it succeed; for D. Alvaro de Silveyra going upon this
Design with twenty Sail, met not with the success he had the year before
against the Malabars. A terrible Storm so disabled him in that Port, that he
was not in a condition to attempt any thing a second time. Michael Rodriguez
Coutino prospered better, going to the Lands of Salsete and Bardes against some
Parties of Hidalcan, who sought Revenge for our favoring Meal. All the
Seaports were destroyed with Fire and Sword, and many Ships perished. He
killed and took many Prisoners, and returned with Honor and Riches to Goa. The
chief of the Booty was a great Ship of Meca, taken at Dabul after a sharp
engagement; for there were Two hundred Moors in her, who killed eight of our
Men.

9. This Misfortune the more enraged Hidalcan; and to mend it, he sends a
numerous Army into those same Lands. The Governor set out with a strong Body
to oppose him. The War lasted all the Winter, without any Action worthy
relating. In September arrived four Ships from Portugal; in them went Ferdinand
de Sousa and Castellobranco, Ambassador to the Emperor of Ethiopia, and F.
John Nunes Barreto, Patriarch of that stubborn People. His Companion was the
Bishop Andrew de Oviedo, who did nothing, because the Emperor could not be
reduced to change his Old Rites. With these came to India F. Goncalo de
Sileyra, to be Provincial; he afterward received the Crown of Martyrdom in
Monomotapa. All this shall be related in its proper place.

10. The Governor set out to Visit our Forts in the North, with a Fleet
consisting of One hundred and fifty Sail of all sorts. He gained the Mountain
and Fort Azarim for a small purchase, by the means of Coje Mahomet, a Trusty
Moor, living at Bazaim. This Mountain is not far from the City, and rises very
upright for the space of a League; a little below the Top it is girt with a
sort of Border standing out, which renders it almost inaccessible, the rest
being very difficult of ascent. It is kept by Threescore Men, who need no other
Arms to defend them but the Stones that lie there, which rolled down the
Passes, must carry before them all that is in the way. The Garrison lives upon
the Top, which is plain and almost round. They light themselves with sticks of
Wood that grow there, and burns like a Torch, with that odds, that they cannot
be quenched by Wind or Water.

11. Antony Moniz Barreto was sent to take possession of this place; he left
there a Captain and 60 Portugueses, and went on to take the Fort of Manora, not
far distant, which the Inhabitants abandoned; he left there George Manhans with
120 Men, and returned to Bazaim, where he found the Governor receiving an
Embassy from the King of Cinde, who desired Succor against a Tyrant that
infested him. We were desirous of this Prince's Friendship, and thought fit to
purchase it by Relieving him. Seven hundred Men were sent to him in Twenty
eight Vessels, all Commanded by Peter Barreto Rolim.

12. The Fleet arrived safe at Tata, the Court of the King of Cinde. The
Prince, who was there, visited Barreto, and sent word of his Arrival to his
Father, who was absent in the Field: He Answered, desiring our Commander to
wait till he Advised what was fit to be done. Barreto stayed, and soon after
hearing the King was agreed with his Enemy without giving him notice; he asked
of the Prince leave to depart, and that he would pay the Charge of the Fleet,
as was promised by the Ambassador. The Answer was so little to satisfaction,
that Barreto landed his Men, entered the City, and in the Fury killed above
Eight thousand Persons, and destroyed by Fire the value of above two Millions
of Gold, after loading the Vessels with one of the richest Booties that had
been taken in Asia. He lost not one Man in this Action. He spent eight days,
destroying all on both sides Indus. The Fort of Bandel made some Resistance,
but being taken was demolished.

13. Gaspar de Monterroyo, a Soldier of Note, going accidentally into a Wood,
met some Blacks, who bid him go no farther; for hard-by there was a Serpent had
just then devoured a Bullock. He desiring to see such a Monster as they
described, went on till he discovered the Head, which was of a wonderful
bigness; and not satisfied, came so near as to touch it with the Point of his
Sword, and the Monster lifted up its Head; and he gave it such a fortunate
stroke on a soft place, that it soon after died. It was thirty Foot long, and
proportionable in bigness. Barreto returned thus Victorious over Men and
Monsters to Chaul. There he found Orders to go to Dabul, where he would find
Antony Pereyra Brandam Admiral of that Coast. They were to join in order to
destroy that City in part of Revenge, for the damage Hidalcan did us. Being
joined they attacked the City, and though vigorously defended, it was taken,
and wholly reduced to a heap of Rubbish. Then they did the same to all the
Villages upon the shore of that River.

CHAP. XIII.
The End of the Government of Francis Barreto.

1. HIdalcan's General, Nazer Maluco, entered 1557.
the Lands of Salsete and Bardes with 2000 Horse, and 18000 Foot. The Governor
with 3000 Portugueses, 1000 Canara's, and 200 Horse, met him in the Fields of
Ponda, having then but 17000 Men, and a Mountain on his back. He furiously
attacked, put him to flight, and returned victorious to Goa. D. Peter de
Meneses, who Commanded the Fort of Rachol, did what he could, which was not
much, because the Enemy was too numerous. John Peixoto vigorously opposed
Moratecan in the Lands of Bardes. A Renegado Portugues, who had fortified
himself, doing him much harm, he assaulted and routed him twice, killing 200 of
his Men, and (...) Captain. Nazer Maluco entrenched himself again at Ponda.

2. Five Ships arrived now from Portugal, three of them were Castaway in their
Return home; one at Tierra del Natal, another at the Island St. Thomas, and the
third at Madagascar. The arrival of these Ships, and some damage we had done
Hidalcan, obliged him to conclude a Peace, which we sued for, yet was not
dishonorable.

3. D. Duarte Deca, Commander of Ternate, was not idle. He was harsh and
covetous, so easily falling out with the King, he Unchristian-like Imprisoned
him, his Mother and Brother Cachil Guzarate, using them very unworthily, and to
complete his Cruelty, ordered they should have nothing to eat. Public
Complaints obliged him to consent the Hospital of Misericordia should maintain
them; and his desire of killing them made him so base as to poison their Water,
which was discovered by a Stone the King had in a Ring. The Ternatenses took
Arms, and called in the Tidores, so that the Fort was in great danger.

4. D. Duarte having received Relief, ventured to fight at Sea with as good
success, as if Justice had been on his side: But the Portugueses themselves no
longer able to endure his Obstinacy, put him into Custody, and discharged the
Prisoners, which put an end to that Discord. No Man would take upon him the
Command of the Fort, till Antony Pereyra Brandam was forced by the People to
accept of it in Trust, till the Governor disposed of it. Whilst some
Portugueses in the Maluco's, by their Actions, appeared most barbarous
Heathens, some Infidels became Christians; a thing to be admired, having such
ill Examples before them. The King of the Island Bacham was converted by F.
Antony Vaz, a Jesuit.

5. The War continued at Goa. A Moor with Five hundred Men waded over the Ford
of Zacorla, in the Island Choram, and surprising those few Portugueses that
were in it, gained some advantage, till others coming in from several Parts,
drove them headlong into the Water, where many of them were drowned. The
Governor hearing of this, marched to their Relief, and sent before George
Mendoca, Commander of the City, with some Gentlemen, who behaved themselves
well, and brought many Heads of Moors to the Governor. All was kept quiet
afterward by D. Francis Mascarenhas, who was left in the Island with 300 Men.

6. The Governor desiring to secure the Promontory of Chaul, asked leave of
the King Nizamuxa to fortify it. He not only refused it, but secured the
Messenger, and sent 30000 Men, who began to build an impregnable Fort there.
The Governor sent Alvaro Perez de Sotomayor with some Ships, to keep the Mouth
of the Port till he came, which was soon after. He brought 4000 Portugueses,
besides Natives. The Enemy better advised, proposed a Peace, which was
concluded to our content, on Condition the Work of the Fort should not advance.
The Governor returned home. A Miracle was seen here, which was, That the Moors
could never cut down, or remove with force of Elephants, a small Wooden-Cross,
that was fixed upon a Stone.

7. The Governor having settled Affairs at Goa, was wholly employed in fitting
out a mighty Fleet against the King of Achem, who is the only Terror of
Malaca. In a few Months he provided 25 Galleons, 10 Galleys, and 80 Galliots,
all so well furnished, it renewed the hopes of fixing our Empire in India. But
all this Industry falls to nothing; for now a new Governor comes, and the New
ones never prosecute the designs of the Old. However this Force was well
employed, though not as our Governor designed.

8. Francis Barreto brought to Lisbon a Jewel wrought by the hand of Nature. A
Portugues Soldier on the Coast of the Island Ceylon, met a Iogue (that is, a
sort of Penitent Heathen,) who among other things had picked up a brown Pebble,
of the shape and bigness of an Egg, on which were represented the Heavens in
several Colors, and in the midst of them the Image of our Blessed Lady with
our Savior in her Arms. The Soldier gave him some small thing for this Stone;
and afterward it came to the hands of Francis Barreto, who presented it to
Queen Catherine, and by virtue of it God wrought several Miracles in India and
Portugal.

9. Francis Barreto was a courageous, discreet and generous Gentleman, and such
a Governor as India now mourns for. He afterward returned as Governor and
Conqueror of the Empire of Monomotopa, where he died, as shall be seen in its
proper place. He had a stately Presence, his Complexion tawny, and black Hair.
He Governed three years, was the 19th Governor, and second of the Name.

CHAP. XIV.
The Government of the Viceroy D. Constantine de Braganza, from the Year 1558,
till 1561, in the Reign of King SEBASTIAN.

1. ABout the End of the Government of Francis Barreto, died King John 1558.
the Third. In him ended the good Fortune of Portugal, as did that of India in
the Viceroy sent thither, after his death, by those who managed the State
during the Minority of King Sebastian. D. Constantin, Brother to Theodosius,
Duke of Braganca, was 30 years of Age when he accepted this Charge. What he
wanted in Age for so great an Employ, was made up by being of the Blood Royal,
and by his great Parts and natural Endowments.

2. He sailed from Lisbon on the 7th of April, with four Ships and two Thousand
Men, and arrived at Goa about the beginning of September. Three things
remarkable happened in his Voyage and at his Arrival; the first, that he had not
the least bad Weather in his Passage; the second, the great demonstrations of
Joy wherewith he was received; and the third, that he no way affronted the
Governor that went off, as was always used in India.

3. Our Viceroy commenced as usual, by sending Commanders to Forts. D. Payo de
Noronha went to Cana^or, and by his Ingratitude in receiving some Presents sent
by that King (though not with sincere meaning) gave occasion to his resentment,
signified by not suffering the Portugueses to resort to the City. The Viceroy
sent fourteen Sail to their assistance, and gave the Command of them to Luis de
Melo de Silva. The Viceroy was bent upon possessing himself of the Town of
Damam, a place of consequence, to secure the Lands of Bacaim, and whereof
Francis Barreto had obtained a Grant from the King of Cambaya. The difficulty
lay in wresting it out of the hands of Cide Bofata, who was in Rebellion
against his Prince, which was the chief Motive why he so freely gave what he
could not get for himself. Bofata was well provided, and with a Resolution not
to sell the place at an easy rate. The Viceroy having held a Council about
it, the result was, he should go thither in person.

4. He first dispatched the Trading Ships for Portugal, in which went his
Predecessor; the Ships were seven, and only three of them came to Lisbon. One
was lost at the Island St. Thomas: Two were forced back to Mozambique, in one
of which was the late Governor Francis Barreto: The Captain of a fourth
finding her sinking, got into a Longboat with 60 Men, and came to Goa, the
rest of the Men all perished. Francis Barreto, at Mozambique, spent 20000
Ducats of his own in refitting the two Ships. They set out again, and being in
distress, the other Ship ungratefully forsook him; yet he afterward seeing her
perishng saved all the Men, so that he had 1137 Persons aboard. In this
condition, not able to go forward, he almost miraculously returned again to
Mozambique. This year ended with the Foundation of that Fort, and return of
Barreto to Goa.

5. Luis de Melo, at Cananor, being assaulted in his Trenches by 3000 Moors,
put them to shameful flight; and while he sent for Succors to the Viceroy,
followed Fortune that now seemed to Favor him. Mean while the Viceroy set out
with the Fleet, had been fitted out by Barreto, having increased it to 100 Sail.

6. The Viceroy arriving at Damam, sent D. James de Noronha to take a view of
the Works; he found them strong, and defended by 4000 Men. Notwithstanding all
this Preparation, no sooner our Men landed but the Enemy fled, abandoning both
City and Fort. The Viceroy entered, and giving Thanks to Almighty God for this
Bloodless Victory, blessed the Mosque under the Invocation of the Purification
of the Blessed Virgin, on which day it was taken.

7. The Enemy, after their flight, encamped at Parnel, two Leagues off, and
thence with 2000 Horse infested the Viceroy. Antony Moniz Barreto offered with
500 Men to remove them. He marched all Night toward the Enemy, and being come
up with them, found that he had but 120 Men, the rest wandering in the dark
through unknown ways; yet thus he attacks and puts them to flight, as believing
the Vice Roy was there with his whole Force. The Morning discovering from how
small a number they had fled, Bofata and his Men come down from a Hill, whither
they had retired, and falling upon Barreto pressed him hard, till those that
were scattered coming up, he again routed the Enemy, killing 500 of them. In
their Camp were found 36 good Pieces of Cannon, some Cart Loads of Copper-Mony,
and other Plunder.

8. The Viceroy with Liberality and good Usage attracted the Country People,
who were fled for fear; and confirmed to the Neighboring King of Sarceta the
Duties he had in Damam. For the more security he resolved to possess himself of
the Island Balzar, not far distant. He intended to go thither in Person, but
sent before D. Peter de Almeyda with 150 Horse, and as many Foot. The People of
Balzar abandoned the Town, which D. Peter entered, and the Viceroy being come,
left Alvaro Gonzales Pinto to Command there with 120 Men, and some Cannon.
Being returned to Damam, he sent D. Alvaro de Silveyra with 20 Sail to the
Red Sea, being informed Cafar was fitting out his Galleys. This Fleet was
dispersed by Storms, and put into several Ports of India, without effecting any
thing.

9. D. James de Noronha was appointed Commander of Damam, and had 1200 Men
given him under five Captains, who were to keep Tables for them. Tables are
kept in India for such as have not any thing of their own; or if they have, yet
will accept of this Liberality. I admire there are men that will stoop to
receive this, but much more there are any that give it; for the same Men when
they come to Spain, have not the Heart to give a stick of Wax, which there is
worth nothing, and here a Halfpeny. The Viceroy after this success returned to
Goa.

10. In the City St. Thomas, or Meliapor, a Portugues, one of those who more
religiously worship their Interest, than the Heathens their Idols, and of those
there are many in India; persuaded Rama Rajo, King of Bisnagar, to march
against the City, telling him the Plunder would be worth two Millions, and it
would be a great Service to the Idols he worshipped, which were there thrown
down by the Christians. He was a good Christian, that was so zealous for Idols.
The King harkening to the hopes of Gain, set out with 500000 Men. Peter de
Ataide encouraged the Inhabitants to defend themselves; but they, to palliate
their Fear said, It was but Reason the King should be admitted to waht was his
own. Ataide went away to Goa; the Townsmen prepared for the reception of the
King, and sent him a Present of 4000 Ducats, wherewith he was somewhat
appeased. He Encamped and would not enter the City; but ordered all the
Inhabitants of both Sexes, and all Ages, and all their Goods, to be brought to
his presence. Which being performed, he found the whole Value did not exceed
80000 Ducats. Enraged at the Wickedness of the Informer, he ordered him to be
thrown to the Elephants, who tore him to pieces. He discharged the Citizens,
and restored all their Goods so punctually, that only a Silver Spoon being
missing among them all, it was sought and restored.

11. Luis de Melo de Silva, who sailed last year for the Coast of Malabar, did
much harm there, and ruined the Trade of the Moors. At Mangalor he ordered two
Captains to bring him a Vessel belonging to our Enemies of Cananor, that was in
the River, but the Owners and some of the Townsmen coming to defend it, our Men
were worsted. Melo enraged hereat assaulted the Town, and put all Living
Creatures to the Sword; then fired it. An old Moor leading a Company of the
Inhabitants that fled, with a Dagger in his hand met our Commander, and struck
him through the Arm. He laying hold of his long Hair, delivered him to those
that were near, saying, Take away that Devil. He had scarce said it, when the
Moor was cut in pieces. Melo having burnt the City with loss of some few Men,
returned to his Ships.

12. Thirteen Ships of Calicut and Cananor were coming up to attack Melo; but
he went out to meet them with only seven. He was foremost in his Galliot, and
the Admiral of Calicut, a Turk, advanced before the rest to meet him. As soon
as they came within Cannon-shot, our Gunner made one so fortunate, it swept him
from Stem to Stern, and in a Minute the Keel of the Ship appeared above Water,
all the Men perishing. Three other Ships board the Galliot, and kill many of
the Men; but Melo stepping forward, not only cleared his own Deck, but pursued
into the Ships, in which not one Man was left alive. Our other Vessels took the
other three Ships of Calicut, so that not one of them escaped; and the Admiral
of Cananor fled with his seven, having only stood by as a Witness of what the
others did. The Enemy lost above 400 Men. For a long time after the People
along that Coast would not eat Fish, because a man's Fingers were found in the
Belly of one.

13. Luis de Melo went thus Victorious to Goa, and the Viceroy confined him;
because he had done those Actions when his Presence was required at Cananor.
His Confinement was censured, and the Viceroy being none of those that will
obstinately persist in their Opinion, though it do never so much mischief; he
went in person to be Friends with Melo at Pangim, where he was in Custody. Melo
knowing well how to esteem such Favors from Superiors, was abundantly
satisfied, and returned with his Fleet, by the Viceroy's Order, to Cananor,
because D. Payo de Noronha, was in some distress there. Emanuel de Vasconcelos
went to Ternate with three Ships, and other small Vessels.

14. Luis de Melo was the Life of Noronha: who was in great danger at Cananor,
being threatened with a Siege by all the Princes of Malabar stirred up by Ade
Rajao, not without some provocation given by Noronha. Rajao with 100000 Men
attacks the Fort, and enters the Trenches. Melo, who was in them with 60 Men,
flew about like Lightning, Antony de Villena, with Fifty, did Wonders among the
Moors, who had entered his House. In fine, the whole number, which was 500 Men,
did more than human Actions among that multitude of Enemies. It is said, A
Religious Man at his Prayers saw the Holy Ghost in the form of a Pigeon on a
Beam of the Church, and showed it to many others. Our Men hearing of it fell on
with new Vigor, and so effectually that they put the Enemy to flight, having
killed 15000 of them. Of the Portugueses 25 were lost. The fight lasted 12
Hours. Luis de Melo played the part of a Soldier as well as Commander. Francis
Risca^, a Man of ordinary Extraction, performed extraordinary acts of Valor.
The Enemy went home admiring the Valor of our Men, and Peace was restored to
Cananor.

15. It is strange, that among all the Churches erected in India, none till
this time had been dedicated to its Apostle St. Thomas. Our Viceroy taking
this into Consideration, began to build at Goa a sumptuous Church to him, which
was not finished, because the time of his Government expired, and remains to
this day as a heap of Ruins, none of his Successors having put his Hand to
advance so good a Work.

CHAP. XV.
Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Constantin, in the Reign of King
SEBASTIAN.

1. AT this time the Emperor of Ethiopia was much molested by the Turks and
Moors, and obtained some Victories over them, having some Portugueses in his
Service. Our Bishop could not work upon him to leave his Heretical Customs, and
therefore resolved to leave him; but stayed at the Request of the Portugueses.
The Emperor being Invaded by the King of Mallassays, contrary to the Advice of
the Portugueses, marched to meet him, and they followed. He was slain by
Malassays; and they seeing his Subjects fly, cast themselves among the Enemies,
and after doing more than is credible, were most of them killed.

2. The Turk desiring to possess himself of the Arabian Ports on the side next
Persia, sent this Year an Officer with two Galleys and seventy Barques, with
1200 Turks and Janissaries, against the Fort of Baharem. Rax Morado, a resolute
Commander, was in it, who provided the best he could, and sent Advice of the
danger he was in to the King of Ormuz, and D. Antony de Noronha, then
Commanding that Fort. D. John de Noronha went to relieve him with ten Ships; he
was near taking the Turkish Galleys, but missed for want of pursuing, and the
next day they obliged him to take shelter in the Creeks along that Shore. D.
Alvaro de Silveyra receiving Advice from Ormuz, came up, and joining D. John
took the Galleys. The Bassa having lost them, concluded he was also lost, if he
took not the Fort, and therefore pressed on his Attacks. Rax Morado and D.
Alvaro had a Meeting, and agreed it was not convenient to fight, but besiege
the Besiegers; yet such was the Insolence of the Sou^diers, that Mutinying they
obliged them to give Battle. Rax joined the Portugueses with 300 Persians, well
Armed, they attacked the Turks, who purposely (though with loss) gave way, till
they drew them to an Ambush, which put them into disorder in spite of all D.
Alvaro could do, till he fell by a Musquet-Ball that hit him in the Throat. The
Portugueses fought desperately, some to defend, and others to bring him off,
but to no purpose, for the Turks cut off his Head. Above 70 of our Men were
killed, and several taken. Rax Morado retired with many to the Fort, after
behaving himself in such manner as might be envied by the Portugueses. Thus was
the rashness of those that were so hot for fighting punished.

3. Peter Peixoto succeeded in the Command of our Men, and following the Advice
before despised, besieged the Island, and so straightened the Turks they sued
for Mercy; whereby it appeared how great a Fault it was not to take this course
at first. D. Antony de Noronha receiving Advice at Ormuz of our loss, presently
set out to revenge it. The Siege continued, and in conclusion the Turks
surrendered on Condition to return our Prisoners (they were about Thirty,) and
deliver up their Cannon, Arms and Horses, and 10000 Ducats. They were to be
carried to Bacora, but were so weak with Hunger and the Pestilential Fever,
which about that time rages at Baharem, that only two hundred of them lived.
Many of our Men died of the same Disease.

4. About the end of this Year arrived in India five Ships from Portugal; six
sailed thence, but one was drove back. In them went F. George of St. Lucy, and
F. George Temudo, the first was Bishop of Malaca, the latter of Cochim, both
Dignities new Created; for Queen Catherine seeing the Sea of Goa was
over-burthened, had obtained of the Pope the Instituting these Bishoprics; but
subordinate to Goa, as were to be all others that should be Instituted.

5. The Vice Roy understanding the Enemy was fitting out Ships on the Coast of
Malabar, where Luis de Melo was, sent to his Aid 17 Sail with 600 Men. Melo
distributed them about the Mouths of the Rivers, and he himself ran along
destroying the Towns and Woods. Seven strong Parao's, well manned and equipped,
came down the River Maim, where Goncalo Perez de Alvelos was, firing their
Cannon upon him, and he answering sunk one of them: But the Powder taking fire
in one of our Ships, blew it up and all the Men in it; so the Enemy escaped.
Melo continued the War this Year and the next with success, and utter
desolation of all that Coast.

6. Bofata, not long since defeated, now marched toward our Fort of Balzar
with 600 Horse, and a great Body of Foot. Our Commander Alvaro Goncalez Pinto
boldly meets him with 20 Horse, 100 Portugues Foot, and 500 Natives. The first
Charge they killed 50 of the Enemy; but being overpowered by the Multitude were
routed, the Captain and most of the Portugueses killed, and 150 of the Natives,
the rest fled. Bofata immediately attacks the Fort, not at all doubting to
carry it; but was vigorously opposed by the Valor of Gomez de Silva, who
though not born a Gentleman, in this Action showed how Gentlemen are Created.
The Enemy encamped, and Silva did great Execution on them, till Tristan V^z de
Vega came to his Relief, from Damam, with ten Vessels well furnished. In spite
of all opposition he Landed and got into the Fort, and Bofata seeing no hopes
of prevailing drew off. Not long after he returns, and our Commander Alfonso
Diaz Pereyra meeting him in the Field, had the same success as Pinto, and was
killed as well as he; all the difference was, that the Enemy now entered the
Fort pell-mell with our Men; but Vincent Carvallo drove them again out
headlong. Calisto de Sequeyra killed 20 with his own hand. They were quite
spent with continual Fatigue when Luis Alvarez de Tavora brought Relief from
Damam, at sight whereof the Enemy retired.

7. However, by the Viceroy's Order, the Fort was abandoned, and the Enemy
returning razed it; then went on doing great harm in the Villages, till they
came to Tarapor, where Martin Lopez de Faria was with 40 Men; they attacked his
Works and were repulsed with such loss, that they desisted and went on. This
Action cost Lopez his Life, being mortally wounded, whereof he died at Damam.
D. James de Noronha marched after the Enemy, and found them in the Country of
Vaypim, being 600 Horse and 1000 Foot; with him were 150 of the former, and 350
of the latter. He fell on with such Fury, that 60 of the Enemy fell the first
Charge, and after a sharp Dispute they all fled, leaving him many Prisoners,
their Women, Money, Baggage, Horses, Arms and Ammunition, with which he returned
triumphant to Damam, notwithstanding the Enemy rallying attacked him in the
Rear; but at last fled to lament his Loss in the Woods, whilst it was
celebrated in the Town.

8. Christopher Pereyra Homem sailing for Ethiopia with three Vessels, only to
set ashore 1560.
there B. Fulgentius, a Jesuit, sent by the Viceroy to the Bishop with some
Church-stuff, near Arquico met Cafar his four Galleys, and with difficulty
escaped them. But the Admirals Galley coming up sometime after, the Fight could
not be avoided, and Pereyra boarding her with 30 Men, the Turks who were 150
killed every Man of them. The other two Vessels leaving him in the danger got
to Goa, where Vincent Carvallo and Rock Pinheyro were put in Gaol for their
Cowardice; for had they done their Duty, Cafar had been taken.

9. B. Fulgentius was taken, and afterward ransomed; the loss of him and what
he carried, was lamented by the Portugueses in Ethiopia. Adamas Sagad succeeded
the Emperor that died, and defeated many Rebels, in which Victory the
Portugueses had a considerable share. The Turkish Bassa returning with a
greater Power, defeated Sagad with the assistance of some Portugueses; for they
can be Turks when they please. This was the cause that Emperor never after
trusted. them.

10. Bisminaique, Lord of the Pearl-Fishery, seeing those of Punicale would pay
no greater acknowledgment than One days Fishing, resolved to right himself by
force. He marched with 1000 Men, Melrao lead the the Van, doing much harm. D.
Duarte de Meneses after several Skirmishes killed him, and stopped the current
of his Men, till the useless People, as Aged Men, Women and Children, with the
best of their Goods, got off in a Ship, where they suffered much Hunger, and
such Thirst that they drank their own Water. The Commander of the Fort, Emanuel
Rodrigues Coutinho, Charged a Body of those that Melrao had Commanded, and did
good Execution; but Bisminaique coming up with his Army, D. Duarte was forced
to retire to his Ship, and Coutinho to another, where he was taken with all his
Men, and after ransomed. The Enemy entered and plundered the Town.

11. Four Ships arrived now in India, of six that sailed from Lisbon: In them
went the first Archbishop of Goa, and the first Inquisitors, sent to suppress
the Jews. One of the six Ships was forced back to Lisbon. Another Commanded by
Ruy de Melo, was drove to Brasile, and thence set out again so unsuccessfully,
that she was lost beyond the Cape of Good Hope. The Men got ashore, and part of
them Coasted along in the Longboat and two Barques they made, the rest marched
along in sight of them, till they took three little Ships which held them all,
and so went up a River in the King of Menanchabo's Country. Their neglect, and
the Beauty of D. Francisca Sardina, Wife to James Pereyra de Vasconcelos, gave
courage and opportunity to those Barbarians to assault them, and steal her.
They fell on our Men on a sudden and killed 60, carrying away this Portugues
Hellen or Proserpine. The rest arrived in India.

12. The late Governor Francis Barreto put to Sea the third time, and arrived
safe at Lisbon with D. Luis Fernandez de Vasconcelos, who had before lost his
Ship. The Kings of Cochim and Cananor were now at War, and the Portugueses
intermedled not, because they were both Subjects to Portugal; in the end he of
Cochim had the better. Those of Cranganor committing some Outrages, John
Pereyra chastized and reduced them.

13. The Viceroy was now preparing to make War upon the King of Iafanatapan,
and Lord of the Island Manar, because he persecuted the Christians, and had
usurped that Crown from his Brother, who fled to Goa, and was Baptized by the
Name of Alfonso. He Landed near the City Iafanapatan with 1200 Men, forcing the
Prince to retire, who with 2000 opposed him. The Portugeses entered at a large
Street in which were some Pieces of Cannon, which killed N. Sardina, Ensign to
Luis de Melo. John Pessoa took up the Colors, and marched up to the Canon.
Luis de Melo and D. Philip de Meneses were both Wounded.

14. The Vice Roy came on, and six or seven Men were killed about him. The
Prince coming down another Street made some resistance, but to no effect. Night
coming on the King retired to his Palace, and not thinking himself safe there,
set fire to it and withdrew to a Fort a League off. Thus the Viceroy was left
possessed of that beautiful City. He marched after the King, who thinking that
Fort too weak, was fled farther off. D. Constantin took possession of it, and
sent several parties to pursue the King, the first of them Commanded by Luis de
Melo, the Achilles of those times. They pursued him till he cried for Mercy;
and to purchase an Accommodation, offered to restore the Treasure taken from
Tribuls Pandar, and his Mother-in-Law, Wife to the King of Cota, to pay an
Acknowledgment to the Crown of Portugal, and give up the Island Manar. The
Viceroy accepted the Conditions, considering how difficult it was wholly to
deprive him of that Crown, and restore it to his Brother, though he had never
so much right.

15. Fortune is as quick in over-turning, as bestowing her Favors. Whilst the
Conditions were putting in execution, the Natives falling upon the Portugueses,
who were secure in their Submission, killed many. The Viceroy escaped narrowly
and got aboard the Fleet, whence he sent D. Antony de Noronha with 400 Men to
relieve the Fort, where Ferdinand de Sousa was, and had killed many of the
Natives in defense of it. They two being joined made themselves way and marched
to the Shore, carrying all that was in the Fort, and killing all that opposed
them. The Viceroy thus succesful at first, and afterward unfortunate, set
Sail, carrying with him the Prince, given as an Hostage for performance of the
Articles of Peace. He sailed to the Island Manar, where he built a Fort, and
translated thither the Inhabitants of Punicale, to redeem them from the Tyranny
of that Nayque who would fleece them. Emanuel Rodriguez Coutinho was left to
Command there, and with him some Franciscans and Jesuits, all satisfied with
the equal distribution the Viceroy made of all things. Then he sent Balthazar
Guedez de Sousa to Command in chief in Ceylon, and with him the King of Cota,
his Grandmother and Kindred, whom the King of Iafanatapan had delivered to him,
being one of the Conditions of that unfortunate Treaty.

CHAP. XVI.
The End of the Government of the Viceroy D. Constantin.

1. AMong the Treasure lately taken from the King of Iafanatapan, was an Idol
adored throughout all the Coast of Asia, and so highly esteemed by all those
Princes, particularly the King of Pegu, that he every year sent Ambassadors
with rich Presents, to get a Print of it. This so much worshipped Relick was
nothing but a Tooth of a white Monkey. Some say, the rarity of the Color was
the cause of his being so much admired, as the King of Siam's white Elephant:
Others affirm, besides his Whiteness, he came into such esteem by finding out
the Wife of an ancient Indian King, that was run away from him, and had been
sought for through all parts to no purpose, the King loving her beyond
expression. The King in requital made much of the Beast while it lived, and
after its death erected Altars to it: Others are of Opinion, it was a Man's, not
a Monkeys Tooth, and perhaps the Man had the same Employ as the Monkey; for all
was no better than Pimping, a great step to Preferment with Princes. However it
was, the King of Pegu hearing our Viceroy had the Tooth, sent to offer him
300000 Ducats for it, and it was not doubted his Zeal would extend to give a
Million, if the Bargain were well drove. Most of the Portugueses were for
taking the Money, and some wished they might be employed in carrying the Tooth
to Pegu, not doubting but they should gather a Treasure by showing it by the
way.

2. The Viceroy doubtful whether he should accept, or reject the Offer, and to
throw the blame of either Resolution from himself, had a meeting of the Chief
of the Clergy and Laity, where the Question was discussed long, and with much
heat. The Resolution was, That the Tooth should not be sold, but consumed to
As^s. The Viceroy accordingly, in the presence of them all, caused it to be
beaten to dust in a Mortar, and then burnt. All men at that time seemed to
applaud the Act; but not long after, (two Teeth being set up instead of that
one, as shall be related in the Government of D. Antony de Noronha) they as
much condemned and railed at it.

3. D. George de Meneses Baroche at this time did much in Ceylon in defense of
the King of Cota against his Brother Madune. D. George was hard to please,
because he loved to endure hardship; he hearing one Morning, in his Galley, a
Soldier asking an ^on for Breakfast, said to him; What do you (...) for
Dainties? There is no provision in this Store, but Powder and Ball. A good
Example for our Times, when a Portugues lords half a Galleon with Hen-Coops,
and (...) of Sweetmeats.

4. This Severity in D. George caused some Soldiers to desert to Cota; he went
to bring them back, and at his return found that George de Melo his Lieutenant
^d fallen upon the Enemy so successfull^ that he cut off a number of them.
Baroche envious of this Honor, attacked them in another place and killed 200,
and with the same heat run up a River after Madune, till a Cannon Ball kil^g 20
of his Seamen at once, he retired a ^e. Then matching by Land, after Raju (...)
Son, who had above 3000 Men ^h him put him to flight, killing 150, without
losing one Man. The Enemy fortified himself in a convenient place, and D.
George going on to attack him, was told there was no Powder; then says he, Load
your Muskets with Sand. He advanced unfortunately; for what with an Ambush, and
what with the assistance of the Elephants, he lost above 70 Men. D. George was
in danger of being killed by an Elephant, had not P^dralvarez Freyre
fortunately shot it. He retired in such a Rage for this ill success, that he
bit the Sand, perhaps because it had not served him instead of Powder.

5. Madre Maluco, King of Cambaya, taking the advantage of the Viceroys
absence from Damam, resolved to recover that City, and was ready to march with
a formidable Power. D. James de Noronha, who spent much Money in Intelligence,
soon understood his design, and finding he could not oppose him with open
Force, had recourse to Artifice. He dexterously persuades Cedemecan Lord of
Suratt, his Neighbor and Friend, that his Brother-in-Law, Madre Maluco, was
coming to expel him that City, and therefore gave out his design was upon
Damam. Cedemecan gave credit to the Fiction, and going to Visit his
Brother-in-Law in the Camp, persuaded him to Sup with him in the Town, and
carry with him the principal Heads of his Army. Scarce were they in his House
when he killed them all, and falling upon the Camp put the Army to the rout
with great slaughter Thus Noronha avoided this Danger without drawing Sword,
and Cedemecan drew on himself another, to shun that which did not threaten him.
The Manager of this Intrigue was, D. James Pereyra, a Gentleman of great
Prudence and Vigilance, who performed it very dexterously, not without great
danger to himself.

6. Chinguiscan with a prodigious Power marches to Suratt, to revenge the Death
of his Father, and enters the City; Cemedecan retiring into the Fort,
Chinguiscan sets down before, and begins to batter it furiously, and Cedemecan
omitted nothing toward his defense, when 10 Ships arrive, sent by D. James
under the Command of Luis Alvarez de Tavora, with Orders so to manage himself,
that either of the two Enemies might believe he came to their assistance. D.
James underhand writ to Chinguiscan, acquainting him he had sent those Ships
to his Aid; Tavora had a Letter from him to Cedemecan of the same purport. All
this Preparation vanished; for the Besieger hearing another Enemy invaded his
Kingdom, agreed with the Besieged and returned home. So did Luis Alvarez,
having given much Content to our Neighbor, who had he known all, had more
cause to be highly dissatisfied. Alvarez coming to Damam found D. James de
Noronha at Death's door, and he soon after expired at ^he Age of 44. He died
Poor, having spent ^ll he got in the Service of his King and Country. D. Antony
de Noronha, after Viceroy, used to say, That a man must be mad to ^ractice
this sort of Liberality. After that rate ^ow-adays all Men are very Wise.

7. The Viceroy being at Cochim, dispatched 1561.
three Ships for Portugal, two of them arrived safe, the other was forced back.
Then he had a meeting with the King of Pimienta, with whom he was at variance,
and they agreed. The Princes of Calicut being sent to be bred at Cananor, and
those of Cananor at Calicut, caused such a Confusion, that John Pereyra,
Commander of Cananor, was in some danger, attempting to hinder the Passage of
the Malabars, who had possessed themselves of the Island Primbalam, belonging
to Cochim, which might prove the loss of our Fort. The Viceroy sent first D.
Francis de Almeyda with ten Ships, and after him Luis de Melo de Silva with 500
Men, and the King of Cochim assisted with his Forces. There was a great Fight,
many of the Enemies were killed, and the rest expelled the Island. Martin
Alfonso de Melo afterward cleared all the Passes, and restored the Island to
the King. D. Constantin returned to Goa.

8. He sent Commanders to several Forts; and a Fleet of 21 Sail under the
Command of Sebastian de Sa, to assist the King of Bacora against the Turks, for
which he offered to permit us to build a Fort there. This Fleet was by bad
Weather scattered and put into several Ports. Cedemecan sent to acquaint the
Viceroy, That Chinguiscan was again marching toward him, and he being in no
condition to oppose him, would deliver up that Fort to the Crown of Portugal,
only upon Condition to be carried with his Family and Treasure where he should
appoint. Don Constantin immediately fitted out fourteen Ships, the Command
whereof he gave to D. Antony de Noronha. With him went Luis de Melo, to receive
the Command of Damam from James de Silva, who held it by the Death of D. James
de Noronha. There they found four Galliots of Sebastian de Sa his Squadron that
was dispersed, and so made up 500 Men, and passed to Suratt. They went up the
River through such showers of Bullets, that there was scarce a Vessel but lost
some Men. Then they Landed, and immediately entered a Work, and after a tedious
Engagement Chinguiscan with above 20000 Men, was beaten by 500 Portugueses, and
our Captain remained Master of the Field.

9. In the same Heat he entered the City, where Chinguiscan was, and retired
honorably, though not without danger: But coming to Treat with Cedemecan about
delivering up the Fort as he had promised, found him quite estranged from it.
Some say, he durst not do it for fear his own Men should kill him; and it is
likely it was so, for D. Antony being gone to Goa, they would have murdered him
only for the Intention; so that he was forced to make his escape from them, and
being taken by Chinguiscan had his Head cut off. Caracen his Brother-in-Law
succeeded him in Suratt, and found the means of obliging Chinguiscan, so that
he left him in peaceable possession.

10. Emanuel de Vasconcelos being arrived at the Moluco's, prevailed with the
King of Ternate, to quit his claim to that Kingdom, as being left by the
rightful Possessor, who died a Christian at Malaca to our King. Accordingly
King Sebastian was Proclaimed in all the Neighborhood, he that Resigned still
keeping the Title and Government. Vasconcelos having made War against the King
of Tidore, soon after died. Sebastian Machado his Lieutenant succeeded him, and
sent George Ferreyra against the Sangaje of Gilolo, who brought him to
Submission. The Christian Faith was now very much propagated in these Parts by
the labor and industry of the Jesuits.

11. The Year ended the Government of D. Constantin, applauded by all lovers of
Truth, though censured by the Vile Portugueses in India. He was endued with all
those Parts that make a man Great, and was fortunate in his Undertakings; his
Government such, that King Sebastian offered it him for Life, and he refused;
and when that Excellent Viceroy D. Luis de Ataide returned thither the second
time, he bid him Govern like D. Constantin.

12. His Countenance was beautiful and majestic, his Complexion white, his
Beard thick and black. In the number of Viceroys he was the 7th, in that of
Governors the 20th, and held it three years.

CHAP. XVII.
The Government of the Viceroy D. Francis Coutinho, Count de Redondo, from the
Year 1561, till 1564, in the Reign of King SEBASTIAN.

1. IN the beginning of September arrived at Goa D. Francis Coutinho, Count de
1561.
Redondo, no less known for his witty Sayings, than his Actions in Peace and
War. He brought five Ships, and sailed from Lisbon the beginning of the Year.
The Count having sent Commanders to several Forts, dispatched five Ships for
Portugal, in one of which went D. Constantin. Next he sent D. Francis
Mascarenhas with 650 Men in 23 Ships, to seek out Cafar's Galleys that were
abroad a pilfering; but he missing of them through neglect, returned to the
Coast of Malabar, where he secured the Trading Ships for the term of three
Months, and then went into Port.

2. In February the Viceroy sent George de Moura with three Galleons, and some
small Vessels, to secure our Ships that were to come from Ormuz against Cafar's
Galleys. On the Coast of Caxem he met a Ship of Achem of great strength and
value, it carried 500 fighting Men and 50 Pieces of Brass Cannon. Toward Night
Peter Lopez de Rebelo stood up with and boarded her, whereupon ensued a bloody
Fight. The Enemy fired the Galleon, and Antony Cabral coming up in the Night
with another, thinking it was the Ship, attacks the Galleon. Perceiving his
Mistake he drew off, and the Ship taking fire both were inevitably lost. Cabral
saved Rebelo and his Men. Of the Enemy only a few escaped in the Longboat.
Moura was coming on with the rest of the Ships, when discovering a Sail he gave
it chase, but in vain. He cruized there some time and saw several Ships, but
could not fetch up any.

3. In September arrived in India 6 Ships from Portugal, with 3000 Land-men.
The Viceroy was preparing to set out for the Sea of Calicut, whilst Cide
Meriam was marching to besiege Damam with 800 Horse and 1000 Foot, after doing
much harm in the Neighboring Villages. Our Men went out to meet them, a
Dominican carrying a Crucifix before them; at the first Charge several of our
Men fell, and among them the Dominican; a Soldier took up the Crucifix and
marched before till a Ball broke the Arm of it, which much stirred up our Men
to revenge. In the heat of the Action Cide appears, calling upon Garcia
Rodriguez, who spurring his Horse met, and with a stroke of his Lance
dismounted him; but Garcia fell too, and Meriam recovering came at him with his
Cimiter; Garcia embraces him fast, and so they strugled till one of our
Soldiers run Meriam through with a Pike. Our Captain mounted again, and
running into the thickest of the Enemy, they were disordered and fled; many
were killed, many taken, and a considerable Booty.

4. About the beginning of December the Viceroy set out of Goa with 140 Sail,
in which number were ten very large Galleys; in this Fleet were 4000 Men. All
this Preparation was only to meet Zamori, and Swear to the Peace already
concluded. They met at Tiracole, the Vice Roy walking through a Lane made by
his 4000 Men, and the King through another of 40000. After the usual Ceremonies
the Articles were read, and then sworn to by each after his own manner.

5. The Count returning to Cochim, dispatched the Ships for Portugal, which
arrived safe, except one that was never heard of. The Portugueses of this great
Fleet having no other employments for their Swords, fell to Challenging one
another, by which means above 50 were killed. The grounds of these Quarrels are
commonly so idle and ridiculous, that it is not worth time to mention any of
them.

6. The Vice Roy began this Year, sending some Commanders to several Parts:
1563.
But there was nothing of moment, but the Business of Amboina, one of the
Maluco's, whither he sent Henry de Sa with some Relief. Amboina is an Island in
that Eastern Sea, about 16 Leagues in compass; but contains in that little
Space many good Towns. Jordan de Freytas, Commander of Ternate, got a Grant of
it for himself (as is before said) from the King of it, who being converted by
his means repayed him with that Gift, which afterward fell to the Crown of
Portugal. Sa sent his Nephew Vasco thither to build a Fort; but he behaved
himself so ill, that he estranged the Hearts of all the People, chiefly the
Inhabitants of Ative, where he was; and those of Aito, not far distant. The
better to compass their Revenge, they offered Subjection to the Queen of
Iapara, in the Island Iava, that she might assist them with her Shipping. The
other Islands also sent a Fleet, and joining with those that were in Arms,
killed many of the Christians newly converted by St. Francis Xaverius. One of
these called Emanuel, gathering a Number, put a stop to this Current, till
Henry de Sa joining they totally defeated all those Enemies, with a great
slaughter of them. Then Sa took in hand the punishing the Rebels, among which
were two Infamous Portugueses, who had laid the muzzles of their Muskets to
Emanuel, because he defended the New Christians; that it may appear, there are
many New Christians better than the Old. Peace being settled, the Spiritual
Conquest was carried on.

7. In Ceylon Madune, always aiming to deprive his Brother, the King of Cota,
of his Kingdom, kept his Son Raju in the Field with a good Force. Raju with
30000 Men besieges the Fort of Columbo, Commanded by Baltasar Guedez de Sousa.
He battered it several days with great Fury, but found such opposition he was
forced to draw off, and marched to the City Cota, two Leagues distant, not
doubting to carry it, having been reinforced and believing the Portugueses were
not in condition to Relieve it. Yet Baltasar Guedez was there as soon as he
with 400 Men. The City was besieged, and the Attacks carried on vigorously, and
backed with Elephants. Many Portugueses were here seen fight with those Beasts
single, and with many Wounds drive them back upon their own Men.

8. Though bravely defended, the Town was in great danger by reason of the
Enemies great number, had not James de Melo Coutinho, Commander of Manar, come
opportunely with 400 Men and Provisions. Raju seeing this Relief raised the
Siege, having lost 2000 Men. On our side twenty were killed, and three
Franciscans. The King repaired his Works, and Coutinho returned to his Command,
leaving the Men he brought.

9. This Year sailed from Lisbon four Ships, one of them was forced back, three
arrived at Goa, one whereof sunk there. The Viceroy sent D. Francis de
Mascarenhas to Cananor with fifteen Sail, we being then at War with that King.
Hierom Diaz de Meneses staid behind with his Ship, in which were forty tried
Soldiers. He met three Parao's of Malabars, and could not with Honor avoid
them; so making up to the foremost laid it aboard, and killing most of the
Moors, had taken it, but that the other two coming up forced our Men to defend
their own Ship, and though they behaved themselves with great bravery, were by
the multitude of Enemies drove into the Poop, whence breaking out again they
cleared their Decks, killing 60 Moors. They parted, and Diaz pursued his Voyage.

10. The Viceroy dispatched two Ships for Portugal, which after a dangerous
Voyage arrived safe. Hearing what had happened, Hierom Diaz with the Malabars,
who continued their Piracies contrary to the Peace so lately sworn, he
complained to Zamori. He Answered coldly, because his Intentions were never
sincere, That those were some Rebels, and whosoever met them might punish them.
The Count meditating Revenge, heard above 80 Vessels of Malabars were sailing
for Calicut; these he resolved to destroy, and if Zamori complained, to Answer
after this manner, That they were some Rebels had done it, whoever took might
punish them. To this he sent Dominick de Mesquita, a Man of Valor and no nice
Conscience, as was requisite for such an Action, with 120 Men in three Ships.
He cruised upon the Coast of Carapatan, and took by two and three at a time
twenty four Sail. The Vessels he sunk, some of the Men he beheaded, others he
sewed up in their Sails and threw them into the Sea. Above 2000 died after this
manner, so that all the Coast of Malabar was filled with Cries for the loss of
Friends and Goods. This Action soon after produced a very tedious War.

11. This was the Viceroys last Action, and scarce came to his knowledge; for
he died very suddenly about the end of February. His Death was lamented,
because he was beloved. He was neither Prodigal, nor Covetous, a great lover of
Justice, and so happy in witty Expressions, that all pleasant Sayings were
Fathered upon him. His Countenance was jovial, his Eyes lively. In the number
of Viceroys he was the 8th, and ^e 21th of Governors, and held it two ^s and
five Months; the third of the Name, ^rst of the Surname, and second that had
the Title of Count, for D. Vasco de Gama was the first.

12. At this time our Famous Poet, Luis de Camoens, was at Goa, and had been
well looked upon and favored by the two last Viceroys. The Governor Francis
Barreto had Imprisoned, and then banished him for Debts and some youthful
Extravagancies; and the Count toward the End of his Government, had again
given him up to the Law, and he was cast in Prison. We shall hereafter see him
deceitfully carried to Zofala, and there sold. Such is the hard Fate of great
Wits.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Government of John de Mendoza, for six Months of the Year 1564, in the
Reign of King SEBASTIAN.

1. JOhn de Mendoca, late Comma^er of 1564.
Malaca, succeeded the Vice-R^ with the Title of Governor. As soon as he had
taken the Sword, there came to him Ambassadors from Zamori, complaining of the
Harm Dominick de Mesquita had done the beginning of the year to his Subjects,
contrary to the Peace so solemnly sworn. The Governor answered as the Count
designed to have done; That it was perhaps some Portugues who was in Rebellion;
that they might punish him if taken, and he would do the same. The Ambassadors
had nothing to say; but before their departure came in Dominick de Mesquita,
and the Governor (not to carry on the Show too far) caused him in their
presence to be apprehended. As soon as their backs were turned he released, and
rewarded him as his good Service deserved.

2. A Woman of a bold Spirit, and of good Repute among her People, Wife to one
of those killed by Mesquita, running about the City of Cananor with loud Cries
and Complaints, stirred up the Moors to revenge that Action. They all run to
Arms, swearing not to lay them down, till they had rooted out the Portugueses
from among them. They beset the Fort where D. Payo ^e Noronha Commanded, and
the King unexpectedly set fire to above thirty Ships that ^ode under the
shelter of it. The Governor sent immediately Andrew de Sousa with six Sail to
the relief of that Fort, where Ade Rajao already was with a great Power. Thus
began the War of Malabar, and went on slowly.

3. It being now the beginning of September, the Ships arrived from Portugal,
in which went the Viceroy D. Antony de Noronha, to whom the Governor
delivered the Sword, and went out of India poor, after bearing honorable and
advantageous Employments. He was the 22th Governor, and held it half a year,
was the second of the Name, and first of the Surname.

4. Since the short time of his Government afforded not Matter enough for a
Chapter, I will give some Account of the Zamories and Preaching of St. Thomas
the Apostle. It is before related how Perimal, who divided the Empire of
Malabar into several Kingdoms, was persuaded to Mahometanism, and went to end
his days at Meca. This was a false Invention of the Moors; for there were
several Sovereign Princes in Malabar 500 years before the Birth of Christ.
Malabar lies between the Points of Cananor and Cape Comori, 150 Leagues in
length, and about 15 in breadth up the Inland, expiring at the Foot of a
Mountain that runs through all that length. The chief Sovereignties therein are
Cananor, Tanor, Moringue, Cranganor, Parum, Mungate, Repelim, Cochim, Diamper,
Pimienta, Turungule, Maturte, Porca, Marta, Pitimene, Calecoulam, Coulam,
Changernate, Gundra and Travancor.

5. The differences that often arose between these Sovereigns, obliged them to
choose an Arbitrator, who was to be but of indifferent Fortune, to prevent his
growing too powerful; and the Office was not to be hereditary, but he always
chose by consent of those Princes. This Arbitrator they called Xara Perimal,
and appointed his residence to be in the City Calicut; so ancient is this
Employment. The great concourse of Merchants from all parts to that City,
caused it in time to rise to an Empire, though such care had been taken to
prevent it. This Dignity of Emperor (which is signified by the word Zamori)
continued till the Year of Grace 347, according to the Records of Calicut; but
according to those of Cochim, till 588. Whenever it was, Xara Perimal then
Reigned, who tired with the Cares of a Crown, and having some knowledge of the
Evangelical Doctrine, as being a great Favourer of the Christians of St. Thomas,
inhabiting at Cranganor, he resolved to end his days at Meliapor, serving in
that Church. By Consent of all his Princes he resigned the Crown to Manuchem
Herari his Page, esteemed worthy and able to Govern that Empire. Perimal died
at Meliapor, and it is thought one of those Bodies found with the Apostles was
his. Since his time till now have been above 110 Zamories, of whose Names we do
not make a Catalogue, because they are all called Manuchem and Zamori, in
memory of that first Successor of Perimal. Another Relation says; This Perimal
was one of the three Kings that went to adore our Savior, new Born at
Bethlehem, and perhaps that might be the Reason of his following the Apostle
St. Thomas. In an ancient Manuscript of two hundred years standing, I have
found what follows: Melchior was King of Nubia and Arabia; Baltasar, of Goli
and Saba; Gaspar, of Tharsis, Insula, and Grisola, where the Body of St. Thomas
lies, and they were afterward by him made Bishops, and suffered Martyrdom with
him.

6. In this Empire (so in all the Kingdoms of it) the Sons do not Inherit, but
the Nephews born of Sisters, by reason of the ill conceit they have of the
Mothers, believing this way they secure the Royal Descent. The Princesses that
bring forth these Heirs, get them in this manner: The Princess is Married to a
Neighboring Prince, who leaves her untouched; a Nayre of the Family of
Naburii, destined for this Employ, gets her Maidenhead, and then departs, never
more to be seen in the Country upon pain of Death. The Princess afterward
chooses others among the Naburiis, of whom she makes use till she has
Conceived. She has liberty to choose among them all, but none of them can court
her upon pain of Death. The Nayres are very poor, few of them can maintain a
Wife; and he that can, need not fear another corrupting of her. For this Reason
three or four of them join to maintain a Woman, and that is their manner of
Marriage: When one goes to the Wife, he leaves his Buckler at the Door, which
is a sign one is within; and if another comes, he must stay. The Kingdom of
Cochin was subject to this Empire, though without paying Tribute, and made free
by the Portugueses in requital, for the fidelity of the King Uniramacoul, who
Reigned when we first discovered India, and exposed himself to utter danger of
being ruined, rather than deliver up the Portugueses to Zamori. King Emanuel
sent him a Crown of Gold by the Viceroy D. Francis de Almeyda, which he
received, submitting himself as a Subject to Portugal, without any other
acknowledgment; but is yearly presented with two pieces of Gold; the one a
Portugues, being a Coin worth 18 Ducats, on the 1st of January; the other on
the day of the Epiphany, is a Cup worth 640, Thus much of the Empire of Malabar.

7. As to Meliapor, for what relates to the Apostle: It is the received Opinion
he was killed at Antenodur, a Mountain a League distant from the Town, where he
had two Caves, whither he retired to Pray. The nearest now belongs to the
Jesuits, the other is the Church of our Lady of the Mount. He being one day at
Prayer in the former, opposite to a Clift that gave Light to it, one of the
Bramens, who was watching, thrust a Lance through that Hole in such manner,
that a piece of it remaining in his Body, he went to the other Cave, and there
died, embracing a Stone on which a Cross was carved. Hence his Disciples
removed and Buried him in his Church, where he was found by Emanuel de Faria,
or Frias, and the Priest Antony Penteado, sent thither on purpose by King
Emanuel.

8. In the Year 1547, being about to repair that Oratory where the Apostle
died, digging they found a Stone, which seems to be the same he held then. It
is about a yard long, and three quarters wide, the Color gray, with some red
spots. In the middle of it is carved a Portal round at the Top, with Letters
between the two Borders; within two Banisters, rather than Pillars; being
turned, on which are two twisted Figures, like Dogs sitting, from whose Necks
rises a graceful Arch of five Borders, and between every two are knots like
Beads. In the hollow of this Door is a Pedestal of two Steps, from the
uppermost of which rises a Branch on each side, and over them, as it were in
the Air, is a Cross, the ends of it like to that of the Military Order of
Alcantara, as the History relates; but the Print shows them like three half
Moons, the Unequal sides outward, and the Points meeting, as commonly we see in
many ancient Churches in Europe. Over all is a Dove flying, as it were
descending to touch the Cross with its Beak. There are ancient Pillars in the
East with Doves after this manner. One preserved in the Pagod of Negapatan, has
carved on it a Cock, a Rope and a Candle. There is a Tradition, it came of it
self to those parts by Sea, with a Candle burning.

9. The Chapel being repaired, or beautified in the Year 1551, the Stone was
solemnly set up in it, and at the time the Priest pronounced those words of the
Gospel; Missus est Angelus Gabriel, etc. it began to change color, and became
black and shining, then sweating turned to its own color, plainly discovering
the spots of Blood which before were obscure. The Letters about it could not be
understood till the Year 1561; a Learned Bramen said, they were 36
Hieroglyphics, every one containing a Sentence, and were to this effect: In
the time of the Son of Sagad the Gentile, who Reigned 30 years, came upon Earth
one only GOD, and was Incarnate in the Womb of a Virgin: He abolished the Law
of the Jews, whom he punished for the Sins of Men, after he had been in the
World 33 years, and taught Twelve Servants the Truth he preached. A King of
Three Crowns, Cheralacone, Indalacone, Cuspandiad; and King Alexander of the
Kingdom Ertinabarad, with Catherine his Daughter, and many Virgins and six
Families, voluntarily followed the Law of Thomas, because it was the Law of
Truth, and he gave them the Sign of the Cross to adore. Going up to the place
of Antenodur, a Bramen run him through with a Lance, and he embraced this
Cross, which was stained with his Blood, and his Disciples carried him to
Maiale, and Buried him in his Church with the Lance in his Body. And because We
the abovenamed Kings saw this, we carved these Letters here. Hence, besides
the Story, is gathered, That Maiale was the ancient Name of the City Meliapor,
now called St. Thomas. This Stone afterward sweated sometimes: Till the Year
1561 it was a good Omen; since then a bad one.

10. In the time of the Priest Penteado were also found three Brass Plates
about a Span long, and half as broad, in shape like a Scutcheon, on the top a
Ring. On the one side was a Cross and Peacock, the ancient Arms of Meliapor; on
the other, Characters which were explained by another Learned Bramen. The first
part was Titles of the King; Boca Raja, Son of Campula Raja, and Grandson of
Atela Raja. He begins confessing, One God without beginning, Maker of all
things. And says of himself, That he is as Great a Gentleman as the Beast
Chigsan, and as one of the five Kings who conquered 99: That he is as strong as
one of the eight Elephants that the World stands upon, and that he Conquered
the Kingdoms of Otia Tulcan and Canara, cutting his Enemies to pieces with his
Sword. The other Plates contained Grants of Lands to St. Thomas, directed to
himself, and calling him Abidarra Modeliar. Whence may be gathered, these
Princes Reigned at the time that Christ suffered. One of them begins thus:
After the Year 1259, in the first Year called Icarrana Rachan, on the 12th day
of the New Moon of the good Year, I give in Alms to the Saint Abidarra
Modeliar, etc. Thus Another: This is a Token of Almsdeeds to purchase Paradise,
and all Kings that perform them shall obtain much more, and he that disannuls
them shall be 60000 years with the Worms in Hell, etc.

11. It has always been controverted, which way St. Thomas came into India. The
Heathen History says, That St. Thomas and St. Thaddeus being in Mesopotamia,
they parted at the City Edessa; and the former sailing with some Merchants came
to the Island Zocotora, and after Converting the People, passed to Mogodover
Patana, a City of Paru in Malabar, where he built a Church. The King keeping
there the Wedding of his Son, some Jewish Women came to sing, and their Music
was Texts of Scripture, many of them fulfilled by the Life and Death of our
Savior. St. Thomas being present, was so rapt, hearing those Prophecies from
them People, that a Heathen observing it gave him a Box on the Ear. Soon after
going to fetch Water, a Tiger bit off his Hand. He came running to tell his
Misfortune, and after him a Dog with the Hand in his Mouth. The Apostle took,
and set it on again, so that no Mark remained. Then he went to Calicut, and
converted Xa Perimal. There is an Account, That he went to the Mogol's Country,
where Chesetrigal then Reigned, and after being in China recurned to India,
visiting the Province of Tibet, and settled at Meliapor, where he ended.

12. In the Year 800 arrived at Mogodover, or Patana, a rich Christian
Armenian, called Thomas Cananeus, who with his Company presented himself to the
King: He received him with Kindness, and soon after won by his Presents, gave
him the Lands of Cranganor and City Patana, where there was scarce any
Footsteps of St. Thomas his Church. On those Foundations he built another;
another at Cranganor by the name of St. Thomas, now standing within our Fort;
another of our Lady, and another of St. Ciriacus. These being the Works of
Thomas Cananeus, made them erroniously be believed the Apostles. Afterward
were found other Plates containing Grants of Lands to the Disciples and
Successors of the Apostles.

12. It may reasonably be believed, that Pagod where Gama entered, as he went
from Calicut to Zamorie's Palace, was of this Foundation, because the Image of
our Lady was there called Mary by the Heathens; and it being believed one of
the three Kings that went to Bethlehem was of Malabar. The Heathens yearly
celebrate a Feast to St. Thomas, to preserve their Ships; because formerly many
of them used to be Castaway sailing to Parvi.

End of the Second Part.
THE Portugues Asia. TOM. I. PART III.
CHAP. I.
Conquests under King Emanuel, from the Year 1515, to the Year 15^8. Lope
Soarez de Albergaria, being Governor.

1. THE great Alfonso de Albuquerque was drawing toward 1515.
the last Period of his Life, when King Emanuel, as if he had foreseen it, sent
a new Governor with a Fleet for India. The Governor was Lope Soarez de
Albergaria, the Fleet consisted of thirteen Ships, and in them fifteen hundred
fighting Men, many Gentlemen by Birth, most such by their Actions. Among them
was Duarte Galvam, a Person of Learning, Authority and Judgment, who went
Ambassador to Prester John, with rich Presents; some for him, some for the
Church. The Governor being arrived at Cochin, by his (perhaps rather affected
than natural) reservedness became disagreeable to many, and particularly to the
King, who was used to Albuquerque's discreet Civility. D. Garcia de Noronha,
who took Charge of the Dispatch of the homeward bound trading Ships, went away
with them after no small Disagreement with Lope Soarez. Till this time the
Gentlemen had followed the Dictates of true Honor, esteeming their Arms the
greatest Riches; from this time forwards they so wholly gave up themselves to
trading, that those who had been Captains became Merchants, so that what had
been Command became a Shame, Honor was a Scandal, and Reputation a Reproach.
Lope Soarez entered upon the Government. He visited the Forts, placed in them
new Captains, gave out Orders and such other Affairs of small moment, which
rather serve to fill Paper than increase the Substance of a History.

2. This year sailed from Lisbon five Ships under the Command of John de
Silveyra, three of them arrived in India, the other two were lost on the Sands
of St. Lazaro. The Governor prepared, according to the King's Order, for the
Red Sea; and being informed, that the Sultan was fitting out a great Fleet at
Suez, he sailed in search thereof 1516.
from Goa, on the eighth of February, with twenty seven Sail of several sorts
and Sizes. In this Fleet were twelve hundred Portugueses, eight hundred Malabar
Soldiers, and eight hundred Seamen of the same Nation. He arrived before the
City Aden, the Commander whereof Miramirzan, finding himself defenseless, by
reason a piece of the Wall was beaten down by Raez Soliman, Admiral of the Suez
Fleet, Lope Soarez went in search of, he made a Virtue of Necessity, and
offered the Keys to Lope Soarez, affirming he would have done the same to
Albuquerque, had not he begun by Acts of Hostility. Lope Soarez pleased with
this Flattery, trusted to him, and took not possession of the City, but went
away in search of Raez Soliman, thinking first to find out him, and then take
the City; and neither did he take Aden at his return, nor meet Soliman as he
went. He went up the Red Sea, in quest of Solomon, but with bad Fortune; for D'
Alvaro de Castro was lost with forty Men through Covetousness; for having taken
some. Vessels, he so overloaded his own with the Goods, that it sunk down to
rights. Other Ships sustained much damage. Hearing that Solomon was drove by
stress of Weather to Ioda, and had no Defense, he resolved to sail thither.

3. Ioda (or as the Arabs call it) Gidda, is seated in Arabia Felix in twenty
one Degrees and half of North Latitude, in a most barren Soil, being all a deep
Sand. It was a Colony of Moors, who attended more to Trade, than Delight. The
Buildings are good, but not the Harbor; the Inhabitants of two sorts, the
native Arabs, and foreign Merchants. The Town was fortified by Mir Hozem, after
he was defeated by D. Francisco de Almeyda, for his own Security, being afraid
to return to the Sultan, but upon pretense of the Defense of the Sepulcher of
Mahomet and his Prince. When Hozem was busy in this Work, came to the Sultan
Raez Solomon, a Turk of base Parentage, but a powerful and bold Pyrate, born in
the Island Mitylene of the Archipelago. He offered himself to command the Fleet
of twenty seven Sail, that was preparing at Suez to fall upon Aden, an employ
Mir Hozem had set his Heart upon. The old Servant was laid aside, and the
Stranger received. The punishment of this Inconstancy soon fell upon Ioda. For
Solomon after repairing the Loss sustained at Aden (where many of his Men were
killed) and taking a great Booty in the City Zeibid, returned to Gidda, where
he slew Mir Hozem, and then delivered the City to the Turk, who not long before
had killed the Sultan in Battle. This was the occasion that Lope Soarez found
Solomon at Gidda.

4. The Port being dangerous, Lope Soarez anchored a League from the City, in
which there was so good Cannon, that three or four Pieces reached the Ships at
that distance. There came a Messenger from Solomon, offering a private Combat
between Man and Man, or as Soarez should propose. The Challenge was received by
Gaspar de Silva, and D. Antonio de Meneses, but the Governor would not permit,
saying he would answer ashore. He sounded a Channel that goes up to the City,
which was terrified by the firing of a Galeon. Solomon appeased the Tumult, and
appeared with some Men without the Walls, whilst multitudes appeared on them,
filling the Air with loud Cries. Lope Soarez delayed the landing two days, till
his Men began to complain of the delay. He appeased them by showing his
Instructions, wherein he was ordered to fight the Fleet, which he could not
compass, not to attack that City where there might be much danger and little
profit. Tho Votes differed, it was resolved in Council to desist. He retired to
the Island Camaran, whence he sent some to several parts of that Sea. Here died
Duarte Galvam, a studious and ingenious Man, who had been Ambassador in several
parts of Europe, and was going now in the same quality, being above seventy
years of Age, to Prester John. At his death he said, that his Son George Galvam
and all his Men were cast away in their Vessel, and that in the Island of
Dalaca they had cut off the Heads of Laurence de Cosme and others that were
sent thither. It being impossible this News could be brought to the Island
where he died, yet was afterward found true.

5. After suffering much through Famine, whereof some Men died, and losing
seventeen Portugueses, taken by the Moors, and carried to Gidda, Lope Soarez
set sail, and appeared before the City Zeyla, on the Mouth of the Red Sea, and
the African Shore, called by Ptolomy, Emporium Avalite, being the great Market
of those parts. The Town was easily taken, being unprovided, and burnt, and
then the Fleet bent its course to Aden.

6. Here Soarez found how much he had been to blame in not taking possession
when offered by Miramirzan; for he finding his Enemy now weaker, and the Wall
repaired, refused by forming Delays what before he offered with haste. Lope
Soarez fearing to lose time, durst not call Miramirzan to account, but set
sail, designing to do the same at the City Barbora, as he had done at Zeyla.
But the Fleet was scattered by Storms, and drove to several Ports, and when
they came after to hear of one another, it was found above eight hundred Men
had perished by Hunger, Sickness and Shipwreck. All which Misfortunes made the
loss of the most fortunate Albuquerque be the more lamented.

7. Whilst these Disstasters attended Lope Soarez, another threatened the City
Goa, where D. Gutierre de Monroy commanded. According to the Orders left him by
Soarez, some Ships of the Enemy were taken of more Value than Reputation, and
with more Danger than Profit. One Alvaro Madureira, who was married in Goa,
fled to the Enemy, and turned Moor, then was reconciled, and falling again,
brought the Indians to attack our Ships, putting them in great danger. And
because Troubles seldom come alone, it happened that one Ferdinando Caldera,
who also was married there, flying the punishment of Crimes, followed the
Example of Madureira, or (as was said) terrified by the Threats of D. Gutierre,
who desired his absence, being in love with his Wife. This is likely, since
there was scarce ever any great Mischief without a Woman at the end of it.
Caldera went to serve Ancostan, an Officer of Hidalcan. D. Gutierre demanded
him, because he desired not his absence that way. Ancostan refused to deliver
him. The other challenged him, but he accepted not. De Gutierre sent one who
pretending to be a Deserter should kill Caldera, he executed it, and was killed
upon the Body by the Moors. Lope Soarez arriving at Goa was informed by D.
Gutierre what had passed, and left it to him take the revenge he thought fit of
Ancostan, which produced the loss of Men and Reputation, and brought upon the
City a dangerous Siege. It fell out thus.

8. As soon as D. Gutierre had this leave of the Governor, he prepared to put
his Designs in execution, and when he thought time, sent out his Brother D.
Fernando with one hundred and fifty Portugueses, whereof eighty were Horse, and
a great number of Canaras, against Ancostan. At Ponda they routed the Moors,
who rallying, obliged D. Ferdinando to retire, having lost two hundred Men,
killed and taken. This caused all the Country to rise in Arms against the
Portugueses, and Hidalcan pretending the Peace was broke, to order his General
Sufo Lari to besiege Goa. Sufo Lari appeared with four thousand Horse and
twenty six thousand Foot, and attempted to pass into the Island, but was
repulsed. Hunger began to press the Besieged, till three Ships arrived, one
from Portugal, another from Quiloa, and another from China, so Lari raised the
Siege, and the former Peace was confirmed.

9. The same Misfortune attended Malaca, through the ill Government of George
de Brito, and Animosities of others. The People fled from Malaca, because of
their tyrannical Usage, and the King of it that had been prepared to recover
it, sending before to this effect his General Cerilige de Raja, with
considerable Forces, and some Cannon. He entrenched himself, and so pressed the
Besieged, that had not D. Alexius de Meneses come to take the Government with
three hundred Men, then had ended the Portugues Possession of Malaca.

10. Anthony de Saldana arrived now in India with six Ships from Portugal. In
this Fleet went one Alcacova as Surveyor of 1517.
the King's Revenue, with such a Power as lessened that of Lope Soarez, and
with a will to take it all away. There soon broke out the Flame of Contention
between these two. Alcacova bore down by such as envied him, took revenge on
himself by returning to Portugal, and on them there by causing them to be
called to account for their Proceedings. Hence began the hearing Complaints
against the Governors and Commanders of India, and hence it was that many took
more care to heap Riches than Honor, knowing them to be a protection against
all Crimes. Lope Soarez sent D. John de Silveira to the Maldivy Islands, D.
Alexius de Meneses to Malaca, Manuel de la Cerda to Diu, and Antony de Soldana
with six Ships, by the King's Order to the Coast of Arabia. They arrived at the
City Barbora near to Zeyla, and not unlike to it, but much less. It was taken
without resistance, the Inhabitants being all fled. It was burnt, and the
Fleet, without doing any thing remarkable, returned to India at such time as
Lope Soarez was sailing for the Island Ceylon.

CHAP. II.
A Continuation of what was done in India the same Year 1517, during the
Government of the same Lope Soarez de Albergaria.

1. THE Island Ceylon is opposite to Cape Comori, and is the Southermost Land
of India, within Ganges, distant from the Continent sixteen Leagues, once, as
some imagine, joined to it, in length about eighty Leagues, and forty five in
breadth. The Southermost Point is in the Latitude of six degrees, the most
Northerly in about ten. In this Sea is a Fishery of precious Pearls. The
ancient Inhabitants of it called it Ilanare. The Persians and Arabs, Seradib.
It took the Name of Ceylon from the Sea that parts it from the Continent,
because being dangerous, and the Chinese having lost a great Fleet there,
called it Chilam, that is to say, Danger (it somewhat resembles Scylla) and
corruptly it was called Ceylon. This is the ancient Trapobana, and not Sumatra,
as some have imagined. It produces many things, Cinnamon better than that of
all other places, Rubies, Saphires and other precious Stones, much Pepper and
Cardamum, Brasil Wood, and other Dies, great Woods of Palm Trees, the Elephants
bred there the most sensible, much Cattle, has good Ports, and several Rivers
of good Water. The Mountains are covered with pleasant Woods, one particularly
rising the space of seven Leagues, on the top whereof is a round plain of about
thirty paces Diameter, in the Center whereof rises a smooth Rock about six
spans above the rest, on the Superficies whereof is the Print of a Man's Foot
about two spans in length. This Footstep is held in great veneration, being
thought to be of a holy Man born at Delhi, who lived many years on that
Mountain, preaching to the Inhabitants the Belief of one only God, who
afterward returning to his own Country, sent one of his Teeth to the Kings of
that Island, as a Token to remember him, and they keep it as a Relict whereon
they repose much Confidence in time of Danger. On this account resort thither
many Pilgrims from places a thousand Leagues distant. The Island is divided
into nine Kingdoms, the chiefest Columbo on the West. The others Gale on the
South; Iaula, Tanavaca, Cande, Batecalon, Vilacem, Triquinamale, and
Iafanapatam.

2. The King of Columbo in Ceylon had a Trade with the Portugueses, desired
their Friendship, and furnished them with Cinnamon from the time of
Albuquerque. Lope Soarez went thither now with a Design to oblige him to pay
Tribute, and to build a Fort as King Emanuel desired. He had with him seven
Galleys, two Ships, and eight small Vessels with the Materials and Workmen for
the Building, and 700 Portugues Soldiers. They had bad Weather, but arrived
safe. The King presently granted leave to build a Fort, and the Moors as soon
altered his mind, and he received Soarez going to begin the Work in such manner
as put him to a straight; but in the end the Enemies were put to flight. They
had fortified themselves to hinder the Work, and Lope Soarez did the same now
to begin it. The King came to composition, the Articles were that he should be
a Subject to Portugal, paying a yearly Tribute of twelve hundred Quintals of
Cinnamon, twelve Rings of Rubies and Saphires, and six Elephants, for Soarez
would not admit his Excuses, wherein he blamed the Foreign Merchants.

3. At this time arrived from the Maldives, John de Silveyra with four Sail; in
his way he took two Ships of Cambaya, and the King of the Island granted leave
to erect a Factory. He went with the same Design to Bengala, where he was in
great Danger, for there a Bengalian young Man that sailed with him, discovered
the taking of the two Ships which were sent to Cochin, and so he was looked
upon as a Pyrate not worthy to be heard. It had been worse with him, had not
John Coello arrived then with his Ship from Pacem, being sent on the same
Errand by Ferdinando Perez de Andrade, to the King of Bengala. Don John de
Silveyra, set Sail hence after passing the Winter with great hardship,
especially through Famine. He was invited by the King of Arracam to his Port,
who, with the Messenger sent him a Present, but all his Kindnesses tended to
destroy him at the instigation of the Governor of the other Port. This
Treachery took no effect, and he arrived at Ceylon at the time that Lope Soarez
finished the Fort, who gave him the command of it, and left Anthony de Miranda
de Azevedo with four Ships to cruise in that Sea.

4. Whilst these things were acted at Maldivia, Chatigam and Columbo, D.
Alexius Meneses secured Malaca, being arrived with Men and Ammunition, and
putting an end to the Divisions of the Portugueses about succeeding the
Governor who lay dying. Alfonso Lopez de Costa had the government, and Duarte
de Melo the command of the Sea. Duarte Coello was sent with an Embassy and
Present from King Emanuel to him of Siam, the substance of it was to confirm
the Peace, and as a token of it, that he would send People to inhabit Malaca,
that so the Moors whom he hated as much as we, might be totally expelled. He
granted all with great satisfaction, and as a testimony of his Sincerity,
caused to be erected in a remarkable place of the City Hudia, where he then
was, a Cross with the Arms of Portugal on it. Coello having thus succeeded was
thrown by stress of weather upon the Coast of Pam, the King whereof received
him friendly, and voluntarily submitted himself to the Crown of Portugal with
an yearly tribute of a Gold Cup. This action was done rather in hatred to the
King of Bintam than of any love to us.

5. The Kingdom of Siam where Coello had now been settling Peace, is one of the
three greatest of Asia, the others are that of China and that of Bisnagar. The
great River Menam runs through the middle of the Kingdom of Siam as it lies in
length, the River has its spring in the great Lake Chiamay in the Latitude of
30 Degrees, and falls into the Sea in 13 Degrees, so that the length of this
Kingdom is 330 Leagues. On the West of it is Bengala, on the South Malaca, on
the East Cambodia, and on the North China. It contains much Mountain and Plain,
and in both sundry sorts of People, some most barbarous and cruel, who feed on
human Flesh, as the Guei who for ornament make figures on their Bodies with hot
Irons. Here are bred many Elephants, black Cattle and Buffaloes. It has many
Seaport Towns and populous Cities. Hudia is the Metropolis or Court. The Faith
of the Siamites agrees in many considerable points with the Christian, as one
God, Heaven and Hell, Good and Bad Angels attending each body. They build
sumptuous Temples, in which they place Idols of vast bigness. They are very
religious, sparing in Diet, much given to divination, studious, particularly in
Astrology. All the Land is most fruitful, abounds in Gold and Silver, and other
Metals. The memorable services of Subjects are recorded to be read to the
Princes, not the favors of the Kings. Against this King takes the Field, he
has in a readiness almost 300000 Men, 10000 Elephants, and other Beasts of
burden.

6. About this time Fernan Perez de Andrade (sent by the King to several
discoveries) sailing toward the Bay of Bengala, arrived at Pacem the
Metropolis of one of the Kingdoms of Sumatra, where he found Portugueses
trading, and was well received of that King. Here he lost his biggest Ship,
burnt by a Candle carelessly set up, and was thereby obliged to return to
Malaca, sending away John Coello in a Ship of Bengala to expect him there with
what Intelligence he could get till he returned from Malaca. Hence Coello set
out with fresh Instructions for China, and met with furious Storms and other
Dangers. On the Coast of Champa taking in fresh Water, had like to cost him his
Life. At Patane he established Peace and Commerce with the Governor, the same
at other places and thus spent the Winter without reaching China. He returned
to Malaca, and refitted himself for his Voyage, to which he now sets out with
eight Ships.

7. The Empire of China is the most Eastern part of Asia, as Spain the most
Western of Europe. Opposite to it is the Island Hainan, as that of Cadiz to
Spain. It is almost as big as all Europe: Divided from Tartary by a wonderful
Wall running from East to West above 200 Leagues, and ends at a vast Mountain
that like a Promontory is washed by the Eastern Sea. This large Empire is
divided into fifteen Provinces or Governments. Along the Coast Quantung,
Fokien, Chekiang, Nanking, Xantung, Leaotung. The inland, Queicheu, Iunnan,
Quangsi, Suchuen, Huquang, Xensi, Kiangsi, Honan and Xansi, in which are 244
Cities. Its Riches are prodigious, its Government to be admired above all
others. They say they have two Eyes, Europe one, and all the rest of the World
is blind. They had Printing and Cannon long before us. The City Quantung, which
is the Chief on the Coast, is remarkable for its Greatness, Strength of its
Wall, and resort of Strangers most Merchants.

8. Fernan Perez arriving here after some dangers and difficulties, had a
conference with the th^ee Governors of this City, and sent to them one Thomas
Perez with an Embassy and Present from our King to theirs, to be sent forward
to him. He settled a Peace with that City and traded in it and the neighboring
Parts, and then sailed for Malaca, having received advice of the dangerous
condition it was in, by reason of the War with the King of Bintam and the
Discord between the Portugueses.

9. Fernan Perez loaded with Riches, Ammunition, and good Success in China, was
no less welcome at Malaca, than D. Alexius de Meneses had been not long before.
What followed shall be seen hereafter. Now let us turn to behold James Lopez de
Sequeyra newly possessed of the Government. Lope Soarez de Albergaria was the
third Governor. He was a comely Man, very red hair; he is pictured with crimson
Breeches and Doublet, and black Coat lined with the same, his Armor white
adorned with Gold.

CHAP. III.
From the Year 1518, tell the Year 1520, ending the Government of Lope Soarez
de Albergaria, and beginning that of James Lopez de Sequeira, King Emanuel
still reigning.

1. ABout the end of March sailed from 1518.
Lisb^ (...) Ships bound for. India, with 1500 fighting Men, all under the
command of James Lopez de Sequeyra, to whom the King gave the Government of
India as a reward of his good Service in Africa, his discovery of Malaca, and
worthy Qualities. At the Cape of Good Hope, one Ship was in danger of perishing
by means of a great Fish, which running against her, stuck the length of two
spans of a long Beak it has into her side; this was afterward found to be the
Fish called the Needle. Lope Soarez presently resigned the Government to James
Lopez, and set Sail for Portugal with nine Ships. Sequeyra began to act. D.
Alonso de Meneses was sent against Baticala, because it refused to pay. John
Gomez went for Maldivia, where he was to command and build a Fort. These things
dispatched at Cochin, James Lopez went away to Goa, whence he dispatched
others, Anthony de Saldana to the Coast of Arabia, and Simon de Andrade to
China.

2. The King of Bintam who had treacherously concluded a Peace, only that D.
Alexius Meneses and Fernan Perez might depart for Cochin, as soon as they were
gone, attacked Malaca with 1500 Men, and many Elephants, and with 60 Vessels by
Sea. In the City were only 200, many sick, and most unprovided. But this
surprise cured many of their Fevers, and all Men running to oppose the danger,
on both sides there was a sharp engagement for the space of three hours with
great loss to the Enemy, and some on our side. Twenty days the King lay before
the Town, and then retired having lost 330 Men, of ours 18 were killed. Then he
lay to hinder the bringing of Provisions till the Governor sent relief, and
the Portugueses perceiving the damage they received from the Fort of Muar,
whence Sansotea Raja made inroads, they resolved to gain it, and accordingly
gave the assault, and after a vigorous resistance entered, having killed most
of the Defendants, which were 800 Moors, and then burnt it after securing the
spoil, in which were 300 Cannons, some of Brass. Thus Malaca was for a long
time delivered of a dangerous Enemy.

3. The King of Bintam still persisting in his resolution of taking Malaca, the
Inhabitants were reduced to great extremity, having but few Men, many of them
sick, and their Commander Alfonso Lopez ready to die. He delivered the City
from this last danger by resigning his command to Garcia de Sa, who was newly
arrived with 60 Men. Nothing of note happened at this time, only that James
Pacheco going with two Ships in search of the Island of Gold was lost, and most
of his Men.

4. Now arrived at Malaca, Anthony Correa, 1519.
who came from the City Martavan, where he had been concluding a Peace with the
King of Pegu, at the swearing of the Peace assisted with the King's Ministers,
the Priests of both Nations, Catholic and Gentiles. The Heathen was called the
Great Raulim, who after the Capitulations made in the Golden Mine, as is the
Custom of those People were publicly read, began to read in a Book, and then
taking some yellow Paper (a color dedicated to their holy uses) with some
sweet Leaves of Trees, whereon were certain Characters, set Fire to it all, and
then taking the Hands of the King's Minister and holding them over the ashes,
said some words, which rendered the Oath inviolable. Anthony Correa, to answer
this Solemnity, ordered his Priest to put on a Surplice and bring his Breviary,
which was so tottered and torn, that it was scandalous those Heathens should
see how little respect was paid to our sacred Books. Correa observing this,
ordered to be brought instead of it a Book of Church-Musick, which was more
creditable, being bigger and better bound, and opening it, the first Verse he
met was. Vanity of Vanities. This passed among those People as well as if it
had been the Gospel. The Metropolis of this Kingdom is Bagou, corruptly called
Pegu. On the West of it is the Bay of Bengala, on the East the Kingdom of Siam,
on the South that of Malaca, and on the North that of Arracam. The length
almost a 100 Leagues, and in some places the same breadth, not including its
Conquests. The Land is plain, well watered, and therefore fruitful, producing
several Plants and plentiful of Provisions, as well of Cattle as Grain. In it
many Temples with multiplicity of Idols and much variety of Ceremonies. The
People believe themselves to be descended from a Chinese Dog and Woman, who
only escaping from shipwreck on that Coast engendered, and thence they say it is
that the Men are very ugly and not the Women, those taking after the Father,
and these after the Mother. Sodomy being grown much in use among them, a Queen
called Canane endeavoring to banish it, ordered that all should wear small
Bells on the private Parts, thereby to incite them to the use thereof neglected
by that horrid vice.

5. Garcia de Sa encouraged with the relief brought by Anthony Correa, resolved
to show himself to the King of Bintam. He fitted 30 Ships, and in them 500 Men,
whereof 150 were Portugueses, and gave the command of all to Anthony Correa.
They sailed to the place where the King was lodged, which was defended by a
Fort well manned and with much Cannon. The access to it was guarded by many
difficult Passes and Vessels well provided Our Men fell on, and the Moors
stayed not for a second attack, so the Fort was taken and in it 20 pieces of
Cannon. The King retired to the Town and the Portugueses followed, and found
him with 2000 Men and some armed Elephants. Mean while our Ships cleared all
that hindered their going up the River, and then landing killed many and put the
rest to flight, the Town was first plundered and then burnt. The King flying on
an Elephant, stopped not till he came to the Island of Bintam, where he
continued long, wanting Courage and Necessaries to prosecute his hopes.

6. His success in the beginning of this War encouraged the Kings of Pacem and
Achem to commit some outrages against the Portugueses. Garcia de Sa being now
victorious, set out a Ship commanded by Manuel Pacheco to take revenge of the
harms sustained. After some success he sent out a Boat for water, rowed by
Malayes with only five Portugueses in it, on a sudden they espied three Ships
of Pacem with each 150 Men, the Commander made up to them before the others,
and they finding it impossible to escape, boarded the Ship, and laid about them
with such fury that they soon covered the Deck with dead Bodies of the Enemy,
the rest leaped overboard, and after them the Captain, rather to punish them
than save himself, being seen to hue them with his Cymater as he swam. The five
Portugueses were left in possession of the Ship, which the other two perceiving
fled. The King of Pacem terrified with this action offered Peace and
Satisfaction for all the damage he had done, and so Emanuel Pacheco returned to
Malaca with Honor, where the Ship taken was preserved as a monument of so
notable an action. Duarte Coello was then ready to sail for China. More of him
in its proper place, let us see what was done by the Commanders sent abroad by
James Lopez de Sequeyra.

7. John Gomez went to Maldivia to build a Fort there, but behaved himself with
so much pride, that the Moors offended at it, fell upon and killed ten or
twelve Portugueses he had with him. This is the Chief of a thousand Islands
that lie in clusters in that Sea, and such is the signification of Maldivia.
They lie like a long ridge of Mountains, and about the middle of them is this
great one, where the King resides. The Natives are Gentiles governed by Moors,
and the distance between some of them so small that the Yard-arms grate against
the Shoars, and Trees. They are stored with Coco-Trees, the inside whereof is
pleasing Food, and the outward rine of use to make Cables. There is another
sort of these Trees growing in the bottom of the Sea, the Fruit whereof is
bigger than the Coco, and a greater antidote against Poison than Bezoar-stone.

8. Christopher de Sousa sent to the Coast of Dabul did much execution, not
without some loss. Christopher de Sa in the Bay of Cambaya gave some trouble to
Melique Az, obliging him to lay up his Fleet of Boats.

9. This year King Emanuel sent a Fleet of fourteen Ships to the relief of
India, which was dispersed to several parts. The Commander in Chief George de
Albuquerque and four more arrived in India. Six stayed at Mozambique. Some fell
into the Coast of Brasil where fifty of the Men were killed, and one of the
Captains D' Luis de Guzman wickedly slew others and turned Pyrat, whereby he
grew very rich and at last died as he deserved. One was drove back to Eisbon,
another watering at Matira lost some Men, and six more at Oja, that King
keeping them long with kind entertainment, the Ship sailed and left them, and
was lost upon a Bank off of Quiloa, and the Moors of that Island, Monfia and
Zanziber, slew all but one young Man. George de Albuquerque passed with much
difficulty from Mozambique to India, not able to follow James Lopez de Sequeyra
to the Red Sea, as he had sent order by Gonzalo de Louli, who by the way took
up the Men that had been cast ashore in the late Storms.

10. Iame Lopez de Sequeyra having dispatched 1520.
the trading Ships homeward-bound, commanded by Ferdinando Perez de Andrade,
and settled other Affairs, sailed from Goa on the 13th of February with a Fleet
of 24 Sail, and in it 1800 Portugueses and almost as many Malabars and Canaras.
On the Coast of Aden Lopez, his Ship struck upon a Rock and was broke in
pieces, the Men were saved and he went into the Galeon of Peter de Faria. At
the entrance of the Red Sea they took a Moorish Ship, who informed them there
were six Turkish Galleys at Gidda with 1200 Men designing against Aden The
weather hindered going in search of them, and it had been to no purpose, for
they hearing of our Fleet had haled in to the shore. James Lopez designed for
the Island Macua, when by the way, on the 9th. of April being Easter-Sunday,
there was seen by all in the orb of the Sun about the time of its setting, a
little black Flag with some motion. Being arrived at the Island, they found the
Inhabitants were fled, yet they found some Booty and Vessels in the Port, and
some Prizes in the Neighborhood. The Inhabitants of Macua were fled for refuge
to the Port of Arquico belonging to Prester John; the Governor of the Town
sent a Messenger with a Letter to James Lopez, desiring he would make Peace
with those People that had fled to his Protection. He asked nothing in behalf
of the Town because they were all Christians, and because there was a Prophecy
among them foretelling the coming of foreign Christians to settle a
correspondence with them, which he seeing the Christian colors looked upon to
be fulfilled. James Lopez* returned a courteous answer, and stood in to the
shore, where some Christians came abroad to him. They told him their Prince
Prester John, had some years since, sent an Ambassador whose name was Matthew,
to a King of the end of the World, whose Fleet then conquered India, to inform
him of those remote Christians, and demand succor against the Moors, but that
he never returned. Sequeyra hearing this, was convinced those Men dealt
ingenuously, because he brought that Ambassador with him, and had orders from
King Emanuel to land him safe in his Prince's Dominions. The Ambassador was
placed before them, who received him with great respect and joy, which was no
less in him for being restored to his Country after ten years absence. Next day
came ten Religious Men from the neighboring convent of the Vision with the
same gladness to see him, they were received by the Priests of the Fleet in
their Surplices. There were great demonstrations of Joy for the Union of two so
distant Nations agreeing in the same Faith, and the fruit of this meeting was,
that those who from the beginning had not acknowledged the Supremacy of the
Roman Church, now submitted to it.

CHAP. IV.
A continuation of the Government of James Lopez de Sequeyra, from the Year
1520 till the Year 1521, and reign of King Emanuel.

1. THE Kingdom of Prester John, now discovered, is most known by this name,
though improper, and is properly called the Kingdom of Abassia, or Empire of
the higher Aethiopia. It was so called from that great Iovarus (corruptly
Prester John) who came to it from the Christians of Tartary, with a Cross
before him like our Bishops. And this King carried a Cross in his hand, with
the Title of Defender of the Faith, as being a Iacobite Christian. The
Dominions of this Prince lie between the Rivers Nile, Astabora and Astapus. On
the East it runs along the Red Sea 120 Leagues, this being the least side,
which in all contain 670 Leagues. On the West it borders on those Blacks who
possess the great Mines of Gold, for which they pay him Tribute. On the North
divided from the Moors, by a Line drawn from the City Suanquem to the Island
Meroe, or Noba. On the South it borders on the Kingdom Adea, from whose
mountains falls the River Obi, that loses it self in the Sea at the Town of
Quilmance in the Kingdom of Melinde.

2. The Kings of Abassia pretend to be descended from Solomon and the Queen of
Saba, she being delivered on the way, called the Child Meilech, and sent him to
his Father to be by him declared King of Ethiopia, who when he anointed gave
him the name of David his Grandfather. He ordered his Household, and gave him
Officers of his own, and for High Priest Azaria the Son of Sadoc, who stole the
Tables of the Law out of the Temple, and carried them with his new Prince. They
affirm, that the Descendants of those same Officers still possess the same
Employs. They had knowledge of the Law of Christ by the means of Queen Candace,
in whom they glory as being of their Country. But their true Apostles were S.
Philip, and S. Matthew. The King, in memory of his Descent, begins his many
Titles thus: David beloved of God, Pillar of the Faith, of Kin to the Stock of
Judah, Grandson of David, Son of Solomon, Son of the Pillar of Sion, Son of the
Progeny of Jacob, Son of the Hand of Mary, etc. Emperor of the great and high
Ethiopia, etc. The People are very religious, have many Churches, and many
Monasteries of only two Religious Orders, the one of S. Anthony, the other the
Canon Regulars. They have no considerable Towns, little practice of Learning,
no skill in Mechanics, and so are very rude in their Diet and Clothing. In
such Houses as use more Grandeur, all the Furniture is of other Countries.
There are as expert Thieves among them, as our Gypsies in Europe. The Religious
Men who live in Convents wear long Habits of Cotton; the others and their
Priests and Nuns, Skins, which does not cover as much as Modesty requires.
Their Prince for the most part lives in the Field in a populous City of Tents,
often removing. In his Messages he uses that style of Portugal; I the King
greet you. This was what our Discoverers could then gather; let others say what
is since found, and what Alterations have happened.

3. Now came the Barnagax or Governor of that Province, having received the
News of the arrival of Matthew the Ambassador, and our Fleet. He appeared on
the Shore with two hundred Horse, and two thousand Foot. After some difference
about the place for him and James Lopez to meet, they met on the Edge of the
Water, and were seated on Chairs upon the Sand, which then burnt with the heat
of the Sun; there Matthew the Ambassador was delivered, and with him D. Rodrigo
de Lima, sent Ambassador by King Emanuel to Prester John. There they treated of
building a Fort either on the Island Camaran, or that of Macua against the
Moors. Lastly, they both swore the Sincerity of this Agreement on a Cross, and
after they parted, sent some Presents on both parts. D. Rodrigo de Lima set
forward on his Journey without Matthew, who soon after died in the Monastery of
the Vision, which he had earnestly desired to reach. James Lopez erected a
great Cross in that Port in memory of the arrival there of our Fleet, and
caused many Masses to be said in the Mosque of Macua. Hence he went to the
neigbouring Island of Dalaca, and having burnt the City, deserted by its
Inhabitants, stood over to the Coast of Arabia. One Galley and most of the Men
were cast away by bad Weather, and he came to an Anchor at Calayate, where he
found George de Albuquerque, who waited his coming, and going on to Mascate,
left him to winter there with the Ships, and he went on with the Galleys to
Ormuz.

4. Whilst our Governor was in the Red Sea, Chrisnarao, King of Bisnagar,
covered the Hills and Plains, and drank up Rivers, with an Army of thirty five
thousand Horse, and seven hundred thirty three thousand Foot, five hundred
eighty six Elephants, loaded with Castles, in each of which were four Men, and
twelve thousand Water-carriers, to supply all parts, that the Men might not
dispe^se to seek it. The Baggage was numberless, and there were above twenty
thousand common Women. He led all this power to take the City Rachol, belonging
of right to his Ancestors, who still left the Recovery of it as a Charge to
their Successors, and was possessed by Hidalcan, with whom to this effect he
waged War.

5. The City Rachol was naturally almost impregnable, seated on a high
Mountain, fortified with several Walls, and large and deep Ditches, strong
Towers, stored with Artillery, and all other Defense, garrisoned by four
hundred Horse, eight thousand Foot, and twenty Elephants, with Provision and
Ammunition enough to tire the most patient Besiegers. Chrisnarao encamped about
it, and gave many Assaults to no effect for the space of three months, when
Hidalcan came to the Relief with eighteen thousand Horse, one hundred and
twenty thousand Foot, one hundred and fifty Elephants, and much great Cannon.
After many Preludes these two Princes came to a Battle, wherein at first
Chrisnarao received great damage, but recovering himself, made such havoc
among Hidalcan's Men, that only those escaped the Sword, or Captivity, who at
last moved pity in the very Enemy. The principal Booty consisted of four
thousand Horses, one hundred Elephants, four hundred great Cannon, besides the
small, and other Riches. Here died valiantly forty Portugueses who were in the
service of Hidalcan, who saved himself by flight. As Chrisnarao returned in a
rage against the City, there came to his Camp Christopher de Figueredo, with
twenty Portugueses, who brought some Arabian Horses to sell to the King. They
discoursed about the Siege, and he asked leave to view the place which was
granted. He gave two Assaults, and being backed in the second by Crisnarao, the
Town was entered. Crisnarao was puffed with this Victory when Hidalcan's
Officers came to beg the Booty taken in the former. He answered, It should be
restored, if Hidalcan came to kiss his Foot, as supreme Lord of the Empire of
Canara. The base Condition was accepted, but the execution prevented by several
Accidents. Ruy de Melo, who commanded at Goa, laying hold of this opportunity,
possessed himself of the neighboring part of the Continent, with only two
hundred and fifty Horse, and eight hundred Canara Foot.

6. About this time Lope de Brito had succeeded John de Silveyra in the Command
of the Fort in Ceylon, and carried with him four hundred Soldiers, and many
Workmen, wherewith he made the Fort so strong, that it raised a Jealousy in
the People of Columbo, who, at the instigation of the Moors, refused to trade
with him. Brito sent them some Threats, which brought on him twenty thousand
Men, who besieged him five months, during which time the besieged suffered
great Hardships, till Anthony de Lemos arrived with fifty Men, with this small
relief they ventured to fall upon that multitude, and putting all to the rout,
the place was restored to its former quiet.

7. The season being fit to sail (which in those parts is very uncertain) James
Lopez set out from Ormuz, and went to meet George de Albuquerque at Calayate,
where he found one Ship arrived from Lisbon, of nine that sailed thence
together, all the others afterward came safe. One of these Ships sailing
before the Wind beyond the Cape of Good Hope, stopped all of a sudden, the
Sails, tho full, giving her no motion. The Cause being examined into, it
appeared that a great Sea Monster bore the Vessel upon its back, the Tail about
the Rudder, and Head up with the Boltsprit, casting up Streams of Water. It was
removed by Exorcisms, no human means being thought sufficient. The Sailers said
it was the Fish called Sambrero or Hat-Fish, because the Head resembles it, and
such a one, tho less, had been seen on the Coast of Portugal, doing great harm
about Atouguia. The King ordered the Governor to build Forts in Maluco,
Sumatra, Maldivia, Chaul, and Diu. James Lopez resolved to attempt the last
first. To that effect he treated with Melique Az, but was put off with delays,
and he dissembling, sailed for Cochin, to provide for his return thither, in
order to gain by Force what the Moor endeavored to put off by Art.

8. He dispatched the homeward bound trading Ships under the Command of Antony
de Saldana. Being eased of this Care he applied himself to that of the Attempt
upon Diu. In order thereunto he gathered the greatest Fleet of ours that had
been seen on those Seas, consisting of forty eight Vessels of all sorts and
Qualities, and in them three thousand Portugueses, and eight hundred Malabars
and Canaras. A great Power lamentably disappointed as will appear in the Sequel

9. On the ninth of February, James Lopez appeared with all his pomp before
Diu, Melique Az was then absent, being gone to the King of Cambaya, to prevent
him granting the leave he persuaded us to ask for building the Fort. And being
suspicious this preparation was made against him, had fortified and entrenched
the City in wonderful manner. He had left in it against all Accidents his Son
Melique Saca, and three stout Commanders with a strong Garrison. Our Governor
having observed the Difficulties, had it debated in Council what was fittest to
be done, and all agreeing the City should not be assaulted, they all afterward
accused him because it was not done. And tho they allowed his Prudence in
private, yet in public accused him of Cowardice, but his Valor was well
known. Besides they laid several Imputations upon him, so that the innocent
Sequeyra suffered for their Crime, having acted nothing with that great Power,
but only lost much Reputation. A misfortune (if it be lawful to say so) well
deserved by Princes, who wink at such Crimes, and do not punish Faults
committed through malice. James Lopez went to winter at Ormuz, some of the
Captains to several Markets, and D. Alexius de Meneses, with the rest of the
Fleet, retired to Cochin, with power from the Governor to act as should be
expedient in those parts.

10. D. Alexius, at his arrival at Cochin dispatched the trading Ships for
Portugal, and others appointed for several places. But their chief Business
being Merchandise, their Names are more proper for the Custom-House-Books. But
because some of them were at Sumatra, it will be fit to give some short account
of that Island.

CHAP. V.
A Continuation of the Government of James Lopez de Sequeyra, the Year 1521,
and Reign of King Emanuel.

1. THE Island Sumatra lying North-West and South-East is in length two hundred
and twenty Leagues, its greatest Breadth being but seventy, the Equinoctial
Line cuts it into two equal parts. It is divided from Malaca by a narrow
Channel, by a less its most Southern Point is parted from Ia^, which is above
one hundred Leagues in length, and but twelve in breadth. East of it lies
Borneo, cut by the Equinoctial, so that two Thirds are on the North-Side the
Line. Sumatra is plain about the Coast, the inland mountainous, watered by
great Rivers, covered with vast Woods so condensed with Fogs, that all the
Force the Sun has there cannot pierce them. For this reason it is very
unhealthy, yet resorted to for its Riches, and chiefly plenty of Gold. There is
in it a Spring of Oil, a burning Mountain like Aetna in Sicily, it produces
white Sandal, Benjamin, Camphire, Pepper, Ginger, Cinnamon, abundance of Silk,
much Fish and Cattle of sundry sorts. The Natives are Pagans; the Moors first
came in as Merchants, then possessed themselves as Lords, since the year 1400.
Of the Natives those they call Batas who inhabit the inland are most brutal,
eating human flesh. The Moors dwell on the Coast. They use several Languages,
but chiefly that of Malaca. Their Weapons were poisoned Arrows like those of
Iava, from whom they are descended; afterward they used our Arms. The Island
is divided into nine Kingdoms, that of Pedir was once the greatest, now that of
Pacem whose Kings are no longer lived than the Rabble pleases. George de
Albuquerque now carried one of their Princes expelled, to restore him to his
Crown, either by persuasion or by (...) he having to this effect fled to the
protection of the Portugueses, when Alfonso de Albuquerque took Malaca.

2. George Albuquerque arriving at the Island, and assisted by the neighboring
King of Ara, proposed to the Usurper to quit the Kingdom to the lawful Prince,
who had submitted himself to the King of Portugal. Genial the Usurper offered
the same submission to keep his possession. The Offer was refused, and
Albuquerque went to attack him in his Fort, which was scaled, and the Gate
broke open, but valiantly maintained by thirty Men who were in a Tower over it
with the Usurper himself, till Cid Cerveyra with a Musket Shot, which went
through his Forehead, brought him down, whereupon the thirty Men dismayed and
fled. The Flower of three thousand Moors (assaulted by three hundred of our
Men) courageously defended a large Court or place of Arms, assisted by the
Elephants. Hector de Silveyra directing his Lance to the Trunk of one, the
Beast put it by, and laying hold of his Body threw him into the Air, but so
fortunately, that he lived. Two others succeeded better, one killing the Rider,
the other wounded the Elephant, so that he flew back, making great havoc among
his own party. The Moors retired to a lesser place, and being close pursued,
the King of Aru coming on to our assistance in due time, two thousand of the
Enemy were slain. Four or five Men of Note were killed on our side, many
wounded, George de Albuquerque twice in the Face. Next day the dispossessed
Prince was restored with great state, and made tributary to King Emanuel, and a
Fort raised there as in other places.

3. At this time arrived at the same Port Antony de Brito with the Fleet that
had been commanded by his Brother George, who with the choice of his Men was
killed on the shore of Achem, twenty Leagues distant from Pacem, and was sent
thither with six Sail, and three hundred Men. Behold an example of Avarice and
Ingratitude. John de Borba, after suffering Shipwreck, having been tossed nine
days on the Waves with nine Companions, and cast upon the shore of Achem, was
received and relieved by that King, as if he had been in his native Country.
But George de Brito arriving, he informs him there was great store of Gold in
the Tombs of the Kings, and the more to induce him to commit the Robbery, said
the King had taken away the Goods of some Portugueses. Brito, after some
inquiry into the Business, began to pick a quarrel with the King, and seize
upon that Gold. He landed with two hundred Men, and finding a Fort in his way,
took it. Two Drunken Men issuing out after the taking were killed by the Enemy,
and several succeeding to relieve or revenge them, George de Brito was at last
obliged to come to their Succor at such time as the King came on with a
thousand Men and six Elephants. Here Brito and most of his Men were killed,
among them fifty of Note. This is the just Reward of Injustice, Ingratitude and
Avarice. The sad Remainder retired to their Ships, the Command whereof fell to
Antony de Brito, (Brother to him slain) who now joined Albuquerque in the Port
of Pacem, where he left some Men, and three Ships which were afterward of use
against a Moor who infested that Coast.

4. George de Albuquerque returning to Malaca, and taking possession of that
Command, prepared to make War upon the King of Bintam, who was forty Leagues
distant from Malaca, in the Island Bintam of forty Leagues circumference. The
Island was well fortified, having two strong Castles, and the Rivers staked, so
that it seemed almost inaccessible. Albuquerque set out from Malaca with
eighteen Sail, and six hundred Men. Finding it impossible for the Ships to come
up, he landed his Men in Boats to attack a Fort, but the Water being up to
their middles, and the Enemies shot very thick, they were forced to retire
without doing any execution, and having lost twenty Men, and many wounded.

5. Hence Antony de Brito set sail for the Maluco Islands, which are in the
midst of many others under the Equinoctial, about three hundred Leagues from
Malaca Eastward. The principal of them are five, about twenty five Leagues
distant from each other. Their Names (tho in general called Malucos) are
Ternate, Tidore, Mousell, Maquien, Bacham. The biggest not above six Leagues in
circumference. They are covered with Woods and Fogs, therefore unhealthy. These
five produce ^ves, but no manner of Food, and th^and Batochina, sixty Leagues
in length, produces Food but no Cloves. In some there are flaming Mountains,
chiefly in Ternate. Their chief Sustenance is Meal made of the Bark of Trees
like to the Palm, from these and others they have Wine and Vinegar. There is a
sort of Canes that in the hollow have a Liquor delightful to drink. The
Inhabitants are not great Lovers of Flesh, though they have plenty; more of
Fish, of which there is an infinite quantity. They are not affable, but
warlike, and most swift either in running or swimming. Idolaters as to their
Religion. Of their Origin there is no account. They were in process of times
possessed by Moors, since whose first coming to them there was yet living an
old Master when Brito arrived.

6. To these Islands, and particularly Ternate, Brito was sent to build a Fort,
which long since Boylefe the King thereof had desired. Others had gone before
but to no effect, as in the time of Albuquerque, Antony de Abreu, who lost one
of the three Ships he carried, but saved the Men. He arrived in the Island
Banda; five go under this name, but it is most proper to the chief, which is
like an earthly Paradise, one great Ornament of it being the Plant which
produces the Mace. Antony de Abreu returned to Malaca, but his other Captain
Francis Serram was drove to Ternate, the King whereof seeing him, and some of
his Men in Armor, concluded a Prophecy was fulfilled, which foretold, that Men
of Iron should come to that Island, who would make it famous. Anthony de
Miranda went thither afterward, Francis Serram staying there to expect an
answer from King Emanuel, to the Letters of the Kings of Ternate and Tidore
each striving to have the Fort built in this ^sland. D* Tristane de Meneses
afterward carried this answer. Because the difference increased about the same
thing between the two Kings and the King of Bachan who desired the same,
Tristan defferred the work to avoid the danger, and get loading for five Ships
he had with him. This was what happened from the taking of Malaca, till this
time when Anthony de Brito undertook the Affairs of Maluco.

7. He had six Ships and above 300 Men. At the Island Agacim he met D. Garcia
Enriquez with four Sail. They set out together, and Brito arrived at Ternate at
such time as the King Boleyfe was dead, and he of Tidore had admitted to the
Spaniards, thinking himself as happy in them, as Ternate could be in the
Portugueses. Yet seeing the Queen of Ternate Governess of her Son, received
Brito with great Joy, he visited and finding him displeased on account of the
new Guests he had entertained, offered to deliver them up to him. This he
thought would oblige him to build the Fort at Tidore, which at length was done
at Ternate as the most convenient, Brito laying the first Stone, and after him
all the Captains and Men of note crowned with Garlands, it being upon the Feast
of St. John the Baptist.

8. At this time a Correspondence was held between Francis Serram at Ternate
and Ferdinando de Magallanes in Portugal, which turned to the advantage of
Spain, and trouble of Portugal. Magallanes, or as he is commonly called among
us Magellan, was a Gentleman of good Note, a Man of Valor, and Knight of
Santiago, and had served well at Azamor in Africa, and in sundry parts of
India. He solicited for a sort of allowance (given usually to Men of service in
Spain and Portugal) very inconsiderable for the value, but of much esteem for
the honor of it. With much Justice he might pretend to it, and therefore
finding a refusal, proceeding from the malicious accusations of some Men, which
found more Credit than his Service, he resolved to quit the Kingdom, and go
over to the Emperor Charles the V. his Service. By his skill in Sea-Affairs,
and the Correspondence he held with Serram at Maluco, he guessed there might be
another way to India, and this at such time as the Spaniard had began to taste
the Fruit of those Islands, and accordingly he writ to Serram that he hoped
soon to be his Guest at Ternate, going thither a new way. In order hereunto he
went and offered his Service in Spain, was admitted, and the command of five
Ships given him, with 250 Men, some of them Portugueses. He sailed from the
Port of St. Lucar de Barrameda on the 20th. of September 1519. Many at this
time took the liberty to rail and cast reproaches upon him, but he to take off
the occasion, had by a solemn act unnaturalized himself. Princes should be
cautious of forcing to desperate actions by injustice, such Men as have
deserved rewards.

9. These Ships being past the Rio de Ianeyro on the Coast of Brasil, the Men
began to be mutinous, but much more when having passed the River S. Julian,
they found not the Straight they looked for, and began to be pinched with the
great cold of that Climat. Hence proceeded some disrespectful discourses
against Magellan, not only reflecting on his Knowledge, but also his Fidelity.
He finding it run high, and that of necessity he must give them some
satisfaction, suppressing the best he could the anger that began to swell his
Breast, called together the Principal Men, to whom he made a large and learned
discouse. He spoke of Navigation in general, then of Discoveries, and the Pains
and Hardships that great Undertakings are subject to, he encouraged them by the
example of all the great Discoverers that had been before them, he put them in
mind that the World would say the Spaniards were less daring than the
Portugueses, and after proposing many motives of Honor and Glory, concluded
with threatening to put in execution the Power of Life and Death the King had
given him, and accordingly to punish such as were refractory. This, instead of
a Compliance, produced fresh Disputes, more Disagreement and finally a
Conspiracy to kill Magellan, thinking no other means were left to prevent the
prosecution of this Voyage. The Chief Conspirators were three Captains
Cartagene, Quixada, and Mendoca. The Design was discovered, and Mendoca
immediately stabbed, and after quartered, the other two were taken, and Quixada
quartered alive, both as Traitors. Cartagena with a Priest who had a hand in
the Design were set ashore on that barbarous Coast: most of the Men were in the
Conspiracy, but it was necessary to pardon them, least he should want them to
prosecute the Voyage. Whilst they wintered there, he sent some Men into the
Country, who went up about twenty Leagues, and brought some of the Natives of
the stature of Giants, being above three yards high. After suffering much
through Cold and Hunger, and continual Labor in the Ships, being almost spent,
they reached the Cape they called De las Virgenes, or, Of the Virgins, because
discovered on the Day of the 11000 Virgins. It lies in 52 Degrees of South
Latitude. Below it they discovered the mouth of the Straight they looked for,
b^ing a League wide. Being entered, they found within in some places the same
breadth, in others somewhat more, and in others much less. The Land high on both
sides, part bare and part covered with Woods, many of Cypress, and much Snow
which made the tops of the Mountains appear the higher. Having run about 50
Leagues in this Straight they spied another, and Magellan sent one Ship to
discover it, but having staid much beyond the limited time for her return and
no news of her, he ordered the Astrologer Andrew Martin to erect a Figure, and
he answered they were gone back to Spain, and that the Captain Alvaro de
Mesquita was carried as a Prisoner for opposing that resolution. It proved so,
and they spent eight Months in the Voyage. Magellan somewhat troubled at this
action, called the Chief Men to Council, and contrary to the Opinions of all
resolved to proceed. Which he put in execution and came out into the South Sea
with only three Ships of the five, that which John Serrano commanded being
lost, but the Men though with much difficulty all saved.

10. To shun the Cold which tormented them, he sailed toward the Equinoctial,
steering W. N W. and being 1500 Leagues from the mouth of the Straight, found
an Island in 18 Degrees of South Latitude, and 200 Leagues farther another.
Having lost his computation for the Malucos, he found several Islands in 15
Degrees and a half of North Latitude, and at last came to that called Subo in
10 Degrees of North Latitude, being about 12 Leagues in circumference. He was
well received by the King and the Natives, and so good a disposition he found
among them, that the King, Queen, their Children, and above 800 Persons were
baptized. This Prince was at War with a Neighbor, and made use of Magellan's
Assistance against him. After two Victories he was killed in a third Battle,
together with the Astrologer and some others, on the 27th. of April 1521. The
King who in Baptism was called Ferdinand, seeing that slaughter, agreed with
his Enemy to kill all the Christians that were ashore, and inviting them to
Dinner poisoned them all. They who were aboard being too few for three Ships,
burnt one, and set sail with the other two, one of them the famous Victory
commanded by John Sebastian Cano. They arrived at the Malucos, and were
received at Tidore by the King, in hatred of the Portugueses and Ternatenses
for their late Differences. There they loaded with Spice, and went thence to
Banda, where they took in more with the Assistance of John de Lourosa a
Portugues. The second Ship returned to Ternate, some of the Men being dead, and
the rest spent by a contagious Disease. Antony de Brito treated them as if they
had been his Countrymen, not intruding Strangers, relieved and sent them to
India, whence they returned in our Ships to their Country. The famous Ship the
Victory returned with triumph to Spain, after performing that wonderful Voyage
about the World. Their arrival raised new Contests between the Emperor Charles
the V. and our King John the III. because the Maluco Islands belonged to
Portugal, according to the former agreement. The Year 1524. there was a meeting
of Civilians and Geographers, about this Affair between Badajoz and Elvas,
which fell to nothing. But was afterward settled in the Year 1525.

CHAP. VI.
Continues still the government of James Lopez de Sequeyra and reign of King
Emanuel.

1. IT is absolutely necessary something be 1521.
said of those Captains who the foregoing years were sent to several parts,
though what they did was in relation to Trade, a subject unbecoming a grave
History. Fernan Perez de Andrade had secured the Trade of China in the City
Quantung. The profit was exceeding great, and all Men's desires were directed
thither. His Brother Simon de Andrade obtained leave of the Governor to
undertake that Voyage with five Ships. They anchored in the Port of the Island
Tamou, opposite to Quantung where the other had been. Our Ambassador to the
King of China was not yet gone thence, but went soon after up a large River
with three Vessels richly furnished with Portugues Colors, it being a received
Custom that none but those of China should be seen there, which are Gules a
Lion Rampant. In this manner he came to the foot of the Mountain, in which are
the Springs of the River he sailed. This Mountain is called Malexam, which
beginning at the Bay of Couchin china in the Province of Fokien, divides three
Southern Provinces, that is, Quangsi, Quantung and Fokien, as the Perineans,
Spain and France. In one of the only two Ports there are in this division
Thomas Perez landed, and traveled Northwards to the Province and City Nanking,
where the King then was, having spent four Months in the Journey without
staying at any place. So large is that Empire. That Prince designed to give him
audience at Peking, a City farther distant. The Ambassador followed. But now
appear the effects of trading avarice, for whilst he traveled, Simon de
Andrade behaved himself after such a manner in the Island Tamou, that an
account of his bad proceedings was sent after Thomas Perez. The Ambassador set
out, but the Information reached the King first, and was fully credited. He and
his Companions were condemned to death as Spies. The rigor of the Sentence was
mitigated, but the Embassy not received, and they sent back Prisoners to
Quantung, with order, that in case the Portugueses would restore Malaca to its
King, who was a subject to China, they they might be restored and heard,
otherwise these should be punished, and none ever admitted, but treated as
Enemies.

2. Simon de Andrade was proud and conceited, and thought by high Hand to
authorize his unjust dealing. To this end, as if he had been King of that
Island, he raised a Fort, and set up a Gallows to terrify the People. He
committed violence upon the Merchants who resorted thither, contrary to their
Privileges, and bought young People of both Sexes without the usual
precautions, giving occasion to Thieves to steal them from their Parents. These
extravagancies which lost nothing by the carriage, were heard by the King
before Thomas Perez, and had the effect above related. At this time arrived
there James Calva with one Ship from Lisbon, and others from Malaca. The
Portugueses agree in acting more insolently, which wholly exasperated the
Governors of Quantung, who to punish them, secured some, and contrived to take
the Ship arrived last. They began to act when Duarte Coello arrived with two
Vessels from Malaca, well manned and provided. The Itao or Admiral of that Sea,
attacked them with fifty Sail, did some, and received greater damage from our
Artillery, was forced to retire, and lying off, kept them besieged. Forty Days
he had kept them in, when Ambrose del Rego came with two Ships more from
Malaca, and it was resolved to force their way through Itaos's Fleet, and get
out of the Island. The Fight was bloody, but a Storm rising dispersed the
Enemies Fleet and left ours in safety. The Itao revenged this Disaster upon
some of our People that arrived there, and upon the Ambassador, Thomas Perez
and his Companions who being returned to Quantung were all slain and robbed of
the Present sent to that King, and what Perez had gained. We will not pass it
in silence to show how great was the return of this Trade, for this Man being
of base Parentage, and by Trade an Apothecary (though chosen for Ambassador
for his good Parts) yet at this time there was found with him 2000 weight of
Rhubarb, 1600 pieces of Damask, 400 of other Silks, above 100 ounces of Gold,
and 2000 of Silver, three quarters of a hundred of loose Musk, and above 3000
Purses of it, at first called Papos, and much other Merchandise.

3. Mocrin King of Lasah refused to pay the tribute due to the King of Ormuz
for the Islands of Baharem and Catifa, on the Coast of Arabia; and he of Ormuz
was backward in paying us, excusing himself with the failure of the other. He
had already sent a considerable Force with some Assistance of Portugueses to
reduce him, but to no effect. He now resolved to do it effectually, and treated
about it with James Lopez de Sequeyra, who to secure our tribute, consented to
assist him against his Enemy. The King of Ormuz set out 200 Vessels with 3000
Arabs and Persians. The Portugues party consisted of seven Ships and 400 Men,
commanded by Anthony Corea. All our Ships arrived at Baharem, Raez Xaraso
commanded the Ormuzians, some whereof came not up. Mocrin was well prepared to
receive them with 300 Arabian Horse, 400 Persian Archers, 20 Turkish
Musketeers besides Natives, and above 11000 armed with several Weapons, strong
Intrenchments and other Works, the Wall well furnished with Cannon, all under
the Care of tried Commanders.

The Persian Gulf lies between Arabia and Persia, from which last, as the
noblest, it takes its name. This most famous Part be gins at Cape Iasque, or
Carpela, in twenty six degrees of Northern Latitude, and ends at the Mouth of
the River Euphrates; along this Coast are many Cities, Rivers, Woods and
Islands. It is not so on the other side, which beginning at C. Mozandan, or
Assaborum, and ending where it meets with Persia, yet in all that distance has
but four Towns, in which is a Fishery of Pearl. Catifa is opposite to Baharem,
and is thirty Leagues round, and seven in length, distant from Ormuz one
hundred and ten. Its greatest product is Tamarins, but has all other Fruit that
is usual in Spain. The greatest Town is of the same Name, there being in the
Island about three hundred Villages. The Inhabitants are Moors and Arabs, the
Air unhealthy. The Pearl found here, tho not so much in quantity, is of more
value than that of Ceylon in India, or Hainan in China. Opposite to the Island
on the Continent is the City Lasah, whereof Mocrim was King, who now was
provided against us at Baharem.

5. Raez Zarafo was ordered to relieve where he should see the greatest need,
whilst Correa landed with one hundred and seventy Portugueses, to which his
Brother Airs carried the Van with fifty, all of them knee-deep in Water. The
Trenches assaulted, the Fight was hot, the King encouraging his Men at the Head
of them, till Weariness and Heat obliged both parties to take breadth. Being
recovered, they return to the Attack, and the King being shot through the
Thigh, whereof six days after he died, his Men fainted, and great numbers being
killed, and wounded, they left us a complete Victory. Raez Xarafo from his
Vessel looked on all the time. But after knowing the dead Body of the King was
carried over to be buried at Lasah, he obtained leave to go take it, and having
performed it, cut off the Head which was carried to Ormuz. We had many wounded,
seven killed, and the Island in two hours was restored to our Homager. For this
reason Antony Correa had the Title of Baharem added to his Name, and the Head
of a King to his Arms, which continues in his posterity.

6. Whilst our Arms were exercised at Baharem, they were not idle in India.
They assisted the King* of Cochin against him of Calicut, who braved it with
two hundred thousand Men, the other having but forty thousand. The Portugues
Aid being but forty Men, thirty of them Musketeers yet so terrified the Enemy,
that they retired, James Fernandez de Beja, who was left by the Governor before
Diu, now came to him to Ormuz, ill treated by the Vessels of Melique Az, whose
double dealing was now visible. James Lopez thought to mitigate the Grief of
this Accident, by another more grateful, and brought new Trouble upon himself
at Ormuz, thinking to prevent the Frauds of that Custom-House. To this effect
he placed Portugues Officers in it, which so exasperated the Natives, who were
concerned, that thev endeavored to shake off our Yoke, as shall appear in its
proper place.

7. Now James Lopez designed to reassume the Business against Diu, and
therefore sent before James Fernandez de Beja, with four Galeons, to hinder any
Ships entering that Port, he executed it effectually, and took some. But Melique
Az his Vessels coming out with much Cannon and better Fortune, they sunk one of
our Ships, and did much damage in the others, till the Wind, which had failed,
favoring, they were obliged to retire. With like Fortune James Lopez drew near
for having taken a Ship by the way, and divided the Moors were in her among
his, those who were allotted to Antony Correa, set fire to the Powder, which
blew the Poop into the Air, and sunk the Vessel, so miserably ended that brave
Captain who had triumphed over King Mocrin. These Misfortunes obliged James
Lopez to desist from the Enterprise, and go over to Chaul.

8. Here he found Ferdinando Camelo, whocame from the Court of Nizamaluco, with
leave for us to build a Fort there, for his own ends, and chiefly for the
importation of Horses, which at that time was the Trade of Goa only. The Work
was begun, and Melique Az fearing it would lessen the Trade of Diu, and
increase our Power, resolved to obstruct it. He appeared in the Sea of Chaul,
with above fifty Vessels of his own and Confederates, and presently sunk a
great Ship in which Peter de Silva de Meneses was newly come from Ormuz, and
for for the space of twenty days did much damage in the Ships and Galleys,
wherewith D. Alexius de Meneses opposed them. Notwithstanding all dangers the
Work was carried on with good success.

9. But it being necessary for the Governor to repair to Cochin, because his
Successor was arrived, and he must prepare to return home, he set out of Dabul,
rushing through the Dangers that surrounded the Work. He left his Nephew Henry
de Meneses to command the Fort, and Antony Correa at Sea.

10. Whilst James Lopez sailed to Cochin, Ag^ Mahamud, who commanded Melique Az
his Fleet, came to hinder the Work of the Fort. To secure the Entrance of the
River there was raised opposite to the Work a Bulwark, which was committed to
the Care of Peter vaz Permeo, with upwards of thirty Men, Mahamud sent three
hundred by night to surprise this Bulwark, whilst he on the other side gave a
Diversion. They reached the place by morning, and the three hundred
unexpectedly assaulted the thirty, and the thirty fought as if they had been
three hundred; for tho the Captain and some others were killed, they maintained
the place till Ruy Vaz Pereyra came with sixty Men, and put to flight about two
hundred of the Enemy, the rest being killed. This Success daunted our Enemies,
and among them Xeih Mamud a great Man in the City, who feigning himself our
Friend, sought our Ruin, and now sent a Present, and to congratulate for this
good Fortune with Antony Correa. Correa, who knew his Designs, sent him for an
Answer the Heads of the chief Men who carried the Present, and hanged the
Bodies along the Shore. The Barbarian was astonished, but began to act openly
what before he had done underhand, encouraging the Aga by giving him
intelligence of our Scarcity of Ammunition, but then arrived D. Luis de
Meneses, to whom Correa gave up the Command. Mean while James Lopez de Sequeyra
with his Ships set out from Cochin for Portugal. He governed three years, was
of a ruddy Complexion, a white Beard, is painted with a Truncheon in his Hand,
a Coat of Mail, his Cap and upper Garment black, the Sleeves, Lining and
Breeches blew. He was the fourth Governor.

CHAP. VII.
The Government of D. Duarte de Meneses, in the Year 1522, when began the Reign
of King John III.

1. D. Duarte de Meneses,. now Governor of India, tho sent the year before 1522.
by King Emanuel, entered not upon the Government till the twenty second of
January of this year, King John III. being on the Throne, whose Father died the
thirteenth of December foregoing. He brought with him twelve Ships. Having
taken the Government, and sent the Commanders to their Posts, he began to feel
the effects of his Predecessors, putting Portugues Officers into the
Custom-House of Ormuz. He received advice the Moors had taken Arms, killed some
Men, and besieged the Fort. D. Luis his Brother was immediately sent with
relief, and Simon de Andre made Commander of Chaul, who began his Charge with
taking two Turkish Galleys, and a Victory in Dabul, which reduced that City to
pay Tribute. Melique Az. terrified with this Success, and the arrival of D.
Luis, of whose Actions in Africa he was informed, withdrew his Vessels from
before Chaul.

2. The Cause of D. Luis his going to Ormuz was the Insurrection which was
occasioned by the avarice of the Portugues Officers there. James Lopez had
placed them there against his Will in Obedience to the King's Commands, and at
the persuasion of Men who loved Novelties, and said the reason the Tribute of
Ormuz was not well paid, was, that the Officers cheated the King, to prevent
which it was convenient to place Portugueses in their stead, To the avarice
used by the Portugueses was added, the Violence they offered to the persons and
honor of those people, forcing their Daughters, and Wives from them. D. Garcia
Coutino then commanded that Fort, with whom that King conferred about sending a
Present and Embassy to our King to obviate the Inconveniences that Innovation
produced. This Means was prevented, and so it broke out to the great loss of
the Portugueses. For sudddenly by night they were attacked by Sea and Land with
Fire and Sword at Ormuz, Baharem, Mascate, Curiate and Soar, by private Order
from the King, and above one hundred and twenty of them killed Ruy Boto was put
to great Torments by the Moors in defense of the Faith. At morning some of our
Men died, endeavoring to relieve others. All things being disposed the best
the time would permit, and the Ships secured under the shelter of the Fort, D.
Garcia sent advice to the Governor. Mean while he was besieged, had two Vessels
burnt, and feared Hunger and Thirst. Tristan Vaz de Vega, and Manuel de Sousa
received advice hereof at Mascate, and prepared to carry Relief. Tristan Vaz
arrived first, and made his way to the Fort through one hundred and sixty Sail
that lay before it. Two days after appeared Manuel de Sousa's Ship at an anchor
two Leagues off. It was dangerous for the Fort to relieve him, and dangerous
for all if he was not relieved. Tristan Vaz with his Ship ventured to his Aid
through the hundred and sixty Sail of Enemies; eighty of them pursued him,
making way with full Sails, and Manuel de Sousa thinking him an Enemy did some
harm, till undeceived. he was taken into the Ship. The King of Ormuz in a rage
lays a heap of Gold on one side, and a heap of Women's Attire on the other, the
one for such as should take Tristan and Emanuel Prisoners, the other ^or such
as behaved themselves not courageously. Some being covetous of the Reward, and
others fearful of the Disgrace, they manned one hundred and thirty Vessels, and
set upon that one, which through Showers of Bullets and Arrows made its way to
the Fort, and brought new Life to the besieged with the Relief it had on Board.

3. The King of Ormuz began to despair of shaking off the Portugues Yoke, and
fearing the punishment of his Revolt, executed one more grievous upon himself
than he could have received from those he had offended. He resolved to quit the
City, and go over to the Island Queixome, which lies fifteen Leagues in length,
close to the Per^ Shore, and three Leagues from Ormuz, is fruitful, but not
healthy. Privately he commanded all the Inhabitants to follow him, and then
barbarously set fire to that beautiful City, which was four Days and Nights
burning. And yet some Gentlemen from our Fort held intelligence with the King,
advising how he should behave himself with the next Governor to be restored,
and this they did in hopes to be enriched by him. Our Men, tho astonished at
this brutal Action were delivered from the danger of the Siege, and going out
to see if any thing were left in the City, only found Water in Cisterns, and
Fire in all the Houses. Soon after came in a Ship from India with Provisions,
and another with Ammunition.

4. D. Luis de Meneses sent by the Goververnor his Brother to Ormuz, did
nothing of Note by the way, but arrived at the Town of Soar with ten Sail. This
Town they destroyed with Fire and Sword, and then gave it to Xec^ Hozem to hold
of the King of Portugal. Mean while his own Favorites murdered the King of
Ormuz at Queixome, and crowned Mamud Xa, a Youth of thirteen years of Age, Son
to the late King.

5. D. Luis arrived at Queixome, and after several Designs that took no effect,
came to a^ Treaty with the new King. It was agreed, that the King should return
to Ormuz, that he should pay the former Tribute of twenty thousand Xeraphins,
and the Arrears due, that the Portugues Commanders should not meddle with the
Government of his City, and to conclude all that King sent D. Luis a Present of
Pearls, Gold, Jewels and Silks for our King, and another for himself, which he
accepted not but to be sent with the other, as was publicly done. Then D. Luis
dispatched three Ships for Goa, which were to take lading there for Portugal.
One of them perished in a violent storm on the Coast of Mascate. D. Luis
followed soon after, and came to Goa.

6. He found the Governor his Brother, and all the City, in Tears, for the
Death of King Emanuel, the News whereof was brought by one of three Ships that
came from Portugal this year, whereof two had wintered at Mozambique. The
Gover^or went over to Cochin, to dispatch the trading Ships for Portugal and
other parts. At this time D. Pedro de Castro was not idle at Mozambique; for
being informed by John de Mata, who commanded that Fort, that the Island
Querimba, and the adjacent, denied the Tribute to those of Zanzibar and Pemba,
whereby they were disabled from paying theirs to us, he went to Querimba with
an hundred Men, and after a sha^p Fight burnt the City, and obliged the Lord of
it to pay the Tribute, the others terrified by this Example submitted. At his
return he wasi n great danger by Storms and Hunger, and his Cousin D.
Christopher killed by the Blacks who defended the Fruit of certain Trees, which
our Men were carried to taste by Hunger, not Curiosity. D. Diego de Melo went
now with him to Goa. D. Pedro's Ship being at an Anchor in that Port, suddenly
sunk down right, being very old, whereby it appears there is no Security in
things that are aged.

7. D. Duarte set out for Ormuz with ^ix Sail, two of them Galleys, which on
the Coast of Diu took a rich Ship coming from Pegu. Which lying between them in
the night, the Moors perceived her sinking, and the Men in our Galleys asleep,
so they furiously rushed into one of them, and our Men fled to the other, who
seeing the Moors fly with their Vessel, and the other sink, took no notice, so
that more Credit was lost by this Action than had been gained before. Melique
Saca, Lord of Diu, afterward had this Galley laid up, as if taken by his
Vessels. About this time John Rodriguez de Noronha, who commanded at Ormuz,
pressed that King to come thither from Queixome to live, as he had agreed with
D. Luis de Meneses, it was effected with the Death of one of his Favorites,
killed by a bold Moor, whom D. Luis had hired before his Departure.

8. Don Duarte being arrived at Ormuz, examined who were the deepest in the
late Rebellion; and it appeared they were found most guilty who had the least
Power. For Raez Xarafo a mighty Man, and the very Soul of those Troubles was
rewarded; and Raez Xamexir who (according to agreement with D. Luis) had killed
Raez X^dim, another Tyrant over those Kings, was banished instead of receiving
the promised Reward. The young King not protected by the Innocence of his
Years, had the Tribute laid on him of thirty five thousand Xeraphins besides
the former twenty five thousand, which he could not pay when the City
flourished, and must now pay so much more when it was ruined Whilst this was
acted at Ormuz, D. Luis sailed toward the Red Sea, whither his Brother sent
him with nine Ships, one whereof perished at Zocotora. On the Coast of Arabia
he took and plundered the Town of Xaer, because they refused to restore the
Goods of a Portugues who died there. At Verruma he burnt some Ships, then
battered the City Aden, he entered the Red Sea, but did nothing considerable,
and so returned to Ormuz, where he found his Brother the Governor, with whose
Proceedings there he was so much dissatisfied, that he left him, and sailed for
Diu, but being forced back by the Weather to Ormuz, kept him company to India.
There they found two Ships of nine that came out this year from Lisbon.

9. That part of the Continent about Goa, which belonged to Hidalcan, and was
taken from him by Ruy de Melo, whilst he was busied with the War of Narsinga,
was now lost by Francis Pereyra Pestana, Hidalcan having no other Care but the
Recovery thereof. Pestana was brave, and opposed the Enemies Power. Ferdinando
Rodriguez Barba obtained a signal Victory over them. Five thousand Foot and
four hundred Horse of them were after defeated by Ferdinando and An^z
Sotomayor, with few Foot and only thirty Horse. Nevertheless by degrees the
Country returned to the Obedience of Hidalcan, and was confirmed to him by the
late Treaty of Peace.

10. D. Duarte de Meneses began to inquire into such things as related to S
Thomas the Apostle, a particular Care of our Kings. This was what could now and
some time after be discovered. In the year 1517, certain Portugueses sailed
with an Armenian, and landing at Paleacate of the Province of Coromandel in the
Kingdom of Bisnagar, he invited them to go visit the place where were the Ruins
of many Builddings, the Stones of several Colors, still retaining the
Footsteps of Grandeur and Art. In the middle was a Chapel entire, of
indifferent Structure, on the inside and outside whereof were carved many
Crosses, like to the ancient ones of the military Order of Alcantara, which is
Fleury Fitched. A Moor resided there, who coming thither blind, miraculously
recovered his sight. He said, That his Forefathers lighted that holy Body: that
there was a Tradition that Church (whereof only this part was standing) was
built by the same Saint when he preached the Christian Faith there, and that
there were buried with him two of his Disciples, and a King converted by his
Miracles. Upon this Information D. Duarte sent thither Emanuel de Faria or
Frias, and a Priest and Mason to repair the Chapel, opening the Foundation of
one side that was like to fall about the depth of an Ell they found a
Stone-Tomb with an Inscription, containing, That when Thomas built that Church,
the King of Miliapor gave him the Duties of all Merchandise imported, which was
the Tenths. Going deeper they found a Hollow in which it was reported the Saint
lay. Here they found between two Stones a Body and the two ends of a Lance, the
But and Spear. These were believed to be the Bones of the Apostle, because
those of the King and Disciple also found were not so white. They were put into
a China Chest, and the others into another, and hid in the Altar. Inquiry being
made, it appeared by the ancient Records of the Kingdom, that it was above
fifteen hundred years since the Saint came to that City called Meliapor, then
in a flourishing Condition, in and about which there was a Tradition there had
been three thousand three hundred stately Churches, that it was then twelve
Leagues from the Sea, the Ruins being now upon the very Shore. That the Saint
had said, When the Sea should reach thither, a People would come from the West,
and preach the same Faith he did. That he converted the King and all his
Family, dragging out of the Sea a vast piece of Timber, which all the Force of
Elephants, and Art of Men could not move, the King coveting it for his
Buildings, and the Apostle for the Church. That a Bramen chief Priest to the
King, envious of his Miracles, had killed his own Son, and accused the Saint of
the Murder, but he restoring the Child to life caused him to say who was the
Murderer. An Armenian Bishop who had spent twenty years in visiting the
Christians of the inland of Coulam, swore he found what follows in their
Writings, That the twelve Apostles being dispersed through the World, Thomas,
Bartholomew, and Judas Thaddeus came together to Babylon, and there parted.
That the last preached in Arabia, since possessed by the Moors, the other in
Persia, and was buried in a Convent of Armenian, religious Men near the City
Tabris; and the first embarquing at Bacora, on the Banks of Euphrates, crossed
the Persian Gulf, preached at Zocotora, came to Meliapor, passed to China,
where he built Churches, and returned to Meliapor, where having done what is
said, he at last suffered Martyrdom through the malice of the Bramens, who, to
execute their Design, counterfeited a quarrel whilst he was preaching, to find
an opportunity of stoning him, and was at last by one of them run through with
a Lance, and buried by his Disciples in that Church of his own Building.
Another Learned Man, a Native of Coulam affirmed, That there and at Cranganor
were two Houses built by the Disciples of Thomas, who were buried in them, and
that in that of Coulam was the burying place of Sibila, Indica, by whose advice
King Perimal of Ceylon went to the Coast of Mascate, to meet the other two
Kings that were going to adore Christ, newly born at Bethlehem. That the same
King at the Entreaty of the Sibil, brought her the Picture of the Blessed
Virgin which was kept in the same Tomb. This was the Invention of the Relicts
of that Heavenly Messenger in India. And gave occasion to build the City, at
this time called S. Thomas, a Portugues Colony in the Port of Paleacate, seven
Leagues from the Ruins of the most ancient Meliapor.

CHAP. VIII.
Continues the Government of D. Duarte de Meneses from the Year 1522, till the
Year 1524, King John then reigning.

1. ANtony de Miranda de Azevedo was this year Commander of the Fort of Pacem,
in the Island Sumatra. On the Western Coast of this Island are six Moorish
Kingdoms. The chief was that of Pedir, to which were subject those of Achem and
Daga. But falling to War, that of Achem gained the Superiority. He of Pedir
took the protection of our Fort against his ill Fortune. D. Andres Enriquez
then commanded it, sent to that Post from Portugal with D. Duarte de Meneses.

2. The Tyrant of Achem scoured the Sea and Land with a great Power, till
coming to the City Pedir, he endeavored to draw to his snare the King who had
taken the Portugues Protection. To compass his Design, he prevailed with the
Men of that City to write a Letter to the King, telling him he might safely
come thither, his Enemy being already expelled, and that he might easily
destroy him with the assistance of the Portuguses. He gave credit to the
letter, desired the assistance of the Commander, who gave him eighty
Portugueses and two hundred Moors, commanded by his Brother D. Emanuel in small
Vessels of Oars. The King marched along the Shore with above a thousand armed
Elephants. He was received at Pedir with feigned Joy, and a Design to take him
Prisoner that night, which was deferred to secure the Portugueses. The King
being informed of the danger, next day fled with two Elephants and some Men.
The Portugueses were left on the Shore exposed to the Enemies Darts and Arrows.
D. Emanuel and thirty five of them were killed, the rest fled. With this loss
D. Andres lost also the hopes of maintaining the Fort. He asked Provisions of
Raphael Perestello, who was at Charigam, the chief Port of Bengala. Dominick
Seixas was immediately sent with a Ship, who was stopped by thirty Portugueses,
who were turned Pirates in that Sea, commanded by Games Iago. Seixas landed at
Tenacari to get Provisions, and one Brito making himself Captain of the Pirates
(Gago being dead) and flying with a Vessel that was laden in the Port, left
Seixas and seventeen Portugueses ashore, who were afterward Slaves in the
Kingdom of Siam, Such is the Fate of those who trust them that have violated
all human and divine Laws.

3. D. Andres advertised the Governor of the Condition he was in, desiring a
Successor to command the Fort, Lope de Azevedo was sent, to whom he would not
deliver the Post through Covetousness of acquiring more, having already gained
much there Azevedo returned to India. The King of Achem over-runs all that
Country with Fire and Sword, enters the City Pacem with fifteen thousand Men,
and summons D. Andres to quit the Fort. He after sustaining three Assaults to
save the Riches he had there, withdraws, leaving the Command to his Brother-in
law Airs Coello, who courageously took upon him this danger he saw the other
shun. But the Sea forced back D. Andres to the danger he avoided.

4. D. Andres sailing for India, met Sebastian de Sousa, and Martin Correa,
with two Ships bound for the Island Banda to load Spices. Sousa came from
Madagascar, whither he was sent by King Emanuel to build a Fort in Port
Matatane, which was not executed, because the Ship wherein were the Materials
for the Work was cast away. These two Captains hearing by D. Andres the
Condition of Pacem, went directly to that Port. Airs Coello had then stood a
furious Assault with loss of a Post. The Enemy seeing this Relief, abated of
their heat; and D. Andres after eight days resisting was forced back by the
Weather. Above eight thousand Enemies one night encompassed the Fort, in which
were three hundred and fifty Portugueses, some sick, some wounded, and all
spent with labor and watching. With great silence they applied above seven
hundred scaling Ladders, and mounted with great Shouts. The Dispute was hotly
maintained on both sides, till some Ships being fired, gave light to each
other, and to level our Cannon, which killed many of the Enemy and two
Elephants. The morning discovered two thousand Men slain about the Fort, on our
side only one Woman killed by an Arrow in her Chamber. The remaining six
thousand retired, leaving half their scaling Ladders and Fireworks.
Nevertheless the Difficulties of maintaining the place considered, it was
resolved in counsel to abandon the Fort, shipping all the Men and Goods, and
then giving fire to the rest. The great Cannon were left full of Powder, that
when the Fire reached them they might burst. Most of the Fort was destroyed,
but the Enemy coming in saved some Cannon, which afterward did us great harm.
The Portugueses lost some Goods in shipping, and embarked up to the Necks in
Water with the Fright, losing more Reputation by this Action than they had
gained by the former. This they were more sensible of when they met at Sea a
more powerful Relief sent by our Friend the King of Aru, who marched by Land
with four thousand Men; and Lope de Azevedo, from whom D. Andres ill deserved
it, embarked at Malaca with Ammunition to come to his Succor. Sebastian Sousa
prosecuted his Voyage to Banda, and the Tyrant Achem followed the Fortune which
had raised him above his own Hopes.

5. At this time Martin Alfonso de Melo Coutino was gone for China, not knowing
what had been done by the Portugueses at Quantung. He had four Ships, and two
joined them by the way. They sent ashore for fresh Water, and returned with
Blood, the Chinese being in Arms to receive them. This drew them to a Battle,
in which most of the Portugueses perished, some drowned, some torn by the
Cannon, and some taken, part whereof died miserably in the Prison at Quantung,
and twenty three were cut in pieces as Spies and Robbers, the last part of the
Accusation being the truest. Martin Alphonso and Duarte Coello returned to
India.

6. All things cannot be exactly related in order as they happened. Malaca was
straightened by the King of Bintam, who sent a greater power against it, and
George de Albuquerque what he could against him under the Command of D. Sancho
Enriquez, whilst they prepared for a Sea Fight there arose a violent storm
which destroyed seventy Portugueses, the whole being two hundred, the Remainder
escaped. Let us see how Misfortunes when once they break out overflow.

7. Till now the King of Pam had been a Friend to our good Fortune, but at
present seeing she favored him he turned against us. George de Albuquerque
(ignorant of this change) sent three Ships to his Port for Provisions, where
two of the Captains and his thirty Men were killed, the third flying this
danger met it at Iava, he and all his Company perishing there. Simon de Abreu
and Crew were killed in another Action, and in another D. Garcia Enriquez sent
to hinder Provisions coming to Bintam, lost two Vessels.

8. At Surubaya in Iava ten or twelve Portugueses were killed. Sebastian Sousa
and Martin Correa found Alfonso de Melo Iusarte in great danger at Banda,
having offended the Inhabitants of Cantor through Covetousness.

9. Such was the posture of Affairs at the Malucos, whilst these thing
happened. Antony de Brito had put the Fort into a very good Condition, when two
Bastard Sons of the late King of Ternate disagreeing, and the King of Tidore
seeking revenge because the Portugueses had not built in his Island; he agrees
with his Daughter the Queen Dowager of Ternate to carry on his Design, at the
same time that she had consented to make war upon him. But all the Contrivance
was discovered, the young King and his Brothers brought to the Fort, and the
Queen fled to the mountain. The War began, and Tidore was besieged. There
George Pinto was killed with six Portugueses, and forty Seamen.

10. The Siege continuing, some places were assaulted. At Mariaco was a Fort on
a high Ground well ga^isoned, Martin Correa first, and after him John Mendez
entered it with twenty Men. Leonel de Lima relieves them, and at last the
Governor of Ternate, Bastard Son to the late King, coming on with his Men, the
Tidores were put to flight, and most of them slain. Several other places being
taken, the King of Tidore begged peace, which was not granted him. But because
there now comes a Successor to D. Duarte de Meneses, let us take leave of him,
he was of a ruddy Complexion, his Beard black, his Cap, upper Ga^nt and
Breeches black, the Doublet Crimson, and the Linings. He governed three years,
and was the fifth Governor.

CHAP. IX.
The Government of the Viceroy D. Vasco de Gama, and of the Governor D. Enrique
de Meneses, the Year 1524 till that of 25, in the Reign of King John the Third.

1. NOW the manner of receiving and delivering up the Government seems to be
settled, it will not be amiss with our usual Brevity to give some account of
it. At first the Wisdom and Experience of the person to be chose, were
considered as well as his Birth. Afterward the Birth was thought a sufficient
Qualification. Gentility among Portugueses being of more account than Virtue
and Merit, which has been the ruin of our first acquired Reputation The Viceroy
or Governor (for the Office is the same, tho the Title differ) solemnly swears,
That he made no Interest to procure that Employ (how needless the Question, and
false the Oath) that he will do Justice and follow his Instructions, that in
bestowing Employments he will not have more regard to his Kindred and Servants,
than to the Kings and such as deserve, that he will take no Bribes. All Vows
made in storms all forgot as soon as out of danger. Can any thing be better
swore, or any thing less observed. In India the succeeded delivers the
Government to the Successor in the condition it is, and a public Instrument
thereof is made. There are always three or four sealed Patents (called
Successions) in case the Governor should die. He sailed this year for India
with the Title of Count de Vidigueyra, and fou^teen Sail, and in them three
thousand fighting Men. Two Vessels perished with all the Men, a third was lost,
and the Men saved. Moss^m Gaspar was basely killed by his Caravels Crew, only
because he was no Portuguese. These Ships being in the Sea of Cambaya in a dead
Calm, on a sudden they t^ssed so, that all thought themselves lost, every one
thinking how to save himself, D Vasco the Viceroy perceiving it was the effect
of an Earthquake, he cried out with a loud Voice, Courage, my Friends, for the
Sea trembles for fear of you that are upon it. One Man who leaped overboard to
save himself was lost, such as lay sick of Fevers were cured with the Fright.
D. George de Meneses, one of the Captains, took a great Ship of Meca worth
sixty thousand C^owns. The Fleet arrived at Goa.

2. The new Viceroy visited some Forts, gave necessary Orders, and from Cochin
sent three Vessels of Oars toward Calicut to curb those Indians who began to
be outrageous. One of them fought three hours with fifty (...), large Indian
Vessels, lost three Men, and had been lost had not his Companions relieved him,
and put them to flight. Hierom de Sousa was ordered with six Vessels against
the Malabars of that Coast, who defeated forty Catures, Indian Vessels,
commanded by Cotiale, a valiant Moor, who hindered the carrying Provisions to
the Fort of Calicut. Two Galleys having joined him afterward, he fought eighty
Paraos in the River of Bracalor, bound for Cambaya with Spice, he took twelve
of them with the loss of four Men. He ordered the Commander of the Fort in
Ceylon to quit it, as not worth the keeping, and had the same Orders for that
of Pacem, but necessity had before caused it to be executed. Simon S^dre was
sent to Maldiva with four Ships to oppose the Moors, who infested us. He fought
a Moor of Cananor, who had six Vessels, took two, and the four narrowly
escaped. The Viceroy, tho sick, had greater Designs in hand, but Death drawing
on, he named Lope Vaz de Sampayo his Successor, till such time as D. Enrique de
Meneses, who was at Goa, and the next named in the Patents came. He died upon
Christmas-Eve, having been Viceroy three months, was of a middle stature,
somewhat gross, ruddy Complexion; he is painted with a black Cap, Cloak and
Breeches, edged with Velvet, all slashed, through which appears the Crimson
Lining, the Doublet of Crimson Satin, and over it his Armor inlaid with Gold.
D. Vasco had a natural Boldness for any great Undertaking, angry he was
terrible, a great sufferer of Labor, and hasty in execution of Justice. In
fine, fit for all that was entrusted him, as Captain, as discoverer, and as
Viceroy. He was the sixth in the number of Governors, and second of Viceroys.

3. Lope Vaz de Sampayo, sent Francis de Sa to carry the News of his access to
the Government to D. Enrique de Meneses at Goa. He delivered that Command to
the said Francis de Sa, and came away immediately. First he sent his Nephew D.
George Telo with a Galliot, and five Paraos, against a Fleet that infested the
Coast. They met thirty eight Vessels laden with Spice, under the Command of
Cutiale, took four, and forced the rest ashore. The four were brought to Goa,
with many of the Enemies hanged upon the Shrouds, the Canaras who rowed carried
thirty Heads, and twelve alive, who were delivered up to the Boys, and by them
stoned to death, the Sea threw up above sixty upon the Shore. Afterward the
same D. George had the like success against a Ship and ^e Paraos, and then
sailed to Cochin with his Uncle, who by the way being accidentally joined by D.
George de Meneses, defeated thirty six Paraos of Diu, and took seventeen. At
Cananor he hanged a Moor of Quality, which occasioned many of his Relations for
shame to leave the City, and go live upon robbing along the the River. By the
King's Consent D. Enrique sent Hector de Silveyra against them with two Galleys
and a Brigantine; in two days he burnt four Towns with much difficulty, and
took their Cannon. Christopher de Brito set out with fourteen Galleys, and
about one hundred Men. They scoured the Sea, destroyed some Moors, and at Dabul
came out to them two Galiots, and seven other Vessels with above three hundred
Men. At the first shock they killed our Commander, Christopher de Brito; to
revenge whom, our Men falling on furiously, in four hours time killed most of
them, and took the rest and their Captain in Chief, who afterward died of his
Wounds at Goa, being first converted to the Faith. The Commander of Calicut
being streightened by a great number of Nayres and other people that frequented
that City, forced them to retire with only fifty Portugueses. D. Enrique made
little haste to Cochin, because his Kinsmen D. Duarte and D. Luis de Meneses
were there, and dissatisfied with what D Vasco de Gama had done in their
Business, and he had no mind to undo what the Viceroy had done to oblige his
Cousins. He sent a Message before, that they should not receive him with any
public Joy, in respect to the death of Gama; this being the only Successor
till then that showed respect to his Predecessor. Another part of his Message
was, that they should not give him the style of Lordship, because good Men had
rather deserve Honor, than make use of its Titles. Afterward the Viceroys took
the Title of Excellency, and the Captains of Lordships. With such modesty did
the new Governor enter upon his Command.

Soon after he set out from Cochin with fifty Sail, besides some belonging to
the Inhabitants of the Town, and Arel de Porca, a Subject to our King with
twenty seven, making fifty more, and two thousand fighting Men, thus he arrived
at Panane. This is one of the principal Towns subject to Calicut, seated on the
Banks of the same River. It was well fortified and stored with Cannon,
commanded by a Portugues Renegado. In the River were many Vessels in order of
Battle. The Fight began furiously by Sea and Land, the Fortifications were
entered, the Cannon taken, and the Enemy fled to the Woods. The Town and Vessels
in the Port were burnt, many killed, of our Men nine. Next day twelve Ships
were burnt in the Port of Calicut, and D. John de Lima did the same in the
Skirts of the City. Hence they went to Coulete, where was the same
Fortification, number of Ships, and Artillery as at Panane, and twenty thousand
Men in Garrison.

5. A Council of War being held, it was generally voted to desist from so
dangerous an Enterprise, but D. Enrique prevailed for going on. D. Simon de
Meneses was to command one Attack with 300 Men, D. Enrique another with one
hundred and fifty, and the Fleet to engage one hundred and fifty Ships that
were there. Great Valor was shown on both sides; at last many of the Enemy
being slain, the rest fled; of the Portugueses fifty four were killed, and many
wounded. The Booty contained three hundred and sixty pieces of Cannon, a vast
number of Muskets, fifty three Ships, most of them laden with Spice; the rest
being shattered were burnt, as was the Town. D. Enrique returned to Cochin,
leaving D. Simon with twenty Sail, and five hundred Men to cruise upon that
Coast.

6. During the time that Lope Vaz de Sampayo held the Government by reason of
the Viceroys Death, and Absence of D. Enrique, he sent Antony de Miranda with
four Vessels, and three hundred and fifty Men to the Red Sea. He was come now
to Cape Guardafu, where arrived before him Antony de Macedo, with a Galeon, and
two Caravels, tho sent later. They had taken the Vessel of those mutinous
Portugueses who had killed their Captain, and now practiced Pyracy by this
Crime to shun the punishment of the former. One N. de Aguiar commanded them who
was beheaded at Cochin, and the rest impaled or banished according as they were
found guilty. The two Antonies agreed to spread themselves cross the Mouth of
that Sea, that so no Enemy-Ship might escape them. This Mouth reaching from
Cape Guardafu in Africa, to Cape Fartaque in Arabia is fifty Leagues over. Here
they took ten Zambucos and three Ships. Thence they went to the City Xael, and
burnt many Moors in seven Ships, and took five. Mean while D. Simon de Meneses,
assisted by Fernan Gomez, burnt the Town of Mangalor, and ten Ships in the
Harbor. They scoured the Coast, had some Rencounters, one with seventy Paraos,
whereof they took twenty, the rest being shattered and dispersed. Another time
the Moors killed Gomez Martinez de Lemos, who going to assist Dominick
Fernandez, struck upon a Bank, where died also Manuel de Lima, with seven
Gentlemen, and all the Boats Crew.

7. Now the King of Calicut resolved to besiege that Fort in which D. John de
Lima commanded with three hundred Men. Twelve thousand Men broke ground to draw
a deep Trench about. D. John did all that was possible to hinder the Work, but
the multitude prevailed and finished it. Then they planted many pieces of
Cannon, some so large the Ball was two spans diameter. The Work being finished,
Zamori came on with nine thousand Men. This Power was enough to terrify any
Resolution; yet D. John was not moved, but ventured to make a Sally, which had
like to have cost him his life, so he resolved to stand firm against all their
Assaults.

8. The Battery began furiously at break of day on the thirteenth of June. Our
Cannon was more dexterously played, and did great harm, but it appeared not so
much in the multitude. Next day advice was sent to the Governor, who
immediately sent to their Relief two Caravels, with one hundred and fifty Men,
commanded by Christopher Iusarte and Duarte Fonseca. The former arrived first,
and there was a sharp dispute by Sea and Land about their entering the Fort, in
which three Gentlemen were killed. The Enemy immediately applied scaling
Ladders, but were repulsed with great slaughter. D. John sent Duarte de Fonseca
back to Cochin to demand more succor, five hundred Men were sent him. Whilst
they sailed, all the military Arts then in use were practiced against the
besieged, and above fifty of them killed.

9. This Relief could not reach Calicut, but was forced back to Cochin. The
Governor joined two Squadrons he had prepared, and they both appeared to the
distressed Fort, when Rage and Despair acted more in its Defense than Valor or
Conduct. Hector de Silveyra commanded one of the Squadrons containing seven
Ships, and Peter de Faria the other of twenty five, and three hundred and
thirty Men. They encouraged our Men, and did harm to the Enemy from the Water,
because they could not land till the Governor arrived with twenty Sail, and
1500 Men, besides some Catures or small Craft; and Antony de Miranda coming at
the same time, all the Sea of Calicut was covered with Ships. A Council was
held about landing, all the Votes were in the negative. D. Enrique spent four
days in considering what to do, then came to this Resolution.

10. One night he put one hundred and fifty Men into the Fort under the valiant
Hector de Silveyra, and the next as many more under D. James de Lima. By break
of day he landed, clearing the Shore of throngs of Enemies with Sho^ Granados,
and all sorts of Weapons. In some Intrenchments they burnt two hundred, in
others three hundred Moors. Many Gentlemen particularly signalized themselves
upon this Occasion. Hector de Silveyra did wonders. D. George de Meneses with a
two handed Sword made great slaughter, till losing the Right Hand, he took a
less Sword in the Left, and went on without losing the Cutlace. But who can
recount the Actions of this day. In fine, three thousand of the Enemy were
killed, of ours thirty, none of Note. D. Enrique remained Master of the Field,
and pitched his Tents to give there the necessary Orders. Zamori sent to desire
peace, the Treaty held four days, and broke up without any effect. The Fort was
demolished (as King John had commanded) because it was of no importance. Having
shipped all that was in it of Value with great care and privacy, they laid
Trains to blow it up, and all drew off to the Ships. The Moors finding the
Coast clear, and no Body in the Fort, run in Clusters to pillage; but the
Powder suddenly taking fire, blew up the whole Fabric with great slaughter of
them. This shows how much must be ventured rather than hazard Reputation; since
all this Labor and Prepararation served only to raze that Fort, because it
should not be thought it was rather Fear than Convenience forced us to quit it.

CHAP. X.
Concludes the Government of D. Enrique de Meneses in the Year 1526, King John
the Third Reigning.

1. THE Fort of Calicut being demolished, and Peter de Faria left with his
Ships to scour the Coast of Malabar, the Governor went to Cochin, to dispatch
the homeward bound trading Ships, which were five, and whereof two were lost:
two also of sour that came this year from Portugal perished. After this
Expedition D. Enrique designed to fall upon Diu. He sent out Hector de Silveyra
upon other pretenses, to Ormuz, with instructions that other things failing, he
should enter the Red Sea, and take up at Arquico, D. Rodrigo de Lima, who by
that time was returned from his Embassy to Prester John. On the Coast of Arabia
he assaulted and took the strong City Dofar, which he destroyed with the loss
of two Men. Then he entered the Red Sea, and reduced the Islands Macua and
Dalaca, to pay Tribute. Thence sailed to Arquico where the Governor delivered
to him D. Rodrigo de Lima, who was there waiting for a passage with an
Ambassador sent by Prester John to Portugal. They went to rest at Ormuz.

2. Peter Mascarenas, who the foregoing year went to succeed George de
Albuquerque in the Command of Malaca, found it in some distress, after
performing honorable Actions. Martin Alfonso de Sousa scouring that Coast with
six Ships and two hundred Men had done great execution among the Natives. After
returning to Malaca he again went out to meet Lacxemena, who ravaged the
Neighborhood with thirteen hundred Moors, after a bloody Fight they were
defeated, and Martin being mortally wounded, died in the City. The King of
Linga our Ally had asked relief of George Albuquerque, against the King of
Bintam, by whom he was besieged. Eighty Men were sent, who falling upon the
Besiegers killed six hundred, the rest fled. This Victory cost but one Man.

3. Here Peter Mascarenas heard of a Renegado Portugues, who commanding three
thousand Men of the King of Bintam, had done much harm to the City, in which
there were but a hundred, yet obliged him to retire with shame. Two hundred and
fifty solemnly vowed to carry the Head of George de Albuquerque, or that of the
Factor Garcia Chaino, to the King of Bintam (all Vows are easier to make than
perform) they lay in ambush in a close Wood, six Portugueses, whereof one was
Francis Correa, fell into it. He seeing no possibility of escaping, encouraged
the other five, and falling desperately upon the two hundred and fifty killed
fourteen, the others fled. One of the six died.

4. Antony de Brito at Maluco, seeing he was not relieved, desired (the last
year) a Successor might be sent him, D. Garcia Enriquez who then commanded the
Cruisers upon the Coast of Malaca went thither.

5. He arrived at Ternate, where some Differences arose between him and Brito.
They agreed among themselves, and by consent sent a Portugues with a small
Vessel to discover the Islands called Celebes, where they heard was great
plenty of Gold. The Discoverer found the Islands, but not the Gold; and being
upon his return, was carried away by a storm to the Eastward, till he lost his
Account, and unexpectedly fell into a great and beautiful Island. The
Inhabitants most simple, and treated them with great affection. Of Color more
inclined to white, of Body strong and comely, lank Hair, and long Beards, their
Clothes of very fine Mats; their Food, Roots, Cocos and Figs. Their Language
was not understood, but they dealt by signs. By tokens they gave to understand
that in the mountain there was Gold, whereof they made no use; they had no
knowledge of Iron, or any other Metal. They left this Island, which they called
of James Lopez de Sequeyra the Name of the Pilot, and returned to Ternate after
eight months, whence Antony de Brito was then departed, leaving D. Garcia the
Command of the Fort.

6. Peter Mascarenas at Malaca considering how much had been done by his
Predecessors in defense of that place, and that it was no less insupportable
than dangerous, to suffer the King of Bintam to lie safe in his Works, and
continue his hopes proposed to deprive him of both. He immediately began to put
in execution his Designs, tho they proved unsuccessful.

7. George de Albuquerque sailing from Malaca toward Cochin, with only one
Vessel, met Arel de Porca with twenty five Barques of Calicut, who was seeking
Revenge, for that D. Enrique had treated him as he deserved for his
Cowardliness at the* Assault of Coulete. The Case was that D. Enrique at that
Engagement perceiving him stand only as a Looker on, watching the opportunity
of sharing the Plunder, caused a Cannon to be levelled at him so dexterously,
that it broke his Leg. Now he sought Revenge, and drew on himself farther
punishment, for Albuquerque not able to avoid the twenty five Barques, to lose
no time of playing his Cannon, levelled among them all, they answered with
Showers of Ball and Arrows. But our Artillery was so well managed, that Arel
was forced to retire with considerable loss, having done no other damage to
Albuquerque, than the killing one of his Slaves.

8. The Governor D. Enrique still continued his Preparations against Diu,
giving out they were for Aden. In all things he acted the part of a wise
Captain.

9. He set out with seventeen Sail of several sorts all large, with a
resolution to clear that Coast of Pirates, that always abound there. At Chale
two Leagues from Calicut he set ashore D. George de Meneses with five hundred
Men, who reduced the Town to Ashes. At Bacanor he found D. George Telo and
Peter de Faria entering that River^ in which they shut up above one hundred
Paraos, bound for Cambaya, laden with Spice. He sent to their assistance D.
George de Meneses, with four hundred Men in two Ships. The Moors by Land and
Sea were four thousand strong. Peter de Faria was left to keep the Mouth of the
River, the other went up to the Paraos, and saw the Shore covered with Men and
Cannon. At length they engaged, the Fight was bravely maintained, but the
multitude, the disadvantage of the place, and ill Fortune, obliged our Captains
to retire, after losing forty Men. Victory cannot be always tied to one side,
and it is wonderful, that in so many Encounters our Party should scarce ever be
worsted, never quite defeated.

10. This was not the greatest Loss then happened to the Portugueses, for at
this time D. Enrique fell sick of an Inflammation in two Issues he had upon one
Leg, and finding Death came on, he gave the necessary Orders, and expired with
that Calmness he had practiced living. This happened at Cananor, (where he is
buried) about the end of January in the thirtieth year of his Age. He was Son
to D. Ferdinand de Meneses, called the Red, of a pleasing Countenance, a large
Stature, an awful Presence, of a free Mind, his Actions just, free from
Covetousness, continent, a true Patron of Merit, and Professor of Honor. It may
appear how free from Avarice in that after his Death all his Treasure was but
thirteen Royals and a half, not a Crown in all; not but that he had an Estate
before, but spent it during his Government on such as deserved well. He
accepted not one Jewel of all that those Eastern Princes presented him. Let us
give one Example of his ready Wit, which will show the Beauty of his Person. A
Gentleman whose person was contemptible, but had served well, and was
dissatisfied with the Governor, one day talking with others, lashed out and
said, I am as good a Gentleman as any in India, and better than some, as much a
Soldier as the best, I have served the King as well as any man; and in fine, I
fear no man, nor yield to no man. The Governor finding all this passion aimed
at him, to show he understood it, and was not disturbed, answered very calmly:
Sir, I confess you are a better Gentleman than I, and more a Soldier than I,
that you have served better, and better deserve to be Governor; but since I
yield so many Points, you cannot but grant me one, and that is that you are not
so genteel a man as I. So the Anger was turned into Laughter, and he doubly
shamed. The most renowned Governors hitherto were D. Francisco de Almeyda,
Alfonso de Albuquerque, and D. Enrique. His Complexion was white, his Beard
Chestnut Color, his Cap, upper Garment, and Breeches, black, slashed with
Crimson Lining, the Doublet Crimson, over it a Coat of Mail, and upon that the
Breast plate. He held the Government a year and a month, and was the seventh
Governor.

The End of the Third Part of the First Tome.
THE Portugues Asia. TOM. I. PART IV.
CHAP. I.
The Government of Lope Vaz de Sampayo, from the Year 1526 to the Year 1527,
and Reign of King John the Third.

1. THE Governor D. Enrique de Meneses, when he died, left a Paper sealed,
wherein 1526.
was named who should succeed him, in case the person appointed by the King was
absent, requiring all there present to give Obedience to him, this Paper was
lost, but the person therein named known to be Francis de Sa, then commanding
at Goa. The second Patent of Succession being opened (because the first was
fulfilled in D. Enrique) it named Peter de Mascarenas then commanding at
Malaca. The distance was great, and the Season not fit to sail, after some
Debates they chose the worst Expedient, which was to open the third Patent, in
which was named Lope Vaz de Sampayo. The Government was put into his Hands,
having swore to deliver it to Peter de Mascarenhas as soon as he came from
Malaca. He immediately dispatched Captains to several places, and went out
himself to scour the Coast with seven Sail. Advice was brought him from D.
George Telo, and Peter de Faria, that they lay upon the Bar of Cananor, to keep
in a Fleet belonging to Zamori. He sent immediate Orders to D. Antonio de
Silveyra, and Christopher de Sousa, who were at Goa, to go join the other two,
and secure the prize till he came. They performed it.

2. Cutiale, Admiral of that Fleet, perceiving the danger that threatened him,
disposed all things to meet it by Sea and Land. He had ten thousand Men at
Command, Lope Vaz went in person through Showers of Bullets to view the
Fortifications, which done, he returned and prepared for the Assaults, contrary
to the Votes of most of the Captains, who rather envied him the Glory of that
Action, than feared the Danger, as if each were not to share with him in it.
Nevertheless all obeyed, and three Vessels were provided with one one hundred
Men each to land first. Lope Vaz followed with a thousand Men in Vessels that
rowed. Peter de Faria was to fire the Enemies Paraos. They all at once
courageously undertook the Charge assigned them, and at the same time mounted
the Trenches with great Slaughter on the one side, whilst above seventy Paraos
were fired on the other. At length our Men remained victorious, above eighty
Brass Cannons were taken, Lope spared the Town, because it belonged to the King
of Narsinga, with whom we were then at peace.

3. Lope Vaz sailed victorious to Goa, where Francis de Sa refused to re^ve him
as Governor, on account of the Title he had to it himself by D. Enrique's
appointment in the absence of Peter Mascarenhas. But the Council of the City
siding with Lope Vaz, he was admitted as Governor, and began to act as such.
The first thing he did was to send Advice to Peter Mascarenas of his Election,
either that he was not yet so fond of the Government, or rather to dissemble
how fond he was of it. Next he gave the Command of Goa to Antony de Silveyra de
Meneses, and sent Francis de Sa to the Island of Sunda, whether he had been
designed from Portugal, giving him four hundred Men in six Ships. Antony de
Miranda Azevedo had fourteen to guard the Coast of India. Manuel de Gama had
nine for the Coast of Coromandel, which he cleansed from Pirates, and retook a
Ship of ours taken by them. Martin Alphonso Iusarte was sent to Maldiva with
six Vessels, and took a rich Vessel of Meca, in which were three hundred Moors.
Having given other necessary Orders, he sailed for Ormuz with five Ships, and
three hundred Men.

4. They suffered much by the way, chiefly through Thirst. In his Passage he
reduced the Towns of Calayate and Mascate, which had revolted, being
exasperated by the avarice of James de Melo; for it is certain the King and
public suffer for the Interest of private Men, a thing D. Enrique was so
sensible of, that this Melo being then Commander at Ormuz, he writ to him to be
more moderate, and not provoke thirty years to go from Goa to teach sixty at
Ormuz, for those were the Ages of them both. Lope Vaz did nothing at Ormuz, but
compose the Difference between James de Melo and Raez Xarafo, which had
occasioned the Revolt of those two Towns, receive the Tribute of that King, and
Prester John's Ambassador, who came with D. George de Lima, both brought by
Hector de Silveyra.

5. Who was sent to lie off of Diu in wait of the Ships of the Red Sea, that
trade for Cambaya, whereof he took three. They went to Diu where he continued
many days at the request of Melique Saca, who made use of him to secure himself
against the King of Cambaya, feigning he intended to deliver the City to
Silveyra, being weary of the Tyranny of that King. Lope Vaz was then at Chaul,
giving Oders for fortifying several places, fearing the Rumes or Turks were
coming with a great Power, whereof he sent advice to King John, and sailed for
Goa.

6. At the same time arrived in India two Ships of five that set out this year
from Lisbon, the other three came afterward. These two brought fresh Orders
from the King, relating to the Succession in the Government, wherein Lope Vaz
was before Mascarenas, the former having been the contrary. The Surveyor of the
Revenue Alfonso de Mexia, to whom they were directed, desirous to kindle
Broils, caused them to be opened, to the great danger of the public Peace.

7. The News hereof met Lope Vaz on the way, and arriving at Goa he was a
second time received as Governor, and went thence to Cochin. He dispatched the
trading Ships home, and sent in them Prester John's Ambassador, who went to
Rome, where he gave entire submission to the Church of Christ, through the
means of the Portugueses; and having received several Favors from Pope Clement
the Seventh, returned to his Prince. These Ships being gone, Lope Vaz designed
to go to the Red Sea against the Turks, who (it was said) fortified the Island
Camaran. Some loose Tongues said it was a policy to strengthen himself at
Cochin, in order to resist Mascarenhas, who came to take upon him the
Government. Others said he really intended to go to deprive Mascarenas of all
Power, and gain the Affections of the Soldiers by giving them plunder. The
certainty is, he studied to secure himself, for to resign a Command voluntarily
is a thing not practiced since those times.

8. Raez Solomon the Turk, who killed Mir Hozem at Gidda, recovered his Princes
Favor by delivering up to him this City he had gained in the Service of the
Sultan, and by means of a considerable Present; for Gifts are of force even
with Princes, who have no need of them. Selin, who was then at Grand Cayre,
converted his Hatred to Love, because Solomon promised him great Advantages in
India, if he would furnish him with a competent power to act there. He gave him
twenty Galleys, and five Galions that were then at Suez. Solomon succeeding his
Father Selin, sent Haydarin, to deliver this Fleet to Raez, who was then
fortifying the Island Camaran, where the said Haydarin upon some disgust killed
him. Mustapha, Nephew to R^ez, succeeded him, and slew Hydarin, then sailed to
Aden, and thence to Diu, seeking the protection of the King of Camb^ya, as
fearful of the Great Turk, whom he had offended with that Murder and other
Actions; and having but few Vessels with him, for most of them refused to obey
him, and returned to Suez. Antony Tenreyro carried an account of the Success of
this Fleet to King John by Land, with general admiration, being the first that
performed that Journey, till then thought impossible.

9. Let us now return to Peter Mascarenas at Malaca, where the News being come
of his Succession to the Government, he was immediately proclaimed and obeyed
as such. As such he gave Orders, and bestowed some Commands. The Season was not
yet proper to sail from Malaca to Cochin. But the Desire of Command wa^s no
season so he set out without it. A storm forced him back to Malaca, and he
making a Virtue of Necessity complied with Fortune, concluding it was
Providence brought him to that City, which he had left in great distress, and
taking it as an Omen of the Honor he thought to gain over Bintam, whose King
entertained no small hopes of recovering Malaca, which was wholly unprovided
Mascarenhas disposed the Minds of the few Gentlemen that were there, and
prepared to fall upon that King, giving out all was for the Island of Sunda,
whither it was known Francis de Sa was designed. He set out with twenty one
Ships, in them four hundred Portugueses, and six hundred Malayes, commanded by
Tuam Mahomet and Sinai Raja.

10. Great Labor was employed in clearing the Mouth of the River, when thirty
Barques appeared, sent by the King of Pam to the Relief of our Enemy. Duarte
Coello and Airs de Cuna went to meet them, battered some, dispersed others,
and took twelve laden with Cannon and Provisions. They return to the hard
Labor of clearing the Mouth of the River, in which Work Ferdinando Serram
consumed twelve Days, wherein his Men were spent with toil, and his Ship
pierced with a thousand Cannon Shot. Yet he obtained his end, tho not without
danger of perishing, for Laxemena fell upon him with such fury, that Ferdinando
was left for dead, and both sides fought with great obstinacy. Peter Mascarenas
perceiving this Action, pressed forwards in small Vessels that rowed, and
coming upon the Moors made them retir^ with a great slaughter. Being returned
to his Post, he considered the City, which was formidable for its Walls and
opposite Fort, flanked with Bulwarks, stored with Men and Artillery. He ordered
the manner of the Assault, assigning every Man his Post, and diverting the
Enemy from the place where he designed the chief Attack.

11. Our careful and almost rash Commander in the dead of night, marched his
men through a close Wood and unknown way, very difficult for the Roots of Trees
that crossed it, and streams of Water that spread the Superficies of the
Grounds, yet before day they reached the City. The warlike Instrument sounding
on a sudden from all sides, put the Moors into a Confusion, at last they resort
where they thought was the greatest danger, and that was where Mascarenas had
posted the Malayes to give a diversion, whilst he entered on the other side.
All was full of Confusion, tho the Enemies behaved themselves gallantly. The
first that mounted a Bulwark was Airs de Cuna. Then they entered the City, and
furiously run through it; Peter Mascarenas ran to the King's Palace, where Laja
Raja who commanded fell upon him, and the Fight was courageously maintained
till they understood the King was not there, for he perceiving the City was
entered, mounted on an Elephant, and fled to the Woods and Mountain. This being
known, the Moors gave way, some were killed, the rest fled. The Garrison
consisted of seven thousand, four hundred were slain, two thousand taken. The
Town was plundered, the Booty great, and almost three hundred pieces of Cannon,
no inconsiderable part of it. We had not above three killed in this Action,
which was one of the most glorious we performed in Asia, to the immortal Honor
of Mascarenas, and Peace of Malaca. For the King dying with grief, tho his Son
Alaudin undertook the same Task, he had no power to annoy us much. The
Proprietor of this Island from whom the King had taken it, begged of
Mascarenhas to be restored to it, which was granted, he owning himself a
Subject of Portugal. At this instant arrived the King of Linga, our All^, with
Succor. He was an honorable Witness of our Victory, and after congratulating,
returned home.

12. Francis de Sa now prepared to prosecute his Voyage to Sunda. This Island
is divided on the South from Iava by a very narrow Channel. It produces pale
Gold, and abundance of Pepper and Provisions. The Natives are many, unfit for
War, but curious in adorning their Arms. They worship Idols, sell their
Children to supply any want. The Women are beautiful, those of Quality chaste,
contrary to what is usual in most of the other parts of the World. They have
Convents into which they enter to preserve their Virginity as in Spain. The
married Women kill themselves when their Husbands die; a good Custom to show
their Duty, and to prevent their killing them, were it not against the Law of
Nature, and therefore a brutal Error.

13. Hither came before Henry Leme drawn by the Plenty and Goodness of the
Pepper it produces, he was well received by the King Samiam, who offered a
place to build a Fort, and three hundred and fifty one Quintals of Pepper, as a
yearly Tribute to purchase the Friendship of the King of Portugal, in order to
his support against the Moors who infested him, and were now much inferior to
the Portugueses in those parts. But he attained not then the effect of his
Desires; for when Francis de Sa came to raise the Fort in the place marked out
by Leme, he met such opposition from the Moors, that he was obliged to return
to Malaca, without doing any thing.

14. Mean while D. Garcia Enriquez did something at the Malucos, which had been
glorious, if just. A War being left on foot by Antony de Brito with the King of
Tidore, D. Garcia made peace with him only to undo what the other had done.
This produced some difference between D. Garcia and Cachil de Aroez, who to
revenge himself joined now with the King of Tidore. D. Garcia fearing this
Union might prove dangerous, suddenly fell upon that City, then busied with the
Funeral Ceremonies of the dead, and entering it, took away the Cannon, and burnt
the rest. Thus the Peace rashly concluded was more rashly broke and the
Portugueses throughout all those Islands were esteemed Men of no Faith or
Reputation, for commonly a whole Nation suffers for the Faults of a few.

15. Martin Iniguez de Carchisano arrived at Port Camafe in the Kingdom of
Tidore with one Ship of six the Emperor Charles V. sent the year 1525 to those
parts that belonged not to him. The other Ships came before to an Island in
three degrees of North Latitude, which they called S. Matthew, where, on the
Trunks of Trees they found Inscriptions denoting it to have been inhabited by
Portugueses eighty years before. As soon as D. Garcia understood the new comers
were Spaniards, he endeavored to compose the Affair, but to no effect, and
perceiving they caused an alteration in the price of Spice, he sent first, then
went in person to expel them, but were all obliged to retire after much damage
sustained by the Spaniards Cannon, yet their Ship, tore by the Portugues Shot,
afterward sunk. Our Men had the like success at another Town on the Shore
where the Spaniards were. D. Garcia sent Martin Correa to Malaca, where he
understood that the Inhabitants of Lobu, a Port of Sumatra, had slain Alvaro de
Brito and seventy Men, he carried to revenge the Death of others killed there.
As soon as he arrived, George Cabral recommended this Business to him, which he
performed, reducing the City to Ashes, after putting all the Inhabitants to the
Sword, taking all their Cannon, Brito's Galley and some others, the rest were
burnt.

16. At this time came to the Malucos that renowned Gentleman D. George de
Meneses, who lost his Hand at the glorious Action of Calicut, being the first
that went thither by the way of Borneo, passing through many Islands, and
giving his Name to some of them. The known way being five hundred Leagues, he
made it a thousand, and spent eight months in the Voyage, by reason of the
Difficulties of that Sea, which is a mere Labyrinth of Islands and Banks of
Sand. D. George and D. Garcia fell presently at variance, because the latter
would not return the way the other came, but by Banda, which was more easy and
advantageous, on the contrary of that by Borneo. It seemed D. Garcia sought not
the same that D. George; and D. George in all obeyed Peter Mascarenas as
Governor of India. The Dispute came to words ill becoming such Men, and the
words to actions of the same nature. D. George puts D. Garcia in Irons. And D.
Garcia being set at liberty, puts D. George into them. Being threatened by some
he set him loose, and D. George being at liberty, sent after him to Banda, in
case he came thither to make him Prisoner, and take his Ship. Vincent de
Fonseca carried the Message. He also sent Vasco Lorenzo, James Came, and Gonzalo
Veloso to Malaca, by the way of Borneo, and with them a Present for that King.
One part of the Present was a Piece of Tapestry with Figures of Men, which the
Barbarian no sooner beheld, but he cried out, They were men enchanted that
would kill him in the night. And no persuasions being of force to convince him
of his Error, ordered the Tapestry should not remain in his House, nor the
Messengers in his Port.

17. Fonseca was so diligent, that he arrived at Banda before D. Garcia. They
both armed, but Fonseca by craft took his Ship, and D. Garcia endeavoring to
regain it, had two of his Men killed, and was forced to retire. He embarked in
a Vessel laden with Goods for Malaca, which was there seized upon, yet restored
to him; yet afterward at Cochin the Vessel sunk, and the Sea swallowed to the
value of fifty thousand Crowns he had in her. D. Garcia was left ashore with
only the Clothes he wore, and Nuno de Cuna, then Governor, imprisoned and sent
him to Portugal, to answer what he had done at Maluco. This was the end of
those violent Courses wherewith he endeavored to enrich himself, and of the
rashness with which he durst say, That in spite of Sea and Winds he would reach
Goa.

18. Whilst D. Garcia struggled with his ill Fortune, the Spaniards at Tidore
were at variance who should succeed in the place of their Captain who died.
They agreed, and another Spanish Ship arrived, commanded by Alvaro de Saavedra.
D. George modestly required them to desist, but to no purpose. Ferdinando
Baldaya went against them in a Galliot. Alfonso de los Rios met him in another
Vessel, they fought courageously, the Spaniards remained victorious, having
killed our Captain and others. Saavedra set sail for New Spain to bring
assistance to prosecute this Act so well begun, and carried with him some of
the Prisoners in the Galliot he had taken. They fled with his Longboat from
certain Islands where he touched, and being afterward taken at Tidore, and
brought to the Spaniards, they condemned them as Traitors to the Emperor (as if
they had owed him any Allegiance) and hanged Ferdinando Moreira, Simon de Brito
was dragged and beheaded. After this D. George de Castro (who accidentally came
to Ternate) by order of D. George de Meneses went against the City Camafo, and
the Inhabitants being fled, burnt it to the ground. But this belongs to next
year, let us see what is doing in India.

CHAP. II.
Continues the Government of Lope Vaz de Sampayo, from the Year 1527, till the
Year 1529, King John the Third Reigning.

1. LOpe Vaz de Sampayo understanding at Cochin, that Peter de Mascarenas was
1527.
coming from Malaca to take upon him the Government, held a Council, where it
was resolved not to admit him as Governor. This done, he went away to Goa,
leaving Alphonso Mexia to put in execution what had been resolved. At his
departure Lope Vaz paid off the Soldiers, who presently concluded, that Action
proceeded not from his Bounty, but was to gain their Affections. Mascarenas
arrived the last day of February, and after some difference with Mexia,
resolved to land unarmed, thinking thereby to disarm the other. On the
contrary, as Mascarenas landed, he was met by Mexia, well armed, and mounted
with armed Men, who fell upon Mascarenas, run him through the Arm with a Lance,
and wounded others of his Company, so that to avoid more harm he was forced to
return to his Ship.

2. The News of this Exploit being brought to Lope Vaz at Goa, it so highly
pleased him, that as a Reward to the Messenger he gave him the Command of
Coulam, taken from Henry Figuera, because he had treated Peter de Mascarenas
with Civility. In this one Action he committed two Crimes, one in rewarding
Insolency, the other in depriving Modesty of its Reward. Now being informed,
that Mascarenas was on the way to Goa, he sent out to take and put him in
Irons, which was executed by Antony de Silveyra, who delivered him at Cananor
to D. Simon de Meneses, Commander of that Fort. The People of Goa were so weary
of these Proceedings, that they broke out into open Railing. And Christopher de
Sousa, Commander of Chaul, gravely reproved him for it by Letter, comforting
Mascarenas the same way, affirming those Affronts redounded more to his Honor
than the Government could have done.

3. Hector de Silveyra, a Gentleman in all his Actions great, fell at variance
with Lope Vaz, upbraided him with his ill usage to Mascarenas, and particularly
with refusing their pretensions to be brought to Judgment as Mascarenas
desired. Lope Vaz (...) sented it, Hector withdrew, and gathering his Kindred,
Friends, and the Council of Goa, they sent a Letter signed by three hundred to
Peter Mascarenhas, desiring him to come to Goa, where they would obey him as
Governor. Then agreed to imprison Lope Vaz, but he knowing it, sent Peter de
Foria, Commander of Goa, to secure Hector de Silveyra, and all that were with
him. Hector refused to deliver himself up, and Lope in a rage arming himse^,
entered the House where these Gentlemen were, then Silveyra, to prevent any
public Disturbance suffered himself to be taken

4. D. Simon de Meneses, who held Mascarenas Prisoner at Cananor, and was no
less offended at Lope Vaz his Proceeeings, hearing what passed at Goa, set him
loose, and together with all that were there, swore him Governor. At this time
arrived three Ships of five that set out of Lisbon, and in them D. John Deca,
Brother-in-law to Lope Vaz, of whom he asked whether he had not a good Title to
the Government, and remained satisfied of the Justice of his Cause, because
approved by him and Friends. The other two Ships were cast away on the Island
Madagascar. Christopher de Sousa acknowledged Mascarenas as Governor, which
much enraged Lope Vaz, but his anger was not of force to take place.

5. Antony de Miranda de Azevedo, Admiral of the Indian Sea, desiring as well
as Christopher de Sousa to prevent Distractions, joined with him, the Result of
their Agreement was, that Lope Vaz was reduced to put the business to
arbitration. It was articled, that the Competiors should stand by the Verdict,
that neither should act as Governor in the interim, that all who were
imprisoned on this Account should be released, that the two who had procured
this Accommodation might come freely to Goa, without any danger of Lope Vaz his
anger. He at first opposed this Agreement, but liking the Arbitrators,
consented, adding some Conditions, the chief about Alfonso Mexia, in case
Mascarenas had the preference.

6. Christopher de Sousa perceiving the Judges were all of Lope Vaz his
Faction, to his great regret, caused one of them to be removed, and five others
to be added. The Arbitrators being declared, many resorted thither, and chiefly
the Inhabitants of Cochin who, conscious, of what they had d^e against
Mascarenas, declared, if he were preferred, they would fly to the Moors. In
fine, those who before solicited for Mascarenas were now against him, and
Sentence was accordingly given against him, the twenty sixth of December. It is
not much that Lope Vaz should rejoice, but strange that Mascarenas should not
be at all concerned. He embarked in one of the Ships that came this year for
Portugal, was well received by the King, who gave him the Command of Azamor in
Africa, on his return from thence he was lost at Sea.

7. As soon as Lope Vaz was quietly settled in his Government, he dispatched
Commanders to some Forts, and among them Peter de Faria to Malaca. Antony de
Miranda de Azevedo was sent with a Fleet to burn the Turkish Galleys that were
left at Camaran, after the death of Raez Soliman. Martin Alfonso de Melo
Iusarte went to build a Fort at Sunda, with eight large Ships and four hundred
Men. He touched at Columbo in the Island Ceylon, where Pate Marcar of Calicut
oppressed the King of Cota our Ally; but hearing of these Ships he fled up the
Rivers, and Madune Pandar the King's Brother who joined with his Enemy, and
pretended to the greatest part of the Kingdom, raised his Siege. Martin Alfonso
went thence rich, having taken some Ships of the Moors, and agreed at Calecare
with the Lord about the price of Pearls, whereof there is a Fishery. Further on
he destroyed the Town of Core, because the Inhabitants had killed John de
Flores, who guarded that Fishery.

8. Going on his Voyage, a sudden and fierce storm drove all his company out of
sight, and set him upon a Bank of Sand near the Island Nagamale, opposite to
the City Sodoe. He went into the Longboat with fifty Men, and with great
difficulty came to the City Chacuria in the Kingdom of Bengala, the Lord
whereof, after making use of them against his Enemy, made them all Slaves.
Hence they were carried to Sore, where two of his Captains arriving, thought to
have stolen them away by night, but were discovered and disappointed. The
Indians had made a Vow to sacrifice to their Idols the handsomest Portuguese
they should take, they judged one Gonzalo Vaz de Melo to be such, and
accordingly sacrificed him, notwithstanding his Uncle Martin Alfonso promised a
great ransom for him. The others were afterward redeemed by a Moor, for three
thousand Ducats.

9. One of the Captains Lope Vaz had sent out, was D. John Deca, to scour the
Sea of Calicut. He behaved himself bravely in several Rencounters, and took
this year fifty Prizes, laden with all sorts of Goods. He burnt the Town of
Mangalor, and meeting afterward the Fleet of Calicut, consisting of seventy
Paraos, well equipped, under the Command of the Chinese Captain Cutiale, he
fought them, took Cutiale, and most of the Vessels, killed fifteen hundred
Moors, and had almost as many Prisoners. In these Rencounters he lost twenty
Portugueses.

10. Antony de Miranda de Azevedo sailed the latter end of January for the Red
Sea, with twenty Ships, and above a thousand Men. After taking some Prizes, he
met in the Mouth of that Sea Henry de Macedo, engaged with a great Turkish
Gallion. They boarded him, and the Turks threw a burning Dart which stuck in
the main Sheet, and began to fire it, but a strong Gust of Wind shaking the
Sail, cast it back into the Turkish Gallion, where falling among the Powder, it
blew all up, so that only eight Men escaped, and those escaped only the Fire,
not the Sword, being killed as they swam. Antony de Sylva took a great Ship of
Diu, and killed all the Men. D. Antony de Miranda fought another two days, and
she got off. Several Captains had other Rencounters. The chief Design, which
was fighting the Turks in the Red Sea at the Island Camaran, took no effect,
the Winds being contrary. They burnt the City Zeylan, the Inhabitants having
saved themselves and Goods by flight.

11. They went thence to Ormuz, and next to Diu, and were dispersed by a storm.
L^pe de Mesquita met a great Ship wherein were 200 resolute Moors, and boarded
her with thirty Men; no sooner were they in her, but his Gallion fell off.
Being left thus they furiously fell upon the two hundred, kill most of them,
and take the Ship, which being much battered by the Gallion, was sinking.
Mesquita with all speed sends his Brother James with sixteen Men in the
Longboat to save the Money taken in the Ship, and return for those that were
behind. Those who thought to escape fell into the greatest danger, for not
reaching the Gallion, they were taken by the Fleet of Diu, and carried to the
King of Cambaya, who would force them to turn Moors, but they remained
constant. The King in a rage caused James de Mesquita to be put into a Cannon,
in order to be blown in pieces, but admiring the resolution with which he
entered, was appeased, and spared him. They were all put into Prison, and
afterward released. Lope de Mesquita, the Gallion and Antony de Miranda met at
Chaul. Antony de Macedo came with his Ship so battered, it was almost a miracle
he escaped, and his Face so monstrous no body knew him, that caused by the
Cannon, the latter by Fire, having been beset by fifty Barks and three Galliots
off of Diu. He fought them a whole day, and was reduced to only six Men and a
Woman, who supplied them with Powder, till accidentally Antony de Silva came up
with him, and the Enemies Commander being killed they fled.

12. The Moors had improved our Divisions to do us much harm, Lope Vaz prepared
to be revenged. He left Antony de Miranda to command at Goa, and went to Cochin
where he fitted out eighteen Ships. At Cananor met him one hundred and thirty
Paraos of Malabars. He could not attack them with the great Ships by reason of
the contrary Wind. But resolving not to slip the opportunity, advanced with
thirteen Paraos against the hundred and thirty. He came up with and did them
much harm with his Cannon, and they spared not theirs, but seeing two Paraos
come out of Cananor to the relief of the thirteen, and the great Ships spread
their Sails to come up, they fled, eighteen of them were sunk, twenty two
taken, and in them fifty pieces of Cannon, eight hundred killed, and many
Prisoners made. Those that fled, and others who joined them fell into the snare
near Cochin.

13. Lope Vaz set out again with the same Fleet in search of Arel, Lord of
Porca, who was seeking revenge for what had happened between him and D. Enrique
at the destruction of Coulete. Lope Vaz scoured the Coast as he went. Simon de
Melo, who commanded the Brigantines, burnt twenty six Ships, and razed the Town
of Chatua. The Fire ran (...) far as Cranganor. He ordered the Fleet that was
there to follow him, that all might share in the plunder of Porca, which he
thought secure. He had a thousand Men with him, and with them he assaulted the
City. Arel was not within it, and the Moors fought courageously in defense of
their Wives, Children and Goods. But the greatest part being slain, the rest
fled, and the Town was plundered. The Wife of Arel and other persons of Note
were taken, with much Gold, Silver, Jewels, Silks and other Stuffs, good
Cannon, and thirteen considerable Vessels, all was put to the Sword first, and
then delivered up to the Flames, without the loss of one Man. The Governor
returning to Cochin found there two Ships that came from Portugal with Nuno de
Cuna, who came to take upon him that Government, and was behind with most of
the Fleet. Lope Vaz desired to deliver up India to him, cleansed of Pirates, and
so prosecuted his Undertakings. He went to Cananor, and sent his Nephew Simon
de Melo against Marabia, a Town not far distant, who burnt twelve of the Paraos
that guarded the Port, and landing, fired the Town. The same he did at mount
Delii. Antony de Silva de Meneses acted in the same nature at other places.
There was nothing every where but Fire and Sword, Ruin and Destruction.

14. The King of Cambaya at this time had fitted out eighty Barques against
Nizamaluco, Lord of Chaul, and did harm to the Portugueses: Alexiath, a valiant
^oor, commanded that Fleet; and our Commander at Chaul and Nizamaluco both
demanded aid of Lop^ Vaz. He set out with forty Sail, in which were above a
thousand Portugueses, besides the Natives, who bore Arms. Hector de Silveyra
had the Command of the Vessels that rowed. Lope Vaz being arrived at Chaul,
sent eighty Portugueses under the Command of John de Avelar to Nizamaluco, then
sailed toward Diu, understanding the eighty Barques steered that way. Off of
Bombaim he had sight of them. Some Vessels run to secure the mouth of the River
Bandora, left the Enemy might escape that way. Hector de Silveyra with his
Brigantines fetched up Aleixiath. The Cannon began a furious Charge, and the
Smoke being dispersed, there appeared in the Air showers of Bullets and Arrows.
Then they boarded, and after a vigorous Engagement Alixiath fled with only
seven of his eighty Barques. Thirty three of them were of use, the rest burnt,
the Prisoners were many, much Artillery taken, and abundance of Ammunition.
Hector lost not one Man in this glorious Action to which Lope Vaz was a joyful
Spectator, tho envious of Silveyra's Glory. John de Avelar acted no less, for
scaling an almost impregnable Fort of the King of Cambaya; he was the first*
that entered, and having slain all the Defendants, delivered it up to
Nizamaluco. Here three Portugueses were lost. They were all assisted by a
thousand of Nizamaluco's ^ubjects. That Prince honored and rewarded the Bravery
of the Portugueses.

15. Lope Vaz overjoyed with this success, thought Diu, now weakened, would
1529.
surrender, if he appeared before it, and he judged right, as afterward
appeared. But all the Captains, except Hector de Silveyra, being of a contrary
opinion, he was forced to desist, and went back to Goa, leaving the famous
Hector with twenty two Vessels that rowed to scour that Coast of Pirates. Antony
de Miranda on that of Malabar drove all that came in his way. He had destroyed
twelve Paraos, when Christopher de Melo, the Governor's Nephew, joined him with
a hundred choice Men in six Brigantines and a Gally. Then they took in the
River Chale a mighty Ship of Calicut, laden with Pepper, and bravely defended
by much Artillery and eight hundred Men. Near Monte Hermoso, or Mount
Beautiful, they defeated fifty Sail of Calicut, and took much Cannon and many
Men in three Paraos. But the Winter coming on, they retired.

16. Hector de Silveyra who was left with his Brigantines on the Coast of
Cambaya did much execution. He run up the River Nagotana of Bacaim, and landed,
the Natives, with the Terror of his Actions, deserting the Towns, whereof he
burnt six. At the last the Commander of Nagotana appeared in the Field with
five hundred Horse, and a great number of Foot. Hector knowing it was a ra^ness
to encounter him, retired toward his Brigantines, but the Horse coming on
hindered any from embarquing. Hector faced them, and killing three, made some
room. Francis Godino dismounting one of the Enemy, got upon his Horse, and
killing another, brought that Horse to his Captain, who encouraging his Men,
made the Enemy give back, and so gained time to imbarque. Hector went hence to
Bacaim, seated on the Banks of the River of the same name, found it well
fortified, and stored with Cannon, through whose Mouths he must force his
landing. Behind the Town lay Alixiath with five hundred Horse, and three
thousand Foot. Hector entered the River by night, and in the morning in
despite of their Cannon forced the Works, killing many of the Defendants. As
he marched to the Town, on a sudden Alixiath fell on him with his three
thousand five hundred Men. Silveyra drew his Men into one Body, and bravely put
all that number to flight, killing many. Whilst they fled, Ba^aim was plundered
and burnt. The Lord of Tana, a great City, not far distant, terrified at this
success, submitted himself as Tributary to Portugal, and was received by
Hector, who now retired to Chaul.

17. Let us now see what was done during this time at Maluco. Simon de Sousa
Galvam was going in a Galley with seventy Men, to take the Command of that Fort
of D. George, a most violent storm brought him in a miserable condition to the
Port of Achem. Immediately flocked about them several Vessels upon pretense of
assistance, but being come aboard they fell upon the seventy Portugueses with
all manner of weapons, but they recovering the Fright, bravely drove them all
from their Ships sides, but not above twenty of them were left that could stand
upon their Feet. The King in a rage that the Ship was not taken, ordered his
Admiral to attack her in the morning. He came, and Simon de Sousa encouraging
those Men that could scarce support themselves, did Feats like to those related
in Fables, and repelled with great slaughter that Inundation that came upon
them. But a Moor, who was in the Galley, leaping overboard, gave the Enemy an
account of her miserable condition. With a fresh supply they came on again and
boarded her, killing most of our Men, Simon de Sousa was cut in pieces. Only
such as had not life enough to seek their death remained alive, and were
carried to the King with the Galley, and afterward served in the execution of
his wicked Designs, as shall appear in its proper place.

18. Thus Simon de Sousa sailing by the way D. George de Meneses continued his
Command at Maluco. He sent some Portugueses against Tidore and the Spaniards
that were there, but they being put to the rout, D. George gathered the
Ternatenses, they their Allies the chief whereof were Cachil de Aroez, the King
of Bacham and the Sangages. They fell upon Tidore in the morning, those of of
Tidore and the Spaniards fought courageously, but were obliged to give ground
and retire, the Spaniards to their Fort, having lost six Men, two killed, and
four taken, the Tidores to their City, whence they were forced to fly by D.
George, who burnt and plundered it. Then he returned to the Fort, and summoned
Ferdinando de la Forre, the Spanish Captain to surrender. He no longer able to
hold out, accepted the Capitulation, the Heads of it were, that he should
immediately go over to the City Camafo, that he should commit no Hostilities
upon the Portugueses, Ternatenses, or any of their Friends, that he should go
to no Islands that produced Cloves. The King of Tidore was made Tributary to
Portugal, and obliged not to aid the Spaniards. Then D. George returned
victorious to Ternate.

19. Mean while Bohaat, King of Tidore, died in the Fort, not without suspicion
of Poison given by Cachil Daroez. His Brother Cachil Daialo succeeded, who was
no less suspicious of Cachil Vaiaco, whom he accused of heinous Crimes, but
being afraid of his Life fled to the Fort, and suspecting D. George would
deliver him to his Enemy, chose rather to die, by throwing himself out of a
Window. All Ternate now mutined against D. George, and he imagining that Cachil
Vaideca had caused to be killed a China Sow he much esteemed, having more
respect to that foul Beast than that noble person imprisoned, and after set him
at liberty, anointing his Face with Bacon, which among that People is the most
heinous affront, and had been as highly revenged upon the Portugueses, had not
the Prudence and Modesty of Antony Galvam, who succeeded in the Government,
appeased the rage of the People.

20. D. George not content with this violence, sent to rob the Houses of the
Moors of their Provisions. In fine, this Gentleman became on a sudden most
wicked and outrageous. The Moors stood upon their Defense, and treated some
Portugueses as they now deserved. In the Town of Tabona D. George took the
chief Magistrate, and two Moors of Note, these two he sent back after cutting
off their Hands, upon the other he set two Dogs on the shore, who tore his
Flesh till he fled into the Water to shun them, but they pursuing, he defended
himself with his Teeth, till the water coming up he was tore to pieces and
drowned. This made D. George odious to all, and moved Cachil de Aroez to stir
up the People to rise and expel both Portugueses and Spaniards. D. George
catched him in the Contrivance, and beheaded him publicly in Ternate, to the
terror of all People, which occasioned the City to be unpeopled, the
Inhabitants and even the Queen flying from this storm to other places. D.
George was imprisoned for these inhuman Barbarities, and sent to India, and
thence to Portugal, where he was condemned to Banishment. Any Reward was too
small for his former Actions, and this Punishment too slight for the latter.
But because Nuno de Cuna now enters upon the Government of India, let us
conclude this Chapter, and hereafter we shall see Lope Vaz return to Portugal,
and his Punishment there for the Extravagancies committed against Peter de
Mascarenas, and usurping the Government, which deprived him of the Reward, if
not the Glory of those notable Exploits which might have rendered him deserving
of it. He was Governor of it three years and ten months, his Complexion fair,
and Countenance venerable, his Beard gray, Cap and upper Robe black with
Crimson Lining, Breeches and Doublet of the same Color, over all his Armor. I
will reckon Peter Mascarenas the eighth Governor, both because he executed the
Power some time, and because the condemning of Lope Vaz confirmed his Right. So
Lope Vaz will be the Ninth in order.

CHAP. III.
The Government of Nuno de Cuna from the Year 1529 to the Year 1538, in the
Reign of King John the Third.

1. IN May this same year arrived at Ormuz, Nuno de Cuna, who came the year
before from Lisbon with eleven Ships. Because setting out late he had a tedious
Voyage, and by the way did considerable things, we will say somewhat of him
before his arrival in India. One of his Ships was lost near Cabo Verde, the
Captain and some Men saved, one hundred and fifty perished. After passing the
Line they were dispersed by a storm, some met again afterward. Nuno put into
the Port San Tiago on the Island Madagascar, where he found a naked Portuguez,
no less wild in appearance than the Blacks, but they were somewhat civilized.
By him he understood the loss of two Ships of five that came from Lisbon the
year 1527, commanded by Manuel de Lacerda and Alexius de Abreu.

2. This Man was a Soldier belonging to Abreu, they were cast away upon the
Sands before that Port. They fortified themselves in hopes some Ships passing
by would take them up. After waiting a year one Ship passed but could not come
to them, and they no longer able to subsist there, marched up the Country to
seek their Fortune in two Bodies, and this Man was left behind sick. Nuno de
Cuna having advertised the King hereof. Duarte and James Fonseca were sent from
Portugal to find these Men The first perished in that Island, the other found
but four and a French Man, and was cast away with them sailing for India. The
French Man belonged to one of three Ships that came that year from France, and
perished in that place. The four said many of their Companions lived in the
Inland, but 'twas impossible to find them. From these it is thought sprung
those People that the Hollanders there found eighty years after. They said,
that a Portugues Captain suffering shipwreck there, conquered that place, and
became Sovereign, and all his Men marrying Natives had numerous Issue, that
they erred much in matters of Faith. Great were their Errors that could be
perceived by the Atheistical Hollanders! But doubtless these People could not
descend from only that Shipwreck, they might be some of the first Discoverers
that were never heard of, and among others the three that sailed from Cochin
with Francis de Albuquerque, the year 1530.

3. Nuno de Cuna being in this Island, inquiring into the Affairs of it, his
Ship perished in a storm. The Men were saved in the other two, much Goods and
Arms lost; and thus he reached the Island of Zanzibar, where he eased the Ships
over-burdened with Men, setting ashore (the King being our Friend) two hundred
sick, under the Care of Alexius de Sousa Chichorro, with orders to go to
Melinde as soon as recovered.

4. Nuno de Cuna went thither, he tried to pass to India, but could not.
Therefore not to lose time he resolved to take revenge on the King of Monbaca,
who, in hatred to us, infested those of Melinde and Zanzibar. If the City was
taken he purposed to make Munho Mahomet, Son of him that so kindly received
Gama the first time, King of it. Which he understanding, and returning thanks,
said, That he was incapable of that honor, being begot on a Cafre Slave; but
since he would gratify his Father's Kindness to the Portugueses, he might do
it in the person of his Nephew, who, tho younger, was of the Blood Royal of the
Kings of Quiloa. Nuno rightly judged, that none better merited a Crown than he
that coveted it not, and reserved his Answer till he saw the Event of the
Enterprise. He set out with eight hundred Men, and Mahomet with sixty, and as
many with Cide Bubac the King's Nephew, the other had proposed to be King.

5. As he drew near there met him the Lord of Otondo, a neighboring Town,
offering to accompany him with a well furnished Vessel, being admitted, showing
Silver Chains upon his Legs, he said, He wore them in remembrance that he had
been wrongfully imprisoned by that King, and had swore never to take them off
till revenged; that all the motive his Enemy had to use him so, was for his
affection to the Portugueses, tho be never was so happy as to serve them. The
King of Monbaca knowing Cuna's Design, prepared, planting Guns on a Bulwark
that kept the mouth of the River, and bringing six hundred expert and resolute
Archers into the City. Nuno entered the River through Showers of Bullets that
flew from the Bulwark, which killed some Men, and battered some Vessels. Yet he
anchored the Evening near the City, all the Night the Enemy poured Arrows upon
the Fleet, which answered with their Cannon. Day appearing, the Attack began,
and Peter Vaz, Brother to Nuno, driving all before him, was the first who set
up the Portugues Colors in the highest place of the City, which being seen far
off, the Ships began to celebrate the Victory. Many Moors were killed, the rest
left the City. D. Ferdinand de Lima was suddenly clasped by a stout Moor, but
his own Men coming in the Moor was slain, fulfilling a Vow he had made to the
King's Niece whom he loved. For this Woman going out with others, said to him:
Are these the brave men of Monbaca, who suffer their Wives and Children to lose
the City, and go for refuge to the Cafres? And he answered: Since you affront
me thus, I swear by the Love I bear you, before two days, those who love shall
weep for me, and you, if you value me, shall not see me to reward my Love. He
fulfilled his Vow, as did many more, not one Portuguese was lost.

6. The City was plundered, twenty great pieces of Cannon taken. D Ferdinand de
Lima going to secure the Bulwark, some Moors issued out of a Wood, did harm,
for a few of our Men died of their poisoned Arrows. Many of the Enemy were
afterward slain. Hither came News of some of Cuna's Fleet who had been
separated from him.

Nuno the better to secure and people the City, which was great, sent to
Melinde, whence presently came a Nephew of that King with five hundred Men,
many of Quality, and he of Montangue with two hundred. By this means the
Natives were drove out of the Island, tho Hunger afterward forced back many.
The King of Monbaca, sensible of his Ruin, sent a Man of Note to treat of an
Accommoda^ion with Nuno, offering to become Tributary, and pay a Ransom for the
City. They came to Agreement.

8. The King presently began the Payment, and as soon fell off, finding the
Portugueses sickened and died. Two hundred were already dead, among them some
Gentlemen, and Peter Vaz de Cuna. This and other Misfortunes pressed the
disposing of the City. The King of Melinde's Sons durst not undertake to
maintain it without a number of Portugueses, which could not be afforded after
such a loss. Nuno consumed the City to Ashes, and returned to Melinde, bringing
with him those who were left before at Zanzibar, and other places, who joined
him after the City was taken.

9. At Melinde he left eighty sick Men to be carried to India by Tristan Homem,
who afterward with them defended that King against him of Monbaca, who sought
to revenge there the harm done him by the Portugueses. In May the Governor
began to visit the neighboring Places to Ormuz, making Proclamation, That all
persons who had any Cause of Complaint against Portugueses should appear before
him. Many appeared with much Cause, and the Offenders were obliged to make
restitution, to the great astonishment of the Moors,, not used to see such
Justice executed. At Ormuz he made a solemn Entry, which being unusual, was
much admired by those People.

10. He found that Raez Xarafo great Guazil, or rather Tyrant over that King,
tho restored by Lope Vaz, was not clear of those great Crimes he stood accused
of. The chief were Rapin and Murder. and the Circumstances such, that King John
had sent after Nuno de Cuna, Emanuel de Macedo, with Orders independent of the
Government, to take and bring him to Portugal. They both had a Hand in securing
him. Nuno visited the King, and gave him Letters from ours. He qualified the
King's Displeasure for imprisoning Xarafo, and his fear for his own Offenses,
received his Excuse, and took leave. The King presented him with rich Jewels,
Pieces of Cloth of Gold, Silks and a stately Horse with fine Furniture after
the Persian manner. Nuno refused to accept, but seeing the King was affronted
at it, received it in his King's Name. The Gentlemen with him received rich
Gifts.

11. Nuno made some Inquiry into Xarafo's Crimes, and sent him to Portugal. The
King for the Murder of Mahomet was sentenced to pay forty thousand Xeraphins
over and above the sixty thousand he paid yearly. It is true, this Crime served
only as a pretense to overload him with this Tribute, being the third part of
the Revenue of Ormuz. Raez Xarafo, tho guilty of heinous Offenses, carried
enough Riches with him to purchase Favor in Portugal, and be restored to his
Employ.

12. Whilst the Governor was thus employed at Ormuz, Belchior Tavarez de Sousa
came thither, he had been to assist the King of Bacora with forty Men against
him of Gizaira. He was the first Portuguese that went up the Rivers Tigris and
Euphrates. Bacora is thirty Leagues from the mouth of these Rivers, in thirty
degrees: somewhat more of Northern Latitude. It is a new Foundation in memory
of the ancient Bacora, eight Leagues distant from it, the Ruins whereof are
still to be seen, and in the opinion of a person of Judgment who did see them,
are twice as big as Grand Caire. The Island Gizaira is formed by the two
Rivers, Tigris, whose Springs are in Curdi, of the greater Armenia; and
Euphrates, whose Fountains are in Turkomania. The Circuit of it forty Leagues,
it contains forty thousand Archers.

13. The King of Bacora had received Sousa with State, and Joy in a Court of
his Palace, so large, that it contained two thousand Men without any Throng.
Next day gave him an account of his Condition, desiring he would either bring
the King of Gizaira to an honorable Peace, or recover some Forts he had taken
from him. The King of Bacora set out with two hundred Dalacas, or large
Barques, in them were five thousand Men, six hundred whereof were Musketeers,
seven Vessels full of Turks with good Cannon, his Nephew marched by Land with
three thousand Horse. He planted himself on the side of Arabia, opposite to
where he of Gizaira was posted with twelve hundred Men. By order of the King of
Bacora, Sousa writ to his Enemy, telling him, He was sent by the Commander of
Ormuz to make peace between them, or to stand to the Event of War, The King of
Gizaira answered, That being the first Request of the Captain of Ormuz, and he
the first Portuguese that had come to those parts, he granted all.

14. The King of Gizaira sent persons with power to treat, and Peac^ ^as
concluded to the satisfaction of him of Bacora, who seeing all safe, refused to
perform what he had promised Sousa, which was to deliver up the seven Turkish
Vessels, and not admit them into this Kingdom again as being our Enemies. Sousa
embarked, took one of his great Barques, and landing with thirty six
Portugueses, burnt a Town of three hundred Houses. Another, tho not so big, he
fired on the Persian side. He again appeared before Bacora, but wanting
Provisions, returned to Ormuz.

15. Nuno de Cuna, to reward Sousa, gave him the Command of that Sea, sending
him at the King's Request to the Island Baharem, to secure Raez Barbadim, who
was revolted. But he having good intelligence baffled the Contrivance, and
obliged Nuno de Cuna to send his Brother Simon with eight Vessels, and four
hundred Men, besides some of the Natives in their Barques. They set out.

16. Mean while Nuno de Cuna prepared to go for India. He arrived at Goa the
latter end of October, where were before him four Ships come from Portugal the
most fortunately that any had done yet; for of above fifteen hundred Men they
brought, none died but our Captain, and they came all in perfect health. Nuno
made a very solemn Entry into the City. There were at this time ready almost
one hundred and forty Vessels, provided by the care of Lope Vaz, many
considerable, as six Gallions, eight Royal Galleys, six Caravels, and fourteen
Galliots, all well stored, with Arms and Ammunition. The Forts were also well
provided. For tho Lope Vaz usurped the Government, he managed it better than
many that were named for it. The Governor's presence was required at Cochin for
the Dispatch of the homeward bound trading Ships and other Affairs.

17. Whilst he sailed to Cochin, Simon de Cuna came to Baharem with his Ships,
and joining Belchior de Sousa, landed. He battered the Fort three days, and
lost it for want of Powder, for whilst he sent for more to Ormuz, his Men so
sickened, that above one hundred Portugueses died, and many were in danger, and
the very Persians used to that Clime were in no better Condition. With this
loss he drew off. This seemed an effect of Divine Justice, for Barbadim offered
to deliver up the Fort upon condition he might go away in safety, but our
Gentlemen would not hearken to him, fearing to lose the Booty.

18. Simon de Seusa found no less a Pestilence had raged among his Seamen. Thus
they set sail, but being becalmed not far from Ormuz, many of the sick died,
and among them some persons of good Note, and Simon de Cuna himself. A great
Grief to his Brother Nuno, who had already lost his other Brother at Monbaca.

CHAP. IV.
Continues the Government of Nuno de Cuna, from the Year 1529, in the Reign of
King John the Third.

1. NUno de Cuna sailing to Cochin, put in at Cananor, and the King sent to
welcome him. Cuna excused himself that he did not go ashore to see him by
reason of his haste, and the King for not going aboard the Gallion, because he
was indisposed. After these Complements came the Guazil, a great Friend of the
Portugueses, and to gain the favor of Cuna, as of other Governors, privately
offered him a Collar, which he refused to receive. Don John de Deca at that
time had the Command of the Fort, he visiting the Governor aboard, brought him
a Message from Lope Vaz then there, desiring him to come ashore, and he would
there resign the Government to him. Nuno sent to desire him to come and resign
aboard. He came, and the Resignation was performed with the usual Solemnities.
As he was in the Vessel ready to return, he was ordered by Cuna to bear him
company to Cochin. Then the Governor made Proclamation, That any who had been
wronged by Lope Vaz, should repair to him, and he would do them Justice. This
troubled Lope Vaz, and he sent him word, That those were rather Libels than
Proclamations; for no Man that had cause of Complaint against him, needed to be
stirred up by sound of Trumpet. At Cochin, Nuno ordered Lope Vaz to be
imprisoned, and an Inventory of all his Goods to be taken, and all deposited in
safe Hands to be delivered at Lisbon, as the King should direct. Lope Vaz said
to the Officer that took him, Tell Nuno de Cuna, that I imprisoned, he
imprisons me, and one will come who will imprison him. Nuno being told it,
said, I doubt not but I shall be imprisoned, but the difference between us will
be, that Lope Vaz deserves it, and I shall not. Neither was he deceived, for he
had been close laid up in Portugal, had he not died at Sea: we shall see it at
the end of his Government. Lope Vaz was less afflicted for his Confinement,
than the insolent Reproaches of the Rabble, that the worst Ship was allotted
him to imbarque, only two Servants allowed him, and barely so much of his own
as would maintain him the Voyage. An unjust proceeding with a Man of his Worth,
whose person ought not to be indecently used whilst his Crimes were inquired
into.

2. Nuno de Cuna found nothing in readiness at Cohin, of what he ordered from
Melinde should be provided to make war upon Diu, which was the principal point
of his Instructions. Perceiving the year was too far gone for that Undertaking,
he applied himself to other Affairs, and fitted a Fleet of thirty Sail to scour
the Coast of Malabar, under the Command of James de Silveyra, who commanded the
four, came last from Portugal. Antony de Silveyra Meneses had a Squadron to
cruise in the Sea of Cambaya. And Hector de Silveyra another for the Red Sea.
Whilst these Commanders sailed on the Coasts assigned them, our homeward bound
Fleet arrived at the Terceras Islands, where an Officer was waiting to put Lope
Vaz into Irons. Loaded with them he landed at Lisbon, and was set upon a Mule,
on which he was carried, accompanied by the rude Rabble up to the Castle, and
put into a Dungeon, w^h Orders, that not even his Wife should be permitted to
see him. He was accompanied in this miserable state by Raez Xarafo Guazil of
Ormuz, brought by Emanuel de Macedo. After two years Lope Vaz his Crimes began
to be taken into consideration and examined, the King having ordered him to be
prosecuted with the utmost rigor. The principal Article against him was his
unjust Proceeding with Peter de Mascarenas. The Duke of Braganca pityng the
Misfortunes of this brave Gentleman, prevailed with the King to give him a
hearing in Council. Accordingly his Majesty being seated in Council with all
his Judges about him, Lope Vaz was brought in, venerable for his person, his
Face covered with a thick and long white Beard, and with such tokens of the
Miseries he had endured in almost three years imprisonment, reckoning from
India, that had Peter Mascarenas or any of his Enemies seen him, they might
think themselves sufficiently revenged of all the Extravagancies he had been
guilty of toward them. Being placed at the Bar as a Criminal, after the King's
leave obtained, he with an undaunted Constancy made a learned, comprehensive
and copious Speech. In which after running over his Forefathers Services to the
Crown, he particularized his own from his infancy till that time, reflected
upon his Sufferings and Wrong done him since Imprisoned, and in general to
several other brave Governors his Predecessors, exposed the Malice of his
Accusers, justified his own Proceedings, illustrated by Examples how others
guilty of greater Crimes than he was accused of, were pardoned in respect of
their Services, then made a parallel between them and his Sufferings, and
concluded, throwing himself upon either his Majesty's Justice, or Mercy, from
one of which he hoped such a Discharge, that he might have more cause to return
thanks for the future, than he had till then to lament his hard Usage. The King
having heared with attention, examined him upon every Article of his
Impeachment, and he answered to each. The Articles were in all forty three; the
principal, as was said, such as related to Peter Mascarenas, the others such as
would never have been thought of, had not those brought them in to fill up the
number. In fine he was carried back to the Castle, whence he sent his Defense,
as is usual in such Cases, and in conclusion was sentenced to lose all his
Allowance as Governor, and to pay to Peter Mascarenas ten thousand Ducats,
which confirmed the latter, not him, to have been the real Governor, and
justified those who had obeyed them as such. He was also banished into Africa.
But he resenting this hard Fortune, resolved to change his Country and his
Prince, as the famous Ferdinand Magallanes had done before. And getting into
Spain, he unnaturalized himself; and from Badajoz writ a Letter to the King,
affirming his usage had been highly unjust, and that he was resolved to try
whether changing his Country he could change Fortune, and restore his Honor.
This had such effect, that he was restored to his Country. Alfonso Mexia being
likewise brought prisoner to Portugal, had the same success; he was also
accused of Crimes committed at Ormuz, the Commander of which Fort James de Melo
was under the same Circumstances. Let us now return to India.

3. James Silveyra on the Coast of Calicut carried so heavy a Hand upon those
People, that their King was obliged to send Ambassadors to Nuno de Cuna,
desiring Peace. He granted upon such Conditions as they deserved who had never
kept any. They were willing to accept part, but rejected the rest, so Silveyra
reduced them to extreme Famine, hindering the Importation of Provisions. They
received some Relief from Cananor, and Simon de Sousa being forced upon that
Shore, after valiantly repulsing the Moors, his Powder took fire, and blew up
the Brigantine.

4. Melique Saca being expelled Diu, found it convenient for the compassing his
Ends with the King of Cambaya, to use those Artifices with Nuno de ^una he had
done with Hector de Silveyra, when he offered to deliver up that City to him.
He writ to Nuno, that tho he could not deliver Diu, at least he could assist
him in the taking of it; to this end it was convenient they should have a
meeting, and in order thereunto he might send him a Pass and Ships for himself
and Retinue, commanded by Gaspar Paez, whom he had known at Diu. The Governor
granted all, and he made use of it to be restored to the King of Cambaya's
Favor, receiving and putting off Gaspar Paez with Subleties and Impudence,
pretending the Pass was not securely worded, and the Ships were too few. Paez
told him he had by the way with those Vessels taken a great Ship, and put to
flight fourteen Barques in the River Pormeane, and that he might go with all
safety. But no Reason is of force against Craft and Falsehood.

5. Gaspar Paez would have taken some Revenge, but could only burn nine
Barques. The Governor enraged hereat, suddenly began to make such Preparations
against Diu as should not easily be disappointed. He had not yet seen the King
of Cochin who was sick of the Small Pox. Nuno being less fearful of the
Infection than the King, who sent him word, That he did not desire to see him,
for fear he might catch the Disease, tho he believed his fight would cure him.
Nuno went to visit him, and it was much he was received, for those Princes
suffer not themselves to be seen in any Sickness. The whole Conference
contained nothing but Complaints of Injuries done by Lope Vaz and Alfonso
Mexia. Nuno left him well satisfied with his Courtesy, so that he began to
look upon himself as a King, having till then been treated as a Slave, and
found himself better in health.

6. It was requisite Nuno de Cuna should 3530.
now go to Goa. At Chale he visited the King, and gave him content. About Mid-
February he came to Cananor, and saw that King, whom he much obliged by
conforming to his own Ceremonies at the Interview. This Prince offered him some
Jewels, which he fearing to affront him received, but delivered to the Officers
of the Revenue as belonging to the King.

7. He ordered James de Silveyra to punish a rich Merchant of Mangalor, who did
great wrong to the Portugueses. He scoured the Rivers along that Coast, with
sixteen Ships, and four hundred and fifty Men. Then entered the River Mangalor,
on whose Banks is the Town of that Name belonging to the King of Narsinga, our
Friend, but that Merchant favored Calicut, our Enemy. This Merchant knowing
the Design was against him, was well fortified. James Silveyra chose the lesser
Vessels with two hundred and forty Men to go up the River, who were met by a
great Squadron, which after some contest was put to flight. The Town was
immediately entered, all the Defendants quitting it. James Silveyra then turned
to the Fort, and after some resistance took it. The Merchant fled in despair,
but was overtaken and killed by a Musket Ball. Those who fled sought refuge in
the River, and our Swords there made it run bloody. Nothing was taken but some
Cannon, for Booty being very great, the Captain caused it all to be burnt, lest
he might endanger his Ships by overloading them. There were also burnt thirteen
Vessels that waited for loading. Winter coming on, he thought so great a Force
was not requisite, and dismissed half the Fleet. But there had been use for all
when he met Pati Marcar, a Commander of Calicut sailing for Mangalor with sixty
Paraos. The Weather prevented fighting then, so he waited their Return, and
gave Battle at Mount Delii, where six Paraos were sunk, then went to Cochin.

8. Antony de Silveyra, to whom the Coast of Cambaya was allotted, had now
under his Command fifty one Sail, whereof three were Galleys, and two Galliots,
and in them nine hundred Portugueses. He went up the River Taptii, on whose
Banks are two Cities, the chiefest of that Coast. On the one side, Surat,
containing ten thousand Families, most Handycrafts, and all of no Courage,
called Bancanes. On the other side, Reyner, of six thousand Houses, but warlike
Men, and well fortified. The River being sounded, it was found there was not
Water enough for the greater Vessels, which were left at the Bar under Francis
de Vasconcellos. With the rest Antony de Silveyra returning to the Mouth of the
River, and having sailed four Leagues, discovered Surat. Three hundred Horse,
and almost ten thousand Foot opposed the Landing, armed with Bows and Muskets,
they spent their-Shot, and fled without expecting an Answer. The City was
entered without any farther resistance, and nothing left in it that had life, or
was of Value. Then the City and some Ships that lay in the Arsenal were burnt.
A little higher on the other side was the City Reyner, inhabited by the Nayteas
Moors, of more Courage and Policy, who nevertheless scarce essayed our Fire,
when they fled, leaving all in the Hands of the Portugueses, who had all been
rich, could they have carried away all the Plunder. They carried what they
could, the rest was all burnt, with twenty Ships and many lesser Vessels that
were in that Port. Emanuel de Sousa was in both Actions the foremost at
landing, not without great danger, especially in the latter, the Enemy playing
much great Cannon at him.

9. Antony de Silveyra returning to the Mouth of the River, found that whilst
he burnt those Cities, Francis de Vasconcellos had not been idle, but taken six
Vessels laden with Provisions bound for Diu. Now they sailed together to Damam,
a Town great and strong, yet terrified by the Disaster of the others, quitted
by the Inhabitants, and burnt by our Men. On the contrary the Town of Agacaim
fourteen Leagues from Chaul, dared the Portugues Fury with four hundred Horse,
and five thousand Foot. At first shock they killed five Portugueses, and the
rest began to fly, but being rallied by the Captains, the Town was taken, and
in it much Cannon and Riches. Many were killed, above two hundred taken. The
Fire of the Town took hold of the Vessels which were three hundred.

10 Whilst Antony de Silveyra was thus employed, Francis Pereyra de Berredo,
Commander at Chaul, overcome by the Entreaties of the Inhabitants, oppressed by
Badur, King of Cambaya; who was Master of the Field, marched with fifty Horse,
and one hundred and fifty Foot, till he met Popaterao with five thousand of the
former, and twelve thousand of the latter. The multitude, weariness and heat so
disordered the Portugueses, that most of them were slain, Francis Pereyra
seeing the Fort in danger, called Antony de Silveyra, who instantly with care
relieved it in person, which preserved it from falling into the Hands of King
Badur, which it must have done, if assaulted at that time. Francis Pereyra was
punished for that loss and rashness by being deprived of his Command, and
imprisoned by the Governor, who gave that Post to Antony Silveyra, whose
Diligence had saved it.

11. Hector de Silveyra, who sailed from Goa on the twenty first of January
with ten Sail, and six hundred Men, for the Red Sea, spread his Ships cross the
Mouth of it from Cape Guardafu on the Coast of Asia, to Xael in Arabia, that no
Enemy might escape him. Most of them had some Success, chiefly Hector and
Martin de Castro who took two great and rich Ships, killing the Defendants who
made a brave resistance. A Brigantine of twelve Men that accompanied the Ship
taken by Hector to Mascate, made up to a great Barque, supposing her a
Portuguese, and discovered not the mistake till it was not possible to avoid
fighting thirty valiant Turks that were in her. They fought till both parties
tired, were forced to rest, and having recovered Breath all the Turks were
slain. Of the Portugueses three died, the nine carrying off the Barque as a
Trophy of this brave Exploit. The Fleet being joined, appeared before Aden,
where Hector managed that King with such Dexterity, that he consented to pay a
Tribute of twelve thousand Xeraphins yearly to the Crown of Portugal, offering
him immediately a Crown of Gold. The Agreement was solemnly signed on both
sides, and Antony Botello left in that Port with a Brigantine and thirty Men.
In the same manner the King of Xael submitted, who not long before had
accompanied Mustapha, a Turkish Captain, with twenty thousand Men to make war
upon Aden. In the Month of September arrived at Goa six Ships from Portugal.

12. Let us look upon the Indian Sea now 1531.
covered with a Wood of Ships, the product of the Governor's great care, now
full of his Design upon Diu. This Fleet consisted of above four hundred Sail,
many large, more indifferent, and the greatest number small, several of them
were only Sutlers, fitted out by the Natives for private Gain. In the Island
Bombaim was made a general Review of the Fleet, and found to contain three
thousand six hundred Soldiers, and one thousand four hundred and fifty Seamen,
all Portugueses, above two thousand Malabars and Canaras, eight thousand Slaves
fit for Service, and almost five thousand Seamen. The Governor landed at Damam,
a Fort of Cambaya, which was immediately quitted by the Moors. Mass was said
there and the general absolution given. Then three Rewards were proposed to the
three first that should mount the Walls of Diu at the scaling of it. Hither
came the News, that the Arabs, Turks and others, to the number of two thousand
fortified themselves in the Island Beth, seven Leagues from Diu. It was by
Nature and Art so begirt with Rocks and Walls, and stored with Cannon, that
Nuno de Cuna gave no Credit to the Relation till he saw it.

13. On the seventh of February he came to the Island, and having in person
viewed all Difficulties besieged it. He summoned the Barbarians to surrender;
but they were so resolute, that many of them shaved their Heads, a Token that
they fear not death, but are devoted, which they call making themselves
Amoucos. Their Commander gave them a brutal Example of Resolution, making a
great Fire, and throwing into it his Wife, Son, Goods and Family, that if the
Portugueses overcame, they might find nothing but a heap of Ashes. Others
followed the Example. Nuno ordered the Island to be attacked at once in six
several places. At Break of Day each Officer courageously fell on the place
appointed him. The Enemy received them with desperate fury. Many were killed,
and among them the brave Hector de Silveyra, who in so many Occasions had
notably signalized himself. This to us was a great loss. Our dead in all were
twelve. A Portuguese ran through an Islander with his Lance, and he pressing
forward upon it, with his Cymiter cut off the Portuguese his Leg, and they both
fell down dead. One stood upon a Rock with four Women, and seeing our Men
comeon, killed two of the Women by their free consent, but a Bullet preventing
him from killing the other two, they both leaped into the Sea to prevent being
made Slaves, but to no effect, for they were taken in the Sea. Eighteen hundred
of the Enemy were killed, and sixty Cannons taken.

14. Nuno de Cuna parting from Beth, appeared no less formidable to Diu, than
that City did to him. The City considered the Sea covered with that Fleet. The
Fleet, a City built upon Rocks, and encompassed by them and Water, the Mouth of
the River crossed with massy Chains sustained upon Vessels, and eighty filled
with Archers and Musketeers to defend them; within ten thousand armed Men, and
an infinite number of great Artillery. The tops of Houses, Walls and Rocks
covered with multitudes of People of both Sexes and all Ages, rending the Air
with Shouts. Our Governor viewed the danger, consulted the Captains, and
ordered the Assault.

15. On the sixteenth of February, the signal being given, the Sea and Land
were covered with Clouds of Smoke and Dust of the Destruction our Guns made in
the City. Nuno standing in a Boat clothed in red, to be the better seen, flew
to all parts where there was occasion, and being known, was all the Mark the
Enemies Shot was directed to. Which Sebastian de Sa, who, by favor, was taken
out of another Boat into his, perceiving with some concern, said to him, Alas,
Sir, was it for this you brought me hither! And he pleasantly, as if no danger
had been near, replied to him and others, Humilitate capita vestra. D. Vasco de
Lima had not lowered his Head, for a Ball took it off his shoulders. Our Cannon
began to burst with the continual Fire. Cuna perceiving this loss, and that
twelve Men were killed without doing any considerable Execution upon the Enemy,
the day being spent, consulted with the principal Men, and it was agreed the
Enterprise was not practical. He desisted, leaving Antony de Saldana with sixty
Vessels in the Bay of Cambaya, to do what damage he could to the Enemy. It was
agreed on all Hands, that had not the Governor stayed to take Beth, he had
carried Diu; for the Moor Mustapha was the only cause of its holding out, who
entered but three days before with considerable Relief. We lost never a Vessel,
and that part of the Fleet which went with Nuno de Cuna arrived at Goa the
fifteenth of March, where it stayed till two Ships came in of six that sailed
this year from Lisbon. Of the other four, one returned to Portugal, another
perished in a storm at Cape Comori, the Captain Manuel de Macedo and all the
Men being saved ashore, where they defended themselves against a great number
of Moors, till relieved from Cochin. A third was never heard of. And the fourth
came afterward, but returning home with another, it was never known of what
became of both.

16. Mustapha as soon as the Portugues Fleet was gone, went to offer himself to
King Badur, carrying great Presents, and was received with Honor, and rewarded.
He gave him the Command of Baroche in the Bay of Cambaya, and other
considerable Revenues with the Title of Rume, because he was a Grecian; for the
Indian Moors being ignorant of the Division of the Provinces of Europe, called
all Thracia, Greece, Sclavonia, and the adjacent Countries Rum, and the Natives
thereof Rumii, this Name being proper only to those of Thracia, called Romania.
Therefore the Turks and Rumes are different Nations, those being originally of
Turchestan, and these of Greece and Thrace, and the Rumes esteem themselves
more honorable than the Turks. He also gave him the Title of Cham, a Dignity
among the Tartars, like a Duke with us, and among the Eastern People is given
to Persons of great Merit. So Mustapha from hence forward was called Rume Cham.

17. Antony de Saldana, who was left in the Sea of Diu with sixty Sail and
fifteen hundred Men, went to the City Madrefabat, five Leagues distant toward
the Island Beth, and burnt it with small opposition. Then he went to Goga
twenty four Leagues distant from the last, a place of great Trade, formerly
populous and strong. In the Port were fifteen of the best Paraos of Calicut,
laden with Spice, who fled up a Creek, and were followed by Saldana, with eight
hundred Men in the smaller Vessels. It was found necessary to land, and three
hundred Horse and eight hundred Foot coming down to the Relief of the Malabars,
there was a sharp Engagement, till above two hundred of the Enemy being killed,
they quitted the Field and Vessels which were all burnt, as was the Town and
eight Ships in the Port. We lost some Men. The chiefest Booty was much good
Cannon. The same happened to the Towns Belsa, Tarapor, Maii, Quelme and Agacim,
and lastly Surat, then rising after the last Fire, and some Vessels in that
River. Saldana having thus terrified all that Coast retired to Goa. About this
time came into Nuno de Cuna's power a Brother of the King of Cambaya, who was
the rightful Heir of that Crown, and through him our Governor hoped to compass
some considerable advantage. D. Antony de Silveyra who parted from Chaul with
six Ships arrived at Aden, and found that King who not long before submitted to
the Portugueses, had killed such as had stayed there, for Covetousness of a
Ship laden with Spice that came to his Port. Silveyra being too weak to revenge
this, sailed to Ormuz, where he died, George de Lima succeeded in his Command,
and took two rich Ships in the Bay of Cambaya.

18. Our Cruisers had about this time taken twenty seven Ships of the King of
Calicut richly laden. He being preplexed with these Losses, and fearing
greater, proposed an Accommodation. James Pereyra was sent to treat, and
obtained what he desired, which was leave to build a Fort at Chale. Chale is an
Island in a River that falls into the Sea three Leagues from Calicut, navigable
in Boats up to the Mountain Gate. Urinama, a Heathen, was a King of it, and
next to him he of Tanor, both Subjects of Calicut. Both coveted the Friendship
of the Portugueses, as well to cast of that Yoke as in hopes to grow rich with
our Trade. As soon as Nuno had obtained consent to raise the Fort, he set out
from Goa with one hundred and fifty Sail, three thousand Portugueses, and one
thousand Lascarines of the Country. Such diligence was used in the Work, (the
Gentlemen not sparing their Labor) that in twenty six days it was in a posture
of Defense, the Wall being nine Foot broad with Bulwarks, Towers, a Church, a
House for the Commander, and Storehouses. The Command of it was given to James
Pereyra, who had forwarded the Work, with two hundred and fifty Men; and to
secure it by Sea Manuel de Sousa with twenty two Ships. The King of Calicut
repenting he had given leave for that Work, made War upon the Kings of Chale,
Caramanlii and Tanor, at the same time making Overtures to draw them to break
with the Portugueses: but to no effect.

19. About the end of February Emanuel de Vasconcellos set out for the Red Sea
with two 1532.
Galliots, and some Brigantines. At Xael with the loss of one Man he took some
Turkish Vessels laden, and among them a great Ship called Cufturca, which was
sent Mascate. The King of Xael fearful of some danger, made his Peace with
Submission and Presents. After Vasconcelos, came thither Antony de Saldania
with ten Ships, and the King seeing he would not allow of the submission he
made to Vasconelos, began to secure himself, sending out of the Town all the
Riches, Women and Children, which were seen from the Ships, crossing the
Mountain upon Camels. But the Weather obliged Saldana to leave that Sea.

20. He sailed to Mascate, thence to the Coast of Diu, seven or eight Ships of
that City came out and engaged him, he took three, and stranded the rest. The
same happened to a Turkish Gallion that was in Port, and endeavored to fly. A
storm rising there dispersed most of the Brigantines. Saldana had three
Gallions with him, and they suffered Hunger and Thirst, when the Sea driving
them toward the Bar, twenty seven Ships of the Enemy that watched the
opportunity fell upon them, but drew off without any considerable Action. He
dispatched two Vessels to view Pate, on which he had some Design, they meeting
a rich Ship bound for Diu, after a very sharp Engagement took her. The Ship had
only in Gold Coin above sixty thousand Venetian Chequins. Sailing to Goa with
Prizes worth above two hundred thousand Ducats, he met short of Chaul, James de
Silveyra, to whom he delivered the Vessels the Governor ordered. At this time
arrived four Ships that sailed from Portugal the beginning of this year, Antony
de Saldana returned home with them.

21. James de Silveyra sailing to Patam, twelve Leagues from Diu, plundered and
burnt that City with four Ships in the Harbor. The very same was done to Pate,
and Mangalor. This was no new thing in James Silveyra, for he had before the
same success at Bandora Tana, and other Towns, and on the Coast of Diu at
Castelete, Tolaja and Madrefabat, by which means he came to Goa with above four
thousand Slaves, and an infinite Booty, having killed a great number, and
spread an universal Terror.

22. All this encouraged Nuno de Cuna to streighten Diu, and the King of
Cambaya, that he might be obliged to consent to the raising a Fort in that
City. And because the Growth of Bacaim might be an Obstacle to our Designs, he
resolved to destroy it. Thither he went with a Fleet of above one hundred and
fifty Sail, three thousand Portugueses, and two hundred Canaras. Melique Tocam
Lord of Diu was then fortifying the City, and hearing of the Power that was
preparing against it, put in a Garrison of above twelve thousand Men. Nuno
divided his Men into three parts to give the Attack, the Landing was dangerous,
and the Enemy so numerous, it seemed a rashness to go on, but our Men despising
all danger, the Enemy fled first to the Fort, and then to the Mountain, six
hundred of them being killed, of ours only eight or nine. Here were taken above
four hundred Pieces of Cannon, and much Ammunition. The Country about was all
ravaged, and the Fort razed. After this Victory the Governor sent Emanuel de
Albuquerque with twelve Vessels and three hundred Men, to destroy the Fort of
Damam; but he not able to effect it, burnt all the Towns from Bacaim to
Tarapor, and bringing under Tribute Tana, Bandora, Mais and Bombaim, then
retired to Chaul with much Riches, and many Vessels taken in those Rivers.
James de Silveyra, who sailed from Bacaim with four Gallions and fifteen
Brigantines bound for the Red Sea, took off Cape Guardafu a rich Vessel. Vasco
Perez about Zocotora took a yet richer Turkish Ship, most of her Men being
slain, and near Cape Fartaque another. James Silveyra afterward burnt two at
Aden, and did a very generous Action, which was thus: He discovered a very rich
Ship of Gidda, which spying him, lay by, and her Captain coming aboard, showed
him a Letter from a Portuguese, who was Prisoner in that City, which the Moor
thought to be a secure Pass, being given him as such, Silveyra opened and found
in it these Words: I beseech such of the King of Portugal 's Captains as shall
meet this Ship to make prize of her; for she belongs to a very wicked Moor.
Silveyra perceiving how the Moor was imposed upon, took no notice of the
Deceit, but discharged him, choosing rather to lose the Riches of that Ship,
than bring into question the Sincerity of the Portugueses. At the latter end of
April he returned to Goa.

23. At the same time arrived in India six Ships from Portugal, a seventh
perished by the way. These Ships brought new Orders, that the Commanders of
Forts should be sworn by the Governor-General, by which it appears, they were
till then independent of them. Nuno de Cuna had always his thought fixed upon
Diu, when Melique Tocam, Lord of that City, desired him to send a fit person
with whom he might treat about an Affair of Importance to the King of
Portugal's Service. He then was apprehensive of his own King. It was therefore
thought, he would for his own security deliver up the Town to us. This was the
intent; but Vasco de Cuna, a Gentleman of parts, being sent, and having done
all that could be expected in it, returned without concluding any thing, but
not without hopes.

24. At the same time Tristan de Ga at Cambaya pressed that King to consent to
the raising a Fort at Diu. The Result was, that the King would have a
Conference with Nuno de Cuna, and his Design was rather to kill him, than grant
the Fort. Nuno went thither with an hundred Sail, in which were two thousand
Portugueses. The King was already at Diu when the Governor arrived, and delayed
the Interview, desiring, he would send him some of his principal Captains, for
that he desired to see them. They went richly clothed, and were splendidly
received. Discoursing, Emanuel de Macedo took the liberty, tho in a respectful
manner to tell the King, That he justly admired he would take the Command of
that City from Melique Tocam his Subject, who had served him well, and was Son
of one who had done so before, to give it to Mustapha, now called Rumi Cham,
whose first merit was his Disloyalty to the Turk, his natural Prince; that if
he denied this, he challenged to fight either single, or as he should think
fit. Rume Cham was present, and gave no answer, till the King looking angrily
upon him for his silence, he said it proceeded from Contempt. Macedo repeated
the Challenge, and the Turk no longer able to shun it, accepted the Challenge
to be fought at Sea. Macedo, according to appointment waited for him, but he
came not. The Interview took not effect for the differences about the manner of
it. Nuno taking another Course, joined in League with Omaum Patxath, King of
the Moguls. Then Nuno returned to Goa, and before and after dispatched several
Captains, Antony de Silveyra went to Bengala with nine Vessels, Vasco Peers de
Sampaya to the Red Sea with sixteen, thither also James de Silveyra with five
Gallions, D. Stephen de Gama to Malaca, the two that were for the Red Sea made
some Prizes.

25. Cunale Marcar, a bold Pyrat, about this time scoured the Sea of Calicut
with eight Vessels well equipped. At Cape Comori he found at night a Brigantine
with eighteen Portugueses, and three Gunners, all so fast asleep, that they
were all bound before they waked. Having awaked them, he caused their Heads to
be bruised to pieces, saying, It was to punish them for daring to sleep,
knowing he was abroad. A pleasant Cruelty. Thence he went to Negapatan, where
were forty Portugueses who defended themselves, but to no effect, for the
Degar, or Governor, who they thought their Friend, agreed with Cunale to rob
them. Coje Marcar, tho of kin to Cunale, desirous to deliver them from this
danger, did it by art, speaking to each of the two apart, and so making them
suspicious to each other. Yet Cunale took some Portugues Vessels in that River,
and shot to death eight of the Men. The first died for sleeping, these, I
suppose, because they were awake. Antony de Silva set out of Cochin with two
hundred Musketeers, in fifteen small Vessels. Cunale hearing of it, run up the
Canamera, a Bay on this Coast, and fortified himself, but Antony obliged him to
make his escape in the Habit of a Beggar to Calicut, leaving his Vessels and
Cannon, with which Silva returned victorious to Cochin.

26. The King of Razet was revolted from him of Ormuz. Antony de Silveyra who
commanded the Fort at the request of the latter, sent Francis Govea with two
hundred Men and eight Sail, to reduce him. Razet received them with Fraud,
designing to kill them. But it succeeded not, for Govea was upon his Guard,
knowing his ill Designs, and that he had with his own Cymiter killed the
Officer he sent to treat with him. Our Captain sailing over to a small Island
to water, met a Fleet of this Kings, and took a Vessel wherein was the King's
Nephew, for whose Ransom Razet restored the Prisoners he had, and submitted to
him of Ormuz, ratified the Peace made by him he had killed, and excused what
was past.

27. King John his Care was upon the Affairs of India. He had understood the
1534.
event of Nuno de Cuna's attempt upon Diu, and that the common Enemy prepared
to disturb our Progress, so he continually sent relief. This year arrived there
twelve Ships with fifteen hundred fighting Men, commanded by D. Pedro de
Castillobranco, who set out from Lisbon the last November. The latter end of
this year came also five Ships more, which set out the beginning of this same
year, they were commanded by Martin Alfonso de Sousa, who had a Commission to
be Admiral of the Indian Sea. The Governor immediately put him in possession of
the Post, sending him against Damam. At Chaul, James Silveyra delivered him his
Squadron, and Vasco Perez his. Now Martin Alfonso had five hundred Men in forty
Vessels. He found Damam destroyed by its own Commander, who was retired to the
Fort with five hundred Turks and Resbutos. Martin Alfonso attempted to scale
it, and received some damage, one of his Ladders breaking, when the Enemy on
the other side opening a Gate to fly, our Men stopped them, and entering, found
a large Court full of Men, and fifty Horse, most of them were put to the Sword,
and the Fort razed. The King of Cambaya fearing greater loss, desired Peace,
which Nuno de Cuna granted, and 'twas sworn upon the following Conditions. That
he should give to the King of Portugal for ever Bacaim, with its Dependences by
Sea and Land. That all Ships bound for the Red Sea from that Kingdom should set
out from Bacaim, and return thither to pay the Duties. That none should go to
other places without leave from the Portugueses. That no Ships of War should be
built in any of his Ports. That he should no more give assistance to the Rumes.
There were other Articles in favor of the King to sweeten the harshness of
these, which were afterward moderated when he gave leave to raise the Fort at
Diu. Now we have some footing in this Province, something may be said of its
situation, people and other affairs with our usual Brevity.

CHAP. V.
Continues the Government of Nuno de Cuna, and Reign of King John the Third.

1. THE Kingdom of Guazarata (commonly called Cambaya, from its Metropolis of
that Name) extends from Cape Iaquete in the West to the River Nagotana near
Chaul. It makes a great Bay of the some Name. The Sea ebbs and flows with such
violence in this Bay, that in swiftness it exceeds the fleetest Horse; and if
in this fury it meets any Ship, it certainly perishes. To avoid this danger
there is always a Man on an eminence, who when he sees that Torrent coming,
gives notice with a Horn. The distance between Cape Iaquete and the River
Nagotana is above two hundred Leagues. On the West it borders upon the Resbuti,
a mountain people; on the North with the Kingdom of Chitor, and the East with
that of Pale, all the Coast is covered with many Towns and Cities. It is
watered by two famous Rivers, Taptii and Tapetii, besides many Creeks that form
several Islands. It breeds abundance of Cattle, and is plentiful of other
Provisions. The Country is all plain, so that they generally travel in Wagons
after the manner of Flanders, but lighter, and easier drawn by Oxen somewhat
less than those of Spain. The Natives are of four sorts; one called Baneanes
Bagancariis, that feed after our manner; another called only Baneanes, who eat
nothing that has life. Their Priests are called Vertias, who cloth themselves
in white, and never take those Clothes off till they fall to pieces. They live
upon Charity, and (like the Children of Israel in the Desert) can keep nothing
for the next day. They place their greatest hope of Salvation in killing no
Creature, they use no light at night lest any Butterfly should die by it; they
always carry a Broom wherewith they sweep the Ground they are to tread on, lest
they tread any Worm or Insect to death. The other two sorts are the Resbuti,
who are good Soldiers, formerly the chief of this Kingdom. They acknowledge one
God and three persons, and worship the Blessed Virgin, a Doctrine preserved
from the time of the Apostles. The last are Mahometans, called Lauteas, that
is, Natives who embraced that Sect, and those who came to conquer the Country.
The common people are very ingenious in Mechanics, in Works of Silk, Gold,
Ivory, Mother of Pearl, Tortoise-shell, Crystal, Ebony and other things of
Delight. They follow the Rules of Pithagoras, killing no Creature, but rather
buy all, tho venomous, from those who take them, and set them loose again. They
entertain men whose only Business it is to look about the Towns and Fields for
Beasts that are sick, which they cure with great care in Hospitals erected for
that purpose. Notwithstanding all this Beastly Charity, they have none that may
be called human, for they will not reach their Hand to assist any person in the
greatest necessity.

2. In the year 1292, and according to the Mohammedan Account 700, the Pagan
Galacama was in quiet possession of this Kingdom, and disturbed it to deprive
his Brother of the Kingdom of Champanel, left him by his Father. Galacarna
employed two Brothers as Generals upon his Frontiers, Madana, one of them had
the most beautiful Woman of that Country to Wife. She was of the Race of
Padaminii, who are affirmed, besides their comely Shape, to have so sweet a
Scent in their Skin, that they communicate it to their Clothes, which makes
them esteemed above all o others. With much reason, for it is a wonder to find
a Woman that has a good smell. Yet not impossible. They say there are scarce
any of these Women in this Kingdom, but many in Orixa. There is no mischief
without a Woman, even where they have an ill favor; how much more where one
smelt well! The King in love with this Wife of Madana, tried all means to gain
her; but she being chaste (which was doubtless the sweet Smell) acquainted her
Husband and Brother, who joining with Xiath Nosaradim, King of Delhi, on whom
the Covetousness of that Kingdom prevailed, they wasted the Kingdom of Cambaya,
till Galacarna was at last slain in Battle. Nosaradim lest Habedxiath his
General to conquer the Remainder. He rewarded the two Brothers who brought him
to this Conquest, and retured home, having made the Kings of Mandou and Chitor
tributary. Nosaradim soon after being killed by his Nephew, Civil Wars ensued,
and several Governors revolting, called themselves Kings, as did Habedxiath, to
whom Moors succeeded. Thus,

3. The year 1330, Hamet the Mahomemetan Tartar, who lived in the City Cambaya,
with the assistance of Arabs, Persians, Greeks and Rumes, or Turks, usurped
great part of this Kingdom, then possessed by Desingue Rao. What he had
tyrannically gained, he prudently maintained. Ale Cham succeeded him, and had
forty Sons, and three of them were Kings. The first Peruxiath, who succeeded
him, the second Azeide Cham, who by his Wife got the Kingdom of Mandou, and the
third Ale Cham, who with his Wife had the Kingdom of Agimar, bordering on that
of Chitor. Peruxiath followed his Father's Example in securing his Government,
and built the City Diu in memory of a Victory gained over a Chinese Fleet.
Sultan Mahomet his Son succeeded him, and reigned at the time that D. Vasco de
Gama discovered India, he left the Crown to his Son Madafor, as worthy of it
for his Actions, as Birth. Not to his Son Scander Cham, who gave occasion to
his Subjects to kill him, and set up his youngest Brother Mahomet Cham. But the
second Brother Latisa Cham, to whom of right the Crown belonged, made War, but
without success, and it remained in the third, his Name was Badur Cham.

4. Modafar divided the Possession of Melique Az, the Lord of Diu, among his
three Sons. This Distribution enraged the King's own Sons, who coveted those
^ands. But chiefly Badur, who poisoned his Father by whom he was as much hated
as loved by his Mother. After this Murder he fled to the King of Chitor, and
killing one there in the King's presence in a Ball made to entertain him with
the assistance of Crementii the Queen he fled to Delhi.

5. There he made himself a Calandar, or Religious Man, to shun the punishment
of his Crimes. These Calandars go loaded with Iron Chains, and feed very hard:
with this outward rigor they practice privately all sorts of Wickedness and
Uncleanness. They enter into no Towns, but blow a Horn without, that people may
bring them Alms. Sometimes they go together to the number of two thousand:
Badur was one of these. Hearing of the Distractions of the Kingdom of Cambaya,
he repaired thither with his Chains in search of the Crown. In that manner he
entered Cambaya, and was proclaimed King by favor of the people, who were
pleased with those Tokens of Religion. His Brother Desta^ Cham thought to
escape by submitting, but he caused his Head to be cut off as a Traitor. Then
he gave the Cities of Reyner and Surat to two rich Merchants, and afterward
overcame in battle his Brother Latisa Cham. He caused Madremaluco to be fley'd
alive, because he had settled his younger Brother in the Kingdom, in hopes to
have the Administration of it, then with his own Hand beheaded the Brother, and
two others that reproved that Act.

6. Badur desiring to take off Melique Saca, Commander of Diu, sent for him
upon pretense of Business, but he excused himself upon other pretenses, and so
stopped the Execution; and being pressed, endeavored to escape with his
Riches, but being disappointed, went off poor, and not without danger. His
Friends at Diu brought thither from Madrefahat his Brothor Melique Tocam.
Badur, the other being fled, had like to have killed this, but for some Reasons
was obliged to pardon him and others, but he destroyed many. He set out for
Champanel the year 1527, where were brought to him sorty French Men, and one
Stephen Dias Brigas, a Portuguese, who for some Crimes done in his Country,
fled into France, and came to India, Captain of a Ship of that Nation; at Diu
they were all taken, and sent to Badur, by whom they were all miserably put to
death.

7. At Champanel came to Badur Ambassadors from Babor Paxiath, King of Delhi,
demanding homage for that Kingdom, as part of the Dominion of their Prince.
Badur at first would have killed them, but replied, he would himself carry the
Answer; and instantly composed an Army of one hundred thousand Men, four
hundred Elephants, and a great Train of Artillery. His Design was disappointed,
being forced to turn himself to Doitabad, a great Town, taken by Nizamaluco,
and tho he recovered it, it was with great loss, some by the Weather, as being
Winter, and some by a Shower of Stones as big as Oranges. At Champanel he found
certain Men of the Kingdom of the Colii, who said they came to receive Tribute,
which he paid by fleying them alive. The year 1529 he marched with seventy
thousand Horse, and two hundred thousand Foot, and did great harm in the
Territories of Nizamaluco.

8. Mean while Babor Paxiath, King of the Mogols and Delhi, marched upon
account of the Answer given to his Ambassadors the year before. The King of
Chitor denied him passage, and in a Battle there was such a slaughter, the
Mogol was forced to go back to raise new Forces to prosecute his first Design.
But the King of Chitor pursuing and doing him great damage in his own Country,
he desisted.

Badur fell upon the King of Mandou, whom he treacherously slew. Then
imprisoned the Sons, giving the Mother and Daughters to his Favorites. Next he
killed some Officers of that Kingdom who had helped to bring him in.

10. Salabedin, one pardoned by Badur, fearful of his favor, getting away,
secured himself in a strong Castle, whence Badur drew him by policy, and forced
him to turn Mohammedan. Then he prepared to take the Fort and mountain Raosinga,
where Salahedin left his Son when he was deceived by Badur's promises; and by
the way designed to expel the King of Chitor, Son to him, who kindly
entertained him when he fled for the Murder of his Father. This young King
bravely resisted Badur, disappointed his Design, and made him return to the
other against Raosinga, a place almost impregnable by art and nature. Here
eight Portugueses who followed him, showed their usual Valor, Francis Tarares
being the first who scaled a Bulwark.

11. Botiparao, the Son of Salahedin, fearing his resistance might occasion his
Father's death, left that City, and went to recover another, the Besieged
surrendered. Badur perceiving Salahedin's Women came not out, asked the cause
of him, and sent in to know it, they answered, They would not come out unless
with him. He was sent to that effect by the King. His Wives and Slaves (above
five hundred in number) as soon as they saw him, exclaimed against his turning
Mahemetan, and showing him a heap of Wood, said, They would sooner burn
themselves with (...), than be delivered to their Enemy. So Salahedin, with one
hundred and twenty that were their Guard, killed them all upon the Pile, where
they were burnt with their Riches. Badur hearing of this, hasted to save the
Treasure, but was stopped by Salahedin and his Men, till all was consumed to
Ashes, and they all slain. Yet Badur saved almost a million and half of the
Remainder of this Destruction.

12. Salahedin, and those who died with him, were honorably buried. The
mountain he gave to Sultan Alamo, who came to him, forced from that place
whither Botiparao went from hence. Hearing there was a Portugues Fleet at Diu,
he flew thither with precipitation. But that being no matter of danger, he
returned to the Conquest of Chitor, with one hundred thousand Horse,
innumerable Foot, and six hundred Cannoh. He encamped in the higher Grounds
about that City, tho it was like Raasinga, it was battered the space of two
months, and capitulated, and now Badur was possessed of three Kingdoms, each of
which was considerable.

13. This was the time when Tristan de Ga was at the Court of Badur, by Nuno de
Cuna's Order, to treat of Peace, which was delayed by sundry Accidents, chiefly
the death of the King of the Mogols, whom he much feared.

14. Badur, through Covetousness, cut off the Pay of many that had served,
which occasioned above four thousand of Note to desert to the Mogol. Mujate
Cham, a prudent and notable Man, represented this to him, and he, to reward his
Advice, sent him on some other pretense to Diu, with orders to Melique Tocam to
kill him. But Melique abominating the wickedness of Badur, advised the innocent
Mujate Cham to fly. Mujate, instead of flying to save himself, returned to
Badur, before whom being prostrate, and delivering his own Cymiter, he said, If
I have deserved death of you, here is the Traitor and the Sword. If you please
to kill me, I can have no greater honor than to die by your Hand, tho my
Grandfather, Father and self have deserved better. The King was surprised,
received him with honor, and bestowed new Favors on him.

15. But his Rage was turned against Melique Tocam for discovering the private
Order, so he sent Rume Cham to kill him. He got into Diu, where Melique was not
at that time, but received advice of it at a Country House where he was
diverting himself, and fled. Badur came to the City, and with his usual craft
brought it under. At the same time arrived there Nuno de Cuna, in order to that
Interview, which took no effect.

16. It took no effect, because Badur never made any Proposals but to shift off
a danger, which he greatly feared from the Mogol, and hoping to agree with him,
he was willing to break with the Portugueses. But he was deceived, for that
Prince recalled his Ambassadors, and commenced the War. Let us see who this
Mogol is.

CHAP. VI.
Continues the Government of Nuno de Cuna from the Year 1534, in the Reign of
King John the Third.

1. THE Mogols call themselves Chacatais, in the same manner as the Spaniards
call themselves Goths. Chacata is the Name of the Province they inhabit near
Turquestan, and the Nobles suffer not themselves to be called Mogols. The
Persians write they are descended from Mogog, Grandson to Noah, from whom they
received the Worship of one only God. This Nation wandering through many
Provinces, got the best footing in Mogalia, or Mogostan, called by Ptolomey,
Paropanisus; now they stretch farther, and border upon the Kingdom Horacam,
which that Author calls Aria, or Here, now the Metropolis thereof. The Mogols
go from the North to drink the Waters of the River Geum, that runs through
Bactria, so called from its Metropolis Bactria, or Bohara (a famous place for
Learning, being the Remains of great Zoroastes, where Avicen got the Learning
that made him so famous) neighboring upon Sogdiana, now called Quiximir, and
mount Caucasus, which divides India from other Northern Provinces. This Kingdom
now reaches to the mountainous Parveti and Bagous, which they call Angou. As
there are in it great Mountains, so there are most large and fruitful Plains,
watered by five Rivers, which compose the famous Indus. They are Bet,
Satinague, Chanao, Rave and Rea. The Cities are many, the Men courageous.

2. The Mogols are Mohometans, their Language Turkish and Persian, they are
well shaped, white, and have small Eyes like the Tartars and Chinese. The
Nobility wear rich and gay Clothes, fashioned like the Persians, their Beards
long. The Women are beautiful. Their military Dress is no less costly, their
Arms being gilt and polished; they are singular at the Bow. In fight violent,
and of good conduct: they use Artillery. Their King is treated with great
Majesty, is seldom seen, his Guard two thousand Horse every quarter.

3. The Mogols and Patanes both equally strove to conquer India. They were
Neighbors. The Event of War and Treachery brought the Patanes and Delhi under
the Subjection of the Mogol, at the time when Babor Paxiath, great Grandson to
Tamerlane the Great, reigned among them.

4. Omaum, Son of Babor, now broke with Badur, King of Cambaya, who to begin
the War sent twenty thousand Horse, and a multitude of Foot upon his Enemies
Frontiers. Here it may appear, that Ingratitude never escapes unpunished. The
Queen Crementii, who had saved Badur's Life, and in return was by him deprived
of her Liberty and Kingdom of Chitor, now revenged her self on him, after this
manner. He by his Ambassadors required her to send him her Son with what Men
she could to serve against the Mogol. The Queen desired he would restore her
other Son, whom he kept as an Hostage, that she might not be deprived of both,
and that the mean while she would raise the Forces. Badur not diving into her
Design, sent him, and she immediately put her self into the protection of the
Mogol Badur enraged at this Action, gathered one hundred thousand Horse, four
hundred and fifteen thousand Foot, a thousand Cannon, many of great Bulk, six
hundred armed Elephants, and six thousand Carriages. This multitude marched in
great order, and was abundantly supplied with all things.

5. He besieged the City Chitor, and battered it furiously; but tho the
besieged received great damage, they did him much more. Badur now raging,
received the News that the Mogols had slain twenty thousand of the Men he sent
to ravage their Country. He vented his passion upon the City, and at last more
by policy than strength became Master of it, having lost fifteen thousand Men,
among them four Portugueses. The Queen with the choice of her Riches fled.
Badur used no Cruelty toward the City, but repaired it against future dangers,
leaving Mina^ Hozem to command in it with twelve thousand Men. Then he marched
toward his Enemy, who advanced victorious through the Kingdom of Mandou, in
order to relieve Chitor, and being now informed it was in possession of Badur,
and that he was entrenched about Docor, Omaum marched thither, and encamped.

6. Badur found the greatest danger where he sought security; for being
encamped between a River and a Lake, and Omaum before him, the resort of
Provisions was quite cut off, so that in few days they suffered extreme Famine,
and such as went out to seek Relief, fell into the Hands of the Enemy, as did
Coracam Cham with two thousand Horse.

7. This so disheartened Badur, that he stole away, and his Camp was plundered
by the Mogols, who found there vast Riches. Badur with all speed fled toward
Mandou, accompanied by Rume Cham, and some Portugueses, being left by many
persons of Note, and particularly Melique Liaz, for the murder of his two
Brothers. In fine, very little of that mighty Army escaped the Sword or Famine,
and what did was dispersed and disarmed. Badur got into Mandou, having slipped
ten thousand Mogols, who thought to prevent his reaching that place.

8. Badur fortified this City, and gave the chief Command to Rume Cham his
Favorite. Omaum hearing of it, lengthened his Marches to come upon him. Rume
Cham, now fearful of his Master, deserts to Omaum, Rume's Wife, Daughter and
Riches were at Champanel. Badur and Rume strove who should first secure
Champanel, the former having there one (tho the least) of his three Treasures,
which only in Copper-Mony was worth thirty Millions, besides Pearls, Precious
Stones, and other things of value, with this Treasure he sent Rume's Family and
Riches under a strong Guard to Diu, whilst he himself hearing the approach of
Omaum, wasted the Country, and destroyed the Artillery, lest it should fall
into the Enemies Hands. The same he did at Cambaya^ Rume Cham seeing his Wife
and Riches were carried away, obtained of his new Master five thousand Horse to
follow them. As he entered one Gate of Cambaya, Badur was going out at another,
who seeing himself so close pursued by Rume, left his Women and Riches by the
way, that they might put a stop to his pursuit. So it fell out, for Rume Cham
returned to Champanel, and Badur got to Diu, whilst Omaum was at Champanel
dividing his Kingdom, and conquering that impregnable place with Liberality.

9. Champanel was impregnable by Art and Nature, and the Mogols not used to
spend time even in easy Sieges, but Tyrants have nothing secure, so these
Rocks which might have been a secure Retreat to him, turned against Badur. This
mountain is thirty Leagues from the Sea, and yet visible thither, the ascent of
it being almost five Leagues. Where Nature left any passage, Art supplied it
with strong Walls. The City stands on the side of it, has sightly Buildings,
twenty thousand Families, and a great Trade. The City it self is not walled,
but there are many places upon the Mountain well fortified, strongly garrisoned
and stored with Cannon. Somewhat higher is the Royal Palace, wonderful for
Structure and Greatness, and on the top a Fort can terrify the most daring.
Here Badur found no security, for Tyrants can meet none in the World, and think
themselves between Sheets, when they are between the strongest Walls, and when
between the finest Sheets they imagine they lie upon Thorns.

10. These Misfortunes were the Motives that induced Badur to consent to our
raising the Fort at Diu. Before, to secure our Friendship against the Mogol, he
had surrendered Bacaim to Nuno de Cuna, and now in hopes of our assistance to
recover what was lost, he offered Diu. Badur sent to dispose Martin Alphonso de
Sousa, who was at Chaul, and he urged the necessity of raising the Fort, giving
advice hereof to Nuno, and desiring leave to go treat about this important
Affair. Cuna refused him leave; jealous that any but himself should compass a
matter so much desired by his Prince, and sent his own Secretary Ambassador to
Badur.

11. Still Badur struggled with his Pride, and thought to get assistance from
the Turk to recover his Kingdom. To this effect he sent Saf Cham Ambassador
with a rich Present, but hearing the Mogol had taken Champanel, utterly
despaired. He resolved to fly to Meca, and there wait the Turks Answer, but his
Mother and Friends dissuaded him, advising to grant leave to the Portugueses to
raise the Fort at Diu, and by their assistance his Fortune might be bettered.
Instantly he sent to offer it to Martin Alphonso at Chaul, whither also came a
Message from the Mogol with the same Offer.

12. Martin Alfonso having sent advice to the Governor, asked not a second time
for leave, but set out immediately for Diu, as Badur desired. At Sea he met the
Secretary Simon Ferryra, and both arrived at Diu on the twenty first of
September. They soon came to an agreement upon these Articles, That Badur
confirmed all that had been done relating to Bacaim; that something which
concerned Trade should be transferred thence to Diu, that there should be a
League offensive and defensive between the King of Portugal and him, that the
Fort should be raised, where and in what manner the Governor should appoint,
that a Bulwark upon the Sea should immediately be delivered to him, that they
should not meddle with the King's Revenues at Diu, etc. Immediately a Jew and
an Armenian were sent to Portugal with this News to the King; and to the
Governor at Goa, James de Mesquita, one of the Portugueses who served Badur at
the Siege of Chitor, that King desiring that Nuno de Cuna would instantly come
to Diu.

13. Whilst these things were in agitation, seven Ships arrived from Portugal
with Men and great Riches. They came to Goa before the first advice reached the
Governor, and before the second could come he was under sail, with a resolution
to accept the Offer of Badur. The King received him with much honor and
demonstration of Joy. After the first Visits, he desired him to send some Men
to recover the Fort of Vivarcne, taken by the Mogols upon the River Indus, and
some Relief to the City Baroche. Vasco Perez de Sampayo was sent to the first
with two hundred and fifty Portugueses in twelve Barques. To the latter
Enterprise went Emanuel de Macedo, who returned to Diu, without doing any
thing, the Inhabitants having quitted the place which was too big for his small
number to maintain.

14. About this time there was one James Botello in these parts, who was in
disgrace with King John, because it was said he designed to go for France,
being skillf^ in the Affairs of India. The Favor of Princes is generally
recovered either by something very inconsiderable, or else by some Action that
seems impossible. Botello resolved upon the latter. He knew how earnestly the
King desired the raising the Fort at Diu; scarce was it granted, when he
getting the Draught of it, and a Copy of the Capitulation, committed himself to
the vast Ocean that is between Spain and India, in a Barque that was but
sixteen Foot and half in length, nine Foot broad, and four Foot and a half
deep. He set ou^ privately with his own Slaves, three Portugueses, and two
others, saying he went to Cambaya. Being out at Sea, he discovered his Design,
they were all astonished, but overcome by fair Words and Promises. Till finding
they were reduced to unspeakable Miseries, the Slaves agreed to kill him, and
killed a Servant, which occasioned all the Slaves, who were Sailers, to be
slain. Without Seamen or Pilot he held his Course, and to the admiration of all
Men arrived at Lisbon, where the Barque was immediately burnt, that no Body
might see it was possible to perform that Voyage in so small a Vessel. The King
was greatly pleased with the News, and James Botello restored to the Royal
Favor, without any other Reward for this prodigious Action.

15. Nuno de Cuna began the Work with diligence, and a great number of Hands,
being himself the first that labored at the Foundation, which was done, with
Sound of Trumpets, Fifes, Drums, Noise of Cannon and Shouts. The Work was soon
finished, and the Command of the Fort given to Emanuel de Sousa, with nine
hundred Portugueses, and sixty Pieces of great Cannon. Badur already reaped the
Benefit of this Concession; for Nizamaluco, at the instance of Nuno de Cuna,
not only made peace with, but assisted him against his Enemy. Vasco Perez had
recovered Varivene, and King Omaum hearing Nuno de Cuna was at Diu, despaired
of taking that (...), and employed his Arms against other places.

16. Badur pleased with this success, desired to view in person how much of his
Kingdom was yet left him. This he communicated to Nuno de Cuna, desiring a
number of Portugueses might go with him, and particularly Martin Alfonso de
Sousa. Nuno approved his Resolution, and gave him five hundred Men, whereof
fifty were of Note. Now Cuna fearing Omaum would fall upon Bacaim, sent to its
Relief Garcia de Sa, with four hundred Portugueses. He seeing a mighty Army
threaten that City resolved to quit it, to the terror of all the Inhabitants,
and with miserable Cries of Women and Children. Antony Galvam considering the
loss of the Portugues Reputation, persuaded him with strong Reasons to alter
his Resolution. Sa began to fortify the place, and the Mogol knowing th^r
Resolution, drew off. This Retreat of the Mogols encouraged Mirao Muhmold,
Nephew to Badur, who was upon the Frontier of Nizamaluco to recover many places
taken by the Mogols, which brought fresh Hopes to Badur of regaining his Crown.

17. Badur being thus prosperous with the assistance of the Portugueses only,
and repenting he had given leave to raise the Fort, would build a Wall between
it and the City, covering the Design he had thereby of gaining the Fort, with
the pretense of parting the Portugueses and Gurarates, whose too free
Communication caused Divisions. There was some bickering between the King and
Nuno about it, till the King desisted. Nuno de Cuna went to Bacaim, and began
the Fort there, giving the honor of laying the first stone to Antony Galvam, in
reward of his resolution in defense of it. Garcia de Sa was left to carry on
the Work, and Nuno returned to Goa.

18. Let us return to Malaca and Maluco, whence the course of the Occurrences
in India drew us. During the Government of Lope Vaz de Sampayo, the King of
Achem had caused to be killed Simon de Sousa, and others, bound for Maluco, and
taken others prisoners. He feigned to be sorry for that Action, and sent three
of the Prisoners to Peter de Faria, then commanding the first time at Malaca,
offering Peace, and desiring him to send persons fit to treat of it, and he
would deliver to them Sousa his Galley, and the other Prisoners. This was much
for the ease of Malaca, and therefore Peter de Faria sent presently a Vessel
with some Portugueses, who were all killed by that Tyrants Order before they
came to him. Six months after Garcia de Sa then commanding, the King writ a
Letter to him, saying, He wondered no Body was sent to treat of Peace;
believing by reason of the Secrecy used in murdering the others, it was not
known; and at the same time caused the Prisoners he had (whom, to compass his
wicked ends, he treated kindly) to write to the Commander about it. Sa
presently sent a Gallion well provided with Men and Cannon, commanded by
Emanuel Pacheco, who suffered himself to be circumvented by the King's Barques,
and he with most of the Men were slain, the Gallion was carried for the King to
see, who then caused the rest of the men, and the prisoners he made much of to
be killed. Then he joined with the King of Aru, and all this to the intent to
gain Malaca, having intelligence with Sinaya Raja, a considerable Moor, who
lived in that City. The Correspondence being discovered by some drunken
Achemes, produced the public safety and death of Sinaya, who was thrown
headlong from a Tower by Garcia de Sa his order.

15. The year 1530 Goncalo Pereyra set out from Malaca for Maluco, and in
pursuance to the Governor's Order, by the way visited the King of Borneo,
offering him liberty to trade at Malaca. Borneo is an Island fruitful of
Provisions, rich in costly Merchandise, and produces the finest Diamonds. The
King is powerful, his Religion the Mohammedan, so his People. The City of that
Name is large, has beautyful Buildings and strong Walls. The Island has four
principal Ports, to which resort Merchants from sundry parts. The Offer pleased
the King. Goncalo Pereyra arriving at Ternate, D. George de Meneses delivered
him the Fort, and King Cachil Daialo, who was there prisoner. The Queen his
Mother, who had fled from her City as was before related, hearing of the new
Commander, sent to put him in mind, how kindly the King her Husband had
received the Portugueses, how ungrateful the Return had been from them, who
caused his Son and Heir to die in a prison, and now kept the other, and obliged
her their Mother to fly to the Mountains, having lost the City where she was
born, and whereof she was Queen. That she demanded Reparation of D. George his
Cruelty, and Liberty for her Son. After some Scruples Goncalo Pereyra solemnly
swore he would set him at liberty as soon as opportunity served, whereupon she
returned to the City, and they agreed; as did the King of Tidore, being eased
of a Tribute, imposed by D. George, which he was not able to pay. There was
also an Accommodation with the Spanish Captain Ferdinand de la Torre. Thus
things were settled as was suitable to the Portugues Reputation.

20. Goncalo Pereyra, in pursuance of the Governor's Orders made D. George a
prisoner. He was carried to Goa, thence to Portugal, whence he was banished to
Brasil, and killed by the Heathens there in a Battle. After this Goncalo
Pereyra examined the Proceedings of the Portugues Officers of the Revenue, and
found them guilty of great Frauds. They offended at this Discovery, conspired
with the Queen to kill him, which they executed, tho he defended himself with
Resolution, yet most of the Murderers were killed by the other Portugueses, who
maintained the Fort which was in great danger of being lost, and Luis de
Andrade kept the Command as Lieutenant.

21. Bras Pereyra, who commanded by Sea, would have succeeded his Kinsman. But
the Conspirators elected Vincent Fonseca one of their Companions. He having
promised the Queen her Sons Liberty, if she would assist him in obtaining that
Post, now loaded him with Irons, and secured his Brothers and Family. She
withdrawing into the Country, stopped all provisions from coming to the Fort,
and so obliged him to set her Son free, and all was appeased for the present.

22. This Quiet lasted not long; for the King being near of Age to govern, Pate
Sarangue, who governed for him, finding his power expiring, conspired with
Fonseca, to set up Tabarija, the King's Bastard Brother, who was younger. To
this effect they began to lay several scandalous Imputations upon the King, and
Fonseca attempted to secure him, which he having notice of fled to the
Mountain. Fonseca follows, pretending he had a Design upon the Fort. The King
might have defended himself, but forbore in respect to the Portugueses whom he
loved. He fled with his Mother to Tidore. His Enemies set up Tabarija, and
following to Tidore, oblige both Kings to seek security in the Mountains.
Fonseca was the more enraged against the King for that at his return a Moor had
killed his Son, and endeavored to slay Tabarija, who escaped; and because many
obeyed not the Usurper, calling him Fonseca's King, whereas they might more
properly term Fonseca, Tabarija's King. He sent Pate Sarangue with Forces, and
subdued all. He by treachery catched the Queen Mother, and gave her as Wife to
Sarangue, and the deposed King's Wife to the Usurper. The distressed King
leaving his Mother and Friends had recourse to the King of Gilolo's Courtesy.

23. Now Fonseca sends Blas Pereyra and others prisoners to India. The Governor
informed of the Insolences committed at Ternate, sent Tristant de Altaide to
command there, who secured Fonseca, and sent him to Goa. With him went the
Spaniards from Gilolo, in order to be sent to Spain in the Portugues Ships. But
the King of Gilolo refusing to surrender the Spaniards, Tristan was obliged to
go with a power, in which the Kings of Ternate, Tidore and Bacham joined, the
City was abandoned and burnt, and the Spaniards set at liberty.

24. Tristan de Ataide, at the instigation of Samarao, put Tabarija in prison,
and set up his younger Brother Cachil Aeiro. The King's Mother and Sarangue
were also secured, and the City became desolate, the Natives of it finding no
Comfort in their Neighbors, who upbraided them for admitting so wicked a
People as the Portugueses, who since they had footing in this Island were
guilty of the most exorbitant Villainies that could be imagined. In fine, Ataide
sent those Prisoners to Goa, for the Crimes he was guilty of himself, and so
Nuno de Cuna judged it, taking care to send them back to their Country.

25. Now Tristan de Ataide employed his Thoughts on the Profit he designed to
make by the Sale of Cloves, and ordered it so, that the King of Bacham would
not consent. Tristan in a rage sent his Men armed, the King protested he was a
faithful Friend to the King of Portugal; but they sought Spice for themselves,
not Friendship for their King. So they were convinced by the Sword, many
killed, and the rest were shamefully put to flight. Tristan in a greater fury
joining with the Kings of Ternate and Tidore, forced him of Bacham to abandon
his City, which was destroyed, and to sue for peace, which was sold him for a
Tribute to be paid in Cloves. Yet at the same time this King conspires with
those of Gilolo, Tidore and the deposed of Ternate, and with Samarao to kill
Ataide, and take the Fort. They began their Design by persuading him to send
Ships several ways, where he lost many Men, and Cachil Daialo, the deposed King
of Ternate, laying hold of the opportunity, recovered part of his Kingdom, with
the assistance of those of Gilolo, Tidore, Bacham, Maquiem and Moutel, with
whose aid the Ternates slew all the Portugueses about the Island. Ataide
prepared to take revenge, when Simon Sodre arrived from Malaca with a Ship and
many Men, that brought new life to the desperate Ataide, and put him in a
posture to recover some places.

26. The Moors endeavored to burn some of our Vessels, bringing to execute
this design almost three hundred Sail, they received some damage, but would not
desist, nor hearken to Ataide, who sued for Peace, being in the Fort, and
reduced to eat all sorts of Vermin. D. Ferdinand de Monroy, a Spanish
Gentleman, who came from Banda with Provisions, delivered him out of this
danger. This Success was answered by a Misfortune, for all the Inhabitants fled
from Ternate, and the Moors killed some of his Men, and took a Ship, but now a
new Captain comes to the Fort, which stood in need of it. Tristan de Ataide was
as deformed of Body as his Actions were scandalous. Let us return to the
Affairs of India.

CHAP. VII.
Continues the Government of Nuno de Cuna, the same Year 1536, in the Reign of
King John the Third.

1. WE have already related how the Empire of Decan by the death of Mahomet
Xiath, was divided into seven parts, by as many Governors who set themselves up
as Kings, and warring among themselves were reduced to five. The first and
chief of these was Hidalcam, whose Territories lie from North to South along
the Sea Coast from the River Domel, eight Leagues off Dabul, to Cintacola,
eleven below Goa, and has sixty Leagues in length, and fifty in breadth where
largest. On the North it borders upon Nizamaluco, on the South upon Canara, and
part of Narsinga, and on the East upon Madremaluco, Melique Verido, and
Cotamaluco, which make the five into which that Crown was divided. Cotamaluco
and Verido were at war because the former reflected upon the latter, as
disloyal to the dead King, as if either of them were innocent. Cota came off
with loss.

2. Hidalcam upon such like occasion took Arms against Cotamaluco, who was then
at Golconda, a City almost impregnable, being seated upon an inaccessible
mountain, well fortified and garrisoned. Hidalcan set down before it with one
hundred thousand Horse, and four hundred thousand Foot. Cota, not without
reason, was apprehensive of this danger, but reposed great confidence in twelve
Portugueses he had with him. The Enemy the first Attacks lost twenty thousand
Men, and afterward an hundred thousand, as well by Famine as Sword, for
Catamaluco cut off all his Provisions, and such parties as went out for them,
and of what he took he sent ten thousand to Hidalcan without Ears or Noses,
bidding him put upon them those of his Men he had served so the last War. The
Sorrow for, these Misfortunes caused his Death, whence sprang Wars between his
Sons. These were Mulacam, who was received as Heir, and Abraham, who could not
brook his being owned as such, and being encouraged by Cotamaluco and others,
disturbed the common Peace, and was at last himself taken prisoner.

3. Cotamaluco set upon Mulacham as he was carrying his Father to bury him, but
was forced to fly to the Woods. Mean while Abraman escaped out of prison, and
by the assistance of Nizamaluco possessed himself of the Kingdom, and took his
Brother Mulac^am whom his Army infamously delivered up at Bisapo^.

Acadacam set out with a good Army to rescue Malucam. But Melique Cuf, in whose
custody he was, cruelly put out his Eyes, and delivered him and his Treasure to
Abraham. He desiring to appease Acadacam, made him great Offers, which were all
rejected; Acadacam encamped within five Leagues of him, and sent a Messenger to
him, whose Name was Cacem; this Man Abraham prevailed with to undertake to
murder his Master, which Acadacam discovering, caused him to be stabbed before
he approached him.

5. Acadacam endeavored to alienate the Hearts of the great ones from Abraham,
but was not altogether so successful as he wished. In fine, Cogerte Cham, who
at his instigation acted in the same manner, was obliged to fly for relief to
Nizamaluco, in whom he sound his Ruin, being robbed by him, and brought to such
misery, he resolved to retire to Mecha, but passing through Dabul, he accepted
the Offer of Protection made him by Simon Guedez* then commanding there, till
Nuno de Cuna received him at Diu, and obtained of King Badur to entertain him
according to his Quality, where after he became one of the chief Generals of
Cambaya.

6. The new Hidalcan (I mean Abraham, for those Princes, when they come to the
Crown, all take this Title) was perplexed with the Proceedings of Acadacam, and
endeavored to reconcile him. Acadacam's Forces at this time ravaged all the
Continent about Goa, and Hidalcan made fresh Instances to bring him to his
Court, but to no effect. Mean while the desolation of that Country was such,
that the Natives freely offered it up to Nuno de Cuna, he, after conferring
about it with Acadacam, accepted the Offer to deliver that Country from utter
Ruin.

7. Acadacam was a Mohammedan as well in his Dealing, as Belief. The more to
perplex Hidalcam, he goes into the Service of the King of Bisuagar, who
received him with great honor. Nuno de Cuna was not exempted from his Frauds;
therefore to carry on his Designs, he persuaded him to send Christopher de
Figueredo, promising to prevail with the King of Bisnagar to resign to the King
of Portugal the Continent about Goa, to which he had an ancient Title. Hidalcan
being informed of these Proceedings encamped near him of Bisnagar with four
hundred thousand Men, and 700 Elephants, the other had a 1000 Elephants more,
and some thousands of Men. He sent to let him know, that according to former
Agreements, he ought to deliver up to him his Slave Acadacam. The King of
Bisnagar referred it to Acadacam himself to give the Answer, and he gave it
such as deceived, and at the same time was approved of.

8. But the King was soon undeceived; for Acadacam, who had done all this only
to better his Fortunes, now went over to Hidalcam, when least he expected it.
Cotamaluco, who had joined Hidalcan, to oppose Acadacam, seeing him received
with great honor, goes over to the King of Bisnagar, who was marching to
besiege the City Rachol, which he had before taken, and had again submitted to
Hidalcam. At last these Princes came to a Composition, parting the Territory of
that City, which fell to the Lot of Hidalcam. Acadacam, by order of his Master,
marched after Cotamaluco to the City Naiteguir taken by him, and recovered it,
and obliging him to put himself into Hidalcam's Power, with a Grand daughter he
had offered him to Wife. The Wedding reconciled all this Discord.

9. King Badur pretended by an ancient Custom of Indostan to have the power of
giving the Title of King. He sent the Royal Ensigns to Hidalcam, desiring he
should acknowledge him as his Predecessors had done: but Hidalcam accepted his
Friendship, and rejected the Title. Badur's intention was to secure Hidalcam
against the Portugueses, to whom he owed the Recovering of his Crown* Acadacam,
being suspicious of Hidalcam, endeavored to be far from him, and to this end
prevailed with Cotamaluco to return home and declare war. Hidalcam discovered
the Author of this Discord, and would have killed him, but the Design being
disclosed, Azadacam threw himself at his Feet with two hundred thousand Pardaos
of Gold, begging pardon, tho he said he had done nothing to ask pardon for.
Thus he bought his Life, and Hidalcam sold his safety. Such is the power of
Gifts, even over those who can give greater.

10. Hidalcam now bent his thoughts upon recovering the Lands about Goa.
Acadacam, who had been the cause that Nuno de Cuna took them, now was the
promoter of his Master's demanding them. Nuno referred the Answer to Diu,
whither he was going, being sent for by King Badur, at his arrival almost
despoiled of his Crown. They expected no answer, but suddenly Solomon Aga
invaded those Lands with almost six thousand Men. They began to hinder the
carrying Provisions to Goa. D. John Pereyra, who then commanded, sent to
advertise Solymam of the Injustice of his Undertaking, but he gave no ear to
it, and killed some Portugueses not without receiving considerable damage. He
besieged Christopher de Figueredo in the Fort of Mandor, to whose relief came
Jordan de Freytas, with some Men, sent by D. John, so the Turk raised the
Siege, and fled as far as Margam.

11. Don John marched at the heels of Freitas, and being at Ma^dor, the Aga
sent him word, he came not to make war, but to receive the Rents of those
Lands: the Answer was, That he should march off within an hour and half. Don
John followed the Messenger to force the Turk, in case he obeyed not, but
finding he did, retired.

12. Solomon halted at Ponda, from whence he made fresh Instances to D. John to
resign those Lands to Hidalcan. He answered, he acknowledged him not as his
Minister, and prepared for War. He built the Fort of Rachol, where some Blood
was spilt, Solomon endeavoring to obstruct it, who lost three thousand Men
about Bailim and Singuizar, slain by the Gentiles, assisted by two hundred
Portugueses. Jordan de Freytas, with fifty Men, routed the Turk Sarnabose, sent
by Solomon with five hundred. Emanuel Vasconcelos razed a Bulwark the Enemy was
making in the Pass of Borii, and burnt some Houses. Solomon advances as far as
Margam. Pereyra went to meet him with five hundred Portugueses, and seven
hundred Canaras The Fight began, the Canaras and some Portugueses gave way,
terrified with strange Fireworks made by a Witch, who in Man's Clothes sought
to revenge the Death of her Husband. Pereyra seeing this Disorder, advanced,
crying out, Let who will follow me, for I hope with the help of God to overcome
the Enemy. All following his Example, Solomon quitted the Field, having lost
eight hundred Men, on our side not one was killed. The Booty was considerable.

13. Mean while Acadacam attempted to recover these same Lands, but met no
great success, for Hidalcam endeavored thus to divert him, while he gained his
City of Bilgam, where his Riches lay. At length they agreed, and Acadacam
designed again to attempt the Dependences of Goa. He proceeded not with Vigor,
being conscious, Nuno had by his advice possessed himself of them, and because
he had lately received a Message from him after his Return from Diu. Yet in
conclusion he marched as far as Ponda with twenty thousand Men.

14. From that place he sent a Letter of Hidalcam to Cuna, demanding those
Lands. The Answer was, He held them by consent of Acadacam, that if he desired
war the Portugueses were not backward, and that he could not restore them, or
raze the Fort of Rachol without his King's Consent. Acadacam fearing his Master
would take his City, acted not much on this side. So there happened no
considerable Action.

15. Now the Answer of Hidalcam was brought, containing, That since Acadacam
was the Cause of his taking those Lands, he would stand by what should be
agreed between them. Both cove^ing the same thing for themselves, they came to
no agreement. Cuna relieved Vasco Fernandez who was in some distress, and they
put the Enemy to flight. Hearing the Enemy appeared now in greater Numbers, he
sent Don John Pereyra with one hundred and thirty Horse, six hundred Portugues
Foot, and one thousand Canaras, commanded by Crisna, an honest Pagan. They
found the Enemy at the Foot of a Mountain, and attacked them with such Vigor,
they presently fled, their Commander and many more were slain, on our side only
four.

16. Acadacam, after these Losses, desired a Conference with Nuno de Cuna, but
it succeeded not, so the Inroads were continued chiefly about Rachol, where our
Cannon killed some. Winter expiring, Nuno began to act more vigorously. He sent
Antony de Silveyra to the Continent with two hundred Canara Horse, and
seventeen hundred Portugues Foot. Antony went three Leagues up the Country,
making great havoc, and killing three hundred Moors, and two considerable
Officers, with loss of eight Portugueses. Mean while Gonzalo Vaz Coutinho
destroyed the Coast of Dabul, and thence brought to Goa many Vessels taken, and
three hundred Prisoners, and abundance of Provisions, which increased the Joy
of the other Victories, and relieved the City distressed for want.

17. The Clamours of that ruined People, and a Letter from Nuno de Cuna coming
to Hidalcan, he ordered Acadacam to desist. He obeyed not, but to justify his
refusal, sent him a Present of a stately Horse and Cymiter, set with Jewels.
Hidalcan going to take off a piece of Silk, in which the Cymiter was wrapped,
was hindered by his Mother, who caused a Page to unfold it, he instantly fell
down dead, as did two Men who were ordered to mount the Horse, Such was the
Poison the Present carried. Then the Queen looking upon her Son, said, Behold
your Father's Murderer. For it was believed he had been poisoned. The Governor
perceiving that Acadacam did not desist, sent Gonzalo Vaz Coutino with thirty
Vessels and three hundred Men, half Canaras, who burnt the Town of Ponda, and
many Ships, and returned with three hundred Prisoners. Azadacam in a rage
marched toward Rachol, and opposite to it began to erect a Fort called Bori,
to obstruct our Sailing up the River of that Name; and notwithstanding our
opposition, put it into such condition, it appeared formidable. Nuno de Cuna
sent a fresh Supply to hinder this Work, and they assaulting it with more
courage than conduct, four hundred of them were slain, and forty taken, whereof
one appearing naked before Acadacam, he took off part of his own Garment to
cover him, saying, The Portugueses were not to be so used. This Loss caused the
demolishing the Fort of Rachol, which the Governor ordered Peter de Faria to
execute. Nuno de Cuna's presence was required at Diu, and he fearing to leave
Goa in danger, concluded a Peace with Acadacam. This was rather a Truce than
Peace, for neither desisted from his pretensions, unless Acadacam did by going
away from Ponda.

18. Whilst these things were in agitation at Goa, the King of Calicut marched
to Cranganor, upon pretense of visiting those parts, as their Emperor, but in
reality to destroy the Portugueses, induced thereto by King Badur. Thence he
designed to pass to Vaipaim, which being suspicious, Peter Vaz commanding at
Cochin, endeavored to prevent, striving withal to avoid affronting him, or
being faulty in his Duty. Having made provision by Sea and Land, he desired the
King to desist from that Design. The King gave no ear to him, but sent many
Ships to clear the Passage: but they failed, above a thousand of their Men
being slain, and much damage received by Vincent de Fonseca's Artillery, which
guarded that Pass, many more flying with precipitation, were drowned. This
happened near the Churches of S. Thomas and S. James, which they endeavored to
burn, but could not compass. The Passes were valiantly defended all the Winter.

19. On the nineteenth of September, Martin Alfonso de Sousa set out of Goa
with one hundred and fifty Men in fifteen Vesels, and passing by Calamute, two
thousand Nayres would have kept him in, whereof he killed many, dispersed the
rest, burnt their Town, and took seven Barques. He arrived at Cochin, where
were five Ships newly come from Portugal. The King of Calicut understanding
Martin Alfonso was coming to meet him with almost a thousand Men drew off.
Martin Alfonso now bent his Force against the King of Repelim, who had offended
him of Cochin. Antony de Brito who had led the Van, met a vigorous opposition
at this Island, till Martin coming up they fled, who maintained the Outworks.
The King retired to his City, in which were six thousand fighting Men. Next day
Sousa attacked it, after some resistance the King and all the Defendants fled.
As Sousa entered a Mosque, he had like to be killed by a Moor, but receiving
the Stroke on his Buckler, he run the Moor through with a Javelin. This Victory
cost us fourteen Men, the City was plundered and reduced to Ashes. The
principal part of the Booty that fell to the King of Cochin, on whose account
this Action was undertaken, was a piece of Marble, by him highly valued,
because on it were carved the Names of the Kings of Malabar for three thousand
years past, which was taken from him by the King of Repelim; some Brass Plates
with Serpents engraved on them, esteemed a great Relick by the conquered King;
and his Hat lost in the flight, which among them is the greatest Disgrace to
the Conquered, and highest Glory to the Victor.

20. The King of Calicut returns with forty thousand Men to attempt the Pass of
Cambalam. Martin Alfonso posts Francis de Barros de Payra to keep the Pass of
Cranganor with three Vessels, which proved of great use; he himself goes to the
other, and landing, sees five thousand of the King's Men attempt to pass the
Ford. Our Men began to fear, but he encouraging them, boldly falls on, and
killing three hundred of the Enemy, made them turn their Backs. Zamori comes up
with the Gross of his Army, attempts the Ford, and is repulsed with equal loss.
Now the Prince of Cochin joins us with twenty thousand Nayres. Martin Alfonso
leaves Antony de Brito with them, and four hundred Portugueses, who in the
space of twenty days fought six Battles with the King of Calicut, wherein he
made such havoc as obliged him to draw off with great Loss, and greater Shame.

21. The Reason why Martin Alfonso left that Post, was because, like a watchful
Commander, he was at once in two places by his Vigilance, here in Body, and in
Thought at Sea, where now appeared a powerful Fleet of Calicut. He therefore
seeing the Valor of Brito, and the assistance of those Nayres, left him to
command there, and put to Sea with three hundred Portugueses in eleven Ships.
At Chale he met James Reynoso with five Vessels, Cutiale, Admiral of Calicut,
had taken one from him, he took Reynoso with him. He went in search of Cutiale,
and found him with twenty five Vessels, and in them fifteen hundred Men, some
of our Vessels impatient of delay, advanced before the rest, and forced him to
retire to Tiracole, whither Martin Alfonso pursuing, the Fight lasted till
night with great slaughter of the Enemy, who fortified themselves, and in the
morning appeared six thousand strong, having flocked from all the
Neighborhood. Just at this time came an Express from the King of Cochin,
desiring Martin Alfonso to return with all speed, because the King of Calicut
knowing he was absent was coming down with a fresh Power This Advice diverted
any farther Action He returned, and the King of Calicut who came on, because he
was absent, retired as soon as he knew he was present. So great is the Force of
Conceit.

22. Mean while Madune Pandar, King of Ceitavaca, besieged his Brother of Cota,
with a Fleet by Sea. Nuno Freyre de Andrade, in defense of the latter went to
Columbo to meet the other with only eight Portugueses, and six hundred Natives,
where he killed many, and took four Paraos, with good Artillery. Madune
demanded Aid of Zamori, he sent him two thousand Men. With this Assistance he
besieged the City of Cota for the Term of three Months. Knowing then that
Martin Alfonso was coming to his Brother's Relief, who had desired it as a
Subject of Portugal, he raised the Siege. When Martin came, Madune was drawn
off, and reconciled to his Brother. There being nothing left for Martin Alfonso
to do here, having visited the King, who was most thankful for the speedy
Succor, he set out in search of the Malabar Fleet, which had assisted Madune,
and met it at Mangalor, where after a sharp Encounter it was defeated, and
twelve hundred Moors slain.

CHAP. VIII.
Still continues the Government of Nuno de Cuna, from the Year 1537, till the
Year 1538, in the Reign of King John the Third.

1. THE King of Cambaya, Badur (who with only the assistance of the Portugueses
had recovered his Kingdom) now studied their Ruin, and repenting he had granted
leave to raise the Fort, endeavored to take it, and kill the Commander, and
all the Garrison. Nuno de Cuna understood his wicked Design, and began to
prepare to prevent it. That brave Gentleman Emanuel de Sousa then commanded at
Diu, by him Badur designed to begin the Execution. On the eighth of October at
night a Moor came to the Wall, and told Sousa, The King would send for him next
day to kill him, that he would not tell his Name, le^t it might be thought an
invention to get a Reward. Emanuel was long in doubt whether to go or stay, at
last he resolved to go, and using at other times to have a numerous Retinue
well armed, went now with only one Servant, being sent for at the hour he had
been before warned. The King seeing him unconcerned, converted his malice for
that time into an honorable Reception, and Emanuel returned to the Fort. The
King's Mother endeavored to dissuade him from this wicked intention, and he
thought it was better by often visiting the Captain in the Fort to take off all
suspicion, and so murder him there, and seize upon it. He was of a violent
nature, and so began his first Visit at an unseasonable hour of the night, not
regarding the very unseasonableness was enough to render it suspicious. Sousa
received him upon his Guard, they discoursed of things indifferent; the King
went away, believing he had ensnared Sousa, and he had given him a sufficient
caution.

2. Nuno de Cuna being advertised by Emanuel de Sousa of the posture of Affairs
at Diu, thought strange, That he had not secured the King when in his Power,
and his wicked Intentions were known; and that he had given out that Ships were
come from Portugal with great Supplies. This Invention endangered Nuno, for
Badur resolved to murder him first, that he might not come to the Relief of the
Fort when Sousa was killed. He writ to him, desiring he would come to Diu about
important Affairs. Nuno, tho he knew his wicked Designs, made no difficulty of
going. He set out of Goa on the ninth of January, and with what Vessels he
carried, and followed him, appeared there with near three hundred Sail.

3. He put in at Chaul, and found that Nizamaluco, induced thereto by Badur,
had been there with eight thousand Men, pretending it was to divert his Women
at Sea, but in reality with an ill design on that place, which was disappointed
by the care of Simon Guedez, who commanded there. At Ba^aim he took up his
Brother-in-law, Antony de Silveyra, a Man of great worth, and left in his place
Ruy Vaz Pereyra.

4. King Badur was at that time in the mountains hunting. Nuno sent to visit
him; but he who let slip no opportunity, now especially, prevented him by
sending to him first one John de Santiago, not long before a Christian, but
fallen again, and become a Favorite of Badur, by the name of Frangue Cham.
Cuna was indisposed, and feigned himself worse, so lying off of Diu he sent to
excuse himself to the King for not landing immediately. The King feigning great
Friendship presently enters into a Boat in which he had sent Nuno a Present of
Venison. There went with him thirteen Men of Quality, and Emanuel de Sousa, who
had carried the last Message from Nuno de Cuna to him. He received him aboard
the Galeon in the best manner he could. Being seated, they discoursed of
indifferent things, but the King was surprised to see a Page whisper Nuno de
Cuna, and it was a Message from Emanuel de Sousa, who believing he was to be
there secured, or killed, sent word that some Captains were waiting his Orders.
The King was somewhat quieter, seeing Cuna did not mind the Page, and soon
rose, and went away. Cuna had thought it strange that Sousa did not secure the
King when he had him in the Fort alone, and now having him aboard the Gallion
he did not detain him. Nuno ordered all the Officers to accompany the King
first, and then Emanuel de Sousa to the Fort, where he proposed to secure the
King, when he came to visit him; as the King on the other side had resolved to
seize him at a dinner he had a design to invite him to, and send him to the
great Turk in a Cage.

5. Emanuel de Sousa was going to invite the King to the Fort, while Nuno de
Cuna got thither. He came up with the King's Catur or Barge, and made the offer
by the means of Rume Cham, who at the sametime advised the King not to go,
because he suspected they would secure him. He slighted the Caution, and bid
Sousa come into his Barge, who stepping over fell into the Sea, but being taken
up, the Officers who came with him carried him to the King. At the same time
came up another of our Barges and some Gentlemen, who seeing Emanuel de Sousa
entered hastily into the Kings. He suspecting their hasty coming aboard,
together with the Caution given by Rume Cham, ordered his Officers to kill
Emanuel de Sousa. James de Mesquita understanding it, flew at, and wounded the
King, whilst they killed that valiant Captain. There was a bloody Fray in which
four of our Gentlemen were killed, having slain seven of the Enemy. Other of
our Barges coming up received some damage from a Page who shot several with the
King's Bow, till killed with a Musket Ball. Three of the King's Ships came up
to rescue him. He seeing the danger began to fly, but was stopped by a Cannon
shot which killed three of his Men that rowed. The King thought now to escape
by swimming, but being in danger of drowning, cried out, discovering who he
was. Tristan de Payva de Santarem coming up, reached out to him an Oar to bring
him aboard his Vessel, when a Soldier struck him cross the Face with a Halberd,
and so others, till he was killed. He was a little while above Water, and then
sunk, and neither his nor Emanuel de Sousa his Body could be found, tho Nuno de
Cuna caused them to be diligently looked after to give them the due Funeral
Honors.

6. Most of the Citizens from the Walls beheld this Engagement, and no sooner
was the News of the King's Death spread, but they began to abandon the City in
such confusion, that many were trampled to death, running hastily to save life.
The fear was that Nuno de Cuna would fall upon the City for the Plunder, but he
soon quieted them with public Proclamations. Such as had not fled, stayed; and
those who had, returned. He was seen to enter the Town unarmed, comforting the
Inhabitants, and restraining the Avarice of his Men, so that not the least
Disorder was committed. Then he went to the Fort.

7. He gave the Command of the Fort to Antony de Silveyra Meneses, his
Brother-in-law, whom he brought from Ba^aim, and the Sequel showed it was his
Worth, not Kindred, that procured him that Post. Pay^ Rodiguez de Araujo was
appointed his Lieutenant. The Queen Mother was retired to Navanaguer. Nuno de
Cuna sent to comfort her, and demonstrate the death of her Son had been of his
own seeking, but she would not hear the Messenger. What was found in the Palace
in Gold and Silver did not exceed two hundred thousand Pardaos. The quantity of
Ammunition was to be admired. In the Port were one hundred and sixty Vessels,
some of great bulk. No less wonderful was the number of Brass Cannon, for that
of Iron was not reckoned. Among the first were found three Basilisks of such
prodigious Greatness, that Nuno de Cuna sent one as a rarity to Portugal, which
is to this day kept in the Castle of S. Julian, at the mouth of the River of
Lisbon, and called, The Gun of Diu.

8. Among the dead King's Papers, and those of Abdel Cader his Treasurer, were
found Letters from Saf Cham, containing the progress he had made toward
bringing the Turks upon the Portugueses, and Copies of others from the King to
those of Aden and Xael to the same purpose. Nuno having gathered these and
other Testimonies against the King, called Coje Zofar, a Man in great repute
among the Maho^etans and Gentiles, who gathered the principal Merchants and
Cazi^es, that is, Teachers of the Law. Before all these the Governor produced
the Letters and other Testimonials, which convinced the wicked Designs of the
King, and justified all his own Proceedings in that Affair. All the Moors and
Pagans confessed themselves fully satisfied, as to the Justice of the Action,
and accordingly gave him Certificates thereof in the Arabian and Persian
Languages, signed by Coje Zofar, and the principal Merchants and Cazices, which
were dispersed to the Princes of Decan, Narsinga, Ormuz, and the Coast of
Arabia as far as Aden, that they might all be informed of the true Causes of
this Accident, and that the Jealousies caused by the King's death might be
allayed.

9. For the greater satisfaction of the public, Nuno ordered the Mahometans
should have the free Exercise of their Religion and Laws; and that the
Constitutions made by Badur should be observed as if he were present. All
Pensions or Salaries allowed by him were continued. Among many that resorted to
reap the Benefit of this unexpected Liberality was a Moor of Bengala, who by
authentic Informations was found to be three hundred and twenty years of Age.
He was seen long after, as shall be said, when we speak of his death, or
vanishing. He had at this time two Sons, one ninety, the other twelve years
old. His Beard and Teeth had fallen and grown again four or five times. To
appearance he seemed about sixty years of Age. Of person indifferent, rather
little than tall, neither fat nor very lean. He said, that being one day in his
first Century, looking to his Cattle on the Bank of a River, there appeared to
him a Man clothed in Gray, girt with a Cord; with Wounds in his Hands and
Feet, praying him to carry him over upon his Shoulders. And that having done
it, he told him, That as a Reward for that Act of Charity, he should continue
in the same disposition of Body, till he saw him again. The Portugueses, after
this coming into India, and he into one of their Churches, and seeing the Image
of S. Francis, cried out with surprise: This is, this is the Man I carried over
the River so many years ago. This was the cause why Badur maintained him, and
why now Nuno de Cuna continued his Allowance.

10. Mir Mahomet Zaman descended from the Kings of Delhi, who had reigned in
Cambaya, hearing the death of Badur, went to visit the Queen Mother at
Novanaguer. She fearing he came to rob her, would not see him. Zaman had no
such intention then, but came to offer her his Service, and to revenge the
death of the Son. She thinking she was not secure there, resolved to remove,
and he offended at her Contempt, lay in wait for her with two thousand Horse,
and robbed her of all that was of Value, which amounted to above two millions
of Gold, and gathering above five thousand Men, was by them proclaimed King of
Guzarate, and with this Title entered Novanaguer. Hence he sent to Nuno de
Cuna, acquainting him with the posture of his Affairs, his Title to the Crown,
and desiring his Assistance, in requital for which he offered the Portugueses
all the Coast from Mangalor to Beth, the Town of Damam as far as Bacaim, the
Royal Country House of Novanaguer, and other advantageous Conditions. Nuno
admitted them, and caused him to be proclaimed King in the Mosque of Diu; at
the same time advising him to raise Forces, and disperse the other Pretenders.
Zaman fearing the Advice was deceitful, lay still, and found the ill
Consequence, for the People set up Mahomet, Nephew to the deceased, and
prepared to fall upon Zamam at Novanoguer, but delayed the Execution because
Cuna was so near. At this time arrived five Ships from Portugal.

11. The Governor being gone as the Princes of Guazarate desired, the better to
1538.
maintain Mahomets Title, two of them marched toward Zamam with sixty thousand
Men, they corrupted most of his Officers. He being sensible of it, ordered his
Friends to carry about them as much Gold and Jewels as they could to serve them
in their flight. Those who were corrupted did not fight; the others did
wonders, particularly Zamam, who fled to Omaum, King of the Mogols, of whom he
received the Kingdom of Bengala. The Conquerors called Antony de Silveyra,
Commander of Diu, to an account for the King's death, and being satisfied of
the Causes, proposed a Peace, but refusing the Conditions granted by Zamam,
broke off. Cuna hearing this News, made ready to return to Diu, dispatching the
homeward bound trading Ships, and sending Martin Alfonso de Sousa with forty
Ships to guard the Coasts of Malabar.

12. The greatest Enemies the Portugueses found in India were the Moors,
inhabiting from Chaul to C. Comori, the space of 200 Leagues, who had flocked
hither in great numbers for the great Riches of the Sea in Pearls, and vast
Trade of all those Ports. Pate Marcar, a powerful Moor of Cochin, offended that
the Portugueses had taken some of his Vessels, went over to Calicut the better
to annoy them with the assistance of that King. There he was furnished with
above fifty Ships, two thousand Men, and four hundred Pieces of Cannon, to go
to the assistance of Madune Pandar, against his Brother the King of Ceylon, our
Ally. At Coulam he found a great Portuguese Ship lading with Pepper, he beset
her, and after a sharp Engagement was forced to retire, having killed the
Captain of her. Farther on he took a Ship, and killed all that were in it.
Beyond C. Comori he destroyed a Town of the Christians. Martin Alfonso hearing
of this, pursues, and running up a River with only nineteen Barques, offers him
battle, but he refused, and got off. It looked like a rashness to follow
further, so Martin returned to Cochin, in order to set out again better
provided.

13. He set out with twenty three Vessels, all to row, and four hundred Men. At
Beadala he met Pate Marcar careening, in order to go over to Ceylon. Pate,
seeing Alfonso, gathered seven thousand Men, and Alfonso with his four hundred
resolved to fight him. He ordered Gaspar de Lemos with seven Barges to stay
till he gave the signal with a Cannon, and then to come up with all the
greatest noise he could to divert the Enemy on that side, while he attacked
them on the other. A Piece being fired without order, Lemos thinking it was the
Signal, came up, and was killed with others, before Martin Alfonso could
relieve him. At last he came and revenged the death of those, killing above
seven hundred of the Enemy, and putting the rest to flight, whereby he remained
Master of the Sea and Field. Thirty Portugueses were lost. Among the Portugues
Slaves here set at liberty was a Woman, who was Mistress to one of them loaded
with Chains, who could not be prevailed upon by Threats nor Promises to
renounce her Faith, but with great Constancy (much to be admired in such a
Woman) encouraged the Slaves to continue firm in the Faith, in contempt of all
Tortures. The chief party of the Booty consisted of twenty three Barques, four
hundred Cannon, fifteen hundred Muskets, and many Prisoners. This happened on
the fifteenth of February. Martin de Ayala was sent to the Governor in a Catur
or Barge, with fifteen Men, who meeting near Chale, a Galliot with two hundred
Malabars, fought them so long till both sides desisted through weariness. Ayala
being recovered, found he had but four Men left alive, and with them prosecuted
his Voyage.

14. Martin Alfonso sailed over victorious to Columbo, the King of which place
was besieged by his Brother Madune Pandar, who at first thought our Fleet had
been that of Pate, coming to his assistance. But hearing the Ruin of it, raised
the Siege, and made Peace. Martin and his Officers honored and presented by the
King, sailed to Cochin, from whence they again set out to scour the Coast. Off
of Mount Delii they met six Paraos, and took five of them. A little farther
they had the like Success with seventeen others. Next day they took six, and a
Ship laden with Provisions. Six thousand Pardaos were offered Martin for the
Ransom of one Moor, and he chose rather to hang him for an Example. Being
ordered by the Governor to Diu, because a great Fleet of Turks was expected, he
forced ashore by the way a great Gallion of theirs, and loaded his small
Vessels with the Riches were in it. Thus Martin Alfonso struck a Terror into
all the Enemies, and purchased us great security for some time.

15. D. Emanuel de Meneses was gone about this time Ambassador to Xael, and was
there imprisoned by that King with all the Portugueses who were in the Town.
So^ base and insolent Spirits were the Cause of this Action. The King had
favorably received some Portugueses in his Port, but they being a loose
People, required his Kindness with Injuries. One of these among others had
robbed the King's own Cousin, and after other Tortures hung him and two other
persons of Note by the private Parts, to make them discover their Treasure.
Gonzalo Vaz committed another Robbery. Alvaro Madera being kindly entertained
by an honest Moor, forced his Wife from him. One Godino had the Honor to treat
the King at his House, and paid it with calling him Drunkard. Others took a
Ship belonging to his Subjects, and impudently came to sell it in his Port.
These and other Villainies had been acted, when D. Emanuel de Meneses came with
seventy Men to settle a Peace. He was ignorant of what had happened, and
suspected it the less, being well treated by the King. He was lodged, and then
beset, the Moors killing all the Portugueses about the Town. A just Punishment
for such Extravagances. The King sent for D. Emanuel to Court, he went with
seventy Men, but was admitted with only one, and received very civilly, but
detained a Prisoner, as were all the seventy, except Godino, whose Head was cut
off in the presence of the King. For Insolencences committed upon Royal Persons
admit no delay of punishment. Of the seventy he sent thirty as a Present to the
Turk to purchase his Favor, thinking he had by this Action lost the
Portugueses. Among the thirty was Madera, who making his Escape from
Constantinople, carried the News to Portugal of the Turkish Fleet that was
fitting at Suez to invade India. This Advice caused the King to send continual
Succors, and immediately he dispatched five Ships.

16. Nuno de Cuna hearing what had happened at Xael, ordered D. Ferdinand de
Lim^ who was going to command at Ormuz, by the way to conclude a peace with
that King. He did it, the Peace was sworn, and D. Manuel de Meneses with those
who were still there restored. Nuno being satisfied the Turks were not coming,
as the Moo^ gave out to terrify him, began that vast Cistern, which is there
of such bigness, that being twenty five Spans deep each Span contains a
thousand Pipes of Water. This he provided against a long Siege, and added new
Fortifications. Having given all the necessary Orders in this place, he sailed
to Goa.

CHAP. IX.
Continues still the Government of Nuno de Cuna, the same Year 1538, in the
Reign of King John the Third.

1. LET us now turn a while to the Bay of Bengala, into which falls the famous
River Ganges, by two mouths. This River has its springs in the mountains of
great Tartary, from whence it runs to the Southward near 600 Leagues, and
divides India into two pa^ts Intra and extra Gangem. On the mouth that falls
into the Sea to the Eastward is the City Chatigam, on that to the Westward
Satigam. The Ganges runs through the middle of the Kingdom of Bengala, to which
were subject on the East those of Caor, Comataii, Sirote, Codovoscam, Cou and
Tipora, but these two last joining together, threw off the Subjection; on the
West of the River Cospetir, (whose Plain is overflowed by Ganges, as Egypt by
the Nile) conquered by the Patanas. The Heathens here say, that God granted
these particular Prerogatives or Blessings to five Kingdoms. To that of Bengala
infinite numbers or Foot, to Orixa Elephants, to Bisnagar People skilled in
Sword and Buckler, to Delhi abundance of Towns, and to Cou innumerable Horses.
The Country of Bengala lying between twenty two and twenty six degrees of
Northern Latitude, and being very well watered is most fruitful, and produces
many sorts of Fruit some like that of Spain, Sugar and long Pepper, abundance
of Cattle and foul, infinite quantities of Cotton, which they work, the
Curiosity of their Quilts is extraordinary. The Natives are Heathens, and Men
of no Courage, but false and treacherous, that it may appear all the World over
Cowardice and Treachery go together. The King is Heir to all Men. The principal
City Gouro seated on the Banks of Ganges, three Leagues in length, containing
one million and two hundred thonsand Families, and well fortified; along the
streets, which are wide and straight, Rows of Trees to shade the People, which
sometimes is in such numbers that some are trod to death.

2. About fifty years before the Portugueses discovered India, came ^o Gouro an
Arabian Mohammedan, who growing rich and powerful, obtained the then King of
Bengala, a Victory over the King of Orixa. The King besides other Rewards made
him Captain of his Guard, and he ingratefully killed the King, usurped the
Kingdom, and left the Inheritance thereof to the Moors that succeeded. They
observe no Rule of Inheritance from Father to Son, but even Slaves sometimes
obtain it by killing their Master, and whoever holds it three days they look
upon as established by Divine Providence. Thus it fell out, that in forty years
space they had thirteen Kings successively. At the time when Martin Alfonso de
Melo Iusarte was prisoner to Mahomet Xiath, that King who tyrannically held the
Crown kept his Court at Gouro, in great apprehension of being deposed, but with
such state that only his Women amounted to the number of ten thousand. Martin
and the others who were Prisoners with him obtained him success against the
Patanas with whom he was at War.

3. Martin and his Fellows obtained their Liberty by the means of Coje Sabadim,
a rich Moor, who promised, i^ Nuno de Cuna would carry him to Ormuz, he would
contrive the King of Portugal should have a Fort in the Port of Chatigam. The
Governor earnest upon this important Affair, granted all he demanded, and sent
thither Martin Alfonso with two hundred Men in five Vessels. The better to gain
the King's good Will, Martin Alfonso sent him a Present, but he being
suspicious, would have killed the Messengers, had not some Moors, and a Gentil
reputed a Saint, and to be two hundred years of Age, dissuaded him.

4. Thirteen who carried the Present, and thirty of forty wherewith Alfonso was
invited to a Dinner, were secured at the same time, the former at Gouro, and
the latter at Chatigam, the other ten that were with him were killed in the
Fray.

5. Nuno de Cuna hearing hereof by those who escaped in the Ships, sent Antony
de Silva Meneses with three hundred and fifty in nine Vessels, to treat of
ransoming the Prisoners, with the assistance of Coje S^badim, the Author of
that Expedition, and detained a Ship of his richly laden, for security of his
fair Proceedings therein. Sylva from Chatigam sent the King the Governor's
Letter, and a Present. The Answer being long a coming, Sylva thought the King
had secured the Messenger, and so rashly fell upon, and burnt Chatigam and
other places. As he was spreading Sail, the Messenger came with the King's
Answer, who knowing what Antony had done, kept the Prisoners more hardly.

6. Necessity obliged him to turn his Severity into Kindness, for Xercham, a
Man of Note with the Mogol, disobliged by his Prince, deserted to the King of
Bengala with his Brother Hedele Cham. Both were put into great Posts. Xercham,
now at the Head of a great Army, resolved to revenge upon this King the Death
of a Child, by him murdered to secure himself the Crown. At the same time,
Omaum the Mogol, in revenge of what Xercham had done at Delhi, met and defeated
him. But being apparently reconciled, he recovered himself.

7. Xercham streightened the King, and he advised with Martin Alfonso how to
withstand him, when James Rabelo came to Chatigam, sent by Nuno de Cuna with
three Vessels to procure Martin's Liberty. The King being in distress ordered
him to be favorably entertained, and to gain assistance from Nuno de Cuna,
sent him twenty two of the Prisoners. Nuno sent nine Vessels. Mean while
Xercham marched to gain a Pass upon the Fort of Gorii, which is where the
Ganges enters Bengala. By advice of Martin Alfonso, the King sent two of his
Vessels, commanded by two Portugueses, with eight others to stop his Passage.
They stopped him there, and he taking another away, set down before the City
Gouro with forty thousand Horse, two hundred thousand Foot, and fifteen hundred
Elephants. Down the River came three hundred Almadies, which sailed to the
place where the King had eight hundred Paraos to oppose them. Here eight
Portugueses, commanded by Duarte de Brito, did wonders in the King's sight, to
take an Elephant that was swimming, and much coveted by the King; he was taken
with the loss of three of the eight. Xercham distressed the City, and the King
bought a Peace, and was content that he from his Army should do him reverence.

8. The King being at ease, gave liberty to Martin Alfonso and his Men to go
for India, leaving only five as Hostages for the assistance he expected from
the Governor. Soon after Xercham returns and enters Gouro by force, obliging
the King already wounded to abandon the City, who died on his way to Omaum, the
Mogol, while Xercham plundered the place. It was said Xercham drew off with
above sixty millions of Gold value, when Omaum came on bringing the dead King
with him. At this time Vasco Perez de Sampayo arrived with the Succor, but
acted nothing. Omaum finding the City abandoned, buried the King, and set up in
his place his own Brother-in law, Mir Mahomet Zaman, lately deprived of the
Kingdom of Cambaya, and soon after of this; for Xercham having secured his
Treasure, with diligence returned to Gouro, and made him fly thence.

9. Omaum again set out to meet Xercham with one hundred thousand Horse, and
one hundred and fifty thousand Foot, besides the Followers of the Army, which
were above two hundred thousand. They met on the Banks of Ganges, near the City
Canose. Xercham by a stratagem got the day with such a slaughter, that Omaum
with only twenty five Men never stopped till he came to Labor, where his
Brother Camiran Mirza received him better than he deserved, Mirza being then
under Cure of the Poison he had given him. Xercham treated Omaum's Women, taken
in that Battle with great respect, and afterward restored them, well convinced
of his Modesty and Liberality.

10. Omaum finding himself too weak for the Enterprise of Bengala, bent his
Thoughts against Cambaya, and demanding Aid of his principal Subjects was by
them disappointed. He went into Persia, in which King he had great Confidence,
on account of the Friendship of their Fathers. Nor was he deceived, for the
Persian King received him with Magnificence, gave him rich Presents, and
lastly, an Army of twelve thousand Horse. And because Sultan Xiath, King of
Quereman, to whom he gave the Command of them, excused himself, saying, It was
not for his Reputation to engage where the person of his Prince was not. He
gave him h^ Son and Heir, yet in his Nurses Arms, and ^ade him Governor of him.
So far can a truly royal Bounty extend when it resolves to do good.

11. Besides these twelve thousand given by Xiath, ten thousand Volunteers
offered themselves to Omaum. Who joining his own Forces, invested the City
Candar, where his Broster Astarii Mirza had proclaimed himself King of
Mogostam. The City taken, he gave to the young Prince, who possessed it not
long, but died soon of the Fatigue of the Marches. King Sultan Xiath, his
Governor, went to a City where many of the Persian Kings lie buried, to inter
the Infant, leaving all the Men with Omaum for the space of two years, under
four General Officers. These soon left him, and returned to Persia, where they
were disgraced by the King, and made incapable of any Post of Honor, declaring
he could not have wished the young Prince a more glorious death than he had in
his Nurses Arms, assisting such a Prince as Omaum. Xercham raised by Fortune to
a formidable pitch, having at command four hundred thousand Horse, and being
courted by all the adjacent Princes, aspiring now to greater Undertakings, took
the City Calijor of the Resbutos, with intent to rob the Treasure that was
there in a Temple. Pointing a Cannon to kill an Elephant belonging to that
Temple, he killed himself; for the Piece bursting, tore him and many more to
pieces. So that Fire turned all his Glory into Smoke. Such is the end of Pride.

12. At Malaca there were no less Troubles than in these parts. D. Paulo de
Gama had the Command of this place, he, to found. Alaudim King of Viantana, Son
to him of Bintam, destroyed by Mascarenhas, sent Sebastian Vieyra with five
Portugueses to settle a Friendly Correspondence. The King, at the instigation
of him of Pacem, bound and poured boiling Water upon them till they died, and
then gave them to be devoured by wild Beasts. D. Paulo was not then in a
condition to take revenge. He sent Emanuel Godino to the Kings of Panda and
Pate, who concluded a Peace with them, whereby Malaca was relieved with
Provisions, which he of Vjantana cut off on the other side. The year 1534 D.
Stephen de Gama came and took possession of that Command, and repaired the
Works. Hearing some Vessels of the Enemy were in the River Muar, he sent one to
discover them, he returned pursued by ten sent by Lacxemena, who came to the
assistance of Vjantana with seventy sent by his Uncle Tuam Gaba. Instantly D.
Paulo set out with nine Sail. Two Paraos were sent after to their assistance
but too late, for when they came up a bloody Battle was ended, in which almost
all our Men were slain, having done wonders, and made such a slaughter of the
Enemy, that they durst not take the Ships whose Crew they had killed. Only
three Men of Note escaped.

13. D. Stephen now resolved to destroy the City of Vjantana, and set out with
twenty six Sail and two hundred and fifty Men. Vjantana is the South East Point
of the Coast of Malaca, from which forty Leagues distant. On the West of it
runs into the Sea the deep River Tor, on whose Banks was seated King Alaudim's
City, and three Leagues below it a Fort so well stored with Cannon, it could
sink any Vessel should attempt the Entrance. Here D. Stephen entered with much
danger, both Banks being covered with armed Men, but a party of Musketeers on
each side cleared the Shores. The first Attacks of the Fort D. Stephen received
damage, but afterward did much more for the space of eight days. The Besiegers
began to dismay, but were encouraged by D. Stephen and Peter Barriga. Now the
Enemy having received fresh Succor, drew out into the Field, where such
slaughter of them was made, that they fled that day in despair to the Fort, and
the next abandoned it, the King escaping with his Women and Treasure. The City
Tor was plundered and burnt, much Cannon and some Vessels taken, such as could
not be carried, perished in the Flames, and D. Stephen returned victorious to
Malaca, where he was received in triumph, this being one of the notable
Victories till then gained in Asia.

14. The King began again Acts of Hostility, and D. Stephen returns with four
hundred Men. He found the Fort he had destroyed repaired, and in it five
thousand Men Five hundred of them were killed the first Assault. Many Ships
were burnt, and D. Stephen marched toward the City, when the King from the
Mountain, whither he had retired, sent to treat of Peace. He was ordered to
send Hostages, and sent an Uncle of his own, with his Wives, so D. Stephen
returned to Malaca, whither four Ambassadors followed, who concluded the Peace
upon these Conditions. That the King should send to Malaca all the Cannon that
was in his Country, that he should build no Ships of War, that he should erect
no Forts, that he should restore all Prisoners and Goods taken, that he should
not hinder bringing Provisions to Malaca, that his Subjects should resort
thither to buy and sell. This Peace being sworn to, brought great Tranquillity
to Malaca. The year 1537 this Quiet was disturbed by a Commander of Achem, who
attacked the Bridge with three thousand Men. D. Stephen met him with some
Gentlemen and two hundred Soldiers, and slew five hundred without the loss of
one, so the Enemy drew off with shame. Soon after he returns with five
thousand, and retired with the like Disaster.

15. D. Stephen had sent Francis de Barros in a Ship with twenty Portugueses to
the King of Patane. In that Port Tuam Mahomet, Admiral of Vjantana, fell upon
him with forty Sail. The Fight was desperate, some Portugueses and many Enemies
fell, and they parted. All advise Barros to save himself ashore, most leave
him, and he stays aboard with only two, who at last prevail, and firing the
Ship, they get ashore in the Boat, and bring off the Cannon. The King received
them kindly. Henry Mendez de Vasconcelos was sent to bring them back. Those of
Iava fall upon them both with twenty Calaluzes that carried two Rows of Oars,
well furnished with Cannon. Mendez and Barros were in two Vessels, ten
Calaluzes attack each, one had sixteen, the other but few more Portugueses. The
Fight was very hot, some Portugueses fall, and Mendez was stunned with a
poisoned Arrow. Barros was in danger, having but three Men and himself wounded.
Vasconcelos recovering, comes to his aid, shatters some, takes others of the
Calaluzes, puts the Remainder to flight, and obtains an entire Victory.

16. Mean while Tristan de Ataide, at Maluco, through avarice, caused great
Troubles. He took King Tabarija and sent him prisoner to Nuno de Cuna, who
endeavored to remedy these Disorders, by sending a very orderly Commander.
Such was Antony Galvam, whose Prudence healed all the Sores made by his
Predecessors. Having taken possession of the Command, he acted with Modesty and
Justice, without favor or affection. The Fort was unprovided of Cannon and
Ammunition, he furnished all at his own charge, and because Timber was wanting
for the Works, he was always the fitst that went to the Woods, and returned
loaded.

17. All things being settled here, Galvam turns to Tidore, where eight Kings
with a vast number of Men were allied against the Portugueses. He sent to sound
them, and they made a Truce, but observed it not, and Galvam seeing he had but
few Men, that those decreased by Famine, and 'twas too tedious to expect relief
from India, he resolved upon an Action that was accounted rash. He set out in
four Ships with on^ hundred and seventy Portugueses, and fifty Moors. Tristan
de Ataide was left in the Fort. Galvam was met by 2000 Moors, there passed some
Blows. Soon after appeared three hundred Sail, containing above thirty thousand
Moors, who thought to have terrified Galvam, but in vain; for he held on his
course, and they followed him. They anchored at Tidore, the Shores were covered
with multitudes who rent the Air with Shouts. The Cannon of the Fort played,
but the Shot went over the Ships. The Fort appeared impregnable, but by that it
was resolved to begin. Galvam scales it with one hundred and twenty
Portugueses, and as many Slaves as made up in all three hundred. The Kings came
upon him with fifty thousand Men, but he draws into a close Wood. They thought
he fled, and pursue with hideous Shouts. Soon were they turned into
Lamentations. King Cachil Daialo, who led the Enemies Van, came another way to
fall upon Galvam, endeavoring to amuse him, till the Body of the Army came up,
which he perceiving, gave the sign to fall on, and after a hot Dispute, the
Enemy fled, the King being killed among the first. Some of those that fled
disordered them that were marching, others run to the Fort. Galvam pursues the
latter, and enters along with them. They abandon the Fort, and he set fire to
it. Whilst the Fort flamed, the Kings fled to the Mountains with their
Treasure, and Antony marches to the City. The Inhabitants abandon, and he burns
it down to the Ground, levelling the Works so that scarce any memory of the
City was left, but the signs of the Ashes. Many Moors were killed, and many
taken. This unparalled Victory cost but one Slave.

18. Those Kings thought to do us some harm with Ambushes at embarquing, and
afterward at Sea, but came off with loss. He of Tidore afterward came to a
peace, the Conditions honorable on our side. Antony, the more to oblige that
King, offered to rebuild the City, which was immediately put in hand, with
these and other Courtesies he so much obliged him and his Subjects, that they
confided in him as an ancient tried Friend.

19. Galvam found it was easier to overcome the greatest Army of Barbarians,
than the least Portugues Avarice. He proposed to put in execution the King's
Instructions relating to the Trade of Clove, and the Portugueses opposed,
because they put a stop to their Frauds and Robberies. Next he would have
examined into the Crimes of Tristan de Ataide, and he conscious of his own
Guilt begged Mercy. Tho undeserving, Galvam took pity on and reconciled him
with many, that they might not be his Accusers. Ataide requited his kindness by
provoking most of the Portugueses to mutiny about the Trade of Clove. Antony
endeavoring to appease, found them them all in Arms. At length Tristan sailed
for India, having hindered the loading Clove for the King's use, and carrying
away most of the Mutineers. So the Fort was exposed to eminent danger. If the
Commanders were bad, the Moors could not live with them, if good, they could
not live with the Portugueses.

20. The Kings of Gilolo and Bachan prepared a fresh to fall upon Galvam. He
being weak, offered peace; for the same Reason they refused it. Galvam finding
himself in no condition to withstand, challenges them both to fight Man to Man.
They accept of the Challenge, but the King of Tidore interposing, came to an
agreement. The two Kings so religiously observed this Pacification, that they
refused to admit into their Ports two Spanish Ships forced thither by stress of
Weather. They were cast away upon the Coast, and those few that escaped, taken
by the Natives, and ransomed by Galvam, who treated them courteously. Their
Captain was Ferdinand de Grijalva, sent out the year 1537 by Ferdinand Cortes.
Now the Ternatenses were at variance, refusing to obey Cachil Aeiro as King,
set up by Tristan de Ataide, and clamouring for Tabarija, by him imprisoned and
sent to India. They offered to make Galvam King till they had a lawful one. He
refused and endeavored to make them agree. This Action of his, and the
persuasions of the King of Tidore, prevailed with them to admit Aeiro. After
this all things continued in a wonderful Calm.

21. Galvam heared a great Fleet was coming upon Ternate, he borrowed some
small Ships of the King of Tidore, into which he put forty Portugueses, and
gave the Command to the Priest Ferdinand Vinagre, who behaved himself so well
he beat that Fleet, and killed their Admiral. Then he quieted the Country,
sometimes handling the Sword, sometimes putting on the Surplice, he baptized
many. Galvam perceiving how great Fruit this Priest produced, assisted him to
prosecute the Conversion; and he so treated the Converts, that the Natives
said, It must needs be a true God that such a man adored, and his Religion
ought to be embraced by all men. At this time Galvam was informed, a great
Fleet was coming from Iava, Banda, Macacar and Amboina to load Clove at Maluco,
by force of Arms. To meet them he sent James Lopez de Azevedo with forty
Portugueses, and 400 Ternatenses and Tidores. The Battle was fought at Amboina,
that Fleet defeated, Vessels, Cannon, Arms and Men taken. He scoured the Coast,
and baptized three whole Towns, Ativa, Matelo and Nocivel. Two Brothers,
Gentlemen of the Island Macacar, came to Ternate to take Galvam, for their
Godfather in Baptism, and took the Names of Antony and Michael with his
Surname. They afterward came to visit him with Ships richly laden, and several
young Gentlemen who were also baptized. They gave an account much might be
wrought in their Islands, and those of Celebes both in Spirituals and
Temporals. Galvam sent sent Francis de Castro with two Priests, who were drove
by bad Weather to discover other Islands a hundred Leagues North of the
Malucos. The first they came to was Satigana, the King and People Pagans.
Castro made Peace with him, which was confirmed by drinking each the others
Blood, to which effect they had a Vein opened. Then the King, Queen, a Son,
three Brothers, and many Nobles were baptized. Next they discovered the Island
Mindanao, where the same happened with the King, Queen, their two Daughters and
many People. After them were baptized the Kings of Butuano, Pimilarano and
Camisino, the two first took the Name of John, the latter was called Francis.
Francis de Castro brought to Ternate many Sons of the new Converts, for whom
Galvam, at his own expense, erected a Seminary, where they might be instructed,
which was the first in our Conquest. The obstinate Mahometans were astonished
at so many Conversions, and endeavored to persuade the Kings to put a stop to
their progress; but were quite amazed when they saw an Arab, whom they
reverenced almost as much as Mahomet, from whom he was descended, leave him to
follow Christ. The term of Galvam's Command expiring, those Kings begged of
ours to continue him for life. But wordly Felicities especially in Government
are never lasting.

22. Antony Galvam seeing all things settled, and that it was unjust the Kings
of that Island should always be Prisoners, set at liberty Cachil Aeiro
persuading him to choose a Queen. This confirmed the great opinion the
Ternatenses had of him, and they made public Songs in his Praise, which are
the only History or Records they use. He composed all Differences between the
Portugueses and Islanders, and being now at leisure built the Fort and all the
Houses after the manner of Spain. After his Example the King beautified
Ternate, with Buildings, and granted Lands to the Portugueses, who began to
make curious Orchards and Gardens and Country Houses, the Moors did the same.
Now Antony Galvam seeing there wanted Water, brought it from three Leagues
distance. Being told he consumed his own without making any advantage of the
Trade of Clove: he said, He could not meddle with Cloves, because it bore five
Nobs, which represents the Wounds of Christ, and are the Arms of Portugal. His
Command at Ternate expiring, he returned to Portugal full of Debts, thinking
(but he thought ill, if he knew his own Country) that he should find some
Reward of so much Valor, such Service, so great Parts and Merits. He found
Contempt and Misery, which brought him to die in an Hospital. This was the
Reward those who deserved best found in Portugal, where Heroic Actions were
looked upon as Crimes, and Crimes as Heroic Actions. But his Fame will live
for ever.

CHAP. X.
Which ends the Government of Nuno de Cuna this same Year 1538, in the Reign of
King John the Third, and concludes the First Tome.

1. THE Present sent by the King of Cambaya to the great Turk to obtain Succor
from him, was delivered together with the News of his Death. The great Value of
this Present demonstrated to that Prince the vast Riches of India, and stirred
up in him a desire of becoming Master of it. He thought he might expel the
Portugueses in the East, and one of them a Renegado, then at Constantinople,
promoted the Design by making it easy.

2. The Turk ordered a Fleet to be fitted, and gave the Command of it to the
Eunuch Solomon Bassa, Governor of Caire. Solomon was a Greek Janisary, born in
the Morea, of stature short, his Face ugly, and Belly so big, he was more like
a Beast than Man, his Age eighty years, he could not rise up without the help
of four Men. His Purse purschased him this Command, offering the Turk to
furnish the Shipping at his own Cost. The better to perform this, he put to
death many rich Men to seize their Estates. Among others he hanged Mir Daud,
King of The^ayda, after taking from him a great Sum of Money. So it might well
be said, this Fleet was rather built by the Dead than by the Living. It
contained seventy Sail, most large Galleys, well stored with Cannon, Ammunition
and Provisions, seven thousand Land-Men Janissaries, Turks and Mamalucs, the
Seamen and Slaves of the best, many of the latter taken out of the Venetian
Galleys then at Alexandria, which were seized upon, the Peace made by Bajazet
in the year 1503, being now broke.

3. Solomon having set out committed Villainies natural to a Tyrant and Coward
as he was. He caused four hundred Soldiers to be put to the Oars, and because
they complained, put to death two hundred. He thought to have taken the King at
Gidda, but he, who well knew him, escaped. At Zebet after receiving a rich
Present he beheaded the King. In like manner after receiving a Present and
Relief from the King of Aden, counterfeiting he had many sick Men aboard, they
were set ashore privately armed, and seized the City while he murdered the King
aboard. About the beginning of September he came before Diu, having lost six
Vessels by the way.

4. When King Badur was killed upon the Sea with some of his Re^inue, one Coje
Zofar swam to shore, and was well received by the Portugueses, who put all
others to the Sword. He upon several occasions showed himself so grateful, that
Nuno de Cuna much favored and recommended him earnestly to Antony de Silveyra.
At last without any provocation he fled from Diu to the new King of Cambaya,
offering his Service, and persuading him to war upon the Portugueses, and drive
them from that Coast, affirming it might be easily done with the assistance of
the Turkish Fleet, which he knew would soon be there. The King with this
Encouragement forms a Body of five thousand Horse, and ten thousand Foot at
Champanel. The first that appeared was Coje Zofar, with three thousand Horse
and four thousand Foot, maintained by himself, knowing it is suspicious to
advise dangerous Enterprises, and not have part in them. Antony de Silveyra
having notice hereof provided for a long and dangerous Siege.

5. Coje Zofar made the first Breach, falling upon the Town of the Rumes near
Diu, where he did much harm. Francis Pacheco defended himself bravely in a
Bulwark with fourteen Portugueses, till relieved by Antony de Silveyra and
Zofar, was obliged to draw off, being wounded in the Arm. At the same time
appears Alu Cham, the King's General with all the Army, and he and Zofar set
down before the Passes. Antony de Silveyra orders the Officers, commanding them
to quit those Posts, the better to maintain the City and Fort. In the Execution
of these Orders they lost some Ships and Guns.

6 By reason of this Loss, and because there were many private Enemies, who
only waited an opportunity of showing their malice, Silveyra could not maintain
the City. Some he hanged, and retired to the Fort, always taking the Advice of
his Captains. Alu Cham and Coje Zofar presently possessed themselves of the
City and Island abandoned by us, and began to play their Shot vigorously. Lope
de Sousa, who guarded the Wood and Water, whereof the Fort stood in need, had
several Rencounters, and slew many of the Enemy, without losing one Man, but
was himself much wounded. Antony de Silveyra, hearing of the approach of the
Turkish Fleet, with speed sent advice thereof to Nuno de Cuna, the Answer was
the Diligence wherewith he prepared to relieve him in person.

7. Michael Vaz, a resolute Man, sent by Silveyra to discover, saw the Enemies
Fleet, and the better to view it, came up so near, that their Shot reached his
Vessel. He got off, and carried the News to the Governor at Goa. The Fleet came
to an Anchor in the Harbor, and was now formidable, not only to those few
Portugueses, but even to the Moors, who had expected it. Next day Solomon
landed six hundred Janissaries well accoutred, and armed with Bows and Muskets
to terrify the Beholders. They entered the City, and there acted all the
Insolences used among Soldiers. Then drawing near the Fort, they killed six
Portugueses, but three hundred of our Musketeers advancing, killed fifty of
them, and forced the rest to retire.

8. A storm obliged Solomon to remove to Madrefavat, a safer Harbor. There he
continued twenty days, in which time Silveyra bettered the Fortifications,
planted his Artillery, and assigned every Man his Post. The same was done by
the Turks, assisted by Coje Zofar. Some of their Cannon played upon a Bulwark,
to burn which they built a wooden Castle on a great Barque filled with
combustible Matbut Francis de Gove^, who had his Command by Sea, went out by
night, and with great difficulty got to and burnt it. At this time came some
relief sent by Nuno de Cuna, yet the greatest Comfort they brought was the
hopes of his coming after in person.

9. Solomon returns from Madrefavat, and fires his Cannon upon the Bulwark
where Francis de Gouvea commanded; from whence, and from S. Thomas his Tower,
he was so well answered, that one of his Galleys sunk with most of the Men. The
greatest harm the Portugueses received, was from their own Cannon, which burst
and killed some: for the Enemy only killed two Brothers, whose Mother took them
in her Arms, and carried off the Bodies without shedding a tear. Zofar now
furiously battered Francis Pachecho's Bulwark, which he rendered not tenable,
seven hundred Janissaries assaulted it, and set up their Colors, but some of
the scattered Portugueses advancing, fell on, dislodged them, and killed one
hundred and fifty. The Dispute lasted all day, and the Enemy drew off with
shame, for the weight of this Action lay upon two resolute Gentlemen. Next day
Pacheco in despair surrendered. The Enemy enters the Bulwark, casts down the
Christian Colors, and set up the Turkish. John Perez, enraged hereat, throws
down the Turkish, and again rears the Christian Ensigns, the Turks come on, and
five Portugueses more join Perez, who all were killed upon the spot, and their
Bodies cast into the Sea, which laid them at the Gate of the Fort, where they
were honorably buried. Pacheco and those with him had articled for Life and
Liberty. The latter was not performed by Solomon, the first he granted,
clothing their Bodies with Turkish Garments, as they had clothed their Souls
with Infamy, in accepting them. Then he sent one of them to Silveyra to summon
him to surrender. He made a jest of the Proposal.

10. Solomon enraged at this Contempt, prepared to batter the Fort. He planted
his Artillery in several places under the direction of Coje. Among the Cannon
were nine Pieces of wonderful bigness, carrying Ball of above ninety pounds
weight. Thus several other Sizes of Cannon, which in all were above one hundred
and thirty, guardby two thousand Turks. Upon Monday the fourth of October, the
Battery began, and continued violently twenty days, doing great harm to the
Fort, from whence scarce any could be done, nor they could hardly repair the
most dangerous Breaches, tho all Art and Diligence was used.

11. The sixth day after they began to batter, the Turks perceiving Gaspar de
Sousa's Bulwark much damaged, thought to carry it, but many of them were killed
in the Attempt, with the loss of two of ours. Every day there was Action.
Goncalo Falcam had his Head shot off. John Fonseca being wounded in the Right
Arm, held his Lance with the Left, as if he had received no hurt. The Gallego
John, a Youth of nineteen years of age, of a little Body, but great Heart,
pursued a Moor till he run into the Sea, thither he followed, till losing
ground he was like to drown. The Moor perceiving it, laid hold on him to kill
him, but he recovering himself without losing Gun or Sword, slew him, and came
out all bloody, walking leisurely toward the Fort, while Showers of Bullets
flew about him. Many other singular Acts of Valor were performed this Siege.

12. But by this time many brave Gentlemen had been killed in the Fort, Powder
grew short, the Provisions shorter, the Relief of the Viceroy D. Garcia de
Noronha, now arrived in India, moved slow, the Neighboring Forts sent no Aid,
and all began to be in confusion. Which was increased by a sickness that
hindered most from swallowing the little Provision they had, swelling the Gums,
and loosening the Teeth, so that they fell out; this was caused by the bad
Water. In fine, the Portugueses fought and suffered, as if so much Misery could
not overcome them. Let the Valor of the Women now take place here. Donna
Isabel de Vega, a Woman of great Virtue, and some Beauty, was Wife to Manuel de
Vasconcelos, he fearing the Fort might be lost, and she taken by the Turks,
earnestly entreated her to go to her Father Francis Ferram at Goa, but she
begged not to be parted from him; which, with much regret at last he granted.
Then this Virago considering there were many Men employed in the Work who might
fight, and their places be supplied by as many Women, calling together all of
that Sex that were in the Fort, she exhorted them to undertake that Labor, to
the end so many Men might be added to the number of their Defendants. They all
followed, she led and gave the Example, and with her Anne Fenandez, with whom
she had before communicated her Design. This Anne was Wife to a Physician, and
so courageous, that by night she viewed all the Posts, and appeared at
Assaults, encouraging the Soldiers. Her Son being killed in her sight, she drew
him away, returned where the Service was, and that ended, went to bury him.

13. Perceiving the Turks undermined his Bulwark, Gaspar de Sousa sallied with
seventy Men to view their Work, which he did with great slaughter of the Enemy.
At his Retreat missing two Men, he turned back upon the Enemy, fought bravely,
and being surrounded, was hamstringed, yet so defended himself on his Knees
till oppressed by the multitude. The Mine was countermined; the continual
Labor was insupportable, and impossible to repair so many Ruins.

14. At this Juncture arrived four Vessels, sent by the Viceroy D. Garcia,
which carried only twenty Men of Relief. Solomon was concerned at this Succor,
tho small, and much more that the Fort stood so many Assaults, Coje Zofar
having assured he would carry it at two. At the beginning of the Siege there
were six hundred Men in the Fort, many were killed, and some Cannon burst. But
the Turk placed no confidence herein, and looked toward the Sea, fearful of the
Portugues Fleet he heared was coming upon him.

15. This moved him to press the Siege with more vigor. The Bulwark of the Sea
where Antony de Sousa commanded, was furiously attacked with fifty Barques, two
whereof were sunk by our Cannon. Then they attempted to scale it, and were
repulsed with great slaughter. The Assault was repeated, and still the Enemy
came off with loss. Sousa sent the wounded Men to be dressed, among them Fernan
Penteado, who waiting, heared the noise of a fresh Attack, and forgetting the
Dressing, run thither, and received another Wound, the very same happened to
him the third time, and then was dressed of all three. By this time there were
left in the Fort but two hundred and fifity of the six hundred Men, fit to take
Arms.

16. Solomon now in despair resolved to venture all. First he counterfeited he
would raise the Siege, and twelve Galleys put to Sea, that Silveyra might be
the easier surprised, but he provided still to repulse the greatest danger. One
night some Noise was heared at the Foot of the Wall by water, it appeared they
were applying great numbers of scaling Ladders, they were opposed, till morning
appearing showed the place beset round, and assaulted by fourteen thousand Men.
First the Cannon was played, and then they mounted on all sides, chieflly next
the Commandant's House, where it was weakest: but he had placed such Men there
as made a great slaughter. Failing there, they attempted a Bulwark, pouring in
showers of Arrows and Bullets. Great was the Confusion and Havoc on both
sides. Now come up fourteen Galleys pouring in their great shot, but do no
Execution. Francis Gouvea made them draw off, having battered two, and killed
some Men with his Cannon. By this time two hundred Turks had entered the
Bulwark, and planted their Colors. Scarce thirty Portugueses were there to
oppose them, but they rushing on desperately regain the Work. The Enemy being
very thick, none of our shot is lost, they sustain great damage, and such as
were in this Action draw off. Fresh Men succeed, and set up four Colors. The
Portugueses wounded and burnt run for ease, and dipped themselves in Jars of
Salt Water, where they perished, seeking Refreshment with hellish Torture.
Antony de Silveyra indefatigably repaired to all places, encouraging all. Here
a Soldier wanting Ball pulled out one of his Teeth to load his Musket. The
Enemy had much the better this second Assault, which a few Gentlemen
perceiving, furiously rushed upon them. John Rodrigues, a Man of great Body,
and as great Courage, run out with a Barrel of Powder, crying, Clear the way;
for here I carry my own and many a Man's death. He threw the Barrel among the
Enemies, and suddenly above a hundred were carried up into the Air, torn in
pieces, twenty lay burnt upon the ground. John himself came off without hurt,
and doing other considerable Actions, deserved afterward some of the first
Rewards and Honors gained this Siege. Other Fireworks burnt the four Ensigns
who had set up the Colors. Two of our Cannon cleared the place of Enemies, and
two Bullets threw down two Ensigns that succeeded the former. The Enemy
withdraws, and fresh comes on the third time, and place their Colors. The
Commander of these, Son-in-law to Coje Zofar, being killed, his Men dismayed,
and turned their Backs. These Assaults lasted above four hours, the same small
number of Portugueses withstanding still fresh and numerous Enemies. Our Women
in the Fort, and theirs on the Walls of the City, being Spectators of the whole
Action. The Portugueses all smeared with Powder, looked more like Moors and
were known by their Clothes not Color, and among themselves by the Voice,
every one looking as if he came out of Hell, their black hue wrought with Fire,
Blood and Sweat. In fine, the Enemy carried off above a thousand wounded and
left above five hundred Men killed. Of ours fourteen were killed, and two
hundred lay useless for want of Blood. Only forty remained able to bear Arms,
and the Arms lay broken to pieces about the Ground, some serving such as could
not stand on their Legs for Crutches. No hope was left if the Enemy renewed the
Attack. The Walls were all shattered, and no Powder left. Nothing but horror
appeard. Only the brave Silveyra's Countenance was what encouraged all Men.

17. Solomon put an end to all these Calamities; for not knowing the Condition
the Fort was in, and terrified with this ill success, he raised the Siege.
Antony Silveyra seeing them weigh anchor, and hoise sail, thought it was still
counterfeit, and prepared to resist as if he had any thing to trust to. He
posted the forty Men, and caused some that were wounded to lean against the
Walls, to show a number; those who could not rise ordered themselves to be
carried in their Beds, saying, It was to die in an honorable place. Some of
the Women also armed themselves, and appeared upon the Works. The Night was
spent upon the watch, but the Morning was more comfortable to the afflicted;
for Solomon was under Sail without any thought of returning. Tho fear did much,
yet a Device of Coje Zofar did more toward removing Solomon. Coje was moved to
it by two Reasons, one that he was weary of the unsupportable Pride of that
Turk; another an Order that he had from his King, in case he found the Turk
would keep that City and Fort (as was feared) he should rather endeavor to
leave it to the Portugueses. Coje's Device was, that he framed a Letter which
came to Solyman's Hands, who finding it contained, that the Viceroy of India
would be there the next day with a vast Fleet, he thought not fit to delay his
Departure, and so sailed away on the fifth of November. The same night Coje's
Men fired the City, and marched away. This was the first Siege of Diu which was
admired throughout the World, and added new Luster to the Portugues Glory, all
due to the invincible Courage of the ever renowned Antony de Silveyra, and
those valiant Gentlemen who were with him, and whose Fame will last from
Generation to Generation.

18. Solomon touched at the Ports on the Coast of Arabia, and took up some
Portugueses he found there. He gathered above 140, and cutting off their Heads,
then the Ears and Noses, salted and sent them to the great Turk to show what he
had done. Among these was Francis Pacheco, who had not the Courage to die like
a Gentleman in his Bulwark. Solomon being come to the great Turk, and not well
agreeing with one who aspired to his Post, was reduced to kill himself. Such is
generally the end of Tyrants.

19. This famous Siege was far advanced when the Viceroy D. Garcia de Noronha
arrived in India, to whom Nuno de Cuna immediately resigned the Government. His
arrival with so considerable Relief as he brought might well have bettered the
Affairs of Diu; yet on the contrary it much endamaged them. For had he not
come, Nuno had relieved Diu with eighty Sail he had in a readiness for that
purpose, and prevented so many Miseries and the death of so many brave Men.
Still fresh Advice was brought of the danger the besieged were in, and still D.
Garcia wasted the time in considering of means to relieve them, without choosing
any, or taking the advice of Cuna. Thus the Siege was raised before he found
the method of relieving, having gathered one hundred and sixty Sail for that
purpose.

20. D. Garcia wanted not Courage, having given good demonstrations of it under
Alfonso de Albuquerque. But he chose rather to commit an Error through his own
wilfulness, than act rightly by the advice of Nuno de Cuna.

21. It soon appeared Noronha was not at all disposed to take advice of Cuna,
treating him in such manner at Goa as obliged him to go to Cochin, to order his
Affairs in order to return to Portugal. At Cochin he refused him a convenient
Ship, contrary to an Order he had from the King to act as Governor, and choose
such Vessel as he liked. He was forced to set out in a Merchant-Galeon, hired
for himself and Family. Tho the Viceroy treated him ill there, no less ill
usage was designed him here; and doubtless the knowledge D. Garcia had of the
ill will the Ministers of State here bore him was the cause of his hard usage
there.

22. Nuno de Cuna by the way fell sick and died. He protested at his death,
that he had nothing belonging to the King but five Pieces of Coin, or Medals of
Gold, found among the dead King Badur's Treasure, which for their Beauty ^e
carried to show to the King. A Chaplain asked, How he would have his Body
ordered to be brought home. And he answered, Since God is pleased I should die
at Sea, let the Sea be my Grave. Since the Land would not have me, I will not
give it my Bones. He died like a good Christian. Ordered a sufficient Weight
should be tied to his Feet to carry him to the bottom. Thus ended an excellent
Governor of India. His Age fifty two years. He was Son of Tristan de Cuna and
Donna Antonia de Albuquerque. Of stature large and well proportioned. He wanted
one Eye. Tho he had Majesty in command, he was courteous, and not subject to
any passion, easy to be reconciled, loved to do good to all, an observer of
Justice, free from Avarice, prudent in Counsel, affable in Discourse. His
Picture represents his Complexion fair, his Beard black, all the Clothes black,
only the Cap blew. He governed ten years wanting two months, and died the
beginning of the year 1539. He was the tenth Governor, and first of the Name.

The End of the Four Parts of the First Tome.
DEDICATED TO HER MOST SACRED MAJESTY, CATHERINE, QUEEN-DOWAGER OF ENGLAND, etc.

THE PREFACE.
SINCE our Asia now receives a new Prince, let us begin another Tome with a
different Style. As the other Prefaces were filled with Instructions and
Documents of pure Zeal; so shall this with the delightful Entertainment of a
curious Reflection. For when Fortune makes it her Sport to heap Burdens of Care,
there is none so resolved or unmoved but requires Diversion and Ease. The
Kingdom of Portugal parted from consider, that it began and ended in Henry's,
and in the number 12; that the last King died on the Day and last Year of
Peace; that the King and Kingdom expired where they had their Birth; that being
founded by a Spanish Female, by another they were extinguished; and suchlike
Reflections; we shall discover no less remarkable Circumstances in the
Portugues Asia. The Promoter of this wonderful Discovery was Prince Henry, and
Henry was the last of our Princes that Possessed it. Alfonso was the Founder of
the Royal Throne of Portugal in Europe, Christ appearing to him; and another of
that in Asia, when the Cross appeared to Alfonso de Albuquerque in the Red Sea.
The Throne of this Kingdom was raised on the Victory obtained by Alfonso at
Orique over the Moorish Emperor called Is^iael; and the Prince of Goa, the
Metropolis of our Dominions in Asia, taken by Albuquerque, was called Ismael;
and the King of Persia, deprived of his Sovereignty over Ormuz, was also
Ismael. Ferdinand Tellez de Meneses was the last Governor of India sent by our
Natural Princes, and his Picture was the last the Hall in the Palace of Goa,
appointed to hang up the Portraitures of the Viceroys and Governors, could
contain. The Name of the first Viceroy of India was Francis, and consequently
his is the first of those Pictures; and now we see the Name of the first
Viceroy sent by a Spa^ish Prince is Francis, and therefore the Picture of that
Name is the first in the second Hall destined to preserve those Memorials. If
there be still any obstinate Philososophers, who hold, That all Worldly Things
are the mere Effect of Chance, let them contemn the Consideration of these
Parallels on such important Occasions; but let not those despise it, who
allowing the most inconsiderable Earthly Affairs to be the Work of Providence,
cannot but be assured the Great are much more its Care. Let not those, I say,
undervalue it, who know the Immortal Providence can be discovered but by
Shadows. The Divine Power has always taken this course to manifest itself to
Man. What Wonder then it should take that Method in the Revolution of a
Kingdom, more peculiarly belonging to Christ himself? Thus then, these
wonderful Presages first concurring, (not to spea^ of Comets,) the Kingdom of
Portugal returned to its formet Original, after 500 Years Peregrination over
the whole circumference of the Earth: And now bringing that Precious Scepter
from the East, puts it into the Hands of Philip in Spain, who had the Fortune
to be the great Ocean to which run all the great, indifferent, and small Rivers
of so many Empires, Kingdoms, and Sovereignties, spread over the whole Face of
the Terrestrial Globle. Who would not believe, that the Portugueses would lose
their Valor, having lost their Natural Prince, since it is certain the
Presence of Princes is the chief Strength of it? We shall see them deprived of
this Glory, but not of that Virtue. Our Hero's of this Age did not degenerate
from those of the other, so soon as naturally might be expected. Such was their
Bravery, such their Courage, they seem to have exceeded the Bounds of their
Fortune, and even of Nature.

THE CONTENTS.
TOM. III. PART I.
CHAP. I. The Government of the Viceroy D. Francis Mascarennas Count De St.
Cruz, fromthe Year 1581, till the Year 1584 Page 1 CHAP. II. Continues the
Government of D. Francis Mascarennas 9 CHAP. III. The Government of the
Viceroy D. Duarte de Meneses, from the Year 1584 till 1588. 20 CHAP. IV.
Continues the Government of D. Duarte de Meneses 28 CHAP. V. Continues the
Government of D. Duarte de Meneses 40 CHAP. VI. The End of the Government of D.
Duarte de Meneses. 47 CHAP. VII. The Government of Emanuel de Sousa Coutinno,
from the Year 1588, till 1590 56 CHAP. VIII. The Government of the Viceroy
Matthias de Albuquerque, from the Year 1591 till 1597. 64 CHAP. IX. Continues
and Concludes the Government of Matthias de Albuquerque 71 CHAP. X. Of the
Propagation of the Gospel in the Empire of China during these later Years 78
CHAP. XI. Continues the Subject of the Propagation of the Gospel 85
TOM. III. PART II.
CHAP. I. THE Government of the Viceroy D. Francis de Gama Count de Vidigueyra,
from the Year 1597 till 1600 93 CHAP. II. Continues the Government of D.
Francis de Gama Count de Vidigueyra 99 CHAP. III. Continues the Government of
D. Francis de Gama Count de Vidigueyra 107 CHAP. IV. The Remarkable Revolutions
of Pegu, during the Government of D. Francis de Gama Count de Vidigueyra 117
CHAP. V. The Government of the Viceroy Airs de Saldanna, from the Year 1600,
till 1604 124 CHAP. VI. The Government of the Viceroy D. Martin Alfonso de
Castro, from the Year 1604 till 1607 138 CHAP. VII. The Government of the
Archbish D. F. Alexius de Meneses, who was Governor from the Year 1607 till
1609 148 CHAP. VIII. Of the Viceroy D. John Pereyra Frojas Count de Feyra, in
the Year 1608 153 CHAP. IX. Of the Governor Andrew Furtado de Mendoca, in the
Year 1609 162 CHAP. X. The Government of the Viceroy Ruy Lorenco de Tavora,
from the Year 1609 till 1612 166 CHAP. XI. Of the Propagation of the Christian
Faith in China 174
TOM. III. PART III.
CHAP. I. The Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo, from the Year
1612 till 1617 181 CHAP. II. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome
de Azevedo, in the Year 1613 190 CHAP. III. Continues the Government of D.
Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year 1614 197 CHAP. IV. Continues the Government of
D. Hierome de Azevedo 207 CHAP. V. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D.
Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year 1615 212 CHAP. VI. Continues the Government of
the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year 1615 220 CHAP. VII. Continues
the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year 1615 224 CHAP.
VIII. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo this same
Year 1615, and that of 1616 229 CHAP. IX. Continues the Government of the
Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo the same Year 1616 234 CHAP. X. Continues the
Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year 1616 242 CHAP. XI.
Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo the same Year
1616 249 CHAP. XII. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de
Azevedo, in the Year 1617. 256 CHAP. XIII. Particular Discoveries made in the
Island of Madagascar, or St. Lawrence, by Order of the Viceroy D. Hierome de
Azevedo. 264 CHAP. XIV. Continues the Discoveries in the Island Madagascar,
under the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo 271 CHAP. XV. The Government of the
Viceroy D. John Coutinno Count de Rodendo, from the Year 1617 till 1619 278
CHAP. XVI. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. John Coutinno Count de
Redondo 284 CHAP. XVII. Several wonderful Accidents during the two Years
Government of the Viceroy the Count de Redondo 292 CHAP. XVIII. Of the Governor
Ferdinand de Albuquerq^e, from the Year 1619, till 1622 299. CHAP. XIX.
Continues the Government of Ferdinand de Albuquerque. 308 CHAP. XX. Of the
Viceroy D. Alfonso de Noronna, in the Year 1621 314 CHAP. XXI. Of the
Propagation of the Faith in Japan, and Ethiopia about this Time 316
TOM. III. PART IV.
CHAP. I. The Second Government of the Viceroy D. Francis de Gama Count de
Vidigueyra, from the Year 1622 till 1627 Page 321 CHAP. II. Continues the
Government of the Viceroy D. Francis de Gama Count de Vidigueyra 331 CHAP. III.
The Government of D. F. Luis de Brito, Bishop of Cochim, from the Year 1628,
till 1629 343 CHAP. IV. Of the Viceroy D. Francis Mascarennas, in the Year
1628; with sundry Occurrences at Pegu, Martavam, Prom, Siam, and other Places.
347 CHAP. V. Continues the Affairs of the Kings of Siam and Peg^ 357 CHAP. VI.
Of the Governor Nunno Alvarez Botello, in the Year 1629 364 CHAP. VII.
Continues the Exploits of the Governor and General Nunno Alvarez Botello 370
CHAP. VIII. The Government of the Viceroy D. Michael de Noronna Count de
Linnares, from the Year 1629 till 1635 374 CHAP. IX. Of the Affairs of
Ethiopia, during the Government of the Viceroy D. Michael de Noronna Count de
Linnares 383 CHAP. X. Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Michael de
Noronna, Count De Linnares. 387 CHAP. XI. Of the Recovery of Ceylon, during the
Government of the Viceroy the Count de Linnares. 396 CHAP. XII. Of several
Occurrences till the end of the Government of the Viceroy the Count De
Linnares. 402 CHAP. XIII. The Government of the Viceroy Peter de Silva, from
the Year 163^, till 1638 408 CHAP. XIV. The Government of Antony Tellez de
Silva, from the Year 1639, till 1640. 412 CHAP. XV. Of the Viceroy John de
Silva Tello, who went for India in the Year 1640 414 A short Account of what
the Portugueses are possessed of between the Cape of Good Hope and China; of the
several Dignities, Commands and Revenues in the said Possessions, and of the
Religious Houses in those Parts 415 An Account of all the SHIPS that sailed
from Lisbon to the Discovery of the Coasts of Africa and Asia, and the Annual
Trading Ships, from the time Prince Henry first attempted the Discovery, till
the Year 1640. 421 The Viceroy and Governors of India, from the first Discovery
till the Year 1640 433 Books in Print and Manuscripts out of which the
Portugues Asia was Collected 436
THE PORTUGUES ASIA. TOM. III. PART I.
CHAP. I.
The Government of the Viceroy D. Francis Mascarennas Count de St. Cruz, from
the Year 1581 till the Year 1584.

1. DON Francis Mascarennas Count of Santa Cruz, was the First Viceroy of
India sent after the Revolution of the Kingdom of Portugal by the King of ^ain.
The Honors and Advantages conferred on him, together with this Command,
exceeded all that till that time had been heard of upon the like Occasion. D.
Francis very well deserved all Rewards of Honor and ^ofit, having served well
in India, and bravely defended the City Chaul with a few Men and no Wall,
against the Power of Nizamaluco, who ^sieged it with 150000 Men. Yet this his
Advancement may be attributed, rather than (...) his Merit, to the Policy of
Princes, who when they gain a Crown, to which there are other Competitors,
endeavor to gain Hearts by Bounty, and heap on one what at another time would
serve many. The Vice Roy had five Ships.

2. Being come to Goa, he found all India had already proclaimed King Philip,
according to the Orders not long before s^nt to the Governor Ferdinand Tells
de Meneses. It is credible the great Favors bestowed on the Count were only to
animate him to procure the peaceable submission of India to the new King, and
that being already performed by Ferdinand Tells, the Count fortunately reaped
the Benefit of his Care and Industry.

3. The new Viceroy being eased of that Care, applied himself to the usual
Affairs of the Government, sending out Squadrons as customary in the beginning
of Summer. Mathias de Albuquerque with two Galleys and Twenty other Vessels and
Seven hundred Men, were ordered for the Coast of Malabar.

4. He being on that Coast, sent Francis Fernandez with Eighteen Sail to burn
Coulete the lesser, which was a Nest of Pirates, it was executed by him without
losing one Man; the same at Capocate, where ^ty Almadies, being fishing
Vessels, were taken, and the Country made desolate for a long ti^ A hundred
Moor^ of Capocate seeing their Houses bu^ ^un in a Rage to the Shore where Alo^
^yra with Eighteen Men withstood ^em till he was relieved from the Ships, and
got off without Loss, some of the Enem^ being killed by our Cannon. D. Giles
Yanez burnt some Vessels, and killed several ^en up that River, then they all
returned to their Admiral, who was become t^ T^ror of all that Coast.

5. This Destruction fell chiefly on the Queens of the Mountains between
Calicut and Car^, and her of Olala, their Towns and W^ods being burnt and cut
down. The neighboring People terrified herewith, submitted and paid the
Tribute they owed for some Years; and the Balala of Panabur was again brought
under subjection. Franci^ Fernandez, Alvaro de Avelar, and Andrew F^rtado took
each of them a considerable Ship. Alfonso Ferreyra over against Could razed a
Fort of the Moors, having killed s^ of One hundred and fifty, he attacked with
few Men.

6. James Lopez Coutinno de Santarem, cruzing on the Northern Coast with Eight
Sail, near Suratte burnt a Village of the Mogols, because they had killed Six
of Twenty four Men, who without Orders went ashore; but as he drew off, the
Enemy came down very numerous with some Elephants, and one piece of Cannon, and
wounded many of his Men and himself, so that he was forced to be sent to Damans
to be cured. Afterward burning another Village he came off with Loss.

7. The Viceroy being informed that the Turkish Galleys, which the Year before
plundered Mascate, were again at Sea, ^ared they would make some attempt upon
Mocambique, and therefore sent thither two Ships to relieve that Place. Mean
while an Army of Mogols with Elephants and other Necessaries for a Siege entered
the Country of Damam, burnt Villages, and encamped not far from the City. Our
Commander there, Martin Alfonso de Melo, having but few Men, and being ill
fortified, sent Advice to the neighboring Commanders and to the Viceroy; and
in few Days so many Gentlemen resorted to him, that they valued not the Enemy.

8. The Mogol thinking nothing was to be got by Men who so freely offered
themselves to Danger, forbore the Siege, and with fresh Fury overran the whole
Country. He took a view of the Fort where Ferdinand de Miranda had Commanded,
and was well known to him; he called Miranda loud, and rid out from the Front
of his Army. Ferdinand knowing he that called was Calichan, General of those
Troops, went out, and pointed his Lance so well, that hitting on his Breast it
pierced the Armor, wounded him, and flew in pieces, but he fell not, being
tied to the Saddle. Calichan retired to his Men, decamped and marched away, but
left a Garrison to keep Possession of one Village.

But the Portugueses had like to have done themselves the Damage they might
have feared from the Mogol, being drawn up in order to fight among themselves,
on account of some Disputes about Superiority, and about opposing Alfonso de
Melo, for imprisoning a Soldier. A fortunate alarm prevented this Mischief.

10. ^mana da Rama, King of Sarceta, five Le^ues Northward of Damam, a Friend
to the Portugueses, being upon this occasion entru^ed to secure the Women and
Children, covetous of the Riches they carried with them, refused to restore
them. Martin Alfonso de Melo and Ferdinand de Miranda marched toward him with
Eight hundred Portugueses, whereof 140 Horse, and 400 Musketeers, and 1000 of
the Natives. Being come in sight of the City Raumalaje, the King sent to offer
he would restore all, provided they would proceed ^o farther. They, thinking it
was only to amuse them, marched on. The King with his Wife and Jewels getting
on Elephants, and being followed by the Inhabitants, fled to a Mountain, whence
he could see the City plundered and burnt, and all the Country about destroyed.

11. The Enemy made some attempts upon our Quarters, and at last the King ^me
in Person with a good number of Men, for some time put our Men very hard to it,
but in the end was forced to fly, and from his retreat sent to make entire
restitution of all that had been demanded.

12. In Ceylon, Raju was preparing to fall upon Columbo. The Viceroy sent five
Sail to its Relief, and Raju understanding it, stirred not. John Correa de ^to,
Commander of Columbo, eased of that care, sent back three of the Ships,
retaining only two.

13. D. Hierome de Mascarennas, who was with a Squadron in the Red Sea, met
with no Enemy, but one Night the Sky being serene and clear, they all saw a
great opening in the Region of the Air with such brightness as enlightened all
the Sea, then there fell abundance of Flames like flashes of Powder. This
lasted not long; the Night after it continued clear as before, and they sailed
to Ormuz.

14. The Kings of Lara always aspired to raise themselves above those of Ormuz,
as formerly they had been. He that now reigned resolving to possess himself of
all Mogostan, and leading a powerful Army, had taken several Towns, and kept
the Fort of Ormuz in a manner besieged, by hindering the resort of the
neighboring Country People, who supply it with Provisions. The King of Ormuz
who was equally apprehensive of this danger, had a Conference with D. Gonzalo
de Meneses, Commander of the Fort, and having adjusted Matters, they both set
out in August, when the heat of the Sun is intolerable, to meet the Enemy. The
King led 3000 Men, D. Gonzalo 800 choice Portugueses, with a train equal to the
greatest Princes. These 800 were divided into three Bodies. They marched to the
Fort of Xamel, which they judged impregnable, not so much (...) Art as its,
natural Situation, in it were Fire hundred L^ines, the flower of that (...).

15. In ^ing our Cannon we lost one Man, and had many Wounded. The Fort was
batt^d Twenty Days without any Effect. The Battery was removed against a
Bastion ^ar the Gate, where it soon made a cons^able impression. The Bastion
was assaul^d and gained with the loss of six Men.

16. The Battery was removed thither, and continued playing till the King of
Lara dying, and his two Sons falling at variance about the Succession, instead
of relieving the Besieged, they were forced to surrender upon Condition to
march out with their Baggage. As they marched the Amadises of the Army of
Ormuz, who had feigned themselves (...) Friends, only to get the opportunity of
revenging the Affronts received from them in the Persons of their Wives and
Daughters, now suddenly fell upon them, killed 150, and had destroyed the rest,
had not the King and D. Gonzalo interposed. Milascar, one of their Officers was
killed by our Men whom he assaulted, believing them the Breakers of the
Articles.

17. Xascambar, another of their Officers more discreet, put himself into the
Protection of D. Gonzalo who found much difficulty to save him. The Amadises
begged of him, since he would not suffer them to kill him, he would at least
permit them to lay their Mouths to his Wounds to suck his Blood in revenge of
their Affronts, with great trouble he appealed them. The King put Coiecenadam
with Five hundred Men into the Fort, and returned to ^z. Immediately after,
Provisions, ^w grown scarce in the City, were plentifully brought to it.

18. At the same time the King of Achem came to Malaca with 150 Sail, and
finding two Ships in that River, battered them the space of fifteen days. D.
John de Ga^ who commanded there, and whose time was now expiring, was most
vigilant till Rocque de Melo succeeded him. The Enemy weary with battering the
Ships resolved to burn them, and had compassed it, had not Bartholomew
Fernandez a Mulato, with two Soldiers turned off from them a flaming Vessel
designed to set them on Fire.

19. Nunno Monteyro coming from the Sreight of Singapura in a Galliot with
sixty Portugueses most of them born at Malaca, had the boldness to attack all
that Fleet. Though it seem fabulous, at the first onset he made all those 150
Sail give way, then the greatest of them boarded him, and he had visibly the
better of them, when some spark of Fire falling into his Powder blew up him,
his Vessel and all the Men: Yet this Accident was but a just Punishment of
Monteyro's Disobedience to the Commander of the City, and the Enemy content
with this success weighed Anchor and made away.

20. The Enemy sailed thence to the City Ior, and began furiously to batter it.
Regale the King se^ to Malaca to desire Succor, it was sent him in twelve
Ships, which entered that Port so unexpectedly, that before any resistance could
be made, they fired some of the greatest Galleys, killing all that were in t^,
and presented the King with the Head^ of one of those Commanders, which being
set up on the Shore so terrified the whole Fleet, they all fled.

21. ^et us return to Damam. Ferdi^ de Mir^da put to Sea again with his
Squadron, consisting of twenty Sail. After most violent Storms they were forced
to come to an Anchor at Suratte. Setting out thence they attacked a mighty Ship
of Balala, which surrendered, having articled for the Men's Lives.

CHAP. II.
Continues the Government of D. Francis Mascarennas.

1. MIranda's Men in a Rage that they were deprived of the Booty of that Ship
which had submitted it self, beset him to the number of Fourteen Sail, and
after much reproachful Language, left him and sailed away to Damam, putting
that Town into a great fright, because they had set up black Colors. They
landed and marched in warlike manner into the City, committing extravagant
Enormities. Every one was astonished not knowing the cause* nor daring to ask
it, and their Resolution was to kill Miranda as soon as he landed. As soon as
he entered the Por^ they ran to the Shore rashly, wounded several instead (...)
him, no Authority being su^t to (...) them. Miranda privately with to the
Convent of St. Francis, and sent (...) to offer them as much as could com^ to
every Man's share of that booty, where^th they were appeased. It was not above
(...) Crowns a Man, which they valued above their Honor and Duty.

2. Miranda sailed hence with some small Vessels, and took another Ship at
Goga, and then stood for Castele^e, a Nest of Robbers long since threatened by
the Portugueses. He now coming furiously upon it demolished the Fort, burnt the
Town, and put the Inhabitants to the Sword.

3. Zamori seeing so many Villages on the Coast destroyed by Mathias de
Albuquerque, offered a Peace, Albuquerque was Commissioned to treat of it, he
finding himself still amuzed with Delays, fell again to acts of Hostility,
destroying all the Coast with Fire and Sword. The City of Calicut felt this
Fury, being strongly cannonaded, as were Paracale, Capocaate and Chatua. This
done Mathias went away to Ormuz, of which Place he was appointed Captain,
leaving his Squadron under the Command of D. Giles Yanes Mascarennas, who came
to succeed him with eight Ships.

4. This Year Five Ships set out from Lisbon, two (...) them (...) forced in
again, one was (...) away a^ (...)* two ^ed in India, (...) o^ (...) upon (...)
fought the or for (...) Vessels, and (...) off with Honor.

5. D. H^ome de (...) and Ferdi^ de Mira^a being (...) with their Sq^drons,
took each of them two M^ar S^ps. Both t^se Commanders were go^ (...) Emanu^ de
Saldanna, Captain of (...), against the King of the (...), who (...) over ^he
Camponeses of that Neigh^* These Commanders being joined with 200 Horse, 800
Musketeers, almost 1000 ^laves and Natives, and the King of Sarceta at the
request of the Viceroy with 150 Horse and 500 Foot, they marched with great
difficulty for the great heat and badness of the ways by Agacaim, Manora,
Assarim, and at the end of Fifteen days discovered the City Tavar they sought
for. The City had beautiful Buildings and Gardens, seated on a Hill that
overlooks a very large Plain. The King and Inhabitants being fled, it was
easily burnt with the neighboring Villages, and the Country People and Cattle
carried away.

6. Our Men advancing into narrow Defiles where two could not go abreast, the
King of the Coals with 6000 Men fell upon their Rear, whilst some Parties
annoyed them from the tops of the Hills. Here they were brought into great
danger, and forced to make their utmost Efforts. Many Gentlemen signalized
themselves, and the King of Sarceta appeared always in the greatest danger,
encouraging ^e Men w^h his Sword in hand. At length our Men made their way
through the Defiles, and the K. ^f the Coals defeated, was forced to sue for
Peace, and accept of such a one as we were pleased to grant him.

7. This year began with two great Losses. D. John de Gama sailing from Malaca
toward Goa with his Wife, Children, much Riches, and many Men, lost his Ship
at midnight at Nicobar* Above 50 Persons were lost, and among them, his eldest
Son. Another Son, his Wife, and almost 300 Persons, were saved in an Island not
inhabited. He framed a Barque which held 90, and with great Hardships, after
being made Slaves, they got to Co^him, the rest being left behind till they
could return to fetch them. Simon Ferreyra coming in a Ship richly laden from
China, was cast away in sight of the Coast of Ior. He desired that King to
assist him with some Vessels to save part of the Goods, and the King took them
to himself.

8. D. Giles Yanes Mascarennas, who commanded the Squadron on the Coast of
Malabar, would not seem inferior to his Predecessor. He made such havoc along
that Shore, that nothing was heard but the Cries of the Inhabitants. He twice
set fire to Calicut, Panane, Calegate, Marate, Conche, and the Island Daruti,
not without opposition with great slaughter of the Heathens.

9. They came to the River Cunnale, upon which is a Fort of the same Name, the
Refuge of Pirates subject to the Commander of the Fort. Two Malabar Ships were
standing in, and being attacked by two of ours, the one was taken; in the
other, 50 Men killed by one Ball that swept from Stem to Stern; being boarded,
and almost taken, she ungra^^^ed, and made to the Shore that was covered with
Mores, and defended with Cannon. Tavora, who commanded our Ship, pursued to
save 6 Portugueses who were carried away by the Enemy, till a Cannon Ball
carried away his Leg, of which he died. Of the 6, only one was carried to
Cunnale, who at one stroke cut him in two. The King of Chale, to prevent his
own Ruin, agreed to pay Tribute, assign a place, and furnish Workmen and
Materials to raise a Fort. Mascarennas on his way to Goa, in the River Sal,
burnt the Villages of Aselonor, and those of Cuenti in Salsete.

10. Bracalor, a City seated on the Coast of Canara in almost 14 Degrees of
Latitude, was once one of the most noted places of Trade in India in the form
of a Commonwealth, but much decayed since the Portugueses built a Fort there.
The People of this place observing, that our Commander Francis de Mello and
Sampayo was wholly taken up in heaping Riches, and pleasing his Wife, resolved
to rid themselves of that Clog. They agreed to fall upon, and kill all the
Portugueses taken up with the Procession on Maundy-Thursday, and had effected
it but that Giles Yancz put in there with his Squadron in his way to Goa. (...)
departing on Friday, they prevailed with some Christians to let them into the
Fort on Ever Night. The Design was discovered, and the Conspirators quartered.
Now they resolve to attack it by open force, and joining with their Neighbor
King of Tolar and 5000 Men, burn the outward Town, and bring all into great
danger. The Viceroy having notice, sent Andrew Fur^ado, w^ routed those
Mutiniers, and going up the River made great Havoc along the Shore. Thus the
Fort was secured, but the Officers not justified.

11. The Religious of the Society of Jesus, who have so much labored for the
Conversion of Infidels, had sent some of their Number into the Island Salsete,
which contains 66 Villages of Pagans. These Fathers took great pains, and the
Viceroy D. Antony de Noronha finding the People incorrigible, destroyed all
their Pagods, yet they in the year 1559. taking up Arms, ruined our Churches.

12. This done, they refused to pay the Tribute they owed us, and fell to
destroying the Preachers of the Gospel. At this time F. Rodulphus de Aquaviva
desiring to spread the Faith in the five Villages of Cocolii, went thither with
F. Francis Pacheca and F. Francis Aranna, three Portuguese Soldiers, and some
Natives. The Heathens fell upon them, cut off F. Rodulphus his Legs, and then
his Head. (...) (...) was struck through with a Sp^ ^d then stuck full of
Arrows. The rest were all slain after several (...). The same ^y (...). (...)
d^ Azevedo that went to B^ll with 40 Companions, all suffered Mar^.

13. (...) Fig^yredo Commander of (...), by the Viceroy's Order (...) a great
^laughter of the People of S^, destroyed the^ Habitations* and leftt them not
(...) Tem^ standing* (...) by a wi^ ^tting those into (...) had (...) Father^*
(...) of them; which (...), that (...) of them ^d, new Chr^ C^es w^e erected,
and Crosses (...) the Hills.

14. This was the posturr of Affairs in India, when ^ve Ships arri^ from P^gal,
and in them F. Vi^ de Fouseca a Dominic^* who went to succeed F. Henry de T^ in
the Archbishopric of Goa.

15. Sultan Amodifar the lawful King of ^aya, kept Prisoner by the Mogo^ after
he had ^surped his Kingdom, at this time f^ed by the means of some Women. In
disguise he came to a Baneane at Cambay^, by whom he was conveyed to Iambo, one
who in the late Revolution had secured to himself a Limb of that Empire. He
dutifully owned, and caused him to be owned by others, so that in few days they
gathered an Army, in which there were above 30000 Horse. Behold, how attractive
is the Person of a Prince found after having been lost* In a very short time*
either (...) force or consen^* they recovered most (...) Kingdom of ^aya.

16. Our Viceroy, the better ^o take the advantage of these Confusions* and
hoping thereby to gain Suratte* went ^th 40 Sail to Chaul, and thence sent some
^standing Men to Baroche* then besieged by Am^difar, the Wife and Children of
Xotubidichan, whom he had fraudulently taken and slain being in the Town. T^se
Age^s had Orders to Treat both with the Kin^ and that Woman, without letting
either of them know any Correspondence was field with the other, that so our
Interest might be ^cured with (...) prevailing Party. But the Mogol coming down
with a great Power, and recovering all he had lost, put a stop to the Viceroy's
Proceedings* who returned to Goa much afflicted for the Death of D. John de
Castro. This young Gentleman commanded a Ship of Ferdinand de Miranda's
Squadron, and being parted from him by a Storm, was attacked by two Malabar
Paraos between Tarapor and Maii, and his Powder taking fire, the Ship blew up,
only three of the Men escaping Death to be led into Slavery.

17. Whilst the Viceroy was absent from Goa, many of the principal Subjects of
Hidalcan, provoked by the Insolences of Larvacan his Favorite, resolved to
set up Cu^ocan Son to that Meal, who being Prisoner at Goa, so long kept this
powerful Neighbor in awe. Cufo was at Goa, and the Conspirators contrived how
to get him out, and Larvachan pr^ending to act for them, corrupted the Guards,
and procured his Liberty. This Treachery was managed by an infamous Portuguese,
called James Lope^ Bayam, much in the King's Favor for suchlike Services. Cufo
thinking he went to them that designed to Crown him, found himself in the hands
of Larvacan, who caused his Eyes to be put out.

18. Then came to Goa a Woman of great fame, formerly banished by Hidalcan. She
was about 65 years of Age, little of Stature, of Complexion fair, still showing
the Ruins of Beauty, esteemed a Virgin, and much valued for her Prudence, Wit,
and Courage, for in a Man's Habit (except her Head which was dressed in white)
on Horseback with a Bow and Arrow she followed the Army like an Amazon, and
gained Reputation. Her Name Abchi. She pretended to Treat with the Viceroy
about important Affairs, which were never known. She was taken by the
Inquisition, banished to Ormuz, and thence fled to the Mogol.

19. Zamori now tired with so much Destruction, and the Clamours of his
Subjects, his own Palace in Calicut being burnt by D. Giles Yanez, and all that
lay without the Town, at last sued for Peace, and concluded it on such Terms as
we thought fit.

20. At Cochim, that King having assigned over all the Customs to the
Portugueses, the People rose to the number of 20000, swearing on a Mass Book to
die in defense of their Liberties hereby infringed. D. George de Meneses
Baroche, who commanded there, finding the Tumult too high to be opposed,
suspended the Execution of the Viceroy's Orders relating to this Affair.

21. D. Giles Yanez Mascarennas being appointed to go to Cochim to endeavor to
suppress that Tumult, was ordered by the Viceroy by the way to destroy the
Nayque of Sanguicer, who having raised a Fort on the River of that Name,
protected Pirates to our great loss. He had 14 Sail with 300 of the choice Men
of Goa.

22. D. Giles run up the River, and the better to come where he desired, went
out of his Galeon into a small Vessel, and run so far between the Rocks that he
could not get out, and his Stem lay almost on the Shore. Those of Sanguicer
poured in their Shot, so that all his Men left him where he was killed, the
other Vessels being no way able to relieve him.

23. James de Azambuja, Commander of Tidore, was driven to great streights,
because no Relief came from Malaca, Ferdinand Ortis de Tavora designed thither,
having been stopped by the coming of the King of Achem upon that City. He
understood by Santiago de Vera Governor of the Philippine Islands, that King
Philip was Proclaimed in Portugal, and therefore asked Succor of him, who sent
ten Sail commanded by D. John Ronquillo This was not only a Supply of
Ammunition, for the Spaniards were assisting to him with their Persons,
especially by taking some Vessels of Iava, that to our loss used that Port.
Babu King of Ternate dying, left his Bastard Son Bozai possessed of the Crown,
though he had a lawful Heir, who wanting Power lost his Right: For seldom does
Right prevail where Force is wanting.

24. About this time the Great Turk sent Mahomet Bassa with 12000 Horse, many
Pioniers, much Artillery and Money, to secure his late Conquests in Persia. Xa
Codabanda joining with Semecombel, the Georgian met him with a moderate Army,
and as he was fording a River cut off many of his Horse, and caused 40000 Foot
to be drowned. The Persians and Georgians got not only the Victory, but much
Riches.

25. Persia was now in a great confusion, for the Georgian Mirsa Salmas,
Son-in-Law and Favorite to Xa, persuaded him, that his Son Abax Mirsa King of
Ceorazone styled himself Emperor of Persia, and caused him to Arm against him.
The Emperor marched against his Son, cutting off the Heads of many principal
Men, till he came to the City Hers built by Tamerlan the Great, and now the
Court of the innocent Abax, who^ not knowing the cause of this his Father's
motion, had fortified himself. But now coming before his Father and clearing
himself, the wicked Salmas his Head was cut off in his presence. The Turk
taking this advantage, sent the Bassa Ferabat with 100000 Horse, and much
Money, to conquer the Province of Raviam. He did much harm there, and had done
much more, but that the Emperor reconciled to his Son, put a stop to his
Current.

27. Now arrives in India D. Duarte de Meneses, who went to succeed the Viceroy
D. Francis, who delivered up the Sword, after having held it three Years, being
the 16th Viceroy, and 31th in the number of Governors, and Third of the Name
and Surname.

CHAP. III.
The Government of the Viceroy D. Duarte de Meneses, from the Year 1584 till
1588.

1. D. Duarte de Meneses, though of great Quality, yet was better known by his
Valor, which moved the King to make choice of him without any Recommendations
or Pretensions of his, not doubting he would be as successful in India as he
had been in Tangier. He had six Ships and a prosperous Voyage.

2. The first thing he applied himself to was the appeasing the Tumults at
Cochin. The Viceroy D. Francis had sent Commissioners to treat with the Heads
of that People, and they had reduced them to hearken to an Accommodation. D.
Duarte now arriving admits their Proposals, so that the Affair of the
Custom-House was settled. He dispatched the Ships for Lisbon, one whereof was
never heard of. The Viceroy D. Francis returned in one of them.

3. The Viceroy being at Goa treated with the Ambassador of Hidalcan, about
the manner of chastising the Nayque of Sanguicer, for the Death of D. Giles
Yanez, and to prevent Piracy. The Ambassador agreed that Rostican, Governor of
Ponda should assist with Forty Thousand Men by Land, whilst D. Hierome de
Mascarenuas, sent by the Viceroy, attacked the Nayque by Sea.

4. Hierome entering the River, sent up 13 Vessels that rowed, and at break of
Day courageously landed, attacked some Works, killed many of their Defendants,
and took their Cannon. Then they marched to the Town, and the Inhabitants
flying up the Inland, fell into the Hands of Rostican, who, according to
agreement, was upon his March destroying all before him. Next day D. Hierome
landed, and he marching on the one side, and Rostican on the other, they laid
all the Country in Ashes. The Nayque from the Woods sent to implore Mercy,
promising to perform Conditions, if the ruined Country were restored to him,
which was granted.

5. James de Azambuja, Cammander of Tidore, was in great want of Ammunition,
the Governor of Manila sent four Barques to his Relief, commanded by Peter
Sarmiento, who by the way took Possession of the Island Mousel. The King of
Ternate, whose the Island was, resolving to be revenged on three of the Barques
that went for Provisions to Bacham, sent his Brother Cachil Tulo with 24
Galliots to take them. They being abroad on this Design, met two Vessels
belonging to the Philipine Islands that had also brought Relief to Tidore,
commanded by N. de Duenas. He not able to avoid them, attacked the Admiral
Galliot and sunk her, but all the others falling upon the 2 Vessels, in which
were but 12 Spaniards, they were all slain, having fought to admiration, and
killed and wounded many of the Enemy. Tulo proud of this Success, met those he
before looked for, after a desperate fight night parted them, 200 of the
Ternatenses and 8 Spaniards being killed.

6. Then arrived at Tidore Duarte Pereyra with one Galleon, he went to succeed
Azambuja, who instead of resigning the Command, assaulted Pereyra in a House
where he was with his Wife and Family, and all was in great danger, had not the
King interposed. At the same time arrived 400 Spaniards from Manila to assist
Azambuja to recover the Fort of Ternate, but he searing Pereyra in his absence
would take Possession of the Command, resolved to let slip this opportunity.
Pereyra understanding it, and being of another mind, said, Such important
Affairs ought not to be lost upon such Motives; that if the other would go, he
would bear him Company. At length Azembuja set out, accompanied by the Kings of
Tidore, Bacham and Celebes. They landed, though opposed by the Natives,
battered the Fort without effect, lost some Men, and retired to Tidore.

7. The City Tauris, on the Borders of the greater Armenia, at the Foot of the
Mountain Orote, was once the Court of the Kings of Persia, and is now one of
the most famous Places of Trade in the East, rich and plentiful. The Great Turk
desiring to raise a Fort there, sent Osman Bassa with a powerful Army, who
encamped before it on the Banks of a River. The Persian Emperor was ready to
receive him with 70000 Horse, and sent out a Party to engage him, while his Son
Mirazen Mirsa lay in Ambush with 10000 to break out in the heat of the Fight.
The Youth was brave, and performed his Part so well, that at one onset he
killed 7000 Turks, and retired with Honor and Booty. 7000 pursue him, and he
facing them cut off one half of them. Next day the Turks assault the City, but
the Persians sallying, killed 3000 at that time, and again at Night 4000 more.
But the Governor after this abandons the City, yet the Inhabitants stood upon
their defense, and at first made a great slaughter, till overpowered by the
multitude many of them were put to the Sword, their Wives and Daughters abused,
and all plundered.

8. Osman being now in Possession, in a Months time raised a wonderful Fort for
greatness and strength in the Royal Gardens as the most convenient place. Some
of the Turks frequenting the Baths in the City, fell out with some of the
Inhabitants, and being worsted by them, stirred up the whole Army to revenge.
They left no sort of Villainy unessayed, but Murdered, Ravished, Robbed, and
marched out with an unspeakble Treasure. The Prince of Persia in a Rage
obtained of his Father 20000 Horse, and falling upon the Turks, at one time
killed 8000, and soon after 20000. They decamped and began to march, and the
Prince desiring to recover the Treasure they had taken at Tauris, was so
successful, that killing 20000 more he retired with 18000 Camels loaded with
Riches, and an infinite quantity of Arms and Ammunition. He pursues them again,
but Fortune changing, he did less harm than he received, and was forced to
retire with loss of 3000 Persians.

9. Fifteen Years before this time there came upon the Country of Mocambique,
such an Inundation of Cafres, that they could not be numbered. They came from
that Part of Monomotapa where is the great Lake, out of which spring those
great Rivers whose source was formerly unknown, to these were joined the
Cafres, Macabires and Ambei, and other Borderers upon Abissinia. With them came
their Wives and Families as those that sought new Countries to inhabit, their
own not being able to contain them. Their choice Food human Flesh, and for want
of it that of Beasts. They left no other signs of the Towns they passed by, but
the heaps of Ruins and Bones of the Inhabitants. For want of them they eat
their own, beginning by the Sick and Aged, so that doubtless Fathers became
Food to their Children. The Women deformed and hardy, carry their Goods on
their Backs, and in fight use the Bow as dexterously as the Men, these march in
Armor, and wherever they halt fortify themselves.

10. Hierome de Andrade, from the Castle of Tete, sent out a Party of
Musketeers, who firing among that Multitude killed some to their great
astonishment, having never before seen that sort of Arms, that they fled
without looking back; in two Rancounters above 5000 were slain. They stopped
not till they came to the Country of Mocambique, having destroyed all in their
way like a fiery Inundation. This Place was approved of by Mambea, Commander of
about 6000, and he began to build a Fort and Towns two Leagues from Mocambique.
The Fort of Cuama where Nunno Vello Pereyra commanded, was much incommoded by
them, he therefore sent out Antony Rodrigues Pimentel, or Pinto, with 400 Men,
four of them Portugueses, who unexpectedly falling on the Barbarians, slew a
vast number and burnt the Fort, but retiring in disorder, they fell upon and
killed him and all his Men, except three Portugueses and very few Blacks. All
the dead were eaten by the victorious Cafres, except their Heads, Hands and
Feet.

11. Since this Relation has brought us to Mocambique, it will not be amiss to
give some Account of that Country. It is full of Orchards and Fruit Trees,
especially Citron, Limon and Orange Trees, has all sorts of tame and wild
Beasts, as in Europe, an infinite number of Elephants. The People feed on
Indian-Wheat, the Woods are of Ebony, a high Tree, bearing a Leaf like that of
our Apple Trees, the Fruit like Medlars but not eatable; from the Ground upward
it is so covered with Thorns, it is difficult to come to it; where one is cut
down, another never grows; the Bark of it is as susceptible of Fire as tinder.
There is another sort of a yellowish Color that is of value. The best Manna is
produced here. Among the Fish of that River, there is one as devouring as
Crododils; no Man in reach escapes them, but they touch not Women, so great is
the Privilege of that Sex. One of these of a prodigious bigness was taken that
had Gold Rings in the Ears. It was supposed to be some piece of Witchcraft of
the Cafres, to clear the River of those dangerous Monsters. To confirm this
Opinion, Metude a learned Arabian relates in an account of Modern Prodigies,
That about the Year 863, in the Foundation of an Egyptian Temple there was
found a brazen Crocodile with certain Characters, which being broke to pieces
the Crocodils of Nile began to devour Men; whence it was inferred, that was a
Charm upon the Crocodiles.

12. Hatred conceived against the Favorites of Nizamaluco in Canara, brought
the Mogols upon the Kingdom of Verara, who after much Plunder and Desolation
possessed themselves of many Towns and Cities. The occasion was, that the King
being ill of a contagious Distemper, his Favorite Acedecan first, and after
him Calabatecan, kept him up without suffering any Body to see him. The Prince
and People ^ad recourse to Arms to oblige these Tyrants to give them a sight of
the King; and they persuading it was to depose him, so far prevailed, that he
meeting them in hostile manner, made a great slaughter of them, and hereupon
the Mogols were called in to their aid.

13. Five Ships sailed this Year from Lisbon for India, one of them was lost
beyond the Cape of Good-Hope, at the Place called Bajos de la India, a
Promontory that rises with many Points, which at a distance look like Trees; it
is oval and three Leagues in length, and abounds in Coral, which being
naturally soft and white, grows hard and turns green, gray, black and red, but
being pounded to Dust, resumes its whiteness.

14. The Captain with a few Men got into a Boat, and after six Days landed at
Quilimane. About sixty got into another Boat, others put to Sea on Planks,
above two hundred were upon the Rocks expecting to be swallowed by the Sea, or
else scorched by the Sun, or starved to Death.

15. Those in the second Vessel chose Duarte de Melo de Bacaim to command them,
and being over-loaded, were forced the first time to throw Seventeen into the
Sea to save the rest, and, not being light enough, afterward some others,
among which the Lot fell upon one of two Brothers, the youngest whereof freely
leaped overboard, but having swam three Leagues after the Boat, was again taken
up.

16. A Boat built by the Pilot Roderick Migueys contained 40 Men, as they were
under Sail a great Storm arose at Night, and is said to have ceased, by casting
into the Water a piece of the Holy Cross one of them carried. Of 400 Men that
were in the Ship, only these mentioned are known to have escaped.

CHAP. IV.
Continues the Government of D. Duarte de Meneses.

1. THE Viceroy governed India, and his Uncle Ruy Goncalez de Camara him, who
desiring to engross all that was honorable, endangered what was necessary. It
was requisite at the same time to send a Squadron into the Red Sea, and another
to build a Fort at Panane in Malabar, and he would command the one and build
the other. The Work ought to be solid and of Stone, yet the Viceroy agreed it
should be slight and of Wood, that being soon finished Camara might be free to
take the other Command.

2. Camara being come to Panane, advertized Zamori of his Design, and he
consenting, desired him to wait his coming, for he would be present at the
choosing the Ground. He delayed coming, because his Bramenes could not find a
lucky day for him to set out; and Camara being in haste, sent Presents to those
Fortune Tellers, who thereupon presently found a fortunate hour.

4. Zamori being come, the Fort was made of Wood, and the Command of it given
to Ruy Gomez de Gram, who pulled it all down, and built it after another
manner, and of considerable strength. So that Gram built the Fort, and Camara
had the Credit of it.

4. As soon as Camara had, as he thought, finished what Gram believed not
begun, he went aboard his Squadron, which having been ill undertaken came to a
worse end. Too much haste in going to Panane, made him too slow in going to the
Red Sea; and now this slowness in going to Sea was as prejudicial as the haste
in building the Fort. His Squadron consisted of four Galleys, two Galleons, and
twenty other Vessels.

5. Cosme Faya went before to discover, and being deceived by a Xeque in the
Island Camaran, was slain with all his Men. Camara sailing with the Wind at
East, entered the Mouth of the Red Sea, and came to an Anchor in a Bay on the
Coast of Arabia, Eleven Leagues from the City Moca. Some of his Ships were
dispersed, and he designing^o take fresh. Water while he waited for them, sent
some Officers and 60 Soldiers with those that were to take Water. Thirty
Turkish Horse and 500 Foot falling upon them out of an Ambush, killed 5 or 6;
but our Men taking courage stood them eight hours, killing many, till Relief
coming, the Enemy fled. Camara sailed thence to find his scattered Fleet, he
found and lost them again, and after suffering much, chiefly through want of
Water, he put into Ormu^, without having done any thing.

6. But before his going in, he sent Peter Homem Pereyra with 15 Sail against
the Niquilus, now dangerous Neighbors, who hindered the carrying of Provisions
to Ormuz, from whence 5 Vessels more were sent him, with which he made up 600
Men, many of them Men of Note. Scarce were they landed, when the Enemy rising
from an Ambush fell on them with such fury, that breaking those who were drawn
up, and hindering the others from forming themselves, they slew 250, forcing
the rest to swim to their Vessels, many whereof were drowned. This was one of
the greatest and most shameful Losses we sustained in India.

7. The pretense for sending this Squadron to the Red Sea, was to fight the
Turkish Galleys that were to set out from Moca, whereas in truth there were no
such Galleys, and the real design was only to employ Camara, and strengthen his
Pretensions; and whereas he ought to have entered Goa in mourning after such a
Loss, he entered that place with all demonstrations of Joy as if Triumphant, and
had great favor shown him. So fortunate is undeserving Impudence.

8. Nevertheless the pretense of sending out this Squadron was made good by two
rotten Galleys that afterward put to Sea from Moca. One of them so rotten, she
sunk as soon as out of the Port; the other did as much as might have been
expected from a sound Squadron. Of such efficacy is the Valor or Fortune of
one single Man. Such was the More Mir Alibet, who now confirmed the great
Opinion before conceived of his Abilities, for coming before the City Magadano,
he brought it under the subjection of the Great Turk only by telling the
Inhabitants, he was but the Forerunner of a great Fleet that came to conquer
all the Coast of Melinde. At the City Lufiva he took from Rocque de Brito a
rich little Ship that had there put itself under the Protection of the King of
Lamo, who basely betrayed it to the More upon Promise from him of being spared
himself, which Promise the More after broke. The Portugues defended himself
bravely, but was at last put to the Oar, and died at Constantinople.

9. The same happened to another Portugues Ship at Pate. Alibet had thus framed
a Fleet of 20 Pangayo's or small Vessels, and daring much, brought under the
Turkish Subjection the Kings of Ampaza, Pate, Lamo, Mombaca, Calife, Brava,
Iugo, and other Cities. All submitted to the force he gave out followed him,
whereas he might have been destroyed by any Portugues Vessel, for in his Galley
there were but 80 Men, and she was in such a condition, that she sunk in the
Port of Maca before she could be carried home, without any stress of Weather.

10. John Cayado de Gamboa being abroad with some Ships against the Pirates of
the North, found that Caliche Mahomet had a Ship at Surat which he designed to
put out without the Portugueses Leave. Gambo lay to keep him in, and Mahomet
sent him 3000 Ducats underhand to remove, which he took, and therewith in the
Town bought Provisions, whereof he stood in need to continue there. This done,
he returned the Money, letting the More know, He was not a Man that would sell
his Honor, but returned Thanks for supplying him with Provisions whereof he
stood in need, to lay wait for his Ship. The More was amazed, and ashamed to be
so slighted, and lost his Voyage.

11. Some time since, Raju Son of the Tyrant Madune of Ceylon had besieged our
Fort of Columbo, commanded by Emanuel de Sousa Coutinno, who defended it with
Valor. He now again sits down before it, John Correa de Brito being Commander.
But perceiving that his Father, Brothers, and some principal Subjects, were a
hindrance to his wicked Designs, he murdered them all. This was a just Judgment
of God, for his Father Madune had done the same with his own Father and
Brothers; but this was no Excuse for Raju's Cruelty. Having nothing now to
stand in awe of but his Mother-in-Law, a venerable Matron, who had tenderly
bred him as her own, he caused her to be stripped before him, and sent into
Banishment, where she died with grief.

12. The Tyrant began to turn his Fury upon the Portugueses, and they, though
but few, engaged a Body of 4000 of his Men, killed 800 of them, and their
Commander Pali^da, on the day of the Invention of the Holy Cross in May, which
therefore was established an annual Feast in that Place. Raju had yet a Nephew
that gave him some jealousy, he sent for him to a Village where he the
resided. The Message was full of Kindness, but the young Man well understood
the smiles of Tyrants are fatal, and that the hour he went to him would be the
last of his Life. He therefore with a pleasing Countenance entertained the
Messengers (who had orders to carry him by force if he refused) and preparing a
Dose of most strong Poison, went with it where his Wives, Children and Family
were. After exhorting them to die courageously, he drank first, and then
offered it to each of them, whereof not one refused to bear him Company in
Death. The Messengers weary of staying, went in and found them all dead.

13. The Great Turk understanding his Fort lately built at Tabris in Perfia
wanted to be supplied, and desiring to raise another in the City Gonsar; to
effect both, sent the Bassa Ferat with 160000 Horse. The Persian having notice
hereof, ordered Ho^alican, Governor of Gousar, to go and treat with the
Georgians his Neighbors to bring them to his assistance. He sent the Prince
with 20000 Hor^ to secure Gansar, and ^e with the rest of his Army sat down
before Tabris, and reduced the Turks in Garrison there to the last Extremities.

14. The Prince (not long before the Terror of the Turks) was overcome by the
Beauty of the absent Governor's Daughter, and enjoyed her. Advice being given
the Father, he concluded hastily, but to content the Affair he was sent to; and
dissembling with the Prince, bribed his Barber with 20000 Crowns to cut his
Throat as he shaved him. He did it, and was torn in pieces by the Servants.

15. The Death of the Prince, who was the Terror of the Turks, endangered the
whole Persian Empire, and so Ferat, without any Opposition, relieved Tabris and
raised the Fort at Gansar, giving the Command thereof to Chedar Bassa, by Birth
a Portugues. Gansar is one of the most populous and beautiful Cities of Media,
divided from the Province of Xeinam by the River Lirus, which the Turks call
Cur. The Persian Emperor was shut up in the City Casby, and the offended
Governor conspiring with others, resolved to set up Tamas Mirsa, the King's
Third Son, who was blind. But Abas Mirsa, who was the Second, and then governed
Coerazone, being the lawful Successor, took Arms to oppose them. The Rebels
thought to take him by Treachery, but he dexterously apprehending the Heads,
put them to Death, and prepared to March and Depose his Father.

16. The old Man fearing he would kill him, hauging a Sword about his Neck, and
leading his third and fourth Sons, presented himself to Abas Mirsa, saying, He
would save him the trouble of looking for his Father or Brothers, if he desired
to Murder them, for there he had brought both them and the Sword The Youth
vanquished with that miserable Spectacle, cast himself at his Father's Feet,
and said, He was his Father, his Lord and his ^ing; but since his Age and
Infirmities would not permit him to do it, he begged he might be allowed to put
a stop to the Ruin tha^ threatened their Affairs, not as a King (for only his
Father should be so whilst he lived) but as General of his Army. The old Man
took comfort hereat, and the Son marched to curb the Fury of the Usbeques, who,
led by their King, in great numbers had broke into Corazone.

17. In the Moluco Islands the Kings of Tidore and Ternate were at War, for
that the latter refused the former his Sister that he had promised to give him
to Wife. At that time arrived there N. de Brito with one Galeon from Malaca,
and Orders to treat with the King of Ternate about restoring the Port. He
carried a Letter for him from King Philip, and another from the Viceroy, and a
Present that rather offended than obliged him, for though but of small value,
it was not to be given him unless he performed what was proposed. Whilst he
knew not this Condition, he agreed with the Portugueses and King of Tidore; but
as soon as it was made known to him, broke off in such a Passion, that he
ordered no Portugueses should enter the City unless they came barefooted.

18. James de Azambuja now gave up that Command to Duarte Pereyra, who came
from Manilla, where he had stayed for that Post. He agreed with the King of
Ternate, who fearing his Uncle Mandraxa, the rightful Heir of that Crown, would
deprive him of it, perfidiously killed him. That Prince was in love with his
Niece, the King's Sister, who had promised her to him of Tidore, and seeing
that Promise, hindered him from giving her to his Uncle, agreed with him he
should steal her, that so there might be a plausible excuse made to the other.
Mandraxa had scarce possessed himself of the Bride, when the King accused him
of this Violence, whereupon he was condemned to perpetual Imprisonment, but the
Nephew caused him to be stabbed, and married his Sister to the King of Gilolo.
The King of Tidore resolved to be revenged of this Affront, and consulting with
Duarte Pereyra, they agreed to contrive the Death of the King of Ternate, by
the means of his Uncle Cachil Tulo, offering him the Kingdom. He approved of
the Proposal, and they concluded on the manner of doing of it.

19. Rajale, King of the City Ior, offended that a Vessel of his had been sunk
at Malaca, though they made him satisfaction, studied Revenge, hindering the
resort of Provisions to that place. D. Hierom de Azevedo, who came to be
Admiral of those Seas, sent Peter Vello to burn a Town near Ior with 8 Ships.
He executed it, but the Enemies Fleet meeting him on his return, he was beaten,
lost 4 Vessels, and had lost all but that Peter da Cuma Carneyro coming up with
his Galeon, bravely brought him off. Rajale thinking himself Victorious,
appeared in the River Malaca with 100 Sail, but this Bravade cost him dear,
much harm being done him as he drew off by our Fleet.

20. Paul Diaz at Angola prosecuted the War against that King with his usual
success; the King was in the Field with 600000 fighting Men, whom he put to
flight with little more than 100 Portuguses; and a number of Blacks.

21. The beginning of this Year sailed from Lisbon for India 6 Ships, one of
them by the way had a sharp Engagement with two English Vessels in one Degree
and an half of North Latitude. In these Ships went Orders for erecting the
Court of Chancery at Goa. The Portugueses of India had sued for it, being
pestered with Lawsuits, and they begged Locusts, for now they beg for Mercy
being devoured by Lawyers. Two of the Ships that went from India this Year were
lost, the Men and Goods saved. By the way died the Archbishop F. Vincent, who
left his Archbishopric, being no longer able to bear with the Viceroy,
Ministers, and even with the Churchmen. He said, He came to inform the King
and the Pope; the Accusation ended with his Death. One of the Ships about the
Islands Azores was taken by Sir Francis Drake, who using honorably of his
Victory, gave the Captain and his Men a Galeon, in which they came to Lisbon.

22. About this time many Pirates put to Sea from the Fort of Cunnale, who
scouring all that Coast, killed and took many Portugueses. These in the Dungeon
were kept several days from starving by a Mouse, for that Creature having made
a hole through the Wall into a place where there was much Rice, every Night
caused as much to fall through that hole as kept them alive. Emanuel de
Oliveyra, one of these Slaves, being asked by Cunnale, Whether any of them
would fight one of his Men? Answered, He would challenge any two. Cunnale
replied, If he would turn Mohammedan, he should have great Favors bestowed upon
him; and several times endeavored to prevail by kindnesses, and then again by
Threats, but all to no effect; for Oliveyra declared, He would rather Die, than
forsake the Faith; and accordingly had his Head cut off upon the Shore, and
gained a Crown of Martyrdom.

23. The King of Melinde, always most faithful to us since our first
Discoveries in Afia, advertised the Viceroy how prejudicial to our Affairs,
what Mir Alibet had done with the Gall^ of M^ca; would prove. And (...), this
was a great ^ep toward the (...) ^sign of possessing himself of the Mines
(...) (...) and Cuo^, the King of (...) having given (...) leave to raise a
Fort ^re. The Viceroy hereupon cons^ted the Men of most Experience in those
A^ts, the Resolution was, That a confiderable Fleet must be sent to stop their
further Progress. Eighteen Sai^ were fitted out, and the Command of them given
to Martin Alfonso de Melo Pombeyro.

24. They came to an Anchor in the Port of (...), beca^e that being the first
place that offended, it was thought ^it to punish it first, as also because
that King relying on his Fortifications, and 4000 Armed Men, had executed John
Rabelo for not renouncing the Christian Faith. Our Men assaulted the Town in
two Bodies, the first met great opposition, and slew the King, then making
their way, both Parties entered the Town, sparing neither Women nor Children.
The Town and Vessels in the Port were burnt, whilst the Woods were cut down.
Ten days were spent in destroying all, with the loss of only four Men on our
part.

25. The King of Pate seeing this Ruin, submitted, he of Lusiva fled to the
Mountains, and our Admiral gave this Kingdom to a Matron, who had been deposed
by him, that fled and came now to plead her Right. The King of Mombaca at first
made show as if he would oppose us, having got together 7000 Men, but
afterward fled out of the Island, and from the top of a Mountain beheld the
Flames that consumed his City. Our Admiral set sail for Orm^z, according to his
Orders, and sent to advertise the King of what he had done, and by the way
saved a Ship of the former Fleet that was just sinking. The Admiral died at
Ormuz, and another went to raise the Fort at Ma^eate, who finished it.

26. The Commander of Mocambique, D. George de Meneses, was not idle, but still
employed against the Mores, who endeavored to settle themselves in the Trade
of those parts of the Island Madagascar, that lay opposite to him. Many of ours
were slain, and among them F. John of St. Thomas, a Dominican, who preached the
Faith to those Infidels.

CHAP. V.
Continues the Government of D. Duarte de Meneses.

1. THE King of Ujantana took many of our Ships, and hindered the carrying of
Provisions to Malaca, insomuch that Famine raged there to such a degree, that
100 died in one day, and Mothers cast away their Children for want of Food. The
Mana^cabo's, a Neighboring People, contributed much to this Misery, destroying
what grew about the Town, and hindered the Country People from bringing in any
Supplies.

2. James de Azambuj^ lately come from the Molucos, marched against them with
100 Portugu^ and 600 Mal^yes, whereof 400 were Musketeers. With great labor
they came to the Town of Nam, where they met 2000 of the Enemy. D. Emanuel de
Almada charged them with half our Men, and driving them out of the Field,
pursued them into their Works, which he cleared with gr^t slaughter. Thence our
Men proceeded to Bombo, where the King of Ior had a Fort, which the Commander
forsook, and the Inhabitants submitted* pleading they had no hand in what was
done to our prejudice.

3. The King of Ac^ seeing Mala^ distressed had provided a Fleet of 300 Sail to
fall upon it, and was ready to set out, when his General Moratiza, who had long
since designed to usurp that Crown, murdered him, the Queen and Chief of the
Nobility, and stayed at home to secure his usurped Kingdom, which was the
saving of Malaca. But Rajale setting Sail from his Port of Ior, entered the
River of Malaca with 120 Vessels, in which were 6000 Men. John de Silva, who
commanded in the Town, and D. Antony de Noronna at Sea, both applied themselves
with all diligence to the Preservation of that place.

4. The Enemy attempting to Land in two Places, were drove back to their Ships
with great loss, and many of them drowned, our Ships with their Cannon sunk two
of theirs, and did good Execution: In the Church of the Cap^ is said to have
been seen a Friar driving out the Enemies, who not appearing afterward, was
supposed to be St. Francis. The Commander stood at the Gate buying the Heads of
the Enemies at 20 Crowns each.

5. D. Hierome de Azevedo cruising about Romania, took and sunk some Ships
which proved some ease to Malaca. The City of Cochim sent thither plentiful and
speedy relief. John de Silva the Commander, whether through any other Accident
or Grief of the Miseries he saw there, is not known, ran mad. The Bishop took
upon him the Government. Bacaim, Chaul and Goa, sent the Viceroy Money to
relieve this City, the latter desiring that D. Paul de Lima might command the
Squadron to be sent thither, and Malaca having desired the same, the Viceroy
consented to it.

6. D. Paul de Lima set Sail with 500 Men in two Galleys, three Galleons, four
Galliots, and seven other Vessels. In their way to Malaca they suffered much
for want of Water, and got some, though with danger, on the Shores of Achem,
where they took some Ships, killed many Men, and made several Prisoners, but
particularly Rajale's Ambassador, who was there to incite that our professed
Enemy to join with him against us.

7. Before D. Paul could come up, some of his Ships joined those commanded by
D. Antony de Noronna before I^r. The Enemies Fleet attacked them, and at the
first Charge of our Cannon fled again, two of them were tak^. D. Antony seeking
to-gather his Squadron, found his Men battering the Fort of Curi^, ^ed above
the Water, with Thirty Pieces of C^, and Two hundred, many of the Defendants
were slain, the rest fled. Antony de Andria landing, brought off the Cannon,
leaving the Fort in a Flame. Then they fir^ some Shipping and the Suburbs, and
r^tired to their Ships with much Booty and many Prisoners.

8. This Success made D. Antony de Noronna believe it was easy to take the
City, if he assaulted it in the Morning. Ambitious of gaining this Honor, and
contrary to the Opinion of the Captains, he Assaults the City with only 200
Men, knowing there were 12000 within, and the Walls at every step planted with
Cannon. Nevertheless he entered it, but had lost his Life, had not D. Paul de
Lima's Captains snatched him out of the Enemies Hands, being penned up between
Palisades with only Seventeen Soldiers, and gained him time to retire to his
Ships.

9. The City I^r is seated on the height of a Point of Land in the Country of
Malaca, in one degree and half of North Latitude, not far distant from the
Shore, girt with thick Walls, though of Wood, yet strong, being composed of
vast Beams well knit together; at small distances are Bastions all well stored
with Artillery, and defended by great numbers of Malays, Manancabo's, and
Islanders of Iava and other Warlike Places, some of them commanded by their
Kings, as those of Tringale, Dragut, Campar, and others. The River adds much to
this strength, embracing the City with two Arms.

11. D. Paul being come, consulted the manner of attempting the place, and
began a Battery with good success. The Enemies Fleet endeavored a Diversion,
but in vain. The Battery was continued till the day of the Assumption of our B.
Lady, to which D. Paul had a peculiar Devotion.

11. The morning of that day he landed 600 Portugueses in three Bodies. D.
Antony de Noronna, who led one, had a hot Dispute about landing with a Number
of the Enemies Musketeers, who being repulsed, still rallied; but at length our
Men made their way to attempt the Town, where some of them were killed,
endeavoring to force a passage where there was none.

12. In the mean while D. Paul cutting through 2000 of the Enemy in a Wood,
joined D. Antony, and both together broke into the City. The Enemy no longer
able to sustain our Fury, gave way, and was pursued by those two Bodies into
the City. The third of our Battalions had the same success in getting in, and
with equal danger, being charged by one of the Kings upon an Elephant with a
strong and resolute Party. But the Beast being shot by D. Nunno Alvarez Pereyra
so disordered them, that our Men had the opportunity to advance.

13. The Fight was very desperate in the Streets, many Arrows and Darts flying
from the Windows; yet our Men advanced till they came to the place where the
King was with his Allies, and there the Battle was renewed. D. Paul encouraged
his Men, not only with Words, but with his Example, leading them on with Sword
in hand.

14. After 6 hours Combat, the fortune of the Day still seemed dubious, till
Matias Pereyra, who had only 15 Men left with him of 150, attacked and entered
the Fort Botabato, which gave new Life to our Men almost spent with continual
Labor.

15. Luis Martines Pereyra, who was left to command the Fleet, ceased not
battering the Town, hearing only the noise of the Fight, and seeing the Enemies
Colors upon the Walls, but seeing the Christian set up on the Fort Cotabato,
he desisted. The Kings also discovering them, and other signs of their Ruin,
mounted on Elephants with their Wives, and fled up the Inland.

16. After the Victory the City was fired, which being great, and of
combustible matter, raised a terrible Flame. Many People were burnt, chiefly
Women and Children, who in the Confusion could not escape. The Booty was very
great, the Prisoners many, and the number of Slain by the Portugueses amounted
to 4000, besides near 3000 killed by those that came to assist Rajale when they
saw he was defeated; on our side 80 were lost. Almost 1000 Pieces of Cannon
were found, some very large, 1500 Muskets, and 2200 Vessels. D. Paul of all the
Booty took to himself only an Image of our B. Lady, found by a Soldier in the
Wood where he was first engaged.

17. The City Malaca resolved to receive D. Paul in Triumph; D. Antony de
Noronna, for the share he had in this Victory, desired he would let him go by
his Side, and he replied, Gloriam mea^ alteri non dabo. D. Antony offended
hereat, acquainted his Soldiers, and they resolved to anticipate the Triumph.
They landed with found of Drums, Trumpets, and noise of Cannon, and covering
the way with their Clothes, led him to the Church. D. Paul landed in the same
manner he had done at Ior, was received by the Religious Orders with their
Crosses, and singing, placed under a Canopy, and crowned by the Bishop with a
Garland of Roses and Flowers.

CHAP. VI.
The End of the Government of D. Duarte de Meneses.

1. THE Tyrant Raju resolving to possess himself of our Fort of Colombo in C^,
to this effect gathered ^0000 fighting Men, 60000 Pioniers, and near as many
Artificers and other Laborers; 2200 Elephants, 40000 Oxen, 150 Pieces of C^on,
50000 Axes, Shovels, Pick^s, and Spades; an innumerable quantity of spare Arms
and Tools; two Castles, carried each upon a great Cart with 9 Wheels, and
almost 500 Sail. He thought fit first to consult the Idols about the Success,
and having placed Men behind them, who should say as he had directed them, the
Answer was, That if he would enter Columbo, he m^st shed innocent Blood.

2. The People was astonished at this familiarity between their Prince and
Idols, and he pretending Obedience to the Divine Commands, caused 500 Children
to be snatched from their Mothers Arms, which were all slaughtered, and the
Idols sprinkled with their Blood.

3. Thus prepared, he marched and sat down before the Town, choosing the
Ground he best liked, there being no body to hinder him. Our Commander John de
Brito knowing this Storm was like to fall upon him, had made the best provision
he could. He had but 300 Portugueses, the third part of them useless, being old
Men or Children, and 700 Natives and Slaves, which he posted to the best
advantage about that Wall, the Circumference whereof is very great, reserving
50 to be ready with himself wherever the greatest Danger called. Raju spent a
month in dreining a Lake that on one side secured the Town, about this Work,
and securing some Boats, we had upon that Water, there were many Skirmishes, in
which the Enemy came off with great loss.

4. The Fort was much weakened by the want of that Water, which was the chief
Defense on that side. Our Commander gave Advice of the Danger he was in to the
Neighboring Places. The first that sent Relief was John de Melo Commander of
Manar, it consisted of 40 Men under the Command of his Nephew Ferdinand, and
Ammunition. Ferdinand was posted on the side of the Lake. Whilst Raju prepared
for the Attack, there was a Skirmish between the Besiegers and Besieged, in
which the former lost many Men, and had some of their Works levelled.

5. On the 4th of August, before day, Raju advanced to give the first Assault,
with such silence he could not be heard, and the Darkness was such he could not
have been seen, but the Musketeers lighted Matches discovered them. They laid
their Ladders, and mounted the Bastions St. Michael, St. Goncalo, and St.
Francis, 2000 Pioniers at the same time working below to undermine the Wall,
many of the former were cast down upon these last, and abundance of them in the
Field torn in pieces by our Cannon.

6. All within and without was full of confusion with the Cries of Women and
Children, Groans of Wounded Men, and Noise of Cannon and Elephants. These,
forced to the Walls by their Governors, were again put back with many Wounds,
and did great execution among their own Men. The multitude of the Enemy was
such, no Slaughter seemed to lessen them, fresh Men still succeeding in the
place of the Dead.

7. Our Commander was in all places where the greatest Danger called, and after
a most tedious Dispute, that vast number of Enemies gave way, leaving 400 Men
dead or dying under the Walls. Some few Chingala's, who were retired to the
Fort for fear of the Tyrant, fought as if they had been Portugueses.

8. Twice after this was the Assault renewed, and the Enemy as often repulsed.
The King enraged fortifies himself anew, and provides for another Attack. James
Fernandez Pessoa coming from Negapatan with a Ship of his own was stopped by a
Storm, but came afterward. Antony de Aguiar and Vasconcelos arrived with a
Ship, and comforted the Besieged. The Modeliar of Candea D. John de Austria,
and the Arache D. Alfonso, did great execution among the Barbarians; and a
Soldier called Joseph Fernandez of great strength, threw several of them behind
him for those that followed to kill them, he having before broke his Spear.

9. The City Cochim understanding the danger of Columbo, fitted out 6 Ships
with Men and Ammunition, under the Command of Nuno Alvarez de Atouguia, to
relieve that place. But Raju resolving to prevent all Relief, on the 20th of
August, at night, gave another general Assault both by Sea and Land, so that
Religious Men were forced to play the parts of Officers and Soldiers; and the
Enemy after a great Slaughter was again repulsed in both places.

10. Then came Atouguia with the Relief sent from Cochim; and from St. Thomas
and other places, arrived of their own free will Ferdinand de Lima, Emanuel de
Amaral, and Roderick de Alvarez. Emanuel M^xia rising out of an Ambush fell
upon one Arache, (who the former Siege had killed 29 of our Men) and running
him through with a Spear, brought him to the Fort, where one of our Men cutting
him open at the Heart, drank his Blood. Such was the Hatred they had toward
him, as obliged them to commit this brutal Action. In September arrived a
Galley and 6 Ships, under the Command of Bernardin de Carvallo, sent to their
Assistance by the City of Goa.

11. Before these Ships departed thence, four were come in from Lisbon; five
set out, but one was forced back. These Ships carried new Instructions about
Trade, the King having agreed with Merchants about setting out the India
Squadron. These Instructions were so prejudicial to the Inhabitants of Goa,
that the Viceroy had need of all his Authority, and that of Religious Men to
appease them. All this was the Project of insatiable Ministers of State, who,
for their own interest, will hazard the Ruin of an Empire, on pretense of Zeal
to the Prince.

12. The Relief being come to Columbo, Raju despairing of carrying the Place by
Assault, resolved to undermine it, and had effected it, but that Thomas de
Sousa found out a way to destroy the Miners in the Work. The Tyrant next
applied himself to Treachery, and agreed with some of his Wizards, that
counterfeiting Discontent they should desert to the Town, poison their Water,
and bewitch our Men. These were suspected, put to the Rack, confessed the
Design, and were drowned. While one of these was on the Rack, he uttered some
Words which deprived the Executioners of their Senses, and left them struggling
with Convulsions for 24 hours. Raju afterward sent others, and they were
punished as the former.

13. Treachery failing, he turns again to Force, and causes his Fleet to attack
ours commanded by Thomas de Sousa, who sunk two of his Ships, and took two,
killing most of the Men, and hanging the rest at the Yard. Arms. Of the Enemy
300 were slain, of ours only two private Men. Raju in a rage beheaded the
Captains of his Fleet, because they had not overcome ours. Now arrived Philip
Carneyro with a Ship laden with Ammunition sent by the Viceroy, and Antony de
Brito, and Emanuel de Macedo, Volunteers. The Enemy gave another Assault by
Night with the same Success as the former.

14. At the same time came John Cayado de Gamboa, sent by the Viceroy with a
Galleon and 150 Men, many of them of Note. Our Commander finding himself
strong, sent out Peter Alfonso with a Squadron to destroy all he could along
the Coast. He did so in the Towns of Belicote, Berberii, and Beligao, where,
for haste to take off the Women's Bracelets and Pendants, they cut off their
Hands and Ears, and having made great Havoc in many other places, they
returned with much Booty and Prisoners.

15. But now Sickness threatened to do what Raju with all his Power could not
effect. This Disease began to rage in the Neighboring Towns, and being brought
into the City, the Physicians found no Cure for it. This Year was drier than
any had been known that Age, and that was thought to cause this Malady. The
Doctors opening some that died of it, found their Entrails impostumated, which
they said proceeded from Heat occasioned by that Drought. They then applied
cold and dry Medicines, and the Disease decreased.

16. The Year ended, but not the Siege. In the beginning of January Raju gave
two Assaults, in the last of which the Bastions of St. Sebastian, St. Concalo,
and Santiago, were in great danger; but by the bravery of the Defendants the
Enemy was at length repulsed, having lost many Men, and three Elephants.

17. Mean while our Fleet, again sent out under the Command of Thomas de Sousa,
ruined all along the Coast of Ceylon. He destroyed the Villages of Coscore,
Madania, Guindurem, Gale, Beligao, Mature, and Tanavar, where the Idolaters
were now undeceived, who believed, our Arms could never reach that place by
reason of a Pagod that is there. The Pagod is seated on a Hill not far from the
Town, and at Sea locks like a City. The circumference of it was above a League;
it is richly Vaulted, and the Arches covered with gilded Copper Plates; the
Idols in it were above 1000 on the side Chapels, and large Cloisters. All round
were Streets full of Shops, because People from all Parts resorted to the
Pagod. Sousa entering this Temple, cast down all the Idols, demolished the
curious Workmanship, carried away all that could be removed on Men's backs, and
killed Cows within, which is the greatest Affront can be offered to those
Idolaters.

18. Let us in a few words here perpetuate the Memory of two illustrious
Actions; the one the effect of a sincere Love, the other of true Generosity.
Among the Prisoners taken at Coscore, one was a Bride. As the Ships were ready
to weigh Anchor, there ran suddenly into that where the young Woman was a lusty
Man, and embracing her, and she him, they said many words not understood. By
the help of an Interpreter it was known, that that Man was the Bridegroom, who
being abroad when the Bride was taken, came to be a Slave with her rather than
live without her. And, she said, That since he by that demonstration of Love
had made her happier than all the Chingala Women, (for they were of those
People) she esteemed her Slavery rather a Blessing, than a Misfortune. Sousa
hearing hereof, resolved not to part such real Lovers, and taking hold of both
their hands, said, God forbid two such Lovers for my private Interest should be
made unhappy, Love has sufficiently captivated you, I freely give you your
Liberties. Then he ordered them to be set ashore; but they two seeing his
unexpected Bounty, requited it by despising their Liberties, and replied, They
only desired to be his, and die in his Service. They lived afterward in
Columbo, where the Man on sundry occasions faithfully served the Portugueses.

19. The Viceroy careful of the security of Columbo, sent to the Relief of it
Emanuel de Sousa Continno, and D. Paul de Lima. Scarce did Raju see Sousa enter
that Port, after he had ruined all the Coast and the great City Chilao; and was
informed, that D. Paul was coming, some of his Ships being already in the Port,
but despairing of Success when the B^d least expected it, he decamped, and
b^gan to march away.

20. Yet our Men, not to suffer him to go quietly away, fell upon his Rear, and
in several Skirmishes cut off many of his Men. During this Siege, some say he
lost 10000 Men, others not above half the Number. Many Towns, Cities, Villages,
and Ships, were burnt and destroyed. The Cannon, Prisoners, and other Booty
taken, were considerable. This rendered Raju very contemptible in the Eyes of
those Princes who waited the Success of his Undertakings. On our side were
killed 140 Men, 30 of them Portuguese^. Of the Sickness before mentioned died
500.

21. D. Paul came the day after the Siege was raised. Eight days were spent in
levelling Raju's Works. They repaired the Damage done to the Fort, and
furnished it with 600 Men and Ammunition.

22. The Viceroy, after receiving the joyful News of this Victory, and
honoring Emanuel de Sousa and D. Paul, died of a violent Sickness in the
beginning of May. He was little of Stature, but Graceful, Courageous, Prudent
in Counsel, and of great Authority, a good Latinist, and Italian, and so
addicted to Poetry, that he writ good Verses, a lover of Justice, and free from
Avarice. The Fault laid to his Charge is, that he suffered himself to be
governed by one less capable of Government than himself. He was the 15th
Viceroy, and 32d Governor, for the space of almost four Years, the 2d of the
Name, and 5th of the S^name.

CHAP. VII.
The Government of Emanuel de Sousa Coutinno, from the Year 1588, till 1590.

1. THE Viceroy being dead, and Patents of Succession opened, they first
appointed Matthias de Albuquerque, who was gone for Portugal; the second,
Emanuel de Sousa Coutinno, then present, who took upon him the Government, and
was well qualified for it, as being very brave, and well experienced in the
Affairs of India.

2. Soon after arrived 5 Ships from Portugal. D. Paul de Lima, weary of the
Toils of War, and much more troubled that he was so ill rewarded, resolved to
return to Portugal.

3. The Ships that were homeward bound* being dispatched, D. Paul embarked in
that called The St. Thomas, whereof Stephen de Vega was Captain. On the Coast
of Natal she sprung aleak in the Stern, and a Storm raging she could not be
kept above Water, though they threw over board all the Riches that was in her.

4. The Boat being lanched, all strove to perish in it, because they would have
it hold all that the Ship contained. Several were killed upon this occasion,
and D. Paul standing on the side with his Sword drawn, could no way prevent it.
At length, those that the Boat could not contain returned to the Ship. The
Women were let down, and almost drowned before they were taken in, because it
could not come to the Ship's side. Da. Ioanna de Mendoca going in to it, left
behind a Daughter but two Years old, and calling for her afterward, could not
get her, because the Nurse would not let the Child go unless they would take
her with it.

5. The Boat was not far from the Ship when they saw it swallowed up by the
Sea. It was yet worse, that being over-loaded with 120 Persons, and there being
no other Remedy left, they were forced to throw some into the Sea, who
immediately sunk. The Boat came to the Shore.

6. Ninety eight Persons, Men and Women, landed, several of them Gentlemen of
Note, their Wives, and some Friars, one of which after having confessed, the
People in the Ship would have stayed to die with them, that he might be aiding
to them in that last hour. They marched in good order, a Friar going before
with a Crucifix on high. The Women put themselves into Men's Habit after the
Indian manner, that their Coats might not be a hinderance to them in going.

7. The Place where they landed, by the Portugueses is called, The Country of
the Fumos, by the Natives of the Macomates, being inhabited by Cafres of this
Name. It is in the Latitude of 27 degrees. 20 min. beyond the River of Simon Dote,
50 Leagues South of the Bay of Lorenzo Marquez. All the Land of the Fumos
belongs to the King of Vira^gune, and runs 30 Leagues up the Inland, bordering
on the South with the Country of Moca^apata, the King whereof extends his
Domi^on to the upper part of the River St. Lucia, in the Latitude of ^8 degrees. 15
min. and to the Kingdom of Vambe, that contains a great part of Terra del
Natal. From hence to the Cape of Good Hope there are no King, but Ancozes, or
Lords of Villages. Next the Kingdom of Vira^gune, is that of Innaca, toward
the N. E. to the Point of the Bay S. Laurence, in 25 degrees. 45 min. of South
Latitude, and has two Islands opposite to it called Choambone and S^timuro, the
last not inhabited is the receptacle of the Portugueses that resort thither to
buy Ivory. About the Bay many great Rivers fall into the Sea, as Beligane,
Mannica, Spiritu Santo, Vumo, Anzate, and Angomane. At Vumo died Da Leonor and
her Children, and Emanuel de Sousa was lost. Anzate runs along the edge of vast
inaccessible Mountains covered with Herds of Elephants, the People of a
Gigantick Stature. In the Latitude of 25 degrees the River De l^s Reyes, or Del
Oro, falls into the Sea, West of which are the Kingdoms of (...) and Mannuca.
From this place to Cape Corrientes the Sea makes a great Bay, along which
inhabit the Moeranges, notable Thieves. Opposite to the Point St. Sebastian are
the Islands of Bazaruta, and not far from it the Kingdom of In^abuze, that
reaches to the River I^narigue; then that of Pande, bordering on the other
Mo^nibe, which extends to that of Zavara in the Inland. Near these are the
Kingdoms of Gamba and Mocuraba, next to it is Cape Corrientes.

8. After suffering much Hunger, Thirst, Weariness, and being persecuted by
Thieves, they came to the Town of the King of M^nica, by whom they were
courteously received, and entertained; he offered them to live in his Town, or
in the Island (where we said before the Portugueses used to reside, during the
time of their stay) till such time as Portugues Merchants came thither. They
accepted of the Island, where some died. Being ill accommodated there, they
passed over in Boats to the other side of the Continent, and in the Passage
were parted. Some few got to the Fort of Zofala, others to the King of Innaca's
Town, where were some Portugues Traders, who had also suffered Shipwreck, here
after enduring great Hardships, many died.

9. D. Paul de Lima ended his Days, and was there buried on the Shore. Such as
escaped Death a long time after went over to Goa. Among these were three Women,
Donna Mariana, Donna Ioanna Mendoca, who after led a solitary Life, and Donna
Beatrix, Wife to D. Paul, who carried his Bones to Goa, then went to Portugal,
and Married again at Oporto.

10. Let us return to India. Mir Alibet encouraged by his Success in the Year
1587, set out the beginning of this Summer from Moca with four Galleys, and the
Vessel he had taken from Rocque de Brito at Lamo. He anchored off of Melinde,
and was obliged to remove the first Night by Matthew Mendez de Vasconcelos, who
commanded on that Coast. Our Governor, Emanuel de Sousa Coutinno, understanding
this Pyrate was abroad, sent against him his own Brother Thomas de Sousa
Coutinno with 900 Men in 20 Vessels of several sorts.

11. After a troublesome Voyage he arrived at Mombaca in February, where Mir
Alibet had already fortified himself. Our Fleet passed through the Enemies Fire
up the River, took the four Galleys, killed above 70 Turks, released many
Christians, and took many Prisoners, and 30 Pieces of Cannon.

12. The Muzimba's at this time were on the other side (in such Numbers as
shall be related in the Year 1593) intending to kill and plunder the Moors of
Mombaca. Having from thence with admiration beheld what the Portugueses had
done, their Commander sent to Thomas de Sousa to desire him, That since the
Portugueses were Gods of the Sea, and he of the Land, and they had done their
Work, they would give him leave to begin his. Sousa consented, and they entering
the Island, killed the Moors and Turks, who from the City fled to the Woods.
Many fled to the Ships and were taken in, the rest were cut in pieces to be
eaten by the Muzimbas. Among those that preferred Captivity before Death, was
Mir Alibet, and a Son and Brother of the King of Qualife.

13. Sousa went over to the Island, the King whereof had been a Principal Actor
in this Revolt, and being now in Arms refused to come to him; but D. Bernardin
Coutinno with only one Soldier ran up to the King at the Head of his Men, and
threatening to stab him if any one stirred, brought him away. He, the King of
Qualife's Brother, and two Governors of Pate were beheaded. The King of Sio was
put to the Oar, the rest were all fined. Then our Commander passed over to the
Island Mandra, the People of which Place had told some Portugueses, that only
the Sun Beams could enter there. Yet the Island and Town were entered, the one
wasted, the other levelled with the Ground.

14. Thus Sousa brought all that Coast under Subjection, and was received at
Goa with great applause. Mir Alibet was brought to Portugal where he died a
Christian.

15. About the end of the Year arrived in India five Ships from Portugal.

16. It is not my Intention to relate only what is honorable of the Portugues,
I will here set down four ridiculous and destructive Actions of theirs. The
first was thus: The King of Banguel our Friend, desiring to destroy a Wood
belonging to an Enemy of his, desired our Admiral of the Coast of Calicut to
assist him with 300 Men, to guard those that cut down the Wood. They were sent,
and instead of securing him, so dispersed themselves in the Wood, that the
Enemy taking the advantage cut them all off. The second; A Portugues Galley
meeting some Pirates of Cangane pursued them with Scoffs, scorning to take up
Arms against them, and they turning upon the Galley entered it, and put all the
Men to the Sword.

17. The third; The Admiral that was so unfortunate in the Red Sea in the Year
1586, having now taken a rich Ship of Meca and killed the Captain, ordered the
Moors in her (as if it had been one of his Galleons) to follow the Admiral's
Light. They as soon as it was night fled, and he being ashamed to be so
deceived, endeavored to excuse himself by saying, The Jesuits had advised him
so to do, as if that were any Justification of his Folly. The fourth; Seven
hundred Portugueses from Chatigam, took a Town, and being in it, a Cannon that
was hid accidentally took fire, and they without examining further, fled to
their Ships in such a Consternation, that one single Moor durst follow them
throwing of Stones.

18. Two of our Galleys going to Chaul, to bring an Ambassador sent by the
Mogol, were set upon at the River of Carapatan, Eighteen Leagues from Goa, by a
great Squadron of Malabars, commanded by the famous Moor Castamuza. After a
tedious fight, the Enemy left them in such a Condition, that only their
departure could have saved our Men, who may be said to have had the Victory,
because they kept the Field.

19. In May 1591, Matthias de Albuquerque arrived in India alone, having set
out of ^bon with five Ships, four whereof were driven back to Portugal. He went
to succeed Emanuel de Sousa with the Title of Viceroy. Sousa having given up
the Sword, Embarked for Portugal on the greatest Ship that had ever been seen
on the Ocean, and vastly Rich, and was cast away on the Sands of Garaj^o,
nothing that was in the Ship being saved. This Ship made up the number of 22
lost in this Voyage between the Years 1579, and 1591, a great loss for so short
a time, and may be attributed to two Causes, the over-loading, and making them
too big, both faults proceeding from Covetousness.

20. In fine, Emanuel de Sousa Coutinno was born in the Village de los
Arneyros, in the Diocese of Lamego, and was a Gentleman, might make the Place
of his Birth honorable. He was the 33th Governor, first of the Name, and
second of both Sirnames.

CHAP. VIII.
The Government of the Viceroy Mathias de Albuquerque, from the Year 1591 till
1597.

1. MAthias de Albuquerque, a Gentleman well deserving this Command, was before
named for this Govermnent by the Patents of Succession, but being come for
Portugal when they were opened was again here appointed with the Title of
Viceroy. The Season was so far advanced, it was generally believed he could
not go through, but he caused himself to be Painted on his Colors standing
upon Fortune, and setting them up in his Ship, said, He would perform the
Voyage in spite of her, and did it. About the time he entered upon the
Government, there sailed from Lisbon James Pereyra Tibao in a small Ship, and
in December Ruy Gomez de Gram in a Galleon, and Gaspar Fagundez in a Caravel,
who were to be in India about the middle of this Year we now enter upon, and
about the end of it arrived there four Ships, that set out about the beginning.

2. The Viceroy understanding that the King of Iafanapatan assisted him of
Candea against, and delighted in Persecuting such as embraced the Christian
Religion, calling himself King of Kings, sent against him Andrew Furtado, that
great Commander, with 20 Sail.

3. Off of Calicut he met three Ships of Meca, after a hot Engagement he sunk
two and took one. Then he sailed in search of the Pirat Cotimuza, Nephew and
Admiral to Cunnale, who with 14 (some say 22) Galleys, was become absolute on
the Coast of Coromandel, had taken several of our Ships, and designed to take
from us the Forts of Columbo and Manar. At the Mouth of the River Cardiva,
Furtado met and fought him, and he having behaved himself well escaped by
swimming, leaving us possessed of his whole Fleet. It is pity we want the
Particulars of this fine Action.

4. Our Admiral after this Victory entering the Port of Manar, found there a
great Fleet, and made himself Master of it, many of the Men swimming ashore to
join the King's Army. Furtado Lands and marches toward the Town, which was well
fortified, manned and provided. He assaults the Works, and drives the
Defendants into the Town, whence the King with severe Language made his
Commander return to Charge the Portugueses, without harkening to the Advice he
gave him to shift for himself, because they would soon be in his Palace. The
General returned, and was killed with all his Men. The Portugueses advancing,
slew the King and his eldest Son, his younger Brother casting himself at
Furtado's Feet begged his Life, which was granted him, and the Government of
that Kingdom, till the Viceroy should order it otherwise. He was afterward
made King upon reasonable Terms.

5. At this time Cunnale Marcar, a Subject of the King of Calicut, successfully
scoured that Coast with a good Squadron. Against him the Viceroy sent D.
Alvaro de Abranchez with a considerable Fleet. F. Francis da Co^a was then
Prisoner at the Court of Zamori, who inclined that Prince to treat of Peace
with the Portugueses, and to that effect sent the same Father to D. Alvaro, who
was then in that Sea. D. Alvaro sent him to the Viceroy, the Peace was
concluded to the content of both Parties, and Zamori not only released all the
Slaves in his Kingdom, but encouraged the Jesuits to build a Church, himself
laying the first Stone.

6. The beginning of this Year sailed from Lisbon four Ships, two whereof we
shall see miserably perish, at the latter end of the Year following.

7. Let us go to Mocambique, where there happened a great loss. Our Commander
of Tete had some Skirmishes with the Cafres our Enemies. Tete is a Fort of that
Authority, that all the Neighbors for three Leagues about, divided under
eleven Captains, obey the Commander of it, as each does their own, and upon the
least signal given resort thither, to the number of 2000 armed Men. With these
Cafres, and some Portugueses, he marched against Quisura, Captain of the Munbo
Cafres, who was at Chicarongo. Six hundred of these gave him Battle, and were
cut off every Man of them, whereby many Prisoners were released, who were to
have been slaughtered like Cattle for the Shambles, theirs being of human
Flesh. The Tyrant Quisura was also killed, who used to pave the way to his
Habitation with the Sculls of those he had overcome.

8. Andrew de Santiago, Commander of the Fort of Sena, designing as much
against the Muzimba's, found them so well fortified, he was obliged to send to
Peter Fernandes de Chaves, Commander of Tete, for aid. Chaves marched with some
Portugues Musketeers and the Cafres under his Command; but the Muzimba's being
informed of it, and fearing the Conjunction of those Forces, fell upon him so
unexpectedly, that they slew him and all his Portugueses, being advanced before
their Cafres, who thereby had time to retire. The Victors quartered the dead
for Food, and returned with them to their Works. F. Nicholas of the Rosary, a
Dominican, was reserved from this general slaughter, and after shot to death
with Arrows.

9. Next day the Muzimba's marched out of their Works after their Leader, who
had put on the Casula, or Vestment taken from the martyred Priest, and holding
a Dart in his Right hand, and the Chalice in the Left. The Men carried the
Commander of Tete's Head on a Spear, and the Quarters of the Portugueses on
their Backs. Andrew de Santiago astonished at that Sight thought to retire by
Night, but the Enemy falling upon him he was killed with most of his Men; so
that in both Actions above 130 of them were cut in pieces, to be buried in
those Barbarians Bellies.

10. D. Peter de Sousa, Commander of Mocambique, under whose Jurisdiction Tete
is, set out with 200 Portugueses and 1500 Cafres, to take Revenge on these
Munzimba's. He battered their Works, but with no success, and endeavoring to
Scale them was repulsed. Being likely to succeed, by raising Gabions as high as
their Trenches, he was prevented by some cowardly Portugueses, who, to hide
their fear, pretended the Fort of Sena was in danger. Our Commander drawing off
to relieve it, was attacked by the Muzimba's, lost many of his Men, the Cannon
and other Booty. Yet the Enemy offered a Peace, which was concluded.

11. Soon after one of these Muzimba's marching Eastward, gathered 15000 Men,
and killing all in his way that had Life, set down before Quiloa, which he
entered by the Treachery of one of the Inhabitants, and put them all to the
Sword.

12. This done, he caused the Traitor and all his Family in his presence to be
cast into the River, saying, It was not fit such base People, who betrayed
their Country, should be spared, nor yet eaten, because they were venomous,
therefore he cast them to be Food for the Fish. So odious is Treason even among
Barbarians. He designed to have done the same at Melinde, but that King,
assisted by 30 Portugueses, withstood him till 3000 of the Mosseguejo Cafres
coming to the Relief of Melinde, the Muzimba's were so slaughtered, that of all
that Army only 100 escaped with the general, after they had ravaged 300
Leagues. Behold the Chalice of this Muzimba.

13. Ma^hew Mendez de Vasconcelos by force of Arms re-established the King of
the Island Pemba, expelled by his Subjects; and they soon after, provoked by
the Villainies of the Portugueses, forced him and them to fly to Mombaca, after
having killed many, and deprived the rest of the hope of ever returning to that
Island.

14. Let us return to India. Melique had a City opposite to Chaul, and of the
same Name, full of Moors, and of great Trade as being a good Port, and famous
for weaving of Silks. The Commander of it was an Eunuch, once a Slave to the
Portugueses, now to Melique. This Man posted himself on that noted Height,
called Morro, with 4000 Horse and 7000 Foot. Morro is a Promontory over the
Sea, and this runs down to the Shore of Chaul which lies to the Northward of
it, the River running between them.

15. They terrified the Portugueses of Chaul, and destroyed them with 65 large
Cannon they played from that Elevation. This motion was made by Nizamaluco
contrary to the Peace establi^d when Francis Barreto governed, and he justified
it with Complaints against Matthias de Albuquerque.

16. This Siege was commenced in April, when Winter begins, at a time the Moors
infested the Lands of Bacaim, and some Horse, those of Chaul. Small Vessels did
great harm along the Coast, but much more was sustained in the City from the
Cannon. Then came 14 Mogols to be present at the taking of the Portugueses,
which they held as a thing certain, but being assaulted by some of our Men, 9
were killed, 2 taken, and the other 3 fled. The Eunuch Taladar escaped being
taken, and died of his Wounds, as did a Turk that succeeded him in the Command.
After him, that Post fell to Faratecan.

17. He with continual Batteries gave our Men no respite. About 1000 withstood
his Power, till D. Alvaro de Abranches brought 300 from Bacaim, and another 200
from Salsete. They now made up 1500 Portugueses, and a like number of such
faithful Slaves, that they received the Wounds themselves to protect their
Masters. Having appointed a day to attack the Enemy, they all confessed
themselves, and then went up the River in several Vessels.

18, The Portugueses, beyond all expectation, made their way to the Plain on
the top of the Promontory, and there the Fight was renewed. Ten Elephants being
turned loose, a Soldier of ours gave one such a cut as made him run back,
trampling his own Men till he fell into the Ditch, making us a Bridge to pass
over. Another Elephant made way to a Wicket, the Portugueses entered, and found
so many dead, as were a stop to them from killing others.

19. Some Accounts say, 10000 were slain, others make them no less than 60000.
Faratecan, his Wife, and Daughter, were taken; he became a Christian before he
died, as did his Daughter, and came to Portugal; his Wife was Ransomed. Only 21
Portugueses were lost. There were taken a great quantity of Ammunition, many
Horses, 5 Elephants, and 75 extraordinary Pieces of Cannon.

CHAP. IX.
Continues and concludes the Government of Matthias de Albuquerque.

1. THE Portugueses, in hopes the Death of Raju might contribute toward
recovering what they had lost in Ceylon, gave Advice thereof to the Viceroy,
who sent thither Peter Lopez de Sousa with a good number of Men and Ammunition.
This Commander made a halt at Palnagure, and ordered Francis de Silva to bring
the Queen of Candea, whom he would put into Possession of that Kingdom. But
John Chingala, who had usurped it, taking the advantage of Peter his ill
Conduct, took him and almost 500 Men Prisoners, and cut off their Noses. The
Queen was put in Prison, and above 150 Portugueses suffered several sorts of
Death.

2. D. Hierome de Azevedo succeeded Peter Lopez in this Command, and with 400
Portugueses fought 12000 Chingala's, but came off with great loss. These
Mutiniers were commanded by Dominick Correa a Chingala, who was afterward
taken, carried to Columbo, and there quartered.

3. Five Ships arrived now from Portugal, and then was first carried into India
the Bull of the Croisade, whereof F. Francis de Faria a Dominican was
Commissary.

4. The Ship St. Albertus sailing for Portugal, was cast away on the Coast Del
Natal, some of the Men lost, the rest marched in a Body under the command of
Nunno Vello Pereyra, suffering great Hardships to the River of Lorenco Marquez,
where finding Emanuel Malleyro with a Ship, Nunno and most of the Men embarked
and came to Mocambique. Those who were left behind traveled by Land, and
forgetting their miserable condition, so provoked the Cafres with their
Insolence, that they killed most of them.

5. Nunno Vello Pereyra embarked again on the Ship Chagas, commanded by Francis
de Melo, and had no better fortune the second Voyage than the first. Near the
Islands Azores three English Ships met, and after a bloody Fight, burnt them.
Only 12 escaped, burning or drowning on Planks, among which were Nunno Vello,
and Blas Correa; they were taken up by the English, carried into England, and
ransomed.

6. The Annual Ship coming in April from China vastly rich, and being on the
Malabar Coast almost in sight of Goa, was set upon by 14 Galliots of the Enemy.
There were but 14 Portugueses in the Ship, 1594.
who fought 3 days and 3 nights till they were all killed; then an Islander of
Iava going into the round Top from thence, with a Barrel of Powder set her a
fire, so that the Enemy got little by her. A poor Comfort.

7. The Viceroy fitted out a Squadron of 18 Sail with 700 Men, and gave the
Command of it to Andrew Furtado. On the first of August he met 3 Ships
belonging to Zamori full of Riches, and People of both Sexes and all Ages,
above 2000 of them were killed in Fight, the Ships taken, and the Booty was
such, that a Servant happened upon 5 Bags of Pagods, a Gold Coin of the bigness
of half a Royal Plate, but thicker, and worth a Crown. Furtado went on, and
found the Malabar Fleet he went in search of in the River of Cardiga, which
shunned not the Engagement, but was totally defeated, and a great Booty taken.

8. Then he sailed for Ceylon, arrived at Columbo, and secured that place, in
great danger of utter Ruin by means of the Portugueses, who were at Variance
among themselves, and mutinied against their Captain. This done, he returned
with fresh Honor to Goa.

9. Now arrived 3 Ships from Portugal, and found another beautiful one built,
called The Mother of God, to return with them, which was lost on the Coast
called Desierto de la Ethiopia Oriental, between Magadaxo and the Island
Zocotora. Many 1595.
of the Men were drowned, and more perished with Hunger and Thirst ashore: Only
16 escaped, enduring such Miseries, they often envied the Happiness of the Dead.

10. I find not any account of the Occurrences of this Year, only that about
the end end of it came 5 Ships from Lisbon, and in one of them F. Alexius de
Meneses, of the Order of St. Augustine, who went to succeed F. Matthew in the
Archbishopric of Goa.

11. About this time the Religious of St. Dominick, to secure the Preaching of
the Gospel in their District, raised a Fort at Solor, which grew so
considerable, it was afterward found convenient to send a Commander thither.
The first, or among the first, were Antony de Vellegas, and Antony de Andria,
who put to the Sword many of the Natives that had killed some Religious Men.
This Punishment, in stead of Amendment, made them worse, for two years after
conspiring together, they agreed to kill the Commander and Friars. They fell
furiously upon the Town and Fort, in the Town they did much harm, the Commander
withdrew himself out of the Fort, and could not be found. They imagining he had
forsaken it, entered, and Andria with a few Portugueses coming upon them through
a private Door they knew not of, killed most of them.

12. A Galley and five other Vessels of ours cruizing off Cape Comori to secure
our Traders from Coromandel, were so surprised by the Malabars, that they
entered and burnt the Galley. The 5 Sail that were at some distance coming up
time enough to have taken the Enemies Vessels, suffered them to go away without
molestation.

13. On the 5th of February happened the Death of the 7 Franciscan Martyrs of
Iapan. They suffered at Nangataqui under the cruel Cambaco, in revenge 1596.
for the Numbers they had converted. Their Names were, F. Peter Baptista the
Commissary, F. Martin of the Assumption, F. Francis Blanco, and the Brothers,
Philip of Jesus, and Francis de Barrilla, and Gonzalo Garzia, with 20
Iaponneses, among which were 3 Brothers Jesuits, and 3 Children, Thomas,
Antony, and Lewis. They were Crucified, and then shot with Arrows.

14. On the Coast of Malabar, between the Cities of Goa and Cochim, 77 Leagues
from the one, and 33 from the other, is the little Port of Pudepatam, within
which the Creeks form a Peninsula, joining to the Land on the South side. On
the North of it are the Ariores or Lords of Baragare and Motonge. They are all
divided by a Rivulet, and toward the East a River falls there from the
Mountain Gate, and another called Capocape on the South. The Moor Pate Marca
perceiving how convenient a place this was to shelter Pirates that might scour
all that Coast, obtained Leave of Zamori, whose Subject he was, and the
Peninsula his, to build a Fort there.

15. He went over thither with his Kindred and Followers, and began to raise a
square Fort on the East Point of it. From hence he began to make War upon us,
taking many of our Ships richly laden. He assaulted the Village of Tana in the
Island Salsete near Bacaim, and carried away a rich Booty, taking the
opportunity of doing it, when those who should defend it were at the Devotions
of the Holy Week.

16. Mahomet Cunnale Marca succeeded him in the Sovereignty of that Fort,
finished and increased it; and foreseeing the Portugueses would seek Revenge,
he fortified the Town (called also Cunnale) by Sea and Land. On the Land side
he made a deep Ditch with double Trenches 2 Yards and a half thick from Sea to
Sea. At distances he raised Towers that flanked the Work, and on the Towers (by
them called Zarames) planted small Cannon Between the two Creeks he built a
strong Wall which secured the Town, with two Towers, one at each end, and along
the Seashore stuck Palisadoes, where were also two Bastions, one greater than
the other, planted with gross Cannon to secure the entrance of the Harbor,
which besides was made very difficult even to small Vessels by Masts strongly
chained together.

17. Being thus secure, he took upon him the Style and Title of King, and
carried on his Uncle's Design against the Portugueses with greater success. He
took one of our Galleys, a Ship coming from China, and many lesser Vessels,
assisted the Queen of Olaba when she revolted, and Melique at the last Siege of
Chaul, and now robbed not only the Portugueses, but the Malabars also, filling
his Peninsula with Riches.

18. Our Viceroy concerned at the increase of his Power, resolved toward the
end of his Government to weaken it, and by D. Alvaro de Abranches, Admiral of
that Sea, advertised Zamori, how that Pirat was equally prejudicial to him as
to the Portugueses, and therefore it would be convenient they should both join
to extirpate him. That Prince being made sensible of this Truth, a new Peace
was concluded, and they agreed, That he by Land, and the Portugueses by Sea,
should jointly undertake the expulsion of Cunnale, and razing the Fort. Both
Parties provided for this Expedition, when a new Viceroy coming, the
prosecution of it was carried on, as shall be seen in his Government.

19. Matthias de Albuquerque was one of the most deserving Men that arrived to
this Command, as well for his Fortune and Valor, as his Prudence and Justice.
In the Treasury he left 80000 Ducars in Money, and Jewels of Ceyl^n of great
value. He thought no body could cheat him, and a Soldier to undeceive him
received his Pay three times in three several Shapes, and by as many Names.
Matthias afterward hearing of it sent for him, and was kind to the Man,
advising him to use that Art no more.

20. He was of a middle Stature, lame of one Foot, but not lame in Manners,
being as much a Christian as a Gentleman, of Viceroys the 16th, of Governors
the 34th, first of the Name, and second of the Surname.

CHAP. X.
Of the Propagation of the Gospel in the Empire of China during these later
Years.

1. THE manner of the introducing and propagating the Gospel in China from the
Year 1580, till 1600, was so remarkable and worthy of memory, that tho I
descend not to the Particulars, I cannot but give ^ome general Account of it.

2. Some Religious Orders had with Courage and Profit labored therein before
the Holy Society of Jesus appeared in India. The first that set foot there was
the Order of the most Holy Trinity, in the Person of D. Vasco de Gama his
Confessor, who (as is before said) was of that Congregation. The second was
that of St. Francis, and the third of St. Dominick's, who trampling all
Difficulties, sowed the Doctrine of Life there, watering i^ with their Blood.
Afterward some Secular Priests, and even Laymen, made themselves famous by
this Spiritual Work.

3. This was the Estate of Christianity in Asia, till its new Apostle St.
Francis Xaverius came thither, who from the Year 1541, till 1552, never ceased
Preaching to those People, and died in the Island Sancham, with an ardent
desire of entering China. By his Death, the design of instructing the Chinese
was laid aside till the Year 1580, when F. Alexandrinus de Valiniano an
Italian, and Visitor of the Society in Asia, undertook it, notwithstanding all
the Difficulties that obstructed.

4. None of the smallest was the hardness of the Chinese Language, more uncouth
to us than all the others of Asia. Yet at length a few attained some knowledge
of it; and the first that set foot in Quantung, was F. Michael Rogerius a
Neapoli^an, on pretense of Administering the Sacraments to the Portugueses who
Traded there, and by this means converted some of the Natives, who went over to
Macao, where for their better Instruction was erected a sort of Seminary near
to the House of the Jesuits:

5. Valiniano considering the greatness of the Difficulties, was resolved to
desist, but God prevented the execution of this Resolution. This Language, at
first so difficult, was afterward the best spoke and writ by these Fathers,
and other Obstacles, though not removed yet, began to appear less terrible. By
order of the Visitor Valiniano, who resided at Iapan, there came from India to
Macao F. Matthew Rivius an Italian, to assist F. Michael Rogerius. They founded
a Confraternity in that City for such Iaponeses and Chinese as were converted,
calling it, The Sanctuary of Jesus. Other Fathers resorted thither, and among
them F. Francis Pasius.

6. This was the posture of Affairs, when the Viceroy of Xanking, for his
private Interest, sent for the Bishop and Governor of Macao. The one sent F.
Rogerius, the other Mattheus Penela, with a Present which satisfied him. F.
Rogorius returned thither again with F. Plasius, and presenting the Viceroy a
Striking Watch, and Triangular Glass which shows Things of several Colors; the
Novelty of these Things so pleased him, that he gave them leave to build a
Church and House in the Suburb, where he entertained them kindly. But after 4
Months, a new Viceroy succeeding, they were forced to return to Macao, where
Plasius died.

7. The new Viceroy sends for the Fathers, the same Rogerius and Matthew Rivius
go to him, and return without any Success, but with much Trouble. In May they
are again sent for to Xanking, whither they came in November, 1583. are kindly
received, and have a pleasant Place assigned them without the City to build.

8. It is remarkable, that when these Religious Men were banished this City,
they left an Altar-Stone in the custody of Nicho Chus, a Youth well inclined to
Christianity; at their return they found it decently placed in a Room with
Perfumes burning before it, and over it a Board with these Words, TIEN CHU,
that is, To the Lord of Heaven. Here the Religious, for this strange Accident,
said Mass, till their Church was made ready.

9. The Fathers, to be the more acceptable, put on the Chinese Habit, and named
God in their Prayers by that Title they had seen on the Board, which much
pleased the Natives. Many of the Gentry and Learned Men began to Reverence the
Images of Christ, and the blessed Virgin; they began to give ear to Matters of
Faith, printed and dispersed among the People the Ten Commandments, highly
approving of them, supplied the Church with Lights and Perfumes, and gave Alms
to the Fathers.

10. The first baptized was a sick Man of mean condition. The Christian
Doctrine was printed after their manner, and dispersed through the whole
Province with no small Reputation for the great Titles the Viceroy bestowed on
the Authors of it.

11. F. Rogerius now went to Macao, to seek some Relief to the great Poverty
that place was in. Mean while the Chinese changing their humors, began to
slander the Fathers, and often threw Stones at their House. F. Matthew Rivius
was carried before the Supreme Court, he carried his Sleeves full of the Stones
had been thrown at him, and letting them fall at the Judges Feet, so mollified
him, that he caused the Accuser to be whipped, and ordered on severe Penalties
no Wrong should be offered the Fathers. Rivius was skilled in the Mathematics,
and made Maps and Dials, all pleasing and new there, particularly seeing so
many Countries in the World to them unknown, as believing there was nothing
beyond Asia. This Novelty attracted People from very remote Parts to behold it,
and proved a great Motive to incline them to receive the Faith.

12. F. Rector Francis Cabrall, Superintendent of this Mission, came from Macao
to visit this new Colony of the Church. He found more Fruit than was expected,
and baptized the first Converts, among which a learned Man of the Province of
Fokien, whom he called Paul, and another John, which was he that with such
Reverence kept the Altar-stone aforemention.

13. The Visitor Valiniano, for joy of this Success, made this Mission
Independent of Macao, subjecting it immediately to himself, and the Provincial
of Iapan. D. Duarte de Meneses, then Viceroy, settled an Allowance out of the
Custom-House of Malaca upon the Fathers.

14. F. Almeyda and Rogerius, having obtained leave, went to erect another
House in the Province of Chekiang, where they immediately baptized an ancient
Gentleman, Father to the Governor of Xanquim, and soon after others. This was
in the City Xanchin.

15. But this lasted not long, for the Fathers were soon expelled. Those of
Xanking were in danger, but got off, and their Accusers were punished. These
religious Men considering, this Prosperity could not be lasting without the
King's Authority, sent F. Rogerius to Rome to obtain a Letter and Present from
the Pope for the King; but the Pope dying the Business was delayed, and F.
Rogerius ended his days at Salerno, in the Kingdom of Naples. Mean while the
Fathers at Xanking were not without Troubles, but still protected by the
Viceroy; converted many People, till a new Viceroy coming they were banished,
and all they had taken from them.

16. On their way to Macao they were overtaken by fresh Orders from the
Viceroy; whereupon they returned to Xanking, and had a Place assigned them to
settle at Hancheu. Not far from that City is a most delightful Plain along the
side of a River, and in it a vast Temple and Monastery of 1000 Bonzos, called
Manhoa, and yet the number of Idols exceeds that of the Bonzos, for only in one
of 12 Apartments, into which it is divided, there were seen 500. These, as they
call them, religious Men live there with their Wives and Children, and when
they think fit, go out to rob. To this place were the Fathers led, that if they
liked they might settle there, and were well received by the Bonzos, but the
design of the Religious was to live in the City.

17. The Fathers were admitted into the City with the general good liking of
all People. They soon suffered by the Contagion of the Air, which infects the
very Natives with a Disease like an Ague, yet escaped the danger. From Macao
two young Chinese Converts were sent to be their Companions, who were
afterward the first of that Nation admitted into the Society.

18. They labored with no small Fruit, some Persons of Note being converted.
Among the rest, Cuytaiso, the Son of a great Man, having lost or spent his
Fortune, came to F. Rivius, thinking he was a Chimist, and might teach him the
way to make Gold, and being by him instructed, found the true Treasure of the
Faith. The same happened to an ancient Gentlemen of almost eighty Years of Age.

19. A Persecution was now raised at Hancheu, and the Governor examining into
it, decreed to punish the Causers of it, but pardoned them at the Intercession
of F. Rivius. In the Year 1591 was converted a Rich Merchant, who long had
consulted the Idols and their Ministers about the way to Salvation, and at
length found it among the Jesuits. F. Rivius went with his Disciple Cuytaiso,
and by his Persuasion to Nanking where he had innumerable Auditors, baptized
six, left many many more in good Disposition. He had done much more here, but
that he was sent for to Hancheu, whither he returned, and converting many,
suffered another Persecution, but weathered it.

20. Till the end of the Year 1594, our Fathers wore their own Habit, and
shaved as in Europe; and then changed it for that used by the Lawyers, for
three Reasons; first, to avoid being called Bonzos, for that those clothed
like them and shaved; secondly, to gain the better admittance to Magistrates,
who familiarly receive none without that Habit; and thirdly, to please the
People.

CHAP. XI.
Continues the Subject of the Propagation of the Gospel.

1. ABout the middle of the Year 1595, F. Matthew Rivius set out for the City
Nanking in Company of a Great Man. The Way was up great Rivers, in one of which
the Vessels were sunk, and F. Rivius forced to swim for his Life, having lost
his Companion John Barradas. His Design was to settle a Residence in that
Court, where he found many Opposers, and among them a powerful Man who had
pretended much Friendship.

2. He went to Nancham, the Metropolis of the Province Kiangsi, between Nanking
and Quantung. Being there in despair of any Success, he obtained a Lodging,
where he said Mass on the Day of St. Peter and Paul, and afterward leave to
fix a Residence, whither resorted F. John Soeyro from Macao, and the Brothers
Francis Martinez and Sebastian Rodriguez from Hancheu; with much trouble they
founded a Church.

3. The Visitor Valiniano seeing how inconvenient it was the Affairs of China
should have any dependence abroad, granted F. Matthew Rivius the full
superintendence of them. He resolved again to attempt settling a Residence at
Nanking. From hence he proposed to send advice of his coming to that King, with
a Present of Things very common in Europe, though there much esteemed for their
Rarity. These were Clocks much admired of the Chinese, for that they move of
themselves. Triangular Glasses, that represent variety of Colors. A Harpsical.
But what was more surprising than all the rest, was the Learning of F. Rivius,
his Art of Memory, his Maps of the World, his Understanding, Wit and Judgment.

4. There being no way to send the Present, it was agreed the Fathers should
carry it themselves, going in Company of a Nobleman that Traveled thither. In
the way to Peking they saw many Cities and innumetable Villages along the Banks
of the Rivers up which they went. Being come to Peking, they spent a Month
soliciting an Audience of the King, but without success.

5. Rivius with great trouble returned to Sucheu, being sent for by his
Disciple Cuitayso. This is doubtless the most glorious City in those Parts. It
is built in a River, as Venice in the Sea, and is of great strength to prevent
all Accidents. The occasion of sending for F. Rivius, was to fix a Residence
there. The Viceroy of Nanking's leave was requisite for this undertaking: Both
Master and Disciple take a Journey thither, and and the Viceroy grants leave to
settle in both Places. Here F. Rivius disputed with a famous Bonzo, and
overcame him even in the Judgment of his Adversaries.

6. The Court of Public Works proposed to the Fathers to buy a House that had
long stood empty because haunted by Devils, they did, and all the People was
astonished to see that after their entrance the Fiends had forsaken it. They
could not undertake any thing than at Sucheu for want of more Fathers.

7. Still F. Rivius his Thoughts were bent upon Peking, to obtain the King's
consent to proceed. Whilst he prepared for this Journey, the Faith considerably
spread at Nanking. The first Baptized was a discreet old Man 70 Years of Age,
of a Noble Family, who had an hereditary Military Command, his Surname was
Chin, and he was Christened by the Name of Paul. His Son, a Learned Man,
followed the good Example, and was named John, then all their Family, and some
Kindred.

8. On the 16th of May 1600, F. Rivius Embarked the second time upon the River
for Peking, with him went F. James Pantoja a Spaniard, called by a learned Man
Golden Hands, for the delicate Works he wrought, and the two Brothers Sebastian
and Emanuel. At Nanking remained F. Lazarus de Catania and B. John.

9. Whilst they went up the River, the Viceroy of the Province of Xangsi's Wife
dreamed she saw a Sovereign Deity with two Children. She concluded her Dream
was expounded, when her Husband relating the Things contained in the Present,
for the King mentioned a Picture of our Blessed Lady, with our Savior and St.
John Baptist. The Lady desiring such a Picture, and there being no Painter to
Copy it, F. Rivius gave her a Copy he had. The Viceroy receiving it with
respect, assured him he and his Family would always Reverence the Mother and
Son.

10. At the City Linchin a covetous Eunuch, who was Receiver-General of the
Revenue, called Mathan, imprisoned them in the Fort of Tiensim, seizing upon
the Present they carried for the King, and all they had. After six Months
confinement, an Order came from the King (without knowing who had procured it)
that the Fathers should be sent to him. All things were restored them, and they
arrived at Peking about the end of the Year 1601. The Present was publicly
carried to Court, and the King as soon as he saw the Picture of Christ admiring
it, said; This is the living God. Yet afterward caused it to be removed out of
his sight. The same happened with his Mother; nevertheless it was set in a
decent place, and honored with Perfumes, and is said to be preserved in that
Palace to this Day. A striking Clock was much admired; so several other things.

11. Afterward they were sent for; a favorite Eunuch spoke to them in the
King's Name; they gave him an account who they were, whence they came, and what
they desired. He acquainted the King with it, and they were lodged in the
Palace, in the Apartment of the Mathematicians, and nobly entertained. There
they instructed some Men appointed by the King in the Motion of the Clocks, and
how to keep them, and then removed to a hired House. The King saw them not,
because he scarce used to see his own People, but to have some sort of sight of
them, sent Painters to draw their Pictures. Having seen the Pictures he took
them for Moors. Pantoja was again introduced into the Palace, to teach some
Musicians to play upon the Harpsical.

12. Thus far were our hopes advanced, when the Fathers were imprisoned by the
Court of Ceremonies, for presuming to reside there, without presenting
themselves before their Tribunal. This confinement lasted but three days,
because the King sent for them. Though he sent for them they saw him not, yet
performed all the usual impertinent Ceremonies to his Throne as if he had been
there. The Supreme President of that Court more particularly examined F. Rivius
who he was, whence he came, and what he and his Companions pretended at Court;
and he being the most expert in the Chinese Language, in most lofty terms
answered to all those Particulars, to the great admiration of the President and
all the Auditory.

13. The King being informed hereof, granted the Fathers leave to live at that
Court, and all the Courtiers favored them, especially the Ministers of State
and Mandarins. F. Rivius so far gained the favor of a Calao, the Supreme
Dignity in that Empire, that he treated him as his equal (a thing never used in
that great Place) seated him at his Table, and gave singular attention to all
he said, particularly in Matters relating to Religion. One of the things that
most pleased him was, that Christianity allowed not of more Wives than one.
Thus Rivius contracted Friendship with the President of the Supreme Council,
and soon after most of the Principal Men.

14. Thus with Divine and Royal Assistance the Faith was propagated at Peking,
Hancheu, Nanking and Nancham. There were converted Mandarins, Lawyers and other
Persons of Note; some with their whole Families; and the Society of Jesus,
after 20 Years labor, in the Year 1601 was possessed of four Residences in
China, one whereof at Court, which was to support all the rest.

15. F. Nicholas Longobardo, a Sicilian, who was Rector at Hancheu, suffered
very much, but some Men of Note, especially one Tauli, pleading for the
Fathers, the Storm was somewhat appeased. But it broke out more furious at the
Instigation of a Witch, who, there being a great Dearth, said, the Goddess
Quonhin would not give Rain whilst the Fathers were there, and F. Nicholas was
threatened with Death, who desirous to suffer Martyrdom, ran to the Place where
they were threatening him. He finding those People disputing about the Rain,
told them how vain it was to expect it from any but the God he preached; and
immediately there fell such abundance as refreshed the Fields, and quenched
their Thirst after his Blood; so that House for that time was restored to its
former quiet. Let this for the present suffice touching the Conversion of
China, till we have occasion to speak of it again.

The End of the First Part.
THE PORTUGUES ASIA. TOM. III. PART II.
CHAP. I.
The Government of the Viceroy D. Francis de Gama, Count de Vidigueyra, from
the Year 1597 till 1600.

DON Francis de Gama Count de Vidigueyra arrived at Goa in May, having set out
from Lisbon the Year before with five Sail, whereof only his Ship Wintered at
Mombaca. He carried himself from the beginning with such State, that he gained
the general ill Will of all Men, notwithstanding in other things he endeavored
to oblige.

2. He disposed of all Places in the gift of the Viceroys to his own Creatures,
who sold them to underserving Persons, whereby those who had merited them by
their Service were put by their Right. Yet afterward hearing the just
Complaints made against this unjust Proceeding, he caused the Buyers to be
refunded, and gave those Places to Men of more worth.

3. Manasinza, the great Mogol's Favorite, marched to subdue the Patanes who
were in Rebellion, because Catula King of Orixa having plundered and profaned a
famous Pagod, they unexpectedly fell upon him, and killed his Son with 2000
Men. Manafinza had with him 35000 Horse, 80000 Foot, many Elephants with
Castles and great quantity of all other warlike Engines. At the City Iassalor
all the Inhabitants, to the number 6000 fell furiously upon the Enemy,
resolving to die, and ordering as soon as they were cut off, their Goods, Wives
and Children should be burnt, that the Enemy might not possess their Riches or
dishonor their Families. They did great Execution at the first onset, but were
all cut to pieces, and there being no time to put in execution their design,
Manasinza entered Iassalor plundering the Riches, and ravishing Women; which
struck such a Terror into the rest of the Patanes they all submitted
themselves. Then marching toward the King of Orixa, and he not daring to stand
a Battle freely offered Subjection.

4. In Ceylon, the Tyrant D. John King of Candea, taking the advantage of time
when our General D. Hierome de Azevedo had dispersed his Men to refresh them,
caused the King of Uva and the Princes of Dinavaca to join, and take the Field
with 4000 Men, many Musketeers, and armed Elephants. With this force they
marched toward our Fort of Corvite (six Leagues from Ceitavaca) where Salvador
Pereyra de Silva commanded with 100 Men. Silva by the General's order chose
some of his Men, and marched one Night with such a secrecy four Leagues to the
Place where the Enemy was Encamped, that they sooner felt than heard him,
killing many of their Men before they could handle their Arms. The Confusion
was such they* presently fled, he pursued them, slew above 1000, and carried
away some Prisoners, Elephants and other Booty.

5. In the Summer D. John, takes the Field again with the King of Uva and Simon
Correa, who being in Rebellion called himself King of Ceitavaca. He thought to
draw our General D. Hierome out of his Works, by attacking our Quarters at
Mature, where D. Ferdinand the Modeliar commanded. D. Ferdinand understanding
the Enemy was near, thought to have performed such another fortunate piece of
Service as Salvador Pereyra had done, but his Companion Simon Pincham prevented
him, and after a desperate Fight, in which he was almost lost, obtained a
Victory equal to that of Pereyra, and falling upon the Rebels in their Works
killed most of them, so that the Flower of Candea fell this Day.

6. At the end of May died at Columbo the lawful King of the whole Island of
Ceylon, D. John Parea Pandar, a Catholic and without Heirs. King Philip was
with the usual Solemnity immediately Proclaimed King of the whole Island, and
the Oath of Fidelity to him taken by all the Principal Men, as being appointed
Heir by the last Will of the Deceased.

7. About this time came first into India the Scourge of the Portugues Pride
and Covetousness; for in the Month of September News was brought to Goa, that
the two first Holland Ships which durst cut those Seas, had been in the Port of
Titangone, and were bound for the Island Sunda. The Viceroy having held a
Council about this Affair, it was resolved to fit out a Squadron of two
Galleons, three Galleys, and nine other Vessels, and the Command of it was
given to Laurence de Brito, an ancient and experienced Captain deserving of
greater Commands.

8. Three Ships arrived now from Portugal. That which had brought the Viceroy
was ready at Cochim to return thither with them, and accidentally taking fire
was burnt with all the Riches in her, amounting to a Million and half.

9. Not only Custom but Necessity now required the sending out the two usual
Squadrons for the Coast of Malabar and the North; the design of the Northern
Squadron shall follow; that of Malabar was to give a Check to Zamori, who not
only winked at but went shares with the Pirates of the Fort Cunnale. Among
other Losses that of Captain (...) de (...) and Melo was greatest, he (...)
Cape (...) with (...) S^ps, (...) eight (...) of Malabars, (...) his (...)
slain, after having ^ed (...) The Squadron the Vi^ (...) that Coast, consisted
of (...), and 36 other Vessels, with almost 2000 (...) Men, under the Comm^ of
(...) D. Luis de Gama. They did (...) in the same nature as has been related on
the like Occasions, which (...) (...) to incline to make W^ on C^le, rather to
avoid the harm we did him, th^n in observance of the Agr^nt before made.

The Squadron for the North con^ed of 10 Ships commanded by Luis de Silva. He
(...) ^nding the Pirates he was in search of in the Island of the Sang^es,
landed and ravaged it for harboring of them. In the River C^ he found four
Paraos of these Pirates, took two and (...) one, killing many of the M^. Of
those who got ashore above 200 were taken, and being Beheaded, their He^ ^re
set up at the Mouths of those Riv^ to (...) their Companions. Near Chaul he
took a Galliot, and further on another, more properly a Galley, in which was
the Nephew of Cunnale with 200 Men, whereof 100 were killed, without the loss
of one Man on our side.

11. The War continued at Ceylon. The Tyrant of Candea endeavored to better
his Fortune, by distr^ing us with several ^odies, of 3 or 4000 Men ^ch, Our
General D. Hierome de Azevedo ordered Salvador Pereyra de Silva, and Simon
Pi^am, with a few, but choice, Men to oppose him. They with singular success
destroyed Towns, took Forts, slaughtered many People, (not without Cruelty to
strike a Terror) and reduced all the Corlas or Precincts that were in Rebellion
to our Obedience.

12. The two Holland Ships, before mentioned, did some small Damage along the
Coast of Malabar, and other places, till on that of Malaca they met 6 Ships
coming out o^ the Port bound for India, and commanded by Francis de Silva. They
engaged and fought all that afternoon, and part of the night. Next morning they
fell to it again, and held it for 8 days continually, till the Hollanders
finding themselves too weak, made for the Port of Queda, many of their Men
being killed, and most wounded. There for want of Men they quitted the weakest
Ship, and going all into the other, were cast away on the Coast of Pegu.

13. D. Luis de Cerqueyra Bishop of China, went this year to succeed D. Peter
Martinez, who died at Iapan, that nothing might be there wanting toward the
Spiritual Conquest for the lack of a Prelate.

14. With the Bishop D. Luis went F. Alexander de Valiniano. They were present
at the Death of Taicozana, Emperor of those Islands. Some time before his Death
he had designed to cause himself to be adored as a God, and to this purpose to
have his Images set upon Altars in the chief Parts of certain beautiful Gardens
in the Fort of Tuxi^. But scarce had he fixed the place of his Adoration, when
on the 20th of July, 1596. there appeared over the City Meaco a wonderful
Blazing Star, then it rained Ashes and Sand, and there followed an Earthquake
which threw down the Fort and Palace of Tuxi^, and in other places many Temples
of Idols, with great slaughter of People. The Sea breaking out, and overflowing
for 20 Leagues toward Miaco, Zi^o, and Bungo, drowned whole Cities and Towns,
overrunning the Tops of some Mountains like the general Deluge. Nevertheless
after his Death he was adored, and Statues raised to him with the Title of The
God of War.

CHAP. II.
Continues the Government of D. Francis de Gama Count de Vidigueyra.

1. ZAmori was now sufficiently incensed against Cunnale, who called himself
King of the M^labar Moors, and Lord of the Indian Sea. It was not these Titles,
or his Pride, or the Complaints of the Portugueses, that provoked Zamori, but
that Cunnale had caused the Tail of one of his Elephants to be cut off, as also
the Privy Parts of a Nayre, which were also fastened to his Mouth.

2. The Portugueses laying hold of this opportunity, offered their Assistance
against that common Enemy, and blew the Coals of Zamori's Anger they saw
already lighted. The Viceroy instantly fitted out some light Vessels, ordering
D. Ferdinand de Noronna to lie with them before the Mouth of the Port o^
Cunnale, till a greater force could be sent to join, in order to assist Zamori,
who was marching to besiege that place with 20000 Men, and some Cannon.

3. That which is properly called the Coast of Malabar, runs from Cananor to
Cochim the space of 42 Leagues. Two to the little Island Tremapatan, opposite
to which is the mouth of a good River, thence half a League to the River Sal,
thence one and a half to that of Maim, one to the Town of Comenna, at a small
distance those of Motangue, Curiare, and Baregare; then the River Pudepatan;
two Leagues farther, the Town of Tiracole, two Leagues from Cotulete, a League
from this the River Capocate, one farther Pudiangare, one thence to Calecut,
two to the River Cale, two to the City Pananor, two thence to Tanor, and two
more to Paranora, one more to the famous River Panane, thence nine to
Paliporto, four to the River of Granganor, and five more to Cochim. At the
mouth of the River Pudepatan is the Fort of Cunnale, seated in a square
Peninsula, the length of the Sides about a Cannon Shot. Just within the Bar a
Creek turns toward the South, good Vessels can go about half way up it, beyond
that only Almadies or Boats; the great River runs first toward the North-East,
then turning to the South forms that Peninsula. Upon that turn of the River the
Fort is built. The I^mus is secured by a strong Wall about a Musket Shot in
length from the Creek to the River, which there opens and forms the little
Island Pinale. We have already spoke particularly of the Fort, in general it
was large, strong, well Manned, and stored with Cannon.

4. Cunnale was well provided, and had distributed the Posts to 1500 choice
Moors well armed. Our small Vessels at the mouth of the River battered the Fort
to keep the Defendants in action, that they might not be any hindrance to
Zamori who was on the other side, taking up the Ground for his Army.

5. D. Ferdinand scoured the Coast, and taking some of the Pirates, hindered the
resort of Provisions to the Fort. Now comes our Squadron commanded by D. Luis
de Gama, Brother to the Viceroy, both unfortunate, the one in choosing, the
other in being chose.

6. D. Luis his Squadron consisted of 4 Galleys, and 35 smaller Vessels, 10
more brought by private Gentlemen at their own charge, three full of Men and
Ammunition sent by the City of Cochim. Besides, there were two large Barques
with heavy Cannon to batter the Fort.

7. The King of Cochim fearing that great Power that was falling upon Cunnale
might be his Ruin, by entirely uniting Zamori and the Portugueses, gave out,
That Zamori had agreed with Cunnale to cut off all our Men at one stroke when
they should be deepest engaged in the Assault. D. F. Alexius de Meneses
Archbishop of Goa, who was there on his way to the Mountains of St. Thomas, at
first was fearful, imagining this might be a faithful Discovery; but
considering better, perceived it was the Politic Product of the King's
Jealousy, answered the King modestly, diverting him from any other designs
seeing this fail. He assured the City their Ships might safely set sail, yet
sent Advice to proceed with Caution. All our Fleet now joined, they found
Cunnale had added to the former Works a Line of Galiots on the edge of the
Water under the Fort, imagining he might be attacked that way.

8. It was resolved in Council to enter the River, and draw up the Ships in a
Line, with their Stems to the Shore, that they might cover the Men who attacked
the Fort. This Resolution was sent to Goa, and approved of by the Viceroy, who
ordered his Brother to put it in execution! He overperswaded by some Gentlemen
that sought his Disgrace, disobeyed, and carried the (...) by the side of
Ariole, believing the (...) might be fatal, and his (...) lay (...) not ^g it.

9. Zamori, who was battering the Town, desired some Portugueses might be sent
him; D. Luis being suspicious of him de^ed Hostag^s, which were presently sent,
being 6 principal Men, and among them the Princes of (...), Chale, (...), and
the chief Judge of his Kingdom. The (...) taken, 300 Portugueses were sent to
him under the command of Belchior Ferreyra. On the 3d of May, at night, our Men
began to land, Luis de Silva led the van with 600 Men, and among them the Major
D. Antony de Leyv^. The Sign for both Armies to fall on, was a burning Lance.
Before this was lighted, there appeared one in the Air, which running along
swiftly, at last va^ed in Sparks.

10. The Besieged took this for a good Omen, as the Besiegers for a bad.
Belchior Ca^aca, who was to give the Sign with the Lance, mistaking the hour
gave it too soon, and all began to be in confusion. For Ferreyra, who was in
Zamori's Army waiting the Signal, as soon as he saw the Flame, fell on with his
Portugueses and 5000 Nayres, and assaulting the Works, lost at the first onset
28 Men.

11. But Luis de Silva, though he was ready, seeing it was not past midnight
stirred not then, which proved of ill consequence to the others, the Enemy not
being diverted on this side. Toward morning he passed the Creek of Balycupe in
60 Almadies or Boats with 500 Men. Benedict Correa was the first that Landed,
and was killed. Luis de Silva, as soon as ashore, was slain by a Musket Shot.
The Ensign Antony Dias concealed his Death, by stripping the Colors off the
Staff, and covering him therewith.

12. Thus they landed without Colors or Commander. D. Francis Pereyra, who
succeeded D. Luis in the Command, followed him also in Death. The next was the
famous Major Leyva, and he seeing all lost, chose rather to die, than stain his
Honor by flight; and having performed incredible Feats, was slain with many
other Gentlemen that stuck by him.

13. F. Francis Baptista a Capuchin, who encouraged the Men, holding up a
Crucifix till it was shot to pieces; after moistening it with Tears, bathed it
with his Blood, being killed with it in his Arms. So Luis Cardoso, who getting
from under a Vessel that overset, upon the Keel defended his Companions that
were swimming from the Moors.

14. Whilst those mentioned and many other Gentlemen died honorably,
performing Actions beyond all belief, about 150 shamefully fled, many of them
meeting Death, where they sought an Inglorious Life, no Persuasions being of
force to bring them back. Doubtless these were some condemned Malefactors who
were pardoned on account to serve in this Expedition, for none are greater
Cowards than infamous wicked Men. Our Commander in chief, who had left the
Fleet to D. Vasco, and had posted himself on the other side the River, opposite
to the Fort, running into the Water up to the Waste spent himself, calling upon
and encouraging the Men, but could send no Relief for want of Boats. So this
proved the greatest Disgrace the Portugueses received in Asia, (next to that of
Ruy Gonzales de Camera at Ormuz.) Three hundred Men were lost, the greatest
part drowned, the others piercing up to the Fort, had burnt the Mosque, and
part of the Town, and killed 500 Moors and Malabars, well revenging their
Deaths. Among the Enemies Dead there was above 40 of Note.

15. The Commander in chief, D. Luis, resolved to retire to Cochim, and leave
somebody to guard the entrance of the River, but no body would accept of that
Post except D. Francis de Sousa, who perceiving some of his Men intended to
forsake him and swim away, ordered a Boat to be brought to the side of the
Galley for them, and said, He would keep none by force, nor have them go away
with danger. This made them ashamed, and they all stayed, and he more by Policy
than Force hindered the Vessels resorting with Provision to the Fort. D. Francis
persuaded Zamori to assault the Town, believing the late Slaughter had so
weakened the Defendants, it might be easily carried; and he, desiring to have
all the Booty he supposed was within to himself, gave the assault with 20000
Men, but was repulsed.

16. This bad News being carried to Goa, Orders were sent to D. Luis for him to
^eturn to Cunnale, and there settle a Peace with Zamori to his content, that he
might not raise the Siege that Winter, but lie till our Fleet could return the
beginning of Summer and take the Town. He returned, and D. Ferdinand de Noronna
went to swear the Peace to the liking of Zamori. The first Article was, That he
should permit the Faith to be preached in his Kingdom and Churches erected. The
Peace concluded, the same D. Ferdinand was left there with 12 Ships.

17. D. Luis de Gama returning to Goa, refreshed the ill will all Men bore him
and his Brother, because he was going to be Commander of Ormuz, which they
looked upon as a Reward of his ill Success, whereas it was the King's Grant
before he came from Portugal, whereof he could not be deprived without being
found guilty of some Misdemeanour. To fix some Crime upon him, he was brought
to a Trial, but acquitted.

18. About this time came to the City Meaco a Spanish Vessel, commanded by D.
John de Samudio, from Manila, he raised a Fort in the Port of Pinal,
notwithstanding D. Paul de Portugal, who commanded there, opposed him. He
protested against this Proceeding, and made use of Threats, but all to no
effect.

CHAP. III.
Contiuues the Government of D. Francis de Gama Count de Vidigueyra.

1. THE Hollanders, in hatred to our new Prince, and desirous to purchase the
Spices of Asia at a cheaper rate, resolved not to beg them any longer in
Portugal, and to this effect set out, in the Year 1595, some Ships which were
unsuccessful; yet this did not deter them, for in the Year 1597, they fitted
out the first Squadron for this Voyage, and reaped the benefit of it in 1599.
This Squadron consisted of 8 Ships, in which were 800 Men, and Provisions for 3
Years. Their Admiral was Jacob Cornelius Neque of Amsterdam, they set sail from
that Port on the 13th of May, 1598. arrived at Madera on the 15th; on the 17th
at the Canaries, where they took Wine; on the 23d at the Islands of Cabo Verde;
on the 29th they were in the Latitude of 6 degrees, and passed the Line on the
8th of June; a wonderful swiftness, and to me incredible.

2. On the 24th of July they saw the Cape of Good Hope, where a violent Storm
parted three of the Ships which arrived at the Island Banda the latter end of
April. The others on the 24th of August discovered the Island Madagascar, and
on the 30th Cape St. Julian. On the 20th of September they came to the Island
Cerne, or Cisne, in 21 degrees of Latitude, and called it Mauricia. Here they
found Tortoises of such a magnitude, that they carried two Men on their Backs,
and Birds they killed with Sticks, which made them conclude it was not
inhabited. At Banda they joined the other three Ships. They loaded four which
returned for Holland, the others steered for the Moluces.

3. On the 21st of January they discovered the great Iava, and touched at the
City Tuban, and on the 27th at the Port of Madura, an Island in 2 degrees. 30 min.
of South Latitude. There they endeavored to Ransom some of their Countrymen,
part cast away in their former Ships, and part secured for offering false
Money; because the Natives demanded too great a Rate for them, they attempted
to rescue them by force. In the fray, two Boats full of Men they would rescue
were sunk, and at last they were forced to Ransom them. At Amboina they
settled Trade. Two Ships returned to Banda erected a Factory, and loading
Spice, arrived in Holland on the 20th of April, 1600. Those that were left at
Amboina went to Ternate, were well received by the King, and loading Clove,
returned home.

4. D. Hierome de Azevedo in Ceylon raising a strong Fort at Manicravare to be
the nearer to the Kingdom of Candea, the Conquest whereof was his chief aim, so
perplexed the Usurper, that he setting out several Bodies with the King of Uva
to distract our General, was in all places by him overthrown. More had been
done, but that the Men mutinied for want, and dispersed themselves throughout
the Villages for sustenance. Being refreshed, they returned to their Duty, and
reduced all the Corlas to our Obedience, D. Hierome cutting off many Heads as a
Punishment to them, and Terror to others. The Year following he obtained
another Victory on the Borders of Candea.

5. D. Alexius de Meneses Archbishop of Goa was gone to visit the Christians,
called of St. Thomas, who live dispersed about the Mountains of Malabar in
Malia, Turubuli, Maota, Batimena, Diamper, Pimienta, Tetemute, Porca, Paru, and
Cartuti.

6. Those Christians continued firm in the Faith till about the Year 750,
though with some mixture of Errors. About the Year 810, came thither the second
Thomas, (mentioned at the end of the second Tome,) repaired the Temples erected
by the first, and restored the Doctrine. Thus it continued almost 100 Years,
till about the Year 900 it was overrun with the Nestorian Heresy. In the Year
890 came thither from Babylon two Caldeans, called Mar Xarsio, and Mar Prod,
who divided that District into two Bishoprics, and were ever after prayed to
as Saints, till our Archbishop, suspicious of them, forbid it. After them came
Mar Ioanne, (sent by the Greek Patriarch,) who living at Cranganor, introduced
the Caldean Brevlary. His Successor was Mar Jacob, who died the Year 1500, and
after him Mar Ioannat^.

7. Thus the Bishops and Heresies continued till the Year 1556, when Pope Paul
the Fourth confirmed D. John Berm^z Patriarch of Ethiopia, and Simon S^ca
Bishop of Ca^emit, the Metropolis of Mesop^ia; and Mar Elias, and Mar Joseph,
confirmed by the Pope, the first as Patriarch of Mussal, and the others in
their Suffragan Bishoprics, and ordered Joseph, who was Bishop of Ninice to go
govern the Christians of Malabar, and the Bishop D. Ambrose Mouteceli for his
Coadjutor. Thus the Patriarchal Seat was divided into two, the one Orthodox at
Mussal, the Heretical at Antioch. Joseph and Ambrose passed over to the
Mountains of Malabar, where the latter would not follow the other, and after
reading Divinity at Goa, died at Cochim in the Year 1557. D. George Temudo,
Bishop of that place, perceiving Joseph spread the Poison of Nestor, caused him
to be secured, and brought in Chains to Portugal, whence he returned to his
Bishopric upon promise of Amendment. He found Mar Abraham in his Place, being
chosen in his absence by the Thomites. Abraham being Persecuted, went to Rome,
and promising to reduce that People to Truth, got Pope Pius the Fourth his
Breves as Prelate. Neither of them performed what they had promised, but
continued in their Heresies.

8. Then came Mar Simon, saying, He was sent by the Patriarch of Babylon to
succeed in that Bishopric. The Queen of Pimienta received and placed him at
C^use, where he exercised the Episcopal Power; till being carried to Lisbon, he
went thence to Rome, and was condemned by Pope Sixtus Quintus, as not being so
much as a Priest, and a mere Nestorian. Abraham died, and his Archdeacon
governed the Diocese, no Babylonian Bishop daring to come there, D. F. Alexius
endeavoring to keep out such Heretical Prelates, and that was the occasion of
this his Visitation.

9. This Prelate found, that amidst their other Errors they denied the
Virginity of our Blessed Lady, rejected the Use of Images, believed the Souls
of the Just enjoyed not God till the General Judgment; allowed but three
Sacraments, Baptism, Order, and the Eucharist; used, in stead of Confession, a
Perfuming in the Churches; that their Consecration Wine was of Cocos; that
their Host was a Cake with Oil and Salt; that Priests were Ordained at 17 Years
of Age, and Married after Ordination; that Fathers, Sons, and Grandsons,
administered Sacraments in the same Church; that their Wives (called Catotiaras,
or Cassaueras, that is, Priests Wives,) wore a particular Mark to be known by;
that in Matrimony they used no other Formalities but the consent of Parties,
and the uniting the Couple by getting a Child; that Women observed the time of
the Old Law to be Churched; that no Sacraments were administered gratis; that
Holy Water was made with Dust of Frankincense, and some of the Earth where they
believed St. Thomas had trod; that they used Sorcery and Witchcraft; and in
fine, that all was Error and Confusion.

10. D. F. Alexius with great Labor and Toil convinced them of their Errors,
and reduced them to receive the true Doctrine. Whole Towns were baptized, and
submited to the Roman See.

11. He held a Provincial Synod at Diamper, and all its Decrees were confirmed
by the Pope, and Francis Rodrigues a Jesuit, who had assisted the Archbishop,
was made Bishop of that Diocese. The Synod breaking up, D. F. Alexius visited
all those Churches.

12. The Archbishop being in the Queen of Changanate's Country visiting the
Church of Talavecare, one of the ancientest in those Parts, (where they showed
him three Plates, on which were engraven the Privileges and Revenues granted
by the King of Ceylon when the Babylonians Xabro and Pro^ built there) met
Topamuta Pandara King of Gundara, Neighboring on that place, and presented him
a Letter of King Philip, in which he granted him the Title of Brother, in
regard he had allowed liberty for the Christian Religion in his Dominions.

13. Toward the End of this Year arrived in India eight Ships from Portugal,
which brought the News of the Death of King Philip; five of them being ready to
Sail the Year before, were detained because the Earl of Cumberland lay before
the Mouth of Lisbon River with an English Squadron, till the Season was spent.
One was lost on the Parcel de Zofala; another at her return fought two Holland
Ships near the Island St. Helena and worsted them.

14. The Viceroy having dispatched the Homeward bound Ships and usual
Squadrons, began to think of carrying on the War against Cunnale. There were
Men enough, but they wanted a Commander; neither was such a one wanting, but
that the Envy of the Portugueses endeavored to rob Andrew Furtado of that
Glory, or rather their Country of that Advantage.

15. At length they were forced to comply and employ him to recover our lost
Reputation, for Cunnale Marcar proud of his late Success, had added to his
former as vain Titles, calling himself, Defender of Mahometanism, and Expeller
of the Portugueses. Many Princes began to have an Eye upon his Success;
nevertheless D. Antony de Noronna, who lay before the Port all Winter, had
perplexed him, taking several Vessels laden with Provisions, and killing above
100 of his Men that opposed him taking fresh Water.

16. The Fleet Andrew Furtado was to Command, consisted of 3 Galleys and 54
other Vessels. By the way he diswaded the King of Banguel and Queen of Olala,
who designed to assist our Enemy, from their Purpose, and cut off the Relief
five Ships of Meca were bringing to him.

17. Our Commander being come to an Anchor in the Port of Cunnale, set forward
to treat with Zamori, and he advanced to meet him on the Shore. The King was
naked from the Wast upwards; about his middle a piece of Cloth of Gold that
reached several times about him, and hung down to his Knees, fastened with a
Girdle of the breadth of a Hand, of an inestimable value; his Arms covered to
the Wrists with Gold Bracelets set with rich Stones, the weight of this
Treasure was so great that two Men supported his Arms; about his Neck was an
extraordinary rich Chain; in his Ears hung so many Diamonds and Rubies, as
stretched them down with the weight; his Age was about 30 Years, his Presence
very Majestic. A little from his side came the Prince with his Sword naked
held up, behind him the Nobility, and somewhat nearer F. Francis Rodriguez. The
King and Furtado embraced kindly, and all the Cannon of the Fleet was fired.
Being come to the King's Tent, they were seated, and discoursed about the
Affair in hand. Furtado at taking his leave, put a rich Collar about the King's
Neck over the other, and they parted very amicably.

18. Zamori sent the Prince of Tanor and other great Men aboard the Admiral
with full power to treat and conclude all things that were for the common
Interest of both Parties. This done there arrived from Goa and other Places one
Galleon, one Galley, eleven Ships and twenty-one other Vessels, with
Ammunition, and 790 Men. Furtado went himself to view the Enemies Works, raised
others, Planted his Cannon, and became absolute Master of the River. He caused
some Outworks to be attacked, the Moors fled, but Cunnale coming in Person to
second them, they made our Men give ground till Furtado landing came up with
Sword in hand and renewed the Fight, here he was in great danger, but at length
remained Victorious, killing 600 Moors. On our side were slain two Captains and
nine Soldiers.

19. Fort Blanco, or the White Fort, was next assaulted with greater Bravery
than Success. Here Captain Andrew Rodriguez Pallota loosing nine Teeth by a
Musket Shot, jesting said, Doubtless the Moor knew I had no need of them: Which
he said in respect he was always so poor he wanted sustenance. Cunnale being in
distress, bribed Zamori with great Presents to accept the Surrender upon
Security of the Men's Lives. Zamori was yielding, and Furtado understanding it
furiously assaults the Works; the King perceiving it, falls on on the other
side with 6000 Nayres. The Works were entered, and the lower Town plundered and
burnt. Batteries were raised against the upper Town and Fort, and doing great
Execution reduced the Defendants to despair.

20 In fine, Cunnale Surrendered upon no Condition but Life, and marched out
with a black Veil on his Head, carrying his Sword with the point down, which he
delivered to Zamori, and he to our General. Cunnale was about 50 Years of Age,
of a low Stature, but well shaped and strong. He and his Nephew Cinale and 40
Moors of Note, were sent Prisoners aboard the Fleet and well treated. Furtado
dealt generously with Zamori, for it being one of the Articles of Agreement,
that the spoil should be equally divided, he said it was to be understood only
in relation to Artillery, and appeased the Soldiers, who expected that Reward
of their Labor. The Fort and all other Works being levelled with the Ground,
Furtado returned to Goa.

21. As soon as some of the Prisoners were set ashore, they were torn to pieces
by the Rabble. How can they who are guilty of such Inhumanities call the much
more honorable Indians Barbarians. Cunnale and his Nephew Cinale were both
publicly beheaded, without any regard that they had articled for Life. So did
that Government and Rabble go hand in hand in Murder and breach of Faith.

CHAP. IV.
The remarkable Revolutions of Pegu, during the Government of D. Francis de
Gama, Count de Vidigueyra.

1. THE Kingdom of Pegu, before not very considerable, was raised to be one of
the greatest Empires in Asia, by the King of Uva and Brama, assisted by 1000
Portugueses under the Command of Antony Ferreyra de Braganca, who served him as
his natural Prince. The Kingdom of Pegu, properly so called, borders on that of
Arracam, the Countries of the Brama's and Iungoma's; on the West is bounded by
they Sea of Bengala, from the City Rei to that of Sidoa, distant 90 Leagues
from each other; the breadth of the Kingdom is about the same, and its true
Name is Bagou.

2. It is about 1000 Years since this Kingdom was first erected by a Seaman,
who was the first King; then his Son, who lived 80 Years; next the Grandson,
called Tam; these and all their Successors added to their Name the Title of
Banna, Cael Uca, Talanna, Inda, Darar, Mampla. Ximindo, the last, who died the
Year 1640 (as was before related) when Branginoco so far enlarged it by his
Conquests, that it extended to China and Tartary, and was Sovereign of
Twenty-four great Kingdoms, beside Eighty Princes not inferior to Kings. Thus
it became the powerfullest Monarchy in Asia, except that of China.

3. This King for the Conquest of Martavam, thirty Leagues distant from Pegu,
gathered 700000, Men and 1700 Ships. The Siege lasted six Months, in which died
160000 Men. The City being taken and the King killed, 140000 Houses were burnt,
besides 1600 Temples, in which were taken 60000 Idols, most of Gold and
precious Stones; there were also taken 3000 Elephants, 6000 Cannon, and
innumerable Prisoners. The King's share of the Spoil was above 100 Millions of
Gold.

4. For the Conquest of Siam he led a greater Force, possessed himself of the
Kingdom, and took the King and his two Sons, called, by reason of their
different color, one the Black, the other the White. He was content to leave
that King in Possession of the Crown as his Vassal, having himself been till
then his Subject, carrying away his two Sons as Hostages.

5. Branginoco returning Victorious to Pegu, entered the City in Triumph, many
Wagons going before loaded with Idols and inestimable Booty. He came at last
in a Chariot with the conquered Queens laden with Jewels at his Feet, and
drawn by the Captive Princes and Lords; before him marched Two thousand
Elephants richly adorned, and after him his victorious Troops. He built a
Palace as big as an ordinary City. The least part of its Beauty was rich
Painting and Gilding; for the Roofs of some Apartments were covered with Plates
of solid Gold. Some Rooms were set with Statues of Kings and Queens of massy
Gold, set with rich Stones as big as the Life. He was carried on a Litter of
Gold upon many Men's Shoulders, the Reverence paid him was more like a God than
a Prince.

6. After some time the two Brothers asked leave of the King to go visit their
Father, which he granted, and afterward sending to demand the usual Tribute,
the black Prince refused to pay it. The King in a Rage sends his great
Favorite Banna with a powerful Army against him. Banna ravaged the Country of
Siam, and Besieges the Prince in Hudixa, who defended it so bravely, that Banna
being forced to draw off, he fell upon and totally defeated him. The King sends
his Brother-in-Law with a greater Power, and he receives a greater overthrow,
200000 of his Men were cut in pieces, with a great number of Elephants and
Horses, many more of both taken. The black Prince remained Victorious, his Men
were enriched, and all encouraged to follow their good Fortune.

7. The King of Pegu raises another Army of 1700000 Men, 1500 Elephants, 80000
Horse and all Necessaries proportionable; the Command of it he gave to Mapa
Raja his Son, with the Title of King of Siam, not doubting of the Victory. At
the News of this Power all Siam trembled, except the valiant Black, now King,
who met his Enemy, and gave him Battle. The two Kings encountering on their
Elephants fought, and he of Pegu was cast dead off his Elephant, at which sight
his Men fled, and the Siamites pursued them a Month, destroying the greatest
part of that vast Army.

8. The King of Pegu in a Rage for the Death of his Son, turned his Fury
against the People, and some days burnt above Ten Thousand, throwing so many
into the River Ganga, as stopped the Passage even of Boats. He forbid them
sowing, which caused such a a Famine, that they not only eat one another, to
which purpose there was a public Butchery of Man's Flesh, but devoured part of
their own Bodies. For want of Fuel they made fire of human Bones, having first
taken off the Flesh to eat. It is wonderful all this Tyranny never obliged that
People to rebel. A good Example given by Heathens, to those more barbarous
Christians, who dare fly in the Face of just Princes, without the least shadow
of Oppression.

9. This was followed by a Pestilence that depopulated all the Kingdom. The
neighboring Princes taking this advantage, fell upon the King of Pegu,
covetous of his Treasures. Among them was the Black of Siam, who retired with
the loss 100000 Men. The King of Tangu was he that possessed himself of all, he
promised Life, Liberty and Estates to all that would come over to him. The
first that deserted were the Portugueses and Moors; for some Portugueses are
like Moors in Matters of Interest. After them followed a Bastard Son of the
King, whose Head was cut off by Order of the King of Pegu's Sister, Wife to him
of Tangu, saying, That he who was false to his Father could not be true to her.
She said and did well, but who will punish her for treating her Brother
barbarously when taken.

10. He in despair delivers himself up to the King of Tangu, who being
possessed of the City and Palace found such Treasure, that he made no account
of Silver, and other Metals and Riches. It is avouched for truth, that he could
not remove all the Jewels and Gold in twelve Caravans, each consisting of Seven
hundred Elephants and Horses. The News of this Treasure drew thither the King
of Arracam, who contenting himself with what he of Tangu undervalued, gathered
above Three Millions, and a great Train of large Cannon. The King of Tangu
presented him of Pegu to his Sister; and she who (having killed his Son for
betraying him) it was thought would comfort, used him Reproachfully, and
afterward seeing the King her Husband inclined to Mercy, caused him to be
beaten to Death.

11. The King of Tangu, in whose House he of Pegu was Murdered by his own
Sister, was his Creature, and Son to a Carter. So that Kingdom had its
beginning in a Seaman or Waterman, and ended in a Carter, both Employs of the
same Nature, one by Land and the other by Water.

12. This Year came into India from the remote Mountains of Scythia or Tartary,
the Prince Baxan, Fourth Grandson of Tamerlain the Great, was by the Augustine
Friars converted to the Faith, lived some time, and married a Woman of Quality
at Goa, and thence came over to live in Portugal.

13. Four Ships arrived safe at Goa from Lisbon, commanded by Airs de Saldana,
who went Viceroy of India. One of these Ships was taken coming home at the
mouth of Lisbon River. In another returned the late Viceroy, D. Francis de
Gama, better beloved by the Elements than by the Portugueses, as will appear by
what follows.

14. Matthias de Albuquerque one of the great Men of India, who afterward fell
at variance with the Count; before that happened, sent him a Present of two
Horses worth Two Thousand Crowns. He accepted, but upon the falling out
returned them. Albuquerque would not take them, and the Count's Messenger left
them by his Order tied at the Door of one of Mathias his Servants. Albuquerque
commanded his Servant to turn them loose, and they run about the City, till no
Body receiving them, they were by his Order tied at the Hospital Door with a
Bill, signifying they were given to the Poor.

15. The Statue of the Great D. Vasco de Gama, Grandfather to the Count, of a
large Proportion cut in Marble, stood over the principal Gate of the City,
fastened to the Wall by a strong Iron Bar. The French Ingenier Sebastian Tibao,
at the Instigation of those Gentlemen, the Count's Enemies, in the Night
applied to the Iron that Herb that has the quality of eating it, by which means
the next Night it was pulled down, broke, and the Quarters hung up in public
Places.

16. The Day the Count was to Embarque, Forty Men well armed got aboard before
him, and hanged up at the Yard Arm his Effigies made exactly like him in Face
and Habit. He was going aboard as they returned, and seeing that sight asked
what it was; they answered, It is your Lordship, and those are the Men that did
it. He only replied, No more, no more India. He caused the Statute to be dropped
into the Sea, set sail, and within two Days came again into the Port, to take
in Fowl for the Voyage, because all he had before were poisoned. This is a
common Practice in India, especially among the great Ones.

17. But as was said, the Elements loved the Count better than the Men, for he
was the first that ever came from India to Lisbon without furling Sail. The
continual biting of the Yards upon the Masts had so fastened them, that they
were forced to out them down when they came (...). Lisbon to lower them,
because they would not run.

18. He set sail on the 25th of December, and arrived at Lisbon the 27th of
May, so that he spent but 5 Months in the Voyage, which equals the swiftness of
the Winds themselves, and could not have been performed but by running
continually with them. The Count was tall, and well shaped, of a grave Aspect,
his Complexion fair, capable of the greatest Command, and not Covetous. He was
the 17th Viceroy, and 35th Governor, 5th of the Name, 3d of the Surname, and
the 5th Count.

CHAP. V.
The Government of the Viceroy Airs de Saldanna, from the Year 1600, till
1604.

1. AS soon as Airs de Saldanna had taken upon him the Government, he
dispatched the homeward bound Ships, which were six, under the command of D.
Hierome Continno. That called the St. Simon, commanded by James de Sousa of
Viana, came first to the Island St. Helena, where there were two great Holland
Ships, with each two tire of Guns. They presently sent aboard our Ship to tell
the Captain, He must instantly yield, and go aboard them, unless he would soon
be sent to the other World. Sousa considering that Message required a loud
Answer, sent it from the mouth of a Cannon, and they understanding it, replied
with 8; the Terror whereof made our Men drop from the Yards who were furling
the Sails, but they soon recovered themselves.

2. The Enemies Cannon playing, killed at first two of our Men, and tore the
Rigging and Masts; at which our People were so frighted, they sought to abandon
the Ship. Sousa with much Valor encouraged them, and began to play his Guns
with good success. The Fight lasted without ceasing that afternoon, all night,
and the next morning, wherein the Hollanders receiving great Damage, made away,
leaving ashore the Cask they had sent for Water. Our 5 Ships came up
afterward, and continued their Voyage together.

3. The Viceroy found at Cochim great Complaints against the King of
Iafanapatan, for that, contrary to the Treaty of Peace, he gave Passage to the
King of Candea through his Country. The Commander of Manar, Manuel^ Barreto de
Silva, was sent against him with 1000 Men. The King expected him with 12000.
Being upon the point of engaging, the Difference was amicably made up by F.
Emanuel of St. Matthias. Religious Men are good to promote Peace between
Lay-Governors, but when they take upon them Secular Governments, they confound
all.

4. This Year 4 Ships set out of Lisbon for India, and were all drove back.
Five Galleons also sailed, and two of them were forced in again, one lost on
the Coast of Zocotora. Another returning next Year from India richly laden, met
at the Island St. Helen 3 Holland Ships of 30 Guns each, ours had but 27 small
ones, yet could not avoid fighting.

5. The Fight lasted some days, till the Galleon was beaten to pieces, and the
Enemy got nothing by the Victory. The Captain and most of the Men were taken,
and basely treated by the Hollanders, who put them ashore in the Island of
Ferdinand de Noronna, whence they passed to Pernambuco, and were there nobly
entertained by James Botello, provided with all Necessaries, and sent home.

6. The Ships that were forced back the last Year, and two more, arrived in
India, and brought the News, That on the 24th of November, 1602. there appeared
over Italaca a Blue Cross, seeming to the Eye about four Fathoms in length, and
two in breadth, of a curious form, with Green Boughs over it. It continued two
hours about daybreak, during which time it was seen by above forty Christians
of Suneputat, who were going to Mass to their Parish of St. Lazarus. The
following Year 5 Ships went from Portugal. We have no farther account of the
Occurrences of these Years, and therefore must be content with what follows,
which happened about that time.

7. Andrew Furtado went over to the Moluco Islands, in hope to recover them. He
drove the Hollanders out of Amboina and Sunda, restored the Rosatelos to our
subjection, gained many strong Places from those of Ito, Nao, and Veranula, and
then appeared before Ternate; from which by bad Weather, and other Accidents,
he was drove, after having spent 5 Years in continual labor. Let us leave him
at Amboina while we treat of the Conquest of Pegu, which happened about the
same time.

8. Xilimixa King of Arracam, who had possessed himself of the Crown of Pegu,
to express his Gratitude to the Portugueses that served him, gave them the Port
of Siriam, at the mouth of the River of the same Name, that runs within a
League of Bagou, the Court of the Kings of Pegu. This Grant was obtained of the
King for the Portugueses by Philip de Brito and Nicote, who most ingratefully
proved false to that Prince, that had raised him from a vile Collier to his
Favor and Esteem. The manner was thus:

9. Xilimixa confiding in Nicote, was by him persuaded to erect a Custom-house
at the mouth of that River for the increase of his Revenue, and his design was
to seize upon it, and build a Fort there to give footing to the Portugueses for
the Conquest of that Kingdom. The King, who suspected not the Design, having
finished the Work, put it into the Hands of one Bannadala, who fortified
himself, and suffered no Portugues to enter there, except F. Belchior de la Luz
a Dominican. Nicote seeing that Design fail, resolved to carry it on by other
means before the Works were too far advanced.

10. He had with him three Portugues Officers, viz. John de Oliva, Paul del
Rego, and Salvador Ribeyro, with 50 Men; these he ordered to surprise the Fort,
and turn out Bannadala, not doubting but his great Credit with Xilimixa would
bear him out in it.

11. The three Captains so well performed Nicote's Orders, that they gained the
Name of Founders of the Portugues Dominion in that Kingdom; and Ribeyro was
like to carry the whole Fame of this Action, some affirming, he was the real
Author of it.

12. Bannadala, who foresaw the Designs of the Portugueses, contrived to expel
them thence at the same time that Riberio thought to surprise him. Banadala
provided many flaming Carts guarded by 600 Men, which advancing by night took
such effect, that the Portugueses were obliged to quit their Factory; but
flying thence, attacked Bannadala's ^ort with such fury, that having left many
Men, he was glad to retire to an Island not far distant, where he fortified
himself, gathering 1000 Men, and securing the Treasure of the Pagod of Digan to
maintain them. The King being informed hereof was much offended, and resolved
to relieve Banadala, but was dissuaded by the false Nicote, who put him in mind
he favored a Sacrilegious Robber, and offered to compose Matters with the
Portugueses. He went thither, and ordered Things to his own mind, so that the
Work still advanced under the Portugueses.

13. Nicote seeing the Fort in a good posture, went to Coa in order to deliver
it up to the Viceroy, and thence facilitate the Conquest of his Master's
Kingdom; persuading him at the same time, his Journey was to bring Succors
wherewith he might become Emperor of all Bengala. He persuaded every one of
the Neighboring Princes. If he would join with the Viceroy, he might easily be
King of Pegu. Some of them sent Ambassadors to this effect along with him.
Scarce was Nicote gone when the King, being sensible of his oversight, sent
down the River a Fleet with 6000 Men under the command of Banadala.

14. Coming down toward the Fort, they were met by 3 Vessels with only 30
Portugueses, commanded by Salvador Ribeyro, who in a little time, without
losing one Man, killed many, took 40 Ships, and put the rest to flight. The
King joining him of Pram, beset the place with 1200 Sail by Water, and 40000
Men by Land. Ribeyro understanding they observed no Order, boldly fell upon
them with his handful of Men, and killing the General, put that whole Army to
the rout.

15. Bannadala gathering 8000 Foot of this scattered Army, sat down the third
time before the Fort, lodging his Men in good order, and furiously battering
the Place, till in the dead of night he ventured to give a fierce Assault. Our
Men bravely opposing, killed above 1000, which were seen the next morning to
fill up the Ditch.

16. The Enemy continued the Siege eight months. Some of our Men deserted, yet
Ribeyro was no way dismayed, but encouraged those that had stayed with him, and
to take from them all hope of Escape, burnt the Vessels that were in the Port.
The Viceroy Airs de Saldanna hearing of these Proceedings, sent considerable
Succors, and many, covetous of Honor or Profit, voluntarily resorted thither;
so that the Commander finding himself 800 strong, resolved to attack the Enemy
in his Works. He put this Design in execution with much Conduct and Bravery,
and was received with no less, till at length Banadala was forced to fly 3
Leagues without looking back, and then stood to see all the Works he had raised
in a Year burnt. The Portugueses thinking this Success had secured their
Affairs in Pegu, dispersed every Man to make his own advantage, so that there
remained with the Captains only 200 that had been sent by the Viceroy.

17. The Enemy returns the fourth time with many moving Castles, and several
sorts of Fireworks. The Fort was reduced to a dangerous condition, when a fiery
Meteor so frighted the Besiegers, that they fled, leaving their Castles behind,
which were soon fired by our Men. Lastly, the Victory we obtained over King
Massinga in the Province of Camelan, killing him, and doing great harm both by
Sea and Land, produced the Security we so much sought after. For those People
finding us not only Victorious, but Courteous, followed us so, that in few days
we had above 20000 of them. These Men considering the Success of Philip de
Brito and Nicote, and his natural good Temper, (which occasioned their calling
him Changa, that is, Good Man,) proclaimed him King of Pegu. Salvador Ribeyro
accepted of the Crown in his Name, he being then absent, and this, perhaps,
might be the cause it was thought in Spain, it was he that was proclaimed.

18. Nicote afterward received the Kingdom in the Name of his Prince as a
Loyal Subject, and was the first of our Men that rose to that pitch of Fortune
in Asia. Roderick Alvarez de Sequeyra succeeded him in the Command of the Fort,
who bravely defended it till it accidentally took fire, and only the bare Walls
of it were left standing.

19. Mean while Nicote solicited for Succors to carry thither, which were not
hard to be obtained; for the Viceroy seeing his great Riches, and the prospect
he had of more, married him to a Niece he had born in Goa of a Iava-Woman, and
for her sake could deny him nothing. He gave him the Title of Commander of
Siriam, and General of the Conquest of Pegu, and Succors in 6 Ships. Being
come to Siriam he repaired the Fort, built a Church, and sent a rich Present to
the King of Arracam, who had sent to compliment him upon his arrival.

20. He ordered the Affairs of the Custom-house according to the Viceroy's
Instructions, obliging all Vessels that traded on the Coast of Pegu to make
their Entries there. Some of the Coast of Coromandel refused to obey; against
them he sent D. Francis de Moura with 6 Sail, who discharged himself well, and
took on the Coast of Tanazarim 2 Ships of Achem richly laden. The King of
Arracam, to the intent to possess himself of that Custom-house, resolved to
join with the King of Tangu, and sent an Ambassador to him with 20 Ialias, or
small Ships. Nicote understanding it, caused Bartholomew Ferreyra, Captain of
our small Craft, to fall upon them, who put them to flight, so that they were
sorced to make their escape to the King of Iangona's Country. The Enemy thus
exasperated, gathered 700 small Vessels with 4000 Men under the command of the
Prince his Son, with whom were Ximicolia, and Marquetam, Sons to the then
Emperor of Pegu.

21. Paul del ^ego Pinnero set out to meet them with the Boats and 7 Ships, and
having taken 10 Boats that were advanced before the rest, returned to secure
them and set out again: but observing the Enemy was too strong for him, went in
to gather more Force. Being reinforced he meets the Prince, routs him, and
takes several Vessels. The Prince thinking to save himself by running up a
River, got into a small Creek, where Pinnero took all the rest of his Vessels,
obliging him to escape by Land, having lost One Thousand of his Men. Then he
took the Fort of Chinim, and in it many Prisoners, among which was the Wife of
B^unadala.

22. Nicote was now abroad with Fourteen small Vessels, in which were Sixty
Portugueses and Two hundred Pegues, he run up a River, and hearing the Prince
was on the Shore with Four thousand Men, Nine Hundred of them Musketeers, he
attacks him. Ximitoto, a valiant Pegu, attempted to take the Prince, and being
himself hurt wounded the Prince in the Face, which occasioned his being made
Prisoner, and gained us the Victory. Two Thousand Men of the King of Pram came
to the Prince's assistance as he was taken, and were also defeated. The Pegues
seeing their Prince carried away to Captivity, would all have gone with him,
striving to get into our Vessels. Such as could not, remained on the Shore,
cursing their hard Fortune, that would not permit them to follow him a
Prisoner, as they had done in Liberty. Christians may here learn the Duty they
owe to their Princes.

23. Nicote may also be a President to all Men; how to use their Victories; for
he not forgetting he had been a Slave to the Prince now his Prisoner, served
him with the same respect now, as he had done then. He watched him sleeping,
holding his Buskins in his Hands with Arms across, a Ceremony used by the
meanest with their Kings in those Parts, and himself attended him upon all
Occasions. This generosity may well equal him with great Men, and purchased him
together with other the like Proceedings, the Name of Changa, which, as was
before said, signifies Good Man.

24. But now ends the Government of Airs de Saldanna, by the arrival at Goa of
Martin Alfonso de Castro, who came to succeed him with the same Title of
Viceroy. He set out from Lisbon with five Ships, whereof one was forced in
again. About the end of the same Year there sailed thence two Caravels.

25. Airs de Saldanna seems to have had more natural Goodness than Inclination
to War; for in his time nothing of this sort was set on Foot. He was one of
those few Viceroys and Governors who are believed not to have wronged the King.
On his rereturn home he died in the Latitude of the Islands, and the Ship that
brought him was lost at the mouth of Lisbon River. He was tall and somewhat
corpulent, of a tawny Complexion; of Viceroys the 18th, of Governors the 36th,
and First of the Name and Surname.

26. I have purposely reserved for the end of this Government the Discovery of
Grand Cathay, for which we are beholding to F. Nicholas Pimenta,
Visitor-General of the Jesuits in Asia. He chose for this employ B. Benedict
Goes, a Man well versed in several Languages, and particularly the Persian,
which was the most important for that Design. B. Goes clothed himself in the
Habit of an Armenian Christian Merchant, and after their manner took the Name
of Abdula Isai, which signifies, Christian Lord. He set out from the Mogol's
Court with that Prince's Favor and Merchandise. In his Company went two Greeks
well skilled in the manner of Traveling, and were Leo Grimanus a Priest, and
Demetrius a Merchant. These had four Mohammedan Servants (who were afterward
Christians) which they left at Laor (one of the Mogol's Courts) as useless, and
took in their stead Isaac an Armenian, who had a Wife and Children there, and
was there faithful Companion. From Laor they set out on the 6th of January 1603.

27. With great Labor and Hardships they passed through the Cities Abec,
Passaur, Caferstan, Guideli and Cabuo. Here they were forced to stay 8 Months,
and meeting a Sister of Hamet Can King of Cascar, that was going a Pilgrimage
to Meca, and was taking up Money at Interest. B. Benedict considering it would
oblige that Princess and her Brother, through whose Dominions he was to pass,
lent her 600 Ducats without Interest, which afterward stood him in good stead.
The Priest Grimanus spent with Labor, turned back from Cabul. The Caravan set
forward, and passed the Dominions of the Mogol's, in sight of the Cities
Characar and Parvam.

28. They passed the high Mountains of Aingaran, and entering Chalca saw a fair
People like the Germans, then went through Gialal^bat, Thalham, Quenam,
Badaxa^, Carebumar, Serpanil, Sarchunar, Tanguetar, Iaconich, in which Journey
almost two years were spent with great Toils and Dangers. Hence they Traveled
to Hiarcan, the Court of the King of Cascar, and Place of great Trade. They
stayed a Year for another Carravan, and then set out, much favored by the
King, for the Kingdom of Chalis. The Son of the Pilgrim Lady they lent the
Money to at Cabul was very serviceable to them, and they were repaid in
precious Jaspar-stone, the richest Merchandise in that Country. In their way
they passed through these Towns, Iolchi, Hanchalix, Alchegret, Hagabareth
Cambaxi, Aconferset, Chiacor and Acfu. Acfu is a Town belonging to the King of
Cascar, where a Grandson of his, only ten Years of Age, then governed, who
favored Goes the time he was obliged to stay there.

29. B. Benedict and Isaac setting forward again (for Demetrius stayed behind
at Hiarcam) and passing the famous Desert Caracatay (that is, The black Land of
Catay) and these Towns, Oitograck, Gazo, Canani, Delai, Saraguebedal, Ugan and
Cucha, they came to the City Chalis, where a Son of the King of Cascar
governed, and where they were in great danger, and stayed 3 months. Here came
in the Caravan from Cathay, by whom our Discoverer heard of F. Matthew Rivius,
then residing at Peking, and found that China and Cathay were the same Country,
and only the Names differed. Goes joyful of this Discovery resolved to proceed.
On his way he passed through these Towns, Puchan, Turfan, Arumuth, Camul and
Quiacio^, (whence may be seen that famous Wall that parts China and Tartary)
and came to Sucheu, where hearing much of the Court of Peking, he was thoroughly
satisfied that China and Cathay where the same thing.

30. Then ended the Year 1606. The 4th of these Travels now grown pleasing to
B. Benedict, for that he had compassed his end, found his Order where it was
least to be expected, and could relieve them with what he had got by his
Merchandise, which amounted to 2500 Crowns, and at that time was a considerable
Treasure. He gave advice of his arrival to F. Matthew at Peking, and he sent B.
John Fernandez, a Novice of the Converts to conduct him forward. He arrived at
Suche^ the latter end of March 1607, and 11 Days after our Discoverer died, not
without suspicion of Poison given by the Moors to rob him, as they did, abusing
Isaac and B. Fernandez, who having buried the deceased went to Peking.

CHAP. VI.
The Government of the Viceroy D. Martin Alfonso de Castro, from the Year 1604
till 1607.

1. DON Martin Alfonso de Castro entering upon the Government, gave some signs
of being ambitious of Glory, but Fortune was not favorable to him, or, as some
say, his own Humor was an impediment. Therefore let us proceed with the
Affairs of the Conquest of Pegu.

2. Ximilica King of Arracam considering his Son was Prisoner, thought good to
treat with Nicote, and he, to come to an agreement the better to make his
advantage of the Profits of the Custom-House, sent Advice of all to Goa, and
received Orders thence to return the Prince without any Ransom. But Interest
being his greatest aim, neither Obedience to the Viceroy, nor the Respect he
owed that King, whose Creature he was, could prevail to hinder him from selling
that Prince for 50000 Crowns, pretending it was for the Charge of the Fleet the
King had obliged him to fit out.

3. The King of Arracam justly offended hereat, set out a small Fleet against
Siriam, which was easily defeated, but gave him occasion to enslave 100000
Christians, and treat them with great rigor; which nevertheless moved not many
of them, though but new Converts. Afterward he combines with the King of
Tangu, who Besieges the Town with a great Army by Land, while he shuts it up by
Sea with 800 Sail, in which he had 10000 Men. Paul del Rego, met him with 80
Ships, and failing of the success he had formerly, setting Fire to the Powder,
blew up himself and all that were with him, rather than fall into the Hands of
the Enemy. The Siege continued so long, till the besieged were ready to
surrender, when on a sudden upon some suspicion the King of Tangu quits the
Field by night, and he of Arracam found it to no purpose to lie longer upon the
Sea.

4. Some of the neighboring Princes startled at this success of Nicote sought
his Friendship, and an Alliance with the King of Portugal. The first that
effected it was the King of Tangu. Nicote marries his Son Simon to a Daughter
of the King of Martavam, thereby to strengthen himself, and have the
opportunity of gathering more Riches. And being now desirous to rob the King of
Tangu, tho actually then in Peace with him, to color his wicked Design he
pretends that King was overcome by him of Ova, (as indeed he was and made
Tributary) since the Treaty, as if that could absolve him for breach of Faith.
In fine, with the King of Martavam's assistance, he fell upon, took, and robbed
him of Tangu, and returned with him and above a Million of Gold, without
harkening to the Protestations he made of his continuing a faithful Vassal to
the Crown of Portugal.

5. Let us keep in mind these his unjust Proceedings, and in its place we shall
see them rewarded as they deserve; for all these Particulars happened not at
this time, but it is anticipated, to prevent too much dismembring the Relation
of them. Indeed it is to be admired, a Christian Government should support such
Unchristian Proceedings.

6. It will be fit to return to the Affairs of the Moluco Islands. The
Hollanders were now strong in those Seas, and well backed by the Islanders, who
tired out with our insatiable Avarice, joined with those Rebels to expel us.

7. The Hollanders about this time having forced us thence, had possessed
themselves of Amboina. Gaspar de Melo commanded there, whom absolute Necessity
obliged to quit it, yet being unjustly accused and in danger of suffering with
Disgrace, his Wife poisoned him. A strange Government, where notorious
Criminals were not punished, and an innocent Person was so Persecuted, that she
who loved him took away his Life, least they should take away his Honor, who
had none of their own. The Portugueses who were at Tidore since the loosing of
Ternate, seeing the King did not deliver them up to the Hollanders who demanded
them, and had nine Ships in the Harbor, but that he was resolved to stand by
them, took such Courage, that they withstood the continual Batteries of 120
Cannons, which played on them without intermission.

8. The King of Ternate sends a Fleet to assist the Hollanders, and Landing
batters the Fort on the other side. All we had to oppose this Power, was 10 or
12 pieces of Cannon, and but a small number of Men able to bear Arms. After
four days Battery the Enemy gives the Assault, our Men encouraged by their
Captain Peter Alvarez de Abreu, with Sword in Hand bravely repulse them. In the
midst of their hopes that this defeat would oblige the Enemy to desist, the
Powder by some accident taking fire, blew up the greatest part of the Fort and
most of the Men; so that the Enemy entered it when they least expected, and our
Men were forced to accept of some Vessels to go where they thought fit.

9. About Four hundred Persons of all sorts were shipped, and got to the
Philippine Islands, where D Peter de Cunna Commanded. Neither was their Voyage
without danger, the enraged Sea being ready to swallow them; but the Mercy of
God brought them safe ashore, by virtue of certain Relics thrown into the
Water by a Jesuit, which laid the Storm, and after their landing were brought
and laid upon the Sand by a Fish.

10. In February Cunna sailed from the Philippine Islands toward Ternate with
One thousand Spaniards and Four hundred of the Natives. He Besieged the Fort,
in which was the King himself, and had above One hundred Cannons. The
Hollanders and Ternatenses thinking to surprise the Besiegers, made a Sally,
and were so received by John Rodriguez Camelo, who commanded a Company of
Portugueses, that he not only beat them back, but entered the Fort along with
them. So that when the Spanish Commander came up, fearing some mischance might
be occasioned by that heat, Camelo met him at the Gate with the Keys of the
Fort, and Cunna to honor him for that Action, put about his Neck a Gold Chain
he had upon his own.

11. The Ternatenses in the fright abandoned the City as they had done the
Fort. The Spanish Commander losing no time, drove the Hollanders out of Tidore,
and cut off their hopes of ever settling in those Islands, which from that time
forward remained subject to Spain.

12. Though the Hollanders lost Tidore, yet they aspired to greater Conquests.
To this purpose they made a League with seven of the Neighboring Kings about
Malaca, thinking to gain that Place. They gathered a Fleet of One hundred and
fifty Sail, in which were 16000 Men. There were but few above One hundred
Portugueses in a condition to oppose this Power, but they were Commanded by the
Great Andrew Furtado de Mendoca. He sent out several Parties to discover the
Enemy's Designs. The first was but of four Soldiers with Gaspar de Fonseca; the
Enemy thinking they Deserted, gave them free Passage, but were undeceived,
receiving considerable damage from only those five Men. Next Captain Ferdinand
de Costa de Andria with Forty Men, some of them Iaponeses, cut off a good Party
of them, and retired without any loss.

13. The Enemy having taken their Ground, began to batter the City; and those
within to feel the Miseries of a Siege, being in want of all Necessaries. To
this was added, that the Master-Gunner was a Hollander, who designedly burst
many pieces of Cannon, having underhand Intelligence with the Enemy. A Moor
who commanded some Men acted no less treacherously, but being discovered, they
were both hanged over the Wall. Many of our Men signalized themselves by brave
Actions, and particularly John Rodriguez Camelo, who with great danger brought
a number of Men and did good Service with them. The Enemy lost so many Men
during four Months the Siege lasted, in which time they spent above Fifty
thousand Cannon Balls; that despairing of success they raised the Siege; the
Kings returning home, and the Hollanders to their Ships.

14. The News that D. Martin Alfonso de Castro, our Viceroy, was coming with
twelve Galleons, four Galleys, and seventy other Vessels, caused the Siege to
be sooner raised. He set out of Goa in May, on St. Antony's Day in June came to
Anchor at Achem, where he took three of the Enemy's Ships laden with
Provisions, and resolved to take Revenge on that King for receiving the
Hollanders into his Ports, contrary to a former Agreement. On the 29th the Men
landed, the Enemy's opposed them in great numbers with many Elephants, but
after a brave resistance were forced to their Works. Our Men mounted and
planted their Colors, and had they followed their Victory, the City had been
that day destroyed. Yet the fight lasted all that and next day; when the
Viceroy perceiving no Benefit accrued, shipped his Men, much afflicted that he
had slipped such an Opportunity.

15. After suffering much for want of Water, and loosing some Vessels by bad
Weather, the Fleet came before Malaca, where Andrew Furtado acquainted the
Viceroy the Siege was carried on by Sea and Land, on the Sea were eleven Ships
and seven Galliots of the Hollanders, and Three hundred small Vessels of the
Natives; by Land, eleven neighboring Kings in their Persons with 14000 Men.
Both of them, during those four Months the Siege lasted, had destroyed many
Buildings, and committed great Outrages against Images and other holy Things.
On the 17th of August the (...) Ships went out to receive our Fleet, playing
their Cannon furiosly, and were answered in like manner with equal loss, till
Night parted them.

16. Morning appearing the Fight was renewed with great Fury, but the Damage
was greater on our side, because the Enemies Ships exceeded us in strength,
swiftness, number of Cannons, and goodness of Gunners. Sebastian Suarez boarded
one and burnt it, after having killed many Hollanders. Alvaro de Carvallo would
have done the like to another, and Duarte de Guerra coming up to second him,
they all three were consumed by fire, and none of the Men saved.

17. D. Henry de Noronna boarded the Admiral Cornelius Madclif, and being both
in danger of being burnt, they parted by consent, promising if they met again
they would not encounter. Whereupon Noronna quitted his Command, telling the
Viceroy, He had rather serve as a private Man, than be obliged to perform the
Promise he had made to the Enemy. D. Peter Mascarennas succeeded him in the
Command, who did Wonders; for the Dutch Admiral coming up to salute him,
supposing it had been Noronna, they engaged furiously; and after the fight,
Four hundred Cannon shot were found in the Galleon, which had done no other
harm than the killing one Caf^e. The Fleets were engaged eight Days, and our
Vessels very much disabled. On the 24th of August the Viceroy again offered the
Enemy Battle, but they all fled.

18. The Viceroy entered Malaca, which had been ruined during the Siege. Andrew
Furtado was of Opinion, the Fleet should be kept together, lest the Enemy might
destroy it, being separated: Others advised it should divide; the worst Advice
was followed. D. Alvaro de Meneses had a Squadron of seven Galleons, to go meet
the Ships that were expected from Portugal at the Islands of Nicobar. Nunno
Alvarez Pereyra; another of five, to secure the Ships of Iava, that brought
Provisions to Malaca, through the Straight of Singapura, but having met the
Enemy, he returned into the Port.

19. The Hollanders having refitted, and hearing our Fleet was divided, came
again before Malaca, and finding there the five Galleons, they began a
desperate fight on the twenty-second of October. Many Men of Note of our side
were killed; one of our Vessels blew up, and only seven Men were saved: In
fine, the whole Squadron was destroyed. Of the Hollanders about Five hundred
were killed. The Viceroy soon after died at Malaca, it was believed that of
Grief for this Loss.

20. The Hollanders met not with the like Success in the Bay of Polobutum,
where D. Alvaro de Meneses was with his Squadron of seven Galleons; for after a
bloody Fight, they were forced to give way, having lost three Ships. But since
the Viceroy is dead, and we must enter upon a new Government, it will be fit to
mention what Ships sailed from Lisbon for India during his Life. In the Year
1605, 7 Ships. Before them three Galleons, which were with the Fleet at Malaca.
After the 7 Ships, set out Belchior Rodriguez in a Caravel with some fresh
Advice, who overtaking them under the Line, returned to Lisbon.

21. In the Year 1606, 3 Ships were to have gone, but were prevented by a Dutch
Squadron that lay at the mouth of the River till the Season was past. Thus much
of the Government of D. Martin Alfonso de Castro, who was Viceroy two Years and
a half, the 19th of that Number, and 37th Governor, the second both of Name
and Surname. Of Stature somewhat tall, of Complexion sallow, a good Christian,
a good Gentleman, well beloved in India, and Zealous of the Kings's Service, a
Thing now rare in the World.

CHAP. VII.
The Government of the Archbishop D. F. Alexius de Meneses, who was Governor
from the Year 1607, till 1609.

1. DOn Martin Alfonso de Castra the Viceroy being dead, D. F. Alexius de
Meneses Archbishop of Goa succeeded him in the Government, but not in the
Title. About the beginning of his Government failed from Lisbon the three
Ships, which were to have set out the Year before. After them followed two
Galleons, and two small Ships, the two former were to remain in India.

2. The Hollanders now aimed at the Conquest of the Island of Mocambique. Our
Fort there was commanded by D. Stephen de Ataide, who not long before had
obtained of the Emperor of Monomotapa a Grant of all the Silver Mines in his
Dominions, which are much richer than those of Asia, to the Crown of Portugal.
The Motive of this Donation was, that we might assist him to subdue his
Rebellious Subjects, which D. Stephen performed, securing him in his Throne,
and to us that great Gift, if we had known how to make use of it.

3. About the end of May, Paul Vercaden the Dutch Admiral anchored in the great
Port of Mocambique with 8 Ships well stored, and carrying 1500 Men. In the Fort
there were but 80 Men, a few and but indifferent Pieces of Cannon, and that
scarce fit for Service. Nevertheless D. Stephen lost no Courage, but posted his
Men, whilst the Enemy invested the Place.

4. The Enemies Cannon-Balls flying very thick, kept the Walls bare of Men, so
that a Colonel of theirs boldly rode about viewing our Works, till he was
struck down dead with a Bullet. The Enemy carrying on their Approaches under
the shelter of their Batteries that continually played, our Men were forced to
appear upon the Walls to oppose that Danger, and the Hollanders being tired,
offered a Truce, which was accepted. While it lasted, they reproached the
Portugu^ses that they had degenerated from their ancient Valor, who, to
convince them of the contrary, offered to fight 50 of them with only 25; which
they refusing, it gave new Courage to the Besieged.

5. The Truce expiring, the Cannon on both sides began to play. The Enemy
thought to take off the use of ours, by bringing up to the Walls great Wooden
Towers equal with our Pa^apets. It was a dark stormy night when they began to
advance, but our watchful Sentinels perceiving it, so many Fireworks were
heaped on them, they were forced to retire with some loss. Next night,
notwithstanding all opposition, they were laid close to the Walls. Twenty five
Portugueses sallied with a Resolution to burn or break them, but succeeded not.

6. Being disappointed of that Design, they fall upon the Hollanders, who
increased to 500, and killing many, those 25 retired without losing one, only
some were wounded. This Action seemed to have astonished the Enemy, for the
next day they stirred not; nor after that for a whole week, tho they saw their
Castles burnt. At last the Admiral sent Ataide a Letter, threatening to spoil
all the Country about, unless he redeemed it from Ruin with a Sum of Money.

7. Our Commander refused, and the Hollander burnt down all that the Fire could
lay hold of, so the Town and other Buildings perished. Next they cut down all
the Woods, and then raised the Siege which had lasted two months; during which
time, 13 of our Men were killed, and of theirs above 300. As they went over the
Bar, one of their Ships was sunk by our Cannon. Scarce were they gone in the
beginning of June, when three of our Ships from Portugal, under the command of
D. Hierome Coutino, entered the Port. Not long after came in Peter Blens, about
the end of July, with 3 Holland Ships, and 2000 Men, which might have been our
Ruin had they come sooner.

8. D. Hierome, having the best he could relieved the Place, was under Sail for
India, when Blens came in, imagining Vercaden was by that time possessed of the
Fort. The Portugueses undeceived him with some Cannon Shot, to which he
answered by landing his Men, and besieging the Fort as the other had done. The
first day the Batteries played they spent above 300 great Shot, which laid one
side open; and they might have entered, had they been as resolute to Assaul^, as
furious in making the Breach. The Damage received by Day, was repaired by
night. Next morning 25 Men sallying killed 30, and returned without losing one,
bringing in Arms, Drums, and Colors. One of these engaged with three of the
Enemy well Armed, killed two, and put the other to flight.

9. A Frenchman and 4 Hollanders came to the Wall, begging to be protected as
being Ca^olicks Blens in a fury demands them of o^ Commander, who refused to
deliver them, and he in revenge ties 6 Portugueses taken at his entrance into
the Harbor, and shoots them to Death. One hundred and fifty more were in the
same danger, who were taken out of a Galleon, which coming from Portugal, and
knowing nothing of what had happened there, run into the midst of the Enemies
Ships, and was burnt by them. D. Stephen chose rather to expose those Men to
danger, than break Faith with those five he had taken into Protection. But
Blens his Passion being over, he recalled the Sentence, raised the Siege, and
setting Sail, put all the Portugueses he had taken ashore in the Island of St.
George. The loss on both sides now, was much the same as had been given and
received before by Vercaden. Blens sailed out of the Port about the end of
August.

10. While the Archbishop was Governor, two Squadrons sailed from Portugal for
India. That of the Year 1608, shall be spoke of in the next Chapter, because it
carried D. John Pereyra Frojas Count de Feyra, who went Viceroy of India, but
died by the way. The other of the same Year which arrived there in 1609, and
carried Ruy Lorenco de Tavora to the same Command, shall be spoken of in the
Chapter of Andrew Furtado de Mendoca, who succeeded the Archbishop. This
Religious Man governed two Years and a half, and was the 38th Governor, the
first of the Name, and sixth of the Surname, and first Churchman that had that
Post. He was of a middle Stature, white of Complexion, gray with Years, of a
serene Countenance which moved Respect, and took such care of his Servants,
that many got Estates.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Viceroy D. John Pereyra Frojas Count de Feyra, in the Year 1608.

1. AT the beginning of this Year sailed from the Port of Lisbon for India D.
John Pereyra Frojas Count de Feyra with the Title of Viceroy. He raised in all
Men great expectation, as well for his Personal Merit, as the greatness of his
Quality, and the Preparations for his Voyage were suitable, being the greatest
that till then had been. His Squadron consisted of 6 Ships, and 8 Galleons.

2. The Viceroy set out on the 29th of March, died on the 15th of May; his Body
was sent back, and brought to Lisbon the 24th of July. The Admiral Noronna
succeeded in the Command of the Fleet. The Count was the second that died by
the way going to govern India, and may be accounted 3d of the Name, 20th
Viceroy, and 39th Governor; for the Patent, not the Possession, make a Man so.

3. But since this Viceroy has not afforded Matter for a Chapter, let us make
it up with one of the greatest Prodigies of the Portugues Fortune that Asia
produced. Three Years she was big with this Monster, from 1605, till 1608. We
shall see another James Suarez de Melo, and another Philip de Brito and Nicate,
famous for their incredible Rise and Insolence. This was Sebastian Gonzalez
Tibao, a Man of obscure Extraction, as born in the Village of St. Antony del
Tojal, near Lisbon, a Place never yet produced any worth Note, either for
Parentage, or worthy Actions. In the Year 1605 he imbarqued for India, went
over to Bengala, listed himself a Soldier, and then fell to dealing in Salt,
which is a great Merchandise there. By this Trade he soon gained as much as
purchased a Ialia, that is, a sort of small Vessel. In this Vessel he went with
Salt to Dianga, a great Port of the King of Arracam, at such time as that King
slew 600 Portugueses who resided there, and suspected nothing less, living
quietly as good Subjects under his Protection. The Motive of this Cruelty was,
That Philip de Brito and Nicote being possessed of Siriam, thought it would be
for his Advantage to gain Dianga. He fitted out some Vessels, and sent in them
his Son as Ambassador to beg that Port of the King. Some Portugueses persuaded
the King, Nicote's design in getting that Port, was to deprive him of his
Kingdom. He orders the Son with his Officers to come to Court, and there
murders them; the same was done in their Vessels; and afterward that Fury fell
upon all the Inhabitants of Dianga. This was in the beginning of the Year 1607.
Some few escaped into the Woods, and 9 or 10 Vessels got to Sea, whereof one
was that of Sebastian Gonzales.

4. Emanuel de Mattos Commander of Bandel of Dianga, who died not long before,
had been Lord of Sundiva, an Island 70 Leagues in compass. Fatecan a resolute
Moor, whom he had entrusted with the Island in his absence, hearing of his
Death, makes himself Master of it, and the more to secure himself, murders all
the Portugueses that were in it, with their Wives and Children, and such of the
Natives as were Christians. Then he gathered Moors and Patans to his
assistance, fitted out a Fleet of 40 Sail, and plentifully maintained this
Charge with the Revenue of the Island, which is great. Sebastian Gonzalez and
his Companions, with those 9 or 10 Vessels that escaped at Dianga, having no
Head to govern them, lived by robbing in the Country of Arracam, carrying their
Booty to the King of Bacala's Ports, who was our Friend. Fatecan understanding
they plied thereabouts, went out to seek them with such assurance of Success,
that he had this Inscription upon his Colors; Fatecan, by the Grace of GOD
Lord of Sundiva, shedder of Christian Blood, and destroyer of the Portugues
Nation.

6. One evening he thought to surprise them, and had effected it, but that they
quarrelling about dividing some Spoil they had taken; this falling out, proved
their Preservation: For Sebastian Pinto upon that account leaving them in a
River of the Island Xavaspur, met Fatecan's Fleet and gave them notice. They
engaged and fought desperately all night, the morning discovered 80 Portugueses
victorious over 600 Moors and Patanes, and 10 Vessels over 40. Not one Sail got
off, nor a Man escaped being killed or taken; among the Dead was Fatecan. Had
they been under a Commander that knew how to make use of the Victory, the
Island must then have been their own. This obliged them to choose a Head, and
they pitched upon Stephen Palmeyro, a Man of Years, Experience, and Discretion.
He gave Proof hereof, by refusing (notwithstanding their repeated Instances) to
Command such wicked People. However they desired him to appoint one, and they
would punctually obey him. He named Sebastian Gonzales Tibao.

6. As soon as the Commander was named, they resolved to gain Sundiva. More
Portugueses were gathered from Bengala, and other Neighboring Ports. Tibao
articled with the King of Bacala, That he would give him half the Revenue of
the Island, if he assisted him to conquer it. The King sent some Ships, and 200
Horse. In March, 1609, he had above 40 Sail, and 400 Portugueses. The Island
having had time to provide for its Defense, was full of Resolute Men. A great
number of Moors, commanded by F^tecan's Brother, received them at Landing, but
were forced to retire into a Fort. The Portugueses besiege it, and lying long
before it, were in danger of perishing, not being able to come at the
Provisions and Ammunition that were aboard their Vessels, Gaspar de Pina, a
Spaniard, delivered them from this Danger, for he coming with his Ship to that
Port, and resolving to assist them, landed 50 Men he was Captain of, and
marching by night with many Lights, and great Noise, made the Enemy believe he
brought great Succor. As soon as he came up the Fort was assaulted, entered,
and all within that had life put to the Sword. The Natives of the Island, who
before had been subject to the Portugueses, presently submitted themselves to
Sebastian Gonzales. He received them upon condition they should deliver up to
him all the Strangers that were in the Island. They brought him above 1000
Moors, and as they came he cut off their Heads; about as many more were killed
in the Fort. Thus Sebastian Gonzales became absolute Master of the Island, and
was obeyed by the Natives and Portugueses as an absolute Lord independent of
any Prince, and his Orders had the force of Laws.

7. To recompense the chief Portugueses who had served him, he gave them Lands
in the Island, and then repenting, took them away. In stead of giving the King
of Bacala half the Revenue of the Island, as had been agreed, he made War upon
him. As he grew Great, so he grew Insolent and Ungrateful, and had now at
Command 1000 Portugueses, 2000 Natives well Armed, 200 Horse, and above 80 Sail
with good Cannon. Many Merchants traded thither, and he erected a Custom-house.
The Neighboring Kings surprised at his prodigious Success, sought his
Friendship. From the King of Batecala, to whom he owed so great Favors, he
took the Islands of Xavapur and Patelabauga, and other Lands from others, so
that on a sudden he was possessed of vast Riches, equal with many Princes, and
sovereign of many brave Men. But these Monsters are like Comets that last
little, and threaten lasting Ruin. They are like Lightning, that no sooner
gives the flash but it is gone. Let us proceed, and we shall see this verified.

8. Such was the fortune of Sebastian Gonzales in Sundiva, when there happened
a Difference between the Prince of Arracam and his Brother Anaporam; the
Occasion was, that the latter refused to give the other an Elephant, to which
all other Elephants of that Country were said to allow a sort of Superiority,
and durst not appear before him. The Prince seeing he could not prevail by
Entreaties nor Threats, raises a great Army, and deprives his Brother both of
his Kingdom, and that so much coveted Beast. Anaporam fled to Sebastian
Gonzales for Succor, who demanded his Sister as a Hostage. Then he sets out to
fight the Conqueror, but to no purpose, for he had too great a Power, to wit,
80000 Men, and 700 fighting Elephants. King Anaporam returned with Sebastian
Gonzales to Sundiva, bringing over his Wife, Family, Treasure, and Elephants.
Thus he remained as a Subject to Sebastian Gonzales, who Baptizing his Sister,
married her, and though so vile a Wretch, pretended he did that Prince a great
favor. Soon after the Prince dies, not without suspicion of Poison, for
Sebastian Gonzales seized upon all his Treasure, Elephants, and Goods, without
any consideration of his Wife and Son. To stop the mouths of the People, he
would have married the Queen to his Brother Antony Tiba^ Admiral of his Fleet,
but could not compass it, for she could never be prevailed upon to become a
Christian.

9. Sebastian waged War upon the King of Arracam with good success. An Instance
hereof may be, that his Brother Antony with only 5 Sail took 100 of that
King's. This moved the King to conclude a Peace with him, and thereby recovered
his Sister-in-Law and Brother's Widow, whom he married to the King of Chatigam.
At this time the Mogol undertook the Conquest of the Kingdom of Balua, and
Sebastian considering it might prove of dangerous consequence, that Kingdom
lying opposite to him, he makes a League with the King of Arracam for the
defense of that Country. The League concluded, the King takes the Field with
80000 Men, most of them Musketeers, 10000 Pegues that fought with Sword and
Buckler, and 700 Elephants loaded with Castles and Armed Men. He put to Sea
above 200 Sail, carrying 4000 Men, which were to join Sebastian Gonzales his
Fleet, and to be under his Command. The agreement was, That Sebastian should
hinder the Mogol from passing to the Kingdom of Balua, till the King of Arracam
could march thither with his Army; and that the Mogol being expelled, half the
Kingdom of Balua should be given to Sebastian, who gave the King, as Hostages
for his Fleet, a Nephew of his own, and the Sons of some Portugueses
Inhabitants of Sundiva.

10. The King of Arracam entering the Kingdom of Balua with his Army, expelled
the Mogols. It was thought, that Sebastian overcome with Bribes had given them
free passage, which, according to the Agreement with the King of Arracam, he
was to obstruct. Others say, He did it to revenge the Death of the Portugueses
slain by that King in Banguel of Dianga. Be it as it will, he was guilty of an
execrable Treachery, for, leaving the mouth of the River Da^gatiar, he gave
them free Passage. He enters a Creek of the Island Desierta with his Fleet, and
calling all the King of Arracam's Captains aboard his Ship, murders them, then
falling upon the Ships, killed or made Slaves of all the Men. Having committed
this infamous Action, and secured that Fleet, he returned to Sundiva. Mean
while the Mogols coming down again with a greater Power, entered the Kingdom of
Balua, and reduced the King of Arracam to such distress, that with much
difficulty he escaped by the help of an Elephant, and came almost alone to the
Fort of Chatigam.

11. Sebastian Gonzales understanding the Slaughter the Mogols had made of the
Arracam Army, and that they were possessed of the Kingdom of Balua, he sets out
with his Fleet, plundering and destroying with Fire and Sword all the Forts of
Arracam that lie along the Coast, and were then unprovided, and confiding in
the Peace that was between them. He had the Impudence to go up to Arracam,
where as the Matter was more, so was the Destruction, there were burnt many
Merchant Ships of several Nations. The King was highly concerned at these
Losses, though not so much at those occasioned by the Mogol, as those he
sustained by this Portugueses, as being all the effects of Treachery; but above
all, he resented the loss of a Ship which he kept in that Port for to take his
Pleasure. It was of a vast Bigness, and wonderful Workmanship, with several
Apartments like a Palace, all covered with Gold and Ivory, and yet the
curiosity of the Work surpassed all the rest.

12. The King seeing the Insolence and Falsehood of Sebastian Gonzales, and that
he did not, or would not, remember his Nephew was in his Power as a Hostage, he
resolved to put him in mind; and causing a Stake to be run through him, made
him be set up on a high place below the Port of Arracam, that his Uncle as he
went out might see him. But he who had no Honor, valued not at whose Cost he
advanced his own Interest. Nevertheless the guilt of so many Villainies began to
touch his Conscience, and being come to Sundiva, he began to apprehend some
heavy Punishment would fall upon him, which he had little means to a^ert, for
all Men looked upon him as a Traitor unworthy of any Favor. The Arracams,
because he betrayed them to the Mogol; and the Mogols, because he was so false
to those that trusted him. But what he did not expect from those we call
Barbarians, he shall obtain of the Portugues Government in India which shall
assist him, and both he and they that Relieve him shall receive their just
Reward, as will appear under the Government of D. Hierome de Azevedo.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Governor Andrew Furtado de Mendoca, in the Year 1609.

1. MOst Men appear fit for public Employments before they have them, and
afterward wholly incapable of them; It was not so with Andrew Furtado, for
every body esteemed him fitter to Govern when he was placed in that Power, than
they had done before, and yet there was none before but wished to see him in
that Post. The Arts by which he gained this Esteem, were Valor, Generosity,
Liberality, and Affability. And being now advanced to this Command, he
confirmed the good Opinion the World had conceived of him, by being courteous
to his Inferiors, and not lifting himself above those who had been his Equals.

2. When a private Captain he dressed costly, now being Governor plainer than a
private Captain. The Workhouses were his Rooms of State, the Shore his Garden.
His thoughts were full of great Undertakings; but considering how small a Bank
there was for such Designs, he gathered the Council of Goa, the Chief Gentry,
and richest Men of that City. Being assembled, he made a Speech, representing
the great Progress the Hollanders had made in India, and exhorting them with
their Persons and Purses to be assisting to expel them.

3. They all assured him there should be nothing he could propose, but they
would forward to the utmost of their power. This was soon made good, for within
two months and a half he had a great Fleet, well manned and provided. All Men
were in expectation of the Effect of those great Preparations, when on the
first of September there appeared at a great distance several Sail that seemed
to be of bulk. It was concluded they were Hollanders. Our Governor hearing of
it, run down to the Shore, and in a few hours made ready some Ships and
Galliots, saying, Now shall they see how Andrew Furtado with these light
Vessels boards their three Deck Ships. The time is come.

4. Just as he came out to order Affairs, so without returning to Court was he
going aboard, without calling any Body; but this his Resolution being known,
there soon flocked to him as many Men as there was occasion for. So it happened
to King Emanucl (whom he now seemed to imitate) who hearing the danger Arzila
was in, set out Post, and without beating Drum by that his speed presently
raised a great Army. But as the Governor was spreading Sail, advice was brought
that they were no Enemies, but Ships from Portugal, that brought a new viceroy.

5. This was Ruy Lorenco de Tavora, who sailed from Lisbon at the end of
October with four Galleons and a Caravel, and had Wintered in the Island of
Ibo. Those who came received a double satisfaction, one in their safe arrival,
the other in seeing that Port of Goa covered with such a number of Ships, as
represented the past more happy times.

6. Many were sorry Furtado was so soon deprived of that Government, for the
great hopes they had conceived of his good Fortune, and Heaven seemed to favor
his continuance, by the Death of the Count de Feyra, who was going to that
Command.

7. Even the Viceroy that went to succeed him was troubled; for seeing that Bay
full of many so Ships and in such Order, he asked; Who governed India? and
being told that Andrew Furtado, he replied, I thought so, for the greatness of
this Work assured me it could have no other Author. I am sorry I came now to
India to take this Command; because it is a hindrance to the great Actions
might be expected from such a Governor.

8. Since this untimely arrival of the Viceroy, has cut off what might be
expected from Furtado's Government, let us Epitomize what he acted under
others. At 16 Years of Age he was in Africa, when the unfortunate King
Sebastian went over thither. Then passed over into India, and having performed
some Military Exploits, had the Command of ten Ships, with which he relieved
the Fort of Bracalor besieged by King Sincarnoboro. He not only raised the
Siege, but reduced the King to become Tributary to Portugal; then falling upon
those that had combined with him, destroyed their Countries with Fire and
Sword, and took one of the chiefest with all his Vessels, putting all the Men
to the Sword. He took several Ships of Meca, defeated the great General
Cotimuza, destroyed another Fleet at Manar, taking many Ships, slew the King of
Iafanapatan that was in Rebellion, ruined a Fleet of Malabars that did us great
harm on those Seas; raised the Siege Raju had laid to Columbo, levelled the
Formidable Fort of Cunnale, bringing him and his Nephew Prisoners to Goa; drove
the Hollanders from Amboyna and Sunda, reduced the Rosatelo's then in
Rebellion, gained many strong holds in the Islands of Ito, Nao and Veranula;
and being Commander of Malaca held out a Siege of four Months against the
Hollanders and 11 neighboring Kings.

9. It was great to overcome so many Enemies, but far greater to conquer
himself. In the dead of Night a Woman got into his Apartment, offering him her
Daughter, moved thereto by extreme want. After a severe Reprimand, he charges
her to marry the Daughter, and gives her a Purse of Money, with assurance he
would make up the Portion.

10. All these great Actions he had performed at the Age of 45, besides many
more which in another had been considerable, but not of Note to him. He was as
to his Quality of the best of Portugal. Having governed three Months, he
Embarked for Portugal, died by the way of the Jaundice, and lies in the Church
of our Lady of Grace in Lisbon. Of Stature he was somewhat tall, his Complexion
tawny, of Body lean, and was the 40th Governor, and 2d of the Surname.

CHAP. X.
The Government of the Viceroy Ruy Lorenco de Tavora, from the Year 1609, till
1612.

1. SCarce was Ruy Lorrenco de Tavora settled in the Government, when there came
in 5 Ships from Portugal, which with the same number that carried him made 10,
and consequently a great number of Men that went in them.

2. About the beginning of the Year were set out the usual Squadrons, but more
numerous and better manned than usual, by reason of the great Preparations
before spoke of, and the Men that came newly. At the same time came from Lisbon
3 Ships for India.

3. The greatest Action at this time was in Ceylon, where D. Hierome de
Azevedo, who had that Command, went on with the usual Success that always
attended him in that Post. He marched with 700 Portugueses and 25000 Lascarines
(that is Chingala Soldiers) to assault the City Candea, and finding by the way
the Fort of Balane abandoned, left Antony de Costa Monteyro in it with two
Companies. Then advancing to the River of Candea, and finding it well
fortified, nevertheless he attempted to pass it, receiving the Enemy's Fire,
which for some time did no Execution. Yet our Men gave way till F. Gaspar de la
Madalena, a Franciscan, ran into the River holding up a Crucifix and
encouraging them, whereupon they charged and drove the Enemy from their Works,
who fled to the Mountains abandoning the City, which was burnt, and such as
could be overtaken slain.

4. This Success so thoroughly reconciled the King of Candea to us, that he
admitted the Conversation of the Franciscans, and put his two Sons into their
Hands to be bred Christians. Thus the Peace was concluded, and he writ to our
King Philip to Compliment him upon his accession to the Crown, testifying the
great Affection he bore him, and desiring to be esteemed among the Princes of
Asia, as one that most desired his Correspondence.

5. The Moor Abdala Carima, Tanadar of Nizamaluco, who, besides his natural
hatred to the Portugueses, was malicious on account that he had lost half a
hand by them, disturbed the Peace at Chaul. His Pretense was receiving his
Prince's Revenue, wherein he proceeded with much Insolence; and we on our part
bore much, rather than break into open War.

6. Our Commander, D. Francis Rolim, complained to Nizamaluco, who answered
with Threats, that he would fit out a Fleet, and that the Hollanders were
already in that Sea. To be as good as his Word, he set out 30 Paraos, which
robbed all that came in their way belonging to the Portugueses. The Tanadar
being thus backed, hearing that George Henrique was gone out to a Wood, he
killed him, and took his Wife and two Daughters.

7. The People of Chaul pressed the Commander to commence the War, he having no
Orders from the Viceroy, and but few Men; yet sent out 16 Men with two Officers
one Night, they found 30 Moors near the Pagod of Ramaceyra, and killing half of
them retired. Peter Cornejo with 30 Men fell upon the Village of Tal, killed
the Inhabitants, burnt the Houses, and sunk two Vessels that were in the Port.
Though this was a sufficient Revenge against the Tanadar, yet knowing some Men
value not their Honor, whilst their Persons are untouched, it was thought fit
to make him feel some part himself.

8. To this purpose D. Francis Rolim marched to Upper Chaul with 350 Men in
three Bodies, one Commanded by him, another by Michael de Abreu, and the third
by Calleyros. Abreu entered first into a narrow Street which ended in a broad
Place where the Enemy was drawn up, and with their first fire killed our
Captain and two Soldiers. Rolim coming up, they made way into the broad Place,
and revenged the Death of those three, with the slaughter of many Enemies, the
rest saving themselevs by flight. Thus they came to the Tanadar's House, which
being forsaken by him was burnt; the same happened to a whole Street, where the
Moors had renewed the Fight, firing out of the Houses. Marching out of the Town
victorious, they killed all that had Life in the Fields, so that Town and
Country were covered with dead Bodies.

9. At the end of this Year arrived at Goa three Ships from Portugal. In
October sailed from Lisbon two Caravels, in November one Galleon, in which went
Antony Pinto de Fonseca with the Title of Visitor and Proveditor of the Forts
in India, as if no Viceroy had been there; in December another Galleon, in
which went a Patent for D. Hierome de Azevedo, to succeed in that Government.

10. The War being begun at Chaul, both Parties increased, and several
Skirmishes happened, in which the Portugueses always had the best, till D.
Francis de Sotomayor came thither with the Northern Fleet, and left there three
Vessels. Being thus reinforced, our Men took the Field, and offered Battle to
the Moors, who were also increased. Antony Furtado de Mendoca advancing too far
with only two Men was killed, and the Portugues Body coming up worsted; for
though they did great Execution, being drawn into an Ambush, Gonzalo de Abreu
was killed, his Country House lost, afterward the War went on with less vigor.

11. Whilst this happened at Chaul, Nuno de Cunna fought the English at Suratt
with more valor and Success. He had four Galleons well manned, but ill
provided with Gunners, for they were ignorant and fearful. He found in that
Port a great English Ship and a Ketch, which had a short fight between the
little Island of John de Nova and the Bank called Baxo de la India, beyond the
Cape of Good Hope, with two Ships of ours, of three that this year sailed from
Lisbon for India, one whereof commanded by D. Luis de Gama making for Zocotora,
was drove by a violent Storm between the Islands called Dos Hermanos, whence he
got late to Goa, after losing four hundred Men; some by the Fatigue of the Sea,
and others through the Miseries they endured in defense of the Ship, and the
Cruelty of that barbarous People.

12. When the English, whose Ships were excellent Sailers, discovered our heavy
Vessels, though they had cause to fear their number, they undervalued them by
reason of that fault. They presently engaged us in the Evening, and fought till
dark Night parted them, having killed 30 of our Men. As soon as Day appeared
they fell to it again, and two of our Galleons running to Board the two English
Vessels, were stuck on the Sands, there being too little Water for the
Galleons. The Pink seeing them aground, kept firing its Cannon upon one till
the Evening Tide brought it off. The great Ship kept the other two Galleons
that were a float in play all that Day. The third day all the Galleons being
afloat made up to board the Enemy, but they who relied on their Cannon and
swiftness, made away to Castelese, a Bay of the Pirates of Diu.

13. Luis de Brito who plied upon that Coast with some small Vessels gave
advice to Cunna, that the English were in that Port. He sailed thither, and
they fought two whole Days, in which time our Ships, by reason of their
heaviness, could never board them; at length the English stood away, having put
up black Colors in token their Captain was killed; they lost many Men, and
slew many of ours. They made to Suratt, Cunna followed; they left the Port, and
Cunna returned to Goa, where then D. Hierome de Azevedo had been Governor two
Months.

14. Some time before 5 Galiots set our for China and two Merchant Ships for
Iapan, they all Wintered at Malaca, the Season being unfit to Sail. Provisions
were very scarce there, and the more now by the addition of those Men. Michael
de Sousa sent out some Ships to get Provisions in the Neighborhood. These met
several Sail bound for Pam and Ior, laden with Spice and other Goods, which
they took and brought to Malaca. Then sailed to Pam where the King of Ior was
with a Fleet, and though at Peace with the Portugueses he went out of their way.
Not far from Patane they took 8 Vessels richly laden, and returning with them
to Malaca, that City was not only relieved, but enriched.

15. The Viceroy receiving Advice from Portugal, that a considerable Fleet was
fitting out in Holland, with a Design against Malaca, he sent James de Mendoca
Furtado, with 8 Galliots to relieve it. Being under Sail for Pulobutum they
were dispersed by a Storm in the Golph of Ceylon, but met again in that Port.
Four of them sailed out before the Admiral and the others, and meeting a Ship
of Iava with seventy Men who traded in the Kingdom of Quedar, with which we
were at War, attacked it, and were well received, having four Men killed and
ten much wounded; but being provoked by this loss, they boarded the Vessel and
killed all in her.

16. The Admiral James de Mendoca continued his Voyage to Malaca, whence he
passed not without danger of the Sea to Pam, to bring thence some Princes of
Borneo who were traveling.

16. Leaving those Princes at Malaca, Mendoca with Emannel Mascarennas,
Commander of that City, went over to the Kingdom of Pera, understanding that
three great Ships of Guzarat's richly laden were in that Port, which lessened
our Customs. Mendoca had Fifteen Ships, he entered the River, which is so
narrow, only two Ships can sail abreast. He boardest the first of the three
Ships, and though the Enemy fought well, entered her, and they set fire to her, so
she perished; the second Ship was easily taken; the third escaped through our own
fault, for being too busy about the Plunder of the other; the Day was spent,
and the Enemy stole away by Night. The Ship taken was brought to Malaca, it had
32 Guns and rich Lading. James de Mendoca Furtado returned to Goa, where he
found D. Hierome de Azevedo was then Viceroy. Ruy Lorenco de Tavora was Viceroy
three Years, the 21th of that number, 41th Governor, and second of the Name and
Surname. He had more Inclination to Peace than War, which produced Concord with
all the Kings of India, of Stature tall, his Complexion fair, aged, and a good
Christian, a rare thing among Men of Quality.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Propagation of the Christian Faith in China.

1. THough these Affairs properly appertain to the Ecclesiastical History, of
which I design a particular Volume; yet for the satisfaction of those who
desire some Information herein, and having at the end of the First Part said
somewhat touching the first entrance of Christianity in China, I will here
briefly relate its Progress till the Year 1640, though it be anticipating the
Time, that the Relation may not be too much dismembered, and because that Order
is chiefly observed by me in Martial Affairs.

2. The four Houses or Residences of Xancheu, Nancham, Nanking, and Peking,
being settled, F. Emanuel Diaz was sent as Visitor of the three first, because
F. Matthew Rivius could not be spared from the other, which was the Soul of
them all. The Visitor-General Valiniano settled 30 Crowns a Year upon each
Residence, finding it sufficient to cloth and maintain the Religious who were
to live there, that they might not obstruct the advancement of the Faith by the
necessity of asking any thing.

3. The Visitor sent new Fathers to all the Residences. In the Year 1604,
Cuitayso was Baptized, till then he only gave ear to it, but was the cause that
many were converted, and procured the Foundation at Nanking. He was called
Ignatius. In the Year 1606, died the Visitor Valiniano at Macao; Nicholas
Pimenta succeeded him.

4. F. Matthew Rivius died at Peking in the Year 1610; the King appointed his
place of Burial, and allotted his Companions a House and Church. The Mandarins
and others celebrated his Funeral with great demonstrations of esteem. He was
the first buried in that country, for all that died before were carried to
Macao.

5. The Year 1613, the Religious were expelled Hancheu, and coming to the City
Nanhiun built a Church there, and afterward others. In the Year 1616, there
were 7 Residences, two at Peking, one of them without the Walls, one at
Nanking, one at Hancheu, one at Nancham, one at Caiyeu, and one at Nanhiun. In
them all were 22 Fathers, the Converts amounted to 6000, among them many
Nobles, Lawyers and Mandarines, and some Bonzo's.

6. The Year 1617, the Religious were expelled from all their Residences, the
Persecution began at Nanking. Some escaped to Quantung and Macao, 14 remained
hid in China, who were afterward called by other Cities to erect new
Foundations. One was at Kiencham, in the Province of Kiangsi, through the means
of a Lawyer who was converted, and christened Stephen. Another at Xambay, in the
Country of Paul the Doctor. Another at Quartim, in the Province of Nanking,
which City it could serve without a Residence there; but the Fathers were
restored to it by the assistance of Doctor Michael, a great Admirer of them and
of Christianity, and afterward one of the most famous Preachers of the Gospel.
By degrees the Persecution ceased, and the Fathers were every where restored.
Two new Residencies were erected in the Cities of Xansi and Xensi, and some of
those that had been banished returned from Macao.

7. The Year 1622, two other Residences were settled in the Province of Fokien,
another at Xansi, another at Xensi, another at Honan. All things went on
successfully, and the Year 1630 the Converts came in by hundreds, afterward by
thousands.

8. In the Year 1634, there were in China 22 European Fathers and 4 Brothers,
greatly esteemed by the Mandarins and other Persons of Note. A Prince of the
Province of Xantung sent for some Fathers to hear their Doctrine, so did other
Provinces afterward.

9. At Peking there were 288 Converts, among them Mandarines, Lawyers, and
Soldiers, one Eunuch, and one Bonzo, which is considerable, they being a sort
of Priests; he converted his Father, and some Relations.

10. At Nanking, 70 Converts, and a Noble Eunuch of 75 Years of Age. The
Christians here were so zealous, that when the Fathers removed, a Lawyer and
his Nephew carrying the Vestments and other Churchstuff on their backs, and
being told by the Father, The Servants might do it: They replied, It was not
fit any body should carry the Things of the Church, but they who were proud to
be Porters to Jesus Christ.

11. At Kiamcheu and Pucheu almost 2000 Converts, at a time when the three
greatest Calamities of this World succeeded each other. The first was Famine,
which raged to that degree they eat one another; two Women were shot to Death,
being convicted of eating 40 Children. A Father and Mother, rather than see
their Child perish in their Arms, cast it into a River, and themselves after
it. Others buried a Child alive; a Christian, called Peter, saved both the
Children, and brought them up. The next Calamity was War; and the third the
Plague.

12. At Hancheu, in the Province of Chekiang, the Converts amounted not to 150.
At Xamhay 400. At Narcham only 26. At Quiencham 80. In the City Fokien 257, and
many in the Country. At Singam not 100, by reason of the Famine that raged; as
at Quiamcheu they eat the Dead, ground Stones, and used the Dust in stead of
Meal. Some at Hoacheu and the Neighborhood. At Honan but 30. In the Kingdom of
Hannam, which the Portugueses call Tonking, almost 100000.

13. Thomas, a Native of Thinhoa, labored in the Kingdom of the Lao'^. That
People is white, good conditioned, and have no Thieves among them. Those of
Hannam undervalue them for eating of Vermin. They wear narrow Gowns, their Feet
bare, the Head commonly uncovered, their Hair round and short like a
Lay-Brother, only one Lock on the Temples, which is run through holes made to
that purpose in the Ears, they adore an Idol called Theica, with the same
Ceremonies those of Hannam worship their Tham. They Trade into this Kingdom
their Merchandise, Elephants, Buda's Skins, Benjamin, and Amber.

14. At Dangthan 2441 Converts, and many at Thinhoa. At Nighihan 4200, the
Residence is at Rumo; there are 26 Churches, and the Divine Offices are
celebrated with much magnificence. In Bochinh, a half Province next
Cochinchina, 130 were Baptized. In an Orchard here was found a Tree brought
from the Laos, the Leaves whereof gain him that carries them the Affection of
all he meets, and Reconcile them if Enemies. Being examined whether it was not
Superstition, it was judged to be a Natural Virtue.

15. In the Year 1635, there were not above 3300 Converted among all the
Residences. The House at Chincheo was then first founded. A Church was erected
in the Town of Yunchum, and another in the City Chancheu. Now there will be a
greater Fruit reaped, because the King protects and countenances the Religious,
and their Doctrine; and in the Year 1638, gave them 2000 Taes or Crowns to buy
a House and Land. He also granted them (what was more than they could have
wished) to put over their Door this Inscription, I the King Approve of and
Protect the Science of Heaven.

16. In fine, there are now in China this Year 1640. above 100000 Catholics,
and among them many Nobles, Mandarines, some Bonzos and Eunuchs. Of Mandarines
and Colao's, the most admirable were 3 or 4 Paul's, one Michael, one Ignatius,
one Leo, and one Stephen, who were not only Converted, but Preached the Faith
with great Elegancy, and much Profit. The great Colao Paul herein surpassed all
others.

17. The Jesuits at this time in China have twelve principal Residences in the
chief Provinces and capital Cities; under these above 500 private Oratories,
with hundreds of Christians belonging to each. They have also gained good
footing about the Neighboring Countries, as in Tomking, Cochinchina, Cambodia,
Laos, and other Kingdoms. In these last Countries, between 10 and 15000 Souls
are converted every Year.

18. The King of China himself casts down Idols, and orders the Prince his Son
to fall down before the Images of Jesus and Mary. The Queen in her Apartment
gives ear to what the converted Eunuchs say concerning our Religion. Mass is
often celebrated in the Palace, and there is great hope of the King, whose
Piety and Zeal have inclined him to respect the Divine Law, insomuch that our
Religious have been joyed upon his Conversion.

19. What wonderful Accidents have happened, and Miracles been wrought in the
Conversion of those Christians, are set down in sundry particular Relations,
and in the History of China, and are not so proper for this, which is only a
profane History. Besides, that being miraculous to some Readers, they will
appear as Fictions; those who are curious, may see them in the aforesaid
History and Relations. Having given the substance of what was writ on a Stone
found in China at the end of the Second Volume, it will be needless to repeat
the whole, which is long, and is no more than the same thing in many more
Words. What has been said relating to China in these two Volumes, may deserve
the Credit of all Men, as being the Observations of the Curious, as well as
Learned and Pious F. Alvaro Semmedo, who spent 22 years, Preaching and
Teaching, in that Country.

The End of the Second Part.
THE PORTUGUES ASIA. TOM. III. PART III.
CHAP. I.
The Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo, from the Year 1612, till
1617.

1. AT the end of last Year came to India the King's Orders for D. Hierome de
Azevedo to succeed Ruy Lorenco de Tavora as Viceroy. This Gentleman had
purchased a great Name by many Years service, and chiefly by 18 spent in
Ceylon, a Thing rare for one who had also gathered great Riches. Not that
Riches make a Man incapable of a good Name, but because commonly the means of
acquiring them contribute much to stain it. The Fame of his Substance
contributed as much as that of his Valor t^ his Promotion to this Employment,
it being thought, that he who had so much, would be less guilty of those Crimes
that proceed from Avarice; whereas Experience teaches, that those who have most
covet most. But D. Hierome had offered to accept of that Post without the usual
Salary, yet afterward he received it, making that a Crime by breaking his
Promise, which had been none if not offered.

2. On Christmas Eve Ruy Lorenco de Tavora delivered him the Sword; and the
first thing he did, was to forbid the payment of Debts contracted by his
Predecessor, who resolved not to depart India till the payment of them was
secured, as well for his own Reputation, as in respect no Viceroy for the
future would be able to get any Money advanced upon the urgent Necessities of
the State, if that ill Precedent was given, and his Debts were all on the
account of the Public. At length it was concluded, they should be paid as
Tavora had ordered. The next Action of the Viceroy was to dispatch Danisbeque
Sedesable Ambassador from Abas the Xa or King of Persia, who falsely courted the
Friendship of all those Princes he designed to spoil, promising each great
Advantages, and stirring them up one against the other. Thus he Treated with
King Philip in Spain, and King James in England, which he found most suitable
to his Designs. Thus he had taken the Island Baharem, and strove to possess
himself of Ormuz.

3. Danisbeque was returned from Spain with the Answer of his Embassy; and
besides, what the King had given him in return for a Present of Silks he
carried, the Viceroy had Orders to add something at his discretion. He added
the value of 12000 Crowns in Spice, which in Persia was worth much more; and
having nobly entertained him, sent away with him D. F. Antony de Gouvea Bishop
of Sirene, who also came from Spain, and went to propogate Christianity, which
had but a slender beginning there. The Bishop went no farther than Ormuz, for
the Persians being already illaffected toward him, he feared it would be worse
when the Ambassador had delivered his Answer. So it happened, for the King
finding the Ambassador brought not the Return he expected, caused him to be
killed, and obliged 6000 Armenians to renounce the Faith.

4. The Viceroy as well versed in the Affairs of Ceylon, gave the necessary
Orders for its preservation, recommending the putting them in execution to
Antony Vaz Feyre, Surveyor of the Revenue in that Island. Antony Pinto de
Fonseca, who had served well in Flanders, and was now Visitor of the Forts in
India, with the Viceroy's Leave went to perform the Duties of his Employ, D.
Henry de Noronna being confirmed in the Command of the Coast of Malabar given
him by Ruy Lorenco, united the Kings of Vanguel, Sierra, and Carnate, against
Ventapanaique, on pretense of their safety; whereas indeed it was to secure our
selves against him, in whose Dominions we held Bracalor and Onor.

5. This done, D. Henry steered for the Coast of Malabar with 28 Sail. Andrew
Coello was sent by the late Governor with 3 Ships to relieve Palicate and
Siriam, and being now driven by stress of Weather to Columbo, they were beaten
to pieces on that Coast, but the Men saved.

6. When D. Hierome came from Ceylon to be Viceroy, he gave the supreme Command
there to Fran. Rojo, a Man of unknown Birth, but noted Valor, and by his
Courage had attained to the greatest Preferments. It was since found, that he
was of the Family of Meneses, as being Son to D. James Count de Ericeyra, and
Grandson to D. Henry de Meneses, who was Governor of India.

7. This D. Francis de Meneses Rojo being General in that Island, and
understanding the King of Candea lay before the Fort of Balane, and the
Commander Emanuel Falcam was in some ^anger, he instantly set out with a very
small number, spreading his Orders for all Men to follow, and marched ^o
Leagues afoot that day. In three he reached Balane, and the King at the sight
of him raised the Siege. D. Francis relieved the Fort, and returned with Glory
to his Quarters, destroying all the Enemy's Country.

8. The Tanadar of Chaul meditating Revenge for the Losses he had sustained by
us the last Year, hired some Moors Naytia's that lived in Caranja, and were
free with the Portugueses to kill Baltasar Rabello de Almeyda Commander of that
Fort. They guided by Melique Balane, entered suddenly when he was at Supper, and
killed him and a Sister-in-Law of his. This done, they shut themselves in, but
the Portugueses forcing the Gates, put them all to the Sword. Ferdinand de
Sampaio and Cunna succeeded in the Widow and Command. About the middle of
April, Abascan General of the Enemy led a great Body of them to revenge the
Death of the others on Caranja. He could not be prevented entering the Town, but
being in disorder killing and plundering, Simon Rangel with 17 Portugueses
doing great Execution, began to put the Moors to flight, whilst Cunna coming on
another way with few Men, they made a great slaughter. This was a warning to
the Naytia's not to return to Caranja. Afterward Cunna, not satisfied with
what he had done, ravaged their Country, and brought away above 3000 Prisoners.
He showed much Generosity, when two Moors being brought to him for entering a
Place forbid them upon pain of Death, he set them at liberty; because being
asked, How they durst come thither without a safe Conduct; one of them
answered, That they had done it, relying on the Fame of his Courtesy, to
ransom certain Kindred of theirs.

9. Ruy Freyre de Andrade, who cruized on that Coast with a Squadron of small
Ships, understanding that Nizamaluco, since the War broke out at Chaul, spread
it as far as Salsete and Agacaim, he repaired thither. In a Village between
Caranja and Tana, he cut off some Moors that opposed him, and put the rest to
flight. Higher they discovered 500 Moors, and an Elephant with a Castle on his
Back, in which were two Cannons. Twelve Soldiers landed, a Captain with 80
Horse attacking them was shot dead, our Men seeing the Enemy halt, stood some
time, and then George Marino sent to challenge their Leader, but he not
accepting of it they returned aboard.

10. From Tana Freyre sent some Ships to relieve the Town of Agacaim, which
being endangered by the Moors, run a greater hazard through the discord of the
Inhabitants. They were but 50 Families, yet all full of Division, and Ruy
Freyre could no way reconcile them. Every one said he was able to defend all
their Houses, and all together could not defend one; for 2000 Moors soon forced
them thence into the Monastery of St. Francis, showing them how great
difference there is betwixt saying and doing, between Animosity and Discretion.
Freyre carried the Women and Children to Bacaim, and then relieved Manora,
passing through multitudes of Enemies who expected him ashore, and sought
resolutely, insomuch that one laid hold of the Colors, on which was the
Picture of the Blessed Virgin, carried by Emanuel Ambrosio, the Moor was shot
dead. He got into the Fort without losing one Man, having killed and wounded
many, and after securing all things there, returned to the Mouths of the Rivers
of Tana, where he behaved himself well.

11. The Affairs of Agacaim grew worse, for fresh Troops of Melique resorting
thither, Ruy Freyre was obliged to return to their assistance. At his coming he
saw the Enemy was firing John de Caldas his House, where he had fortified
himself, and James Rodriguez Caldera, a Soldier well known for his Valor, was
let down by a Rope to quench it, as he did. Freyre with much difficulty brought
off those that were left, and carried them to Bacaim. There he landed, and
joining the Commander of the Fort, and Men of the Northern and Diu Fleets, they
pursued a Body of Moors, till it was thought fit to retire, for fear of an
Ambush. A few Days after, Freyre and the Northern Squadron being gone to convoy
a Fleet that lay at Damam for fear of Pirates, Andrew Pereyra de Sousa with
three Companies was drawn into an Ambush, and not a Man of them escaped.

12. The Moors at the upper Chaul were drawn into the like snare by D. Emanuel
de Azevedo, Commander of that Place, a Man well skilled in Military Affairs,
having gained Experience by several Years Service in Ceylon.

13. The Necessities of Damam, represented by the People and their Commander
Nunno Alvarez Pereyra, obliged Ruy Freyre to make some stay there. The Case
was, that among other Enemies the King of the Sarcetas, who lives in intricate
Woods which serve him for defense, had sent out Parties of Horse and Foot which
destroyed and carried away all they found in the neighboring Villages. Freyre
gathering about 200 Men from Damam, Maim and Trapor, fell upon 600 of the Enemy
in their Woods and Works before Day when they were all asleep, slew a great
number of them, and retired with a considerable Booty, burning all that could
not be carried away. Above 700 of the Enemy pursued him, but not daring come
too near, he retired in good Order and got into Damam with Honor.

14. D. Henry de Noronna had detached George de Castilo with some small Vessels
toward Cape Comori to convoy the Fleet of Turocori. There he discovered a
Galliot that carried 170 Moors. Francis de Soufa Pereyra with his little Ship
in which were but 16 Soldiers bore down upon her, Castillo sends two more to
second him, and they discovering some Ships of Bengala, leave him to follow
them. Those of the Galliot seeing our small Vessel forsaken, fire their Cannon
upon her, which killed three of the Men that rowed, and the rest leaped into
the Sea. The Moors board her, and all our Men were either killed or taken.

15. In May, Nunno de Cunna sailed from Goa for Bacaim to succeed Ruy Dias de
Sampayo as Admiral of the North Sea; his Squadron consisted of 13 Ships, in
which were 400 chosen Soldiers, designed to carry on the War against Melique,
who was grown strong. By the way he had some Encounters not considerable enough
to be related, and at the City Galiana after entering the Enemies Works, taking
some Cannon, and killing many with the loss of one Man, was forced by a Storm
to desist from his Design of burning some small Vessels.

16. Being at Bacaim he kept the Enemy in great awe, notwithstanding they had
400 Horse and as many Foot, whereas we had but 30 Horse and 160 Foot. Several
were killed in Skirmishes this Winter, the number of theirs not known, on our
side 40. On All Saints Day the Enemy came on through a Plain, having to
distract us made a feint of coming through the Water. Their Horse having made
Antony Pinto de Fonseca give way, were bogged, and our Men rallying upon them,
killed, and took some, putting the rest to flight. Francis Tavares who carried
Lope Sarmiento's Colors, stripped and wrapped them about his Arm, charging the
Enemies with the Spear, till being thrown down he lay upon the Colors, so that
they could not be taken from him, but the Portugueses coming into his
assistance he rose, and though the Blood run from him, fell in again among the
Moors.

17. During all this time the Moors showed such respect to the Christian
Churches, as may well confound Christians themselves. The Portugueses made use
of two Churches dedicated to our B. Lady, putting 50 Men into each, and though
thence they annoyed the Enemy, yet the Moors never made one shot at them,
because some of them had there recovered their Health, making Vows which they
punctually paid.

CHAP. II.
Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year
1613.

1. IT was the fate of the Fort of Mombaca to have insolent Commanders. Emanuel
de Melo Pereyra herein exceeded many of his Predecessors treating the King
Sultan Hazen with unexpressible disrespect. The chief Promoter of the
Disagreement betwixt Melo and the King was his Uncle Munganaje, an old Man,
who, pretending much Zeal for our Affairs, aimed at the Crown. He vented his
Malice one day by giving out in the Fort, the King designed to kill them all.

2. Melo resolved to attack the King's House, but he being sensible how
fruitless any excuses would be, fled with the Christian Colors to the Town
Quolifi of the Cafres seven Leagues distant. That People pressed him to
reinthrone himself by force, but he several times withstood their Importunities.

3. At length not able to prevail upon him they marched without him, and entered
the Town of the Moors, but they were all retired into our Fort. The Cafres not
thinking good to assault the Fort, were upon their return, when Emanuel de
Melo, who observed them, pursuing and falling suddenly on them, cut off the
best Part. A few days after the King returned to his House, and having excused
himself to our Commander thought he was satisfied, but he only dissembled his
Malice, as shall appear hereafter.

4. Our Fortune in Pegn now declined with the same swiftness it had rise, and
it was just a wicked increase should have a sudden detriment. The violence
committed by Philip de Brito Nicote on the King of Tangn, provoked the Anger of
the King of Ova, under whose Protection he was. Scarce had he heard the News,
when casting on the Ground his Gown and Veil, he vowed to the Idol Biay of
Degu, he would not enter within his Gates till this Quarrel was revenged. He
marched with 120000 Men, having put to Sea 400 Vessels of considerable
strength, in which were above 6000 of those Moors of noted Valor (called de
Caperuca, or that wear Caps. All that was without the Walls of Siriam he burnt,
but met with vigorous opposition at that Place, notwithstanding Nicote was
quite unprovided, having suffered most of his Men to go for India, and being
scarce of Powder, as who had fired the vast quantity of it found at Tangu. In
this distress he sent a Soldier to buy Powder at Bengala, and he run away with
the Money; and having sent for some to the Town of St. Thomas, they sent him
none. Besides, those few Portugueses that were with him committed such
Outrages, Robberies and Murders as seemed to hasten his Ruin.

5. For want of Powder there was no firing of Cannon, they poured boiling Pitch
and Oil upon the Enemy. His number of Men might suffice, having 100 Portugueses
and 3000 Pegues. Nicote sends out three Ships against the Fleet, in one of them
all the Men were slain, the two retired with all theirs wounded. The Enemy
began to undermine the Works, and the Besieged labored much, but to small
purpose. After the Siege had lasted 34 Days, Nicote sent to beg Mercy, but was
not heard. He thought to prevail by the means of the King of Tangu whom he had
robbed of his Crown, Riches and Liberty, but the King of Ova understood, and
was resolved to punish him.

6. The King of Arracam whom he had so grievously offended, sent 50 Sail to his
Assistance, which were all taken by the Besiegers. The King of Ova gives an
assault, and they fought three days without intermission; the end of it was,
that 700 of the Besieged were slain, one Banna whom Nicote had always honored
having betrayed him. Nicote was taken, carried to the King, and by him ordered
to be impaled, and set up in an Eminence above the Fort, that he might the
better look to it, as the King said. He lived two Days in that misery. His Wife
De Luisa de Saldanna was kept 3 Days in the River to be cleansed, because the
King designed her for himself, but being brought before, and exclaiming against
him, he ordered her Leg to be bored, and that she should be sent to Ova among
the other Slaves.

7. Francis-Mendez and a Nephew of his were treated as Nicote. Banna demanding
a Reward was soon torn to pieces, the King saying, He could never be true to
him that betrayed the Man who so much had honored him. Sebastian Rodriguez was
cooped up with a Yoke about his Neck. At first the King designed not to spare
any of the Inhabitants of that Place, but growing calm, he sent many Slaves to
Ova. Then passing by Martavam he obliged that King to kill his own Daughter's
Husband, because he was Nicote's Son, that none of the Race might remain. This
was the end of that Man's Avarice, who being naked a few years before, was
raised to be worth 3 Millions; he had one when he went to Goa, brought another
from Tangu, and had got at least another since by Prizes and Trade. The Enemy
confessed they lost at that Siege 30000 Men.

8. But that it may appear that seldom any great Calamity happens without the
help of a Woman, it is necessary to show how Nicote's Wife was one of the
Principal Causes of his Ruin. She entertained one of his Captains as her
Gallant, and perceiving the Portugueses censured their familiarity, they
persuaded Nicote he had no need of them, which was the reason they were
dismissed, and that the cause of his Ruin.

9. Our Viceroy understanding the danger of Siriam, and thinking to relieve it
in time, sent thither James de Mendoca Furtado with 5 Galliots. He had orders
to act something by the way, and endeavor to strengthen himself by the
addition of some other Ships and Men, which he effected not till he came to
Martavam, where in the River he found a Fleet of 20 Sail, which after a sharp
Engagement fled, except 4 that were taken with some Men, from whom he heard
what had happened at Siriam, so that there was no need to go farther.

10. Nor long before this set out from Goa for China John Cayado de Gamboa with
3 Galleons, and was to join Michael de Sousa Pimentel, who was there with 4
others to secure our China Trade against the Hollanders, who were this Year
very strong in those Seas. One of the 3 Galleons was cast away near Sancham 60
Leagues from Macao, the Sea then running so high that it drowned several Towns.
There were above 200 Men in that Vessel, whereof about 60 Portugueses and 80
others escaped. They chose Gonzalo Machado a noted Soldier to command them,
and having the good Fortune to be well treated, clothed and fed by the
Chinese, came to a City where they were so nobly entertained, they had almost
forgot the end of their Voyage. Their common Food was three Pullets a day each,
they were feasted on the River in stately Boats like Palaces with several
Apartments, and garnished with Gold. In fine, on their way thence to Macao they
were attended as if they had been Chinese Colaos, or Mandarines. At the Inns
they were treated with a sort of Food most pleasant and delicious, which
afterward they were informed was made of Toads and Worms. What chiefly they
admired after this Journey was the Chastity of the Chinese Women; for though they
are beautiful, and Beauty be inclined to Wantonness, and though our Men were
long among them and familiarly entertained, yet they could never by any means
prevail with any of them to yield to their Desires. At Macao they found the
other two Galleons, which had escaped the Storm, having more Sea room.

11. Near the end of this Year Luis de Brito and Melo entered the Port of Goa
from Cruizing in the Sea of Diu, and brought with him a rich Ship of the
Mogol's that came from Meca. He took her off of Suratt, after a vigorous
resistance, in which he lost some Men, and was forced to send to Ruy Freyre for
aid. This provoked the Mogol to Besiege Damam, and destroy the Country about
it. The King of Decan did the same about Chaul and Bacaim, at the Instigation
of the Mogol, who thought to drive us out of Asia.

12. A Letter writ by D. Luis de Gama from Ormuz with more Passion than
Discretion, moved the Persians on the other side to gather 300 Barques, in
order to take the Port of Bandel, and stop the Course of the Water that goes to
Ormuz. Ferdinand de Silva Admiral of that Sea went to quell them, and as he
engaged, his Powder taking fire was blown up. D. Nunno Alvarez Pereyra
succeeded him, who drove them away with such slaughter, that the Xa of Persia
excused himself to the viceroy, saying, that attempt was made only by the
Sultan of Lara.

13. Francis Lopez Calleyros brought into Malaca a Dutch Pink, that had taken a
rich Portugues Ship. The News of the Hollanders taking that Prize, was the
occasion of his setting out in a Ship of his own with 28 Soldiers.

14. This Year expired with great dissatisfaction in India (though the like had
happened other times) for the Ships from Portugal, which were expected with
impatience, the better to oppose the English and Hollanders, were forced back
to Lisbon, after having been five Months abroad; they were four.

15. D. Hierome de Almeyda returning to Portugal with the Ships of the last
Year, in the Bay of St. Helena met four mighty Holland Ships. They sought with
much equal Courage and Loss. The Dutch Admiral was sunk, and ours beginning to
take fire Emanuel de Prado and Magallanes rolled himself upon it till he
quenched it. For this Action the Command of the Fort of Mascate was given him,
with the Privilege of leaving it to whom he pleased in his Will. We shall see
him hereafter serve well, and die valiantly in fight.

CHAP. III.
Continues the Government of D. Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year 1614.

1. THE King of Ova grown Proud with his success against the Portugueses at
Siriam, resolved to conquer all the neighboring Princes. He caused himself to
be Crowned at Bagou, and by the Conduct of his Brother with 50000 Men was soon
Master of the Kingdom of Tavay. This General moves to Tenasarim, and Besieges
it by Sea and Land. Christopher Rabelo, who had fled from his House at Cochim
for some Crimes, durst attack his Fleet of 500 Sail with only 40 Portugueses
and 70 Slaves in 4 Galliots, and put it to flight, after burning many Vessels,
and killing 2000 Men.

2. The King of Siam, to whom that Town belonged, for joy of this Action highly
honored the Victorious Portugueses, and offered them leave to build a Fort in
any part of his Kingdom they would choose; to this intent sending for James de
Mendoca Furtado, who was in that Sea with a Squadron, and offering him the
Title of an Earl with a suitable Revenue; but there being too much then on our
hands these offers could not be accepted of. Furtado in his way to Man
destroyed the Towns of Queda and Pa^ with Fire and Sword.

3. D. James de Vasconcelos sailed from Gao with the Squadron for the North
consisting of 17 Sail, he had orders to take in D. Emanuel de Azevedo at Chaul
and carry him to Diu, being appointed Commander of that Place. By the way
landing at the River Sifardam in Melique's Lands, he destroyed a Town abandoned
by the Inhabitants.

4. Azevedo being come to Diu. seized on the Goods of his Predecessor Sebastian
de Macedo, for the Money he was indebted to the King. Next he resolved to fall
upon the People of Por, for the Damage the Trade of Diu sustained by their
means; Gaspar de Melo and Sampayo was sent with a Squadron to this Expedition,
who came before that City (40 Leagues distant) with much difficulty, because
our Vessels could go but one at a time up a narrow Creek that leads to it, and
the Enemy poured in showers of Bullets and Arrows from the Shore, and from the
Bastions, killing 18 of our Men. The Walls were scaled on the one side, whilst
our Men entered at a Breach on the other, notwithstanding the vigorous
opposition of 4000 resolute Enemies, whereof many were slain, the rest fled,
some into the Fields, and others to a Fort standing in the middle of the Town.

5. Those in the Fort offered Forty thousand Crowns, if we would not batter the
Place. It was denied; they attacked to no purpose, and our Men forced to depart
with double dissatisfaction, for refusing the offer and suffering the repulse.
The City was plundered, 1000 killed, and 300 taken; the Houses then fired being
full of Perfumes cast a delightful smell.

6. James de Vasconcelos from Diu sailed with 9 Ships to the mouth of the River
of Agacaim, where 16 Paraos of Malabars set upon him. Without the Loss of one
Man he slew many, took several Prisoners, and all the Paraos. Vasconcelos
himself took one of them, thinking their Commander Porcasse had been in it, but
that Honor fell to Michael Ferran de Castellobranco.

7. Ruy Freyre de Andrade went from Damam to Chaul, to succeed in that Command
to D. Emanuel de Azevedo, who was gone to that of Diu. He was ordered by the
Viceroy only to secure himself within the Walls, and not attempt any thing
abroad, because the Country swarmed with Enemies, and there were but few Men in
the Fort. But he training many Camponeses; raised new Works, and forced the
Enemy to withdraw with great loss.

8. Gaspar de Melo now commanded the Northern Squadron consisting of 16 Sail,
he went to Bacaim understanding there was most need of his Assistance. The
posture of our Affairs was much mended by this Relief, the Enemy being kept
more in awe, till one day fighting from Sun to Sun, our Men without losing one
Man overcame a great multitude.

9. The Fort of Manora, four Leagues from the mouth of the River of Agacaim,
being besieged by the Decariis, and Bacaim in a good Posture, Gaspar de Melo
resolved to relieve it, and Antony Pinto to bear him Company; the chief of
their Strength was 700 Portugueses. Gaspar one night went himself to view the
Enemies Camp, and finding it stronger than he had imagined; when he returned
persuaded his Men it was much weaker. He prepared them to fall on before day,
which was done so successfully, that some fled at first with the surprise, and
many being killed, the rest followed. Thus that Siege was raised without the
Loss of one Man.

10. Hence Gaspar de Melo went to Damam again infested by the King of the
Sarceta's, and in sight of the Enemy cut down their Woods and Orchards, they
not daring to oppose him. The heat of the Sun was then so violent, that it
caused a Soldier immediately to run mad, and died soon after; this was all the
Loss sustained by us in that Action.

11. Then Melo returned to Chaul, where he found Ruy Freyre de Andrade
successful over his Enemies. They marched to destroy a Wood near Upper Chaul,
in defense whereof a great multitude of the Enemy met them, and there ensued an
obstinate fight. Here Melo forgetting the Duty of a Captain, acted more like a
private Soldier, which heat of his Ruy Freyre did endeavor to moderate, he now
gave the advice he would not afterward take. They returned victorious, but not
without losing some Men.

12. Freyre being left alone, gave Orders to fall upon the Enemy, Captain Peter
Gomes Villano answered, They had no Men. Advancing still, he again orders them
to fall on, and at the same time received a Musket Shot in his Belly. His Men
seeing it, began to give way, but he running forward, cried out, There is no
cause to retire, I am very well; yet for some time his Life was in danger. Here
it was he wanted the Advice he gave to Melo, yet that Resolution produced an
honorable Victory.

13. Melo again joins Pinto de Fonseca at Bacaim in order to relieve the Fort
of Assarim, that high Mountain that overtops the flight of Birds, and is
counted impregnable. Though the Country swarmed with Enemies, they conducted 200
Wagons to that Mountain, and having relieved it returned in safety.

14. We had not the like success at Diu, for Francis Sodre being sent against
the Resbutos at Coche with 300 Men in 13 Ships, behaved himself so
indiscreetly, that they slew many of his Men, and forced him to retire to his
Ships in haste, but not cowardly, for he still faced them, and did all that
could be expected at such a time.

15. Our Affairs at Mombaca were in a very bad posture, for King Sultan Hazen
being persecuted by his Uncle Munganaje, who armed at the Crown, and by the
Commander Emanuel de Melo, who thirsted after his Riches, was accused of
Treason, those being really the Traitors who accused him. His feigned Crimes
being laid before the Viceroy, he rashly orders him. to be brought to Goa,
directing Simon de Melo Pereyra, who went to succeed Emanuel de Melo to seize
him. The King understanding the Design, endeavored to avoid being taken, and
the new Commander attacking his House obliged him again to fly to Arabaya of
the Cafres. Our Commander with Money prevailed to have him killed, and cutting
off his Head sent it to Goa, as it had been a Trophy of some great Conquest.
Then he puts the Government into the Hands of the Traitor Munganaje, joining
with him Melinde, Brother to the deceased. But he who desired no Colleague,
laid Crimes to his Charge, as was done to his Brother, and caused him to be
beheaded. We shall hereafter see the Benefit reaped by this Tyranny and
Treachery.

16. Cojenitamo, Commander of Suratte for the Mogol, with 800 Horse and some
Elephants, on a sudden overran the Country of Damam, burning the Villages; and
some of our Men endeavoring to put a stop to him, were drawn into an Ambush,
and all slain. The Enemy comes on again with a greater Power, and was now
absolute Master of the Field, when Luis de I^ito and Melo Admiral of the
North-Sea came into that Port with his Squadron, which consisted of 14 Sail,
and in them 350 Soldiers. These joined 200 of Damam, and 70 Horse, and above
1^0 other Foot. They attacked the Enemy who far exceeded them in numbers, yet
drove him out of those Lands, killing above 400 of them, 2 Elephants, and their
Commander in Chief Dalapute Rao; on our side only Antony Godinno was slain.

17. Luis de Brito pursued them to the Fort of Baroche, and entering the Port,
burnt the Town, and all the Vessels that lay there. As he returned Victorious,
discovering the City of the Resbuto's, called Barbute, he resolved to attack
it. A great number of them met him, and after a Fight which was long dubious,
were defeated with the loss of 450. On our side died one Captain, and four
others. The City was burnt, and the Heads of most of the Dead cut off, which
were cast ashore near Surat, to be seen by the Moors of that place.

18. At Bacaim and Chaul there were many Skirmishes, which for brevity are
omitted; but many Towns were burnt, much Plunder taken, and the Enemy on all
sides kept under.

19. Emanuel Mascarennas Homem succeeded D. Francis de Meneses Rojo as General
of Ceylon; he had Orders to curb the Insolence of the Portugueses, well known
to the Viceroy since he Commanded there, and which did us more hurt than the
Enemies Sword. We had not grown odious to the Chingala's, had we not provoked
them by o^ infamous Proceedings. Not only the poor Soldiers went out to rob,
but those who were Lords of Villages adding Rapes and Adulteries, which obliged
that People to seek the company of Beasts on Mountains, rather than be subject
to the more beastly Villainies of Men.

20. The viceroy perceiving that India was not in a condition to withstand so
great Enemies as was the Mogol, and Xarife Melique Commander of Ponda, and
suspecting that Ibrahim Idalxa underhand supported him, sent Antony Monteyro
Corte Real, Ambassador to the latter, with a Present for the King, and another
for his Favorite. Being come to Visapor, he had the desired Success, which was
to obtain, that Melique should be Imprisoned at Ponda; that the Hollanders, who
labored to settle a Factory there, should be expelled. This was done by the
assistance of Vincent Ribeyro a Portugues, who lived at Visapor, and had much
interest with the Favorite.

21. At Bacaim, Luis de Brito and Melo, and D. John de Almada Admiral of the
Diu Squadron, joined Antony Pinto de Fonseca Commander of that place, resolving
to force the Enemies Camp. They made up 1500 Men, and marched toward the Enemy,
who had 1000 Horse and 1500 Foot well entrenched. Our design was to surprise
them, but they had intelligence from some Portugueses in the City; nevertheless
their Trenches were forced with the loss of 6 or 7 of our Men, and not above
500 of the Enemy escaped. This Victory secured the Inhabitants of that Country,
and the Island of Salsete, who had suffered much during the two last Years.

22. Zamori possessed himself of the Kingdom of Upper Granganer, which was of
dangerous consequence to our Town of the same Name, which he always coveted,
having an Eye upon a Pagod where the ancient Emperors of Malabar used to be
Crowned. This Neighborhood became the more dangerous, for that the little King
of Paru, a small Island, relying on his Friendshop with Zamori, had began the
War in the Rivers between Cochim and Paliporto. The King of Cochim (not without
cause offended at the Portugueses) underhand kindled this Fire. The Viceroy
sent D. Lope de Almeyda with one Galley and ten Ships to relieve Cananor. He
came upon the King of Paru, who terrified thereat, concluded a Peace. Only the
King of Cochim and Zamori now remained: an Embassy, and Presents were sent to
the latter; both which he admitted, but nothing was concluded.

23. At this time arrived at Goa 4 Ships from Portugal, five came thence, but
one was lost within two Leagues of Melinde. Of 3000 Soldiers that were shipped
aboard these Vessels, not half the number came to India, the rest dying by the
way, which was a great loss, by reason of the want of Men there was there,
having so many Enemies upon them, and because these same Ships should have come
the Year before, and were forced back to Lisbon. Three Ships homeward bound had
yet worse fortune, for one was cast away at the Maldivy Islands; another, in
which were all the Men of the former at the Island Fayal, where above 200 Men
perished; the third arrived at Lisbon.

24. The Viceroy with that small Recruit resolved to go in Person to the North
to meet our European Enemies the English and Hollanders, who were strong in
these Seas, he sent before D. Emanuel de Azevedo with 22 Sail, who at Suratte
joined the two Squadrons under Luis de Brito, and D. John de Almada. They
landed, and destroyed the Lands of Cifandam and Diva; the Towns of Baroche and
Goga were plundered and burnt, as were six great Ships in that Bay. Hence they
sailed to the City Patane, the Inhabitants whereof, terrified by the Flames of
Goga, fled to the Woods; so the Town was fired without any opposition.

25. Mean while the Viceroy set out with 7 Galleons, that in which he was so
large, it carried with ease 230 Men at Arms, the 30 all Gentlemen. There were
besides two Pinks, one Galley, one Caravel, and five other Vessels. In all
which were 1400 Portugueses, and much Artillery, but unskilful Gunners.

CHAP. IV.
Continues the Government of D. Hierome de Azevedo.

1. THE chief Design of this Squadron, which at Suratte joined those three
under Azevedo, Brito, and Almeyda, was to destroy four English Ships that lay
in that Port. These Preparations seemed too great for such an Enterprise, but
the Event proved the contrary. Being come in sight of the English, the Viceroy
ordered the two Pinks, the Caravel, and other smaller Vessels, to lay aboard
one of the Ships which was separated from the others. Having all grappled, and
almost entered her, the other three coming up beat them off. The first three of
our Vessels having taken fire, endeavoring to burn that of the Enemy,
perished, and the English escaped. All this day was spent without any Success
on our side; and the next nothing was done, because the Ships lay in a hole,
where only one of our Galleons could come at them at once, and so might be one
by one disabled by the Enemies Cannon. Some said, this was only a pretense of
those who had no mind to come at them. It was attempted to burn them with
Fireships, but without success.

2. The Viceroy perceiving he only lost his Time there, sailed to Diu to send
thence Relief to Ormuz, having received Advice from D. Luis de Gama Commander
of that Place, that the Fort of Comoran was besieged by a Persian Captain of
Xirav with 14000 Men by Sea and Land. This Siege was laid by order of Abas Xa
of Persia, on account that Gama did not pay him certain Duties due to the King
of Lara, and the Persian was now possessed of that Kingdom. He was glad of this
pretense of taking Arms, as desiring to possess himself of Ormuz, toward which
he thought the Fort of Comoron was a good step. Nor did he miss his aim, for no
sooner did the ancient Men of Ormuz hear that Fort was delivered, but they
concluded this lost. D. Luis sent some Succor which hastened the Surrender,
because one half of it was cut off, and the rest returned. Andrew de Quadros
commanded at Comoran, he had but few Men, and less Cannon, (for always our Aim
was at trade,) and was forced to surrender upon Conditions, which the Enemy
never observed. This was done when the Relief of 9 Sail, sent by the Viceroy,
arrived under the command of Michael de Sousa Pimentel, who having nothing to
do there, and to shun the Distasts that happened between him and D. Luis de
Gama, went away to Mascate.

3. The Viceroy returning with his Fleet from Diu, discovered the 4 English
Ships a great way from Surat making all the sail they could, and standing to
the Southward. He made the best of his way, and in the afternoon came up alone
within Cannonshot of one of them, because his Galleon was a better Sailer than
the rest of the Fleet. His Gunner offered to sink her with two 40 Pounders;
many opposed it, representing the other 3 Ships would come upon him, and the
Fleet being out of sight, the Galleon would be lost, which would be a great
discredit, besides the Damage at such a time when the Government was so poor.
The Viceroy submitted to their Opinions, without obliging them to give it under
their hands, thinking they would never deny it, which they did when he was
accused for not doing what the Gunner proposed. The English returned Thanks for
this kindness, firing their Cannon without Ball.

4. The Ships that this Year went from Portugal, carried Orders to the Viceroy,
to sell all Commands and Employments that would yield Money, there being no
other means than to supply the Wants of that Government. This was put in
execution, and much resented, for three Reasons; one, That it had never been
done before; another, Because many were debarred thereby the Right to those
Places they had purchased by long Service; and the third, Because by this means
those who had Money, though never so undeserving, would get those Posts.

5. The Ships that this Year sailed from Lisbon for India, in which the
abovesaid Order went, were four* D. Antony Tello Captain of one of them being
ashore when they set sail, and not able to get aboard, though he followed in
another Vessel as far as the Island Madera, returned to Lisbon, and taking with
him Captain Emanuel de Prado de Magallanes, traveled to India by Land, found
his Ship there, and returned in her to Portugal. Francis Lopez Carrasco,
Captain of another of those Ships, was left behind through neglect at Goa when
the Ships came away, and Francis de Magallanes came in his Place. John Pereyra
Cortereal, a third Captain of the same Ships, returned not without Trouble,
which he overcame like a good Commander, for some of his Men mutinying, he with
his own hand slew one of them, and caused two to be hanged; for which good
Service he was rewarded.

6. This Year also set out from Goa another Ship commanded by Francis de Brito,
which was lost off of the Islands of Querimba, where and at Mocambique the Men
were saved with the Fatigues usual in those Shipwrecks. D. Hierome Manuel, who
commanded the 4 Ships that came from Lisbon, returned next Year, when we shall
speak of him.

7. Abas Xa, King of Persia, desiring to settle some Trade with us to vend his
Silks, writ to our King, telling him, He was weary of receiving Friars as
Ambassadors, and desiring him to send some Gentleman of Note, for he should
better know how to treat with such a one, and God and his Majesty would be
better served, because a Religious Man out of his Cell was like a Fish out of
the Water. D. Garcia de Silva and Figuero^ a Spanish Gentleman, well qualified
for that Employment, was sent to him. He carried a rich and beautiful Present,
and of rare Workmanship in Silver and Gold, set with precious Stones. He went
from Madrid to Lisbon, thence to India, where he was to receive further
Instructions, and 20000 Crowns consigned on the Custom-house of Ormuz for his
expense, besides what he had before received, because his Equipage was very
great. Thus far we had an account of this Embassy; hereafter we shall see that
Ormuz was lost, which was what the Persian coveted; so that it seems the
Embassy did not divert him from that Thought.

8. The Blacks besieged the City of St. Thomas, and raising a Fort, they put in
Ammunition and 600 Men, spreading 20000 about the Town, which they battered
from the Pagod near St. Francis. Captain Emanuel de Frias besieges the Fort,
which was surrendered to him for want of Water. Among the Cannon found in it,
there was one Piece of 25 Spans, that is, 6 Yards and a quarter in length, that
carried a Ball of 50 Pounds weight.

9. A Peace was concluded between the Mogul and us through the solicitation of
Hierome Xaverius of the Society of Jesus.

CHAP. V.
Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year
1615.

1. DON John de Silva commanded for the Spaniards at Manila, who demanded
Succors of the Portugueses to defend the Moluco Islands against the Rebellious
Hollanders. The Viceroy sitted out 4 Galleons for this Expedition under the
Command of Francis de Miranda Enriquez. It was easy to foresee they would be
unfortunate, because most of the Soldiers were Outlaws, Men who have Courage
to commit Villainies, but in dangers of Honor are mere Cowards, as has always
been found by Experience, and was at this time, for many deserted as soon as
they had received their Pay at Goa, and many at Malaca, the Admiral contrary to
his Orders, having touched there.

2. Between the Islands of Nicobar they were some time becalm^d. Not far from
those of Diu they met two Holland Ships coming from Paliacate, our Admiral
prepared to fight, and they having made show of standing to it, after some
Cannon-shot exchanged, stood away. Being pursued very close they threw many
Goods overboard to be the lighter; among other things they cast over some
Pigeons, the weight whereof could not much hinder them, but in the Confusion
they knew not what they did. Our Galleons could not make up with them, and in
the morning they were not to be seen. It was afterward known they skulked
behind the Island of Pulopinam.

3. The Galleons being in the Road of Malaca, the Admiral landed D. Goncalo de
Silva, Bishop of that City, whom he carried to this intent, and thought to hold
on his Voyage, having already been out above 2 Months, and it being about the
middle of July. Going out of the straight there arose a storm, and the
Vice Admiral springing a Leak, they were forced to put into Malaca; where they
all stayed, resolving to prosecute their Voyage the next Year, not knowing the
ill Fortune that attended them there.

3. When they came in, James de Mendoca Furtado, Commander in Chief by Sea and
Land, was ready to set out with 6 Galleons and 12 Jalia's, or small Vessels.
They were manned by the Garrison of Malaca, and went to meet the Ships that
were expected from China, and at the same time to discover whether any Fleet of
Achem appeared as was reported. They discovered it about (...) Leagues from the
straight; it consisted of above 500 Sail, whereof above 100 Galleys greater
than ours, and above 150 less, yet considerable. The King came himself in this
Fleet with his Wives, the best of his Treasure, and 60000 Men. He carried no
Colors, but Globes of massy Gold, as was the Throne whereon he sat. He was
four Years in fitting out this Fleet.

5. James de Mendoca Furtado having well viewed that fleet, designed to fight,
and in order thereto called all his Captains to Council; it was resolved he
should not fight but return to Malaca, which was weak for want of those Men
they had drawn out. He stood thither, sending Advice to the Galleons to prepare
to fight. The Admiral Fr. de Miranda Enriquez received the Advice, and with
Furtado's Squadron on the 4th day met that vast Fleet, which was standing for
Malaca. Both Parties drew themselves into order of Battle, and after Noon
Miranda began to play his Cannon without losing a Shot, the Enemy stood so
thick, and they received all his Fire without making any return, as it were in
contempt of him.

6. Furtado and Ferdinand de Costa with their two Galliots attack 7 Galleys;
one they boarded and burnt, another was blown up by a Ball that fell into their
Powder Room. Several of the Enemymade up to the Galliots, our Galleons move to
succor them, and then the whole Enemies Fleet comes on. This was toward
Evening when a Storm rising so separated our small Vessels, that they could not
join the Galleons till next day at Noon. Being joined they made toward the
Enemy, who not regarding them stood in for Malaca. Our Galleons being ill
manned, because many of the Men were fled to the Woods, it was found expedient
to take those out of the Galliots who were of tried Valor. Thus they prepared
for Battle, which the Enemy accepted, drawn up in the form of a half Moon. This
happened on a Sunday in the Afternoon about the middle of November.

7. The Admiral, and D. John de Silveyra's Galleons were boarded, Ant.
Rodrigues de Gamboa with his Galliot came to assist Silveyra his
Brother-in-Law, but the Galliot taking fire fired the Galleon, and both
perished. There were 50 Men in them, 20 of them died, and the other 30 were
taken. The Admiral Miranda was three times boarded, and, though he had but few
Men, still cleared the Decks, killing numbers of the Enemy, and sinking some of
their Galleys. Ships were fired on both sides, and the labor to quench them
was great especially on our side. The fight lasted till midnight, the flaming
Ships and other fires lighted of purpose by the King affording them light.

8. In fine, the Admiral's Galleon during this time was attacked by the whole
Fleet 14 times, fired 18, and as often quenched, Men wrapped in wet Blankets
rolling themselves in the fire. Miranda being struck down by a great Splinter,
a Soldier cried out he was killed, but he instantly arose, saying, I am not
dead, here I am alive, fight courageously my brave Lions, for Heaven promises
us a glorious Victory. The 3 Galleons were in a Line at about a Musket shot
distance from each other, and for want of Wind the 2 could not come up to
succor the Admiral, against whom the Enemy bent all his Force. Could they have
come up, the Enemy had been utterly ruined, for they were so disabled, that
they retired toward Bancales.

9. Day appearing, and the Enemy gone, our Galleons thought to pursue them but
could not. Their Loss was computed to 20000 Men, and 50 Sail of all Sorts.
James de Mendoca and Silva being upon discovery with his small Vessels, found
the King had sent out his Boats for Water, he fell in among them and took them
all, and 200 Prisoners. The King after this loss asked the Prisoners he had
taken, whether an Embassy to treat of their Liberty would be acceptable at
Malaca, and being by them assured it would, he writ to the Admiral and
Commander of the Town, affirming our Ships had attacked him without cause, when
he was going only to subdue his rebellious Subjects, expressing concern for the
loss of our Galleon and Galliot, offering to restore the Prisoners without
Ransom, if they sent for them. This King being very subtle and false, it was
not fit to give two much Credit to him; yet his Ambassadors were well received,
and it was answered, that the King's Designs not being known, it could not but
he believed he designed against Malaca. They sent him all his Subjects taken by
James de Mendoca and a good Present, thanking him for the offer of restoring
the Portugueses, and desiring he would deliver them to him that carried the
others. The King being under sail when our Messenger came to him, said he would
answer after he had treated him as became a Portugues Ambassador. He had rather
have taken his answer there, being suspicious of the King, but was forced to
follow. The King being come home, received the Embassy friendly, and a Month
after dispatched him well satisfied with the Prisoners.

10. The reason why, as was before hinted, the 3 Galleons could not pursue the
Achem Fleet, was because they had advice that 8 Holland Ships were sailing
toward Malaca. Mendoca was of opinion to repair to the City for the security
thereof, but Miranda was for pursuing the Enemy, and having destroyed them they
might retire to Polubutum or Gale; which would have ruined the Achem Fleet, and
saved our Galleons which were destroyed afterward by the Hollanders. These
drawing near, Ferdinand de Costa was for securing the Galleons at Gale; Miranda
for fighting; and Furtado advised to draw the Galleons close to the little
Island, so that the Hollanders might not pass between them and the Land, so
they might do the more Execution, bringing all their Cannon over to one side.
This Opinion being approved of, was scarce put in Execution, when the 8 Ships
appeared and made at them. Every Ship exceeded each of our Galleons in number
of Men and Cannon, able Seamen and Gunners. The order of drawing under the
Island was so ill executed, that the Hollanders took the Post ours aimed at.

11. The Battle began and continued all that day with equal Loss. Next day one
of Galleons, after losing 3 Captains, and being torn to pieces even with the
superficies of the Water, was quitted by those Men that were left. The 3d day
only 10 Men being left in another Galleon, they fired it and got ashore. The
Admiral Miranda would defend himself, though wounded in the Leg, with only 6, but
they and a Jesuit by force carried him into the Island, leaving the Galleon on
fire. About 200 Men were lost in them all. The loss of the Hollanders was
considerable, but being Masters of the Sea they sailed to the Mouth of the
Straight, to intercept the Ships that were expected from China, till
understanding that D. John de Silva, Governor of Malina, was coming that way
with his Fleet, they quitted that Sea, which was no small comfort after so
great a Loss.

12. Francis de Miranda Enriquez went to Goa, where he walked upon Crutches, by
reason of the hurt received in his Legs when he fought the Hollanders. However
he was brought to a Trial, for not sailing directly for Manila, according to
his Instructions, or not retiring where they might have been secured. In the
Conclusion he was cleared, and having behaved himself so bravely, it was but
reason he should.

13. D. John de Silva being informed that the four Galleons could not go to
Manila, did all that could be expected of a good Commander to join us in order
to suppress the Hollanders. He sent Ammunition to our Fleet a^ Malaca, and
advice for our Ships to avoid falling into the Enemies hands. But all failed,
the advice by the ill Conduct of him that carried it; and the Ammunition,
because our Galleons were lost when it came. Without knowing hereof he put to
Sea with 10 strong Galleons, the product of his great Care and Industry. Eight
days after his departure 6 Holland Ships came to the Bay of Maribeles and were
the first of that Nation that passed the Streights of Magellan. Had D. John set
out 10 days sooner, he had taken the 8 Ships that defeated Francis de Miranda,
and 10 Days later those other 6. Ships On the Sea of Pulatinam he found the
Galleon commanded by Captain Antony Homen de Azevedo and the Plate Ship coming
from China. Having passed the Straight of Singapura, he left the Galleons with
his Vice Admiral and with two Galleys, he had went himself and convoyed those
two Vessels to Malaca. There he was received under a Canopy with great State,
and demonstrations of Love and Gratitude; there also he soon fell sick in such
manner, that the seventh Day were buried with him the great hopes conceived of
destroying the Hollanders by his Zeal, Valor and Conduct. The Galleys carrying
the Body returned to his Nephew, and the Vice Admiral and he with them to
Manila.

CHAP. VI.
Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year
1615.

1. ABout this same time a Peace was concluded at Damam between the Portugueses
and King Choutia. Gonzalo Pinto de Fonseca was appointed to go to exchange the
Ratifications. The King would not come into our Dominions to swear it, nor
would we go into his; those of the King of Sarceta, though our Enemy, and his
Father-in-Law, were agreed upon. Pinto came to a Village appointed for this
Ceremony with 400 Foot and 50 Horse, and found the King there with 40 of the
latter, and 900 of the former. Our Commissioner offered his Tent, and the King
his, urging his Character. It was accepted to avoid displeasing him. The
Quarrel had been about certain Lands the King pretended to, and now quitting
his Claim the Peace was solemnly sworn with satisfaction of both Parties. He
offered to serve our King with 1000 Foot and 200 Horse, and that his Son should
live at Damam to Command a Fleet at Sea. He added pleasantly, that he envied
those who could be in Damam at the public Feasts, and caused Pinto with some
of the chief Portugueses to go to his House, saying, the Queen was desirous of
seeing him. She saw him, but not he her, being behind a close Lettice. The King
made fresh offers, and gave good Proofs of real Friendship.

2. The same Goncalo Pinto concluded a Peace with the Mogol. The Articles were,
That Iahanguier, King of the Mogols, and the Viceroy should hold no
Correspondence with English or Hollanders. That they should harbor neither of
those Nations in their Ports, that they should be obliged to expel them the Sea
of Guzarate in 3 Months after any of them came thither. That if the English
entered the Lock of Suratte, the Portugueses should have leave to plant Guns
ashore to drive them out. That all Animosities laid aside, the Mogols and
Portugueses should Trade freely in each others Ports. That Prisoners be
restored on both sides. That the King should restore all the Portugues Effects
in his Kingdom, after repaying himself 70000 Xerafines, he had received Damage
in a Ship that came from Meca. That the Hulk of a Ship should be given to the
Queen Mother for one of hers burnt at Goa. That the Viceroy should give leave
for two Ships of his once, and one every Year to Trade from Suratte to Meca,
without paying any Duties. That the Malabars should be excluded the Ports of
both Parties as pernicious Pirates. That by this Peace the King of Portugal's
Right to the Duties paid at Diu, by the Ships that Trade in the Bay of Cambaya,
should be no way infri^ged.

3. About the middle of February, Gonzalo Rodriguez de Sonsa came to the Moluco
Islands with 6 Galliots of War, and two of Merchants. He was sent by the
Viceroy with Succors. D. John de Silva, Governor of Manila, with his Spaniards
were then besieged at Ternate by 11 Dutch Ships, Sousa in sight of them
relieved the Place, and the Besiegers stood away to the Southward. D. John
ordered two Galleys and a Pink with the Galliots to follow the Enemy, who
steered for Macassa. These put the Towns of Arsula Best, and the greater and
lesser Manciolas to Fire and Sword. They burnt Ships belonging to the Kings of
Ternate, Maquien, Bacham and Cacoa, who favored the Holland Rebels. Landing in
the Kingdom of Corane, they easily took the chief Fort, the King who was in it
flying for shelter to the Woods. Returning aboard, they discovered three great
Ships in which came the King's Son-in-Law and Grandson to his aid, the latter
was taken, the other killed. On the 2d of April they arrived at Macassa, a^
such time as the Admiral of the 11 Hollanders seen at Ternate, was coming into
that Port. After half a Day's fight being upon the point of taking her, a
sudden Storm parted them. Our Men returned to Ternate with Booty, Provisions,
and more Ships than they carried out.

4. In Ceylon our Genesis Em* Mascarennas Homem marched against Candea with 14
Companies of Portugueses of 30 Men each, and the Dissava's, or Chiefs of the
Natives* Near the River of Candea fell so great a Rain, there was no dry place
to lie down, and in the Morning they were all running Blood, being bit by
Leeches. It appeared difficult to pass the River being then swelled, but there
being 11000 Men there they cut Trees, and laying a Bridge over passed. The
Chingalas began to Skirmish, chiefly at Night, taking the advantage of the
Woods. We lost some Men. The like happened at the Entrance into the Kingdom of
Uva.

5. They marched to the City Babule, Metropolis of that Kingdom, burning all
that lay in their way. Three thousand of the Enemy, who lay in Ambush near the
City, fell upon Simon Correa who led our Van, but 600 Musketeers charging
them, they fled to the Woods, about 40 being killed on both sides. The same
happened in the Rear. There being no Plunder in the City it was burnt, and all
Fruit Trees cut down. Our General spent 3 Months in this Expedition, in March
returned to Sofragan, and thence to Malvane, having done the Enemy great harm.

6. In August he sent Peter Peixoto de Silva, with 8 Companies to Tumpane,
another Inlet into the Kingdom of Candea toward the North a League from
Balane. He spared neither Sex nor Age, for that the Tumpanenses had endeavored
to betray us to the Enemy. The Lands of Archiapato of Candea were burnt; but in
a Village they cut off 20 of our Blacks in an Ambush; 25 of them were slain in
the same manner on their way to Matale. Near Matale 70 more fell of 1500 that
came to oppose us, which caused them to quit the Field, and Peixoto returned to
Manicravare with 500 Prisoners, and 2000 Head of Cattle, some of them Elephants.

7. After this the Dissava Philip de Oliveyra had much the same success, making
a Road into Candea with 10 Companies. The success, continued as long as Emanuel
Mascarennas Homem commanded in that Island, which was little above a Year,
every one wishing it had been much longer as much in respect of his Valor, as
Fortune and Affability.

CHAP. VII.
Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year
1615.

1. IN the Year 1608 we gave an account of the prodigious rise of Sebastian
Gonzales Tibao, who of a poor seller of Salt in a small Barque the Year 1605,
in that of 1608 was become an absolute Sovereign without dependence on any
Prince whatsoever. It is now time to show the end of such Monsters. This base
Man being lifted to that height, the steps by which he ascended being Treachery
and Ingratitude, he now found it was no longer possible to support his Power
without some considerable Succor.

2. This Man, who in his Prosperity forgot to submit himself to the Viceroy,
now seeing the probability of falling, acquaints him with the Danger he is in.
He proposes like an absolute Prince, That if the Viceroy will effectually
support him, he will become Tributary to Portugal, with the acknowledgment of a
Galleon laden with Rice, to be delivered Yearly at Goa or Malaca. He urged,
all had been done by him was to revenge the Murder of the Portugueses
slaughtered by the King of Arracam in Banguel of Dianga; and (to gain the
Viceroy by the hope of Profit) hinted, that the vast Treasure of that King
might be taken. This last so blinded the Viceroy, that in stead of abhorring
the Villainies of that Wretch, he resolved to assist him, contrary to all Human
and Divine Laws.

3. For this Expedition, the Viceroy fitted out 14 of the largest Galliots, one
Flyboat, and a Pink, and gave the Command of them to D. Francis de Meneses
Roxo, who had governed Ceylon. He sailed from Goa about the middle of September
well manned and equipped, but not without much foreboding of an unfortunate
Event; for as the Viceroy only weighed the prospect of Gain, the People
considered the injustice of the Enterprise.

4. On the 3d of October D. France arrived at Arracam, the chief Port and
Residence of that King, he had before sent a Galliot with Advice of his coming
to Sebastian Gonzales at Sundi^a. His Instructions being opened before all the
Captains, they contained, that he should enter that Kingdom without expecting
Sebastian Gonzalez. It was more reasonable that man should have been expected,
as who knew the Country, and their manner of Fight, besides the Forces he was
to bring; but God had decreed the Ruin of that vile Wretch, and of that unjust
Succor. On the 15th of October, they discovered coming down the River a Fleet
so numerous, they could not see the end of it. The foremost was a Dutch Pink,
and many Hollanders commanded other Vessels. All that could be discoverd
appeared full of Men, and well equipped, an ill sight for 15 little Ships that
expected them; neither were they now 15, for one was gone to Sundiva; the Pink
was in pursuit of a Ship that fled, and another was gone to fetch the Pink.

5. The Dutch Pink fired the first Gun, and then the Fight began furiously, our
Galliots advancing without any dread of that vast Fleet. Four Galliots got
before the others, and in an instant their Captains and many Soldiers were
killed, yet the rest were no way dismayed, and the other eight came up,
darkening the day with Smoke, notwithstanding the repeated flashes of Fire.
Many of the Enemy were drowned, oversetting their Vessels through haste to fly
from us. The Fight lasted from morning till evening, when the Enemy drew off,
thinking some Relief was coming to us, having discovered the Galliot that went
to seek the Pink, which they could not find. We lost 25 Men of Note, besides
others.

6. Next morning the Pink came up, aboard him the wounded Men were carried, and
such as he had fit for Service taken out. D. Francis resolved to lie at the
mouth of the River till Sebastian Gonzalez came to join him, and then again
attack the Enemy. At length Gonzalez came with 50 Sail well manned and
equipped, and hearing what was done, railed against the Viceroy for giving such
Orders, and against D. Francis for obeying them. About the middle of November
they sailed up the River, discovered the Enemies vast Fleet riding in a safe
Place, and resolved to attack it. D. Francis took half Gonzalez his Ships, and
gave him half those he brought, so they made two equal Squadrons. They divided
themselves and fell on on both sides, firing upon those Vessels they could
reach, but none of them advanced. The King from the Shore encouraged his Men,
causing the Heads of some that fled to be set upon Spears for a Terror to the
rest.

7. Scarce had our Men time to breath, when a great part of that vast Fleet
came down upon them divided into 3 Squadrons. This was at Noon, when the heat
of the Sun scorched. Sebastian Gonzalez put to flight those that attacked him;
our Pink did as much with the Hollander. D. Francis received and did much harm.
The Advantage was visible on our side, till about Sunsetting our Admiral D.
Francis was killed by two Musket-Balls, one in the Forehead, the other in the
left Eye. A Signal given on Board his Galliot, caused Sebastian Gonzalez to
cease ^ollowing his good Fortune, and the Tide ebbing, the Fleets parted; but
Gaspar de Abren's Galeot being left among the Enemy, all her Men were slain,
and the Vessel torn in pieces; yet Abreu was brought off by Antony Carvallo
mortally wounded, and lived some days after.

8. Our Fleet being come back to the mouth of the River, care was taken of the
Wounded, and above 200 Dead were buried in the Sea. The Body of D. Francis was
embalmed. D. Luis de Azevedo the Vice Admiral succeeded in the Command. They
all sailed over to Sundiva, and D. Luis with his Squadron thence to Goa,
notwithstanding Sebastian Gonzales for his own security labored all he could
to keep him there. Not long after the King of Arracam falling upon him in his
Island, took it, and reduced him to his former miserable condition; so his
Sovereignty passed like a Shadow, his Pride was humbled, and his Villainies
punished. Our Fleet on their return burnt some Ships of the Moors, laden with
Provisions, upon the Coast of Paliacate and St. Thomas. But John Gomez Paez
fighting with others, had his Galliot blown up, and few Men were saved.

CHAP. VIII.
Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo this same Year
1615, and that of 1616.

1. THE Viceroy fitted out the Squadron for the North, which consisted of 12
Ships, and as many small Vessels, in which were at least 20 Gentlemen of
Quality, whom the Portugueses call Fidalgos, that served as Volunteers. The
Admiral was Ruy Freyre de Andrade.

2. This Fleet set out about the end of October. Ruy Freyre by the way visited
the Northern Forts. At Balcar, beyond Surat, he sent out the Fleet for Cambaya
under the Convoy of two Ships, giving Advice to the Commander to send away that
which was there. As soon as Ruy Freyre came to Suratte, Nababo, who commanded
there for the Mogol, sent him two Vessels loaded (as he said) with fresh
Provisions, but they were costly Curiosities and Silks. Ruy Freyre to receive
this Message, called all the Captains aboard his Galliot, and before them
viewed and commended the Present. That done, he took only one Piece, assuring
the Messenger, All must be returned, but that he should be as ready to serve
his Master, as if he had received the whole Present. Nababo much admired this
Proceeding, understanding it was Freyre's custom rather to Give than Receive.

3. The Piece Freyre kept was Cambolim, worth about 20 Pardao's. The value of a
Pardao is 12 Royals and a half. Cambolim is a piece of Stuff the Women wear on
their Shoulders like a Veil. The Captain's extolling this Action, he said, The
Cambolim was due to some Lady; that they should agree whose Mistress was
handsomest, and it should be given to her. The Price without any dispute was
allowed to ^ippolito Furtado his Mistress.

4. Whilst the Merchant Fleet stayed at Cambaya, Freyre went to visit the Fort
of Diu, and landed by the way at Goga, once a proud City of the Moors, but
humbled by our Arms the last Year. At the end of December, the Fleet sailed
from Cambaya, and was the greatest that had been seen in many Years, Freyre
with his Squadron convoyed it: Near Damam there arose such a Storm, that it was
a wonder they did not all perish. Two Ships were lost, with all the Men; of
another, only one Man was saved; of a fourth, all the Men. What caused most
admiration was, that 10 small Boats escaped, which in a calm Sea carried but a
span above Water. At length they got into Bacaim; 8 Merchant Ships being drove
to Chaul, met there 4 Parao's of Pirates, who took two of them. Freyre caused
the Beards of the Soldiers of the other six to be cut off for not following his
light. At last he came safe to Goa with the Fleet.

5. D. Bernard de Noronna commanded the Fleet on the Coast of Malabar. Zamori
had again broke the Peace, and distressed Granganor. Noronna hasted thither,
and cut off all Correspondence between Zamori and 3 Holland Ships that came
into that Sea; and in despite of all the Nayres relieved Granganor. Mean while
D. Henry de Sousa sent by him with 11 Sail to Calicut, burnt there a great Ship
belonging to that Emperor, loaded and ready to sail for Meca. This done, D.
Bernard having visited the Forts of Malabar and Canara, returned to Goa.

6. D. Nunno Alvarez Pereyra succeeded Emanuel Mascarennas Homem, as General of
Ceylon, and made several successful Roads into the Kingdom of Candea, bringing
thence many Prisoners, and much Cattle. But let us relate a dangerous Commotion
that happened in that Island, the Occasion whereof, though it be not new in the
World, is one of those that, though often repeated, is still admired, and was
thus:

7. Some Years before this died Nicapeti King of Ceylon, who being converted,
and having no Issue, made the King of Portugal his Heir. At this time there
lived in Ceylon a poor Fellow called also Nicapeti: He served the Portugueses,
and gaining admittance to one of the Queens of Valgameme, heard somewhat of
that Prince called Nicapeti. This Fellow being of the same Name, resolved to
represent his Person, and persuade the People, that he was their Natural Prince
come to Life again. He feigns himself a Iogue, (that is, the same as an Hermit
among us,) and beginning to appear about Mareguepore, gave out, That taking
compassion on the Calamities of his Country, he came to free them from the
Portugues Bondage. He found Credit, and Men flocking to him entered the seven
Corla's, when the Dis^ava Philip de Oliverae was absent. At Matiagama he slew
two Fathers of the Society, in 6 or 7 days was succored by the King of Candea
with 2000 Men, and declared King by most of the Country.

8. As soon as our General had notice hereof, he sent Emanuel Caesar with some
Men to quench this Fire before it grew Masterless. Caesar meeting him with 6000
Men at Gandola, a Village on the River Laoa, they engaged, and Ferdinand
Caldeyra, who led our Van, going on rashly, was killed, with 10 or 12 Soldiers,
and Captain Gaspar de Antas:

9. In the heat of the Battle 1000 Chingala's, who served under Luis Gomez
Pinto, deserted to the Enemy. At this sight our Men gave themselves for lost,
but much more when D. Constantine a Chingala, but Subject of Portugal, and of
the Royal Blood, stepping forward, cried aloud, Whither do you fly, my Friends?
If you look for your Natural King, here am I, who by seven several Branches am
descended from them. In a moment they all turned to, and proclaimed him King,
and he made use of this opportunity to reduce them that had revolted from us.
After a long Dispute, the Enemy fled over the River. Next morning our Men
passed over, and meeting no Enemy, stayed there for further Intelligence.

10. In the mean while Philip de Oliveyra returned from Candea, having heard of
Nicapeti's Attempt, but not of our Victory. There was then a considerable
number of Chingala's who served under him; to incite these to rebel one came,
and from the top of a Mountain admonished them to forsake the Portugueses, and
follow their Natural Prince. This caused much disorder among the Men, and next
day Oliveyra marching on, came to the Field of the late Battle, and finding
above 1000 slain, could not discover who had gained that Victory. On a Tree was
seen an Inscription, signifying that all Portugueses were slain, no body of
them left in Ceylon, and that Columbo was surrendered. This startled the
Portugueses, and not a little rejoiced the Lascarines, (the Chingala's that
serve among us are so called,) who were 800 in number.

11. As Philip de Oliveyra continued his march, 300 Men attacked his Rear, but
as soon as he faced them, fled. Nyhe came upon him near the River Laoa, he sent
to Emanuel Caesar and they joined, which made the Revolters fly to the Woods.
They two agreed to take all the Women and Children of some Villages, hoping by
that means to reduce the Chingala's that were in Arms. Oliveyra took above 400;
the same night the 800 Lascarines deserted with their Arms, leaving the
Portugueses alone, who were not above 200. These marched 5 Leagues to the Pagod
called Atanagale, near Maluana, where the General resided, who sent them 500
Men, 200 whereof were Portugueses. He ordered D. Emanuel de Castro to take care
of Provisions and Ammunition, having made D. Constantine Dissava of the Corlas,
(this was the Chingala, who, as was abovesaid, brought back those who fled from
us,) in stead of D. Philip de Oliveyra, wrongfully punishing him for the
desertion of the 800 Lascarines.

CHAP. IX.
Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo the same Year
1616.

1. NIcapeti, like an absolute King, bestowed Employments and Lands, having
gathered an Army of 24000 Men, with which he marched toward Columbo; so vain,
that half a League from that Town on the Banks of the River Nacolega, he would
be proclaimed Emperor of Ceylon. He sent to the King of Candea to send him one
of his two Wives, who answered, It should be done when the Portugueses were
subdued. Nicapeti, in a Rage at this Answer, threatened to use that King like
the Portugueses. Those 2000 Men, sent by him to Nicapeti's assistance, hearing
these Threats, deserted him, and returned home. This set those two Enemies of
ours at variance, and was no small help to our Affairs.

2. The two Commanders, Emanuel Caesar and D. Constantine, being joined, they
marched toward Nicapeti, and found the way he was to come very clean, and
strewed with Flowers. A Chingala carried Nicapeti the News of our approach, who
caused him to be impaled, saying, There were no Portugueses left in Ceylon. He
was soon undeceived, the two Vanguards coming in sight of each other. Nicapeti
instantly possesses himself of a Hill, and intrenches with 7000 Men. Our Van
attacks and enters his Works, kill 1000 of his Men, and force him, laying aside
the Regal Ornaments, to fly to the Woods. We lost only an Ensign. The other
part of the Enemies Army seeing this defeated, fled over the River Laoa. Night
coming on, our Men rested there, and in the morning found themselves
strengthened by 500 Chingala's, who had deserted from the Enemy.

3. At this time a Chingala, who had been a Christian, and Follower of the
Portugueses by the Name of Antony Barreto, served the King of Candea. Though of
base Birth, his Valor advanced him to be General of that King's Forces, with
the Title of, Prince and Governor of the Kingdom of Uva. This Man laying hold
of the opportunity of Nicapeti's Revolt, came with a considerable Power to
seize our Fort of Sofragan. Barreto counterfeiting Friendship, drew our Men,
which were but 60, under two Captains, Faria and Matoso, to a Conference, and
treacherously slew most of them. Those that escaped retired to a Church, where
want of Ammunition obliged them to surrender, and they were carried to the King
of Candea.

4. This misfortune was justly due to those Portugueses for murdering an
Ambassador sent by that King to Treat of an Accommodation, that they might
jointly carry on the War against Nicapeti. The King, who might justly have put
to death Faria and his Men in Revenge for his Ambassador, Treated them
courteously. He sent two of them to Balane, to advise our Garrison there to
deliver that Place to him, being distressed by Nicapeti; they went, and having
advised the contrary, returned into Slavery.

5. The King being informed by these Messengers, that those of Balane would not
s^rrender, fell upon them with 10000 Men, and many Elephants. Our Commander
Emanuel Falcam held out some days, but seeing 6 Portugueses had deserted, and
there was no hope of Relief, was forced to Capitulate. The King treated him and
his better than they deserved He was so desirous of Peace, that he presently
sent an Ambassador to Treat thereof with our General D. Nunno Alvarez Pereyra,
but the Success of that Negotiation belongs to the next Year.

6. An Embassy came to Goa from the King of Siam, acknowledging the Favors
received of the Portugueses. The Heads of the Message were, that he had
received a Letter from James de Mendoca, who stayed not for the Answer, that he
offered the King of Portugal the Port of Martavam to build a Fort there; that
he would maintain the Garrison and a small Fleet to Cruize on that Sea against
the King of Dua. The Ambassadors were splendidly entertained, and F. Francis of
the Annunciation, a Dominican, sent along with them with the same Character. He
set out the beginning of May, with a costly Present for the King. The King
received the Ambassador with great Satisfaction, who proposed to him how
ambitious the Portugueses were of his Friendship, that they should both join
their Forces to subdue the King of Ava, that there should be a free Trade
between Siam and Malaca; that he should not admit the Hollanders into his
Country.

7. The King answered, That the Portugues Merchants might freely resort to his
Ports and be exempt from all Duties, and his Subjects should Trade to Malaca;
that the reason they had not done it of late was the ill usage they found
there, whereof he gave good Instances; that he had admitted the English, Dutch
and Malayes into his Ports for the great respect they showed him, and the need
he had of them; that he had assisted the Portugueses against the Hollanders;
that he was no way concerned for the harm those of Malaca had done the Queen of
Patane, because she was a Madwoman, but she being now dead he had placed one of
more Sense there, and desired there might be free Trade with her as well as
with Siam; that the Goods of such Portugueses as died in his Dominions should
go to their Heirs; that he had ordered all Portugueses who committed any
Crimes, should be tried at his Court, to prevent any wrong being done them by
the prejudice of Magistrates. Thus our Ambassador was answered and dispatched,
and the King sent with him two Siam Gentlemen, to go his Ambassadors into Spain.

8. There were great Complaints against the Commander of Mocambique Ruy de Melo
and Sampayo, for that he robbed the Natives, and did not pay the Soldiers,
having privately strangled some of them, which caused a Mutiny. Francis de
Fonseca Pinto was sent from Goa to regulate these Disorders. With him went
Salvador Vaz de Gama to succeed Melo, in case he were found Guilty. Melo's
Conscience accusing him, he refused to admit the Judge, who resolved to return
to Goa, but hearing that Melo had left open a Wicket of the Fort, he rushed in,
and deposing him, gave the Command to Guerra, contrary to what the Viceroy had
ordered. He was also to Victual the Fort at Tete, and furnish it with Cloth,
that Fort being maintained to continue the discovery of the Mines of
Monomatapa, which gave great hopes of Profit. But before we relate what
happened at this time, let us refresh the Memory of what was before.

9. In the 10th Chap. of the 3d Part of the 2d Vol. we gave some account of
what was acted by some of our Commanders in these Parts. Chunzo a powerful King
rebelled against the Emperor of Monomotapa, and was subdued by the assistance
of the Portugueses; so other Rebels. To gratify these Favors he for ever gave
all his Mines to the King of Portugal, making a resignation of them to James
Simoens Madera, Commander of Tete, who was then in his Service. The substance
of the Instrument was, That he gave all his Mines of Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin,
Iron, Lead, to the King of Portugal, upon Condition he should support him in
his Throne; That the King should admit of him as his Brother; That the next
Year he would send his Son with an Ambassador to Goa; That he had put two Sons,
and would soon two Daughters, into the Custody of James Simoens to be bred
Christians. The Emperor ordered Simoens to have an Instrument made hereof; and
he asking how he would Sign it, since in his Empire none could write, the
Emperor made three Crosses on the Ground, one under the other, and said, he
would sign it that way, which accordingly he did.

10. This done, Simoens with his Men accompanied the Emperor who was marching
toward Ancone that was in Rebellion. Gaspar Pereyra Cabral being left behind
wounded was carried by Cafres, who run away from him. Simoens understanding it,
went back with one Slave, and helped to carry him on his own back. An Act
worthy of memory* from a Captain to a Soldier. The Rebel being subdued,
Simoens returned to Tete with the Emporor's two Sons. They were baptized by the
Names of Philip and James. The latter remained there, the other went back to
his Father.

11. The Emperor thinking he could now overcome his Enemies without the
assistance of Portugueses, marched to the Kingdom of Baroe, and was there
defeated; at Mongas he had a Son killed, and Matuzianne usurped the whole
Empire. James Simoens restored him, and possessed himself of Chicova.
Matuzianne raising new Forces was defeated and killed by the Portugueses. D.
Stephen de Ataide raised a Fort at Massapa, and gave that Command to James
Carvallo, whom he sent to Monomotapa with a present to obtain the Delivery of
the Mines.

12. Carvallo went and told the Emperor he had a great Present, but gave him
none; and he seeing the Portugueses entered his Lands for Gold without his
consent, caused all they had to be taken from them, and many to be killed.
Carvallo had with him some Forces belonging to the Emperor, with whose
assistance he curbed the Robbers of Quizinga, and supported himself. He
resolved to revenge the spoiling of the Portugueses by a horrid Treachery
against those that served him, for joining with the Quizinga's, he one Night
fell upon the Cafres, and killing many put the rest to flight, who justly
cursed the falseness of the Portugueses.

13. Carvallo fearful of his own Wickedness, abandoned the Fort of Massapa and
went to Tete, leaving all the Country in Arms against the Portugueses. All he
acted was by order of D. Stephen de Ataide, who, in stead of appeasing the
Emperor, threatened him with War. He sent out from Sena, and by his order
Carvallo raised another Fort on the Banks of Zambeze, two days Journey from
Tete. James Simoens Madera was left to Command at Tete, because Ataide returned
to Mocambique, hearing the Hollanders were coming thither. D. Stephen
perceiving no Dutch appeared in 6 months, returned to Tete. The Emperor sent to
offer him Chicova if he would send the ordinary Present, which was a Debt, and
no Gift. D. Stephen would not so much as hear the Ambassadors, refusing to give
a Present of 5000 Crowns, which might have saved much greater Charges, for
above 30000 were already lost at Massapa to no purpose.

14. D. Stephen set forward with 150 Men, but being better advised, expected
News from Portugal and India. In July he received the King's Orders to go to
Goa, and give the Command of Tete to James Simoens, and that of Mocambique to
D. John de Ataide the Viceroy's Brother. D. Stephen obeyed against his Will,
leaving Simoens 140 Soldiers without any thing to maintain them in that
dangerous Conquest. However Simoens made the best on it, and resolved to
proceed, beginning with Chombe a powerful Cafre, demanding of him what he owed
as our Tributary, and the Restitution of the Portugueses he had. Some infamous
Portugueses advised Chombe to take no notice of Simoens, because he could do
him no harm. This caused that King first to slight, and then to molest him in
the Vessels wherein he sailed for Tete. Simoens landing drove the Cafres so,
that they troubled him no more.

CHAP. X.
Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year
1616.

1. JAmes Simoens Madera raising 6000 Cafres, marched with them and his
Portugueses against Chombe at the beginning of September. One night they heard
a Voice that said, Chombe rejoices at your coming, and desires you will make
haste, for he is hungry, and expects to feast upon your Bodies. Simoens marched
on, and fortified himself close under the Enemies Works, which were half a
League in length, and in breadth proportionable, furnished with 8000 Men.
Simoens attacks them twice, but to no effect. Next night a Cafre fled to the
Enemy, and from them a Christian Black Woman to us with Advice, That Chombe
would fall upon our Men before day. Simoens expected them with silence, and
killing 1000, put the rest to flight.

2. The Enemy proposes a Peace, but nothing is concluded. Simoens attempts
their Works, but without success; he sends to the Commander of Senna for
Succor, who sends him 40 Portugueses, and 3000 Cafres. The Works were again
assaulted in vain; soon after some Deserters informed, the Intrenchment was
weakest on the side of a Lake. Here the Assault was renewed, the Works entered,
Chombe put to flight, and the Place given to Quitamho a Cafre, who faithfully
served us, on condition to pay what Chombe had denied.

3. James Simoens was now bent upon the Conquest of the Silver Mines in
Chicova. The Emperor sent to acquaint him, He again resigned those Mines to
him, upon condition he should not go thither with an Armed Power. Simoens
desired, he would send one to put him in Possession thereof, and to receive
Cloth to the value of 4000 Ducats he had to present him. The Emperor was
satisfied, and Simoens, with Applause of all the Cafres, took possession of
Chicova on the 8th of May, 1614. being put into it by Onanxangue a great Man,
Nephew to the Emperor. The first thing he did was to raise a Fort there; the
next, to join Friendship with a powerful Cafre called Sapoe, and his Country
Borore.

4. The Lord of Chicova, now subject to the Portugueses by virtue of the
Emperor's Resignation, withdrew himself from them; so that Complaint was made
thereof to the Emperor, who gave leave to Depose him, and put another in his
Place, sending a Cafre called Cherema to show the Mines. This Man twice
deceived Simoens, causing him to dig in Places where he had hid some Ore, for
which reason he was confined; and then showed another place, of which some hope
was conceived, he excusing himself what was done had been by the Emperor's
Order. Nevertheless Simoens sent him a Present; he detained the Messengers, and
sent word, He would have Needles, Pins, Knives, Looking-Glasses, Candles, Soap,
Zafran, Pepper, and some rich Silks. He repented the giving of Chicova, and
sought occasion of Disagreement, thinking that Simoens could not send what he
damanded. But he sending all things, the Emperor seemed satisfied.

5. That D. Philip the Emperor's Son, whom James Simoens caused to be Baptized,
attempted several times to make his escape to the Portugueses, and was taken;
at length he got to the Fort of Chicova, and was joyfully received. Hearing
there that Chirema was fled to avoid discovering the Mines, he sent for him,
pretending to be sent Ambassador by his Father, and having rebuked and secured
him, went himself to Tete. The Emperor hearing hereof, proffered great Rewards
to any would kill his Son. At the same time it fell out, that a Soldier
gathering some Fruit, the Son of the Owner, who was a powerful Man, forbid him;
the Soldier complains to his Captain James Teyxera Barroso, who without farther
examination shot the young Man. The Father, in Revenge of his Son's Death, did
the Portugueses much harm; and the Emperor declared War, because they
entertained his Son against his will.

6. In March, 1615. 10000 Cafres assault the Fort, but were forced thence with
great loss, James Simoens coming in time with Succor. The Country being clear,
Simoens sent some Men with Cherema to discover the Mines; after some days
digging they discovered Ore, whereof one half was pure Metal, and some scarce
wanted casting. It appeared to be no cheat, some being grown into the Roots of
a Tree.

7. Our Commander being assured there were rich Silver Mines, resolved to send
three great clods of Ore for a Proof to Spain. The Messengers and Ore were
received with great joy at Madrid. Gaspar Bocarro was so ambitious of carrying
this News, that after the others were gone, he gave 2000 Ducats to purchase the
Employ, and offered to go by Land at his own Expense; but he ended his days at
Mocambique.

8. The excessive Heat caused a Sickness in the Fort of Chicova, whereof the
Soldiers died in 3 or 4 days. Next followed a Famine, which gave occasion to
the Cafres, who served the Fort and dug in the Mines, to run away, so that
there was no Silver to buy Cloth, and consequently no Cloth to purchase
Provisions with at Sape, it being the only Coin that passed there. James
Simoens had acquainted the Viceroy, That Conquest could not be maintained
without Relief. The chief Sustenance of that Garrison for some days was a small
Fruit, so harsh they could not swallow it, unless rolled in Ashes.

9. The Supplies were sent by the Viceroy to Mocambique, but never reached
Chicova, which thereupon was abandoned. The hatred the Lawyer Francis de
Fonseca Pinto, to whom the Viceroy had given the whole Charge of the Affair,
bore to James Simoens, was the cause he was not Relieved, and that important
Place lost.

10. This is that Francis de Fonseca Pinto, who (as was said before) took the
Command of Mocambique from Ruy de Melo and Sampayo, and had all Necessaries for
Chicova, as well of Provisions as Tools to work in the Mines. But his hatred to
Simoens diverted him from sending those Succors; besides, he sold all that was
to relieve that Place, and converted it to his own use, and seized upon Ruy de
Melo's Effects. James Simoens pressed him by Letters for Relief, in his last
protesting with all his Men, If the Place were lost, the fault would lie upon
him.

11. All the Answer that insolent Fellow returned, was putting Simoens his
Nephew, sent to conduct him, in Irons. Then he entered his Lands, and destroyed
all that was there, selling his Slaves; he forbid the Inhabitants on pain of
Death corresponding with, or relieving those of Chicova, and sent word to the
Emperor, that he might freely kill Simoens, for entering his Dominions without
Orders from the Viceroy. Not satisfied to procure his Ruin by those means, he
marched toward Chicova with intention to murder him. Simoens understanding it
withdrew thence, and Pinto hearing of it, though so near, would not relieve the
Fort, not examine the Mines as he had in Orders, but returned hastily to Tete,
fearing James Simoens should meet him. But going back to the Fort, caused the
Notary to draw an Instrument, containing the Causes why that Fort was
abandoned, to which they all signed. This done, they marched with their Women
and Children toward Tete.

12. Weakness caused them to march very slow, and two Soldiers fell dead for
want. At Marenga, Simoens received a Summons from Pinto, to appear before him
at Tete in 9 Days to answer for himself. But knowing now he had quitted the
Fort, sent 2000 Cafres commanded by a Portugues to murder him; they, though the
opportunity was presented, would not do it. Simoens stayed in the Country of
Inambanzo which was his own, and all the Company went to Tete. There Pinto
inquired of them, whether there were any Mines at Chicova, they all unanimousl^
answered there were. But he in hatred to Simoens desiring to conceal them, with
Threats and Rewards prevailed with each of them single to swear there were
none. Then he gave Sentence against Simoens for abandoning the Fort, not
considering if there were no Mines there (as he endeavored to made out) it was
no Crime, and that if any fault were it was his own, since the other held it
longer than could be required.

13. This done Pinto Promises the Emperor a considerable Present, if he would
fall upon Simoens at Inambanzo. The Emperor not only expelled Simoens those
Lands, but so distressed Tete, that they were forced to make up the Present
promised by Pinto, to buy his absence, the Emperor positively requiring it at
their hands. James Simoens afterward returned to Tete, being utterly ruined by
his good Service, and Pinto who had ruined all was enriched by his Villainies
and Rapine. This is what happened about the Mines of Monomotapa. I will only
add that the first Commander there, Francis Barreto, was undone by a Divine,
and now James Simoens the last by a Lawyer; and the King, by employing such
Gownmen in things they understand not, lost the great Advantages might be
expected from those Mines.

CHAP. XI.
Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo the same Year
1616.

1. THE Inhabitants of the City Meliapor, commonly called St. Thomas, were all
divided, killing one another without any regard of Human or Divine Laws, or any
Shame, that even the Moors and Gentiles abominated their Wickedness. The
occasion was what they call Points of Honor. To appease these Disorders, the
Viceroy sent Ruy Diaz de Sampayo with 7 Sail, and 250 Soldiers.

2. Ruy Diaz performed all that was given in Charge to him, and having
reconciled the Citizens of S. Thomas, sent 6 of his Ships to scour the Coast of
Carriero under the Command of Peter Gomez de Sousa, a Man more courageous than
discreet. At Montepoli he made cruel havoc, surprising the Inhabitants. As he
returned with great Booty, and many Women and Children, an ancient Moor
appeared upon the Shore, who coming to our Men told them, he was much wronged
by Cotamuza King of Goloconda, and therefore would not only turn Christian, but
show them a Fort (meaning that of Carriero) they might easily surprise. This
was all a Fiction devised by a Moor, who seeing what was done by our Men, had
gathered 600 Moors, and lay in Ambush to see whether Peter Gomez would suffer
himself to be deceived by this Messenger.

3. Peter Gomez, though warned that all this was Treachery, gave Credit to the
Moor, followed him a League, and there fell into the Ambush, where he and all
his Captains, save one that was left at St. Thomas, with 130 Portugueses were
all slain, 25 taken, and only 30 escaped by flight: 186 Indians were killed in
the Action.

4. Joseph Pereyra de Sampayo, who was left Prisoner by Peter Gomez, carried
the remainder of the Men and Ships to S. Thomas. The Moors sent the Portugueses
they had taken to the King of Goloconda, who complained to F. Bartholomew Dias,
sent to him by the Bishop of Meliapor, that the Portugues should enter his
Country in hostil manner, at the same time they treated amicably with him. The
King admitted the weak excuse, that it was not done by order of the Government,
and delivered the Prisoners upon condition those of Montepoli should be
restored.

5. D Emanuel de Meneses sailed from Lisbon with 3 Ships for India, one of them
springing a Leake was forced to put into the Port again; another arrived safe
at Goa, after being parted from D Emanuel by a Storm on the Coast of Guinea. D.
Emanuel near the Island of Madagascar met 4 English Ships, the Commander of
them sent to order our Captain aboard, who refused, but sent an Understanding
Man to view their Strength, and he returning said publicly, that the Enemy's
Admiral alone was too strong for our Ship. D. Emanuel taking him aside, blamed
his Indiscretion for disheartning the Men; then he sent word to the English,
that since their Kings were at Peace, there was no reason the Subjects should
break it; that they should bear off, and not come a head of him. Nevertheless
the least of the 4 did, he fired at her, and then all the 4 at him.

6. Night came on, our Ship held her Course, and in the Morning found her self
among some Islands near the Head of that called Mannoto. The Enemy coming on,
and the Wind calming, we were forced to engage, our Vessel was soon unmasted,
and made the best it could for the Island Angagiza. The English sent to tell D.
Emanuel he was running to his Ruin; that if he would surrender himself, all
the Men should be landed at Suratte, whence they might travel by Land to Goa;
he answered, if any more such Message were sent him, he would hang him that
carried it. The Ship driving toward the Shore with the Tide, stuck between two
Rocks, which proved the saving of all the Men, who got ashore leaping a narrow
Gut, into which many fell for haste.

7. As soon as landed, the Cafres received them with showers of Stones. They
were appeased with some Gifts, and the help of some Musket Balls let fly among
them by Joseph Alvarez Torres, who (though it was plain their Safety consisted
in their Arms) advised they should be cast into the Sea, because the Cafres
would not furnish them with Provisions as long as they were armed. D. Emanuel
consented, and scarce were they seen next day unarmed, when the Cafres stripped
them even of their Shirts. Some traveled up the Country, and others along the
Shore; the latter in two Days found no Water to drink, were consumed with the
heat of the Sun, and some died for want.

8. The 3d Day they met other Cafres, who seeing nothing to take from them,
gave them Milk and Water with Signs of Compassion. Sebastian Prestes, the Pilot
of the Ship, attempted to save himself with a few Men in the Boat, and coasting
along the Island, met Chande a Noble Moor of Pate, who was sailing for the
Island Madagascar with two Pangayos. He told the Pilot that King was his
Friend, and for his sake would use them all well. The Pilot sent to acquaint D.
Emanuel, and it appeared those Cafres with whom he was, were that King's
Subjects. They all came to the Port, and the Moor gave each of them a Cloth to
cover his Nakedness. Here it appeared how little the Cafres esteem what we most
value, they gave many Pieces of Eight for a Rag scarce worth a Farthing, and
fetching Bags full of Money out of the Ship, scattered it about the Rocks, and
putting their Heads into the Bags were very well pleased.

9. It may well be doubted whether a Portugues would have done with 600 Moors,
as this Moor did with 600 Portugueses in that miserable Condition. He
maintained them, gave them Clothes, which sold to the Cafres had been worth
much Money; justly restored them Jewels of great value wherewith they entrusted
him, and gave them his two Pangayos to go over to Mombaca. They arrived thither
on the 4th of September, and were maintained and clothed by the Charity of that
little Town. On the 10th of that Month they Embarked, and arrived safe at Goa.
The Viceroy sent Presents to D. Emanuel de Meneses, and comforted him for his
Loss. D. Hierome Manuel, who commanded the homeward bound Ships about the
Islands of Flores fought with 4 Pirates, and put into the Island Tercera, whence
he came to Portugal with the Ship that was put back the Year before.

10. The Trade of the Port of Soar in Arabia much lessened the Customs of Ormuz
and Mascate. To remedy this the Viceroy sent D. Francis Rolim with a Galley and
five other Vessels, who joined D. Vasco de Gama Admiral of that Sea with five
Sail more at Mascate. Amer, Head of a Hord of Arabs, to revenge himself upon
Mahomet King of Soar, took part with us, and marched by Land with 1200 Men. Our
Men landed, and possessed themselves of some Mosques to secure themselves till
the Cannon was set ashore.

11. A Fort on a Hill was first attacked, but so well defended it could not be
entered that Day, though Mahomet who commanded it was killed with a Musket-Ball.
We lost a Captain and 6 Men. In the Morning the Trenches were entered, then a
Mosque, and lastly a Town, where many Women and Children were made Prisoners,
and much Booty found. In this Action we lost 6 Men more. The Fort not able to
hold out for want of Men surrendered; and the King's Brother being taken, was
put to Death Our Men violated the Articles they had made, killing and
plundering many of them that marched out. And having agreed with Amer, that
there should ^e no Prisoners made, yet they took several Girls on pretense of
Breeding them Christians, as if that were an excuse for Breach for Faith. John
de Sousa was left to Command that Fort, and Antony Pimenta joined with him, as
skilled in the Affairs of that Country.

12. At Cananor happened an accident sad enough, and yet ridiculous. The Nayres
show no Mercy to a Thief, though the thing stolen be of no value. They impale the
Criminal, and leave him to be eaten by the Birds. An Indian that was turned
Christian stole a Knife, the Nayres apprehended him, and sent to acquaint the
Judge of the Portugueses at Cananor. He returned answer, they should kill him.
They instantly cut off his Head, thinking it was a piece of Civility, being he
was a Christian, to kill him our way. Our Commander, Nicholas Soveral, sent
some Soldiers to fetch the Body, and revenge his Death on the Nayres, as if
they had not obtained leave for what they did. The Soldiers killed a Nayre,
which provoked them in great numbers to besiege the Fort with great Threats, if
Satisfaction was not given them. Our Cammanders made show of hanging one of
Soveral's Servants to appease the Nayres; and being cut down put him into a
Coffin, as if he were really dead. The Nayres were satisfied, and our Men as
well pleased that this Fiction had passed upon them, as if the Condescension
had not been equal, whether the Act was feigned or real.

13. The King of Ova, or Avaa (for both Names are given him) fearing the Kings
of Siam and Arracam, his Enemies should come to an accommodation with the
Portugueses, sent Ambassadors to settle a Peace with us, excusing the killing
of Philip de Brito Nicote, offering to restore the Prisoners he had taken, and
to assist us against the King of Arracam, of whose great Treasure he desired
nothing for himself, but the white Elephant. The Viceroy accepted of the
Ambassadors Proposals, and sent back with them Martin de Costa Falcam to
ratify the Agreement. He spent many Days in soliciting an hour's Audience, at
length it was appointed at Midnight, and he was led in the dark to a Place
where they ordered him to speak, for the King heared; he spoke and saw no King,
nor heard no answer. He signified the desire he had of seeing the King, and was
ordered to wait his going abroad. He went out one Day upon an Elephant, and
knowing Falcam waited in the Street to see him, never so much as turned his
Eyes that way. Such was the account he made of our Embassy, so the Ambassador
returned to Goa without concluding any thing.

14. Let us conclude this Year with an account of a Monster. In September was
born at Chaul this Monster, whose Head and Face were as round as a Ball, the
Mouth of excessive bigness, the Nose quite flat, the Eyes very little, the Ears
vastly big like those of an Elephant, the Neck extreme thick, in other respects
like a Pig. It died the hour it was born.

CHAP. XII.
Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo, in the Year
1617.

1. THE Affairs of Ceylon were in a dangerous Condition, for we had three
powerful Enemies, but few Men to oppose them, and lost the Forts of Sofragam
and Balane. Our Enemies were the King, the Chingala Antony de Barreto and
Nicapeti, who though overcome still was strong. Our General, D. Nunno Alvares
Pereyra, divided his Men, who with much hazard put all to the Fire and Sword,
sparing neither Sex nor Age; for neither Mercy obliged the Chingala's, nor did
Cruelty terrify them. The Particulars are not worth relating, let us see what
happened with Nicapeti.

2. Our Forces marched after Nicapeti from Pelandu to Catugambala, Devamede and
Cornagal, taking some Forts by the way, killing many, and carrying away 600
Prisoners. The Tyrant retired to Talampeti his usual Refuge, our Men advanced
to Polpeti in sight of the Enemies Camp, and forcing their Works passed to
Balapane of Religiam, whence they sent away the Prisoners and wounded Men. It
was debated in Counsel what was best to be done, and the worst advice
prevailed, so D. Constantine marched with a Party toward Alicur after Barreto,
and heard he was fortified with 6000 Men at Iatipara, having secured all the
Women of the Araches and Lascarines, and that Nicapeti was at Moratena. Our Men
being divided did little, and had performed much more, if the best advice,
which was to keep together, had been followed. The Chingala's when the
Portugueses prevailed offered submission, but upon any ill success of ours
recanted. At last our Forces quite harassed, went into Quarters at Botale.

3. At this time Laurence Perez de Carvallo sailed from Goa for Ceylon with Men
and Ammunition in a Pink, all at his own proper Charge. A Counsel being held
before our General D. Nunno Alvarez at Columbo, the result was, That he marched
in Person with a considerable force to drive Barreto from Sofragam and Mature;
Luis Gomez Pinto was left with his Regiment to secure Alicur, and oppose
Nicapeti, and Emanuel Caesar stayed at Botale with 100 Men. It was about the End
of March, when those who were for Sofragam set out, carrying Laurence Lopez
Carvallo with them. Our Parties were successful on all sides, driving the Enemy
from their Works, and slaughtering them in the Woods.

4. In May our Army advanced toward Nicapeti, who was well fortified at
Moratena, yet fled toward Candea with such speed, that our Army could not keep
with him. Luis Gomez Pinto with his Men and two Companies more was detatched to
pursue him, who was so intent upon overtaking Nicapeti, that he passed by
several rich Booties that offered by the way. At length he overtook him in the
Deserts of Anorojapure, and unexpectly fell in with him. Nicapeti having killed
one of our Lascarines with an Arrow, fled to the Woods, his Men made a small
stand till 60 were slain, and then took the same shelter of the Woods.
Nicapeti's Wives called Queens, and a Grandson of Raju, and Nephew of Madune,
who used to be at Uva with Barreto, were taken. The Fame of this Victory
brought the Inhabitants of the Corlas loaded with Rice to submit themselves to
our General at Malvana, which had been much distressed, but for this unexpected
Victory that happened about July.

5. The News hereof also moved Anaras Pandar, King of Pandar, to send his
Ambassadors with 32 Portugueses he had Prisoners to treat of Peace. Our General
sent his Letters to Goa, and the Viceroy read them in Council. The Contents
were, That a perpetual Peace should be settled; That he would become Tributary
to Portugal with the yearly acknowledgment of 4 Elephants, and a quantity of
Cinnamon; That he would repair and restore the Fort of Balane; That he would
consent to the raising another in Candea; That his Kingdom should be confirmed
upon him, and his three Sons. All the Conditions were admitted, only in what
related to settling the Kingdom on him and his Heirs, care should be had that
nothing of the Claim the Portugueses have to it were diminished. Yet afterward
finding us less formidable, he recanted of part of the Conditions, and the
Peace was concluded only with the yearly Tribute of two Elephants.

6. The King of Portugal had a Title to the Kingdom of Iafanapatan, that King
dying and leaving his Son a Child under the Tuition of his Brother Chingali, a
fair opportunity was offered of seizing that Crown, but other Affairs diverting
our Forces, the Viceroy ordered Chingalij should continue his Possession with
the Title of Governor.

7. The Cities of Bacaim and Chaul, and Lands of Trapor and Tana, were consumed
by Discord among the Portugueses, and some of them were daily killed. Bacaim
chiefly was full of Broils, occasioned by Ferdinand de Miranda and Andrew de
Abreu. To suppress these Disorders, the Council sent thither Dominick Cardoso
de Melo Judge of the Criminal Court, and with him D. Peter de Azevedo Commander
of the North. We shall hereafter see God's Judgments on that City and the other
Places, to convince those Men they could not escape his Justice, though they did
that of Men.

8. Ruy de Melo, who was deprived of his Command of Mocambique by the Judge Fr.
de Fonseca Pinto, went to Goa, and being tried was cleared of all the Crimes
laid to his Charge, and ordered to be restored to his Post; James de Cunna and
Castellobranco Judge of the Criminal Court, was sent to restore him. The
Viceroy charged Melo to forget past Grudges, to take care of the Peace and
Preservation of that Place, and not to offend Guerra or Pinto; and the more to
secure the latter, continued his former Commission during his stay in those
Parts. The same Charge he gave to the Judge Cunna.

9. Melo and Cunna sailed from Goa in two Vessels, and Cunna arrived first at
Mocambique in May. As soon as he came he promised to reconcile him to Melo, and
in return desired him to secure Pinto, contrary to the Viceroy's Orders, which
made their Power equal. Pinto coming with above 100000 Crowns he had gathered
by Extortion, was put into Irons. Being a Prisoner in the Fort he made use of
his Rhetoric, telling Guerra how much he was beholden to him, and offering, if
he would release him and secure Cunna, to give him sufficient Certificates to
save his Reputation, and clear him of all Crimes at Goa. This he said, because
Guerra's guilt was no less than his own.

10. Guerra overcome with these Promises, releases Pinto, and sending for Cunna
on pretense of Business detains him Prisoner. He seeing himself in the Power of
his two greatest Enemies, whose design was to stay him at Mocambique, giving
18000 Ducats security, got loose and escaped to Mombaca, where Ruy de Melo was
detained. They two with Simon de Melo Pereyra, Commander of that Fort, and
Emanuel Freyre de Andrade gave Sentence of Death against Guerra, as a Rebel.
Melo and Cunna Embarque for Mocambique; mean while Pinto to secure his Gold was
sailing for Goa. Guerra was advised not to stay the coming of his Enemies, yet
he did, and receiving Melo at the Gate delivered him the Keys. Melo, or his Son
(for in this particular Relations vary) embracing Guerra stabbed him, then
spurning and reviling, caused him to be apprehended. A few Days after he was
condemned to be hanged, and though he offered to fit out a complete Galleon for
the King's Service to purchase Life, was executed.

11. The Chinese provoked by the Insolences of the Portugueses at Macao, were
drawing together Forces to expel them. The Mandarines of the Province of
Quantung, sent to them first to reproach them of their Crimes, ordering that
either they should for the future resolve to live honestly, or immediately
withdraw from thence with their Wives and Children. The Portugu^ses pleaded
innocence, excused their Faults, and promised for the time to come to observe
their Laws.

12. D. Garcia de Silva (of whom mention was made before) was still at Goa, in
order to go Ambassador to Persia. The Reason of his stay was because that King
continued to commit Hostilities, having taken from us Bandel of Comoram in
Arabia. Yet now he resolved to send an Ambassador to Spain, and chose for this
Employ Robert Sherley an Englishman.

13. The Persian sending an Ambassador to Spain, it was thought the Spaniard
might safely go to him. D. Garcia began to make ready, but his long stay at Goa
having been chargeable, he demanded 30000 Ducats of the Viceroy, who was forced
to give him the best part of that Sum; but this being in the dead of Winter,
his Voyage was put off till Spring, and I cannot find any farther account what
became of him or his Embassy.

14. The Viceroy, to gratify the King of Macassa for his kind Entertainment of
Goncalo Rodrigues de Sousa, answered his Letter, and sent him a Present by
Augustine Labato, who sailed from Goa on the 3d of October with 2 Galliots. On
the way he took two Vessels of Achem, and being well received and dispatched by
the King of Macassa, he sailed then laden with Provisions for Ternate. He
fought two Dutch Vessels, landed the Provisions, returned again and brought
more from Macassa, then going to Manila wintered there.

15. The Portugueses sailing from Malaca to Manila, found there was a Days
difference between those two Places; that is, they who go from Malaca think
they arrive at Manila on a Sunday, and it is Monday; and the contrary from
Manila to Malaca. The reason is, that those who sail to the Eastward at every
15 Degrees have the Sun rising an hour sooner, and they who to the Westward an
hour later. From Portugal to India 7 hours are gained, the rest from Goa to
Manila, which added to those lost between Manila and Spain, make up the
difference of a whole Day.

16. Our Viceroy earnestly desired to hear of the many Portugueses were said to
be cast away on the Island of Madagascar since the Discovery of India, as also
to plant the Christian Faith there, and settle a friendly Correspondence with
the Kings thereof, to the Exclusion of the Hollanders out of those Ports. To
this effect he sent thither several Vessels during his Government. I have
thought fit not to divide the Relation of those Expeditions, and therefore
place them together in the following Chapters.

CHAP. XIII.
Particular Discoveries made in the Island of Madagascar, or St. Lawrence, by
order of the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo.

1. THE Viceroy, in pursuance of the King's Orders for discovery of the Affairs
of the Island Madagascar, or St. Lawrence, fitted out a Caravel for that
Expedition under the Command of Paul Rodriguez de Costa, with Soldiers, two
Jesuits, and Interpreters.

2. They set sail from Goa at the end of January, and reached that Island about
the middle of April. The circumference of it is about 600 leagues, the length
260, and lies North-North-East, and South-South-West; the breadth, where most,
is not above 80 leagues on the South part, and less Northward, for there it
ends in a Point which bears the Name of St. Ignatius, and is about ^5 leagues
in length from East to West. It is therefore divided into 3 parts; the first
made by an imaginary Line drawn from East to West at Cape St. Andrew, forms the
North part: The other two are divided by a ridge o^ Mountains running from the
said (...) the middle of the Island to Cape (...) ^omanus.

3. I will not name the Kingdoms it contains, because they are too many, and
confused. It is very Populous, the Inhabitants living in Cities and Town of
different extent and grandeur, well watered, and diversified with Mountains,
Valleys, Bays, and Ports. The Names of Madagascar and St. Lawrence are given it
by Strangers, the Natives having no general Name thereof. There is no certainty
of the first Planting of it. The generality of the Natives, called Buques, have
no Religion, and consequently no Priests, or Churches. Any body circumcises the
Children between 5 and 7 Years of Age.

4. They are not all of a Color, some quite Black, with curled Hair; some not
so dark, with lank Hair; some like Mulato's; and some up the Inlands whiter,
yet of both sorts of Hair. Of Stature large, well made and strong, of a clear
judgment, and apt to learn. Every Man has as many Wives as he can or will, and
turns them off at pleasure, and they find other Husbands. The Husband gives the
Portion, saying, It is a Recompense for their Fathers by whom they were bred
for them. Their Funeral Obsequies consist in Feasting the Guests. The Mourning,
in laying aside all marks of Joy, cutting the Hair, or covering the Face and
Body with Clay.

5. Their Government is Monarchical, the Kings are called Andias, Anrias, and
Dias, without any dependence on another. They are continually in War, the end
whereof is rather Plunder than Slaughter. No Arms were found among them, but
some Guns given by the Moors and Hollanders, which they do not use, and are
fearful of them in their own hands. Their Merchandise is excellent Amber, white
Sandal, Tortoises, Ebony, other sweet Woods, and abundance of Slaves. There is
plenty of all sorts of Cattle. Their Goat is as sweet as our Mutton, They have
abundance of Sea-Cows, Sea-Horses, Monkeys, some say Tigers, and Snakes not
very very venomous. No Elephants, Horses, Asses, Lions, Bears, Deer, Foxes, nor
Hares.

6. This is the Island of Madagascar, where our Discoverers now were in a large
Bay near Masialage, in which is an Island half a league round, which contains a
City of 8000 Inhabitants, most of them Weavers of excellent Stuffs made of the
Palm Tree, in the Latitude of 16 degrees. Here the Moors used to buy Boys, whom
they carried to Arabia to serve their Lust. The King of this Place was called
Samamo, with whom Friendship was established, and he granted Leave to Preach
the Gospel. They coasted almost 40 leagues Westward, discovering the mouth of
the great River Balue in the Latitude of somewhat more than 16 degrees. Turning
Cape St. Andrew, they saw the River and Kingdom of Casame in 17 degrees of
Latitude, where they found little Water, and had much Trouble. Here also Amity
was established with the King, called Sampilla, a discreet old Man, but in all
this way heard no News of the Portugueses sought after. About the middle of
May; on Whi^sunday, Mass was said on Shore, and two Crosses set up, which that
King seemed to be pleased at, promising to restore them if at any time they
fell.

7. In the Holy Days they discovered a small Island in 18 degrees of Latitude,
which they call Espiritu Santo; half a degree farther Banks of Sand 9 leagues
in length, where they were in some danger. On Trinity-Sunday they landed
further on, were again in danger of Sands, anchored at the 7 Islands of Cuerpo
de Dios in 19 degrees of Latitude, near the River and Kingdom Sadia, to which
they came on the 19th of June, and found scarce Water enough for Caravels. The
Kingdom is large, the City on the Banks of the River has about 10000
Inhabitants, great plenty of Flesh, Indian Wheat, Tar, Tortoises, Sandal,
Ebony, and sweet Woods, the People black, simple, but good natured, and have no
Trade. The King's Name was Capitape, an ancient Man, much respected, and very
sincere. He established Peace, and gave his Son to guide our Men, and assist
them along that Coast. All along this Coast from Massalaje to Sadia, which are
130 leagues, is used the Language of the Cafres. All the rest of the Island
uses the Language called Buqua, which is the Native.

8. Turning toward the South they discovered the Country of the Buques, a very
wicked and poor People, feeding upon the Spawn of Fish. The Inland Kings, who
are more powerful, oppress them. They passed by the River Mane; that of Saume
in 20 degrees 15 minutes of South Latitude; Manoputa in 20 degrees 30 minutes,
(here they heard of Portugueses;) Isango in 21 degrees; Terrir 21 degrees 30
minutes; the 7 Islands of St. Elizabeth in 22 degrees. On the 11th of July they
came into the Port of St. Felix in 22 degrees, and heard somewhat of
Portugueses from Dissamuto the King.

9. Our Men offering a Silver Chain here for some Provisions, the Natives gave
it to an old Woman to try whether it was right, she said, That 3 days Journey
down a River there was an Island inhabited long since by a white Warlike
People, habited like our Men, that wore Crosses about their Necks, and lived
upon Rapine, that they easily took what they would, being Armed with Spears and
Guns. Our Men were pleased at this Information, and here whilst they were at
Mass, the Prince of Loquexa with a Black ran away. Three Portugueses catched
him, and he begged they would kill him; being brought back and better treated,
he wholly submitted to their will.

10. Passing by the Bay of St. Bonaventure, and the mouth of the River
Massimanga, they entered the Port Santa Clara, whither Diamassuto came to them,
concluded a Peace, and on his knees worshipped the Crucifix. They were told,
that white People resorted to the Neighboring Port, which were supposed to be
Hollanders. Going on they found Banks of Sand not set down in the Charts, and
entered the Port in 24 degrees of Latitude. The People were affable, their
King's Name Diacomena; they said, That on the opposite Coast there were
Portugueses who had been cast away, and fed Cattle; that the Hollanders had
been there three times, and left them four Musketeers, with whose help they
made War on their Enemies. Friendship was established here, upon condition they
should not again admit the Hollanders. Some Inscriptions were found carved on
Trees, one of them had these words, Christophorus Neoportus Anglus Cap. And
another, Dominus Robertus Schurleius Comes, Legatus Regis Persarum.

11. In the Latitude of 25 degrees, entering a Port they called it of St.
Augustine, the Name of the Kingdom is Vavalinta, the King's Diamacrinali a
Buque, who no sooner saw the Portugueses but he said, Are these some of the Men
of the other Coast? This confirmed what had been heard of the Portugueses
before; and the King, being asked, said, They were 6 days sail thence. In
September our Men saw Cape St. Mary, where they spent 40 days in stormy
weather, and on St. Luke's day entered the Port of the same Name in the Kingdom
of Enseroe. The Natives said, That half a day's Journey off there were white
People with Crosses, who had a great Town. Randumana the King came to the
Caravel, and sent one of his Subjects with a Portugues to show him where he
said those White Men were, but the Black left our Man half way.

12. Among others, there came thither to Trade with our Men a King with above
500 fighting Men, his Sons almost white, their Hair long, wearing Gowns and
Breeches of Cotton of several colors, with Silver Buttons, Bracelets, and
other Jewels of Gold, Pearl, and Coral. This King's Name was Bruto Chembanga;
his Kingdom, called Matacassi, borders upon Enseroe on the West. He showed
Arabic Books. He said, The Portugueses were all dead, who not far from thence
had built a Town of Stone, and worshipped a Cross, on the foot whereof were
unknown Characters. He drew all on the Sand, repeated Portugues Sirnames, and
demanded much Gold for telling his knowledge herein. Some of his Men wore
Crosses, and informed our People, there were two Holland Ships in Port St. Lucy
or Mangascafe.

13. In a small Island here was found a square Stone Fort, and at the foot of
it carved on a piece of Marble the Arms of Portugal, with this Inscription, REX
PORTUGALENSIS S. Many Judgments were made of that Circle between the two last
S's, but nothing of certainty can be concluded.

14. The King Chambanga desired a Portugues might be sent to his Court to treat
about important Affairs, leaving a Nephew Hostage for his safe return. The
Master Antony Goncalez, and F. Peter Freyre, were sent, who at 12 leagues
distance found his Court, called Fansaria, very populous and magnificent. He
Treated them well at first, then coldly; but they making him a considerable
Present, they were good Friends, and he delivered them his eldest Son to be
carried to Goa, desiring as Hostages for him the two Jesuits, and four other
Portugueses, to whom he gave the Island of St. Cruz to live in.

15. These People are descended from the Moors, and call themselves Zelima's;
they use the Alcoran in Arabic, and have Faquies who teach them to write and
read; they eat no Bacon, are Circumcised, and some marry several Wives.

CHAP. XIV.
Continues the Discoveries in the Island Madagascar under the Viceroy D.
Hierome de Azevedo.

1. THE same King told the Portugueses* That in his Father's time a Ship of
theirs was cast away on that Coast; that about 100 of the Men came ashore, some
brought their Wives, others married there, and left a numerous Offspring. He
repeated several of their Names, and showed a Book writ in Portugues and Latin,
and some Maps, and concluded, saying, There were more Portugueses on that Coast
7 days Journey Northward.

2. Inquiring further, our Men found an old Man 90 Years of Age, who had known
the Portugueses that were cast away there, and could remember still some odd
Words of our Language. The Ships that were lost, and never known where since
the discovery of India, were as follows. In the Year 1504, three Ships; one in
the Year 1505; in 1527, two were cast away on the Island Madagascar, and the
Men remained there for want of Vessels to transport them; four were lost the
Year 1534, not known where; one more in the Year 1538. The Portugueses, those
People spoke of, must belong to some of these Ships.

3. Our Men all set their hands to work, and built a small Chapel and House for
the four Portugueses and two Religious Men, who were to remain there. The Work
done, Mass was said, and many of the Natives came to learn to make the sign of
the Cross. The King seeing some Men labor under a Cross that was to be set
upon a Rock run half naked and bare footed, and carried it alone to the Place
appointed. The Portugueses might say, they had found another Emperor Heraclius,
for after this pious Action he became wicked, in this manner.

4. Our Captain being ready to sail, demanded that Son the King had promised to
send with him; and he not only refused to perform, but denied he had made any
such Promise, and offered a Slave. The Captain seeing this change, sent the
Master and Pilot with some Men to demand Hostages, that a Portugues might go to
Port St. Lucy to sound it, and see an Inscription the Natives said was in that
place. If the King granted this, they were to require no more; if not* to
endeavor to bring away by force one of his Sons.

5. The Peace thus broke, and some Attempts of getting one of the King's Sons
failing, some Portugueses marched with their Muskets. The King dreaded them,
but kept his Men in readiness* a Fray ensuing, they catched one of his Sons 11
Years of Age, who was his Darling. The King endeavored to rescue him, but was
repulsed by our Shot. The Subjects of another King came to offer any thing for
the Boy's Ransom; but being told, it was the Viceroy's Command, the King's
Promise, and that they should lose their Heads if they did not carry him, they
went away satisfied. Thus ended the Year 1613. The Child came to Goa about the
middle of the Year 1614, the Viceroy caused him to be well instructed in the
Faith by the Jesuits, and was his Godfather in Baptism, giving him the Name of
Andrew because it was on that Apostle's day, and the Surname of Azevedo as his
Godchild.

6. The Viceroy treated him with all Honor and Magnificence, hoping to gain
him, that when he succeeded his Father, he might forward the Propagation of the
Gospel* and believing he was sufficiently grounded, sent him away with four
J^s. The Vessels were a Pink and a Caravel, commanded by Peter de Almeyda
Cabral, and John Cardoso de Pin^, who set out on the 17th of September 1616,
and on the 20th of March they discovered the Island Del Cisue, or The Sw^n, a
most delightful Place, watered with pure Springs, and bearing several unknown
Plants and Herbs, besides many known both Sweet and Medicinal. The Religious on
the Barks of the Trees carved the time of their arrival there, and planted some
Crosses.

7. In this Island there are two Mountains that overtop the Clouds. The Wreck
of two Holland Ships was found there. Our Ships entered Port St. Lucas, in the
Island of Madagascar. The King and Queen came (...) receive their Son with
great joy, and delivered Hostages at taking him away.

8. With the Prince went the Fathers and six Soldiers. He was every where till
he came to the Court, received with demonstrations of Joy, which to us seem
ridiculous, as those used by us would appear to them. This done, the King made
the same Agreement with our Captain that had been with the former, which was,
that the Religious should inhabit the Island of Santa Cruz, and thence have the
liberty to go out and Preach the Gospel; that there should be a League
Offensive and Defensive between the King and Portugueses. So the Fathers,
Almeyda and Costa, went to the Fort of Santa Cruz, and D. Andrew the King's Son
sent them Workmen and Provisions.

9. The Captain Peter de Almeyda had Orders to carry the King to Goa; or if he
refused, another Son, which, if not consented to, should be taken by force. A
Son being demanded, he answered, He had but one, who was too young for that
Voyage. Almeyda thinking this was but an Excuse, began to commit Hostilities,
but being 1617.
informed it was true, desisted. Yet he carried away Anria Sambo the King's
Nephew, who was Baptized at Goa by the Name of Hierome.

10. Being now a Christian, he was sent to his Country in a Pink, commanded by
Emanuel Freyre de Andrade, with 100 Soldiers, 2 Jesuits, and a Present worth
4000 Ducats for the King and Prince. They set out in the beginning of February,
and being forced to water at the Island Del Cisne, or The Swan, they saw three
Ships sunk at the mouth of a River. Our Men landing, found 2 leagues from the
Shore 20 Hollanders guarding the Goods they had saved. They made some
opposition, but being overcome, Freyre carried them to his Pink, with a great
quantity of Clove, Pepper, Arms, Ammunition, and Provision, then fired all that
was left. The Hollanders said, They came from the Molucco Islands with a Pass
from their Admiral Lawrence Ales.

11. Freyre coming into Port St. Lucas, the two Jesuits came to him, both sick,
affirming it was impossible to live there, and that those who had been left
with them were dead. The Captain sent the King the Letters he had for him, and
a Present, by his Nephew D Hierome's Servants. The King in return sent 100 fat
Oxen, much Fowl, Honey, and 6 Slaves, but would not come himself; and it was
found, that his Son D. Andrew fell off from the Faith into Mahometanism. The
Sadio's and Fansayr^'s are Mohammedan Cafres, and love the liberty of having
many Wives. The King was a Fansayr^, and now designed to destroy Freyre by
Treachery. The cause of this Change was a Chingala, Slave to the Jesuits, who
running away from them, persuaded the King the Portugueses would deprive him of
his Kingdom, and undertook to destroy them. Many Cafres coming to the Shore, to
this purpose began a Fray, giving F. Almeyda a cuff, then Stones and Darts
began to fly, but our Bullets also flying, some were killed, and their Quarters
hung upon the Trees for an Example, and one of their Towns was burnt.

12. Emanuel Freyre carried away with him the King's Nephew D. Hierome, and a
Brother of his taken in the Skirmish with the Cafres, who was converted, and
died at Goa. All the Jesuits agreed to desist from that Mission, and depart
with the Captain, though he opposed them, and came to Goa, where the Viceroy
not allowing their weak Excuses, much condemned their remisness in that Affair.

13. Toward the end of this Year arrived in India D. John Coutinno Count de
Redondo, who was to succeed the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo, and of whom 1617.
we shall next treat. D. Hierome returned to Portugal in the same Ship that had
carried the Count, and no sooner anchored at Lisbon but he was made Prisoner,
and put into the Dungeon of the Castle. He was disrespectfully treated, after a
long Imprisonment, had a Hearing, and then again was worse used. The chief
Crime laid to his Charge, was not fighting the Hollanders.

14. He was so rich at his entering upon the Government, that Nunno de Cunna
telling him after all his Misfortunes, he was still worth 4 or 500000 Ducats;
he answered, I am worth that in Cattle. Notwithstanding all this Riches, he
died poor in Prison, and the King got nothing by it. His Liberality was so
great, he gave the value of several thousand Ducats in one Present of
Curiosities at Ceylon. He was of the Ancient and Noble Family of Azevedo, a
Soldier of Valor, and wise Commander, and zealous Viceroy.

15. But it is not amiss to observe, that though this Gentleman could not
justly Suffer for the Crimes laid to his Charge, yet these his Misfortunes were
a Judgment from the Hand of GOD for his extraordinary Cruelty. In the height of
his Success in C^ylon, he forced Mothers to cast their Children between
Millstones, and having seen them ground to Mash, they were afterward Be^eaded.

16. He caused the Soldiers to take up Children on the Points of their Pikes,
and hearing them cry, bid them hark how those Cocks crowed. Playing upon the
likeness of the Names, those People being called Gala's, and Cocks in Portugues
Galo's. He caused many Men to be cast off the Bridge of M^vana, for the
Soldiers to see the Crocodils devour them. And those Creatures were so used to
this Food, that at a Whistle they would lift their Heads above Water.

17. D. Hierome was of a middle Stature, thick and swarthy, his under Lip
hanging, and always moist, a certain Token of Cruelty. He was reduced to such
Extremity in Prison, that the Society of Jesus maintained, and after his Death
decently buried him. He held the Government almost five Years, and was one of
them who best deserved it. Of Viceroys he is the 22th, of Governors the 42th,
the 1st of the Name and Surname.

CHAP. XV.
The Government of the Viceroy D. John Coutinno Count de Rodendo, from the Year
1617 till 1619.

1. THis Year sailed from Lisbon D. John Coutinno Count de Rodondo with sour
Ships, one whereof was forced back from the Line. During his Government, which
lasted not two Years complete, there happened wonderful Prodigies, Storms,
Dearths, and other Judgments. I will give an account of the most remarkable,
dividing that from what relates to his Government, which shall be first spoke
of.

2. The War continued at Mangalor, where Salvador Ribeyro Marinno commanded,
who being assisted by D. James Coutinno, Commander in Chief of Malabar, took
the Field against 11000 Natives, and destroyed many with the loss of 6 Men. The
little King of that Banguel, or District, who was our Friend, not able to
maintain it against his Enemy Bentacanayque, made it over to us to defend it.
Antony de Saldanna was left to command there afterward. D. Francis de Meneses
de Bacaim was sent to his assistance with an allowance of 4000 Crowns; for now
the Wages were grown greater than the Employments. The Men landing in disorder,
the Moors, who lost no advantage, slew some; but the others forming themselves
put them to flight. For some time they were kept under by 300 Portugueses and
1000 Indians.

3. Soon after another Skirmish happening with the Canara's, the Plain was
covered with the dead Bodies. In August the Viceroy sent thither Francis de
Miranda Enriquez with 8 sail, and by the end of the same Month 4000 of the
Enemy were slain, with the loss of 800 Portugueses. Miranda having taken a rich
Ship of the Queen of Olala coming from Meca, gave her occasion to assist our
Enemy with a good Body of Men, they besieged our Fort of Banguel, burnt the
Town, and hereupon followed so sharp an Engagement, that though many of the
Enemy were slaughtered, it was with such loss on our side we had no cause to
rejoice. Miranda thought to have taken the Fort of Olala by Storm, but was
repulsed. The beginning of the next Year was more unfortunate; for
Bentacanayque with 12000 Canara's falling upon Luis de Brito and Melo, who
carried Succors, and D. Francis de Miranda, killed them both with 180
Portugueses, and above 60 Slaves. The day after the News of this Disaster came
to Goa, there was found a Lampoon upon the Viceroy, the Secretary, the Surveyor
of the Revenue, and the Chancellor, laying that and other Misfortunes to their
Charge.

4. It has been related how Ruy de Melo, and Sampayo, and James de Cunna
executed Salvador Vaz de Guerra at Mocambique. The News of that impudent Action
brought to Goa so terrified the Judge Francis de Fonseca Pinto, then a
Prisoner, that he made his Escape by Bribes, and died in the Country of the
Moors.

5. The Viceroy sent an Ambassador to the Mogol, to desire he would not admit
our Enemies the English and Dutch into his Ports; F. Emanuel Pineyro, a Jesuit,
went on this Errand. The result was, that the King took off the Embargo that
was upon 200 Sail of ours in his Ports, and forbore making War upon Damam and
Diu, for which purpose he had already detatched 30000 Horse from the Army, that
was ready to march against the Persians who invaded his Territories. His Army
consisted of 300000 Horse, the Foot innumerable, many Thousand Camels, 12000
Elephants, 6000 Yoke of Oxen drawing as many Carts, besides such as carry on
their backs like Mules; 70000 poor People followed this multitude.

6. This multitude being to pass a rapid River that falls from a Mountain, he
laid over it a wooden Bridge for the Men, and broke the Fury of its Course with
a Dam for the Beasts to swim over safely. A whole Month was spent in passing.
The Camp was 8 Leagues in compass so regular, so beautified with rich Tents,
and so well supplied with all Necessaries, that it looked like a well governed
City.

7. This Year sailed from Lisbon for India 3 Ships, and 2 Flyboats, under the
Command of D. Christopher de Noronna. Six English Ships lay then about the Cape
of Good Hope, which taking one of the Flyboats, understood the others were
coming, and lay in wait for them. They meeting, the English Admiral said, He
had Orders from his King to seize Effects of the Portugueses to the value of
70000 Crowns for the Damage done by the Viceroy D. Hierome de Azevedo to the 4
English Ships in the Bay of Surat. This Sum was immediately paid him, and 20000
Ducats more to divide among his Men. Our Admiral no sooner arrived at Goa, but
he was secured by the Viceroy, and sent Prisoner to Lisbon.

8. The King of Iorcon came into the River of Malaca with 80 Sail in a
miserable condition, as who was expelled his Dominions by the King of Achem.
Our Officers ^ing to visit him, he desired Assistance against that Enemy, which
was denied him; and yet afterward they desired the same of the King, to oppose
the Power of Achem which threatened that Place, and was more formidable than it
had been till that time.

9. A small Squadron was sent from Malaca, under the Command of Lope de Sousa,
to plunder the Hollanders Factory at Ia^e, where they found only 4 or 5 Dutch
Men with a number of the Natives, yet would not attack them for fear of
exposing the Son-in-Law, and Son of the Commander of Malaca, who, if not to be
exposed, ought not to have gone. They lost the opportunity of taking a great
Sum of Money that was kept there, and in stead of plundering that Enemy, gained
another, by destroying some Towns along the Coast.

10. The Tartars having ruined part of the famous Wall of China, entered like a
Torrent with above a million of Men, bearing down Cities, and whole Provinces,
till they drew near the Court of Peking in so terrible a manner, that the King
was about withdrawing to Nanking. But the Chinese recovering of the first
Fright, fell upon the Tartars, and made such a slaughter as obliged them to
quit that Province. The Jesuits here gained much Esteem, having been very
serviceable with their Intelligence. For an Example to posterity, I will relate
the Particulars of this Invasion of the Tartars till the Year 1640.

11. When Humvu, the first of the Family, now reigning in China, expelled the
Tartars, who for 90 Years had been possessed of that Crown, he not only
recovered what had been lost, but conquered the Frontiers of Tartary, dividing
them into several Governments. These in time grew to such a height, that they
raised themselves into 3 Kingdoms, one on the East, the other toward the West,
and the third on the North. The two last immediately cast off the Chinese Yoke,
the other continued in Obedience till the Chinese seeing it grow powerful,
without any other occasion resolved to weaken it. But the Tartars oppressed
taking courage, revenged themselves, running to Arms, and securing a strong
Hold in the Province of Leaotung, by which and other Actions they became
Masters of the Field. The other two Kingdoms moved by the hope of Gain, joined
with the former, and in the Year 1618, (which was 300 after Humvn,) formed a
most formidable Army, which coming to Battle with that of China, no less
numerous, gave it a total overthrow, rather to be attributed to the ill Conduct
of the Chinese, than Valor of the Tartars. The King of China so much
neglected his Government, he seemed to be in a perfect Lethargy; and all the
Industry used by his Ministers to awake him, was of no effect.

12. In fine, the Tartars continued the War with such Success, that they
conquered the Northern Province of Leaotung, and forced the Kingdom of Corea to
pay them Tribute, as they did till then to China. After the Tartars were beaten
from Peking, a Chinese Woman headed some Troops against them, and gained great
Fame, defeating them in several places.

CHAP. XVI.
Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. John Coutinno Count De Redondo.

1. AT the time the Tartar Invasion appeared most formidable, Goncalo Teyzeyra
a Portugues was at Peking, having carried thither a Present from the City Macao
to the Mandarins, he in the Name of the said City offered to assist them with a
number of expert Soldiers. They accepted the Offer, and sent thither him that
made it, and F. John Rodriguez a Jesuit. Four hundred Men were raised in the
City, most of them Portugueses, the rest Chinese bred among them, and
consequently good Musketeers. Every Soldier had a Mulato Servant bought at the
King's expense, and their Pay was so great, they all clothed themselves in
costly Apparel, bought the best Arms, and yet thought themselves rich. They
embarked under two Captains, Peter Cordero in chief, and Antony Rodriguez del
Cabo. At Quantung the Chinese were astonished at their Volleys, and Exercise.
They were sent in Boats (...) the* River, and well treated. Being come to a
Mountain they crossed it on ^ck, and then (...) ^oats again, crossing almost
all the Province of Kiangsi, till they came to the Metropolis thereof. The
People admired their Presence, Arms, and Garb; and because some had their
Clothes slashed, said, They could not imagine why Men of sense should purposely
tear a Stuff that was whole.

2. These Men, who might have been so serviceable upon this occasion, were from
that City sent back to Macao. The principal Reason is supposed to be, That the
Chinese of Quantung; who are Factors for the Portugueses, fearing this might
be a means for them to be admitted into the Kingdom, whereby they should lose
the Advantages they made of them in the way of Trade, represented it to the
Magistrates as a thing dangerous to introduce those Strangers into the Kingdom,
and underhand bribing the Mandarins, prevailed with those very Men who had
advised the King to send for the Portugueses with so great Expense to send them
back, saying, It was not convenient to make use of them.

3. The King answered: It is not long since you proposed making use of these
Men against the Tartars, now you say, it is not convenient. When you propose
any thing again, consider of it better* and if they are not for our service,
let them return. It is remarkable, that whereas the Chinese are so jealous,
they suffer no Strangers (even Ambassadors) to view their Towns, especially the
Court, these Soldiers had liberty to see all Things at their pleasure without
any let. The same liberty (...) given to the Ambassadors sent by the City
Macao, and to the Jesuits*

4. The Jesuits made at this time good progress in the propagation of the
Faith, and were informed of a certain People called of the Cross, as being
descended from ancient Christians. Two Fathers had this Intelligence from
certain Jews in the City Caifumfir. These Jews had there a Synagogue as big as
a large Church, well adorned, and the Bible in Hebrew, Syriack, and Chaldaick

5. They gave some account of those People of the Cross, who were then
dispersed, and their Church converted to a Heathen Pagod. The Jesuits inquiring
in the Neighboring Towns, found some footsteps of that People, though they
concealed themselves, fearing this search after them was upon some ill design.
One of these had the Pictures of St. Peter and St. Paul.

6. Four Galliots sailing from Macao, w^ attacked by a Holland Ship, and being
boarded by them, fired herself. One Iaponese was saved, who said, That Ship
carried Money to supply their Forts, and that there were aboard some Chinese
of Quality taken not long before. Five Portugueses were lost in the Ship.

7. Constantine de Sa and Noronna succeeded D. N^o Alvarez Pereyra, who was
gone to the Conquest of the M^ of C^ma, in the Post of General of Ceylon. He
built the Fort of Sofragam, because the Neigh^* hood was in Arms, and left
there 100 Port^* gueses and 200 Lascarines. Then he man* ched toward Madune,
who was fortified at the two Corla's, the ancient ^trimony of his Forefathers,
a Mountainous Cou^ well watered, bearing much Rice, and abo^ 7 Leagues in
compass. Noronna stayed some days at Ceytavaca to get Provisions, and settle 30
Portugueses in a high Tower, the only part standing of that great City. After a
month's march through the Enemies Country, where Hunger began to pinch, he
underderstood Madune fled. He follows to his City, and finding (...) abandoned,
burns it. A Budiame was here destroyed, that is, a Tree those People highly
esteem, saying, Their God Budum leaned against it* whence it takes its Name. On
the foot of this were the Images of several Idols curiously carved.

9. Noronna finding no Enemy, was upon his return, when 500 of Madune's Men
appeared in his Rear, commanded by Chacatien Zala. Our General laid a few
Portugueses and 1000 Lascarines in ambush, and though some of our Men at first
fled, he broke the Enemy, killing man* and taking 35 Men of great Note, whereof
one was C^atien. The Enemy seeking Revenge another day, had 30 principal Men
slain, and among them the Prince of Uva, who called himself King.

10. The Hollanders this Year took several good Prizes, the Portugueses
endeavoring to gather Wealth, but not providing the means to defend it. The
Particulars are too inconsiderable to be related, I will say somewhat of the
Malabar Pirates, whom our Carelessness and Presumption made bold.

11. Whilst our Admiral of the Malabar Sea was upon that Coast, D. Pedro (a
Cousin of that Cunnale who was beheaded at Goa) after becoming a Christian fled
from that City, and commanding 5 Parao's, took several of our Ships, hindered
the Trade, and took the Island De las Vacas, and that of Tristan Golayo. Our
General D. Co^tine de Sa from Columbo sent 40 Galliots to Manar, to join 18
small vessels there, and destroy that Pirat. They set out on the Eve of the
Ascension, and being parted by a Storm, the 18th met at the Island of Golay^.
Vitorio de Abreu commanded them, who being informed by two Blacks, left there
by the Owner of the Island, that the 5 Parao's were gone to some Place near for
Ammunition, and that before they returned he might possess himself of Goods to
the value of 30000 Ducats let there by D. Pedro in a House; he made light of
this Intelligence, and staying for the Enemy, lost 12 of the 18 Sail, and about
300 Men besides those that were taken, whereof he was one.

12. Mean while our Squad^ convoyed the Merchant Fleet after such a manner,
that the same Pirate took a Vessel without their offering to desend it. The
Merchants of N^an (...) the Captains of the Con^oy to recover that Ship, but
they would, or d^ not. A Spanish Flyboat accidentally p^g by, at the request of
that City retook it.

13. Constantine de Sa, ever since he was General of (...), had intelligence,
that C^li C^are King of I^tan, and (...) ^ect, assisted Man. He offered (...)
Money to wave receiving the Price of the Elephants due as Tribute. C^li privily
Armed, and Constantine sent Philip de Olivoyra wit^* ^o Portugueses, and 3000
L^es, (...) demanded the value of the Elephants, and (...) answered not to the
purpose, relying on 8000 Men well Armed, and his strong Walls. Oliveyr^
advanced, and the King understanding it by a treacherous Portugues, sent to him
not to proceed, and he would stand by the former Capitulation. This was only a
^gem to cut off our Van, which was far advanced under L^ Cabral de Faria.

14. Oliveyra credited the Fraud, and sent Orders to Faria to come back, but at
such time as the Enemy had attacked him; he answered, It was then too late, and
breaking a Body of 1000 Blacks, advanced. Two thousand that followed him were
defeated by Oliveyra, who hearing the noise, marched with all speed. Changali
flying over the River, was taken, and with him 8000 Crowns, our Men undecently
treating the Princesses that were in his company. The King seeing his Brother
in-Law's Ears cut off for the Earrings, took out his own, and gave them to the
next Man. Oliveyra ordered him at Iafanapatan to make a List of the Portugueses
he held Correspondence with. He made one, and among the many named was Oliveyra
himself, with the allowance of 2000 Crowns, and the late General D. Nunno
Alvarez Pereyra with 9000. The King was carried to Goa, Oliveyra was left to
govern the Kingdom. Madune wanting this Friend, submitted himself.

15. Andrew Botello de Costa coming to Iafanapatan with 6 Sail, understood
there was a great Danish Ship at Gale that had taken some Prizes, he found out,
and after three hours Fight, took her. Of the Enemy, 8 were killed, some
burned, others got ashore with the Captain, and 40 were taken. On our side 8
were slain, whereof one was the Commander.

16. The Hollanders took a Portugues Ship bound for Brasil, and cast into the
Sea 20 of the Men, their Hands and Feet bound. The rest they carried to Iacatra
to serve that Place; but they run away to the English, who had a Factory 20
leagues off, and sent them to Malaca. They said, one of the English had told
them, they had lost a Ship at Sunda that carried the Money given by D.
Christopher de Noronna to save fighting, and that they had several times fought
the Dutch by Sea and Land, always worsting them; and lastly, that the Dutch had
taken the Governor sent from Portugal for Angola, and carried him to Iavs.

17. Augustine Lobato sailed from Malaca with two Ships and a Galliot. At
Ioatume he fought and worsted a Hollander; then hearing the Dutch had a Factory
at Bima, 7 leagues distant, assaulted it with 14 Men, slew 4, took 3, whereof
one was the Factor; he distributed 600 Crowns among the Soldiers, having done
damage to the value of 20000. Having burnt the Factory he retired, and burnt
seven Towns about End.

18. At Solor he landed with 40 Men, and fought many thousand Enemies, killing
200. but lost 10 or 12, to the great admiration of the Adversaries, who thought
them to be Sons of the Sun, and consequently Immortal. This encouraged them to
press on, and it was much the 30 escaped. Lobato being ready to imbark, was
killed by a Iaponese.

19. Malaca feared to be besieged by the King of Achem, but he armed to defend
himself against the Viceroy, who, 'twas said, would go thither in Person.
Fifteen English Ships at Sunda fought 20 Hollanders and defeated them, killing
1500 Men. At Patane the Dutch had better success, taking two of the Victors,
and killing a Captain who was a Portugues, and was visiting the Factories of
that Nation. At Iava they took a Dutch Ship, another was lost in a Storm. It
was reported, the Governor of Manila took five in one Fight. At this time
there were in the South 35 Ducth Ships, and above 20 English. The French had
Factories at Macassa and Iava.

20. The Viceroy sent Gaspar de Melo with a Squadron to succor Mangalor, and
destroy a Fort built by the Canara's. The little King coming on while he
battered the Fort, was twice defeated, and many of his Men made Prisoners. This
Year sailed from Lisbon for India four Ships, two Galleons, and three Flyboats.

CHAP. XVII.
Several wonderful Accidents during the two Years Government of the Viceroy the
Count De Redondo.

1. IN May 1618, there was a general, and doubtless Diabolical Storm, whereof
it is convenient to give some account. On the 15th of that Month it began at
Bacaim (the Portugues Ninive) so terrible, that the People hid themselves in
Cellars, not doubting the Houses would be torn to pieces; but an Earthquake
beginning at two in the morning, many Houses fell. The Sea, though remote from
the Town, was brought into it by the Wind.

2. The noise of the Waves overcame that of the Ruins, notwithstanding the tops
of Churches were blown off, and vast Stones flew a great distance. Two thousand
were killed in the Town and adjacent Parts. The Fish died in the Ponds, and
corrupted the Waters. Most of the Churches were laid even with the ground, as
if God had showed there was no need of them among such wicked People. A Lamp
remained burning before the Blessed Sacrament in the Church of St. Dominick
when the Wind overthrew Buildings.

3. Many Vessels were lost in the Port. Some Cattle was seen to fly, and the
Birds to fall. The Woods were torn up by the Roots. Men fled to the Mountains
for shelter, and the wild Beasts to the Town. Nature seemed reversed, the
People rent the Skies with Cries for Mercy, which at last obtained, the Storm
ceased.

4. There were strange Prodigies before and during this Storm, as Giants seen
in the Air throwing great Globes of Fire one at the other. A confusion of Human
Voices was heard there, trampling of Horses, and the sound of Warlike
Instruments. A Troop of furious Horsemen was seen to attack the City, and a Man
clothed in Skins to oppose them; those were concluded to be Devils, and he St.
John Baptist.

5. At Bombaim the Sea swallowed above 60 Sail, some Men, and much Riches. At
Agacaim a Boat flew out of the Sea into a House, where it killed a Woman and
her Child. At Tana, a Beast taken up by the Wind fell upon a Tree that was torn
up by the Roots, and a Branch struck through the Body of it. A Woman seeing a
Giant-like Man carrying a Pan of burning Coals, asked him for one, and he
blowing it, burnt her Face. Much of this nature happened at Salsete, and other
Places.

6. D. Luis de Gama coming from Ormuz, where he had Commanded for Goa, in a
Ship full of Riches, was cast away on the Coast of Bombaim. A new married
Couple being upon a Plank, the Bridegroom fell off, and the Bride for grief
cast her self after him; he came up again and was saved, without Wife or Goods.
A Maid that went to be a Nun escaping, was ravished by the Moors, and then
killed. Thus several Ships belonging to Captains who came from their Commands
perished, perhaps a Judgment for their unjust heaping of Wealth.

7. The City Goa seeing this destruction, had recourse to Heaven. All the
Religious Orders made Processions, and performed great Acts of Mortification.
The Women rent the Clouds with Cries of Mercy. All lay down in the Churches to
be trampled upon. This lasted some days and nights; the Churches were
continually open, the Streets full, yet in all the Concourse the least noise
was not heard.

8. This Example was followed at Cochim. The Bishop of this City had
excommunicated any that should buy Timber of the Queen of Coulam. A Portugues
presumed to build a Ship there, when it should be Launched, no Force or Art
could move it. The Portugues confesses his Crime with Repentance, and returning
to the Ship, it was Launched without the least difficulty.

9. There reigned through all India a new Distemper, which caused great Pains
over all the Body, and contraction of Sinews, so that some lost the use of
their Limbs. Many with Anguish ran mad; whole Families sickned at once. The
only Remedy was found to be Bleeding. A Surgeon being no way able to stanch
the Blood of a sick Man, laid upon it a Cross he had, in which was believed to
be a piece of that of our Savior, and it stopped immediately.

10. A Cafre fled from a Widow, whose Slave he was, to a Fidalgo or Nobleman's
House, and afterward returned to his Mistress. The Fidalgo sent to demand the
Slave of her, as if he had been his own. She refusing, he sent some Soldiers to
take him by force; but she received them with Grenades in her hands, and they
returned with shame.

11. N. Barreto a Fidalgo, 16 Years of Age, killed his Father, for which his
Head was cut off; so Justice was done where there never was any. The Mercers of
Goa, esteemed more Honorable than the Goldsmiths, would not allow them to use a
sort of Umbrello, with an Ornament on the top and middle of it. A Goldsmith
went abroad with such an Umbrello, the Mercers broke it and beat him. The other
Goldsmiths coming to assist their Brother, there ensued a Fray, in which much
Blood was spilt, and much Plunder got, though no victory, for the Algna^es or
Officers robbed the Shops of those who were fighting.

12. On the 11th of November appeared a Comet in the East, and another on the
24th. They were seen at four in the morning, both under the Sign Scorpio. The
first extended toward the South in the form of a Palm, the other toward the
North, and was like a Flower-pot. The latter lasted till the beginning of
January, the other till the 20th of December.

13. The first time the King of Arracam went to the City Chatigam after the
Portugueses inhabited there, they presented him a Bough thick set with Figs; he
offered it to his white Elephant (so coveted by all the Eastern Princes) to
eat, but he would not, though the King prayed him to take it for the King of
Ova, the Mogol, and his own sake. But scarce did he desire him to eat it for
the King of Portugal, when the Elephant joyfully snatched it in his Trunk. The
King in a Passion caused him to be deprived of all his Ornaments, as a Golden
Dish on which he fed, Gold Chain by which they led him, and the like. The Beast
for Grief would not eat, and the King, for fear it should die, was forced to
restore its Furniture.

14. At this time died at Bengala that Moor so famous for his Age, being above
300 Years old when Nunno de Cunna took Diu, which was 60 Years before this
time, and he seemed now but 60 Years of Age. It was reported, there were others
200 Years old thereabouts, but upon enquiry none appeared. Only one Woman was
found about 100 Years of Age, and had married that same Year, having before
buried seven Husbands. Thus much for the Year 1618, now for that of 1619, which
is no less wonderful.

15. Upon one of the three Hills that overlook Goa stood a large wooden Cross,
on which very many of the Inhabitants of that City, the 23th Day of February,
saw the perfect Figure of a Man Crucified. The Archbishop having examined the
Truth of it, took it down, and of it made a small one two spans in length, with
a Crucifix of Ivory upon, and a Glory of Gold round. The remaining Pieces were
distributed to the Churches and Persons of Quality. Ten Days after the Cross
was taken down, Water gushed from the hole where it had been fixed, in which
Clothes being dipped wrought many miraculous Cures. On the Place where the
Cross stood was built a Church.

16. It was debated in an Assembly of the principal Clergy, whether the Threads
the Bramenes hang across their Shoulders were a Heathenish Superstition, or
only a mark of Nobility; after some time it was concluded in favor of the
latter, as only a distinction of Honor. The reason of examining this Point
was, because many of the Bramenes refused to embrace the Faith, only for that
they were obliged as soon as Christians to leave off those Threads.

17. D. F. Christopher, the Archbishop, said the first Mass in his Cathedral at
Goa, which was finished this Year, and is not inferior in Grandeur to many of
the European Churches of Fame. It was dedicated to St. Catherine, on whose Day
that City was taken.

18. There happened a great Dearth and Famine, which destroyed many People. In
only the little Island of Bardes almost 400 died. There was a wonderful Eclipse
of the Sun most visible at Mocambique, soon after noon, the day becoming quite
dark the space of two hours. This caused great Admiration, as did another of
the Moon at Goa.

19. In the Province of Peking in China it rained not for a whole Year. In that
of Xantung the Famine was such, Men eat one another. Two Women were executed for
eating eleven Children. In that of Nanking was a Plague of Mice. Two Parts in
five of the King's Palace were burnt; and five Towers were blown down in the
City. Two Suns were seen together, the one eclipsing the other. A Man entered
the Palace to kill the Prince. In the Province of Xangsi appeared a Man
clothed in yellow with a green Cap and Fan of Feathers, who said. Vambie (that
was the King's Name) does not govern; he has reigned long; is always asleep;
the Kingdom going to Ruin, the People starves, the Captains are slain. This
said he vanished, and, though all means were used to find him, he could never
be heard of.

20. That there might be somewhat extraordinary in the Viceroy, he died on the
10th of November of a swelling upon his Back as big as the Crown of a Hat, so
black and monstrous, it frighted not only the ignorant, but the ablest
Physicians.

21. The Viceroy was buried in the Church of the King's, a League down the
River, the usual Burial Place of those who die in that Command, as his Father
did who is there interred. He was not of a very piercing Judgment, but
positive; of Stature tall, well shaped, neither white nor swarthy. Of Viceroys
he was the 23th; of Governors 43th; the 4th of the Name, and 3d of the Surname.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Governor Ferdinand de Albuquerque, from the Year 1619, till 1622.

1. THE first Patent of Succession being opened, there was found named
Ferdinand de Albuquerque, a Gentleman 70 Years of Age, 40 whereof he had been
married, and an Inhabitant of Goa, and consequently well versed in the Affairs
of India. But having lived long at ease, was become slow in Business, which
suited not with the pressing Occasions of that time.

2. The King of Porca always ill affected to the Portugueses, this Year
embraced our Friendship with great Demonstrations of Sincerity and Affection.

3. The Arache D. Luis, who became a Christian only to gain the better
Opportunity of raising new Troubles, now disturbed the Peace of Iafanapatan. He
stirred up the People to Enthrone a Prince at Remancor, and marched with 30000
Men toward our Men, who were fortified in a Pagod. Philip de Oliveyra had but
30 Men, having sent the rest to Ceylon as fearing no Insurrection. With those
30 he withstood all that number of Enemies, who first attacked the Church of
our Lady, in which were 30 other Portugueses, and then the Pagod where Oliveyra
was, and were at both Places repulsed with Loss. Oliveyra held it out a Month,
till Relief came from Ceylon. Andrew Coello brought Succors by Water, and Luis
Teyxeyra 1600 Men by Land. The latter entering the Kingdom, did many Actions
barbarous and inhuman. He clove Men with Axes like Trees, opened the Wombs of
Women and put in their Children snatched from their Arms. These are impieties
unworthy a Christian, yet sometimes excused in War.

4. Oliveyra finding himself thus strong took the Field, slew a multitude of
the Enemies, and gave them a total overthrow. Scarce had they breathed after
this Victory, when the Prince of Remancor appeared with his Army, but Teyxera
suddenly falling upon him made such havoc, he was glad to cast himself at
Teyxeyra's feet, who received him with great Courtesy. They returned to give
Thanks for this Victory in Our Lady's Church, where the Religious at the Door,
offering Oliveyra a Palm, he said it was due to Teyxeyra, and caused it to be
given to him. Both deserved, but he doubly who refused, once for conquering his
Enemies, another for overcoming himself in not accepting it. A wonderful
Victory in our Age.

5. The Arache D. Luis escaped, his Wife and Children were taken, she in
despair slew her self, whilst he persuaded the Nayque of Tanjaor he might make
himself King of Iafanapatan. He raised 2000 Badagaes, and gave the Command of
them to Chem Nayque, that King of the Carcas who not long before assisted
Chingali. Oliveyra was strong in Our Lady's Church, but in November met the
Enemy. The fight being desperate with some loss on our side; he advanced to
encourage the Men, the Enemy knowing him, seven of them attack him, and one of
them struck a Spear through his Mouth out at his Throat, yet he recovering
killed two of them, the others fled.

6. The Enemy retired to their Trenches, Oliveyra being reinforced by 1000 Men
from Ceylon assaults them, kills many, and took many more; yet after all he
ransomed 1500 taken by the Chingalaes, and set them at Liberty. The Nayque
still coveting that Crown raised more Badagaes, Oliveyra sent three Captains
with their Companies to suppress him; they slew so many without losing one Man,
that being weary of killing they returned with 1000 Heads.

7. The Prince, Son to the late King of Iafanapatan, who had escaped the
Tyranny of Chingali, being in the Hands of the Franciscans, was baptized
together with his Mother and many Nobles and Commoners, and at last making over
his Claim to that Kingdom to the King of Portugal, took the Habit of that
Order, by the Name of F. Constantine of Christ.

8. Chingali, who was taken some time before, was sent to Goa with his Wife,
there condemned to Death; and being first converted to the Faith made a most
happy end. His Wife following the Example given by him was baptized by the Name
of Margaret of Austria; and retiring to the House of the Converts in that City,
led a Life that may be an Example to all ancient Christians.

9. I think I have not specified the cause of these Troubles, which was thus.
Para Raja Cheygra Pandara, made Governor and King of Iafanapatan when Andrew
Furtado slew the former King, wore that Crown 28 Years, and hoping the Viceroy
would confirm his Choice, named a Son of the deceased to succeed him, who being
but 7 Years of Age, he ordered his Brother Areaquerari Pandara should govern
till he was of Age, him Changali Cumara murdered to usurp the Crown. After that
he slew many others, whereupon the People mutinying reduced him to great
Streights, till being succored by a number of Badagaes, raised by the Nayque
of Tangaor, and commanded by the King of the Carcas; they came to a Battle,
wherein Changali being victorious, secured the Crown for some time. This Tyrant
not content that the Portugueses winked at his bad Title, refused to pay them
the usual Tribute, which was the Cause why Oliveyra fell upon and took him as
has been related.

10. Abas Xa King of Persia being bent upon possessing himself of the Island
and Kingdom of Ormus, Camberbeque Came of Lara began to undertake it, on
pretense an ancient Tribute was not paid him, which he never had since Alfonso
de Albuquerque entered that Place He hindered the Trade, and secured several
Portugues Merchants; and seeing we did not agree with him about the Trade of
his Silks, he settled it with James King of England, concluding a League with
him for the taking of Ormuz. Ray Freyre de Andrade who came the Year before
from Lisbon with 5 Galleons to cruize on that Sea, sent to Goa for Succor but
could not obtain it, though he only desired 4 small Vessels.

11. Nevertheless Freyre fights the English and worsts them, The Arabs joining
with the Persians had taken Iulfar and Dola, which caused great scarcity of
Water at Ormuz, where there is none but what is brought from abroad. Freyre
went over to forward the building a new Fort at Queixome, and by his Absence
the Fleet before weak, was much impaired. Then came two Galleons from Goa
commanded by D. Emanuel de Azevedo and D. John de Silveyra, an Enemy to Freyre;
they were ill manned, and scarce of Ammunitions, and brought Instructions that
curbed the Power of the Admiral.

12. Being now strong at Quixome he scoured that Coast, where were burnt 400
Sail, and the Towns of Boami, Camir, Cong^, Astan, and Docar, at Niquilay he
took and destroyed four Ships, and above 80 great Barques. The Persians
assisted by the English furiously battered the Fort at Queixome, yet Freyre
carried on his Work, and assisted the Arabs that continued firm to us. When
Freyre was somewhat straightened, the two Captains that came with the Galleons
to his assistance from Goa left him.

13. This Year sailed from Lisbon for India 4 Ships under the Command of Nunno
Alvarez Botello. There came also two Pinks, one for Malaca, the other for
Mocambiqus; and two Ships more under Iacome de Morales Sarmiento, who was to be
General at Mocambique during the War about the Mines of Monomotapa, as if he
were like to last as long as the War.

14. The Ships that came from Portugal under the Command of Botello, returned
the next Year, and with them two more built at Goa, with the Men and Loadings
of two others, one left in India as unfit for the Voyage, the other lost at
Mombaca. In one of these two Ships called the Conception, was a Hermit, who
whilst they Wintered at St. Helena stole away, and being asked why he left the
Company, said, He had rather stay in that desert Island, than to go see the
Misfortune that Ship would soon fall into. Being come to the Island Tercera,
they found Orders there to make the Lat. of 39 Degrees. where they would find D.
Antony de Ataide, Admiral of Portugal. They obeyed, but missing of him, one
Morning at the Mouth of Tagus they met 15 or 16 Sail of Turks. Our Ship was ill
manned, had but few Guns, and her Steeridge full of Bails.

15. The Turks having powered in their broad-sides boarded the Ship, killing 20
Portugueses of 140 that were in her, most of them sick, yet the Enemy receiving
great damage entered with 400 Men, who were all slain save 8 or 9 that got off.
This done our Ship cast Anchor in an advantageous Place, but next day received
Orders to put to Sea where she would find the Fleet to defend her. She was no
sooner out but the Turks attack her, yet after a desperate fight again left
her. But the third Day the Enemy coming on again burnt her, few of the Men
escaping Death, and those remaining in Captivity.

16. The Ship called St. John, another of the two built in India, had no better
Fortune, for springing a leak she was with much labor of Pumping brought as
far as the Cape of Good Hope, where three Holland Ships pursued her 20 Days,
whereof 8 were spent in fight. Our Ship being totally disabled, offered to
surrender upon Conditions, but whilst they treated a Storm parted them, and she
was drove aground full of Water two Leagues from the Shore in the Bay of Lagoa,
which is in the Lat. of 32 Degrees. The Captain was forced with his own hand to
kill a troublesome Pilot, who to save himself and 30 more would expose all the
rest to perish inevitably.

17. The Captain landed the Ammunition and Provisions with the loss of 9 Men,
and marched with 260 toward Zofala, having burnt the Ship, and saved the
Diamonds, Pearls, Amber and Musk. They marched in sight of the Sea, carrying
the Women on their Shoulders. Having set forward the beginning of September,
about the end of November, being weary of carrying those things of value, they
cast into a River all the Musk.

18. Those who carried the Women could no longer hold out, though many thousand
Ducats were promised them. A Maid not able to go a foot was left to the Mercy
of Cafres, or Fury of wild Beasts. A young Man her Brother would have stayed
with her, but was not permitted, and he soon after died for Grief.

19. Some Men died with Fatigue, and the strongest conspired to take all the
Diamonds and march faster. The Captain being informed of it, slew him he
thought to be the Ringleader of that Contrivance. About the middle of December,
those who carried four Women would do it no longer, 10000 Ducats were offered
to any to undertake it, but none accepted the offer. Sixteen were left behind
with their Slaves who murdered them, and afterward overtaking the Company, and
being examined were hanged. Hunger forced them to eat these and others that
died. The Captain Morales died, and Francis Vaz de Almada succeeded him. There
were but 150 Men left, and half of them not able to fight when the King of
Mocaranga assails them with 1000 Cafres and robs them, killing some. Those that
escaped came to Mocambique, having traveled 500 Leagues with unspeakable
Misery.

20. At this time Ruy Freyre de Andrade, who had but Three hundred Portugueses
in the Fort of Queixome with some of the Natives and Arabs that came
afterward, was besieged by the Sultan of Xiras with 20000 Men, and the Fort
began to be undermined. Freyre defended himself with much valor; but the News
being brought that the English Succors were at hand, the Defendants dismayed.

CHAP. XIX.
Continues the Government of Ferdinand de Albuquerque.

1. FReyre being besieged by Sea and Land, the English and Persians being
joined; Simon de Melo came from Goa with 13 Sail, rather to affront than
relieve them.

2. The Commander of Ormuz, who somewhat comforted Freyre in these Troubles
died, and Simon de Melo by the Governor's Order succeeded him; which was
another wrong done to Freyre, because according to the ancient Custom he being
Admiral of that Sea ought to have succeeded. This was the Ruin of Ormuz, for
had he been there it had not been lost. Freyre nevertheless desisted not from
sending advice to Ormuz, which Melo slighted, relying on the Strength of the
Place, though it was in no posture of Defense, the Commanders of it for many
Years having only taken care to enrich themselves, so that there was but little
Cannon, and that lay on the Ground without Carriages, and stopped up with Earth.

3. The English offered Freyre honorable Conditions if he would surrender, but
he refused, thinking Ships would have come that Night from Ormuz, to carry him
off and dismantle the Fort. D. Gonzalo de Silveyra came with only one Barque
carrying some Ammunition, a small Relief in that Distress. Freyre seeing this,
sent fresh Advice to Melo how to act in his own defense; and he taking it in
ill part, writ to the Governor, accusing Freyre of Arrogance and Ignorance, for
pretending from Queixome to instruct and terrify him.

4. Freyre no longer able to withstand the English and Persians, resolved to
burn the Fort, and die honorably in the Field; but his Men crying they would
not cast away their Lives to no purpose, designed to deliver him up to the
English; and some leaped from the Wall into the Sea to save themselves. Freyre
was forced to capitulate to march out on the side of Arabia with his Colors,
Arms and Ammunition; the Capitulation was not observed, for the Portugueses
were stripped, the Natives delivered to the Persians, who put them to the
Sword, Freyre and four Captains sent Prisoners to Surat.

5. Melo at Ormuz thinking the Enemy would be satisfied with the taking of
Queixome, began to treat of Peace with the Persians, but to no effect. Above
12000 Persians came over in their Barques, and the English in 6 Ships,
besieging the Town and furiously battering it.

6. Luis de Brito agreeing with others who loved not to expose their Lives, was
let down from the Wall by a Rope, concluded Articles of Surrender with the
English, and returned to the Town to put them in Execution. Simon de Melo
seemed to oppose the Surrender, but the Soldiers feigning to mutiny (for it was
supposed to be done by his Direction) the Enemy entered the Town, above 2000
Portugueses of both Sexes and all Ages were sent stripped to Mascate, leaving a
great Treasure, and the Honor of their Country, in the Enemies Hands.

7. Mean while Freyre, who was Prisoner, with the four Captains made his
Escape, and having lost one of them with the other three got to Damam, thence
to Bacaim, and at last to Mascate. Constantine de Sa was then there with
Succors for Ormuz, and they were upon going thither when the People that were
dispossessed of that Place appeared. Freyre insisted to go on, hoping to
surprise the Enemy, but could not prevail upon Sa; so he went away to Goa, and
Embarked for Portugal.

8. At this time the Mogol was highly respected by all the Eastern Princes, and
there resided at his Court several Ambassadors, who carried him rich Presents.
One sent by the King of Massanapatan was valued at Two Millions, consisting of
Elephants with costly Trappings, Camels and precious S^ones.

9. The Portugueses, who in the Years 1^42 and 1^45 had escaped the Destruction
of the Cities Liampo and Chincheo, lived in the Island Lampacau, till the Year
1557, they then built the City Macao, the greatest we have in Asia next to Goa.
The manner was thus: They resorted to the Island Sanchuan on the Coast of China
to Trade, where they lived in Huts made of the Boughs of Trees, and covered
with Sails during their stay.

10. From this Island to another called Gaoxama, are 18 Leagues closer in upon
the Coast of China. The Island being in^icate and mountainous, was the Refuge
of Robbers who infested the Continent. The Chinese, who had twice expelled the
Portugueses, thinking them a more tolerable Evil than those Outlaws, offered
them the Island if they could root out that Generation of Thieves. The
Portugueses undertook and performed it without losing a Man.

11. The Island being cleared, every one began to build where he liked best,
there being no Proprietor to sell the Land, which afterward was sold at a
great Rate, the Trade and Fame of this City increasing. This caused the
Hollanders to have an Eye always upon it, desiring to make themselves Masters
thereof.

12. It contains about 1000 Portugues Inhabitants, all Rich, and of the best in
India, because the Portions being there very considerable, many Persons of
Quality resort thither for Wives. There is besides a considerable number of
Christian Chinese, who are clothed and live after the manner of Portugal; and
of Heathens, being Artificers, Shopkeepers and Merchants, about 6000. They have
a Bishop and a Judge. The Duties of the Ships trading thence to Iapan amount to
300000 Xeraphins, at 10 per Cent. A Xeraphin is almost a piece of Eight. The
Yearly Expense of the City to maintain their Fortifications and Garrison is
above 40000 Ducats. At the Fair of Quantung is paid the like Sum for Duties, at
six and seven per Cent. The Voyage of Iapan, with Embassies and Presents for
the King and Tonos, costs 25000. The House called La Misericordia spends 8 or
9000 in Works of Charity. The City maintains two Hospitals, three Parish
Churches, five Monasteries, besides the continual Alms it sends to the
neighboring necessitous Christians in China, Aynam, Iapan, Tunquim,
Cochinchina, Cambodia and Siam.

13. On the 19th of July, 17 (some say 23) Sail of Hollanders came before this
City, hoping to take the Fleet that was there ready to sail for Iapan, having
taken several Chinese and Portugues Ship about the Philippine Islands. They
had aboard 2000 fighting Men. Their Admiral Cornelius Regers intending to gain
the City, battered the Fort of St. Francis the space of five Days. On Midsummer
Day in the Morning he landed Eight hundred Men, and without much opposition
made himself Master of an Intrenchment.

14. The Enemy marched toward the City, thinking to meet no resistance, but
John Suarez Vivas, seeing them advance to gain a considerable Post, prevented
them with 160 Men. After a Discharge of their Firearms, they fell to the
Sword, the Hollanders ^ed with precipitation to their Ships, leaving 300 dead
on the Shore; seven and their Colors were taken, one piece of Cannon, and all
their Arms which they threw away when swiming to their Ships. Mean while the
Ships battered the Fort, which answered so effectually some of them were sunk
and 60 Men killed. This Victory cost us 6 Portugueses, and some few Slaves. A
Cafre Woman a Slave had share in it, who fighting in Man's Clothes with a
Halbard killed 3 Hollanders.

15. The Citizens seeing themselves exposed to such Attempts, built a Wall
round the Town, with six Bastions. On that of St. Paul, which overtops the
City, they planted six large Cannons; on that of the Bar fourteen, some 50
Pounders; eight on that of Our Lady of Good Deliverance; five on that of St.
Peter; eight on that of St. Francis, that looks toward the Sea; and three on
that of St. John. And because the Mountain of Our Lady of the Guide overtops
the Bastion of St. Paul, they fortified it, planting thereon 10 large pieces.

16. This Year were computed to be converted in India 10000 Souls. Some with
such pure Zeal, that five being condemned to Death, and desiring first to be
Baptized, they were told it should not save their Lives, they answered, They
knew it, and only sought the Salvation of their Souls. They were all Baptized
under the Gallows, and died with Resolution and Stedfastness in the Faith,
though they saw the others hanged before them.

17. The Government of Ferdinand de Albuquerque, in what related to the Civil
Administration, was inferior to none; in the Military, especially what
concerned Ormuz, unfortunate. It was observed how little care was had of this
Government in Spain, for that during the whole time of his Government he had
not one Letter from the King. He was of a middle Stature, a good Christian, the
44th Governor, 2d of the Name, and 3d of the Surname.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Viceroy D. Alfonso de Noronna, in the Year 1621.

1. IN the Year 1597, D. Alfonso de Noronna commanded the Ships that went for
India, and was now chose Viceroy, as well in respect of his good Services, ^s
his Birth and Experience. He set out the 29th of April with four Ships and six
Galleons, of all which only one reached India, by being a little a head of the
others, which were all put back to Lisbon. This makes good that notable Saying
of an able Seaman, who being asked when was the best time for the Ships to
Sail, answered, The last Day of February is too soon, and the first of March
too late.

2. In fine, D. Alfonso was put back with all that Relief whereof India stood
in great want; he, his Ship, and the Captain of her were used to this
Misfortune, having been put in the Year before. Some would attribute this to
the ill Fate of the Captain or Ship.

3. This was the last Governor of India named by the Pious Philip III. (but
Second of Portugal) and the first that sailing from Lisbon with that Command
was forced in again. D. Alfonso de Noronna was ancient and well qualified for
that Post; affable and courteous, moderating the gravity of his Age. As soon as
the News was brought to Lisbon of the shameful Surrender of the City Baya in
Brasil to the Hollanders, without regarding his Quality, Age and Commands he
had bore, he listed himself a private Sentinel for that Service. A bravery well
deserving eternal Fame, and an Example that moved many to follow it.

4. As we have hitherto reckoned the Viceroys and Governors who were chosen,
though they enjoyed not the Command, we will account D. Alfonso de Noronna the
24th of the former, and 45th of the latter; the 3d of the Name, and 5th of the
Surname.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Propagation of the Faith in Japan, and Aethiopia about this Time.

1. SOme small hints have been already given of the Progress of Christianity in
Iapan, since their Apostle St. Francis Xaverius began to Preach there. The
Proceedings there are much like those in China, save that the latter has not
been so much sprinkled with the Blood of Martyrs. I will only touch upon some
Martyrdoms that happened in Iapan.

2. At Firando, in the Year 1622, F. Peter de Zuniga, and F. Luis Flores of
Saint Dominick, were burnt alive by the Emperor's Command, together with
Captain Ioachim, a Iaponese, who carried them in his Ship from Manila, and
twelve Seamen beheaded.

3. At Mamgasaqui 25 were burnt alive, and 25 beheaded. Of the first number was
Father Charles Spinola, a Genoese, and Father Sebastian Quimura born at Firando
the first Iaponese Priest, and six Iaponese Lay-Brothers all Jesuits. Five
Franciscans, and nine Dominicans. Also a Woman and twelve Children were
executed, and after that a Dominican and others.

4. At Omura, a Dominican, a Franciscan and twelve more were burnt alive. Ten
suffered Martyrdom at Iquinosima. Another was burnt at Firando, fourteen at
Namgasaqui, and others in other Places, all which made up the number of 118,
whereof 46 burnt alive.

5. In the Year 1624, another Persecution was raised at the Court by means of a
Bonzo, who becoming a Christian in hopes to grow rich, and being disappointed,
became an Informer against Christians. The Emperor gave him the Charge of
Discovering them. The first apprehended were two Jesuits and a Franciscan, who
being committed to Prison where Faramandondono the Emperor's Cousin was,
Baptized there forty Persons: Fifty in all were taken out of the Prison and
burnt alive. Two Gentlemen who were Christians, but not known, being present,
leaped from their Horses and cast themselves into the Fire, crying, They died
for the Faith. At Night Three hundred Christians assembled and stole the
Relics of the Martyrs. This gave occasion to a new Search, and almost Five
hundred suffered. To prevent the concealing of any Religious Men, all the
Spaniards were expelled Nangasaqui; and some married to Iaponese Women were
parted from them. Many Natives who would not renounce the Faith were banished,
and many more, especially at Ozaqua, had a Cross burnt deep on their Foreheads,
that they might be known to be Christians; and they joyfully said, Now we shall
be known to be Slaves of Jesus. They were turned off with that mark, and almost
naked in the dead of Winter, with their Children, and many of them died.

6. In the Year 1637, Father Marcelas Francis Mastrili of the Society of Jesus,
was apprehended with his Companion Lazarus, and carried to Namgasaqui, where he
endured many Tortures. On the fourteenth of October he was brought out in sight
of all the People, with a Paper on his Back whereon were these Words; Iogan
Sama, Emperor of Iapan, Orders this mad Man to be Executed, for Preaching in
these Kingdoms a Law contrary to that of Xaxa, and Amida, and of the F^toques.
Come all to see him, for he is to die hanging in the Cave for an Example. At
the Marketplace of Ten^, where the Portugues Merchants resort, he saluted them
three times with his head, having a Gag in his mouth.

7. He was hanged up by the Feet in the Cave of the Mountain, where generally
Martyrs suffer, and is therefore called Holy. He hung four days uttering
wonderful Doctrine, and the Blood never fell into his Head, as is usual in such
Cases. Seeing he did not die, they took him out to be beheaded, and he expected
the stroke on his Knees, saying twice, My Father Saint Francis Xaverius. It is
believed he saw that Saint, and that was the occasion of naming him. The first
stroke took no Effect, the second made an impression, and the third his Head
fell to the Ground, having called upon Jesus and Mary. There followed an
Earthquake all the Country about. Being dead he had many Wounds given him, then
was burnt, and the Ashes cast into the Sea. Thus much of Iapan, let us say
somewhat of Ethiopia.

8. In the Year 1521, Sultan Sagued being Emperor, the Society of Jesus had a
Residence at Gorgora in the Kingdom of Dambia, and a stately Church. Another
Residence at Colela in the Kingdom of Gogan, to which was subordinate the
Mission of the Agaos, a large Province. Another at Fremona in the Kingdom of
Tigre.

9. The first Patriarch of Ethiopia was D. John Bermudez, chosen by the Emperor
and confirmed by the Pope, of whom we spoke in the Sixth Chapter of the Fourth
Part of the Second Tome. The second Patriarch was D. John Nunnez Barreto, a
Jesuit, of whose Sanctity it is a sufficient Testimony, that he being at Tetuan
serving the Slaves, the Bassa of that Place said, The Works of the Holiest Moor
were not to compare with his. He died at Goa without reaching Ethiopia. The
third was D. Andrew de Oviedo, of a very Religious and Austere Life. He
suffered much Persecution, for Preaching and Converting many Ethiopians. The
fourth Patriarch was D. Belchior Carnero, a Jesuit, who died at Goa. The fifth,
D. Alfonso Mendez, of whom we shall speak hereafter. The sixth, D. Apollinarius
de Almeyda, of whose Banishment also a further Account shall be given in its
Place.

The End of the Third Part.
THE PORTUGUES ASIA. TOM. III. PART IV.
CHAP. I.
The Second Government of the Viceroy D. Francis de Gama Count De Vidigueyra,
from the Year 1622, till 1627.

1. DON Francis de Gama Count De Vidigueyra having lest the Government of India
much hated, and affronted, always endeavored to obtain that Command again; not
to be revenged, as some said, but to satisfy the World he had not deserved
that ill Usage. Twenty Years passed before he could obtain his Desire, which
was upon the Accession to the Crown of Philip the Fourth of Spain, and Third of
Portugal.

2. He sailed from Lisbon on the 18th of March with 4 Ships. Not long before
him parted thence Sancho de Tovar and Silva with 2 Galleons and 2 Pinks. On the
Coast of Tierra de Natal a flash of Lightning falling upon the Count's Ship,
burnt the Colors, and did some harm, but killed no body. Under the Line two of
his Ships left him, and arrived at Goa at the end of August. The third stayed
behind him; it was thought they shunned his Company designedly.

3. About this time 6 Dutch Ships plied near the Islands of Angoxa, one of them
perished in pursuit of a Portugues. The Viceroy standing for Mocambique, met
the other five on the 22d of June. His other Ships had now joined him, and
there ensued a terrible Fight, which fell heaviest upon the Vice Admiral, who
was entirely disabled. The Viceroy and D. Francis Lobo rescued and brought him
off. But the Ship being so much battered sunk, some Men and Money were saved,
and some fell into the Enemies hands. Night coming on, the Viceroy and Lobo
were drove upon the Sands, and their Ships lost; they saved what Goods,
Rigging, Ammunition and Cannon they could, and fired the rest, that the Enemy
might make no Advantage os it. The Viceroy shipped all the Goods, and what Men
he could, aboard some Galliots, and arrived at Cochim. Gonzalo de Sequeyra was
gone before with his Galleon to relieve Ormuz, but came too late.

4. From Cochim he went to Goa, and arrived there in September. His Enemies
seeing him in that Post, were all terrified, fearing he now in Power would
revenge the Affronts done to his Person, but he carried himself with more
moderation than was expected. The Count thought of punishing Simon de Melo and
Luis de Brito, as the most guilty of the shameful loss of Ormuz. Melo was fled
over to the Moors, and Brito in Prison; this was Beheaded, as was the other in
Effigies.

5. Goncalo de Sequeira, who was to have relieved Ormuz, stayed with his
Galleon at Mascate, believing his Assistance necessary upon a Report that the
Persians designed against that Place. Hearing the Enemy fortified at Soar in
Arabia, he fitted out 7 Sail, and coming before it, expelled the Persians with
much slaughter, and not without loss, because they defended it with more Valor
than the Portuguezes had Ormuz. Goncalo de Sequeyra remained there, and again
defeated the Enemy endeavoring to gain Mascate.

8. The Dutch, who had lain before the Bar of Goa, being gone toward
Triquilimale, the Viceroy sent Constantine de Sa and Ruy Freyre with a Squadron
to assist Sequeyra in the Sea of Ormuz. They chased an English Ship, which got
away from them, and returning to the Sea of Ormuz took two Ships of the Moors,
putting them all to the Sword.

7. Three Galleots of Cochin defeated some Dutch and Pegu Ships at Paleacate.
D. Francis Mascarennas, a Person of known Valor and Prudence, was sent to
Command at Macao to oppose the Hollanders, and quiet the Disorders that were
among the Citizens. The Divisions among the Laity being made up, there began
others among the Clergy about the Government of that Cathedral for want of a
Bishop.

8. Three Ships, three Galleons, and two Pinks, sailed from Lisbon for India.
One of the Ships returning home, was lost at the mouth of Lisbon River, the Men
and some Goods saved; another perished at Mocambique; the third on the Island
St. Helena, part of her Loading being taken into the other Ships, the rest
fetched away from Brasil. Two of the Galleons were also cast away at
Mocambique; and a Pink, through the unskilfulness of the Pilot, on the Coast of
Arabia. In these Vessels were 5000 Men, whereof many died of Sickness, besides
what perished by Shipwreck.

9. Now begins the Year 1624, famous for the Sufferings of Gativanda Queen of
Dopoli at Xiras in Persia, and Cruelty of the King Xa Abas. But this having
relation to the Religious of St. Augustine, who labored much in the conversion
of Asia, I will relate some Particulars of what they did in those Parts. They
resided at Ormuz, where, among many others, the Heir of that Crown was
converted, and took their Habit by the Name of F. Hierome Iaete, and afterward
Preached with much Zeal. With him was Baptized D. Alfonso Nordim of the Blood
Royal, and his Sister Da. Philippa Morada.

10. The Fathers preached also with success along the Skirts of Arabia Petrea.
When Ormuz was lost, they went over to Bacora, a City subject to the Turk,
below Babylon, on the Borders of Arabia Felix, with Orders from the Archbishop
of Goa to endeavor chiefly the Reduction of the Armenian Schismatics called
Christians of St. John, in the Kingdom of Bombareca, where F. Francis of the
Presentation, and F. Matthias an Englishman, who died at Ormuz with a general
Opinion of Sanctity, had been before, but with no success. After them F.
Nicholas de la Vega, with the consent of the Turkish Bassa, erected there a
House and Chapel.

11. F. John de los Santos, and F. Joseph of the Presentation, built a Church
and Convent, and many Schismatics were reconciled to the Church. The Bassa
gave them Power over all the Christians, Chaldeans, Nestorians, and Jews, and
many Chaldeans were Baptized. Many Infidels, Arabs, Turks and Persians,
resorted to the Convent, and some were converted. In the City and the
Neighborhood there are about 70000 Inhabitants, whereof about 5000 Christians
of St. John, so called, because they have a Tradition, That their Forefathers
were Baptized in the River Jordan by the Baptist.

12. The Portugueses, after the loss of Ormuz, settled their Trade in this City,
and founded a Seminary for Learning. The Bassa very much countenanced the
Religious, and seeing a Christian Soldier in love with a Moorish Woman, secured
and delivered him up to them. They sent him to Mascate, she followed, was
baptized, and married him. He consented that a Girl should be taken from her
Mother, who seeing her go, followed, and both were reconciled to the Church.

13. The first time Vespers were sung, a Drum going about to gather the
Christians, all the Moors flocked thither, in so much that the Cacizes said,
This was some particular Act of Divine Providence, and cried, The World must be
at an end.

14. These Religious first entered the Court of Ispahan in the time of King
Sebastian, afterward 5 Armenian Bishops, many Priests, and a multitude of
People, submitted to the Sea of Rome. The King offered the Fathers 2000 Ducats
a Year, which they refused, lest it should be thought they went to enrich
themselves, not to plant Religion. They were afterward Imprisoned by the
Moors, ill Treated, and sent to Xiras, 100 Leagues distant. The Governor of
that Place sent them to the Convent with Fetters on their Feet, and Yoaks on
their Necks. The Governor pretended the cause of their Imprisonment was, That
Ruy Freyre had secured three Moors at Ormuz, and said, They should be set at
liberty if those were restored. Brother Peter carried Advice hereof to Goa, and
the Moors were released.

15. The Labors of these Fathers have been very succesful in Gorgistan or
Georgia. The first that undertook that Mission was F. William of St. Augustine,
who was well received by the Georgians, but put to Death by the Sultan of
Fabris, and was buried by the Armenian Religious of the Order of St. Dominick.

16. The King of Persia invading one of the Georgian Princes, he sent his
Mother called Gativanda to Treat with him, who, after giving an ambiguous
Answer, caused her on the way home to be apprehended, and carried Prisoner to
Xiras. This Lady was kept in Prison 11 Years, living always a most godly Life
in Fasting and Penance; her greatest Grief was, to hear that some of the
Captives of her Country wavered in the Faith.

17. The Religious coming at that time to Xiras, greatly comforted her. The
King of Persia being solicited to release Gativanda, sent to advise her to turn
Mohammedan, otherwise she must expect to endure the cruelest of Tortures. She
desiring a little time to recollect herself, spent it in Prayer, and that
ended, resolutely told the Officers, They might fulfill their Orders. They
taking compassion, endeavored to persuade, telling her, The Torments would be
insupportable, and she replied, The Delay was the most grievous Torture.

18. Her Hands being tied, the Executioners put on her Head a Copper Vessel
made red hot, and tore her Cheeks and Breasts with burning Pinchers. Not a Sigh
came from her till she was stripped to the Waste to have her Breasts cut off,
looking upon it more grievous to be naked, than to endure such unsupportable
Pains. Her Feet were torn, and she then fainting, they cast all the Fire upon
her. Seeing she neither died nor complained, the Executioners strangled her,
after having suffered alone enough to purchase many the Glory of Martyrdom.

19. Tamarascan, the Queen's Son, understanding the Death of his Mother, entered
Persia in a rage, and obtained several Victories, in 3 Years slew above 70000
Persians. At length a Peace was concluded, and he restored to all he had lost.

20. Two of the Religious of St. Augustine traveled toward Georgia suffered
great Extremities in vast Deserts, in some Places near perishing in Snow. At
Emanenga in Armenia they were entertained by the Religious of the Order of St.
Dominick, who reside there.

21. At Ervan, the Metropolis of Armenia, they were courteously received by the
Patriarch in a Convent of 30 Religious of St. Basil, whose Office is long,
being the whole Psalter every day, and Matins at midnight. That Prelate was a
Man of a very austere Life, gave great Alms, redeemed Captives, repaired
Churches, was a great Reformer of Manners, and suppressed Married Priests. He
was almost Adored by the Armenians, and hearkened to the Proposal of submiting
to the Sea of Rome. Our Religious found him Preaching in a Church, but as soon
as he saw them, he took leave of the Auditory, and went to receive them, washed
and kissed their Feet, telling the People. Those were the true Apostles of
Christ.

22. At length our Religious entered Georgia, were honorably received by the
King, who refused to let them kiss his Hand, but made them sit; and knowing
they carried the greatest part of his Mother's Body, declared himself pleased
above measure.

23. That day they dined with the King, the next with the Queen; she and her
Ladies went to receive the Body, and heard Mass with great attention. The King
caused his Mother to be buried among the ancient Kings of Georgia. Speaking of
the Pope, he said, He owned him as chief Prelate, and had always declared him
such. Being presented with two Images of our Savior and Blessed Lady, he said,
He worshipped them not because they were Idols, and only honored Pictures. One
of the Fathers reprehended him, and was going away, but he held by his Habit,
kissed him, and begged Pardon, affirming, He knew not what he said.

24. Next day the King and Queen excused themselves to the Father, praying him
not to depart, but to choose any Place in the Kingdom to build a Church and
Monastery. He pitched upon the City Gori, which is seated in a Plain watered by
two great Rivers well stored with Fish. The Patriarch an ancient and venerable
Person, with the Bishops and other Clergy, thought they could never
sufficiently encourage the new Foundation. This happened about the end of the
Year 1628.

25. To conclude, with these Religious they labored as much as any in China,
India, Persia, and Arabia. On the 17th of May, 1626, after Noon, at Bassora was
seen a Cloud rising in the East in the form of a Half Moon, the Horns whereof
seemed to enclose that City. It appeared like Smoke and Ashes, and moved with a
Noise that seemed to threaten Destruction. All the Country about for the space
of half an hour was quite dark, then for two hours followed such a storm of
Wind and Thunder, as terrified all those People. The Turks and Persians fled to
the Christian Church, believing that the only safe place, and crying aloud, the
former, Coda, Coda; the latter, Ala, Ala; that is, God, God, without remembering
Mahomet.

26. In the Year 1627, the Enemy surprised a Ship of ours there, and killed all
the Men but three, who being carried before Hazen Governor of Humo, he offered
them their Lives if they would become Mahometans. They answered, They were
ready to die rather than do so. He caused them to be Beheaded on the 21st of
December, 1628.

27. In Africa these Religious baptized the Prince of Melinde, who afterward
coming to the Crown acknowledged the Pope, writing a Letter to him in the Year
1627, which he signed by the Name of D. Hierome Chingalia. This was the first
King that received the Faith in those Parts, which might have spread more, had
not the Portugueses by their Enormities obliged this Prince to fall off from
them and the Faith, as shall be seen hereafter.

CHAP. II.
Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Francis de Gama Count De Vidigueyra.

1. THis Year sailed from Lisbon two Ships and six Galleons under the Command
of Nunno Alvarez Botello, and arrived all safe at Goa. Mean while Ruy 1624.
Freyre de Andrade with his Squadron was successful in the Sea of Ormuz,
cutting off Provisions from that Town, sinking some Vessels, and chasing
others. He had done more if better supported.

5. Some English and Dutch Ships having relieved Ormuz distressed by that
Gentleman, the Viceroy strengthened by those Ships come from Portugal, would
not suffer them to depart without being visited. He sent Nunno Alvarez Botello
Admiral against them with 8 Galleons. They sailed at the beginning of the Year
1625, and were separated by a Storm; but six meeting Botello, appeared in the
Sea of Ormuz, and was received by twelve of those two Nations. The Fight was
very terrible, and the Enemy having the Wind, our Admiral could not come to
board as he desired. The Dutch Admiral and Vice Admiral being disabled, were
forced to draw off. At the same time Ruy Freyre having heard the noise of the
Cannon came up with three Galliots, and the Enemy drew off to the Bay of
Comoram. We had many Men killed and wounded, among the latter our Admiral
Botello.

3. About the middle of February they met again. Nunno fearing he should not be
able to come to board them, sent a Challenge to their Admiral; but he not
accepting of it, the Fight began, and was continued with great fury till the
Enemy again drew into Comoran, having lost many Men, and we 2 Captains and 40
Soldiers. Botello went to Water at the Island Lare^a opposite to them, and
hearing a Cannon fired, answered with another, supposing it had been a Signal
of Battle, but the Enemy stirred not then, though our Vessels were almost
unmasted since the last Engagement. At last they thinking it time to depart
drew out, and being pursued, there ensued another Fight. The Enemy fled, having
lost in those three Encounters 1000 Men, and 3 Ships which were sunk; some of
them carried 60 Guns.

4. Our Admiral gave chase, but soon lost sight of them, and went to Winter at
Mascate, whence he set out in September with 7 Sail, whereof he lost three in a
Storm, the Men saved. He came to an Anchor with the rest at Soveral, where he
took a rich Ship of Meca that sailed with a Dutch Pass. Understanding by the
Prisoners some of the Enemies Ships were at Surat, he hasted thither, and found
they were the same that escaped after the Fights of Ormuz and Comoran. It being
impossible to come at them, he provoked them by Signs, and set up a Challenge
on the City Gates; but seeing they did not stir, sailed away. Not far from
Damam he discovers three English Ships, and coming up with them found they were
strong, and carried two Tire of Guns. They fought three days, at last the Enemy
made away.

5. There were great Tumults at Macao, the Inhabitants of that City forcing
their Commander D. Francis Mascarennas to shut himself up in the Fort, but
being defeated, were pardoned by him. The Chinese growing jealous on account
of the Wall built by him, it was found absolutely necessary to throw down part
of it.

6. The Patriarch D. Alfonso Mendez now set out from Diu for Ethiopia with 6
Fathers, and other Retinue in 3 Vessels. He landed at Bailur, a Town subject to
a little King, and traveled over the Field called of Salt, because that is
found there which passes in stead of Money being like small Bars. Next is the
Mountain, where is another sort of reddish Salt, good against some Diseases.
Traveling by night, by reason of the heat of the day, they saw an Exhalation
so bright, it enlightened all the Country about. This was held as a good Omen.
At Fremona they understood the same Light had been seen there. They traveled
with greater labor to the Court, and were received with great joy by the
Emperor, who soon after acknowledged the Pope's Supremacy; but this Happiness
was not lasting, as shall appear hereafter.

7. About this same time was discovered the famous Kingdom of Tibet, extending
to the Springs of Ganges. The Natives are well inclined, and docible, zealous
of their Salvation, and value Things of Devotion given them by their Priests
called Lama's, who profess Poverty and Chastity, and are much given to Prayer.
They have strange Customs and Ceremonies, Churches like the most Curious of
ours, and some knowledge of the Christian Religion, but mixed with many Errors;
they abhor the Mahometans and Gentiles. It plainly appears, that in former Ages
they had the true Light of the Gospel. They are easy to be converted. The
Country produces some Fruit like that of Europe, Rice and Wheat, and breeds
Cattle, but there is much barren. It is fit to say somewhat of their Religion
and Lama's. Their Habit is a Red Cassock without Sleeves, for the Arms are
naked; it is girt with a piece of Cloth of the same color, the ends whereof
hang down to the Feet; on their Shoulders a striped Cloth, which they say is
the Habit of the Son of God; at their Waste hangs a little Bottle of Water.
They keep two Fasts, in the greatest they eat but once a day, and speak not a
word; necessary Affairs are expressed by Signs: In the second it is allowed to
eat as often as every one pleases, but Flesh only once. They call to Prayers
with Trumpets, some made with dead Men's Bones; the Skulls serve to drink out
of: Of other Bones Beads are made, which they say is to put them in mind of
Death. The Churches are opened only twice a Year, those who resort to them walk
round three times, then enter and do Reverence to the Images. Among which are
some of Angels, called by them Lat. The greatest is he that intercedes before
God for the Souls. It being painted Armed, with the Devil under its Feet, make
it supposed to be St. Michael. It is not unworthy consideration, that Lamas,
the Name of their Priests, begins with La, which signifies an Angel. The young
Lama's go about the Towns dancing regular and modestly with Crowns, Bells and
other noisy Instruments. They say, it is in imitation of the Angels, as they
are painted among us, singing in Choirs. The beginning of every month they make
a Procession with black Flags, Figures of Devils, Drums and Music, and believe
this chases the Evil Spirits. Holy Water is made with many Prayers, and putting
into it Gold, Coral, and Rice, and is used against Devils that haunt Houses.
The Country People bring to the Towns black Horses, Cows, and Sheep, over which
the Lama's say many Prayers, saying, the Devils endeavor to get into black
Cattle. They cure the Sick by blowing on the Part afflicted. Three sorts of
Funerals are used, according to the Star rules the time of Death. One is after
our manner; and there are Tombs adorned with gilded Pyramids. Another is
burning the Body, and of the Ashes mixed with Clay they make Images, by which
they swear. Another is casting the Bodies to certain white Birds like Cranes,
and this is reckoned the happiest Burial. These three Forms are used with such
as are esteemed to have lived well, for others being cut in pieces are thrown
to Dogs. They believe the Good dying go directly to Heaven, the Bad to Hell;
but such as are indifferent between both, their Souls instantly return into
noble or base Creatures, according to their deserts. They advise Fathers to
give their Children the Names of filthy Beasts, that the Devil may be loath to
meddle with them. They use Divination after a ridiculous manner. In fine, they
acknowledge One God in Trinity; that his Son becoming Man died, and is in
Heaven; that he is God as well as his Father, and Man at the same time; that
his Mother was a Woman, and gone to Heaven; that from the Death of the Son till
that time, were about 1600 Years. They know there is a Hell, in the same manner
as we do. They burn Lamps, that God may light them in the way of the other
World.

8. F. Anthony de Andrade, and Andrew Marquez, both Jesuits, set out for this
Kingdom from Delhi in the Mogol's Country with a Caravan, that conducted
Pilgrims to a famous Pagod. They passed the Kingdom of Laor, and came to the
vast Mountains, whence the Ganges falls into the deep Valleys. On the way they
saw many stately Temples full of Idols. The great Fatigue lessened the pleasure
of seeing the variety of beautiful Trees, and smelling those odoriferous
Flowers, on the scent whereof the Ancients said those People lived. At the
Kingdom of Siranagar they saw the Ganges running over Snow, the whiteness
whereof almost blinds such as travel that way.

9. At the end of 50 Days they came to the Pagod on the Borders of the Kingdom
of Siranagar, whither Multitudes resort to wash in a Spring so hot it is scarce
tolerable, which they imagine cleanses them from Sin. There Food here is raw
Flesh, and are very healthy eating much Snow. The Women there do what is the
Work of Men among us, and the contrary; the Women Plow, and the Men Spin. Hence
the Fathers came to the Town of Mana, and having rested, continued their
Journey, almost blind with the continual traveling among Snow, till they saw
the Springs of Ganges, which runs out of a great Lake. Soon after they entered
the Kingdom of Tibet, and were honorably received by Officers sent to that
purpose from the King's Court at Chaparague. The King and Queen heard them with
much Satisfaction, and admitted their Doctrine without any dispute.

10. The time being come they must return to Siranagar, the King would not
permit them to depart till they swore they would return, and then he promised
they should have liberty to Preach, and he would build them a Church, being
much pleased with a Picture they left him of our Lady with our Savior sleeping
in her Arms. The Fathers returned acccording to promise, and the King in
pursuance of his built the Church with great joy, and was afterward Baptized
with the Queen, notwithstanding the Lama's for their private Ends did all they
could to oppose it. The Fathers understood by Merchants who came from China,
that it was 60 Days Journey distant from that Court, traveling through the
Kingdom of Usangu^, 40 Days Journey from the same Court, and thence 20 to
China: That there were two great Kingdoms where the Cross was much used. That
Cathay is not a Kingdom, but a great City and Metropolis of a Province subject
to the Grand Sopo, very near China. Hence perhaps some gave China the name of
Cathay. Perhaps this Empire of Tibet is that of Prester John, so much spoken
of, and not Ethiopia, as was believed. But let us return to India.

11. In April 4. Malabar Parao's took a Portugues Ship, carrying the Men into
slavery under Arcolo, a King of the Country opposite to the Place where the
famous Fort of Cunnale once stood. Among the Prisoners were two Franciscans,
one whereof proved so acceptable to the King, that he was the cause of settling
a firm Peace between him and the Viceroy.

12. Two Ships arrived from Lisbon, which returning home the next Year were
lost, with the whole Portugues Fleet upon the Coast of France in a terrible
Storm, and was the greatest Loss Portugal sustained since the time of King
Sebastian.

13. There being nothing remarkable this Year in India, let us see what the
Carmelites did in Persia, where they got footing in the Year 1604. They soon
erected several Convents, and confirmed the Armenians who were in danger of
falling from the Faith, terrified with the Persecution raised by the King of
Persia. F. Basil of St. Francis was very successful among those called of Saint
John about Bassora. In the short space of six Months he Preached in the
difficult Persian, Arabian and Turkish Languages, as if he had part of the gift
of Languages peculiar to the Apostles, and gained such Reputation, that many
neighboring Princes permitted him to Preach and build Churches in their
Dominions.

14. F. John Thadeus and F. Peter of Saint Thomas went to the City Xiras, being
sent for by the Sultan thereof, where they converted some Mahometans; others
gave them their Doubts in Writing to be sent to Rome, assuring if they were
satisfied in those Points, there would be no need of Preaching to convert them.
Ve^taviet Moses an Armenian Bishop, acknowledged his Error in denying the
Supremacy of the Church of Rome, and promised to persuade all her Diocese to
acknowledge it. In fine, these Fathers have labored with great Profit and
Success.

15. Three Ships sailed this Year from Lisbon to India, one of them at his
return, on this side the Cape Good Hope, fought twice with three Dutch Ships,
and came off with Honor.

16. Nunno Alvarez Botello sailing with his Galleons for Mascate, there arose
such a terrible Storm, that it parted all his Company from him, and he had much
difficulty to persuade his Men in despair to work: The Tempest ceasing their
Provisions fell snort; there was but one Pipe of Water for 500 Men, and no Land
near where they might be supplied. Some died with Thirst, others running mad
leaped overboard. After a Fortnight spent in this miserable Condition, they
discovered the Land of Rozalgat^ always fatal to the Portugueses. The Men cried
to go ashore, but Nunno with fair words and kindness dissuaded them, and coming
to Teve they were relieved without danger.

17. Off Surat Nunno discovered six Dutch Ships, he gave them c^ace, but lost
them. He sailed to Bombaim to refit a Galleon, and thence to the Bar of Diu. An
English and Dutch Squadron, both consisting of 17 Sail, sailed to Bombaim
thinking to find him there. They battered the Fort, and m^ting no Opposition
burnt the poor Towns along the Coast. A Dutch Captain entering the Church of Our
Lady of Hope, with his Sword cut to pieces a great Crucifix, and burnt part of
it. He had soon after the Reward of this Barbarity, his Ship being burnt by Ruy
Freyre, and he with all the Men slain. Nunno hearing of this Action begged the
Crucifix of the Rector, vowing to carry it always with him, till he had
revenged the Wrong, or died in the Execution of it. So it fell out, as will be
seen hereafter.

18. The King of Achem fitted out a Fleet of 35 Galleys against Malaca, D.
Francis Coutinno with 16. Sail burnt 34 of them killing or taking 3000 Men, and
bringing off 800 pieces of Cannon.

19. On the 17th of June 4 Dutch Ships came before the Port of Macao, designing
to fall upon the Fleet was ready to sail for Iapan. The King's Revenue being
low, our Commander could act nothing against them, some rich Men undertook it
in Merchant Ships. They fitted out five, and boarding the Enemy's Admiral burnt
her, killing 37 Men, taking 50, 24 pieces of Cannon, a quantity of Ball, some
Money and much Provisions. The other 3 fled.

20. Ferdinand de Sousa commanded at Angola, and after defending it against two
Dutch Squadrons, fortified the Coast the space of half a League, raising 4
Works planted with Cannon, and cast up a Trench at the Bar of Corimba, which
secured it against any attempt. Zinga Queen of Angola went with a great Power
to Besiege the Garrison of Ambaca, but John Carreyro sending a Company of
Portugueses to assist that Lord who was our Friend, the Queen was defeated. A
Body of Men marching to her aid was met by nine Portugueses with a number of
Blacks, who fled at first sight; the nine Portugueses fought till their Powder
was spent, and two being killed, the other seven were taken, which was no small
Satisfaction to the Queen, and many of the Blacks who before were our Friends,
hereupon became Neuters.

21. Soon after the Queen was defeated and deposed, and her Brother
Airiquibange Crowned King, being become a Christian, as did many Persons of
Note by his means. At Congo the City Salvador was taken by the Prince of Sun,
who killing the King, placed in his stead D. Ambrose of the same Blood Royal.
He proved a wise and religious Prince.

22. The beginning of this Year went from Portugal for India but one Ship, and
a Pink. The latter as it returned was burnt by the Dutch, and the Men made
Prisoners. But in November 3 Ships more set sail. The Viceroy returned to
Portugal in the first Ship, having resigned the Government to D. F. Luis de
Brito Bishop of Cochim, by reason D. Francis Mascarennas, appointed to succeed
him, was gone to Spain. The Count this second time Governed above 5 Years. He
was the 25th Viceroy, and 46th Governor; the 6th of the Name, and 4th of the
Surname.

CHAP. III.
The Government D. F. Luis de Brito, Bishop of Cochim, from the Year 1628, till
1629.

1. THE King having ordered the Count de Vidigueyra to resign the Government to
D. Francis Mascarennas then gone to Spain, he committed it to D. F. Luis de
Brito, Bishop of Cochim. There being no account of any thing memorable in this
first Year of his Government, we will go on to next. The first that occurs is
what happened at Ceylon.

2. Our General Constantine de Sa having declared War against Candea, F.
Francis Negram sent him advice to attack that City immediately, and he might
take the King, as being wholly unprovided; he lost the Opportunity by only a
short Delay about other Affairs. Nevertheless the City was destroyed with Fire
and Sword.

3. The King of Achem imflamed with the Desire of recovering Malaca, contrary
to the Laws of Nations, imprisoned our Ambassador then residing at his Co^t,
and made extraordinary Preparations for a Siege, as designing to undertake it
in Person. Lacamane his great General who had conquered many Kings for him,
opposed this Resolution, for which he lost his Prince's Favor.

4. Marraja ambitious by Flattery to gain his Prince's Esteem, promised the
King to make him soon Master of that so much coveted Town; and hereupon had the
Command of the Sea given him, as Lacamane that of the Land. The King set out
with a Fleet of near 250 Sail in which he carried 20000 Men, and a great Train
of Artillery. In this number of Vessels were fortyseven Galleys of
extraordinary Strength, Beauty and Value, all near One hundred Foot in length,
and of a proportionable breadth. The King went aboard with his Treasure, Wife
and Children; but upon some ill Omen the Fleet sailed without him, and came
before Malaca at the beginning of July.

5. As they landed they marched toward the Castle that is between the City and
Pangor. Antony Pinto de Fonseca with 200 Men, charges them, and kills above 300
without losing a Man. John Suarez Vivas, who commanded 350 Portugueses at
Iller, after doing great Execution among the Enemy on several occasions,
overpowered by their numbers was forced to abandon that Post.

6. The Enemy having gained Mount St. John, thence battered the Fort furiously,
which answered with no less liberality. The Capuchin Convent of the Mother of
God was of importance to the defense of the Fort, James Lopez de Fonseca having
defended it 50 Days, made a Sally with 200 Men defeating 2000 of the Enemy.
Lopez falling sick, Francis Carvallo de Maya took that Post and defended it so
well, that the Enemy was provoked to batter it with such Fury, that the
Monastery was abandoned, being levelled with the Ground. Out of those Ruins the
Enemy raised good Works, where Lacamane held his Quarter with 3000 Men. Maraja
had another large Fort upon Mount St. John; there was another toward Iller;
another at St. Laurence, and so in other Places with Lines of Communication.
They provided Boats to run up the River, and straiten the Town on all sides.

7. Our General Fonseca desiring to disturb Lacamane, sent Vivas with 220
Portugueses to attack his Works. He killing 100 and the rest flying, possessed
himself of the Work by Night, and retired with some of the Cannon. The King of
Pam our Allye understanding the Posture of our Affairs, sent a Fleet with 2000
Men to the assistance of the Town. Next came Michael Pereyra Borallo with five
Sail from St. Thomas, but all was too little to remove so powerful an Enemy,
though they had lost above 4000 Men, having killed but 60 of ours. This was the
Condition of the Town at the end of October when Nunno Alvarez Botello arrived
there.

8. The Bishop then Governor was informed of this Design upon Malaca in June,
and of the weakness of the Place, which required a speedy Relief. It was then
the dead of Winter, and the Bishop was not very forward; so the business was
put off till September. The Bishop falling sick minded the Recovery of his
Health, more than the Town, and was put in mind by the principal Men of Goa
(moved thereto by Nunno Alvarez Botello) of the great danger that Place would
be exposed to, if not speedily relieved. They desired him to appoint some
Person who might forward that Business since sickness hindered him. He, after
seeming to approve of what they said, could never be prevailed with to name
any, fearing perhaps he so named would wrest the Government from him sooner
than Death.

9. But Death took him away about the end of July, that those who were
Ambitious to relieve Malaca might put their Designs in Execution. That Bishop
governed nineteen or twenty Months, was the Fortyseventh Governor, second of
the Name, first of the Surname, and the second Prelate that had that Command.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Viceroy D. Francis Mascarennas in the Year 1628, with sundry
Occurrences at Pegu, Martavam, Prom, Siam, and other Places.

1. DON Francis Mascarennas had served so well in India, that without
soliciting he was appointed Viceroy there, at the same time he was coming for
Spain. Being arrived here, he was sent back this Year with the same Title, and
sailed from Lisbon with three Ships, only one of them reached India, the other
two with the Viceroy were put back to Lisbon.

2. In the Viceroy's Ship a Gentleman was taken actually committing an
abominable Crime, whom the Viceroy caused to be shot in pieces at the mouth of
a Cannon. He He was accused of this Action, as not having power of Life and
Death, being at that time upon his return, yet he was well received at Court,
and sworn of the Council of State of Portugal. He may be reckoned the 27th
Viceroy, and 48th Governor, the 7th of the Name, and 4th of the Surname.

3. Since this Gentleman not passing to India has deprived us of the worthy
Actions might be expected from him, let that Want be supplied with an account
of Exploits of the Black King of Siam, in whom appeared a strange mixture of
Virtues and Vices. Much has been said of him already, whereof some hints shall
be given here, and all that was before omitted added.

4. In the Year 1544, the King of the Brama's by Sea and Land besieged the City
Martavam, Metropolis of the great and flourishing Kingdom of that Name, whose
Yearly Revenue was 3 Millions of Gold, Chaubainaa being then King, and Nhay
Ca^otoo Queen thereof, who from the height of Fortune fell to the depth of
Misery. The Brama Fleet consisted of 700 Sail, 100 of them great Galleys. In
them were 700 Portugueses commanded by one John Caeyro, reputed a Man of Valor
and Conduct.

5. After a Siege of 7 Months and 5 Assaults, wherein the Brama's lost 12000
Men; Chaubainaa found it was impossible to withstand that Power, Provision
being already so scarce, they had eaten 3000 Elephants. He offered to
Capitulate, but no Conditions were allowed by the Besieger; and therefore
resolved to make use of the Portugueses, to whom he had always been very just
and serviceable. But Man never remembers Favors received in Prosperity of
those he sees in Adversity.

6. The disconsolate King sent one Seixas to Cayero to offer, if he would
receive him, his Family and Treasure into the four Ships under his Command, he
would give half the Treasure to the King of Portugal, become his Vassal, and
pay such Tribute as should be agreed upon, not doubting with the assistance of
2000 Portugueses, who should be maintained at his own Expense, to recover his
Kingdom. Caeyro consulted the principal Portugueses, and in their presence
asked of Seixas what the Treasure of Martavans was; who affirmed, he had not
seen all, but that of what he had two of our Ships might be loaded with Jewels
and Gold, and 4 or 5 of Silver. The Portugueses envious of the great Fortune
Cayero might make by accepting that Offer, threatened to discover him to the
King of Brama if he consented.

7. The King of Martavam surprised at this refusal, and seeing Seixas took his
leave to fly the Danger that threatened the City, gave him a pair of Bracelets,
excusing the smallness of the Gift, and they were afterward sold to the
Governor of Narsinga for 80000 Ducats. Then he resolved to fire the City and,
sallying with those few Men he had left, die honorably among his Enemies. But
that night an Officer with 4000 Men dedeserted to the Enemy, and discovered the
Design. The King thus betrayed, Capitulated with the Enemy for his own and the
Lives of his Wife and Children, and leave to end his Days in Retirement. This
and more was granted easily, because the Conqueror designed to perform no part
of the Promise.

8. From the City Gate to the King of Brama's Tent was a league distance, all
which way was a Lane of many thousand Musketeers of sundry Nations, and next
the Gate were posted the Portugueses. The first came out was the Queen in a
Chair, her two Daughters and two Sons in two others. About them 40 beautiful
Ladies led by as many ancient ones encompassed with Talegrepos, (a sort of
Religious Men among them habited like our Capuchins) who prayed and comforted
them. Then came the King guarded by his Enemies, seated on a small
She-Elephant, clothed in black Velvet; his Head, Beard, and Eyebrows shaved,
and a Rope about his Neck, which moved even the Enemy to compassion.

9. The unfortunate King seeing the Portugueses would not stir one foot till
they were removed from that Post, and that done went on. Being come before the
King of Brama, he cast himself at his Feet; but not being able to speak for
Grief, the Raolim of Mounay Talaypor, Chief Priest of those Gentiles, and
esteemed a Saint, made an Harangue in his behalf, of force to have moved to
Compassion any other but that obdurate King. The miserable King, his Queen,
Children, and Ladies, were secured. The two following days were spent in
removing the Treasure, at which 1000 Men labored, and it amounted to 100
Millions of Gold. The third day the Army had liberty to plunder, which lasted
four days, and was valued 12 Millions. Next the City was burnt, wherein
perished by Fire and Sword above 60000 Souls, besides as many made Slaves; 2000
Temples, and 40000 Houses, were laid even with the Ground. There were in the
Town 6000 Pieces of Cannon, 100000 Quintals of Pepper, and as much of other
Spices.

10. The morning that followed this Destruction, there appeared on a Hill
called Beydao 21 Gibbets, with a strong Guard of Horse. Thither was led the
Queen, with her Children and Ladies, in all making 140, and were all hanged up
by the Feet. The King and 50 Men of great Quality were cast into the Sea with
Stones about their Necks. The Army seeing this Barbarity, mutinied, and the
King was in great danger.

11. He leaving People to Rebuild the ruined City, returned to Pegu with the
rest of his Army, and among them John Caeyro and his 700 Portugueses. Of these,
four stayed at Martavam; one of them was John Falcam, who, in stead of
assisting Fernan Mendez Pinto, sent by Peter de Faria Commander of Malaca to
confirm the Peace with the murdered King, accused him to the Governor of the
Town as an Enemy to the King of Brama. The Governor seized Pinto's Vessel, and
in it Goods to the value of 100000 Ducats, killed the Master and some others,
and sent the rest Prisoners to Pegu. This false Dealing was not new in Falcam,
for he had before forsaken the murdered King after being much honored by him.

12. The King of Brama, who thought now to reap the Fruit of his Victories in
Peace, was alarmed by him of Siam, who attempted to recover the Kingdom of
Tangu, which had been wrested from him. In March 1546, he embarked 900000 Men
on 12000 Vessels upon the River Ansedaa, and passing out of it into that called
Pichau Malacon in April, came before the City Pro^. The King hereof was dead,
and had left a Son to inherit but 13 Years of Age, married to the King of
Avaa's Daughter, from whom he expected 60000 Men would come to his Assistance.
This moved the King to press the Siege, hoping to gain the City before that
Succor could come. After 6 days, the Queen offered to hold the Crown of him,
and pay what Tribute he should impose, provided he would draw off from the City.

13. The King insisted, that the Queen should put herself into his hands with
all her Treasure, but she knowing how perfidious he was, resolved to defend
herself. He gave several Assaults, and by the Sword in them, and a Plague that
raged in the Army, lost 80000 Men, among which were 500 Portugueses.

14. This way of Assault proving so pernicious, he raised a Mount, which
overlooking the Town, and being full of Cannon, left no place of safety to the
besieged; but 5000 of them sallying, destroyed the Mount, killed 15000 of their
Enemies, carried off 80 Cannons, and wounded the King, who in a rage slew 2000
Portugueses that were upon the Guard, as negligent of their Duty.

15. About the end of August, Xemin Melatay, one of the four principal Men that
commanded in the City, treacherously gave him entrance, and the Place was
utterly subverted with Fire and Sword. Two thousand Children cut in pieces were
served as Food for the Elephants. The Queen was publicly whipped, and
delivered up to the Lust of the Soldiers till she died. The young King was tied
to her dead Body, and cast into the River; the same was done with 300
Gentlemen, after Stakes were drove through their Bodies.

16. The Prince of Avaa marching to the relief of his Sister, understood what
had happened, and meeting the Traitor Xemin that had betrayed her leading a
great Power, they came to a Battle, in which all the Avaa's were slain to 800,
having made an incredible slaughter of their Enemies. The King coming up, fell
upon those 800 and slew them all, with the loss of 12000 of his Army, and then
beheaded the Traitor Xemin.

17. After this Victory he went up the River Queytor with 60000 Men in 1000
Boats, and coming to the Port of Avaa about the middle of October, burnt above
2000 Vessels and some Villages with the loss of 8000 Men, and among them 62
Portugueses. He understood the City was defended by 20000 Moors, 30000 of which
People had at Meleytay slain 150000 of his Army; and that the King of Siam was
preparing to come to their Relief. Upon this News he returned with speed to
Prom and fortified himself, whilst an Ambassador went to purchase Succors from
the Emperor of Calaminam with rich Presents, and the offer of certain Lands.

18. The Empire of Calaminam is said to be 300 leagues in length, and as much
in breadth, formerly divided into 27 Kingdoms, all using the same Language,
beautified with many Cities and great Towns, and very fruitful. In it is to be
found all that Asia produces. The Metropolis is called Timpham, seated on the
River Pitui, which is covered with multitudes of Boats. It is girt by two
strong and beautiful Walls, contains 400000 Inhabitants, the Buildings good,
especially some stately Palaces with fine Gardens; in and about it are 2500
Temples belonging to 24 several Sects. Some use bloody Sacrifices, and some of
the Priests abstain from Women, but satisfy their Lust by such ways, it were
better they did not abstain. The Women are well shaped, fair and beautiful;
though beautiful, they are chaste, two Qualifications seldom go together. Their
Habit suitable to their Quality, not the Purse. The great ones are served in
Gold. In their Law Suits, (O happy Country!) they use no Attorneys,
Sollicitors, not Pr^ctors; all Things are decided at one Hearing. The Kingdom
maintains 1700000 Soldiers, 400000 of them Horse: 6000 Elephants, whereof the
Emperor styles himself Lord by reason of their numerousness; his Revenue is
above 20 Millions. There remain some footsteps of Christianity from ancient
Times among them; as, that they believe the Blessed Trinity, and make the sign
of the Cross when they sneeze.

19. This was the Empire of Calaminnam, whither the King of Brama sent his
Ambassador. He being returned, the King sent 150000 Men in 1300 Boats against
the City Sebadii, 130 leagues distant toward the North-East. The General
Chaunigrem having lost many Men in several Assaults, raised two Mounts, whence
he did great harm in the City; but the Besieged sallying, killed at once 8000,
another time 5000 of his Men. Let us a while leave the King of Brama's Affairs
in this condition to see what was done at Siam, in order to treat of them both
together.

20. The King of Cheammay, after destroying 30000 Men that guarded the
Frontiers, besieged the City of Guitirvam, belonging to the King of Siam, who
immediately gathered 500000 Men, among which were 120 Portugueses much honored
by him. This multitude was conveyed along the River in 3000 Boats, and by Land
marched 4000 Elephants, and 200 Pieces of Cannon. He found the Enemy had about
300000 Men, and 2000 Boats. The Siammite gave the Command of his Army to three
Generals, two Turks, and one Portugues called Dominick Seixas. At first the
Siammite was worsted, but recovering, defeated his Enemy, killing 130000 Men,
whereof almost 40000 were good Horse. This Victory cost him 50000, but of the
worst of his Army.

21. This done, he marched against the Queen of Guibem, who had given the Enemy
passage through her Country, and entering the City Fumbacor, spared neither Sex
nor Age. The Queen being besieged in her Court of Guiror, agreed to pay a
Tribute of 60000 Ducats, and gave her Son as Hostage. Then he advanced toward
the City Taysiram, (whither he thought the King of Chiammay was fled) putting
all to Fire and Sword, only sparing the Women; then Winter coming on, returned
home.

22. Being come to his Court of Oiaa, or Odiaz, he was poisoned by the Queen,
then big with Child by one of her Servants; but before he died, caused his
eldest Son, then young, to be declared King. He left 30000 Ducats to the 120
Portugueses that served him, and ordered they should pay no Duties in any of
his Ports for 3 Years to come.

23. The Adulterous Queen, being near the time of her Delivery, poisoned her
lawful Son, married her Servant, and caused him to be proclaimed King. But they
enjoyed not the Crown long, being both slain at a Feast on the second of
February by the King of Cambodia and Oya Pansiloco, with all their Adherents.

CHAP. V.
Continues the Affairs of the Kings of Siam and Pegu.

1. THERE being no lawful Heir to the Kingdom of Siam, Pretiel a Religious
Talagrepo, bastard Brother to the poisoned King, was by common Consent received
as such, in the beginning of the Year 1549. The King of Brama or Pegu (for it
is the same) seeing the Affairs of Siam in Consusion, resolved to conquer that
Kingdom. He raised an Army of 800000 Men, among which were 1000 Portugueses,
40000 Horse, 60000 Musketeers, 20000 Elephants, 1000 Cannon drawn by as many
Yoke of Oxen and Abadas, and 1000 Wagons of Ammunition drawn by Bufaloes. The
Portugueses were commanded by James Suarez de Melo called the Gallego, who came
to India in the Year 1538, in 1542 was Pyrating about Mocambique, in 1547 was
at the Relief of Malaca, and in 1549 being in the Service of this King was
worth four Millions in Jewels and other things of value, had a Pension of
200000 Ducats yearly, and the Title of the King's-Brother, was supreme
Governor of all his Dominions, and General of his Army.

2. The King marched with that prodigious multitude, and after one repulse took
the Fort of Tapuram defended by 2000 Siammites, putting all to the Sword, with
the loss of 3000 of Men. By the way the City Iuvopisam surrendered, and he sat
down before Odiaa, the Capital of Siam, which seemed to make no account of that
great Power. James Suarez who commanded in chief surprised hereat, gave an
assault and lost 10000 Men. Another attempt was made with Elephants, but with
no better success.

3. The King offered 500000 Ducats to have a Gate of the City delivered to him;
Oya Pasiloco who commanded in the Town understanding it, opened a Gate, and
sent to tell him he might bring the Money, for he was ready to receive it. The
Tyrant had no answer to make, but continuing the Siege with vigor, was forced
to flacken upon the coming of the new King. Five Months being spent with the
loss of 150000 Men* News was brought that Xemindoo, a Man of great Parts, had
rebelled at Pegu, and killed 15000 Men that opposed him. As soon as this was
known in the Camp, 120000 Pegues deserted in hatred to that Foreign Ring that
oppressed, and to the Insolence of James Suarez who commanded them.

4. Xemindoo was of the ancient Blood Royal of Pegu, a great Preacher, and
esteemed a Saint. He made a Sermon so efficacious against the Tyranny of
Princes and Oppression of that Kingdom; that he was taken out of the Pulpit and
proclaimed King. Whereupon he slew 5000 Brama's in the Palace, seizing all the
Treasure, and in a few Days all the strong Holds in the Kingdom submitted to
him.

5. The Armies of the two Kings met within two Leagues of the City Pegu; that
of Brama consisted of 350000 Men, Xeminboos of 600000; of the latter about
300000 were slain, and 60000 of the former. The victorious King entered Pegu,
and contrary to agreement slew many, and seized great Treasures.

6. Mean while the City Martavam declares for Xemindoo, killing 2000 Bramaes.
Xemim of Zatam did the same in the City of that name. The King marched toward
him, but he contrived to have him murdered by the way. This was the end of that
Tyrant.

7. Xemim was proclaimed King by his Party, and in nine Days gathered above
30000 Men. Chaumigrem, Brother to the dead King, plundered the City and Palace
and fled to Tangu where he was born. Xemim de Zatan became so odious by his ill
Government, that in four Months many of his Subjects fled, and some joined with
Xemind^o, who made an Army of 60000 Men. Let us leave him a while to relate the
end of James Suarez de Melo, after the wonderful Rise already mentioned.

8. James Suarez passing by a rich Merchant's House, on the Day of his
Daughter's Wedding, and seeing the great Beauty of the Bride, attempted to
carry her away by force, killing the Bridegroom and others who came to her
rescue. Mean while the Bride strangled her self.

9. The Father expecting no Justice whilst that King Reigned, shut himself up,
and never stirred abroad till Xemim de Zatan coming to the Crown, he so
lamented his Wrong about the Town, that above 50000 of the People gathered
about him crying out for Justice. The new King searing some worse consequence
caused Suarez to be apprehended and delivered up to that Rabble.

10. This was accordingly performed, and and the multitude stoning him he was
in a minute buried under a heap of Rubbish. No sooner was that done, but they
took the Body from under that Pile, and tearing it in pieces delivered it to
the Boys to drag about the Streets, they giving them Alms for so doing. His
House was plundered, and the Treasure found being much less than what was
expected, it was believed he had buried the rest.

11. The new King Xemim de Zatan soon followed James Suarez, for his Subjects
no longer able to bear his Cruelty and Avarice, fled in great numbers to
Xemimdoo, who was now Master of some considerable Towns. He marched to the City
Pegu with 200000 Men, and 5000 Elephants. Zatan met him with 800000, and the
Fight was long doubtful, till Goncalo Neto who with 80 Portugueses followed
Xemimdoo, killed Zatam with a Musket Shot, which opened the way for Zemimdoo
into the City, where he was Crowned on the 3d of February 1550. Gonzalo Neto
had 10000 Crowns for that fortunate Shot, and his Companions 5000.

12. Chaumigrem, who the Year before retired to Pegu, hearing afterward that
Xemindoo was unprovided, marched against him, and obtaining the Victory brought
that Crown again under the subjection of the Bramaes. Xemindoo taken some time
after, was publicly beheaded.

13. The War began again between Chaumigrem King of Pegu and him of Siam. The
Army of Pegu consisted of 1700000 Men, among which were many Portugueses, and
17000 Elephants. All this Army came to Ruin, and the Kingdom of Pegu was made
subject to that of Arracam, as was related in the 3d Chapter of the 2d Part of
this Tome. The Kingdom of Siam, though much harassed with these Invasions, held
out, and in the Year 1627, whereof we now treat, was possessed by the Black
King, so called because he really was so, whereas all that People is white and
fair.

14. This King in the Year 1621, sent an Embassy to Goa, desiring some
Franciscans would come to Preach in his Kingdom. F. Andrew of the Holy Ghost
went, and was much honored by him at his Court of Odiaa. He not only gave him
leave to erect a Church, but was himself a^ the whole ^xpence, and offered the
Father great Riches, which he constantly refused to the great admiration of
that King.

15. This Prince was of Stature small, of an ill Presence, and of Temper in
part most wicked, and in part generous. Though cruel Men be generally Cowards, he
was most cruel and valiant; and whereas Tyrants for the most part are covetous,
he was most liberal. As much barbarity as he practiced in some things, he
showed as much goodness in others.

16. He was not content to put Thieves and Robbers to common Deaths, but caused
them to be torn to pieces in his Presence, and for his Pastime by Tigers and
Crocodiles. Understanding that a King his Vassal was about to Rebel, he shut
him up in a Cage, and fed him with morsels of his own Flesh torn from his Body,
and then had him fried in a Pan. With his own hand he cut 7 Court-Ladies off at
the Waste, only because he said they walked too fast. He cut off the Legs of 3
others because they staid long, being sent for Money he was to give to certain
Portugueses: The first suffered for going too fast, these for being too slow.

17. This severity extended to brute Beasts. He cut off the Paw of a Monkey he
much valued, because the silly Beast put it into a Box wherein were some
Curiosities. A Horse no less esteemed had his Head cut off in the Stable before
the rest, because he stopped not when he checked him. Some Crows making a noise
over the Palace, he caused 500 of them to be catched, some were killed, others
shut up, and others turned loose with Yokes about their Necks. A Tiger that did
not immediately seize a Criminal cast to him, was by his Command beheaded as a
Coward

18. Thus much of the wicked part of this Prince, now to speak of his Virtues.
He kept his word inviolably, was rigorous in the Execution of Justice, liberal
above measure, and very merciful to those that committed pardonable Faults. He
sent a Portugues with much Money to Malaca to buy several Goods, he after
buying them lost all at Play, and yet had the boldness to return to the King's
Presence, who received him kindly, saying, He valued the Consifidence reposed
in his Generosity, more than all the Goods he could have brought. He showed
great respect to our religious Men, and encouraged the planting of Christianity
in his Dominions. His Valor was unspeakable.

19. Let us conclude this Chapter with a short Description of this Kingdom. Its
proper Name is Sornau. The extent along the Coast is about 700 Leagues, and the
breadth up the Inland 260. Most of the Country consists of fruitful Plains,
being watered by many Rivers: It is plentiful of all sorts of Provisions. The
Hills are covered with variety of Trees, particularly abundance of Ebony,
Brasil and Angelin. There are many Mines of Sulphur, Saltpeter, Tin, Iron,
Silver, Gold, Zaphirs and Rubies; much Sweetwood, Benjamin, Wax, Cinnamon,
Pepper, Ginger and Cardamum, Sugar, Honey, Silk and Cotton. The King's Revenue
is about 13 Millions. In his Dominions are almost 13000 Cities and Towns,
besides innumerable Villages. All the Towns are walled, the People for the most
part timorous, weak and unarmed. The Coast reaches to both Seas; on that of
India are Iunzalam and Tanauzarim; on that of China, Mompolocota, Cey, Lugor,
Chinbu and Perdio.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Governor Nunno Alvarez Botello, in the Year 1629.

1. THE Bishop late Governor being deceased, and the next Patent of Succession
opened, there appeared two named; D. Laurence de Cunna Commander of Goa for the
Civil Government, and Nunno Alvarez Pereyra for the Military. Of this last Name
there were two in India, or none; for if D. Nunno Alvarez Pereyra, a Gentleman
well known, was meant, there wanted the Title of Don; and if Nunno Alvarez
Botello, the Surname was wrong.

2. It was thought unlikely the Title of Don could be omitted through a
mistake, because in Portugal it is peculiar to some Families only, and
therefore could not be forgot. The mistake as to Nunno Alvarez Botello was more
probable, because he had long gone by the Name of Pereyra, in memory of his
Grandfather Alvarez Pereyra, and changed Pereyra for Botello when he inherited
the Estate of his Father Botello; yet some called him by the one, and some by
the other Name. For this Reason, and because the Counsel of Goa, and the Count
de Linnares when he came to India allowed Nunno Alvarez Botello as such, I have
given him this Place among the Governors of India.

3. Nunno Alvarez Botello zealous of the Honor of his Country, and considering
how dangerous Delays might prove to Malaca then in distress, undertook the
Relief of that Place, saying, he would refer the Decision of the Debate about
his or the others Right to the Government till his return. Nevertheless by
general Consent he went with the Title of Governor. Afterward it was concluded
by the Counsel of Goa, that Goncalo Pinto de Fonseca the High Chancellor,
should have the Charge of the Administration of Justice. Thus the whole
Government was divided between Cunna, Fonseca, and Nunno.

4. Nunno now admitted as Governor, left the Palace to go live upon the Shore,
to be the more at hand to forward the Preparations for his Design, wherein he
used such Diligence, that having that Charge committed to him on the 2d of
August, by the beginning of September he had gathered 900 Portugueses, a good
Train of Artillery, store of Arms and Ammunition, and had 30 Sail ready to put
to Sea, if the Weather had permitted.

5. He set Sail the 22th of September, and was in 4 Storms; 2 of them so
terrible, they all gave themselves for lost. In this manner he sailed to
Pulubutum, and sent 2 Vessels to give notice of his coming at Malaca, but came
himself before the Advice, and understood that Michael Pereyra Botello sent by
the Bishop late Governor was there before him. At Pulubutum he found a Vessel
of Cochim, and two of Negapatan, which was some addition to his Fleet. On the
22th of October after Noon, the Fleet arrived at Malaca divided into 3
Squadrons, Nunno commanded one, the Vice Admiral Coello and D. Hierome de
Silveyra the other two. Lacamane was strangely surprised, because his Fleet was
then in the River Pongor, a League from the Fort, whence they could not escape
ours.

6. Our General landed and gave the necessary Orders, then imbarquing again
entered the River through showers of Bullets, which he repaid so effectually,
that the Enemy the same Night abandoned their advanced Works, retiring to those
of the Capuchin Monastery. There was not Water enough in the River Pongor for
our Ships, therefore our General put what Men he could aboard 33 Balones or
Balames, lighter Vessels, and with them went in Person to view the Enemy's
Strength.

7. The Enemy in care for their Galleys, quit their Works at Madre de Dios and
St. John, and with wonderful Expedition cast up others. Nunno attacks them, and
gained so much advantage, he proposed to the Enemy to surrender, Marraja
returned a civil and resolute Answer.

8. His Case being desperate, he attempted to escape by Night in the lesser
Vessels, leaving the main Fleet to our disposal, but was discovered and
prevented by the vigilance and bravery of Beltasar Mendez Vasquez de Evora, who
cut off many of his Men, not without some Loss, whereof was no small part that
of his own Arm. Our Governor understanding the Enemy resolved to make use of
their formidable Galleys prepared to receive them, and perceiving that called
The Terror of the World move, sent Francis Lopez Admiral of our Galleys to
attack her: He pierced through Clouds of smoke, and millions of Bullets,
boards, and after two hours fight makes himself Master of her, killing 500 of
700 Moors she carried, with the loss of seven of his own Men.

9. On the 25th of November the Enemy firing a Galley that was full of Women
brought to People Malaca, and now sent to People Hell, again attempted to break
through our Fleet, but without success, many of them were taken, and many
leaping into the Water fled to the Woods, where they were devoured by wild
Beasts. Lacamane hanging out a white Flag, sent Commissioners to treat with
Nunno, who answered, No Treaty could be allowed, till they delivered our
Ambassador Peter de Abreu, whom they kept Prisoner. But they delaying, our
Cannon began again to play furiously.

10. The last Day of November our Governor understood Marraja was killed, and
at the same time, that our Allye the King of Pam was coming with 100 Sail to
his assistance. Nunno went to visit him, and his Mother who came with him, and
was received with the greatest Ceremonies used by those Eastern Princes to our
Governors. Presents were sent reciprocally, and Nunno returned to his Post. The
Enemy played their Cannon so desperately, it made our Men abate of their
Confidence, but on the 4th of December sent our Ambassador Abreu with
Proposals, only desiring 3 Galleys of all their Fleet to carry off 4000 Men
that were left of 20000 that came before the Town.

11. It was answered, they must immediately surrender upon promise of Life.
Whilst Lacamane doubted, Nunno assaults him, and forcing all his Works puts
many to the Sword; some flying to the River are drowned, others in the Woods
become food to the wild Beasts. In fine, Nunno obtained the most glorious
Victory the Portugueses ever had in India; for of all that Fleet not one Vessel
got off, and of that great Army not a Man escaped being killed, or taken. The
Booty was such, all our Men were enriched, and Nunno reserved for himself
nothing but a Parrot much valued by Lacamane.

12. He distributed the Cannon that was taken among the Forts of India, the
Galleys and Slaves among the Religious, and so the rest to others. This done,
he entered the City in Triumph, not that he desired it, having begged they would
suffer him to go alone and barefoot, to prostrate himself before the Lord of
Hosts, and acknowledge this Victory was wholly his, and not of the Portugueses,
but he was forced to submit to the Will and Entreaties of the City.

13. The Streets were thronged with Men, the Windows and tops of Houses with
Women, sprinkling sweet Waters, and strewing Flowers upon our Hero. The Music
could not be heard for the noise of Cannon, and all the City was filled with
Joy. The like Demonstrations were afterward in all our other Eastern Conquests.

14. This done, the Governor returned aboard, having other Designs in hand.
Then came an Embassy from the King of Pera Tributary to him of Achem now
defeated, he offered to pay our Crown the Tribute, he had till then paid the
other, and to deliver up great Riches left in his Custody belonging to that
King and the General Lacamane. D. Dierome de Silveyra was sent with 11 Ships to
receive the Treasure, and established the Peace, which he performed, and
returned with all that had been promised. It was applied to pay the Men, and
refit the Fleet.

15. The King of Pam came to congratulate the Victory, and Nunno set out to
meet him. Great Civilities and presents passed between them, and the King
desired leave to see the City, which was granted, and whilst he was there nobly
entertained, the Magistrates and Officers went to visit his Mother, a wise
Woman, and great lover of the Portugueses. These Ceremonies performed, Nunno
resolved to sail toward the Straight of Cingapura, to secure the Ships that
were expected from China against the Hollanders. The King kept him Company a
little way, and they parted on the 11th of December, Nunno earnestly
recommending to him the taking of Lacamane, who was fled into the Woods, and
the King promising his utmost endeavors, after which they steered several
Courses.

CHAP. VII.
Continues the Exploits of the Governor and General Nunno Alvarez Botello.

1. ABout the middle of January Nunno Alvarez Botello being about Romania,
there were brought Prisoners to him Lacamane, and two other Officers, one of
them the first Lord of Achem. Such was the diligence used by the King of Pam.
Our Governor received them honorably, and Lacamane being before him nothing
daunted, said, Behold here Lacamane the first time overcome and Prisoner; but
two things concur to make my Misfortune more tolerable, one, That I am overcome
by you; another, That Obedience to my King contrary to my own advice, has
brought me into this Condition. Nunno replied, Malaca is beholding to you for
the advice you gave your Prince, and I for your Obedience to him.

2. Nunno Alvarez, by reason of the contrary Winds, could not come up with five
Holland Ships that were about Pulolaor, and took one of our Galliots coming
from China, the Men getting ashore. He returned to Malaca to refit his Ships,
and resolved to attempt the Fort of Iacatara, the best those Rebels possessed in
Asia. But first he sent Antony de Sousa Coutinno with Lacamane's Admiral
Galley, called The Terror of the World, in which he was Prisoner in order to be
sent to Spain, the Galley went of a Present to the City Goa. This Galley
carried one Gun of Tambaca, a precious sort of Metal, which was valued at above
7000 Ducats, another much more for its curious Workmanship. Lacamane died
before he could be brought to Portugal.

3. Nunno understanding the new Viceroy, the Count de Linnares, was arrived at
Goa in October, gave him an account of what had been done, and desired
assistance and his approbation to continue in those Parts, in order to carry on
his Designs against the English and Dutch. About the end of April the Viceroy
sent all he desired and much more, which was a full Power to act as Governor,
without being obliged to expect any Orders from Goa.

4. Mean while Nunno sailed with 2^ Ships toward the Straight of Cingapura.
Putting in at Iambe, a Place abounding in Pepper, and therefore much resorted
to by our European Enemies, after a stout opposition he took two large Ships,
the least whereof, with the Prisoners, was sent to Malaca. Then sailing up the
River, he discovered another Ship so large and beautiful, he designed it to
make his entrance into Goa, but a Bullet falling into the Powder, blew her up.
Passing farther up, several of the Men seeing the Water cool and clear, and not
knowing its venomous quality, drank of it and died.

5. They spent 22 days going up the River with much trouble. About two leagues
from them was the Town where the Hollanders had two Ships under shelter, and
our Admiral was desirous to take them. He manned 14 light Vessels to go view
the Place and Works; 26 Sail of the Natives and Dutch met him, and were put to
flight.

6. Having viewed the Works, and found it not practicable to attempt the two
Ships by reason of the shelter they were under, he destroyed all the
Neighboring Places with Fire and Sword, then sailed down the River designing
for Iacatara. By the way he discovered a Dutch Ship of 24 Guns laden with
Powder for their Forts. Our Vessels beset and boarded her, and she took fire.

7. Nunno understanding the Danger, ordered his Ships to draw off, lest the
Enemy's blowing up some of them might be lost with it. Finding D. Antony
Mascarennas did not bear away from her, he made to him with his Galliot to
bring him off; but coming about the Poop of the Enemies Ship, she blew up, and
sunk his Galliot downright. All our Vessels made to that place, and of all that
was in the Galliot, they found nothing above Water but the Body of Nunno
Alvarez, as yet with some life, which soon fled.

8. Every body was astonished at this unfortunate Accident, the Body was opened
to be embalmed, and his Heart was found to be of an extraordinary bigness. At
Malaca the Body was received with a general Lamentation of the whole City, and
honorably buried in the Church of the Jesuits.

9. Nunno Alvarez was well shaped, of a clear Complexion, his Hair yellow,
somewhat tall, and Limbed proportionably, his Srength and Valor equal, his
Countenance pleasing and grave. He was virtuously inclined, addicted to
Learning, chiefly Poetry, very Liberal, and not known to be addicted to any
Vice.

10. The News of his Exploits and Death being brought together to King Philip
the Fourth, he writ with his own Hand as follows. Considering the two Pinks
that were fitting for India may be gone without an account of my Concern for
the Death of Nunno Alvarez Botello, an Express shall immediately be sent by
Land with Advice, That if I were not now in Mourning for my Aunt the Queen of
Poland, I would wear it for him. I create his Son an Earl, and allow his Wife
the Honors of a Countess, and the Profits of the Fort of Mocambique to pay her
Debts, and whatever she has belonging to the Crown for ever, the Revenues of
Military Orders she is possessed of for four Lives after her with 1500 Ducats
Pension from others, and 1000 more during her Life. And if the Kingdom were in
a better condition, I would bestow a great Estate on her. Nunno Alvarez was the
49th Governor, and D. Laurence de Cunna may be reckoned the 50th.

CHAP. VIII.
The Government of the Viceroy D. Michael de Noronna Count De Linnares, from
the Year 1629, till 1635.

1. THis Year sailed from Lisbon D. Michael de Noronna Count de Linnares,
Viceroy of India, with three Ships and six Galleons. One of them was cast away
near the Cape of Good Hope, 1629.
and not a Man of 400 that were aboard saved.

2. When the Count arrived at Goa, Nunno Alvarez Botello was gone for Malaca,
and all Men promised themselves good success, when about the beginning of the
Year came the News of the Victory by him obtained. The Viceroy returned Thanks
to the King of Pam for the Succors he carried to Malaca, and sent him
Presents. In the same manner he endeavored to oblige the Neighboring Kings,
and honored the Admiral Antony Pinto de Fonseca for his good Service.

3. Constantine de Sa, who Commanded in Ceylon, puffed up with the Honor of
having destroyed the City Candea, and relying too much upon the Fidelity of the
Christian Chingala's, who underhand held Correspondence with that King for our
Destruction, gave too much Credit to Theodosius their Captain, by whom his Head
was promised to the King, at the same time he promised D. Constantin to deliver
the King into his hands. D. Constantin had more faith in that Traitor than in
the Franciscan, who being among the Enemy sent him intelligence, or in his own
Officers who foresaw his Ruin, which soon followed.

4. He marched from Columbo, leaving that Fort with almost no Garrison, entered
the Kingdom of Uva with 400 Portugueses, and destroyed the Capital City. As he
returned after this Victory, the King of Candea, who had left that Town as a
Bait to draw him on, meets him with a great Power. D. Theodosius and his
Chingala's no sooner discovered the King's Forces, but they went over to him
and faced the Portugueses, whom they served the moment before.

5. The 400 Portugueses and 200 Natives that remained with them fought three
days with incredible bravery. The General D. Constantin having done more than
Man, was slain, and then his Men being broke, many were put to the Sword, and
many made Prisoners. The King of Candea understanding how weak the Garrison of
Columbo was, sat down before it with 50000 Men, and a number of Elephants,
believing the Natives had (as was agreed) murdered those few Portugueses left
there. But they seeing farther than their General, had destroyed those were to
kill them, and so the King was disappointed. The Death of D. Constantin being
known, Lancelot de Seixas succeeded him in the Command, and being in that
Distress, did more than could have been expected from so small a Force.

6. He distributed 400 Men, which was his whole Strength, including the
Religious, among the most important Posts, who behaved themselves so well, the
King found he had a harder Task in hand than at first he had imagined. But
Hunger was a more dangerous Enemy within the Walls, than the other without.
This was much increased by the useless multitude of Women and Children,
notwithstanding D. Philip Mascarennas Commander of Cochin sent a Ship laden
with Provision and Ammunition to their Relief, D. Blas de Castro five from St.
Thomas, and the Viceroy one. Yet all their Hope was in Nunno Alvarez Botello,
not knowing, as yet, of his unfortunate End.

7. The Inhabitants of Cambolim a Peninsula, 40 leagues from Goa, and in sight
of Cananor, offered the Viceroy leave to build a Fort there upon certain
Conditions. James de Fonseca, Commander of Zofala, was sent to carry on that
Work. Being begun, it was interrupted by Virabadar Hayque, the Usurper of the
Kingdom of Canara. After much opposition, finding it could not be obstructed,
he made a Virtue of Necessity, and seemed to be well satisfied it should go on.
The principal Article of the Cambolims was, That no Religious, but those of St.
Francis, should be sent thither. At this time arrived at Goa two Ships from
Portugal, one of them returning, was lost upon the Bar of Lisbon.

8. It is, doubtless, those who are destined to perish unfortunately, meet
their Fate even where they thought to find their safety; this will appear by
the loss of the Ship St. Gonzalo, some of the Men whereof being taken up by
that mentioned in the last Paragraph, were cast away in her; I will therefore
give some account of the loss of the said Ship St. Gonzalo, in relation to the
other. This Vessel having set out from Goa with two others, finding, after
being parted from her Company, that she could not be kept above Water, they
made the shore, and came to an Anchor in the Bay called Formosa, for its
largeness being 3 leagues over, exposed to no Winds but the East, North-East,
and South-East, and lies near the Cape of Good Hope.

9. Being come to anchor, they ought whilst the Weather favored to have landed
the Men and Goods that were not before cast overboard; but in stead of that, at
the persuasion of some Officers, they attempted to suck the Ship dry in order
to sail again. Three Men were let down one after another to clear the Pump, and
returned not; then a fourth being put down with a Rope about him, and brought
up almost dead, it appeared the Steam of the Pepper which had taken wet killed
them.

10. In order to refit the Ship, 100 Men landed, and 130 remained aboard, who
after 50 days perished together with the Ship, by a sudden Storm being beaten
to pieces upon the Coast. The 100 Men left ashore built Huts, because it would
be long before they could find the means of going to Sea, which were only by
building two small Vessels out of the Wreck and the Trees on the Mountain. The
Captain being old and sick, gave the Men leave to choose another, and they
pitched upon Rocque Borges, who behaved himself well; but one Simon de
Figueyredo, in that misery ambitious of Command, endeavoring to kill him
missed his Design, yet grievously wounded him, but Borges recovering, stabbed
him, and all was quiet again.

11. They sowed some Seeds, and reaped the Fruit; mean while they lived upon
Rice that had been saved, some Fish taken, and Cows and Sheep they bought of
the Natives for Iron. The Language of these Natives could not be understood,
therefore they had recourse to Signs. They are not quite black, go naked, cover
their Privy Parts with a Skin, in Winter wear Cloaks of the same, about their
Necks hang Bulls Pizles, their Bodies anointed with the Dung of those Beasts,
they make sudden stops in their Speech, carry Fox tails in their Hands to make
Signs with; have no Towns, but wander with their Cattle like the Hords of
Arabs; some carry Stakes and Mats to make a sort of Tents; they use no Tillage,
and offered our Men a Cake that seemed to be made of Meal of Roots mixed with
Cow Dung; they eat Flesh, but almost raw, just showed to the Fire, which is
made by rubbing Sticks together; their choicest Food is the Guts and Tripes,
the Filth only squeezed out; their Weapons are Darts and Bows, no sign of
Religion was discovered among them. But it was observed, that on Midsummer or
St. John Baptist's Day they appeared crowned with Garlands of sweet Herbs and
Flowers.

12. The Soil is fruitful, free from Stones, produces all sorts of Herbs,
Plants, sweet Flowers, and variety of Trees. It is watered by great Rivers, and
many Springs. The Spring begins in November. Summer and Winter in these Parts,
as also in India, are not caused by the Sun coming near or going from the
Zenith as in Europe, but by the Winds. It is Winter when it rains, and then the
Sun is in his greatest Altitude; when in his greatest Declination it rains not,
and then it is Summer. Winter begins about the end of May, when the West Wind
reigns, which brings great Rain, and lasts till September, during which time
all Navigation ceases. From September till May the North East Winds blow, which
keep a serene Sky, and this is the Summer when all put to Sea. Let us return to
the description of that Country, and our Men there.

13. There is an infinite number of wild Beasts, and those very large, as Deer,
Wolves, Sea-Horses, Bufaloes, wild Boars, Monkeys, Tigers, and Elephants, and
some Rabbets not unlike our Ferrets. They have abundance of wild Turkeys,
Geese, Pigeons, Turtles, and Partridges, which last build their Nests hanging
on Branches of Trees. Thus much of the People and Country about the Cape of
Good Hope. There lived our Shipwrecked Portugueses, and had erected a sort of
Church where Mass was said, and there were frequent Sermons, five Priests being
in that Company.

14. The Ships being built, in stead of Tar they made use of Benjamin and
Frankincense; and wanting Oil to dissolve them, supplied it with that of
Sea-Wolves. Before their departure they erected a Cross on the top of a
Mountain, with an Inscription signifying their Misfortune. The Vessels were
launched, the Men and Goods shipped, one Party designing for Portugal, the
other for India. The former, after some days fruitless labor, were almost in
the same place they set out from, and in that condition were taken up by Antony
de Sousa and Carvallo in that Ship which, as was before said, afterward
perished.

15. D. Nunno Alvarez Pereyra was Commander of Mocambique, and died this Year.
D. Philipa Christian was Emperor of Monomotapa, with whom we were in league. A
Cafre, called Capranzirle, rebelled against him, who falling upon a Body of our
Men as they marched to Tete, slew 300 Portugueses, the chief cause whereof was
a Dispute between our Captains about Superiority. All had been lost but for
Christopher de Brito and Vasconelos, who put a stop to the Current of the
Victorious Enemy. James de Sousa and Meneses commanded Mocambique at that time
in the Place of Pereyra. Soon after it was known the Cafre died of a Musket
Shot he had received, and a Brother of the Emperor but 13 Years of Age, and a
Christian, baptized by the Dominicans by the Name of Dominick, was proclaimed
King.

16. About the end of this Year a great Danish Ship entered the Port of Coulam.
Emanuel de Camara and Noronna Admiral of the Canara Coast went to meet her with
a Galley and eight other Vessels, she fled, he gave her chase, and coming up
after a sharp Dispute, fired and then took her; what remained of her was
carried to Coulam.

17. In April 1631, D. Blas de Castro, who commanded 12 Sail at Negapatam, took
a Dutch Ship, and soon after in a Storm lost half his Ships, and about 100
Portugueses, who got ashore, were left in slavery. The excessive Covetousness
of the Portugueses keeping the Prices of Spice so high, moved our European
Enemies to seek it at a cheaper Rate in India, and their Insolences inclined
the Indians to receive those Holland Rebels into their Ports. Covetousness
couched under the Pretense of Religion, carried the Portugueses to conquer
those remote Countries; and the insatiable Avarice of some expels and makes
them esteemed less than Rebels and Pirates.

18. Two Ships that sailed from Lisbon for India, after five Months Voyage were
put back into the same River, having lost many Men by sickness. In November
sailed two Pinks. The Viceroy desiring to recover Ormuz, sent Dominick de Toral
and Valdez a a Spaniard, to view the Place, and confer with Ruy Freyre then at
Mascate about it, but it came to nothing. However a Fort was built at Iulfar, a
Fishery of Pearl 50 Leagues distant from Mascate.

19. This Year our European Enemies ranging the Seas without any 1632.
opposition took many of our Ships, and ruined our Trade. Besides they incensed
the Indian Princes against us, we having no body at those Courts to disappoint
their Designs. The Ruin of our Affairs proceeds from the little regard the
great ones have for the lesser sort; and the covetousness of the small ones,
which made them forget their Country and their Honor.

20. The Portugueses dispersed in Ceylon since the defeat of D. Constantine,
gathering again considerably annoyed the Enemy. Hence it appears our own
Disorders are our Ruin. The Portugueses can recover what is lost, but know not
how to preserve what they gain, which is the most glorious part, it being the
Work of Fortune to gain, and that of Prudence to preserve.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Affairs of Ethiopia, during the Government of the Viceroy D. Michael de
Noronna Count de Linnares.

1. THis being the last time we shall treat of Ethiopia, it will not be amiss
to relate some farther Particulars of the Reception of the Patriarch D. Alfonso
Mendez, though somewhat has been already said concerning it. He sailed from Goa
on the 17th of November 1624, and at Chaul received a Letter from the Emperor,
Congratulating his arrival in India.

2. All the way he traveled in Ethiopia, he was entertained by the Governors
and principal Men, was met by the Sons of those Portugueses who went thither
with D. Christopher de Gama, to the assistance of the Emperor then Reigning,
and came to Fremona, the chief Residence of Catholics on the 21th of June,
1625. The Emperor much rejoiced at the News of his arrival, and sent two Men of
great Quality to Conduct him, but could not then see him, being in the Field
with his Army against certain Rebels. On the 6th of February 1626, he was sent
for by the Emperor to the Army. The Prince accompanied by the Viceroys and
Nobility, went out to meet and conduct him through a Lane of 18000 Men to a
Tent provided for his reception. There he put on his Pontifical Robes, and
being mounted on a Horse led by the Emperor's High-Steward Sarta Christos, and
under a Canopy held up by Viceroys and Lords, went to the Church, where the
Emperor sitting in a rich Chair, with a Crown of Gold on his Head, and rich
Cushions at his Feet, expected him. The Emperor rising embraced him, and then
all the Cannon was fired.

3. The Emperor went to his Palace, the Patriarch to the Habitation of his
Religious, and having put off his Pontifical Ornaments returned to Court. The
Emperor made him sit, expressed much Joy for his coming, and appointed a Day
for all the Nobility to meet and make their public Submission to the Sea of
Rome. Wednesday the 11th of January being the Day prefixed, the Emperor and
Patriarch were equally seated, and there appeared before them all the Princes,
Viceroys, Lords, Commanders, Priests, Religious, Masters and Lawyers. The
Patriarch made an Harangue to them, which was answered in the Emperor's name by
his Nephew and High-Steward Viceroy of Semen Melcam Christos.

4. The Speeches ended, the Emperor turning to the Patriarch said, I would not
have your Lordship believe the thing I am going about is newly thought of, for
it is long since I made my Submission to to his Holiness by the means of Father
Superior, who is here present. Then the Patriarch opening a Missal, or
Mass Book, the Emperor knelt and swore in these words. We Sultan Segued,
Emperor of Ethiopia, do believe and confess, That St. Peter, Prince of the
Apostles, was by our Lord Jesus Christ constituted Head of all the Christian
Church throughout the World, when he said to him, Tu es Petrus and super hanc
Petram edificabo ecclesiam meam, and tibi dabo claves regni coelorum; and
again, Pasce oves meas. We believe and confess that the Pope of Rome, duly
elected, is the true Successor of St. Peter the Apostle, and has the same
Power, Dignity, and Supremacy over all the Catholic Church. And we do Promise
and Swear to give true Obedience to, and humbly submit our selves and our
Empire at the Feet of the Holy Father Urban, by the Grace of God the Eighth,
and our Lord: So help us God and the Holy Evangelists.

5. All there present Swore in the same manner, and that done they took an Oath
to the Prince as Heir apparent. The Emperor allotted the Patriarch more and
better Lands than his Predecessors had enjoyed, and sent him a Present of 2000
Crowns. There was a great resort of Ethiopians to be instructed in the true
Catholic Doctrine, their greatest difficulty was to be satisfied with one
Wife, and fast Lent; nevertheless the number of Converts in a few Days amounted
to 100000.

6. The Emperor after this taking the Field against the Rebels, subdued them,
killing above 100000. Still the Empress continued obstinate, and was a great
favourer of the Schismatics. In the Years 1627 and 1628, above 160000 were
converted. There were nine Residencies of the Jesuits, and in them above 200000
Communicants.

7. Who would imagine this same Emperor Sultan Segued, who had given such
evident Signs of a real Conversion, should endeavor to root out the Faith in
his Dominions. The same Emperor on the 24th of June 1632, by public
Proclamation banished the Catholics, and gave free liberty to all his
Subjects, to return to their ancient Ceremonies and Errors.

8. The chief Motives of this great Change, were the natural inconstancy of the
Ethiopians, and their Inclination to Judaism. Immediately after the
Proclamation for banishment, 4 Portuguezes suffered Martyrdom; nor were there
wanting Ethiopians who remained constant, notwithstanding the severity of the
Edicts. Thus ended the great hope of reducing the Emperor to the Church.

CHAP. X.
Continues the Government of the Viceroy D. Michael de Noronna, Count De
Linnares.

1. IN its proper place we said the Portugueses would one day pay for the
Insolence wherewith they treated the Kings of Mombaca, and now the Day is come,
which was the 15th of August. Peter Leytam de Gamboa was Commander of that
Fort, who using that King as if he had been his Slave, provoked him to revolt,
and deliver himself from the Tyranny he was under. The King was D. Hierome
Chingulis, who being bred a Catholic at Goa under the Religious of St.
Augustine, had submitted to the Sea of Rome, as was related in the Year 1627.
The memory of his Father's Death, who was cruelly murdered by the Commander
Simon de Melo Pereyra, was no small incentive to stir up the King.

2. He used often to visit his Father's Tomb, and was once observed by a
Portugues, who seeing him weep, and use some Ceremonies he thought savoured of
Mahometanism, gave an account thereof to the Commander Gamboa, who told him
privately, he would the next Day secure and send the King to Goa. As soon as
that Man heard it, he acquainted the King by whose Order he was slain in a Wood
by the Cafres.

3. The King having dispatched that Portugues, gathered 300 Cafres, and entering
the Fort as it were to visit the Captain, slew him and all the Guards, making
himself absolute Master of the Place. The Wife and Daughter of the Commander
were killed with a Priest, for refusing to renounce the Faith.

4. This done, the King in his Fury put all the Portugueses to the Sword, and
fired their Town. Some few escaping to the Convent of the Augustins, held out 7
Days, when for want of Provision they surrendered upon promise of their Lives,
but were all with their Wives and Children shot to Death. Then the King
declared himself a Mahom^tan, affirming he had long hated the name of a
Christian. This was the effect of the Portugues Villainies; for could he have
lived among them, he had never proceeded to commit all these Murders.

5. After gathering the Plunder of the Dead, the King came out a Horseback to
view the Bodies of the slain, which were 60 with their Families. Some of the
Converts died among the Portugueses, the rest being assembled in the Church the
King made a Speech, advising them to return to their old Religion, which some
of the Auditory did; such as refused were sent to Meca with Merchandise to be
sold in order to bring some Turks to his Assistance. All was sent in a good
Ship, which returned with a Flag; the Cazices or Priests of theirs said, would
defend them against all Enemies, being set upon the Fort.

6. The King putting to Death all that would not renounce the Faith, only
spared his Queen who was a Native of India, and that at the request of his
Aunt, but treated her as a Slave, and it was said afterward, when he fled to
Arabia, he prevailed with her to turn Mohammedan. In fine, all that belonged to
the Church was profaned, and then the King applied himself to carry his Revenge
farther, advertising the neighboring Kings of what he had done, and advising
them to kill all the Portugueses in their Dominions. Those of Montangante,
Tanga and Motone put it in Execution; others sent him Succors. Manazonga King
of the Mozungoes, came in Person to his Assistance.

7. The News of the Loss of Mombaca being brought to Goa, all Men of Sense
rather admired it had been kept so long, than that it was now lost, being
sensible of the reason there was to expect it: However immediate care was taken
for the recovery of it. The Viceroy fitted out a Galley, a Pink, 7 Galliots,
and 7 other Vessels, carrying 500 Portugueses and his Son, who being too young
for that Command, it was given to D. Francis de Moura, a Man well versed in the
Affairs of India. He sailed from Goa about the middle of December, came to
Ampaza on the 2d of January, and was 1632.
there informed of the Posture of those Affairs by certain Portugueses. On the
10th he arrived at Mombaca, and was joined by 3 small Vessels sent from Mascate
by Ruy Freyre with 100 Men; Adam Barbosa and Martin Lorenco brought 20 Men at
their own charge. The Cities of Chaul and Bacaim sent each a Vessel, in which
were 30 Soldiers; so the number of Sea and Landmen was made up to 800. It soon
appeared this Fleet would not be very successful; for whereas they might have
taken or burnt some Ships of the Enemy that were in the Harbor, they did
neither, every-Captain striving to execute it, it was omitted by all.

8. D. Francis began to land some Men with difficulty, because the Sea ran
high, and on the 11th of January went in his Boat with the Viceroy's Son to
view the Channel of Marepa, leaving five Vessels there to hinder any resort
from the Continent to the Island. Five Men deserted to us from Mombaca. Gaspar
Pacheco was ordered to land all Necessaries for a Siege under the Fort upon the
Continent. Two Boats that were under the Fort were taken, and D. Francis sent
an Express to our King by the way of Mocambique, promising speedily to make
himself Master of that Place, but the Event depending upon Fortune, he was not
so good as his Word. The Major Dominick de Toral and Valdez, who went over with
the Viceroy from Madrid, was sent to view the Ground about the Fort, which he
found would be dangerous to be supplied with Provisions from the Sea, because
being in the middle of the Island, Provisions and Ammunition must be conveyed
thither with a strong Guard.

9. Andrew Vello took 6 of the Enemies Boats, and had 5 Seamen and a Soldier
killed and others wounded. On the 15th Toral went again to view the Fort with
10 Men in a Boat, had 3 killed, and the Ensign Carvallo who dying confessed
great Crimes aloud. Andrew Vello attempting to burn the Cops near the City lost
one Man had 3 wounded, and failed of his Design. On the 16th D. Francis with
the Viceroy's Son went to view the Fort on the side of the Sea. Toral and
others going up a Creek observed that side. On the 17th D. Francis and Toral
viewed the City of the Moors, and Bastion of the Turks. It was resolved in
Council to land at the Place called Our Lady.

10. D. Francisco was ashore on the side of Tuaca preparing Gabions and
Necessaries to land, he made a Review of his Men, and found above 400
Portugueses and many Blacks. On the 22th he ordered Andrew Vello what was to be
done on the side of the Moors City to divert the Enemy, that they might not
hinder our Landing. This Day 8 of our Seamen deserting to the Enemy discovered
our Designs; which caused them to move their Cannon to a place whence they
could annoy us. On the 24th the Men attempting to land, could not perform it in
the place appointed, because the Sea was rough, but did at the place where two
of the Enemies Ships lay.

11. They marched in good Order with their Cannon, through difficult ways to a
Wood where they halted and Entrenched, to find out a fit Place for a Battery.
Three hundred Blacks opposed the Landing, but were repulsed with Loss; of our
Men 8 were killed. Those who were to return to the Ships did it in a great
Consternation, some throwing away their Arms at the first sight of the Blacks.
On the 26th the Enemy appeared, showing the Heads of 2 Portugueses they had
killed the Day before. In order to make our Approaches, a House defended by
some Blacks was taken, but found of no use to us. Three Battalions of Blacks
beset the House, and pressed those within so vigorously, that we lost 28 Men,
besides many wounded, among which was D. Francis hurt with 24 Arrows; 7 of
which were mortal, as being poisoned, if the Limb be not cut off, or the
Blood-sucked. A Servant sucked those Wounds and died, but saved the Life of D.
Francis.

12. The no^se of the Fight brought D. Ferdinand the Viceroy's Son thither with
some Men, which saved those that were left in the House, for the Blacks
presently retired to a Wood, whence they annoyed us, till the Cannon being
brought they fled. D. Francis being unfit to Command by reason of his Wounds,
was carried aboard his Galley, and Goncalo Barros de Silva was appointed to
Command in his stead, but the Men refusing to obey him, Peter Rodriguez Botello
the Vice Admiral, who had before refused that Post, was obliged now to accept
of it. It was now the beginning of February, and our Men were more attentive to
commit Villainies, than prosecute on the War; D. Francis understanding it,
caused himself to be carried ashore in a Chair, and put some Remedy to it. Two
large Vessels were built to batter the Fort, and they began to execute it
successfully, and promised a good Event. A Battery was also raised upon the
Turks Bastion. On the 2d of March the Enemy began to play a twelve Pounder from
the Moors Town, which did much harm aboard our battering Vessels, killing 3 Men
and wounding 10.

13. On the Turks Bastion were planted 2 ten Pounders, and began to play. The
Moors of the Continent attacked it by Night, killed 2 of our Men, and wounded
6. At last that Battery was found to be useless, so all was Shipped again; and
it was agreed, there was no staying there longer, for Winter came on, and it
was necessary to return to Goa. Winter begins there at the end of May, and
March was not yet over; there was time enough to take the Place, because it
could not hold out four Days. In fine, D. Francis returned to Goa, leaving
three Ships to guard the Coast, and hinder any Provisions from being carried to
the Enemy. Two of them had Orders as soon as Winter began to retire to Patij
and Zanzibar, which they did before their time, leaving their Vessels behind. A
Seaman deserting before the Fleet set Sail, gave Intelligence to the Enemy of
our Designs; and they planting a Gun on the top of the Mosque did much harm,
chiefly among those that were watering to return to Goa. The Fleet sailed on
the 20th of March, and arrived at Goa the last Day of May.

14. As soon as the King of Mombaca saw the Coast clear, he made use of his own
and our two Ships left there, to get away. He imbarqued all the Artillery,
razed the Fort and City, destroyed all Fruit Trees, and then sailed with his
Treasure, some Moors, and some Native Christians to the Coast of Arabia. That
Place lay 2 Months desolate before any of our People knew it, and might have
been so much longer, had not some Moors advertised Peter Rodriguez Botello who
was at Zanzibar, and immediately went over to Mombaca, where beginning to build
he found 5 or 6 Servants of Portugueses that had lain hid in the Woods when
that Destruction happened.

15. Mean while at Goa the Viceroy was accused for sending D. Francis de Mour^
upon that Expedition, and he for want of Conduct, and coming away too soon. The
Viceroy excused himself, and put the other upon his Trial, desiring Toral to
take the Guilt upon himself, by saying he had voted for coming away, which he
refused, and was 2 Months in Prison without any cause shown. At last he was
released to accompany D. Roderick de Costa, who toward the end of this Year
was going to discover certain Islands, but meeting two Dutch Ships about Damam
had his Head struck off by a Cannon Ball the first Charge; so the Fleet
returned without doing any thing. D. Francis de Moura was cleared of that
Impeachment, being honored at Madrid.

16. The Hollanders lying at Pulolaor intercepted most of our China Fleet,
which enabled them to relieve all their Forts and Factories. This great Booty
cost them no Blood, because we had no fighting Ships on that Sea, all being
employed at Mombaca and Ceylon.

17. The Persecution of the Christians continued at Iapan, but there were hopes
it would cease, the Emperor lying very ill. In China they were alarmed by the
Tartars. Nababo Azafacan Father-in-Law to King Corran with the Army of the
Mogol besieged Visapor, and some time after drew off with great loss sustained
by Want and Sickness. The Mogol so highly resented this Misfortune, that he
removed Nababo, though his Favorite, and preferred to that place Mobatecan his
Enemy, a Man of great Repute among the Soldiers. Thus ended this Year, much
dreaded in India, without any known reason, every Body saying before it came;
Ob that the Year 32 were past.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Recovery of Ceylon, during the Government of the Viceroy the Count de
Linnares.

1. AFter the Natives had left but a small part of the Island, Ceylon in our
Possession, the Kings of Matale, Uva and Candea with 20000 Men came to Besiege
Columbo, the chief Place then in our hands. The Besieged were reduced to that
Extremity, it is said they eat the Dead, and some Mothers their own Children.
Then came in five Ships sent by the Viceroy, rather to take up the Cinnamon was
to be sent to Portugal, than relieve the Place. But the Besiegers thinking it
was Relief raised the Siege. D. Philip de Mascarennas went over from Cochin to
Ceylon with a Pink laden with Provisions and well manned at his own expense,
which was a great help to that Place.

2. The Viceroy gave the Command of General of Ceylon to D. George de Almeyda,
who set out on the 19th of February 1631, in the great Galley taken by Nunno
Alvarez Botello, when he destroyed the Fleet of Achem. This Vessel though large
being not sound enough to endure any Storm might rise, a Flyboat that went
loaded with Provisions, was ordered to keep close always with D. George, which
soon left him, and was the cause that many perished.

3. The Galley having coasted as far as Cape Comori, and then striking over to
Ceylon, a Storm arose, and it appeared impossible to save her. D. George
perceiving she must perish, launched the Boat and got into it with 29 Persons,
whereof 4 were Religious. This was done so late and with such precipitation,
that there was not in the Boat Provision for one meal. The Night was spent in
lading out the Water the Sea and Rain brought into the Boat. In the Morning
discovering a Sail at a distance, though D. George assured them in 3 or 4 Days he
would bring them to Maldivia, they made toward it, and coming near found it
was their own Galley then sinking.

4. With much trouble on the 4th Day they reached one of the Maldivia Islands
about evening. This was at a time that the Natives keep a Fast of 30 Days,
during which time they eat nothing between Sun and Sun, and do nothing but
gormandise all the Night. Here D. George stayed 30 days, spending what he had
got to maintain his Men, and got some Shipping to go over to the Coast of
India. The Men made a sort of Habitation, but D. George lay in his Boat to be
always the readier against the Moors, who kept them always upon their Guard.
There was a vast number of Mosquitoes or Gnats, that made the Blood run where
they stung; next followed a Sickness which none were free from, and was cured
by Bleeding; two died of it, one a Franciscan. The King of the Islands writ to
D. George, condoling his Misfortunes, and sending him a parcel of Rice.

5. Being provided with all Necessaries they sailed to Cochim, where D. George
lay sick a long time. When he was somewhat recovered, there came to that Port 2
Pinks sent by the Viceroy to the Relief of Ceylon with 500 Cafres, 800
Canaraes, some Portugueses, 40000 Xerasins, which are worth about a piece of
Eight each, Provisions and Ammunition. D. George emba^qued with them, having
raised some more Men; sailed from Cochim on the 17th of October, and arrived at
Columbo the 21th. He marched not presently toward the Enemy (though censured
upon that account) by reason the Season being wet, that Country, which is for
the most part plain, is boggy and overflowed. Besides the Trees are full of
Leeches, which drop down upon Men as they pass, and bleed them to Death.

6. The Season being somewhat more favorable, D. George marched on the 5th Day
of January 1632, and passed the River Calane toward the North. Six Ships were
ordered to go up the River with several Pieces of Cannon, but only two could
perform it. The first day they could march but one League, and quartered at
Calane. Next Morning having heard Mass, they marched with great difficulty, by
reason of the Bogs and Waters, through which they waded up to the Breast.
Besides the Enemies Musketeers endeavored to hinder our Passage about the Fort
called Tranqueyragrande, but many of them were slain, our General giving 3 or 4
Pistols for every Head that was brought him. This Pass being cleared they
advanced to another, where the Enemy appeared again. Our General went himself
to view it, and returning disposed his Men to attack those Works, in which were
almost 6000 Men. It was done with such fury, that many of the Enemy being
killed, the rest fled, firing all they left behind. Our Army advanced to
Maluana, where they found only 3 old Men, who said the Prince of Candea hearing
the approach of our Men, had the day before abandoned that Place. All the
Houses were burnt by D. George his Order.

7. The Fame of these Actions made many come in and submit, whom our General
treated with kindness and rewarded; but Fear and Malice being equally prevalent
in them, they hid themselves, thinking to get away to their own People again,
which D. George understanding caused them to be apprehended, gave some as
Slaves to the Captains, and delivering one to the Cafres, they in sight of his
Wife and Children immediately cut him in pieces, which they divided among
themselves to eat.

7. The Army marched to Cardevola, where were 2 Forts, whence showers of
Bullets flew. The General having viewed them, drew out 3 Battalions to give the
assault. These advanced, and the whole Army ambitious of sharing the Honor,
followed of their own accord, and D. George had much difficulty to stop them.
On a sudden the 3 Bodies crying St. James applied the scaling Ladders, mounted,
and planted our Colors upon the Walls of both Forts. We lost two Officers and
four private Men, and had some few wounded. As our General entered one of these
Forts, a Chingala came and told him that of Tanqueyra Grande was abandoned by
the Enemy; he sent thither a Body of Men, and found it was true, and that they
had left in that Fort good Brass and Iron Cannon, many Muskets and Ammunition.
Those of Cardevola which were presently demolished were no worse provided, one
piece of Cannon was found with the Royal Arms of Portugal upon it.

8. In several Parts of the River Bodies were afterward found with Cymeters,
which showed many in confusion were drowned for haste. The Enemy had strowed
Crowsfeet about the Fort to gall our Men, which did them the greatest harm as
they fled. Our Army pursued the Enemy, but could not come to any Action, till
they met at the Foor of the Mountains of Candea, where they were defeated, and
we remained Masters of the Forts of Manicravate, Sofragan, Maluana, and
Caliture. About Mature, where D. Theodosius lived as a King, was the like
Success.

9. The same at Chilao, a Seaport, which our General assaulted by Sea and
Land, and took there a great Booty, part whereof were 130 Vessels. The King of
Candea sent Ambassadors to sue for Peace, the General was against it, but being
importuned by the religious, in consideration of the Misery the Country was
reduced to by those Troubles, he granted the Ambassadors should go to Goa, to
treat with the Viceroy. In fine, D. George not only recovered our lost
Reputation, but increased it.

10. D. George found the Inhabitants of Columbo, that ought to have worshipped
him for delivering them from a deplorable Condition, more dangerous Enemies
than the Natives. He endeavored to put in Execution the King's Orders, to
prevent the Frauds committed by the Officers of the Revenue; they arming made
several Shots at him, by one of which he lost a Finger. This Mutiny being
looked into, those concerned were put out of their Places and the Island; and
it was declared in the Council of State, that D. George had acted better then
any before him; and it was requisite for the King's Service, he should be
continued in that Post. Peter de Silva, who was Viceroy after the Count de
Linnares, removed him, only because it is a Custom for the new Viceroy to undo
what his Predecessor has done. But no sooner did D. George leave the Command of
the Island Ceylon, than all that he had gained was lost. Returning to Goa poor
and full of Merit; he died in a low Condition, rather (as was believed) through
Grief than Age.

CHAP. XII.
Of several Occurrences till the end of the Government of the Viceroy the Count
De Linnares.

1. AN Indian Woman married to a Portugues was delivered at Bardes of a Monster
with two Heads and Teeth, the Ears like a Monkey, on the Forehead an
Excrescency of Flesh like a Horn, the Legs so joined they looked like one,
leaping out of the Midwife's hands; it seized a Black, and bit out a piece of
her Flesh. The Wife of a Heathen Barber brought forth much such another
Creature, and a Cow a third, all successively one after the other. These
Prodigies were general through most of the World this Year.

2. The Year 1633. was not quite unlike it; the beginning of this Year we lost
the Town of Golin in Bengala in this manner. The Mogol having lost above 50000
Horse the last Year in several Engagements he had with Hidalcan, attributed it
to the Assistance the latter received from the Portugueses. In Revenge thereof
he now besieges Golin with almost 200000 Men by Land, and a vast Fleet sent
down the River Ganges. In the Place were 200 Portugueses and their Slaves, who
defended themselves several days without out any Fortifications, killing 50000
Mogols. Being no longer able to hold out, they attempted to escape in four
Vessels, two whereof full of Women and Children, and vast Riches, fell into the
Enemies hands. The Women, rather than remain in Slavery, fired the Vessels, and
were burnt with their Children and Treasure. The other two Ships with the Men
were also taken; and the Mogol offering their liberty to such as were not
Inhabitants of Cambolim, they refused, saying, They would all share the same
Fortune. It is not known whether they were killed or made Slaves.

3. The War continued in Ceylon with the King of Candea. The false D.
Theodosius had returned to our Friendship but with a design to deceive us, but
was at last killed. The King sued for Peace, and submitted to our Conditions,
but then again refused to ratifle it, and James de Melo and Castro offering him
Battle if he persisted in the denial, he signed the Treaty. Thus we were again
restored to all that had been lost in Ceylon.

4. Last Year three Ships were ready at Lisbon to sail for India at the usual
time, which is about March, but the Weather proved so bad, they were
disappointed. In July three others set out, and two of them had the good
fortune to make the Voyage without seeing Land till they came to Goa. This Year
we now treat of sailed the three Ships that were disappointed the last. One of
these coming back, was cast away beyond the Cape of Good Hope, but lost not one
Man, and very few of them died ashore. Of the Wreck, and some Wood cut in the
Mountains, they built two small Vessels that carried them off, though not
without difficulty, the greatest to make the Men agree to this only means of
saving themselves.

5. On the 16th of February 1634, Antony Tellez de Silva sailed from Goa
toward the North with 6 Galleons, in search of the like number of Dutch Ships
that came from Persia. About Trapor he discovered them, and giving chase they
fled, throwing overboard many Goods to lighten.

6. The Viceroy was not so wholly taken up with the Military Affairs, but he
could attend adorning and beautifying the City. He built a Church dedicated to
St. Laurence near the Bar, and gave it to the Franciscans. Then he founded and
endowed an Hospital for the Poor in the Field of St. Lazarus, which made four
Hospitals at Goa. He rebuilt the Council-house of the Inquisition, and Palace
of the Viceroys, which were going to ruin.

7. For Military Works, at Panelim he finished that called the Powder-house,
where are daily made 14 Quintals of Powder. Repaired the Fortifications of
Mascate, and others. These Works seem sufficient to have made him beloved, but
either some Humors made him odious, or else it was impossible to please the
Portugueses. Some discontented Persons, when the Viceroy was about to depart,
set up several scandalous Libels against him in public Places, and hanged his
Effigies on the public Gibbet. Yet after all it was voted, that an honorable
Statue should be erected to him in the same place where the other had been
hanged, but it succeeded not, for when the Pedestal was set up, there arrived a
new Viceroy, and the arrival of such always reverses whatsoever was done before.

8. Now died the famous Commander Ruy Freyre de Andrade full of Merit
unrewarded; we have already spoke of his Actions, his Qualities were a mixture
of good and bad, more Politic than Conscientious. He was Prudent and Generous.
Gave all his Orders in doubtful terms, to reserve a Meaning to justify himself
by in case of ill success. Was familiar with no body, choosing rather to be
feared than beloved. He heard all Soldiers standing, or made them sit. Any
breach of Orders he never pardoned, but beheaded a Captain for saving a
beautiful young Woman, being commanded to put all to the Sword. It is needless
to repeat more Extravagancies of this kind.

9. Two Ships sailed from Lisbon, carrying a new Viceroy to India. The Count De
Linarez returned with them, one whereof was cast away near Lisbon; the other,
in which he was, went to Malaga, where many of the Men died, much of the
Loading was wasted, and the Ship was broke up.

10. The Count went to Court, and was the first that presented his Prince with
part of what he had gained. To the King he gave a Hatband, to the Queen a pair
of Pendants, both valued by some 100000, by others 80000 Crowns. He was at
first received with Hononr, and after Imprisoned. The Count was of a beautiful
Presence, and comely Aspect, discreet and well inclined, of Viceroys the 27th,
of Governors the 51st, and 6th of the Surname.

11. This Year was remarkable in Cochinchina for a Dearth, which caused such a
Famine as had not been known in the memory of Man, and for repeated Treasons.
About the beginning of the Year a Bastard Son of the King, but Adopted by the
Queen, went to govern the Provinces between Cacham and Chapa; he had before his
departure conspired with eight principal Men to bring the Government of the
Kingdom into his and his Brothers hands, which then was managed by the Sons of
another Woman. As soon as he came to his Government he began to make Warlike
Preparations; the King understanding it sent for him, and he kept off till the
Kind died, and the Princes possessed themselves of the Palace. The Conspirators
came to celebrate the Funeral Rites. An Uncle of those young Princes was
present, who understanding those Traitors design to murder his Nephews, called
up the Guards that were ready to execute his Orders, but he thought it enough
to terrify those Conspirators. The Funeral ended, the Prince having with
difficulty got the Royal Seal from the Queen, tendered it to his Uncle, offering
to acknowledge him as King; but the old Man unwilling to be outdone by the
Youth, refused the Offer, only desiring him to remember his Children.

12. The News of the King's Death being brought to the Bastard at the City
Cacham, he ordered the deepest Mourning according to the custom of that
Country, which was to cut their Hair short. This to them is a great Affliction,
for they wear their Hair at length like Women, and think it makes them
beautiful, whereas they are very ugly. This done, he raised Men, and fortified
himself at Turam. The young King's two Brothers soon came upon him, and were
Masters of all. He fled, and being taken, attempted to kill himself with a
Knife; but failing, was committed to Prison, where he poisoned himself. After
his Death many Persons of great Note, being Accomplices in the Treason, were
put to Death.

CHAP. XIII.
The Government of the Viceroy Peter de Silva, from the Year 1635, till 1638.

1. ABout the end of this Year 1635, the Count de Linarez resigned the
Government of India to Peter de Silva. The same People that accused the Count
for being so rigid, accused Silva of being too easy. Perhaps they blamed the
Extremes, but what Man can overcome his Inclinations? Every Man's
Qualifications ought to be looked into before an Employment is given him. I
know not whether Sylva were naturally easy, but he had gained the Nickname of
Mole, which in Portugues signifies Soft. Neither did he like the Government,
being often heard to say, God forgive them that named me for this Employ, for I
am not fit for it.

2. In March, Antony Tellez set out again with his 6 Galleons, after 13 Sail of
Dutch he expected to meet at Surat. A Storm forced him to Bombaim, and the
Enemy to shun him put into Dabul. Tellez returned to Goa, and being there at
Anchor, four great Holland Ships appeared before the Port, he went out, and
having fought two days, forced them to lighten their Loading, the better to
escape. This done, he enters the Port again, and a Squadron of 10 Sail of the
Enemy was seen at his Heels, the Disadvantage being too great, it was not
thought expedient to fight them.

3. This Year was signalized with a Miracle that happened with a Crucifix.
There is a Monastery of Nuns at Goa, in the Arch of their Choir facing the Nuns
was placed a Crucifix, the Workmanship whereof was not liked because the Eyes
were quite shut, and the Knees too high. On the first Friday of Lent, after the
usual Procession, some Nuns being at Prayers in the Choir, distinctly saw the
Image open its Eyes; the Women frighted cried out, and all the other Religious
with the Father Confessor resorted thither, and before Midnight all of them saw
the Eyes open 26 times, and sometimes the Body and Cross seemed to move, the
Mouth opened as if it spoke, and Blood ran from the Temples and Wounds. Some
part of these Wonders were seen several days, till on a Tuesday, the Church
being full of People, they all saw what the Nuns had seen, for the Body of the
Image turned to one side. The Bishop and Inquisitors were Witnesses of much of
this Motion, and the whole was confirmed by the Asseveration of all the
Citizens. The Eyes remained half open, the Knees stretched lower, the Feet
falling and dragging the Nail after them, and the whole Body of the Image
appeared more beautiful.

4. Only two Ships sailed from Portugal this Year for India, whereof one was
put into Lisbon again. D. Hierome Chingala, who now called himself Sufo, that
had lost the Kingdom of Mombaca, as has been related, appeared about this time
in the Island Madagascar. When he fled he carried with him above 400
Christians, and sold them on the Coast of Arabia, obliging many to turn
Mabometans. After wandering on that Coast he returned toward Africa, and
landed at Madagascar, where the King of Massalaye and Moors of Pate favored
him. The News hereof being brought to Mocambique, the Inhabitants of that Town
resolved to attack him. They fitted out 10 Ships and some other small Vessels,
in which were about 60 Portugueses and 110 Cafres, commanded by Andrew Borges
and Antony de Oliveyra, who were to obey Rocque Borges that was about that
Coast.

5. On the 17th of May the Cafres landed to discover Sufo's Works, where they
slew some Men, and brought the Heads of three, losing one Man. Borges resolved
to assault the Works next day, leaving the Care of the Vessels to John Gomez
Suarez, a secure Man, that he might have a Retreat in case of any Misfortune.
The Men marched half a League through Bogs up to the Knees, at the foot of a
Mountain Sufo met them with a multitude of Blacks. After a resolute Fight, Sufo
retired so orderly, that Borges suspected it was to draw him into some Ambush;
wherefore after 4 hours Engageme^t finding it impossible to overcome by reason
of the multitude of Enemies and disadvantage of Ground, he withdrew to the
Ships, having killed many of the Blacks without losing one Man. Suarez had not
been idle there, for 1000 Blacks and Moors of Pate had assaulted the Ships, but
were repulsed with considerable loss. Our Commander carried the War along the
Coast, burning some Towns and 15 large Vessels, besides the small, whereof he
saved much Rigging, Ammunition, and Cannon.

6. On the 21st of January, Antony Tellez obtained leave to set out to fight
the Hollanders, who upbraided us with Cowardice. After 8 hours Dispute the
Enemy gave way. Our Admiral meeting them again about the middle of February in
the Northern Sea, had the like success.

7. At Malaca the Feuds were so great between the Commander of the Town and
Admiral of the Coast, that the latter shot an Uncle of the other. This
encouraged the King of Achem to break with us, imprisoning Francis de Sousa and
Castro, who resided there as Ambassador, and killing all the Portugueses about
his Court. Malaca being much distressed for want of Provisions, and the Viceroy
endeavoring to relieve it, News came that our Commander at Damama was dead,
whereupon it was found necessary to divide that Relief. Four Galleons were sent
to Malaca, and Antony Tellez the Hero of these Times with 500 Men, half of them
Soldiers, to Damam. Tellez went no farther than Bacaim, understanding there
that the Peace offered by the Mogol was concluded.

8. Two Ships sailed from Lisbon for India. About the end of June died the
Viceroy Peter de Silva. An Inventary being made of what he was worth, it was
censured to be too much for the little time he had to get it. He held the
Government almost four Years, was the 28th Viceroy, and 53d Governor, the
third of the Name, and first of the Surname.

CHAP. XIV.
The Government of Antony Tellez de Silva, from the Year 1639, till 1640.

1. ANtony Tellez de Silva served in India with much Valor, and had been
successful against the Hollanders, as has been related. He was named to succeed
in the Government in one of the 1639.
Royal Patents, which were opened upon the Death of the Viceroy Peter de Silva;
others also were appointed, whose Names were not known to the Military Men,
they might perhaps be singular for Sanctity, which, when real, is very private.
But because Antony Tellez was then absent, D. F. Francis of the Martyrs
Archbishop of Goa, who was one of those beforementioned, took upon him to
Govern in his Name. He sent Tellez Advice of his Election, and the mean while
employed himself in fitting out 12 Men of War, and some Victuallers, to relieve
Malaca.

2. At the same time 9 Holland Ships entering the River of Goa, fired three of
our Galleons that were at Murmugam without the least opposition, because the
Fort was quite destitute of Men and Ammunition. Then arrived the Governor
Antony Tellez storming at this unlucky Accident, not so much for the greatness
of the Loss, as for Shame that the Enemy should compass their Ends in our
Harbor, without sustaining the least harm.

3. After this Misfortune, News was brought, that two Enemies united were in
sight of Malaca, the Dutch with 12 Men of War, and King of Achem with 25
Galleys. 1640.
The Governor was taken up, making greater Preparations to remedy these
Disasters, than the low condition of India seemed to promise, when one came to
succeed him in the Government, which he held not long, because it would have
been for the advantage of India. He was the 53d Governor, third of the Name,
and second of the Surname.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Viceroy John de Silva Tello, who went for India in the Year 1640.

1. JOhn de Silva Tello, who had Commanded the famous Place of Mazagam, on the
Coast of Africa, and done good Service there, was now made Viceroy of India,
and sailed from Lisbon with two Ships and two Pinks. He received the Sword from
Antony Tellez de Silva then Governing, who presently imbarqued for Portugal,
and so India lost him, he not thinking it proper to serve as Admiral where he
had been Governor. Other Authors will write the Actions of the Viceroy John de
Silva Tello, for he begins his Task where I end mine, which is at the end of
the Fatal Year 1640, the Period of my Labors. I will only reckon him the 28th
Viceroy, 54th Governor, the fifth of the Name, and third of the Surname.

The End of the Fourth Part.
A short Account of what the Portugueses are possessed of between the Cape of
Good Hope and China; of the several Dignities, Commands and Revenues in the
said Possessions, and of the Religious Houses in those Parts.
1. THE Portugues Empire to the Eastward, extends from the Cape of Good Hope in
Africa, to Cape Liampo in China, distant from one another 4000 Leagues along
the Seacoasts, without including the Shores of the Red Sea and Persian Golph,
which make about 1200 Leagues. Between this space lies half Africa, and all
Asia with innumerable Islands adjoining to those two vast Parts of the World.
These 4000 Leagues are divided into seven Parts: The 1st is bounded by the Cape
of Good Hope and the Mouth of the Red Sea; the 2d by the Mouth of the Red Sea
and Persian Golph; the 3d by that Golph and the River Indus; the 4th by that
River and Cape Comorij; the 5th by that Cape and the River Ganges; the 6th by
Ganges and Cape Singapura; the 7th by Cape Singapura and that of Liampo.

2. The first Division between the famous Cape of Good Hope and Mouth of the
Red Sea, contains along the Coast many Kingdoms of the Cafres, as the vast one
of Monomotapa, who is Lord of all the Gold Mines in Africa; those of Zofala,
Mocambique, Quiloa, Pemba, Melinde Pate, Brava, Magadoxa, and many other
Sovereigns. Here the Crown of Portugal is possessed of the Forts of Zofala and
Mombaca, and the City and Fort of Mocambique.

3. The second Division between the Mouth of the Red Sea and Persian Golph,
contains the Coast of Arabia; where we have the impregnable Fortress of Mascate.

4. The third Division between Bazora or the Persian Golph and Indies, contains
the Kingdoms of Ormuz, Guadel and Sinde, part of those of Persia and Cambaya;
here we hold the Fort of Bandel, and that of Diu.

5. The fourth Division between Indus and Cape Comorij, contains what is
properly called India, that is part of Cambaya, Decan, Canara, and Malabar,
subject to several Princes. Here we have the Forts of Damam, Assarim, Danu, St.
Gens, Agacaim, Maim, Manora, Trapor, Bacaim with the City, Tana, Caranja, the
City Chaul and opposite Fort called Morro. The most noble City Goa, large,
strong, and populous, the Metropolis of our Eastern Dominions; an
Archbishopric, whose Prelate is Primate of all the East: This is the Residence
of the Viceroys, and here are the Courts of the Inquisition, Exchequer and
Chancery, a Custom-House, Arsenal and Magazines well provided. The City is
seated in an Island girt with a strong Wall and six mighty Castles called of
Dauguim, St. Blas of Bassoleco, Santiago, Agacaim, Panguim and Nuestra Sennora
del Cabo. On the other side to secure the Bar is that of Bardes. Opposite to
the Castle Dauguim is the Fort of Norva, with a good Town. On one side of this
Island lies that of Salsete, where is the Fort of ^achol. Then going along the
Coast we have the Forts of Onor, Barcelor, Mangalor, Cananor, Granganor, and
then Cochim, which is a Bishopric; behind it Angamale another Bishopric, and
near Cape Comorij the Town and Fort of Coulam.

6. The fifth Division between Cape Comorii and Ganges, contains Coromandel and
Orixa, where we have the Fort of Negapatam, that of Meliapor with the City
which is a Bishopric of late called St. Thomas, and Masulapatam.

7. The sixth Division between Ganges and Cape Singapura, contains the vast
Kingdoms of Bengala, Pegu, Tanazarim, and others of less Note. Here we have the
City Malaca, a Bishop's Seat, and the last place we possess in the Eastern
Continent.

8. The seventh Division between the Capes Singapura and Liampo, contains the
Kingdoms of Pam, Lugor, Siam, Cambodia, Tsiompa, Cocbinchina, and vast Empire
of China. Here we have no place but the City Macao, yet Trade all along those
Coasts.

9. In the Island Ceylon we possess the City and Fort of Columbo, those of
Manar Gale and others. Beyond Malaca a Fort in the Island Timor. The number of
our Forts in all this great Tract is above fifty, and twenty Cities and Towns,
besides many Villages depending on the others.

10. As to the Revenue; the Customs of Diu are worth above 100000 Crowns; those
of Goa 160000; those of Malaca 70000; the Tribute paid by several Places
amounts to 200000, all which with Prizes and other Profits uncertain, will make
above a Million. If the Officers had any honesty, it might amount to Two
Millions; for there is no doubt but they cheat the King of half his Income, as
may appear by what follows.

11. The Forts of Zofala and Mocambique are worth to their Commanders 200000
Ducats each; Mombaca 30000, Mascate 50000, Bandel 2000, Diu 60000, a Fort at
the Mouth of that River 1000, the Pass of Brancavara 1000, Assarim 4000, Danu
600, S. Gens 600, Agacaim 600, Maim 600, Manora 15000, Trapor 400, Bacaim
30000, Tana 400, two Forts upon that River 2000, Chaul 80000, Goa 20000, the
Fort of Dauguim 3000, St. Blas 1000, Agacaim 2000 Bardes 6000, Noroa 1500,
Rachol 600, Onor, 12000, Barcelor 30000, Mangalor 12000, Cananor 15000,
Granganor 6000, Cochim 100000, Coulam 12000, Negapatam 8000, Musalapatam 8000,
Meliapor or St. Thomas 12000, Malaca 150000, Columbo 40000, Manar 24000, Gale
16000, Solor: 6000, besides others of lesser value.

12. All together are worth to their Commanders yearly half a Million. The
value above is computed for three Years. There are other Emloyments no less
profitable than the Command of Forts, as are the several Voyages. That from Goa
to China and Iapan is worth to him that Commands it 100000 Crowns. From
Coromandel to Malaca 20000. From Goa to Mocambique 24000. To Ceylon 4000. This
arise only of the Freight of Goods carried, and the Captain makes as much more
by way of Trade.

13. The Viceroy's Salary is 18000 Crowns, besides the disposing of Places,
which are all sold; but the chief thing which they all look upon is Trade, for
whereas the King gets nothing out of India; some Viceroy^ have cleared 3, some
5, and some 800000 Duc^. All other Officers have great Salaries, besides their
lawful Profits, and their more considerable Frauds. The Salaries are
considerable enough to have made Men honest, but Avarice knows no bounds. Thus
much of the Temporal Power, let us come to the Spiritual.

14. The Archbishop of Goa is Metropolitan and Primate of all Asia. Cochim was
made a Bishopric in the Year 1559; Malaca the same Year; Meliapor 1607. The
Bishops of China were instituted by Pope Pius Quintus. There is also a Bishop
of Iapan, and one of the Mountain near St. Thomas Meliapor. There were Bishops
of Persia, as also Patriarchs of Ethiopia. The City Angamale is a Bishopric,
as is that of Macao.

15. We will set down the Houses, Churches, or Monasteries of Religious,
according to the time of their first going into India. The Franciscans have 22;
the Dominicans 9; the Augustins 16; the Jesuits about 28 Monasteries, Colleges
and Seminaries, besides a vast number of Residencies, so called by them where
there are only 2 or 3 Fathers. This may suffice to show the great Progress made
there in propagating the Faith, which has been more particularly spoke of in
many Places of this History.

An Account of all the SHIPS that sailed from Lisbon to the Discovery of the
Coasts of Africa and Asia, and the Annual Trading Ships, from the time Prince
Henry first attempted the Discovery, till the Year 1640.
1. ONE Ship sent by Prince Henry, who began these Discoveries about the Year
1412, and reached as far as Cape Bojador, none till then having passed beyond
Cape Nam, which in Portugues, according to their way of Pronouncing, signifies
No, as who should say, There was no going farther. Year 1412 2. Two Ships
having lost their Account in Storm, accidentally discovered the Island called
Puerto Santo 1418 3. The same two going out again with another, found the
Island Madera. 1419 4. Two Ships passed 30 leagues beyond Cape Bojador, where
they landed and returned home. 1434 5. Next Year set out two Ships which
advanced 12 leagues farther, fought with some of the Natives, and brought home
Skins of Sea-Wolves. 1435 6. Two Ships touched at the place where the former
killed the Sea-Wolves, fought with the Natives, and brought some Prisoners to
Portugal. 1440 7. Anthony Gonzalez with one Ship discovered the River he called
Del Oro, or of Gold, because he found somethere, and brought the first Blacks
to Portugal. Year 1442 8. Nunno Tristan discovered the Islands of Arguim, and
that of Garcas. 1443 9. A Company being erected to carry on these Discoveries,
one Lancelote sailed with 6 Ships discovered the Island Nar, and others. 1444
10. Gonzalo de Sintra with one Ship passed 14 leagues beyond Rio del Oro 1445
11. Antony Gonzalez went with 3 Ships to Trade at Rio del Oro. 1446 12. Nunno
Tristan with one Ship went to Rio del Oro. 1446 13. Dinis Fernandez with one
Ship reached to the River Sanaga, and discovered the Islands of Cabo Verde.
1446 14. Antony Gonzalez with 3 Ships sailed as far as the Islands of Arguim.
1447 15. The same Year set out first 3 Ships, which went no farther than the
Islands of Arguim. Then 14 Sail, after them 3 more. Then another Squadron, the
number of Vessels not known, but they carried 2600 Men to conquer the Canary
Islands. After this another Squadron; no number of Ships known. Then Nunno
Tristan with one Ship, who went as far as Rio Grande, and was there killed. And
last, Alvaro Fernandez, who passed 40 leagues beyond Rio Grande to the River
Tabite. All these set out in one Year. 1447 16. Giles Yan^z with 10 Caravels
went no further than what was before discovered. James Gil Homem with one Ship
passed beyond Cape Gue, and brought the first Lion from those Parts to Lisbon.
Ferdinand Alonso with one Ship went Ambassador to the King of Cabo Verde.
Gonzalo Vello with one Ship discovered the Islands Azores. All these the same
Year. Year 1448 17. Suero Mendez with one Ship went to build a Fort at Arguim,
which was the first erected in those Conquests. 1449 18. Antony de Nole with 3
Ships discovered the Islands Mayo, and St. Philip and St. Jacob. 1460 19. Peter
de Sintra with 2 Ships sailed as far as Sierra Leona. 1467 20. John de Santar^m
with two Ships went as far as Cape St. Catherine. Ferdinand Po with one Ship
discovered the Island Hermosa; there were also other Discoveries, but the
Discoverers are not known. 1469 21. James de Azambuja with 12 Sail and 600 Men
built a Fort in Guinea, from which time the King styled himself Lord of Guinea.
1481 22. James Came with one Ship discovered the River of Congo, or Zayre. 1484
23. James Came setting out again with one Ship, ran 200 Leagues farther,
discovering the Kingdom of Beni, and Empire of Ogane. 1485 24. Bartholomew Dias
with 3 Ships discovered the Bay called Angra de los Vaqueros, the Island De la
Cruz, the River Del Infant, and Cape he called Tormentoso, but King John the
Second named it Cape of Good Hope. Year 1486 25. Goncalo Coello went to assist
the Prince of Ialof, the number of his Ships not known. Peter Vaz de Cuna sent
to the River Zanaga with 20 Sail. 1488 26. Gonzalo de Sousa sailed with 3 Ships
to Congo. 1489 27. Vasco de Gama with 3 Sail discovered India. 1493 28. Peter
Alvarez Cabral sailed for India with 13 Vessels, whereof 5 were cast away, one
put back to Lisbon, and another accidentally discovered Brasil, being drove
thither by a Storm. 1500 29. John de Nova with 4 Ships, one of them discovered
the Islands Conceicam, and St. Helena. 1501 30. D. Vasco de Gama, the first
Discoverer, returns again to India with 9 Sail. 1501 31. Vincent Sodre
commanded 5 Sail bound for India, as are all that follow, so that it will be
needless to repeat it; two of these were lost 1502 32. Stephen de Gama with 5
Sail. After him Alfonso de Albuquerque with three, then Francis de Albuquerque
with three, Antony de Saldana with three; two of this number were lost, one
found the Island Zocotora. 1503 33. Lope Soarez de Albergaria with 13 Sail.
1504 34. D. Francis de Almeyda, first Viceroy of India, with 20 Sail; one was
cast away. Peter de Anaya with 6 Sail, two of them perished. Sebastian Bar^uda,
or Cyd Barbosa, with 2 Sail. Year 1505 35. Tristan de Cunna with 16 Sail, who
discovered the Islands to which he gave his own Name; one of these Ships was
cast away. Alfonso de Albu^erque with 6. 1506 36. George de Melo with 4 Sail.
Ferdinand Suarez with 4. Vasco Gomez de Abreu with 7. 1507 37. James Lopez de
Sequeyra with four Sail. 1508 38. George de Aguiar with 13 Sail, three of them
were cast away. D. Francis Coutinno with 17. 1509 39. James Mendez de
Vasconcelos with 4 Sail. Goncalo de Sequeyra with 7, one of them was lost. John
Serram with 3. 1510 40. D. Garcia de Noronna with 6 Sail. 1511 41. George de
Melo with 9 Sail, one cast away. Garcia de Sousa with 4. John Chanoca with one
Ship. 1512 42. John de Sousa and Lima with 4 Sail, two of them cast away. 1513
43. George or Christopher de Brito with 5 Sail, one cast away. Luis Figueyra
with two. 1514 44. Lope Suarez de Albergaria with 17 Sail. Fernan Perez de
Andrade with 3. 1515 45. John de Silva, or Silveyra, with 5 Sail, two of them
cast away. James de Unnos, or Unes, with only one. 1516 46. Antony de Saldanna
with 6 Sail. 1517 47. James Lopez de Sequeyra with 12 Sail. 1518 48. George de
Albuguerque with 14 Sail; one of them cast away, the Captain ran away with
another. Raphael Castano with 3. Year 1519 49. George de Brito with 10 Sail.
1520 50. D. Duarte de Meneses with 12 Sail. Sebastian de Sousa with 3. 1521 51.
D. Peter de Castro with 4 Sail, one of them lost. 1522 52. James de Silveyra
with 9 Sail, one cast away. 1523 53. D. Vasco de Gama with 17 Sail, 3 cast
away. 1524 54. D. Lope de Almeyda with 4 Sail. 1525 55. Christopher de Vega
with 5 Sail. 1526 56. Emanuel de Lacerda with 5 Sail, two were lost. 1527 57.
Nunno de Cunna with 11 Sail, three lost. 1528 58. James de Silveyra with 5
Sail. 1529 59. Francis de Sousa Tavarez with 6 Sail. 1530 60. Achilles Godinno
with 5 Sail. 1531 61. Peter Vaz with 5 Sail. 1532 62. D. John Pereyra with 7
Sail, one cast away. D. Peter de Castellobranco with 10 Sail. 1533 63. Martin
Alfonso de Sousa with 5 Sail. 1534 64. Fernan Perez de Andrade with 7 Sail.
1535 65. George de Lima with 5 Sail. 1536 66. George Cabral with 5 Sail. D.
Laurence de Silva with 6. 1537 67. James Lopez de Sousa with 8 Sail. Year 1537
68. D. Garcia de Noronna with 11 Sail, one lost. 1538 69. James o^ Peter Lopez
with 6 Sail, one lost. 1539 70. Francis de Sousa Tavarez with 4 Sail. 1540 71.
Martin Alonso de Sousa with 5 Sail. 1541 72. Henry de Macedo with 4 Sail, one
was lost. 1542 73. James de Silveyra with 5 Sail. 1543 74. Fernan Perez de
Andrade with 6 Sail, one cast away. 1544 75. D. John de Castro with 6 Sail.
1545 76. Laurence Perez de Tavora with 6 Sail. Lionel de Sousa with one. 1546
77. D. Francis de Lima with 6 Sail. Martin Correa de Silva with 3. 1547 78.
Francis Barreto with 3 Sail. 1547 79. Emanuel de Mendoca with 5 Sail. John de
Mendoca with 3. D. John Enriques with 3. 1548 80. D. Alvaro de Noronna with 5
Sail, one lost. 1549 81. D. Alfonso de Noronna with 5 Sail, two lost. 1550 82.
James Lopez de Sousa with 8 Sail. 1551 83. Fernan Suarez de Albergaria with 6
Sail, one cast away. 1552 84. Fernan Alvarez Cabral with 5 Sail, one burnt, one
cast away. 1553 85. D. Peter Mascarennas with 6 Sail, one lost. 1554 86. D.
John de Meneses and Sequeyra with 5 Sail, one cast away. Year 1555 87. D.
Leonardo de Sousa with 5 Sail, one lost. 1556 88. D. Luis Fernandez de
Vasconelos with 5 Sail, two cast away. 1557 89. D. Constantin de Braganca with
4 Sail. 1558 90. Peter or Lope Vaz de Sequeira with 6 Sail. 1559 91. D. George
de Sousa with 6 Sail, one lost. 1560 92. D. Francis Coutino Count de Redondo
with 5 Sail. 1561 93. D. George Manuel with 6 Sail. 1562 94. D. George de Sousa
with 4 Sail. 1563 95. D. Antony de Noronna with 4 Sail. 1564 96. D. Francis de
Sa with 4 Sail, one lost. 1565 97. Luis or Ruy Gomez de Cuna with 4 Sail. 1566
98. John Gomez de Silva with 4 Sail. 1567 99. D. Luis de Ataide with 5 Sail.
1568 100. Philip Carnero de Alcacova with 4 Sail. 1569 101. George de Mendoca
with 4 Sail. Emanuel de Mesquita with one Galleon, Francis Barreto with three.
1570 102. D. Antony de Noronna with 7 Sail. 1571 103. Duarte de Melo with 4
Sail, one lost. Bartholomew de Vasconcelos and Cuna with one Ship. 1572 104. D.
Francis de Sousa with 4 Sail, one lost. 1573 105. Ambrose de Aguiar Continno
with 6 Sail. Year 1574 106. D. John de Castellobranco with 4 Sail. 1575 107.
Ruy Lorenco de Tavora with 5 Sail. 1576 108. Panta^on de Sa with 4 Sail, one
cast away. 1577 109. Matthias de Albuquerque with 2 Sail, one lost. D. Luis de
Ataide Count de Atouguea with 3 Sail. 1577 110. George de Silva with 3 Sail.
1578 111. D. Stephen de Meneses Baroche, and John de Melo, with 2 Caravels.
1578 112. John de Saldanna with 5 Sail. 1579 113. Emanuel de Melo de Cuna with
4 Sail. 1580 114. D. Francis Mascarennas Count de Santa Cruz with 5 Sail, one
lost. 1581 115. Antony de Melo and Castro with 5 Sail, one lost. 1582 116.
Antony de Melo and Castro with 5 Sail. 1583 117. D. Duarte de Meneses with 6
Sail, one lost. 1584 118. Ferdinand Mendoca with 5 Sail, one lost. 1585 119. D.
Hierome Coutinno with 6 Sail, two cast away, one taken by Sir Fr. Drake. 1586
220. Fr. de Melo with 6 Sail, one lost. 1587 121. John de Tovar Camina with 5
Sail, one lost. 1588 122. Bernardin Ribcro Pacheco with 5 Sail, one lost. 1589
123. Matthias de Albuquerque with 5 Sail, one lost. 1590 124. The Commander not
known three Sail. Year 1590 125. Ferdinand de Mendoca with 6 Sail, one cast
away, another burnt, and a third taken by the English. 1591 126. Francis de
Melo with 4 Sail, one cast away. 1592 127. D. Luis Coutinno with 5 Sail, 3
lost. 1593 128. Airs de Miranda Enriquez with 10 Sail, one lost. 1594 129.
John de Saldana with 5 Sail, 2 lost. 1595 130. D. Francis de Gama Count de
Vidigueyra with 5 Sail, one burnt, one run ashore. 1596 131. D. Alonso de
Noronna with 3 Sail. 1597 132. D. Hierome Coutinno with 5 Sail was ready, but
went not from Lisbon, the English lying before the Harbor. 1598 133. The last
Year's Commander with four of the same Ships, and Simon de Mendoca with three
others. 1599 134. Ayrez de Saldanna with 4 Sail, one cast away, another taken.
1600 135. D. Francis Tello de Meneses with 4 Sail, all forced back to Lisbon.
Antony de Melo and Castro with 5 Galleons, he taken by the Dutch. 1601 136. D.
Francis Tello de Meneses with 6 Sail. 1602 137. Peter Hurtado de Mendoca with 5
Sail. 1603 138. D. Martin Alonso de Castro with 5 Sail, one lost. More 2
Caravels. 1604 139. Blas Tellez de Meneses with 6 Sail, two lost. Alvaro de
Carvallo with 3 Galleons. Belchior Rodrigues with one Caravel. 1605 140. D.
Hierome Coutinno with 3 Sail, set not out the Dutch lying at the mouth of the
River. Year 1606 141. D. Hier Coutinno with the last Year's Ships. John Correa
de Sousa with 4 Sail. 1607 142. D. John Pereyra Count de Feyra with 6 Sail, 3
cast away. D. Christopher de Noronna with 8 Galleons, one lost. Ruy Lorenco de
Tav^re with 5 Sail. 1608 143. D. Em. de Meneses with 5 Sail. 1609 144. Luis
Mendez de Vasconcelos with 3 Sail, one lost. 1610 145. D. Antony de Atayde with
3 Sail. 1611 146. Andrew Coello with 2 Caravels. Antony Pinto de Fonseca one
Galleon. John Corres de Mendoca one Galleon. 1611 147. D. Hier. de Almeyda with
3 Sail. 1612 148. D. Em. de Meneses with 4 Sail, all put back by stress of
Weather. Belchior Rodriguez one Ship. 1613 149. D. E. Coutinno with 5 Sail, 4
lost. 1614 150. D. Hierome Manuel with 4 Sail. 1615 151. D. Em. de Meneses with
3 Sail. 1616 152. D. John Coutinno Count de Redondo with 4 Sail. Afterward 4
Sail more. 1617 153. D. Cbr. de Noronna with 5 Sail. 1618 154. D. Fr. de Lima
with 4 Sail. Ruy Freyre de Andrade with 5 Galleons. 1619 155. Nunno Alvarez
Botello with 4 Sail, one lost. Iacome de Morales Sarmiento with two. After them
two more. 1620 156. D. Alonso de Noronna with 4 Sail, were all put back by
stress of Weather. D. Alonso de Noronna again with 6 Galleons, all put back
again but one. 1621 157. D. Francis de Gama Count de Vidigueyra with 4 Sail,
two were lost. Sancho de Tovar y Silva with 4 Galleons. Year 1622 158. D.
Antony Tello and Meneses with 3 Sail, all lost. D. Philip Mascarennas with 5
Galleons, three lost. 1623 159. Nunno Alvarez Botello with 2 Sail. Sebastian de
Costa Valente with 6 Galleons. 1624 160. Vincent de Brito and Meneses with 2
Sail, both cast away. 1625 161. D. Emanuel Pereyra Coutinno, with 3 Sail. 1626
162. John Sequeyra Varejam with 2 Sail. Dominick de Camara with 4. 1627 163. D.
Fr. Mascarennas with 3 Sail. 1628 164. D. Michael de Noronna Count de Linarez
with 9 Sail, two lost. 1629 165. D. George de Almeyda with 2 Sail, one lost.
1630 166. Antony de Saldana with 2 Ships, both put back by Weather. Fr. Vas de
Almada with 2 Sail. 1631 167. Ios. Pinto Pereyra with 7 Sail. 1632 168. Antony
de Saldana with 5 Sail. 1633 169. Hier. de Saldana with 3 Sail. 1634 170. Peter
de Silva with 2 Sail, one lost. Gonzalo de Barros and Silva with two 1635 171.
John de Melo with 2 Sail. 1636 172. John Suarez Vivas with 2 Sail. 1637 173. I.
de Sequeyra Varejam with 4 Sail. 1638
These are all the Ships there is any account of that sailed from Lisbon to
discover, and after for India, since the Year 1412, when Prince Henry first
attempted finding the way to India by Sea.

The Viceroy and Governors of India, from the first Discovery till the Year
1640.
1. DON Francis de Almeyda, first Viceroy and Governor Year 1505 2. Alfonso de
Albuquerque, second Governor 1509 3. Lope Soarez de Albergaria, third Governor
1515 4. James Lopez de Sequeyra, 4th Governor. 1518 5. D. Duarte de Meneses,
5th Governor. 1522 6. D. Vasco de Gama Count de Vidigueyra, 2d Viceroy and 6th
Governor. 1524 7. D. Henry de Meneses, 7th Governor. 1527 8. Peter Mascarennas,
8th Governor. 1529 9. Lope Vaz de Sampayo, 9th Governor. 1529 10. Nuno de
Cunna, 10th Governor. 1529 11. D. Garcia de Noronna, 3d Viceroy and 11th
Governor. 1538 12. D. Stephen de Gama, 12th Governor. 1540 13. Martin Alfonso
de Sousa, 13th Governor. 1542 14. D. John de Castro, 4th Viceroy and 14th
Governor. 1543 15. Garcia de Sa, 15th Governor 1549 16. George Cabral, 16th
Governor 154^ 17. D. Alonso de Noronna, 5th Viceroy and 17th Governor. 1550 18.
D. Peter Mascarennas, 6th Viceroy and 18th Governor. Year 1554 19. Francis
Barreto, 19 Governor 1555 20. D. Constantin de Braganca, 7th Viceroy and 20th
Governor. 1558 21. D. Francis Coutinno Count de Redondo, 8th Viceroy and 21th
Governor. 1561 22. John de Mendoca, 22 Governor. 1564 23. D. Antony de Noronna,
9th Viceroy and 23d Governor. 1564 24. D. Luis de Ataide, 10th Viceroy and 24th
Governor. 1567 25. D. Antony de Noronna, 11th Viceroy and 25th Governor. 1571
26. Antony Monez Barreto, 26 Gov. 1573 27. D. Laurence de Tavora, 12th Viceroy
and 27th Governor. 1576 28. D. James de Meneses, 28 Gover. 1576 29. D. Luis de
Ataide Count de Atouguia the second time, 13 Vicer. and 29 Gov. 1578 30.
Ferdinand Tellez de Meneses, 30th Governor. 1581 31. D. Francis Mascarennas
Count de Santa Cruz, 14 Viceroy and 31 Governor. 1581 32. D. Duarte de Meneses,
15th Viceroy and 32th Governor. 1584 33. Emanuel de Sousa Coutinno, 33 Gov.
1588 34. Mathias de Albuquerque, 16th Viceroy and 34th Governor. 1691 35. D.
Francis de Gama Count de Vidigueyra, 17th Viceroy and 35th Governor. 1597 36.
Airs de Saldanna, 18th Viceroy and 36 Governor. 1600 37. Martin Alfonso de
Castro, 19th Viceroy and 37th Governor. 1604 38. D. F. Alexius de Meneses
Archbishop of Goa, 38th Governor. 1607 39. D. John Pereyra Count de Feyra, 20th
Viceroy and 39th Governor. 1608 40. Andrew Furtado de Mendoca, 40th Governor.
1609 41. Ruy Lorenco de Tavora, 21th Viceroy and 41st Governor. 1609 42. D.
Hierome de Azevedo, 22th Viceroy and 42th Governor. 1613 43. D. John Coutinno
Count de Redondo, 23th Viceroy and 33th Governor. 1617 44. Ferdinand de
Albuquerque, 44 Gov. 1619 45. D. Alfonso de Noronna, 24th Viceroy and 45th
Governor. 1621 46. D. Francis de Gama Count de Vidigueyra the 2d time, 25
Viceroy, 46 Governor. 1622 47. D. Luis de Brito Bishop of Cochim, 47th
Governor. 1628 48. D. Francis Mascarennas, 26 Viceroy, 48 Governor. 1628 49.
Nunno Alvarez Botello, 49 Gov. 1628 50 D. Michael de Noronna Count de Linnares,
27 Viceroy, 50 Governor. 1629 51. Peter de Silva, 28th Viceroy, 51th Governor.
1635 52. Antony Tellez de Silva, 52 Gov. 1639 53. John de Silva Tello, 29
Viceroy, 53 Governor. 1640
Books in Print and Manuscripts out of which the Portugues Asia was Collected.
BOOKS in Print.
1. EIght Volumes of the Affairs of India, by Ferdinand Lopez de Castanneda,
who went into India only to examine into he Truth of what he writ. His Style
nor Geography are not commendable, but he has many curious, though tedious
Remarks. It has been translated into French and Italian, and I suppose some
other Languages.

2. Four Decades of the great John de Barros, who though posterior to
Castanneda as to time, is preferable to all for Judgment, and is particularly
esteemed for his Geography.

3. Four other Decades of James de Couto, Historiographer of India, from the
4th to the 7th; for he began at the 4th, for then that of John de Barros was
not public.

4. Commentaries of the Actions of the great Alfonso de Albuquerque, writ by
his Son of the same Name.

5. Antony Pinto Pereyra his Chronicle of D Luis de Atayde, the famous Viceroy
and Supporter of India, writ in the Days of King Sebastian.

6. Ferdinand Mendez Pinto his Indian History, writ at the same time as the
last: Many make a doubt of Truth of what he writes; and as many who have
traveled those Parts affirm he might with truth have writ much more no less
incredible to our apprehension. I look upon him as a very true Historian, for
many Reasons. Yet supposing he is not, it is in things wholly omitted by me.

7. The Bishop D. Hierome Osorio, wrote the History of India in Latin, which
beyond dispute is the best Work of that Nature, next to Titus Livius. As to his
Latin, all Men grant him to be the best Ciaeronian. His method is singular, his
Judgment piercing, his Reflections sharp, his Ornament majestic. In fine, he
is accomplished in all Points.

8. Mafeus is well known and very pleasant; he did little but Epitomizing the
Decades of John de Barros, as to the Substance of the History.

9. F. Antony de S. Roman, did little more than Translate Mafeus, but not with
Elegancy equal to him; the Translation there is of him in Italian is better.

10. John de Lucena a Jesuit, in the Life of S. Francis Xaverius brings in many
Particulars of the Indian History. He sticks not to the Rules of History* but
in his way of Writing deserves esteem for his Judgment, Elegancy, and way of
Reasoning.

11. Antony Galvam who was Commander of Ternate, writ much concerning India,
and particularly of the Affairs of those Islands, which has not been Printed,
or is extant, at least it has not come to my Hands. I only saw the Books he
calls of Discoveries, which is only short hints of things.

12. Dr. Garcia Dorta, of the Drugs and Medicinal Plants of Asia.

13. A Collection of several small Books by several Authors, giving an Account
of many Shipwrecks that happened, whereof we make mention in their Places.

14. Several Relations, particularly of the Jesuits.

15. My own Book of the Empire of China, collected from the Memories and
Observations of F. Alvaro Semedo, of the Society of Jesus.

16. Bartholomew de Argensola of the Molucoes, who in many Particulars errs as
much as F. Urreta.

17. Manuel Xaverius a Jesuit, of the Victories obtained by Nunno Alvarez
Botello.

18. Two Poems of Hierome de Cortereal.

19. Francis Alvarez a Priest of the Affairs of Abassia.

20. F. John de los Santos a Dominican, of the Affairs of Ethiopia.

21. F. Luis de Urreta.

MANUSCRIPTS.
1. ONE Volume of the Portugues Voyages, found among the Papers of the Bishop
D. Hierome Osorio. Emanuel Fernandez Villareal helped me to the sight of it.
and from me it went to D. Hierome Mascarennas of the Council of Orders in
Castile.

2. Five Decades of James de Couto Historiographer of India, from the 8th to
the 12th, the last but half complete.

3. The History of the Actions of D. Paul de Lima, a great Man in India, by the
same Couto.

4. The 13th Decade of Antony Bocarro, Historiographer of India, yet not
divided into 10 Books, as the Title implies.

5. Military Affairs of India, a Book of great Learning written by Francis
Rodriguez Silveyra, who served there some Years, and gained Reputation.

6. The Spiritual Conquest in Asia, by F. Paul of the Trinity a Franciscan in
the Year 1630. I saw it upon occasion of its being designed to be Printed at
Madrid in the Year 1638, when the Ordinary sent it to me for my approbation. It
is a good Work, and treats of what relates to that Order.

7. A Translation of that which among the Malabars is held in the same Account
as the Bible among us. It treats of their Gods and Ceremonies; it is strange,
and resembles Ovid's Metamorphoses. The Heads of it are in the 4th Part of the
2d Tome of my Asia.

8. One Volume of several Relations of the Affairs of Asia, and of some
Shipwrecks. A Relation of the Government of the Viceroy the Count de Linnares,
given by his Order to a Spaniard, who promised to write his Actions. Another of
the same by Captain Dominick de Toraly Valdez, who served under him in India.

9. A Copy of several other Relations communicated to me by Emanuel de Severim,
as also the Book of the Malabars, that of the military Affairs, and that of
Bocarro above mentioned.

10. Loose Papers and annual Letters of the Jesuits, imparted to me by F.
Alvaro Semmedo of the same Order, out of which I afterward collected the
History entitled, The Empire of China.

11. The Chronicles of King Alfonso the 5th, and the Earl D. Duarte de Meneses
Commander in Africa, by Gomez Yanez de Azurara, Historiographer to King Alfonso
the 5th.

12. One Volume of diverse Relations of Occurrences in Africa, during the Reigns
of King John II. Emanuel, John III. and Sebastian.

13. A Description of Ethiopia, by F. Emanuel Barradas a Jesuit, who having
seen the Country himself, truly and zealously discovers the many and remarkable
Errors set down in his Ethiopia by the Learned and Elegant F. Luis de Urreta.
Emanuel Severim de Faria imparted it to me.

Besides the Books above mentioned, there is much relating to Asia in the
Chronicles of King John II. King Emanuel, King John III. and King Sebastian, as
well in those which are still in Manuscripts, as those Printed.

FINIS.

