A Phanatique LEAGUE and COVENANT, Solemnly entered into by the Assertors of
the GOOD OLD CAUSE.
WE Ignoble men, Barbers, Cobblers, Colliers, Draymen, Grocers, Hucksters,
Malsters, Pedlers, Sowgauters, Tinkers, Tailors, and Mechanics of all sorts,
being of the Fanatic party within the Kingdoms, (formerly so called) of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, living under, and Submitting to only the
Government of one Prince, Beelzebub Emperor of the Infernal Region, and having
laid before us the advancement of his Scepter, with the utter destruction of
all Earthly Kings, and National Powers whatsoever, calling to mind the many
contrivances, and earnest endeavors of the most of the people of these Nations,
to reduce that strife and confusion, which we have been so many years in
working, into Order and Unity again, we do now at last (after many in
successeful plots and fruitless attempts, for the preservation of our Good Old
Cause, and the destruction of our enemies) resolve and determine, after the
example of our dear brethren in Germany, under Muntzer, Hofman, and
Knipperdoling, to enter into a mutual confederacy by a solemn Protestation and
Engagement, whereto we all subscribe, and each with hands poynting downwards,
and a heart devoted to his Infernal Majesty, does swear:

I. THat we shall from the very root of our corrupt hearts and consciences,
endeavor by all means possible, in our several capacities, to obstruct and
abolish all Decency, Order, and Form whatsoever, in the Government of Church or
State, in the three Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Territories thereunto belonging; and that we will with all vigor possibly
contend for the utter extirpation of all Magistracy, Ministry, Universities,
Schools of Learning, and all civil Decorum and Disciplines, whereby we may be
in any thing restrained from our ambitious, malevolent, and most pestilent
Designs and Undertakings; or whereby the world may be so far undeceived, as to
discover what Mischief and Confusion we aim at, by the Pretense of Spiritual
Gifts, and New Lights: And furthermore do Declare, That there is nothing more
Hateful and Abominable in our sights, than that our Designs should become
manifest to Malignants, and the wicked of the World.

II. That (as we do in general hate all Reformation and Oder in all Affairs,
either civil or Ecclesiastical, so) most especially do we from the very sink of
our souls detest, and abominate that Mistress of Iniquity, Prelacy, as that
whereby all our damnable projects are most in danger to be frustrated, the
thing called the ancient Church in all ages, and Nations of the world, having
been thereby, and thereby only (as to outward means) preserved inviolate from
the Sacrilege and glorious attempts, of the most renowned Heretics, and
servants of our good Lord, who always ruled in the hearts of the disobedient.

III. We shall with a most perverse obstinacy, to the hazard of our lives and
fortunes, assert our own interests and right of conquest, we had usurpt over
the three Nations, against all pretended Privileges of Parliament, Liberties
of the People, and any general good whatsoever, that shall seem to obstruct our
designs of Liberty, to domineer over the three Nations, by virtue of that Text,
The Saints shall possess the earth. And we do most inveterately devote our
selves to the destruction of King Charles, and the whole family of the Stuarts,
by whose introduction we are in so much danger of that damnably abhorred
composure of all differencies, both in Church and State. And we will by all
means posible, contrive the confusion of that potent enemy, General Monk and
his Army.

IV. We shall with all sincerity to the hazard of our Estates and lives,
endeavor the mutual support of one another, whether under the Notion of
Quakers, Anabaptists, Fifth Monarchists, Ranters, etc. And notwithstanding we
differ in judgment from our selves, as well as from all Orthodox Christians,
yet we will make it appear to the world, and to the Author of that model of a
Commonwealth, called the Rota, that we are a Wheel, whose Spokes, though
divided in the circumference, yet concenter in this, viz. A total extirpation
and subversion of all Government, both Ecclesiastical and Civil.

V. We do declare, promise, and protest against a thing, called, A Solemn
League and Covenant, hatched in Scotland, and brought over into England, taken
and subscribed by many thousands, but hitherto kept by few, which Covenant is
now again revived by the present Parliament, and Ordered to be published and
placed in all Parish Churches and Chapels, as a main hinderance of our
Schismatical designs, and prevention of the building of that Babel of
Confusion, which we so earnestly labor to accomplish: And that we will to the
utmost of our abilities, endeavor with all violence to execute Justice, right
or wrong, upon all those who shall oppose our interest, by endeavoring to
bring about that so much talkt-of Union in the three Nations, between Prince
and People, or the People with one another.

Luke Robinson John Lambert Col. Overton Hugh Peter's St. Feake Edmond Waring
Will. Lilly Will Kiffin Jeremy Ives Praise God Barebones John Huson John Ireton
Tho. Harrison Edw. Whaley Will L. Mounson Hen. Martin John Barkstead Robert
Tichbourn John Okey John Harrison Miles Corbet Charles Fleetwood Thomas Scott
Hen. Vane Phil L. Herbert Isaac Pennington Humphrey Saloway John Berry Arthur
Haslerig Cornelius Holland Vavasor Powell John Fox Michael Ouldsworth Nathaniel
Fiennes Bulstrod Whitlock William Brereton John Rogers John Desborow James
Naylor Henry Hagar Mar. Needham


Printed for G.H. the Rumps Pamphlteer-General.


