The Famous and Renowned HISTORY Of the Two Unfortunate, though Noble LOVERS,
Hero and Leander:

Giving an Account of all that happened from the beginning of their Loves, till
both of them Ended their Lives in the Sea, for Love of each other.

Their Various Adventures, and the Renowned Atchivements of Leander, in his
many Glorious Victorys and Successes, till he was forbid Access to the Fair
Hero, by her Cruel Father, upon his killing his Rival in a Combat. Also how
(she being Imprisoned in a Tower) he Swam over the Sea to Visit her, and in a
boistrous Storm was drownded, for the sorrow of which, she leaped into the
waves and drownded herself.

depiction of Hero and Leander in a garden.

Printed by A. Milbourn. for J. Blare. at the Looking-Glass on London Bridge.

To the READER.
THe Famous Story of the Loves, and Unfortunate Deaths of Hero and Leander, has
been so much the Subject of Poetry, and other Learned Authors, that I think
there are but few People that have not heard little or more of it: Though
indeed, the particulars of the beginning and end of their loves, has, to many,
been left in the dark, as being written in Foreign Languages, who have
celebrated their Memories as the most Constant Lovers, that ever were.
Wherefore, that our English Nation may not be left in Ignorance, I have though
late, drawn it into a small compass, though very much to the purpose,
containing much variety and delight, so that it may be accounted the perfection
of History, dressed in a Method, that cannot but please, wherein the Passions
of Lovers are expressed to the height, and the various dangers they meet
withal, and strugle with, and although Virtuous Love be sometimes Unfortunate,
it never misses of praise, and due commiseration, and moves a generous
compassion in the hearts. Wherefore, not doubting but it will do so in those
that shall, as well as those that have heard of it; I commend it to your
perusal, as the choicest of Historys, and remain

Your very Humble Servant, to Command, J. S.

The Famous and Renowned History Of the Two Unfortunate, though Noble Lovers
Hero and Leander, etc.
CHAP. I. How Leander, returning in Triumph from his Eastern Victories, fell in
Love with the Beauteous Hero, and she in Love with him; and of the strange
Vision of the Goddess Venus appearing to Horo, and what she represented, etc.
WHen Greece flourished in Riches and Renown, becoming, by Virtue, and Valorous
Atchivements, the Glory of the whole World, having subdued to it self, not only
the Persian Empire, but almost all India, and indeed the most part of Asia;
Then it was that the Famed Leander, after many Warlike Exploits, and bringing
into Subjection diverse Countries, as General of the Grecian Forces, coming back
with his Victorious Army, Adorned with Laurels, and Triumphs, had his Praises
sung every where. Whilst the Crowding Spectators flowed from all parts to
behold him as he passed in his Triumphant Chariot. And amongst the rest of the
Asian Beauties, the fairest of her Sex, and even the very Mirror of Beauty,
Hero, Daughter to a Prince who had a stately Castle called Sestus, situate
upon the banks of the Helespont, or narrow Sea, of about two miles over, that
parts Europe from Asia, she that day was adorned in the Richest Attire that
Gold or Siks, or Jewels could set out to the highest Illustration, glistering
like the morning Star, or a Goddess in a Radiant Cloud, she was in a Chariot
drawn by four white Horses in Silver Trapings, and shaddowing Plumes of
Feathers of various colors, attended by a train of Servants, dressed in the
Richest Garments that could be found, and with her, as her Companions, were
diverse Beautiful Virgins, so that she appeared like Diana, surrounded with her
Nimphs, yet out shining them as far as the Sun does the glimering Stars. This
Object soon made Leander fix his eyes upon it with Admiration, and though he
had divoted himself to the God of War, and gave Nations Laws, yet now the God
of Love put in to gain a Victory over him, who had been esteemed unconquerable,
the Queen of Love seemed to guide his thoughts, and take up all his
cogitations, he wished he might lay his Laurels and Trophies at this fair Ladys
feet, and found an inward fire kindled, that made him love this fair Stranger,
before he knew what she was, or what Quality, yet could guess by all that
appeared, she was no less than Noble, when his Triumphant Chariot had passed
her, he could not but turn his Eyes back to behold her, and, like the Lovesick
Son to his fair and beloved Lencothe, was loath to go out of her sight, he
thought once or twice to order his Attendants to enquire who she was, but then
other thoughts countermanded them, when he considered that His Fame and Glory
would be Eclipsed, if, just returning from the Wars of Mars, he should be
suspected to Incline to the soft Tents of Venus, so that without any inquiry,
coming to the Seashore, he Embarked his Victorious Army on the ships that lay
ready to Transport him into Greece, and immediately, the sails being filled
wi^h a prosperous Gale, whilst Neptune and his Trytons danced before him, he
reached the Joyful Short, filled with People from all parts, who came to
welcome him with Music and Songs, loudly with shouts of Joy, proclaming his
welcome, and thronged after him to his Castle, or Palace of Abidos, where his
Father and Mother with open Arms received him, and all the States of Greece
came to congratulate his Success, proclaming aloud his Victorys, and held ten
days festival in their Capital Citys, in honor of his many brave Exploits and
Atchivements over so many several Nations.

Leander, during the General Rejoicing, was thoughtful in disposing his Army,
and settling his Affairs, which being done, he thought to betake himself to
repose after the tedious toils of War, but the beauteous Hero, whose Idea or
Form, continually seemed to be in his sight, opposed it, he thought she was
always in his sight, for sleeping or waking, his fancy and his dreams
represented her unto him all Lovely and Charming, so that he could no longer
stifle his Flame, but he signally showed by the Alteration of his Countenance,
that something inwardly disturbed him; his Parents and Friends wondered at so
sudden a change, and not knowing the cause, urged him to discover it, but he
being very prudent, put them off with fictions.

Whilst Leander was at this pass, the fair Hero no less surprised with the
sight of him, represented to herself all that was great and worthy to be
admired in mankind, in him, so that their flames and passions were Equal,
though either was Ignorant of it, she was so taken up with the thoughts of him,
that she bated much of her natural rest, and was pleased with nothing more than
to hear the great actions he had done, the relation of which was music to her
Ears, and joy to her Heart, and often she would ask Amphilia her Nurse, who had
brought her up, and in whom she alone confided, what she had heard of the
famous Grecian Captain since he had passed the Sea. This Woman being of a ready
and quick understanding, found by the young Ladys often changing color, and
sometimes letting a sigh escape when she spoke of Leander, that she had a more
than ordinary concern for him, resolving to dive more deeply into her thoughts,
she urged her many times to know, why she so earnestly enquired after the fame
and welfare of this person above all others, but she answered her either with
silence, or that she did no more in it, than every body did of so brave a man.
But one night Amphila being to watch in the chamber of fair Hero, whose inward
fire had, by burning too fierce, somewhat distempred her health, she heard her
in her slumber cry out: Oh! how Cruel is the God of Love to an Innocent Virgin,
to give her so deep a wound without hope of Cure. She scarce had said this,
when she fancyed in her dream, as she afterward declared, she beheld Leander
standing by her in a most lovely and charming shape, and the Goddess Venus as
it were presenting him to her with these words: depiction of Cupid taking aim
with his bow and arrow at Hero, standing over a coffin. Behold fair Maid what
you desire,
His breast I Have filled with equal fire,
Both shall enjoy what either Craves,
Till Love is quenched in Neptunes Waves.


Having thus said, Leander seemed to embrace her, and she him, very tenderly
with Ardent Affection, when a great Sea of Water seemed to flow into the place
on a sudden and parted them, at which she starting between sleep and wake,
cried as in a fright: O my Leander, my love, how or where have I lost you; and
so awoke with Rosy Blushes on her Cheeks, and tears in her eyes, and being
told of this by Amphilia, she could no longer deny her love, whereupon she
promised her her best Assistance, which she faithfully performed, as will
hereafter appear.

CHAP. II. How Leander passed the Sea to prosecute his Love with Hero, and by
what means he delivered her and her Father from death, and slew a great number
of their Enemies that had beset them in a Wood, and acted many other strange
wonders.
LOve having gained thus a double Conquest, and both the Lovers ignorant of
each others passion, Leander grew impatient casting many ways in his mind, how
he might come to the speech, or at least the sight of his fair Hero, whose
image had made so deep an impression in his heart, and after some wavering of
mind resolved to pass over into Asia, as a private Person to wait there a while
for a favorable opportunity of seeing his beloved Mistress; he could see her
Castle from the Shore of Europe, to which he had often walked for that purpose,
and would often cry out: O happy Walls, who contain so Inestimable a Beauty,
even the Glory of her Sex, and matchless perfections of Women kind, wishing
himself the happiness, the senceless Marble unthinkingly contained by circling
her in its circumference, and securing her when she took her soft slumbers and
Repose, but long he debated not before he put his resolves in practice, and
going to a private Harbor between two Rocks somewhat distant from Abidas,
without the knowledge of his Relations, and finding a small Bark there, he
agreed with the Master to Transport him to the further shore, which he did with
a favorable gale, and Landed him by the side of a Forest, some distance from
Sestus, the Castle of his beloved Hero, where having dismissed the Master of
the Bark with a Reward suitable to his Labor, he sat him down under a spreading
shade, to consider the best methods to be taken without giving offense.

Long he had not stayed there, e're, at a great distance, he heard the cry of
Hounds, and the shout of Huntsmen, which by degrees drew nearer, yet his
thoughts wholly taken up with love, was little affected with (...), and
therefore to avoid it he was turning another way to some little houses, that
stood at the bottom of a Hill in a Valley, when after some silence; he heard
grievous out-crys, as of People in distress, and immediately a man all bloody
and wounded, came running out of the Forest, whereupon mounting his horse he
had brought with him, he came up to this miserable Person, and demanded who had
so misused him, to whom with a faint voice, he replied, Certain Pirates, lying
in Ambush in the Forest, had set upon Prince Armelius and his Train, and had
killed many of them, yet those, that remained, valiantly defended their Prince:
Therefore, for God's sake, Sir, said he to Leander, if you are generous, hasten
to his assistance e're it is to late.

Leander, who had always a Noble Soul, and took great delight to relieve the
distressed, need not be Incited to such an Enterprise, set Spurrs to his Horse,
being directed to the place by the cries that continued, and found the Prince,
most of whose men were slain, valiantly defending himself, his back being to a
Tree against depiction of Leander arriving on horseback to bring aid to Prince
Armelius and his retinue fighting pirates. nine or ten of these, he easily
perceived who the oppressors were, and who the oppressed, and flying in amongst
them like a Tempest, beat all down before him, cutting off the heads of some,
and the Arms of others as they were about to strike, making their Swords drop
useless from their hands, this put new Courage into Armelius, and his wounded
men, who yet survived their fellows, so that lustily laying about them, all but
three of these Pirates were slain, who, being likewise wounded, escaped among
the trees. Armelius had scarce time to thank the Generous Leander, when hearing
the cries of his Daughter, whom other of this rout were carrying away Prisoner,
he besought him on his knees to bend his course thither-ward, and help to
rescue her. Leander, now all covered with the blood of his Enemies, turning his
Horse to the path, followed the cry, and soon over took them, but Oh! what
Amazement and wonder seized him, when he saw, and knew this Lady, though in
Tears, and disordered and torn Hair and Garments, to be the beauteous Hero, he
lifted up his hand to Heaven for directing to this Forest, at a time when the
fairest of creatures, and joy of his life was in such danger, and with a great
cry, incited by love and revenge, sell upon them like a Thunderbolt, breaking
from a Cloud, dying afresh his Sword, not dried from the former blood, whilst
the trembling Lady almost dyed away to see such fatal strokes, which at every
turn brought death to one or other of 'em, so that disparing to carry off their
precious prize, when defended by one whom they supposed to be much more than
man, those that could, fled, and those that could not; left their lives behind
them.

By this time Armelius and his company were come up to lend what assistance
they could, and seeing fair Hero Rescued, they would have fallen at the feet of
their Deliverer, but he Generously withheld them from doing, alleging that he
had done nothing but what all Good and Just men, ought to hazard in such Cases
to rescue the oppressed, and punish the oppressor, by this time the Alarm being
taken, a great Crowd of People came flocking from the Neighboring Parts, with
such weapons as came first to their hands, and hearing what wonders this
Stranger had done, and that it was to his Valor alone they owed the safety of
their Prince, and his fair Daughter, they saluted him with shouts of Joy, but
his thoughts were so taken up with his love, that he little regarded their
applauses, for his mind was mortally perplexed for Hero, who, by the fright,
and seeing so much blood shed, was fallen into a swound, but reviving at
length, she was put into a Chariot, that stood by the Forest side, and
conveyed to the Castle of Sestus. Leander being in his Encounter unknown to
her, by reason his Face was all over covered with the blood of his Enemies:
Armelius, and all with him, entreated him to go with them to the Castle, to
which he seemingly consented, but it growing dark, he took an opportunity, in
the Crowd to withdraw himself till he might better consider to manage his love
affairs, and so went that night to a Neighboring Village, where he refreshed
himself, and presenting the Master of the house with some Jewels, desired him
not to let any one know he was there, if enquiry was made, which he promised
and performed.

CHAP. III. How Leander Justed before the Princes, and won a Rich Diadem, which
he presented to Hero with a Letter in it, manifesting his love, and overthrew a
great number of men that lay in Ambush to take his life, etc.
HEro, being pretty well come to her self, made a strict enquiry after her
Deliverer, and when she was told he had secretly withdrawn himself, her Eyes
could not refrain from T^ars, that she had not a convenient opportunity to
thank him for her deliverance ye^ more she could not but wonder who this
gallant stranger should be, and sent to diverse places to enquire after him,
sometimes she thought it could be none but the Famed Leander, but those
thoughts again were dashed with the considerations he was passed over to
Europe, and taken up there with the welcome of his Triumphs, during these
Cogitations; and still fixing his Idaea in her mind, great shows of joy were
used in the Castle for the happy deliverance; and at the end of them a solemn
Tilt and Turnament was ordered, wherein he that did best, were to have a Golden
Carronet set with Diamonds and other Precious jewels, which Glorious Sport of
Martial Prowess was proclaimed by the Heralds, and it soon reached Leanders
ear, and whereupon, not to be behind-hand, left his lodging and Rid to
Peteropolis, a famous City near at hand, and there bought him a change of
Armor, having in his Shield a flaming heart, on which the Sun darted some Rays
upon, through Clouds, with this inscription, She, for whom I suffer, is
ignorant of my love.

Leander, thus Accoutred, took his opportunity to come to the list, just as the
Trumpets were sounding to the Action, and found diverse Champions in a readiness
well mounted who, upon the Signal, run two and two together, and broke their
Lances with diverse Successes, many being laid in the dust; but, above all the
Prince of Persopolis, who was Enamoured of the fair Hero, and to whom her
Father designed to Wed her unhorsed all that came near him, and, though he was
a man of an Ill-temper, and little beloved by any glorying in his Atchivements,
in a braying manner, came and demanded the Prize, as his due unelss any other
Knight would dare to attempt any thing further against him. Leander, who had
all this while stood still that he might be Crowned with the greater Victory,
ill endured by those he had foiled, and putting spurs to his horse, entered the
List, and demanded the combat against him. They no sooner encountered, but the
Prince was overthrown together with his Horse, as if he had been driven down,
or Thunder depiction of Leander and Altamansor, Prince of Persepolis, jousting
in the lists. struck with a mighty Tempest, which disgrace some of his
Followers attempting to Retrieve, run the same Risq, so that in the end, none
daring appear against him, the prize was declared his, which he had no sooner
Received, but he laid it at the feet of his most lovely Hero, telling her,
That, above all the world, she alone was worthy of so fair a Diadem: She
modestly refused it, and said, It was the prize of his Valor; but he, urging
his Forces, inspired by her Beauty, had made him accomplish what otherways he
was not capable of doing, he at last urged so long, that she declared she would
keep it for his sake. Many Admired at this, some with wonder, and others not
without jealousy, all admiring what this might mean. Prince Armelius was well
pleased with it, as imagining this Stranger could be no other that this Gallant
Deliverer, and, the justs being ended, he caused a Lord near him to go and
invite him into the Hall, where a sumptuous Entertainment was prepared: but
Leander, who had his Face all this while covered, and not yet willing to
disclose himself, returned the Prince his humble thanks in the most obliging
expressions imaginable, and desired to be excused, saying, He had taken his
repast already, and obliged himself by promise, to return as soon as the Sports
were over.

This speech satisfied the Prince, in that he ever held that a man of Honor is
ever tied to his word, but the Prince of Persopolis, inwardly grieving that
this Stranger should carry away the prize, and Glory of the day, and being also
jealous by the Act on he beheld, that he might prove a Rival in his Love, he
being passionately Enamoured of the fair Hero, and had sought many occasions to
make his love known to her, which she minded not, or, rather not Regarded, he
being the proudest and most ambitious of all men, it turned him to Mortal
hatred to Leander, and watching his departure, he sent 12 of his Followers
after him to set upon him, and when they had murdered him, to bury him
privately that it might not be known.

These men knowing the ways of the Country, crossing the nearer ways, got
before him, and planted themselves closely in a Wood he was to pass, out of
which Ambush they all on a sudden burst upon him with their drawn Swords, and
gave him a furious Assault; but he, who was never used to fear, was not at all
daunted, recoiling his Horse a little, to get out of the enclosure, drew his
trusty Sword, that had never failed him, and flourishing it in their Eyes, like
a dreadful Commet that threatened death and destruction, he set upon them with
such fury, that he felled them as if a Whirlwind had thrown down a row of
stately Cedars from some Mountains top, so that hewing off Arms and legs, and
sometimes Heads, in spite of their attempting to fly, he sent Eleven of them to
keep company with the Dead, while he that remained, though much wounded, fell
on his Knees and begged his life which he generously gave him, upon his
submission and Confession, at which, Leander could not but wonder how any Noble
Man could be guilty of such baseness, and then commanding him to rise, Go,
wretched Man, said he, and tell thy Master that Treachery never prospers, and I
wear a Sword that may one day let him see the difference between true Manhood,
and such Inglorious Acts as these.

The trembling man, glad his life was given him, having by, Leander's order,
dragged his slain Companions into the wood, with much thankfulness took his
leave and relating the fatal miscarriage, and what Leander had given him in
charge, put the Prince of Persopolis into an extraordinary rage, so that he
stormed and cursed the skies, and his own misfortunes, in which fret we will
leave him, and return to Hero.

CHAP. IV. How when the fair Hero read Leanders letter, she was transported
with Joy, and sent Amarissa her Nurse, in search of him, with a letter she
wrote to him. How he killed a cruel Beast, and saved the Woman that came in
search of him, and his Amorous discourse of Hero, etc.
YOu have heard how Hero had received the present of Leander, which she
curiously surveying, perceived in the Curious Needlework, that adorned the Cap
of it, a little role of paper thrust in; which she eagerly, but not without
blushing, took out, and read in these words:

Fairest of Creatures,
Is it not without cause, that all, who cast their Eyes on you, become Lovers
and Admires of your Noble Perfections. Pardon we them, if, among the rest, I
have presumed to gaze on so bright an Object, which has not only dazzled my
eyes, but penetrated my heart, and enflamed it with a desire to serve you, my
life and fortunes, Madam, I humbly lay at your feet, and, by my Obedience, if
permitted by you, and to be ranked among the number of your Adorers, hope to
gain some little spark of your condescending goodness to pity me, and give me
at least your good Esteem, when you come to know who your Faithful and Constant
Servant is, who now can no longer call himself his own, but must beg leave to
subscribe himself your entirely devoted

Leander.


The Princess reading this Letter, paused, and blushed, but, when coming lower,
and having cast her eyes upon the Name of Leander, Oh! Heavens, how was she
transported, her eyes sparkled with Joy, and she cried out as in an ecstasy:
Oh* you Powers above, how do you overload me with happiness, was it then the
brave Leander that I beheld with such wonder, who made me this present, and was
no doubt my deliverer, for who but so Noble a Prince could be capable of such
Glorious Actions.

As she was thus transported, Amorissa came in, and finding her in such a
dis^^^^^, could not but be very inquisitive into the Cause, and seeing her hold
a paper still in her hand, to which the name of Leander was affixed, she soon
understood the meaning, and joined in the joy with her young mistress, who
embracing her in her Arms, cried out, O Amarissa now the gracious
constellations of light shower happ^ ^^fluances on my Fortune, the brave
Leander, on whom my heart is so entirely fixed, (...) me for love, as by the
Tennor of this letter appears. Amorissa was over joyed that the troublesome
part she was to undertake in going to Leander on her mistresses behalf, and
finding a way out to make that love known, which she saw so visibly torment
her, and would no doubt have brought her to her Grave, was now so generously
prevented, yet being of a prompt wit, she began to doubt whether this might be
the true Leander, or some that might use so gallant a name, on trust to
introduce his affection, For had it been he, said she to Hero, who changed
color and looked pale at this suspicion, why did he so suddenly withdraw
himself, he need not have feared acceptance in your Fathers Court, his glory
and renown would have made all proud of the honor of his Company: Yet, again,
said she, recollecting her self, it may be he, since as I remember, when he
passed by in his triumphant Chariot, he looked languishing when he fixed them
on your face, and seemed to say, that love from your fair eyes, had sent his
Darts to conquer him, who had subdued whole Nations.

Between these hopes and fears, Hero knew not what to say or think, however it
was agreed between them, that Amorissa, should go in search of the Renowned
Hero, and know if it was the true Leander or not, before any other Presents or
Tenders of Love should be received from him, for to him, alone she had vowed
her Virginity, with all her love and Chaste Affections, and if she found it to
be him, to deliver an answer to his letter, which she wrote in these words.

Sir,
Though you are a Stranger, with whom I never had any Conversation, yet the
Fame of Leander 's Virtues and Renowned Deeds, which have taken up the
Discourse of the world, cannot, you may well imagine, but have reached the ears
of Hero, and created in her an esteem, worthy of so deserving a person; but how
you could conceive so great a passion as you expressed in your letter, upon so
slight a view, I cannot hastily believe, since the greatest, Queen on Earth,
would be proud of Leander's Courtship, and set a Diadem on his head for love, I
think if I mistake not, I owe my life, at least my liberty, or my honor, which
is dearer to me than both, to your Valor, and therefore in gratitude return
you my thanks, and cannot but declare, that it is just when I am an Enemy to
Leander, that I be so to my self: The rest I leave to the Bearer, in whom you
may entirely repose any confidence, and so I take leave to subscribe my self,

Yours in Friendship and good Wishes. Hero.


Amorissa delayed not to go in this search, and having seen which way this
Cavileer went, she mounted upon a white Steed, and riding to be as little
observed as might be, happened to light on the way he went, and enquiring of
diverse Peasants, got some information that such a like Person, as she
described, had entered the Wood before her, about three hours since: this
gladed Amorissa, who scowred after as nimble as the Wind, but coming between
the broad spreading Trees that made a thick shade, and a kind of a Gloom at
Noon day, she began to be fearful, she being alone, some thieves or Wild Beasts
might assault her; however her fears were not so great, but she resolved to go
on, and did so, till she came to the place ^he Fight had been, where seeing the
grass and leaves crimsoned with blood, she started ^n a fright, and almost fell
from her Horse, and being a little recovered, was de^irous to turn him, but he
head strongly leaped forward, carried her away by force; ^ar she had not Rid in
this speed, but she heard a Monster terribly Roaring in the Wood, who having
scented the blood of the slain, was making toward them, to Satiate his Hungry
Maw, but upon hearing the noise of her Horses track, she had scarce passed the
place where he was, but he came running to the Edge of the Wood, and putting
out his dreadful head through the Bushes, which afrightned and made her
redouble her speed, yet after her he came full cry, which (happy for her)
unusual sound piercing the Ear, of Leander, as he sat under a spreading Beech,
(...) which he had tied his Horse, to refresh himself after so much Toil, and
as a small Spring, which there bubled up, to wash off the blood and dust from
his Face and Armor, which had besmeered them in the Combat, whereat, claping
on his Helmet, he came unto the way, with his drawn Sword, and perceived a
Woman ^ying, and crying for help as she fled before a monsterous Beast, whose
Iaws were already bloody, with the Prey he had already torn, which made him
have to interpose his never unsuccesful Sword, between her and death, which he
scarce had time to do, e're the Cruel Monster was come so near, as to make a
full leap at her, which made her, through fear, fall from her Horse in a
swound, so that missing her, he tore and rent the Horse in a miserable manner,
before Leander could give him a full stroke, which, however, at length he did,
with such force, that it gave him a depiction of Leander battling a monster
outside the city walls, near a well. deep wound in his neck, which made him the
more eager, and with great fury cam^ at Leander, rearing himself, upon his
hinder paws, and stretching out his forwar^ ones to catch him in his grasp,
whereupon, with a home thrust followed clos^ coming in between them he pierced
his Breast, and so his heart, that he fell dow^ dead, with a dismal cry: When
he had done this, he came to Amorissa and reare^ her (who now began again to
recover her senses) demanding what adventure ha^ brought her such a dangerous
way: At these words, rearing her eyes, and fixin^ them upon him, she
immediately knew him to be the same that had won the Priz^ at Sestus, and the
man she was in search after, whereupon she fell at his feet, an^ embracing his
knees with tears of Joy in her eyes, said: Sure Heaven is this day favorable
to me, and to the fair Hero, in delivering me from death, and, as I hope
putting an end to a more tedious search.

Leander, when he heard the name of Hero, started, and a little after
recovering himself again, took Amorissa in his arms, and tenderly embracing
her, said: For Heavens sake let me hear that Heavenly sound again, I think
(continued he) you name^ Hero. I did so, my Lord, replied she, and hope you are
Leander. I am so, said he* what is the cause of your venturing alone this
desolate way. Insearch of you said she Of me, replied Leander, hastily, to what
end I pray? You Read that said she, and you may be better informed: Whereupon
she gave him the Letter, that Hero had writ* He no sooner saw her name, but
bending one knee to the Earth, he kissed the Papers a hundred times, before his
words could get utterance, and then said he: Ha^^ the Immortal Powers so great
a Regard to Leander, as to inspire the Breast of the Faif Beautiful, and
Virtuous Hero; speak, speak, I say, for thou art my good Angel, I think thou
bring me these glad Tidings: And with that he thrust a Jewel of great value
into her hand, for bringing him the happy news. To which, Amorissa modestly
replied, that if he was really that Leander of Greece, who passed some days
since Triumphant over the Hellespont, she had a Commission (if Hero had any
power over him, as in his Letter he expressed she had, to let him know, that
she had no light esteem of him, and that he might hope to be happy in her love.

If that may be, said he, I am the happyest Man on Earth. It was my fear of
offending her with my passion, that made me thus twice retire: First when I had
rescued her in the Wood, and now, which cannot but grieve me, because it had
almost proved fatal to you. But think you, continued he, I may be so over
blessed to see my Hero alone, and presume to tell her of my love, without
interruption, or without offending her.

Amorissa undertook this, and gave him Encourgement, this his Enterprise should
be Crowned with Success, but that he carry on his Love as privately as might
be, for that Altamansor, Prince of Persopolis, had declared himself a lover of
the Princess Hero, and by reason of the Power he had in that Country, and the
Ascendant over the Father of her Mistress, might much obstruct their Loves, if
not make it prove of fatal consequence. To all, this Leander consented, and
gave himself wholly up (...) be conducted by her management, yet concealed from
her the design Altaman^^^ had upon him by Treachery, though she was
inquisitive, if he knew, how so ^uch blood came spilt in the Road.

CHAP. V. ^ero and Leander meet over-joyed with Love, and knit the Bond that
ended with their Lives, and of the mutual Agreement they made, and how Leander
prepared to go to Sestus, to gain her Fathers consent.
THE Joyful Leander now resolved to go to Sestus with more willingness, ^^an he
went to reap Laurels and Triumphs, took Amorissa (whose (...) the Monster had
killed) up behind him, and crossing a nearer way, tha^ (...) ^im, Rid through
all the Bypath, till they came to a little Country-lodge, a^out half a Mile
from the Palace, where there was a Curious Garden, to which Hero used, in the
cool of the Evening, to Resort, of this place she hid the Keys, and here they
Entered, and showed him to put his Horse and Armor in a Vaulted Stable
underground, that they might not be discovered, if any body should come
unexpected with the Princess, and carried him to a curious shady Arbor, so
intricately winding and turning, and shut up with leaves and Trees, that those
who remained in the Remotest part, could not be without difficulty discerned.
Here she lest him, with a promise that she would so order it, that the fair
Hero should come thither, without knowing of his being there, least otherwise
she might think it beyond the Rules of Modesty, to meet a Man, that was so
great a Stranger to her, though she loved him never so entirely, thus she
dissembled to Leander, but going to her Mistress, she told her all that had
happened, who could not but blush, she had made such promise in her name,
refusing for some time to go, as Judging it might be interpreted as too much
fondness, but Amorissa urging it, as necessary in this Juncture, to prevent
discovery, and laying aside her Rich Garments, put on a disguise, and so
passing through the back Garden of the Castle of Sestus, through a little
Wicket, that was shaded by a Tuft of Trees, they got into the Field, and so to
the little Lodge, where Leander waited with Impatiency, the coming of his
bright Angel, and employed all his thoughts in meditating in what manner he
should Accost her; but, whilst they lasted, he espied Amorissa coming, and in
her Company one, who, by her Garb he knew not what to think of, as imagining it
could not be his Adored Princess, but, upon a nearer approach, her beauty, like
an Angels brightness, shot through those seeming Clouds and almost confounded
him with Amazement, that nothing before could daunt* So near a Kin is Love to
Impotency, that it disarms us of Courage, and enfeebles the strongest and most
daring Resolution. She took a turn or two in the Walks and when she came near
the Arbor, where he was, he ventured out, and, with a low submission, falling
at her feet, and (whilst she stood almost confounded with Blushes and
Amazement) thus expressed himself:

Pardon me, Divinest Creature, if I thus presume to prostrate my self before
you, in hopes, that so much Goodness can pardon a Crime of a higher Nature, and
especially this, seeing it is Authorized by Love, whose commands must be
obeyed, and whose flames are irresistible. O turn not away those dazzling Su^s
of light that gu^de me to my happiness, but let those Orient Eyes shine upon me
with beams of Comfort, that I may live by the brightness of then Rays, and by
the Smiles of my Fair Hero. He would have proceeded, but Hero entreating him to
rise, and Amorissa advising them to go into the Arbor, as well to keep them
from the Heat, as from the prying eyes that might be upon them; the two Lovers
obeyed, being both, without any farther Ceremonies, overjoyed at so happy a
meeting, though Hero dissembled it as well as she could, telling him, whilst he
gently squeezed her fair Hand, which she permitted him to Kiss, that, she hoped
he would not misconstrue her Actions, is being so forward in granting him
Favors she had never yet done to any body, since, in gratitude, she could do
no less, seeing he had been her Deliverer, but to grant him Love, which he
earnestly requested, she must take a longer time to consider on it, before she
absolutely fixed, or settled her Affections; though she most confess, his
Merits required a greater Beauty, and a larger Fortune. Leander, hereupon,
promised to obey her in all things, so that (she giving him very large hopes of
winning those Affections, which, indeed, she had entirely fixed upon him
before) it was agreed, that the next day he should make his public appearance
at the Castle of Sestus; but to be very cautious how he made Love to her in
public, or showed the least sign of it, till she knew how her Father stood
inclined to favor him, for, though she loved Leander entirely, yet she much
relied upon her Obedience to her Parents, which proved very Tragical as will in
the end appear.

CHAP. VI. Leander's Fatal Dream, and the Treachery of the Prince of
Persopolis, to oppose his love. Heroes Father entertains him with Joy, yet denis
his Consent, in favor of the Prince of Persopolis, and other Rare Adventures.
THE best and constant of lovers having had this Mutual Satisfaction of an
Enterview, and, in their hearts, inseperably linked by the Chains of love. Hero
and Amorissa retired, and Leander resolved to take up his Abode, seeing the Sun
was near set, in that Lodge, till the next morning, when after many thoughts
coming in his head, he fell asleep, and fancied he had fair Hero in his Arms,
dancing on the Waves, and riding Triumphant in Neptune's Chariot, as if
commanding the Seas, till Aeolus, the god of the Wind, conspired, with all his
force, to raise a mighty and prodigious Storm, which ov^r-set his Shell
Triumphant; whereat, for fear of losing Hero, who seemed to rool (with him) on
the watery Surges; he started, and awoke, much troubled at such an unusual
Dream; but concluding it only the fancy of the night, and of his extraordinary
Love, he hushed those Cares, and set his mind intent how to dispose himself the
next day; he had forgotten to tell Hero how he had been set upon by Altem^^^^^
Treachery, and knew he would not only oppose him in his love, but make (...)
practices upon him, wherefore he found it was convenient to be warey.

Day approaching, he laid his Armor in a safe place, and took only his Hor^e,
and went to the Castle of Sestus, where, the Bridge being down, and the (...)
open, he entered, and took him a secret lodging in a little House, in the
Remoatest Place, where Amorissa often visited him, and diverse letters passed
be^^een him and his fair Mistress, and sometime he was privately let into her
lodgi^^ where, in the end, their hearts became so firmly united, that they
enjoyed ^ll manner of innocent freedom, so that Hero, at length, resolved that,
if she could gain her Fathers Consent, she would, without further delay, Marry
Leander and pass over into Greece with him, where, besides his Castle, he had
larg^ Lands and Territories, but, as she thought to do it, and just going to
speak of the matter, he prevented it, by laying his Commands upon her to
entertain Altemansors love, with which she had been a long time persecuted, but
ever flighted and despised, he laid before her the Advantage of such an
Alliance, the power and riches of that Prince, and many other matters, but she
answered him only with her (...), and entreatys, that she might not have a Man
she could not Affect; this made the Old Man in a great Rage, protesting not
only to disown her, but dis^^herit her forever, if she disobeyed him. This News
she sent Leander in a letter, all blotted with her tears, which made him for a
time like a man beside himself, but resolving to hazard all for his Mistress,
he concluded to appear like himself, and demand, or despute her against
Altemansor, and so, in the most Rich Attire, which he sent for out of Greece,
he appeared one of the most goodly Persons that ever had been seen in the
Court, so that all admired who this Stranger should be, till Heroes Father one
day casting his Eyes upon him as he passed by, run to him with tears in his
eyes, crying out: O my Deliverer, and my good Angel, have I found you again,
Sinon.

Thersites.

Pyrhus.

Synon and Thersites converse outside the walls of Troy as Greek soldiers, led
by Pyrrhus (also known as Neoptolemus) exit the Trojan horse. how is it that
you left us, after you had saved our lives from a Death that was so near us!
Leander made modest Excuses on this Account, saying: It was no more than in
Honor he ought to have done. And if the Old man was transported, now he was
the more abundantly, so when he knew it was Prince Leander, he carried him into
his Palace, showed him all his Rarities, and made great Feasting for several
Days desiring him to demand of him whatever was in his power to oblige him, and
he would do it for him.

Leander thought now was his time in this height of Carresses, said: Sir, for
all the Favors you have done me, and for the Offers you have made me, I return
you my most humble thanks; there is but one thing in the World I desire of you,
and if I could but think you would grant me that, I would freely demand it.

Demand then (said he) boldly, and whatever it is, expect it. It is then, said
Leander, your leave to serve the Pri^c^ss Hero. At which he started and looked
pal^ protesting had he not already promis^d her to Altemansor, there was no man
under Heaven that he would more gladly have bestowed her on, than Leander,
whose Fame and Worth had sufficiently spread over Asia and Europe, but having
sworn to give her him before the high Altar, he could not go back with his
word, or, if he should, he being Powerful in these Parts, would take her by
force, and lay his Inheritance ^^st. But Leander told him, that should never be
whilst he wore a Sword. But no entreaties could prevail with him for his
consent: and Hero having promised to dye rather than Marry any but Leander,
though she stood stiffly upon her Obedience Leander knew not what to think, but
coming to his fair Mistress, very sad and pensive depiction of Leander wooing
Hero in a garden, overlooked by Cupid. made her the sorrowful lamentation, who
thereupon hung about his neck, a^^ over flowed with tears, and gave him fresh
Assurance of her love and constancy, whereupon he told her the Treachery of
Altemansor, and that neither himself nor she were safe on that Shore, but that,
if she would go with him into Greece secretly, he would Marry her Royally
there, but she still insisted upon her Obedience, and told him, that time might
mollify her Fathers heart.

CHAP. VII. How Prince Altemansor suborned one to Poison Leander, and how he
was prevented, and how, coming to assassinate him, he slew him and his company,
upon which he was forced to swim the Hellespont, whilst Hero was confined to a
Tower, whither, guided by her light, he often visited her by night, and
attempting to fetch her away, was drownded, whereupon she leaped into the Sea.
BY this time the News of Leander's coming to Court, being known to Altemansor,
the Person that had escaped, having told him it was the same that overthrew him
at Turnament, and had destroyed his men in the Wood, he, was greatly enraged,
but when he had secret notice he pretended to Love his Mistress, he imputed all
the Rigorous usage of Hero toward him, arising from the love she had to this
new-come Stranger, and therefore; seeing open force had failed, he resolved
that secret Mischief should take place, and so with a great sum of Gold, hired
one of Leanders Servants, (that he had newly hire'd) to poison him with a glass
of Wine, but as soon as he was putting it toward his lips it flew to pieces,
whereat the Wretch seeing his Treachery discovered, fell on his knees, bagging
pardon, and disclosed the whole matter, upon which this and the former
Treachery was published to the Disgrace and Anger of Altemansor. Hero's Father
was much displeased with this, and sent sharply to reprove him, which made him
rage the more, and vow revenge, yet, knowing Leander to be a Prince of great
Courage, and having suffi^ently tried his strength, he durst not challenge him
to the Combat, but though if he could any ways destroy him, it would open his
way to Hero's love, wherefore one night he broke into his Lodging with about
twenty men, which creating some noise, Leander, who had not time to put on his
Clothes, got his Sword, and defended himself so well, that he killed the Prince
and most of his Followers, which so Alarmed the Castle, that all were up in
Arms, when Leander fearing to be oppressed, or that revenge would be taken for
this proud Prince, made his retreat good, with the Slaughter of his Enemies,
and getting to a Window, that jutted into the Sea, leaped into the Waves, and
directing his Course by the Stars, swam with full revenge to the Shore of
Grecia, and safely arrived at Abidas, he thought for these many Treacheries to
have brought over a powerful Army, and have spoiled Persorolis, (...) the
secresy of his love, and desire not more to offend Hero's father, who was ^^ady
outrageous for the Death of Altemansor, he desisted that resolve, he sent a
^^ty Servant to hear how things were resented, who told him at his return, that
fair Mistress was confined, by her Father, to a little Tower that jutted into
the from the Castle, and there mourned her Captivity, and his Absence.

Leander at this was altogether impatient, and resolved, at any terms, to free
(...) whereupon he got two of his trusty Servants to row him over in a l^^^le
B^at depiction of a lady and gentleman looking over a body of water, where
boats are being rowed cities on either bank. ^^e right time, and being furnished
with a ladder of rope, come safe under the win^^^, and calling with a low voice
Amorissa who waited upon her Mistress soon heard (...) and by his Direction,
let down a line of thread, and drawing up the ladder, ^^^ed it to the beam of
the Window, mounted by it. Hero who was bu^ just a^^^e, trembled to see him
there, by reason her Father had promised, if Leander ^^^ll be taken, to D^liver
him up to Altemansors Brother, to be punished, who was ^^^el and as blood
thirsty as the other had been, so that, after many kisses, and (...) embraces,
Leander, in a passionate manner, endeavored to persuade Hero (...) make her
escape, with him, to Abidos; but she resisted it, so that, in t^is ^^nner, by
stealth, as it were, he came often to visit her; she setting up, in the dark of
Night, a Torch Light, in the Window, to giuid him to the Tower, (...) he heard
the killing News, that her Father had designed to Marry her, with^^ three days,
though she had opposed it with her tears and prayers, to Babaz^ Brother to
Altemansor, to prevent a War, and to Atone for his Brothers Death This fatal
Decree possessed Leander with Mortal Fears, so that she, seeing no hop^ but
either to destroy herself, or be forced into the Arms of a man she hated, (...)
Leander's proffered Aid in case of War, would not be accepted by her Father,
(...) consented the next night he should come with a small Ship to go fetch her
and Am^rissa, with all her Jewels and Treasure, into Greece. The over-joyed
Leander we^^ back to prepare a vessel, which he soon did, and caused it to be
drawn in betwe^^ two Rocks, lest his purpose might be discovered to the other
shore, 'till it w^^ Evening, when himself being weary, and lying down to
slumber, he was suddai^^y awaked by a Melodious Song, sung by two Maremaids,
who appeared danci^^^ on the Waves.

SONG.
Awake, Leander, see the Skys
Do in Blackest Tempests rise:
in Neptune's Watery Kingdom, see,
Two Lovers shall Entombed be;
Whose hard Mishap, the Sea Gods all,
With us, lament their Funeral:
The Cruel Ghosts Revenge do crave,
And Fate Decrees them to their Grave.
We pity Lovers that are crossed,
And in their highest Hopes so lost;
When nearest to their Joys they seem,
And find all but a Golden Dream.
Then do Cross Winds bear away
Their hopes; Leander, prithee say:
But the too forward Fates drive on,
By Love, the best of Lovers are undone.
Leander hearing this, as it were, between sleep and wake, much admired it, and
^^und a little trouble and heaviness in his mind, however, he resolved to keep
his lord at any rate, but, about Sunset, a mighty Tempest arose, the Sea
swelled (...) Terror, all seemed a sudden midnight, when as, going toward the
Vessel, he ^erceived it had broke its Cable, and had driven out to Sea, with
those men that depiction of a ship breaking up against a cliff, under a tower,
as sailors try to escape the stormy sea. were on Board it, he hailed them as
loud as he could, but they stood away before the VVind, and could not get back;
then he run about the Shore to seek another Vessel but could find none, so that
seeing the light in Hero's Tower, by which he knew she expected him, he
resolved to run any hazard than break his word and so stripping himself to his
shirt; and hiding his Clothes in the Rock, he leaped ^^to the swelling Main, in
hopes to overtake the Vessel, or find it at the place appointed, and so floated
on the Waves, till he was half Sea over, when, as if the Elements had
conspired his ruin, Rain, Thunder, Lightning and Wind bandyed him from wave to
wave, calling to Heaven, and on fair Heroes name, (...) dashing among the Rocks
on the other side, he lost his Noble Life, and He^^ who had impatiently
expected him all that night with greedy eyes, looked o^ trembling in the
morning, and there by the too Cruel Fate of the Ridged De^^nies, she beheld his
body, floating on the waves, at this she cried out in a lament^ble sort, and
calling upon his Name, leaped out at the window before her Nur^^ could prevent
her, perished in the Waves, which after they were dead, drove the^ on Shore,
folded Arm in Arm, which sad Trajedy being known, they were pitty'd by all, as
the great Examples of Love and Constancy, and Buried in on^ Grave. Heroes Father
soon after Dying for Grief, in consideration of the Cruelt^ he had used toward
these LOVERS.

FINIS.
Licensed according to Order.

BOOKS Printed for Jos. Blare Bookseller at the Looking-Glass on London Bridge

THe English Fortune Tellers. The Famous History of, the Knight of the
Burning-sword. The History of Parismus and Parismanus Ayrst's Arithmetic. The
Complete English Scretary and newest Accademy of Complements. Russell's Seven
Sermons. Russell's Companion for Children and Youth, or a little Book for
Children. The Accomplished Ladys Rich Closet of Rarities, or the Ingenious
Gentlewoman, and Servant maids Delightful Companion. The Famous History of the
Gentle-Craft.
At the Place above mentioned, Country Chapmen are Furnished with all sorts of
BOOKS, Bound or Stitched, small BOOKS and BALLADS.


