The Famous HISTORY OF GUY Earl of WARWICK.

By Samuel Smithson.

Licensed, and Entered according to Order.

knight on horseback, carrying boar's head on pike

London, Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, J. Wright, and J. Clarke.

The Famous History OF GUY Earl of WARWICK.
CHAP. I.
IN the Blessed time of Memory, when King Athelstone wore the Imperial Diadem,
and Reigned Regent of our English Nation, Sir Guy Warwicks mirror, and the
Worlds Wonder was the chief Hero, and Knight of Chivalry in that Golden Age,
whose Prowess and bold deportments, with his noble Valor, became so Peerless
and excellent, surpassing all his Predecessors; that Fames loud Trumpet Sounded
Warwicks praise throughout the World, by which Jews, Turks and Infidels,
trembled at the name of Guy.

But as Mars the God of Battle, was inspired with the amorous Beauty of Venus,
so our Sir Guy, by no Man conquered, was conquered by Love* for Phelice the
fair, (so was she called by the Commonalt^) because of her exquisite beauty and
feature, whose ^^^tue inestimoble, with such sweet modest behavior, so
abundantly overflowing in her Breast, that her Graces and her Effigies, made a
perfect sympathy: This bright Heavenly Star, shining with such luster, that
Guys poor heart was ravished with her countenance, from whence proceeded
etherial darts of amity, directed by Cupids overreaching power, that our
admired champion (Sir Guy) prostrated to the Earth, in adoration of his
heavenly Phelice, and his earthly Goddess, whose beauty was so rare and
excellent, that Hellen the pride of Greece, might seem a Black-a-more to our
peerless Phelice, being the Fairest Creature under the Sun. This heavenly
object to Guys sight which shon with such glory and splendour from the fair face
of Phelice, caused numerous of Contemplations in his Lovesick mind, which are
but mere fancies springing from affection, leading the overtaking lover into
crooked mayzes, into labyrinths and Seas of troubles: therefore Sir Guy
resolves to make trial of his Love desires, not to stand doting on a Woman's
face of Beauty, but to pursue the onset according to Cupids invitation, by
which the Game may be won.

CAAP. II.
THus resolved in his mind he makes his journey toward Warwick-Castle, where
Phelice dwelt (being daughter and heir to the Lord Rohand Earl of Warwick)
being entered the Castle, Guy much desired to see the jewel of his heart: the
Earl ( Phelices Father) hearing of Guys coming, entertains him with great joy
and triumph; After some certain time of repose, the E. desired Guys good
company to recreate themselves in hunting; but Sir Guy feeling the pangs of
love beating upon his Shipwrackt mind, feeling such deep impressions made in
his heart, by the enchanting looks of phelice. Guy feigned himself sick of a
contagious disease, as an answer to excuse what had been requested. Earl Rohand
troubled for his friend Guy, sent his own Doctor to assuage him of his malady,
for the recovery of his well beloved friend; after some serious dispute, the
Doctor told Sir Guy, that his Body was very dangerous and hard to cure, and
without letting Blood there was no Remedy: Dr. (said Guy) I know my body is
distempered, but you want skill to cure the inward Inflammation of my Heart,
Galens Herbal cannot quote the Flower which I lack for my Remedy, but I my self
know how my sickness is, both the cause, and the effect, and therefore Doctor
for your love I am obliged.

The Doctor departed, and left Sir Guy in his Lovesick passion, sighing to
senceless Trees, and chattering Birds, yiedling no comfort to appease his Love
Afflictions, but choice of Cogitations springing in his breast like an
overflowing fountain, but still his drift was, how and which way to obtain the
Flower Preservative of his Love-disease; at last through times procurement, he
cast his gentle Eyes upon that Heavenly Face of phelice, walking in a choice
Garden Crowned with Golden Roses, and Odoriferious Flowers, her self being
Queen of this pleasant Paradise.

Guy resolves to attempt his design, and therefore entreats sweet Cupid to
assist him; Teach me (quoth Guy) to Woe, to court and kiss, to dally with loves
delight, frame my action, my Speech, my gesture, that I may be to phelice, as
phelice is to me.

CHAP. III.
With speed Guy walks to the Garden, being entertained by a Damosel that
waited on fair phelice, reposing of her self in a green Arbor of pleasure, whom
Guy salutes with bended knee, amazed with her love enchanting Eye, where Cupid
appeared in every Corner, as Comets do in their etherial station, saying, All
hail fair phelice, thou mirror of Nature, fair flower of Beauty, and jewel of
virtue, it is love, fair phelice, which was my conductor, and bound me in the
burning Italian fire, where resting in torments, hoping in despair, I wait the
hour of bliss or minute of misery, celestial Creature made of beauties mold,
whom honors and Royal dignities do attend as Stars do wait upon their Queen; be
pleased to grant and grace my suit as Hero did to Leander, so shall I think my
self happy in thy Cordial love, otherwise fatal: completed by the decree of
destiny.

I know sweet Lady that great Princes seek to win thy love, whose exquisite
perfection of Modest Nature might seem to Grace the Mightiest Monarch of the
World, yet may they all come short of poor Guys real affection in whom is Love
Pictured with naked truth and honesty: disdain me not for being a Stewards Son
one of thy Fathers Servants, for love may abound in me to fair Phelice, nay
more then any mortal in the world besides.

Phelice interrupted him, and said to Guy, Cease gentle youth, and leave off
this passionate affection, let not doting love seduce to such fits of idleness,
you are but young, and also meanly born, and therefore you may not love and
like where you please.

Love is an idle toy, and feeds your brain with fancies, leading astray every
young giddy-headed Lover, and as a Frenzy operateth monthly in the brain, and
disturbs the wits with dumpish cogitations, I would not for a world my Father
should know this passion, and how thou spendest thy time in concealed
imaginations, thou art unfit for my degree, for Honors wait not upon thee, and
the Princely Eagle never catches Flies.

CHAP. IV.
GUy thus discomfited with the harsh words of Phelice, cutting more sharp than
two-edged swords, lives like one Distracted, and in his melancholy mind, tore
his golden Hair from his Head, wringing his hands most sadly, overwhelmed with
torments, still continues this lovesick Man, resolved to travel throughout the
World to find out the love of Phelice, or death to end his misery.

Long may Dame Nature frown, whose direful looks makes so many shipwrackt
hearts in the sea of Sorrow, but when her course is run, she wheels about to a
posture of amity, and sends a smile to cure their hearts that were wounded with
her frowns; by which means Cupid (being the God of Love) and vice-Regent to his
Mothers Court, issues forth his special Warrants, signed with a golden Dart;
and whosoever denies to appear according to the time prohibited, must endure
the just censure of their will and mercy, Cupid knowing his Authority, finding
in the Records Phelice obstinacy, straightway sollicites her to his Mothers
Court; and because she should not think that he came only in an idle Dream,
sent a powerful golden Dart, for a real testimony, presenting her a worthy
Knight of Chivalry, saying, fair Phelice love him, nay, thou must love him, for
thou can not withstand my Power: this valiant Knight, with his bold
achievements, shall become so famous in the World, that his Renowned actions
shall be crowned to everlasting Posterity.

When fair Phelice found her self wounded with the golden Dart of Love, she
cries, O Pity me, sweet gentle Cupid, solicit for me to thy mother, and I
will offer my life as a sacrifice to her Alter: O pity her that has been too
too pittiless, and grace me with the favorable Bow; the Queen of Love from
henceforth I Will adore, resigning all my Titles, honors, and Royal Dignities,
which are unfit for me, let her be Graced with them, whilst I remain a Servant
to her Love, Will and pleasure.

Guy little dreaming of this sudden thaw, and wanting the balm of love to apply
to his wounded sores, resolves to make a Second Encounter in Loves enterprise,
expecting nothing but death and destiny; so coming again to fair Phelice, gives
fire with this charge, saying; Fair Lady, I have been arraigned long ago, and
now am I come to receive my just sentance from the Theater of love; it is life
or death fair Phelice as I look for, let me not lie languishing in despair;
give judgment, fair Phelice, give Judgment, that I may know my doom; a Word
from thy sacred Lip can cure my bleeding heart, a frown can doom me to the pit
of misery, how happy are they (sweet Phelice) that live in loves amity, but
Threefold misery attends that Lover that lives in hate by his Mistress.

Gentle Guy, said Phelice, Love is not at my disposing, you know my Fathers
name is great in the Nation, and I dare not match without his consent.

For that, sweet Lady, I make no doubt, but quickly to obtain both his love and
liking, if martial deeds may win his love and favor, i will venture through the
World with a noble resolution; let me have thy love first fair phelice, and
there is no fear of thy Fathers wrath to prevent us, it is an old saying, get
the good will of the Daughter, and her Parents love will soon be attained after.

Sir Guy, quoth phelice make thy bold achievements, and noble actions shine
abroad as the glorious Sun, that all opposers may tremble at thy high applauded
name, and thy suit shall not be denied.

Fair phelice (said Guy) I ask no more, never did the Hound mind more his game,
than I do my enterprise, phelice, farewell, take this joyal Kiss as a signet
from my heart.

CHAP. V.
THus noble Guy being at last enlarged from the thraldom of loves cruelty, now
arms himself like a Knight of Chivalry, and prepares for to cross the surging
Ocean, which happening according to his expectation, he did soon arrive in the
Realm of France, where he heard of mighty matters to be performed in Normandy,
which Warlike Music did ravish his greedy ear, for the Emperors Daughter of
Almain was made a Prize for him that won her in the field, fair Blanch, (for so
the Emperors Daughter was called) was spread throughout all Christendom, upon
which report the Worthies of the World came thither for to try their Fortune,
the Golden Trumpets Sounded with great joys and Triumphs, and the stately
pampered Steeds proudly stamped upon the ground, and each one there thought
himself a Coesar that could abide no equal, Kings and Princes being there to
behold who shou^ (...) the Conqueror, every one thinking that fair Blanch
should be his own. After desperate charging with Horse and Man, much blood was
shed, and Princes no more valued then vulgar Peasants, but our noble Guy
appearing in his Warlike posture, laid about him like a Devil upon the Princes,
there lay one headless, there another without a Leg or an Arm, there lay a
Horse sprawling in his blood, Guy still like Hercules charged desperately, and
killed a German Prince and his Horse under him; Duke Otten vowing revenge upon
our English Champion, gave Guy a fresh assault, but his courage was soon
cooled; then Duke Rayner would engage with our famous Knight, but as little
successful as the rest, so that no man would encounter Guy any more, by which
valor he won the Lady in the field as a prize, being the approved Conqueror.

The mighty Emperor being spectator of his noble design, and seeing our English
Knight. so Valiant, sent a Messenger for him: Guy coming into the Emperors
presence, gives to his Majesty reverend obeisance, and the Emperor as a token
of his real affection, gave him his hand to kiss, and withal resigned his
Daughter, the Falcon and the Hound, as the master-prize of his conquest; Guy
humbly thankt his Majesty for his gracious favor, but for Phelice sake, left
fair Blanch to her fathers tuition, and departed from that graceful Court only
with the other pledges.

CHAP. VI.
NOw Guy begins to meditate upon his long absence from his Fair Phelice,
doubting of her prosperity, or that she might too much forget him because the
Proverb says, Out of sight, out of mind, therefore Guy upon this consideration
prepared for England, and at last arrived at the long wished for Haven of Love,
and with this kind of salutation, greets his beloved Mistress: Fair foe, said
Guy, I now am come to challenge the Legacies of Love according to your last
promise, which was upon making my name famous by Martial deeds, I should be the
Master of my Beloved Mistress: behold fair Phelice part of my prize which I won
in open field before Kings and Princes, and since this conquest, I cannot find
any man but Cowards in the World.

Quoth Phelice, Worthy Knight, I have heard of thy winning the Lady Blanch from
Royal Dukes and Princes, and I am much rejoiced to think my Guy should be so
Victorious: But truly Guy thou must seek out for more Adventures.

Guy something discomfited at this answer, wishes himself amongst the midst of
battles, taking his leave of Fair phelice, Clad himself afresh in Bellona's
arms, and aspiring now to the height of Reputation, Traveled toward Sedgwin
Duke of Lovane, against whom the Emperor of Almain lay in siege, but as Guy was
going his pretended journey, Duke Ottea (whom Guy had disgraced in Battle)
hired sixteen Traitors to slay him, Guy being set upon by these Rebels, drew
his Sword and fought in blood up to the Ears, until at last he had slain all
these Traitors according to their deserts, leaving them to the Fowls of the Air
to feed upon. This storm being thus happily over, Guy comes happily to the Duke
of Lovane close beleagur'd round about with the Almains power, and little
resistance did the Duke make against the Emperor. Guy caused the Lovanians to
issue forth upon the cowardly Almains, and made such a bloody slaughter amongst
them, that they were much disheartened, but the Emperor gathered new Forces,
and besieged it again, thinking to starve them out with hunger, but Guy
standing on the Walls threw them victuals in abundance, that the Emperor might
see that they had store of provision, and when Guy perceived their bodies
better fed than taught, sallyed out upon the Almains Guards, cutting off Horse
and Man, that above thirty thousand were slain of the Almains in these 2
Battles, the Fields overflown with crimson blood, but Guy got more Fame and
Praise in making a Perfect League and Peace with the Emperor and the Duke, than
he did in his former Conquest, whose noble Head deserved to be crowned with
Trophies to everlasting Memory.

A perfect Peace being concluded between these two mighty Princes, noble Guy
took a Thousand Christians, to fight with Turks, Jews, or Infidels, and coming
into the midst of Battles, where these Heathens were Fighting, Guy with his
Christian Soldiers made a mighty slaughter of these Infidels, insomuch that
they Wondered at his great success and victory, at which Coldran, a mighty
Pagan, challenged Guy at a single combat, so to cutting they went, and our
noble Guy brought him to the ground, then Morgadour, a Giant, went to revenge
his Brothers wrong, but Guy conquered him and all the Pagan Champions which
made them leave the fields, and went for security into the Town, where the
Governor a blood-thirsty Villain proudly came to Guys Tent, and Demanded a
Duel, saying, That he had promised his head to a Lady; but when they rusht
together desperately, Guy being too courageous for his Valor, Eskeldart fled
away to save his own head upon his shoulders, Guy meaning to crown his conquest
with more Grace, Challenged the mighty Souldan, the Pagans chief General, and
as the rest were slain by his conquering hand, so the mighty Souldan was
brought to the Ground, and perceiving his life a departing, in disdain of
Christianity he slung whole handfuls of blood at Guy, thus were the Pagans
conquered by our English Champion.

CHAP. VII.
AFter this tedious fight, on his travel he came to a silver Spring, which
Water was more sweet then wine to his appetite, reposing his wearied limbs for
a while: at last he heard a most hideous noise, as if the Devil had been a
Progress, being guided by his listening ear, he espied a Lion and a Dragon a
fighting, biting and taring one another with their massy nails, that blood
issued forth like an overflowing Fountain, but the Lion began to faint, which
Guy perceiving, he encountered the Dragon with such noble magnitude, making
this ugly Cerberus to yell and rore like the fiends of hell, at last down came
the Dragon; thus Guy adding more glory to his former victories, went away as
conqueror; the Lion for the love of Guy run by his horse like a Spaniel, till
lack of food made him retire to his wonted abode.

So Guy now traveling to the Duke of Lovane, met by the way Earl Terry, set
upon by sixteen Traitors in a wood, who had taken away his Lady; Guy demands of
the Earl, which way the villains were gone, at last Guy overtook them, and fell
upon these bloody Traitors, and killed eight of them presently; the Lady seeing
so much Blood shed, desired Guy to spare their lives that were left, and
according to her request he did, restoring the Lady to her own Lord and Husband.

Now as Guy, Terry, and Osille went about the woods, they heard a most terrible
noise which much affrighted these friends and lovers: at last they met a
friend, who told Lord Terry, That Duke Otten had straightly ^egi^t his Father
about the Castle, and threatened to pull down the Tower about his ears, no
sooner noble Guy hearing Duke Ottens Name (that grand Traitor) but he and the
Lord posted thither, and freed the Castle immediately, and Guy in open field
slew Duke Otten hand to hand, but his dying words of repentance moved Guys
heart to remorse and pity. But as Guy returned through a Desert, he met a
hugious Boar that had slain many Christians, Guy manfully drew out his sword,
and the brutish Boar gaped with his dreadful tusks intending to devour our
Noble Champion, but Guy quickly cooled his courage, and killed the mightiest
Boar as ever Mortal beheld.

CHAP. VIII.
NOw noble Guy is bound for England, and ariving in his native Country, news
came to K. Athelstone of Guy's arrival, being in the Famous City of York, where
after due reverence to his Majesty, the K. told Guy of a Mighty Dragon that had
Destroyed both Men, Women, and children, annoying grievously the Country of
Northumberland, and many worthy Knights had engaged their lives to slay this
Deadly Monster, but all were killed, and none could kill him. Guy desired to
have a Guide, so coming to the Dragons Cave, out starts this hideous Monster
whose eyes did Burn like flaming fire, and Guy charged the Dragon most
desperately, but the hideous Monster bit his Lance in two like a reed, with
that Guy drew his Sword, and cut gashes in the Dragons side, that filthy blood
issued out from his venomous carcass, wounding every part about him, that down
came Cerberus to the ground, noble Guy cut off the Monsters head, and gave it
to the King as a present, whose direful countenance being dead, would affright
the living, and for Guys praise and memory King Athelstone caused the picture
of the Dragon (being 30 foot in length) to be wrought in cloth of Arras, and
hung up in Warwick Castle, for an everlasting Monument.

After all these bold achievements performed by noble Guy, phelice hearing of
Guys Fame, and how he killed that ugly Dragon, came and met him at Lincoln,
where after some pretty conceited Salutations, imbraceing each other in love
purity, and balmed kisses: The happy day of Marriage was appointed betwixt
noble Guy and fair phelice, King Athelstone and his Queen were invited to this
Royal Nuptial, with all the Princes, Nobles, and Barons of the Land, which
Marriage was Celebrated with much Joy and Triumph.

No sooner was this Royal Nuptial completed, but Earl Rohand, phelices Father,
dies, and leaves to his Son Guy all his Earldome and Lordships, and the King
to grace Sir Guy for all his Worthy actions, Created him Earl of Warwick, in
Rank and Quality of all the Nobles of the Land.

CHAP. IX.
IN the height of Guys glory, being thus exalted to all his Fathers dignities,
Conscience bids him to relent for all his former sins, and his youthful time
spent in the behalf of a Woman: Therefore Guy resolved to be converted into
another posture, and like a Pilgrim intends to travel to the Holy Land; phelice
perceiving the sudden alteration, inquires of her Lord what was the cause of
this sad passion: Ah phelice, said he, I have spent much time in honoring
thee, and to win thy Favor, but never spared one minute for my Souls health in
honoring the Lord; phelice (though much grieved) understanding his
Determination, strove not to oppose his will, but with exchanging their Rings
and melting kisses; Guy departs like a stranger from his own habitation, taking
neither money nor scrip with him, but cold herbs and roots, such as the Wild
Fields afforded was his chiefest diet, vowing never to fight more but in a just
cause.

Guys intended Journey was to go to Jerusalem, but traveling many tedious
miles, he met with an aged man oppressed with sorrows, for a masterless Giant had
taken 15 of his Sons from him, and kept them in a strong captivity, Guy (like a
Pilgrim being at that present) demanded in love of the old man the cause of his
grief, which Guy understanding, borrowed the old Man's Sword and went to the
Castle Gate where the Giant dwelt, who coming to the door, asked Guy what was
his business to come thither, or how durst you, (quoth Amarant) (for so was the
Giant called,) knock so boldly at my Gates? for this I vow by all my Gods to
split thy brains asunder.

Guy laughing to scorn this massy Giant; said Sir, it seems you are very
quarrelsome, come, thou hound Dog; I have a sword that shall maintain my cause,
which have hewed such Lubbards as thou art often asunder, and therewithal Guy
said about the Giants shoulders with a keen and massy blade, that the Giant
bled abundantly, and Amarant heaving up his club in the air thought to have
killed him quickly, but noble Guy was nimble, cutting on the Giants pillars,
insomuch that he began to faint, desiring a little respit to quench his
vehement thirst, which our noble Guy granted. So Amarant having slack'd his
draught, they fell to it pell mell; yet all the Giants blows fell in vain on
the ground, who being much enraged thereat, slung his Club at Guy, and beat him
down, and ere that he could recover, got up his Club again; at the conclusion
Guy killed this tripple headed Dog, and releast diverse Captives that had been
in Thraldom many years: Some were even starved to death, some hung up by the
thumbs, some were hung about the middle, others were hanging with their heads
downward, which sweet deliverance caused much joy and thankfulness, but Guy
delivered both the Castle and the Keys to the Old Man and his fifteen Sons,
desiring that no wrong might be imposed upon Women.

CHAP. X.
GAining this freedom for the Captives, Guy went on his intended journey, and
coming to a Grave, found a dead skull all Worm-eaten, with which Guy
conversed, speaking to the scalp, and making answer for the Head; Perhaps, said
Guy, thou were a Prince or mighty Monarch, a King, Duke, or Lord? But the
Beggar and the King must all to the Earth, and therefore Man had need to
remember his dying hour: Perhaps thou might be a Queen, Duchess, or Lady,
garnisht with beauty, but now thou art but worms meat, lying in the Grave, a
Sepulcher for all creatures.

And whilst Guy was in this repenting solitude, phelice like a mourning Widow,
clothed her self in sable attire, to express her inward grief and sorrow,
vowing chastity in the absence of her beloved Husband; which pattern of
sobriety may be crowned to everlasting memory, for her whole delight was in
Divine meditations, heavenly consolations, and praying for the welfare of her
Beloved Lord, also in conceit she traveled with him, for her heart was fixed
most absolutely upon him, shedding many bitter tears, fearing that some savage
Monster had devoured him, or that Death had ended his Date before his Natural
course, otherwise she thinks that he sits by a River side, and swells the water
with weeping and hearing in conceit, as an Echo, his voice, phelice, phelice,
it is thee I love.

Thus phelice spent the remnant of her life in sorrow for her dear Lord, and to
show her humility, she sold her jewels, and costly robes, with which she used
to grace King Athelstones Queen, and gave the Money freely to the Poor, and in
this virtuous act she did excel all the Ladies of the Land, for none but
phelice won the hearts of the people; she relieved the Lame, and the Blind, the
Widow and the Fatherless, and all those that came to crave an alms, she gave
it to them freely, building a large Hospital for aged and sick people, that
they might be comforted in their weak conditions, and according to this rule
she laid up her treasure in Heaven, which will be repaid again with life
everlasting.

CHAP. XI.
WHilst phelice was so excellent in her graces, Guy her beloved Husband
Traveled through many Lands and Nations: At last in this weary Journey, Guy
met with Earl Terry his sworn Brother, who had been exiled from his Nation by a
Masterless Traitor; Guy bid him not be dismayed: for, says he, Earl Terry, i will
venture my life for your restoration to your former honor and dignities, the
Earl thanked Guy very courteously, so walking together against Terrys enemy,
Guy challenged him into the field, and courageously slew the Traitor hand to
hand, and set the Earl in all his former places of honor, Earl Terry desired
to know his Champions name, but Guy told him a secret now had otherwise
confined him, nor would Guy take any gratuity for his Love.

Thus noble Guy was successful in all his valiant actions, and finding his head
to be crowned with silver hairs; after many years travel, Guy is resolved (if
the Heavens had decreed it) to lay his aged bones in his own Native country,
for by natures course Guy found that his Glass had but a little sand, and
therefore returning from the Holy Land, he comes for England, and being arrived
on his Native shore, he found the nation in great distress, for the Bloody
Danes had invaded the Land, destroying the Country, burning Cities, Towns and
Villages, killing Men, Women and children in a most barbarous and bloody
manner, insomuch that King Athelstone was forced to fly to the invincible City
of Winchester for the safeguard of his life, which Town was strongly walled
round about, and no Cannons were used in those Days, but he was the best
Champion that won his conquest by the sword.

CHAP. XII.
THe Danes having intelligence of King Athelstones being at Winchester, drew
all their forces thither, and seeing there was no means to win the City, the
Bloody Danes sent in a Summons to K. Athelstone, desiring that an Englishman
might combat with a Dane, and that side to loose all that had their Champion
killed.

Upon this, mighty Colbrond singles himself from the Danes, and entered into
Hide-Mead near Winchester, breathing out venomous words, calling the English
cowardly Dogs, and that he would make their Carcasses meat for Crows and
Ravens: Is now said Colbrond all your English courage become so Timorous that
you dare not fight? What mighty boasting has there been in foreign nations of
these English Cowards, as if they had done deeds of Wonder, who now like Foxes
hid their heads, saying, It is safe sleeping in a whole skin.

Guy hearing the proud disdain of Colbrond, could no longer forbear, but
presently goes to K. Athelstone, and begged this Combat upon his knees at the
Kings gracious hand, the K. liking well the courage of the Pilgrim, for so was
Guy Habited (unknown to all the English Nobility) he bid him go on and prosper,
so Guy walked forth of the North-gate unto Hide-mead where Colbrond, the Danes
mighty Champion was treading every step two yards of ground.

When Colbrond espied Guy in his Palmers Weed, the Giant disdained him with
much ire and scorn, saying, Art thou the best Champion England can afford, for
the honor of their K. Crown and Country: Giant, quoth Guy, your words are
tedious, and it is uncivil for professed Champions to rail, filling the air
with idle Wind, I have a Sword that shall be my Orator, and make deep
expressions in thy blood, no longer stood they to parley, but with great vigor
and courage they fought manfully, but Guy cut upon the Lubbards carcass that he
bled most desperately, Colbrond being moved to chollor, was mighty vehement
against Guy, and his heart could have eat him up at a mouthful, watching for to
break his sword with his knotted club; but Guy was so nimble that in vain
Colbrond struck, for every blow lighted upon the ground, Guy still laid about
him like a Devil, which gave some encouragement to the English: but Colbrond in
his combat began to faint, and bid Guy sue for mercy at his hands, and so leave
fighting. No, coward, says Guy, i will have thy life or else I Will loose my own;
for the King has ventured his crown on my behalf, and therefore know Traitor I
am resolved to fight while breath remains in my Body, with that Guy lent him
such a mighty stroke which made a wide rupture in the Giants flesh, that
corrupted blood issued out, the next blow brought the Giant to the ground,
which the English seeing, they shouted with such joy and acclamation, that
peals of echoes rung in the air. After this conquest won by the English, the
Danes all departed to their own country.

CHAP. XIII.
King Athelstone sent for his Champion to honor him, but Guy refused it,
saying my Liege, I am a mortal man, and therefore set the vain World at
defiance, but by earnest request of the King upon promise of concealment, Guy
told the King his name, which so much rejoiced his heart, that he embraced his
worthy Champion, but Guy took leave of his Sovereign, and as an unknown
stranger went into the Fields; and made him a Cave living very pensive and
solitary: and his dying hour drawing on, Guy sent a messenger with the Ring to
phelice, which she seeing, came with all speed to her beloved Lord, where with
weeping joy they embraced each other, Guy departed his life in her tender arms,
and was honorably Interred, his Widow taking grief for the death of her
Husband, dyed within fifteen days after him, but K. Athelstone to grace the
everlasting memory of Guy, caused many monuments to be erected in
Warwick-Castle, that after ages might speak of the noble fame and Honor of GUY
Earl of WARWICK.

FINIS.

