The Famous Bull IN CAENA DOMINI, Published at ROME every Maunday Thursday
against Heretics, and all Infringers of Ecclesiastical Liberties.

With a PREFACE containing some Reflections on the Bull, and Animadversions on
the late Account of the Proceedings of the PARLIAMENT of PARIS.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed in the Year. 1688.

PREFACE.
AFTER so many and so loud Outcries against that just and necessary
distinction of Old and New Popery, which the late Artifices and shiftings of
our Adversaries have enforced the Divines of our Church to observe and publish;
after so many vehement Protestations against the reality of any such
distinction, and confident assertions of the entire Conformity between the
Doctrine of the present Church of Rome, or rather some few Emissaries of it,
and that of the immediately precedent Ages, so many new Systems,
Representations and Expositions of the pretended Catholic Doctrine; it might
have been justly expected that the Faith and Doctrine, if not of the present
and precedent Age, yet at least of all National Churches at this day in
Communion with the Church of Rome, should be perfectly conformable and
invariable. For the Opinions of the precedent Age may be indeed falsely
represented to us, the truth of them may be obscured by cunning Artifices and
Illusions, or evaded by a bold and obstinate Denial; but the Doctrines and
Practice of the present Time cannot be dissembled, nor without too manifest an
affront to Truth, be denied by these Gentlemen of the Mission, who may perhaps
confound our Reason, but can never delude our Senses.

That this distinction is both just and real, needs no other Argument, than the
known and confessed distinction between French and Italian Popery. For, since
the Patrons and Defenders of both these Parties appeal to the belief of the
Church in the precedent Age; since both propose Tradition as the Rule of their
Faith, and challenge to themselves the Consent and Suffrage of that Rule; since
both their Pleas cannot be allowed, and one Party must necessarily have
departed from the true, ancient, and genuine Popery; it evidently follows, that
as one Party conserves the Old, so the other has framed a New sort of Popery.
I know it is commonly pretended that these differences are of small moment,
neither essential to Christianity, nor to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome,
that either side may be safely believed, and neither renders any Man either
less Orthodox, or more Heretical. But certainly these Pretenses are no other
than Protestations against matters of Faith, since not only the Subjects of
these different Doctrines are Matters of the greatest moment and concern, but
attended with all the solemn Characters and evident Marks of the most momentous
Articles of Faith; I mean an infinite Zeal and Concern of each Party for the
defense and propagation of their own Opinion, and condemning the contrary
Doctrine as a Crime worthy of Excommunication and Anathema, which are never
supposed to be inflicted on Opinions of an indifferent nature, and free from
all Contagion of Heresy or Schism.

If then the Pope and Italian Divines will not allow those of France to be
truly Orthodox and Catholic, if they think them unworthy and incapable of
Ecclesiastical Dignities and Promotions, and daily issue out Excommunications
against such Practices as the Church of France is manifestly known to act,
allow and command; if on the other side, the French Clergy so far return the
Accusation as to attaint the Pope of Heresy, to declare his Censures rash,
unchristian and destructive of the Church, and himself ipso facto
excommunicate; certainly we must renounce all Sense and Reason to imagined
these to be no more than verbal Differences, Scholastic Niceties, and Opinions
of private Divines, which may be safely either rejected or received. That
Differences of this nature have arose between the Church of France and See of
Rome, and those continued with great Heat and Animosity through several Ages,
is manifest both from Ecclesiastical and Civil History. This indeed our
Adversaries deny, but surely by the assistance of that wonderful Secret which
can enable them confidently to propose the greatest Contradictions and
Falsities, and then effectually secure them from blushing at them. The Violence
and Cruelties practiced upon many thousand Protestants of France have been
acted within a few Months in the view of the World and the face of Mankind; yet
there are not wanting who decry all Relations of these Cruelties and
Barbarities as the Calumnies and Fictions of Heretics, and have added this to
the other glorious Titles of Lovis le Grand, that he has reduced his Subjects
to the Profession of one Religion by methods of Mercy and Gentleness. The
present differences between the Courts of Rome and France, how conspicuous
soever, might have suffered the same fate, and with equal Reason have been
denied; if Monsieur Barillon, the French Ambassador, had not, by endeavoring
to vindicate his Master's Honor and the Justice of his Cause, obliged us with
an Account of the Proceedings of the Parliament of Paris upon the Pope's Bull;
an Account which as it is undeniable and unexceptionable to our Adversaries, so
it abundantly evinceth what I have hitherto advanced.

The whole Church of France, and after them the Sorbon, have within a few Years
defined and asserted the Fallibility of the Pope; and herein acted consonantly
to the Principles and Doctrines of their Ancestors, who had constantly taught
the same Doctrine, but never solemnly defined it. However, this Article is
beyond the Alps rejected with a no less contrary Zeal, and Infallibility of
the Pope ranked among the Fundamental Doctrines of the Christian Religion. For
proof of this we need go no farther than the forementioned Account of the
Proceedings of the Parliament at Paris, which assures us, that not only the
Italian Doctors and Emissaries of the Court of Rome are employed carefully to
propagate the Opinion of the Papal Infallibility, as if the belief of that
Point were wanting to render France truly Catholic; but also that one third of
the Episcopal Sees of France being now vacant, and the King having nominated to
them some of those who assisted at the late National Assembly, wherein the
Papal Infallibility was rejected, Persons as well recommendable for their Piety
and Virtue as for their Knowledge and Learning, the Pope refuses to grant Bulls
of Confirmation to them on pretense that they do not make Profession of a sound
or Orthodox Doctrine, because they do Page 5, 23.
not believe him to be Infallible, nor like the Italian Doctors, attribute to
him the Title of Universal Monarch. Which evidently demonstrates, that the
Papal Infallibility is esteemed a necessary Doctrine in Italy, and the denial
of it incompatible with a sound and Orthodox Belief of the Catholic Faith;
since Scholastic Niceties were never known to incapacitate Men for
Ecclesiastical Preferments, or cast them out of the number of Orthodox
Christians.

The Primacy of the Pope is a matter of no less moment. How far it extends is
indeed controverted among Roman Catholics; but that some Power was assigned by
Christ to St. Peter and his Successors over all Members of the Christian
Church, is the common Principle of all, proposed by them as the only Center of
Unity, and a Doctrine necessarily to be received by all Catholics. Whatsoever
this Power is, it being of Divine Institution, cannot be annulled or restrained
by any General Council, much less by the Laws and Edicts of the Civil Power,
but may be exercised independently from both. If then any Church refuses any
Obedience or Submission to the Commands of the Pope, unless they be conformable
to the Canons of Councils, and ratified in the first place by the Civil Power;
they thereby declare an entire Disbelief of any Power committed to the Pope by
Divine Institution. For however they may pretend Councils to be Infallible, and
consequently inerrable in fixing the limits of the Papal Power (although even
according to this supposition the Papal Power not being antecedent to General
Councils, could have no existence in the three first Centuries, when no such
Councils were held) yet this Infallibility cannot be pretended to be inherent
in the Civil Power. The Temporal Prince may possibly be an Atheist, an
Apostate, or an Heretic; may forbid all Obedience to be paid even to the most
just Commands of the Pope, and deny to ratify such Orders as do naturally flow
from the execution of that Commission which Christ has given to the Pope. If
the Pope has indeed any such Divine Commission, he may and ought to execute it
in spite of all opposition of the Civil Power; and if he exceeds not the
bounds of his Commission, he ought to be obeyed by all faithful Christians,
although the Civil Power, far from ratifying his Commands, should even forbid
them to be obeyed. No privilege can exempt us from this Duty, nor any humane
Law dispense with the Obligation of it: yet the Church of France pretends, and
constantly averrs that no Obedience is due to any Commands of the Pope of what
nature soever, until they be first ratified and confirmed by their Prince. This
pretense was not started of late, but has been introduced and continued for
several Ages, being the grand Principle of the so much famed Liberties of the
Gallican Church, a Principle which can no otherwise be maintained than by
disowning and disclaiming all Divine Institution of the least Papal Power; and
accordingly we are told in this account that the boundless and arbitrary
Authority of the Pope has been the Source of almost all the incurable mischief
with which the Church is afflicted; that his Power Page 13, 15, 22, 9.
reaches no farther than the Diocese of Rome, and his Patriarchship than the
neighboring Provinces styled Suburbicarian; that it would be very advantageous
that all Ecclesiastical Matters were transacted in the Kingdom, without ever
being obliged to have recourse to Rome; and that an Ambassador of France,
executing his Master's Orders, cannot thereby incur Ecclesiastical Censures;
although none will deny that Ambassador may possibly in obedience to his
Master's Commands oppose even that Authority of the Pope, which was lawfully
invested in him by Christ, if any such there be.

But not only does the Church of France hereby disown the Divine Institution of
any Papal Power, not only does she declare the Thunders of the Vatican to have
nothing formidable, to be transitory Fires, which exhale into Smoke, and do
neither hurt Vid. page 19.
nor prejudice save to those who darted them; but affirms the Pope to be a
Favourer and Patron of Heretics, ipso facto excommunicate, and no Member, much
less Head, of the Catholic Church. He is accused to have maintained converse
and correspondence with the condemned Disciples of Jansenius, ever since Page
27.
he has been seated in S. Peter's Chair, to have spoken in the highest degree
in their praise, and declared himself their Protector, and thereby so far to
have endangered the Peace of the Church, that nothing less than the foresight
and cares of Lovis le Grand could restore or conserve it: that he favors the
Quietists, and connives at their Heresy; underhand espouseth their Party, and
protects their Persons. He is denounced Excommunicate upon this ground, That he
who without lawful cause, and through humane motives, undertakes to suspend one
of the Members of Jesus Christ, from the Communion of the Church, does Page 12.
separate himself from it by such an unjust Attempt. Nay farther, he is
declared by the ill exercise of his Power, to have lost Page 37.
the Power of binding and unbinding, and thereby in effect to have fallen from
the Papacy and to be deposed. Alas, that Innocent XI, whom our Missionaries
represent to us as the grand Pattern of Apostolic Virtue and Holiness, should
at last be convicted of Heresy, and proved to be no Member of the Church* He
hardly escaped last year from being condemned as a Quietist in the Inquisition
of Rome; and now, (alas poor Man!) instead of enjoying that Honor, which he
has so ambitiously courted, of suffering Martyrdom in defense of the Church,
he may perhaps be burnt for an Heretic, as soon as Lovis le Grand shall please
Page 7.
to execute that Right, which he pretends to have to make himself known in the
quality of his Sovereign.

It cannot be pretended that these are matters of light moment in themselves,
but unhappily at this time heightened into great differences by the ill Conduct
and false Zeal of an ignorant and stupid Pope; since his Actions are grounded
upon, and upheld by the famous Bull in Coena Domini: which himself refers to,
and the Parliament of Paris upon that account decrieth with so much
indignation, telling us, that if this Decree, whereby the Popes declare
themselves Sovereign Monarchs of the World, be legitimate, Page 11.
the Majesty Royal will then depend upon their humor, all their Liberties will
be abolished; the Secular Judges will no longer have the Power to try the
possession of Benefices, nor the civil and criminal Cause of Ecclesiastical
Persons. All this is indeed literally true, and the natural consequence of that
Bull. But then this alone abundantly manifests the Justice of our Charge, and
the real difference of the Doctrines of the Churches of France and Italy in
matters of the greatest moment. In France this Bull is esteemed impious,
unjust, and uncanonical, derogatory to the Rights of Princes and Privileges of
national Churches, contrary to the Laws, and destructive of the Christian
Church. At Rome it is accounted sacred and inviolable, ratified and confirmed
by more than twenty Popes, whose Names and Constitutions are prefixed to the
Bull, published with the greatest Solemnity imaginable every Maunday Thursday,
the Infringers and Violators of it declared ipso facto excommunicate, and
Privileges and Dispensations to the contrary annulled and made void; and all
this, as the Preface of the Bull assures us, to preserve the Unity and
Integrity of the Faith, to teach all private Christians what they are certainly
to believe, and by preventing their Fluctuation and Mistakes in Faith, to
secure to them the attainment of eternal Salvation.

After this Bull has been Enacted and confirmed by so many Popes, promulged so
often and so solemnly, so exactly executed and put in practice by the Church of
Rome, proposed as the Standard of Catholic Doctrine, and appealed to by this
present Pope in the Controversies depending between him and the Court of
France; it cannot be any longer doubted that all matters whether of belief or
practice contained in it are esteemed necessary to Salvation by the particular
Church of Rome. This also the punishments annexed to it evidently demonstrates,
Excommunication and Anathema being ipso facto incurred by the violation of any
part of it. For the very nature of these Excommunications supposes that the
persons offending do by that very act cease to be Christians or Catholics, and
disown themselves to be so, and that the action to which this punishment is
declared to be annexed, is directly contrary to Faith, and destructive of it.
If after all, the Doctrines of this Bull be denied to be justly charged upon
the Church of Rome; it might with equal reason be pretended that the ancient
Commonwealth of Rome could not be justly accused of Idolatry, or the worship of
false gods, although she established that worship with severe Laws, maintained the
exercise of it with the public Revenues, punished the neglect of it with great
strictness and severity, and made her addresses to those false Deities upon all
great occasions and affairs of State; because some few Philosophers opposed the
general opinion, contemned their Ceremonies, and disapproved their worship.

Many and large Observations might be drawn from this Bull disadvantageous to
the Doctrine and Discipline of the present Church of Rome. But I will here take
notice of no more than two. And first, Popery is commonly represented by the
Reformed Divines as injurious to the Rights of Princes, and promoting Sedition
and Rebellion. That the lawfulness of the Deposition of Princes has been often
defined by Popes and Councils, and put in practice by them, cannot be denied;
but then it is pretended that it was not defined dogmatically, nor as a matter
of faith, that their definitions are misrepresented by us, and were never
received nor allowed by the Universal Church. However the justice of our Charge
is sufficiently manifested by this Bull, which asserteth and maintains the
Independency of the Clergy from the Secular Prince, by forbidding the Civil
Power to apprehend, imprison, vex, summon, tax, fine, or exercise any Act of
Authority over Ecclesiastical persons, upon pain of Excommunication and
Anathema. Now Deposition of Princes by the Papal Authority, and exemption of
the Clergy from any obedience to them, by reason of their immediate subjection
to the Pope, being both founded upon the same principle of injustice and
usurpation, do mutually infer each other. Nay to exempt the whole Clergy from
the obedience of their Natural Prince, does actually divest him of all
authority of one part of his subjects, and deprive him of one half of his
Kingdom, especially in those Countries where the Clergy and Regulars are vastly
numerous, as in all places where Popery obtains, or where they possess a great
part of the Revenues of the Kingdom; the Secular Prince being not only
forbidden to impose any Taxes upon the Clergy, or their Revenues, but also even
to receive them when voluntarily offered without an express License from the
Court of Rome. If after all this the Romish Emissaries will pretend to true and
real Loyalty, and acknowledge their subjection to their Natural Prince, they
must first own themselves to be Excommunicated persons, and lay down the name
of Roman Catholics. But we have reason to believe that our English
Missionaries intend no such acknowledgment; since they have with so much pomp
lately revived the Festival of St. Thomas Becket, who died in defense of this
Traiterous Position, That the Clergy owe no Subjection to the Secular Power.

In the next place it may be observed, that the greatest part of this Bull is
employed in Excommunicating and Anathemat^zing all those who any ways presume
to intermeddle in the cognizance of Ecclesiastical matters, or interrupt the
proceedings of Ecclesiastical Courts by Prohibitions, Appeals, or any Evasions
of the like nature; or who give aid, advice, or consent thereto. All this is
worded with such scrupulous nicety and exactness; that it is impossible to be
avoided by any subtle Evasions, and then the Excommunication incurred can be
taken off and absolved only by the Pope himself, except at the point of death,
and then only when eminent signs of true repentance and assurance of full
satisfaction are given. Notwithstanding such express prohibition and
denunciation of Anathema's, it is notoriously known that all Popish Princes do
intermeddle in judging Ecclesiastical Causes; that particularly in France the
Spiritual Courts are almost wholly rendered useless and debarred from exercising
their Authority by frequent Prohibitions from the Secular Court, and that in
Sicily all Ecclesiastical Matters and Causes are decided by the sole Authority
of the King of Spain and his Commissioners; not to mention examples and
practices of the like nature in other Popish Countries. From whence it follows
that by virtue of this Bull all these Princes, their Counselors, Parliaments,
Lawyers, and Adherents, together with all who procure, execute or consent to
these Prohibitions and Impediments of Ecclesiastical Justice, stand
Excommunicate by the Pope, and are really no Members of the Church of Rome.

No Privilege or Exemption can in this case be drawn from ancient Immunities,
Pragmaticks or Concordats, which the Parliament of Paris, so much insist on;
since the Bull proceeds with a Non obstante to all these, and declares them
Null, whenever they oppose the Contents of the Bull. Nay, decrees that
whoever recurs to them, thereby to elude the Obligation of the Bull, shall
thereby ipso Facto become Excommunicate, although he should in no other case have
incurred that Punishment. In vain, therefore does the Parliament of Paris
oppose the Liberties of the Gallican Church, the Pragmatick of St. Lewis, and
Concordat of Lewis the XI. and Francis to the present Attempts of the Pope, and
his Excommunication of the Marquis of Lavardin. For the Pope having wisely
grounded his Proceedings upon the Bull in Caena Domini, which annuls and
abolisheth them all, the Parliament must either forego their Plea, or their
pretense of retaining Communion with the Church of Rome. By the same Artifice
the Pope has cut off the Advocates Appeal to a future Council. For the Bull
declares that all who make, admit, favor, or countenance any such Appeal,
shall incur Excommunication. Thus also the Argument of the Invalidity of the
Excommunication of the Ambassador, drawn from the Omission of his Name in the
Papal Instrument, falls to ground. For the Bull has particularly provided for
this Case, and decrees that all Violators of it, of what Dignity soever, shall
be as effectually Excommunicated, as if they had been particularly named in it.

If then all the Violators of this Bull, are ipso Facto Excommunicated; and
all, or at least almost all the Popish Princes of Christendom, together with
the greatest part of their Subjects, are open and manifest Violators of it, it
follows that we have very false Notions of Popery, when we imagine it a large
and diffusive Sect; that vast and numerous Schisms are entertained, and lay
undiscerned in the Bosom of the Church of Rome; that the Primacy of the Pope
instead of being the Center of Unity, is indeed the Fountain of Schism; and
that among many Papists, there are few Catholics. For if, as our Adversaries
commonly define it, the Catholic Church be the Collection of all Christians in
Communion with the particular Church of Rome, whosoever are Excommunicated by
the Pope, cease to be in Communion with the Church of Rome, and consequently in
their Opinion, cease to be Catholics. They may indeed still remain Members of
the truly Catholic Church; but then a true Notion of Catholic Church must be
allowed, and the former must be discarded. But then the Church of England may
also put in her claim for Catholic, and the grand Argument of our Adversaries
against her Reformation, will be totally dissolved. However it manifestly
appears that this Bull has shut most Papists out of the Bosom of the Church,
and reduced the Church of Rome to very narrow Limits.

Whenever, therefore our zealous Missionaries exaggerate to us the extent of
their Church, and urge the glorious Title of Amplitude in favor of it, we may
justly reject it; it not certainly appearing, who may be properly called Roman
Catholics, since this, and other Bulls of the like Nature, which inflict ipso
Facto Excommunications, deprive vast numbers of Men, whole Societies, and
perhaps Kingdoms, of Communion with the Church of Rome; or if we in any manner
allow their Argument, we must first require them to substract from their
account all whom the Pope in this Bull does Excommunicate, and thereby puts in
the same Condition with Turks, Infidels, and Heretics. We have one request
more to them, that to facilitate the Conversion of three Kingdoms, they would
obtain of the Pope an Abolition of this Bull, or at least of that Clause of it,
which Excommunicates all Secular Persons who possess Church Lands. For since
out of the abundance of their Generosity they have been pleased to assure to us
the quiet Possession of Abby-Lands, it remains to complete their kindness, that
they set us right in the Court of Rome, as well as that of Westminster.
Otherwise it will be an eternal Obstacle to the Conversion of the Possessors of
these Lands, if the Curses of our Holy Father the Pope, be plentifully showred
down upon them every Maunday-Thursday; and they must entrust their Souls to the
Pope for no other end, than that he may deliver them up to the Devil.

Ex Bullario Laertii Cherubini, Romae 1638. TOM. III. p. 183.
Constitutio Pauli V. 63.
EXcommunicatio and Anathematizatio quorumcunque Haereticorum, eorumque
fautorum ac Schismaticorum, vel Ecclesiasticam Libertatem laedentium, aut
quoquo modo dispositis in hac Bulla, de more in die Caena Domini publicare
solita, contravenientium.

Quoad omnia quasi Capitula hujus Bullae (ultra Extravagan. 3. Pauli II. and
Extravagan. 5. Sixti IV. in tit. de Paenitentia and Remissionibus) habes supra
Constitut. 1. Vrbani V. fol. 215. Constitut. 25. Julii II. f. 482. Constitut.
10. Pauli III. f. 522. necnon Constitut. 81. Gregorii XIII. f. 348. l. 2.
Aliorum autem Bullas ejusmodi Caenae Domini nuncupatas volens praetermisi, his
duntaxat contentus, ex quibus pro temporum condition Romanos Pontifices
aliquid immutasse cognoscatur. Non tamen posthabui proxime indicandas, uti
apprime necessarias, and super hujus Bullae capitibus specialiter editas.

Extat ergo in hoc Opere specialis edita sanctio Nicolai III. circa primum
hujus Bullae in ejus Constable. 2. sup. fol. 143. and circa 2. extat Constable. 5. Pii
II. f. 290. l. 1. Circa 4. extat Constable. 7. Pii V. f. 137. l. 2. Circa 7. extat
Constable. 3. Nicolai V. f. 283. l. 1. Circa 10. extat Canon Callisti I. in c. 23.
cause. 24. q. 3. Circa 11. respectu Cardinalium extat Constable. 16. Leonis X. f.
420. l. 1. and alia 93. Pii V. f. 222. l. 2. Circa 12 extat Constable. 11.
Alexandri VI. f. 352. Circa 14. extat Constable. 2. Martini V. f. 239 and alia 17.
Innocentii VIII. f. 343. ac altera 30. Leonis X. f. 440. necnon alia 39.
Clementis VII. f. 505. l. 1. and altera 19. Gregorii XIII. f. 290. l. 2. Circa
15. multi sunt Canones in Corpore Juris, and extat Constable. 10. Martini V. f.
247. Circa 19. extat Constable. 3. Vrbani VI. f. 222. Et Circa 20. extat Constable.
(...) Joannis XXII. f. 174. and alia 3. Clementis VI. f. 212. alia 13. Leonis
X. f. 314. and altera 11. Pauli IV. f. 595.

Alia hujusmodi Excommunicatio in die Coenae Domini Promulgari solita est in S.
D. N. Vrbani VIII. Constable. 62. Pastoralis infr. Tom. 4.

Paulus Episcopus, Servus Servorum Dei, ad perpetuam rei memoriam.
PAstoralis Romani Pontificis vigilantia and sollicitudo, cum in omni
Reipublicae Christianae pace and tranquillitate procuranda pro fui muneris
officio assidue versatur, tum potissimum in Catholicae fidei sine qua
impossible est placere Deo, unitate atque integritate retinenda, maxim
elucet: Nimirum ut fideles Christi non sint parvuli fluctuantes, neque
circumferantur omni vento doctrinae in nequitia hominum ad circumventionem
erroris, sed omnes occurrant in unitate fidei and agnitionis Filii Dei in virum
perfectum, neque se in hujus vitae societate and communione laedant, aut inter
se alter alteri offensionem praebeat, sed potius in vinculo caritatis
conjuncti, tanquam unius corporis membra sub Christo capite, ejusque in terris
Vicario Romano Pontifice Beatissimi Petri Successore, a quo totius Ecclesiae
unitas dimanat, augeantur in aedificatione, atque ita divina gratia adjutrice
sic praesentis vitae quiet gaudeant, ut sutura quoque beatitudine perfruantur.
Ob quas sane causas Romani Pontifices praedecessores nostri hodierna die, quae
anniversaria DominicaeCoenae commemoratione solennis est, spiritualem
Ecclesiasticae disciplinae gladium, and salutaria justitiae arma per
ministerium summi Apostolatus ad Dei gloriam and animarum salutem solenniter
exercere consueverunt. Nos igitur, quibus nihil optabilius est, quam fidei
inviolatam integritatem, publicam Pacem and Justitiam, deo autore, tueri,
vetustum and solennem hunc morem sequentes;

. 1. Excommunicamus and anathematizamus ex part Dei Omnipotentis, Patris and
Filii and Spiritus Sancti, auctoritate quoque Beatorum Apostolorum Petri and
Pauli, ac nostra, quoscunque Hussitas, Vuichlephistas, Luteranos, Zuinglianos,
Calvinistas, Ugonottos, Anabaptistas, Trinitarios, and a Christiana fide
Apostatas, ac omnes and singulos alios Haereticos, quocunque nomine censeantur,
and cujuscunque sectae existant; ac eis credentes, eorumque receptatores,
fautores, and generaliter quoslibet illorum defensores; ac eorundem libros
haeresin continentes, vel de Religione tractantes sine auctoritate nostra and
Sedis Apostolicae scienter legentes aut retinentes, imprimentes, seu
quomodolilet defendentes, ex quavis causa public vel occulte, quovis ingenio
vel color; necnon Schismaticos and eos qui se a nostra and Romani Pontificis
pro tempore existentis obedientia pertinaciter subtrahunt vel recedunt.

2. Item, Excommunicamus and anathematizamus omnes and singulos, cujuscunque
status, gradus, seu conditionis fuerint, Universitates Collegia and Capitula,
quocunque nomine nuncupentur, interdicimus, ab ordinationibus seu mandatis
nostris ac Romanorum Pontificum pro tempore existentium ad Universale futurum
Concilium appellantes; necnon eos quorum auxilio vel favore appellatum fuerit.

3. Item, Excommunicamus and anathematizamus omnes Piratas, Cursarios ac
Latrunculos Maritimos, discurrentes Mare nostrum, praecipue a Monte Argentario
usque ad Terraciuam, ac omnes eorum fautores, receptatores and defensores.

. 4. Item, Excommunicamus and anathematizamus omnes and singulos, qui
Christianorum quorumcunque navibus tempestate, seu in transversum (ut dici
solet) jactatis, vel quoquo modo naufragium passis, seu in ipsis navibus, sive
ex eisdem ejecta in Mare, vel in littore inventa, cujuscunque generis bona, tam
in nostris, Tyrrheni and Adriatici, quam in caeteris cujusque Maris regionibus
and littoribus, surripuerint; ita ut nec ob quodcunque Privilegium,
Consuetudinem, aut longissimi etiam immemorabilis temporis possessionem, seu
alium quemcunque praetextum excusari possint.

5. Item, Excommunicamus and anathematizamus omnes qui in terris suis nova
Pedagia seu Gabellas, praeterquam in casibus sibi a jure, seu ex speciali sedis
Apostolicae licentia permissis, imponunt vel augent, seu imponi vel augeri
prohibita exigunt.

6. Item, Excommunicamus and anathematizamus omnes falsarios literarum
Apostolicarum, etiam in forma Brevis, ac* Supplicationum, Gratiam vel Justitiam
concernentium, per Romanum Pontisicem vel S. R. E. Vicecancellarios seu
gerentes vices eorum, aut de mandato ejusdem Pontificis signatarum, necnon
falso publicantes literas Apostolicas, etiam in forma Brevis, and etiam falso
signantes Supplicationes hujusmodi sub nomine Romani Pontificis seu
Vicecancellarii, aut gerentium vices praedictorum.

7. Item, Excommunicamus and anathematizamus omnes illos, qui ad Saracenos,
Turcas, and alios Christiani nominis hosts, and inimicos, vel Haereticos per
nostras vel hujus Sanctae Sedis sententias express vel nominatim declaratos
deferunt seu transmittunt Equos, Arma, Ferrum, filum Ferri, Stannum, Chalybem,
omniaque Metallorum genera atque Bellica Instrumenta, Lignamina, Canapem,
Funes, tam ex ipso Canape quam alia quacunque materia, and ipsam materiam,
aliaque hujusmodi, quibus Christianos and Catholicos impugnant; necnon illos
qui per se vel per alios de rebus statum Christianae Reipublicae
concernentibus, in Christianorum perniciem and damnum ipsos Turcas and
Christianae Religionis inimicos, necnon Haereticos, in damnum Catholicae
Religionis, certiores faciunt, illisque ad id auxilium consilium vel favorem
quomodolibet praestant. Non obstantibus quibuscunque Privilegiis, quibusvis
Personis, Principibus, Rebus-publicis, per Nos and Sedem praedictam hactenus
concessis, de hujusmodi prohibitione expressam mentionem non facientibus.

8. Item, Excommunicamus and anathematizamus omnes impedientes seu invadentes
eos, qui victualia seu alia ad usum Romanae Curiae necessaria adducunt, ac
etiam eos qui ne ad Romanam Curiam adducantur vel afferantur prohibent,
impediunt seu perturbant, seu haec facientes defendunt per se vel per alios,
cujuscunque fuerint ordinis, praeeminentiae, conditionis and status, etiamsi
Pontificali seu Regali aut alia quavis Ecclesiastica vel mundana praefulgeant
dignitate.

9. Item, Excommunicamus and anathematizamus omnes illos, qui ad sedem
Apostolicam venientes, and recedentes ab eadem, sua vel aliorum opera
interficiunt, mutilant, spoliant, capiunt, detinent; necnon illos omnes qui
jurisdictionem ordinariam vel delegatam a nobis vel nostris Judicibus non
habentes, illam sibi temere vendicantes, similia contra morantes in eadem Curia
audent perpetrare.

10. Item, Excommunicamus and anathematizamus omnes interficientes, mutilantes,
vulnerantes, detinentes, capientes seu depraedantes Romipetas seu Perigrinos ad
Urbem causa Devotionis seu Peregrinationis accedentes, and in ea morantes, vel
ab ipsa recedentes, and in his dantes auxilium, consilium, vel favorem.

11. Item, Excommunicamus and anathematizamus omnes interficientes,
vulnerantes, mutilantes, percutientes, capientes, carcerantes, detinentes, vel
hostiliter insequentes S. R. E. Cardinales, ac Patriarchas, Archiepiscopos,
Episcopos, Sedisque Apostolicae Legatos vel nuncios, aut eos a suis
Diaecesibus, Territoriis, Terris, seu Dominiis ejicientes, necnon ea mandantes
vel rata habentes, seu praestantes in eis auxilium, consilium, vel favorem.

12. Item, Excommunicamus and anathematizamus omnes illos, qui per se vel per
alios, personas Ecclesiasticas quascunque, vel seculares ad Romanam Curiam
super eorum causis and negotiis recurrentes, ac illa in eadem Curia
prosequentes aut procurantes, negotiorumque gestores, advocatos, procuratores
and agentes, seu etiam Auditores vel Judices super dictis causis vel negotiis
deputatos, occasion causarum vel negotiorum hujusmodi, occidunt, seu quoquo
modo percutiunt, bonis spoliant; seu qui per se vel per alios, direct vel
indirecte delicta hujusmodi committere, exequi vel procurare, aut in eisdem
auxilium, consilium vel favorem praestare non verentur, cujuscunque
praeeminentiae and dignitatis fuerint.

13. Item, Excommunicamus and anathematizamus omnes tam* Ecclesiasticos quam
Seculares, cujuscunque dignitatis, qui praetexentes frivolam quandam
appellationem a gravamine vel futura executione literarum Apostolicarum etiam
in forma Brevis, tam gratiam quam justitiam concernentium, necnon citationum,
inhibitionum, sequestrorum, monitoriorum, processuum, executorialium, and
aliorum Decretorum, a Nobis and Sede praedicta seu Legatis, Nunciis
Praesidentibus, Palatii nostri and Camerae Apostolicae Auditoribus,
Commissariis, aliisque Judicibus and delegatis Apostolicis emanatorum, and quae
pro tempore emanaverint, aut alias ad Curias Saeculares and Laicam potestatem
recurrunt, and ab ea instante etiam Fisci Procuratore and Advocato,
appellationes hujusmodi admitti, ac literas, citationes, inhibitiones,
sequestra, monitoria, and alia praedicta, capi and retineri faciunt. Quive illa
simpliciter, vel sine eorum beneplacito and consensu vel examine executioni
demandari, aut ne Tabelliones and Notarii super hujusmodi literarum and
processuum executione, instrumenta vel acta conficere, aut confectaparti cujus
interest, tradere debeant, impediunt vel prohibent, ac etiam parts seu eorum
agentes, consanguineos, affines, familiares, notarios, executores, and
sub-executores literarum, citationum, monitoriorum, and aliorum praedictorum
capiunt, percutiunt, vulnerant, carcerant, detinent, ex Civitatibus, Locis, and
Regnis ejiciunt, bonis spoliant, perterrefaciunt, concutiunt and comminantur
per se vel per alium seu alios, public vel occulte; quive alias quibuscunque
personis in genere vel in specie, ne pro quibusvis eorum negotiis profequendis
seu gratiis vel literis impetrandis ad Romanam Curiam accedant, aut recursum
habeant, seu gratias ipsas vel literas a dicta Sede impetrent seu impetratis
utantur, direct vel indirecte prohibere, statuere seu mandare, vel eas apud se
aut Notarios seu Tabelliones, vel alias quomodolibet retinere praesumunt.

14. Item excommunicamus and anathematizamus omnes and singulos, qui per se vel
alios, auctoritate propria ac de facto, quarumcunque exemptionum vel aliarum
gratiarum and literarum Apostolicarum praetextu, beneficiales, and decimarum,
ac alias causas spirituales ac spiritualibus annexas, ab Auditoribus and
Commissariis nostris, aliisque Judicibus Ecclesiasticis avocant; illarumve
cursum and audientiam; ac personas, capitula, Conventus, Collegia, causas ipsas
prosequi volentes impediunt ac se de illarum cognitione tanquam Judices
interponunt. Quive parts actrices, quae illas committi fecerunt and faciunt,
ad revocandum and revocari faciendum citationes vel inhibitiones aut alias
literas in eis decretas, and ad faciendum vel consentiendum eos contra quos
tales inhibitiones emanarunt a censuris and paenis in illis contentis absolvi,
per statutum vel alias compellunt; vel executionem literarum Apostolicarum seu
executorialium, processuum* ac decretorum praedictorum quomodolibet impediunt,
vel suum ad id favorem, consilium aut assensum praestant, etiam praetextu
violentiae prohibendae, vel aliarum praetensionum, seu etiam, donec ipsi ad nos
informandos, ut dicunt, supplicaverint aut supplicari fecerint; nisi
supplicationes hujusmodi coram Nobis and sede Apostolica legitime prosequantur,
etiamsi talia committentes fuerint Praesidentes Cancellariarum, Consiliorum,
Parlamentorum, Cancellarii, Vice-cancellarii, Consiliarii, ordinarii vel
extraordinarii* quorumcunque Principum Saecularium; etiamsi Imperiali, Regali,
Ducali, vel alia quacunque praefulgeant dignitate; aut Archiepiscopi, Episcopi,
Abbates, Commendatarii seu Vicarii fuerint.

15. Quive ex eorum praetenso officio, vel ad instantiam partis, aut aliorum
quorumcunque personas Ecclesiasticas, Capitula, Conventus, Collegia Ecclesiarum
quarumcunque coram se ad suum Tribunal, Audientiam, Cancellariam, Consilium,
vel Parlamentum, praeter juris Canonici dispositionem, trahunt, vel trahi
faciunt vel procurant, direct vel indirecte, quovis quaesito color; necnon
qui statuta, ordinationes, constitutiones, pragmaticas, seu quaevis alia
decreta in genere vel in specie, ex quavis causa and quovis quaesito color, ac
etiam praetextu cujusvis consuetudinis and privilegii, vel alias quomodolibet
fecerint, ordinaverint and publicaverint, vel factis and ordinatis usi fuerint,
unde libertas Ecclesiastica tollitur, seu in aliquo laeditur vel deprimitur,
aut alio quovis modo restringitur, seu nostris and dictae sedis, ac
quarumcunque ecclesiarum juribus quomodolibet direct vel indirecte, tacit vel
express praejudicatur.

16. Necnon qui Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, aliosque superiores and inferiores
Praelatos, and omnes alios quoscunque Judices Ecclesiasticos ordinarios
quomodolibet hac de causa direct vel indirecte, carcerando vel molestando
eorum agentes, procuratores, familiares necnon consanguineos and affines, aut
alias impediunt, quo minus jurisdictione sua Ecclesiastica contra quoscunque
utantur, secundum quod Canones and sacrae constitutiones Ecclesiasticae, and
decreta Conciliorum Generalium, and praesertim Tridentini, statuunt; ac etiam
eos qui post ipsorum ordinariorum ac etiam ab eis delegatorum quorumcunque
sententias and decreta, aut alias fori ecclesiastici judicium eludentes, ad
Cancellarias and alias Curias seculares recurrunt, and ab illis prohibitiones
and mandata etiam paenalia, ordinariis aut delegatis praedictis decerni, and
contra illos exequi procurant; eos quoque qui haec decernunt and exequntur, seu
dant auxilium, consilium, patrocinium and favorem in eisdem.

17. Quive jurisdictiones seu fructus, reditus and proventus ad nos and sedem
Apostolicam, and quascunque Ecclesiasticas personas ratione Ecclesiarum,
Monasteriorum and aliorum beneficiorum Ecclesiasticorum pertinentes usurpant,
vel etiam quavis ocsione vel causa sine Romani Pontificis vel aliorum ad id
legitimam facultatem habentium expressa licentia sequestrant.

18. Quive collectas, decimas, talleas, praestantias and alia onera Clericis,
Praelatis and aliis personis Ecclesiasticis, ac eorum and Ecclesiarum,
Monasteriorum and aliorum beneficiorum Ecclesiasticorum bonis, illorumve
fructibus, reditibus and proventibus hujusmodi, absque simili Romani Pontificis
speciali and expressa licentia imponunt, and diversis etiam exquisitis modis
exigunt, aut sic imposita a sponte dantibus and concedentibus recipient. Necnon
qui per se vel alios direct vel indirecte praedicta facere, exequi vel
procurare, aut in eisdem auxilium, consilium vel favorem praestare non
verentur, cujuscunque sint praeeminentiae, dignitatis, ordinis, conditionis aut
status, etiamsi Imperiali aut Regali fulgeant dignitate; seu Principes, Duces,
Comites, Barons, and alii Potentatus; quicunque etiam Regnis, Provinciis,
Civitatibus and Terris quoquomodo Praesidentes, consiliarii and Senatores, aut
quavis etiam Pontificali dignitate insigniti. Innovantes decreta super his per
Sacros Canones, tam in Lateranensi novissime celebrato, quam aliis Conciliis
generalibus edita, etiam cum censuris and paenis in eis contentis.

19. Item, Excommunicamus and anathematizamus omnes and quoscunque Magistratus
and Judices, Notarios, Scribas, Executores, Subexecutores quomodolibet se
interponentes in causis capitalibus seu criminalibus contra Personas
Ecclesiasticas, illas processando, banniendo, seu sententias contra illas
proferendo vel exequendo sine speciali, specifica and expressa hujus Sanctae
Sedis Apostolicae licentia; quique ejusmodi licentiam ad Personas and casus non
expressos extendunt, vel alias illa perperam abutuntur, etiamsi talia
committentes fuerint Consiliarii, Senatores, Praesidentes, Cancellarii,
Vice-cancellarii, aut quovis alio nomine nuncupati.

20. Item, Excommunicamus and anathematizamus omnes illos, qui per se seu
alios, direct vel indirecte, sub quocunque titulo seu color invadere,
destruere, occupare and detinere praesumpserint, in totum vel in partem Almam
Urbem, Regnum Siciliae, Insulas Sardiniae, and Corsicae, Terras circa Pharum,
Patrimonium B. Petri in Tuscia, Ducatum Spoletanum, Comitatum Venaysinum,
Sabinensem, Marchiae, Anconitanae, Massae, Trebariae, Romandiolae, Campaniae,
and Maritimas Provincias, illarumque Terras and loca, ac Terras specialis
commissionis Arnulforum, Civitatesque nostras Bononiam, Caesenam, Ariminum,
Beneventum, Perusium, Avenionem, Civitatem Castelli, Tudertum, Ferrariam,
Comaclum, and alias Civitates, Terras and loca, vel jura ad ipsam Romanam
Ecclesiam pertinentia, dictaeque Romanae Ecclesiae mediate vel immediate
subjecta, necnon supremam jurisdictionem in illis, Nobis and eidem Romanae
Ecclesiae competentem, de facto usurpare, perturbare, retinere and vexare
variis modis praesumunt, necnon adhaerentes, fautores, and defensores eorum,
seu illis auxilium, consilium vel favorem quomodolibet praestantes.

21. Volentes praesentes nostros Processus, ac omnia and quaecunque his literis
contenta, quousque alii hujusmodi processus a Nobis aut Romano Pontifice pro
tempore existente fiant aut publicentur, durare suosque effectus omnino sortiri.

22. Caeterum a praedictis sententiis nullus per alium quam per Romanum
Pontificem, nisi in mortis articulo constitutus, nec etiam tunc, nisi de stando
Ecclesiae mandatis and satisfaciendo cautione praestita, absolvi possit, etiam
praetextu quarumvis facultatum and indultorum quibuscunque personis
Ecclesiasticis, secularibus, and quorumvis Ordinum, etiam Mendicantium, and
Militarium, regularibus, etiam Episcopali vel alia majori dignitate praeditis,
ipsisque Ordinibus and eorum Monasteriis, Conventibus and Domibus ac Capitulis,
Collegiis, Confraternitatibus, Congregationibus, Hospitalibus, and locis piis,
necnon Laicis, etiamsi Imperiali, Regali, and alia mundana excellentia
fulgentibus, per Nos and dictam Sedem ac cujusvis Concilii decreta, verbo,
literis, aut alia quacunque Scriptura in genere and in specie concessorum and
innovatorum, ac concedendorum and innovandorum.

23. Quod si forte aliqui contra tenorem praesentium talibus excommunicatione
and anathemate laqueatis, vel eorum alicui absolutionis beneficium impendere de
facto praesumpserint, eos excommunicationis sententia innodamus, gravius contra
eos spiritualiter and temporaliter, prout expedire noverimus, processuri.

24. Declarantes ac protestants quamcunque absolutionem, etiamsi solenniter
per Nos faciendam, praedictos excommunicatos sub praesentibus comprehensos,
nisi prius a praemissis cum vero proposito similia ulterius non committendi,
destiterint, ac quoad eos, qui contra ecclesiasticam libertatem, ut
praemittitur, statuta fecerint, nisi prius statuta, ordinationes,
constitutiones, pragmaticas, and decreta hujusmodi public revocaverint, and ex
Archivis seu Capitularibus, locis aut libris, in quibus annotata reperiuntur,
deleri and cassari, ac Nos de revocatione hujusmodi certiores fecerint, eos non
comprehendere, nec eis aliter suffragari; quinetiam per hujusmodi absolutionem,
aut quoscunque alios actus contrarios tacitos vel expressos, ac etiam per
patientiam and tolerantiam nostram vel Successorum nostrorum, quantocunque
tempore continuatam, praemissis omnibus and singulis, ac quibuscunque juribus
Sedis Apostolicae ac Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae undecunque and quandocunque
quaesitis, vel quaerendis nullatenus praejudicari posse aut debere.

25. Non obstantibus privilegiis, indulgentiis, indultis, and literis
Apostolicis generalibus vel specialibus supradictis, vel eorum alicui, seu
aliquibus aliis cujuscunque ordinis, status vel conditionis, dignitatis and
praeeminentiae fuerint, etiamsi, ut praemittitur, Pontificali, Imperiali,
Regali, seu quavis Ecclesiastica and mundana praefulgeant dignitate, vel eorum
Regnis, Provinciis, civitatibus seu locis a praedicta Sede ex quavis causa
etiam per viam contractus aut remunerationis, and sub quavis alia forma and
tenore, ac cum quibusvis clausulis, etiam derogatoriarum derogatoriis
concessis, etiam continentibus quod excommunicari, anathematizari vel interdici
non possint, per literas Apostolicas non facientes plenam and expressam ac de
verbo ad verbum de indulto hujusmodi, ac de ordinibus, locis, nominibus
propriis, cognominibus and dignitatibus eorum mentionem, necnon
consuetudinibus, etiam immemorabilibus, ac praescriptionibus quantumcunque
longissimis, and aliis quibuslibet observantiis, scriptis vel non scriptis, per
quae contra hos nostros Processus ac sententias, quo minus includantur in eis,
se juvare valiant ac tueri. Quae omnia quoad hoc, eorum omnium tenores, ac si
ad verbum, nihil penitus omisso, insererentur, praesentibus pro expressis
habentes penitus tollimus, and omnino revocamus: caeterisque contrariis
quibuscunque.

26. Ut vero praesentes nostri processus ad publicam omnium notitiam facilius
deducantur, Chartas seu Membranas Processus ipsos continentes, valvis Ecclesiae
S. Joannis Lateranensis, and Basilicae Principis Apostolorum de Urbe appendi
faciemus; ut ii, quos Processus hujusmodi concernunt, quod ad ipsos non
pervenerint, aut quod ipsos ignoraverint, nullam possint excusationem
praetendere aut ignorantiam allegare; cum non sit verisimile, id remanere
incognitum, quod tam patenter omnibus publicatur.

27. Insuper ut Processus ipsi and praesentes literae, ac omnia and singula in
eis contenta, eo fiant notiora, quo in plerisque Civitatibus and locis fuerint
publicata; universis and singulis Patriarchis, Primatibus, Archiepiscopis,
Episcopis, and locorum Ordinariis, and Praelatis ubilibet constitutis, per haec
scripta committimus, and in virtute sanctae obedientiae districte praecipiendo
mandamus; ut per se vel per alium seu alios praesentes literas, postquam eas
receperint, seu earum habuerint notitiam, semel in anno, aut, si expedire
viderint, etiam pluries, in Ecclesiis suis, dum in eis major populi multitudo
ad Divina convenerit, solenniter publicent, and ad Christi fidelium mentes
reducant, nuncient, and declarent.

28. Caeterum Patriarchae, Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, aliique locorum Ordinarii,
and Ecclesiarum Praelati, necnon Rectores, caeterique curam animarum
exercentes, ac Presbytei saeculares and quorumvis Ordinum regulares ad
audiendas peccatorum confessiones quavis authoritate deputati, transumptum
praesentium Literarum penes se habeant, easque diligenter legere and percipere
studeant.

29. Volentes earundum praesentium transumptis, etiam impressis, Notarii
publici manu subscriptis, and sigillo Judicis Ordinarii Romanae Curiae, vel
alterius personae in dignitate ecclesiastica constitutae munitis, eandem
prorsus fidem in judicio, and extra illud ubique locorum adhibendam fore, quae
ipsis praesentibus adhiberetur, si essent exhibitae vel ostensae.

30. Nulli ergo omnino hominum liceat hanc paginam nostrae excommunicationis,
anathematizationis, interdicti, innovationis, innodationis, declarationis,
protestationis, sublationis, revocationis, commissionis, mandati and voluntatis
infringere, vel ei ausu temerario contraire. Siquis autem hoc attentare
praesumpserit, indignationem Omnipotentis Dei ac Beatorum Petri and Pauli
Apostolorum ejus se noverit incursurum.

Datum Romae apud S. Petrum, Anno Incarnationis Dominicae Millessimo
sexcentesimo decimo, sexto Idus Aprilis, Pontificatus nostri anno quinto.
Anno a Nativitate Domini Nostri Jesu Christi millesimo sexcentesimo decimo
tertio, Indict. 11. die vero quarta mensis Aprilis, Pontificatus Sanctiss. in
Christo Patris and D. N. D. Pauli divina providentia Papae V. anno octavo,
supradictae literae affixae and publicatae fuerunt ad Valvas Basilicarum S.
Joannis Lateranensis and Principis Apostolorum, and in acie Campi Florae per
nos Baldassarem Vacham and Brandimartem Latinum Cursores.

Jacobus Brambilla, Mag. Curs.

The Sixty third Constitution of Paul V.
THe Excommunication and Anathematization of all Heretics whatsoever, and
their favorers, and Schismatics, or of those who violate the Ecclesiastical
Liberty, or any ways infringe the Contents of this Bull, which is wont to be
published on Maunday-Thursday.

As for almost all the Chapters of this Bull, (besides the 3d Extravagant of
Paul II. and the 5th Extravagant of Sixtus IV. in the Title of Penance and
Remissions) you have them before ordained in the first Constitution of Urban.
V. fol. 215. in the 25th Constitution of Julius II. f. 482. in the 10th
Constitution of Paul III. f. 522. and in the 81st Constitution of Gregory XIII.
f. 348. lib. 2. Other Bulls of this nature, called Bulls in Caena Domini, I
have purposely omitted, being content with these; from which it may appear that
the Popes have made some Variation in them, according to the Exigency of the
times. Yet I would not omit those which follow, as being especially necessary,
and partiticularly published upon the several Chapters of this Bull.

There is extant therefore in this Collection, a particular Edict of Nicolas
III. about the 1st Section of this Bull in his 2d Constitution. Sup. fol. 143.
concerning Sect. 2. there is extant, Constable. 5. of Pius II. f. 290. l. 1.
concerning. 4. there is extant, Constable. 7. of Pius V. f. 137. l. 2. concerning.
7. is extant, Constable. 3. of Nicolas V. f. 283. l. 1. concerning. 10. is extant a
Canon of Callistus. in c. 23. Constable. 24. qu. 3. Concerning. 11. in respect of
the Cardinals is extant, Constable. 16. of Leo X. f. 420. l. 1. and Constable. 93. of
Pius V. f. 222. l. 2. Concerning 12. is extant Constable. 11. of Alexander VI. f.
352. Concerning 14. is extant Constable. 2. of Martin V. f. 239. and Constable. 17. of
Innocent VIII. f. 343. and Constable. 30. of Leo X. f. 440. and Constable. 39. of
Clement VII. f. 505. l. 1. and Constable. 19. of Gregory XIII. f. 290. l. 2.
Concerning 15. are many Canons in the Body of the Law, and Constable. 10. of Martin
V. f. 247. Concerning 19. is extant Constable. 3. of Urban VI. f. 222. Concerning
20. is extant Constable. 8. of John XXII. f. 174. and Constable. 3. of Clement VI. f.
212. and Constable. 13. of Leo X. f. 314. and Constable. 11. of Paul IV. f. 595.

Another like Excommunication usually published on Maunday Thursday, is extant
in the 62d Constitution of our Holy Lord Urban VIII. inf. Tom 4.

Paul Bishop, Servant of the Servants of God, in perpetual memory of the thing
now Decreed.
THE Pastoral vigilance and care of the Bishop of Rome, being by the duty of
his Office continually employed in procuring by all means the peace and
tranquillity of Christendom, is more especially eminent in retaining and
preserving the unity and integrity of Catholic Faith; without which it is
impossible to please God: That so the faithful of Christ may not be as Children
wavering, nor be carried about with every wind of Doctrine, by the cunning
craft of men, whereby they lay in wait to deceive; but that all may meet in the
unity of the Faith, and the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man: That
in the communion and society of this life they may not injure nor offend one
another; but rather being joined together with the bond of Charity, as members
of one body under Christ the Head, and his Vicar upon Earth the Bishop of Rome,
St. Peter's Successor, from whom the unity of the whole Church does flow, may
be increased in edification, and by the assistance of the Divine Grace may so
enjoy the tranquillity of this present life, that they may also attain eternal
happiness. For which Reasons the Bishops of Rome, our Predecessors, upon this
day, which is dedicated to the Anniversary commemoration of our Lord's Supper,
have been wont solemnly to exercise the Spiritual Sword of Ecclesiastical
Discipline and wholesome Weapons of Justice by the Ministry of the Supreme
Apostolate to the glory of God, and salvation of Souls. We therefore, desiring
nothing more than by the guidance of God to preserve inviolable the integrity
of Faith, public Peace and Justice; following this ancient and solemn Custom;

. 1. We excommunicate and anathematize in the name of God Almighty, Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, and by the authority of the Blessed Apostles Peter and Paul,
and by our own, all Hussites, Wiclephists, Lutherans, Zuinglians, Calvinists,
Hugonots, Anabaptists, Trinitarians, and Apostates from the Christian Faith,
and all other Heretics by whatsoever name they are called, and of whatsoever
Sect they be: as also their Adherents, Receivers, Favorers, and generally any
Defenders of them; together with all who without our Authority, or that of the
Apostolic See, knowingly read, keep, print, or any ways for any cause
whatsoever, publicly or privately on any pre text or color defend their Books
containing Heresy, or treating of Religion; as also Schismatics, and those
who withdraw themselves, or recede obstinately from the obedience of us, or the
Bishop of Rome for the time being.

2. Further, We excommunicate and anathematize all and singular, of whatsoever
station, degree or condition they be; and interdict all Universities, Colleges
and Chapters, by whatsoever name they are called; who appeal from the Orders or
Decrees of Us, or the Popes of Rome for the time being to a future General
Council; and those by whose aid and favor the Appeal was made.

3. Further, We excommunicate and anathematize all Pirates, Corsairs and
Robbers by Sea, roving about our Sea chiefly from Mount Argentiere to
Terracina, and all their Abetters, Receivers and Defenders.

4. Further, We excommunicate and anathematize all and singular, who when the
Ships of any Christians are either driven out of the way by Tempest, or any
ways suffer shipwreck, convey away any Goods of what kind soever, either in the
Ships themselves, or cast out of the Ships into the Sea, or found on the Shore,
as well in our Tyrrhenian and Adriatic Seas, as in any other Divisions of
Shores of all Seas whatsoever; so that they shall not be excused by any
Privilege, Custom, or possession of time immemorial, or any other pretext
whatsoever.

5. Further, We excommunicate and anathematize all who impose or augment any
new Tolls or Gabells in their Dominions, except in cases permitted to them by
Law, or by especial leave of the Apostolic See; or, who exact such Taxes
forbidden to be imposed or augmented.

6. Further, We excommunicate and anathematize all Forgers of Apostolic
Letters, even in form of a Brief, and of Supplications respecting Indulgence or
Justice, signed by the Pope of Rome, or by the Vice-chancellours of the Holy
see of Rome, or by their Deputies, or by the command of the said Pope; as also
those who falsely publish the Apostolic Letters, even in form of a Brief; and
those who falsely sign such Supplications in the name of the Pope of Rome, or
the Vice Chancellor, or their Deputies.

7. Further, We excommunicate and anathematize all those, who carry or transmit
to the Saracens, Turks, and other Enemies and Foes of the Christian Religion,
or to those who are expressly and by name declared Heretics by the Sentence of
us, or of this Holy See, Horses, Arms, Iron, dust of Iron, Tin, Steel, and all
kind of Metals, and Warlike Instruments, Timber, Hemp, Ropes made as well of
Hemp as of any other matter, and that matter whatsoever it be, and other things
of this nature, which they make use of to the prejudice of Christians and
Catholics: as also those who by themselves or others give intelligence of
matters relating to the State of Christendom to the Turks and Enemies of the
Christian Religion to the hurt and prejudice of Christians, or to Heretics to
the prejudice of the Catholic Religion, or who any ways afford to them
counsel, assistance or favor; notwithstanding any Privileges hitherto granted
by Us and the aforesaid See to any Persons, Princes or Commonwealths; wherein
express mention is not made of this prohibition.

8. Further, We excommunicate and anathematize all hindering or invading those,
who bring Provisions, or any other things necessary, for the use of the Court
of Rome; as also those who forbid, hinder or obstruct the bringing or
conducting of them to the Court of Rome; or who abet the doers of these things
either by themselves, or by others; of whatsoever order, preeminence, condition
or quality they be, even although they be Bishops or Kings, or invested with
any other Ecclesiastical or Secular Dignity.

9. Farther, We excommunicate and anathematize all those who kill, maim, spoil,
apprehend or detain by themselves, or by others, those who come to the
Apostolic See, or return from it; as also all those who having no ordinary
jurisdiction, nor any Delegated by Us or our Judges, rashly challenging it to
themselves, presume to commit any like actions against those who reside at the
Court of Rome.

10. Farther, We excommunicate and anathematize all who kill, maim, wound,
detain, apprehend, or rob Travelers to Rome, or Pilgrims for the sake of
Devotion or Pilgrimage going to that City, staying in it, or returning from it;
and those who give aid, counsel or favor in these cases.

11. Further, We excommunicate and anathematize all who slay, wound, maim,
strike, apprehend, imprison, detain, or in hostile manner pursue the Cardinals
of the Holy Church of Rome, and Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Legates or
Nuncios of the Apostolic See; or those woe drive them out of their Territories,
Diocesses, Lands or Dominions; or those who command or allow these things to be
done, or give aid, counsel and favor to them.

12. Further, We excommunicate and anathematize all those, who by themselves or
by others slay, or any ways strike or despoil any Ecclesiastical or Secular
Persons having recourse to the Court of Rome for their Causes and Affairs, and
prosecuting and managing them in the said Court, or even the Auditors or Judges
deputed for the hearing and managing of the said Causes and Affairs, upon
occasion of these Causes and Affairs: as also those who by themselves or by
others directly or indirectly presume to act or procure the said Crimes, or to
give aid, counsel or favor to them, of whatsoever pre-eminence or dignity they
be.

13. Further, We excommunicate and anathematize all those, as well
Ecclesiastics as Seculars, of whatsoever dignity they be, who under pretense
of a certain frivolous appeal from the injustice or future execution of the
Apostolic Letters, even in form of a Brieve, respecting as well indulgence* as
justice, as also from the injustice and future execution of Citations,
Inhibitions, Sequestrations, Monitories, Processes, Executorials and other
Decrees, issuing out, or which shall at any time issue out from Us and the
aforesaid See, or our Legates, Nuncios, or Presidents, from the Auditors of
our* Palace and Apostolic Chamber, from our Commissaries, and other Apostolic
Judges and Delegates: as also those, who any other ways have recourse to
Secular Courts and the Lay Power; and who cause such Appeals to be admitted by
the Secular Courts, even although the Procurator and Advocate of the Exchequer
should require it; or who cause the* aforesaid Letters, Citations, Inhibitions,
Sequestrations, Monitories, etc. to be seized or retained; or those who hinder
or forbid the said Letters to be put in execution, either simply, or without
their goodwill, consent* or examination; or who hinder or forbid Scriveners or
Notaries from making or delivering when made to the Parties concerned any
Instruments or Acts concerning the execution of these Letters and Processes; or
who apprehend, strike, wound, imprison, detain, drive out of Cities, Places and
Kingdoms, despoil of their Goods, terrify, vex and threaten, either by
themselves or by others, publicly or privately, the Parties, or their Agents,
Kindred on both sides, their Friends, Notaries, the Executors or Sub-executors
of the said Letters, Citations, Monitories, etc. or who any other way presume
directly or indirectly to forbid, ordain and command, any Persons in general
(...) in particular, to betake themselves, or have recourse to the Sea of Rome
to prosecute their Affairs of any kind, or to obtain Indulgences or Letters, or
who forbid them to obtain the said Indulgences, or to make use of them when
obtained of the said See; or who presume to retain the said Indulgences in
their own hands, or in the hands of a Notary or a Scrivener, or any other way.

14. Further we Excommunicate and Anathematize all and singular, who by
themselves or by others, by their own Authority and de facto, under pretense of
any exemptions, or any other Apostolic Indulgences and Letters, take away the
cognizance of Benefices, and Tithes, and other spiritual Causes, or annexed to
spirituals from our Auditors and Commissaries, and other Ecclesiastical Judges;
and hinder the proceeding and audience of them, and the Persons, Chapters,
Convents, Colleges, desiring to prosecute the said Causes; or who intrude
themselves as Judges in the Cognizance of them; or who by order, or any other
way compel the Plaintiffs to withdraw, or cause to be withdrawn, their
Citations, or Inhibitions, or any other Letters decreed in the spiritual Court;
and the Defendants, against whom such Inhibitions were issued out, to procure,
or consent to be absolved from the Censures or Punishments contained in them;
or who any ways hinder the execution of Apostolic Letters, Executorials,
Processes and Decrees aforesaid; or give their allowance, counsel, or assent to
it, even under pretense of hindering violence, or any other pretexts
whatsoever, or even until they shall Petition us, or cause us to be Petitioned
for our better information, as is commonly pretended, unless they prosecute
such Petitions before us and the Apostolic See in lawful form; even although
those who commit such things should be Presidents of Chanceries, Councils, or
Parliaments, Chancellors, Vicechancellors, ordinary or extraordinary
Counselors of any secular Princes, (whether they be Emperors, Kings, Dukes, or
any other dignity) or Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Commendataries or Vicars.

. 15. Also those who under pretense of their Office, or at the instance of any
party, or of any others, draw, or cause and procure to be drawn, directly, or
indirectly, upon any pretext whatsoever, Ecclesiastical Persons, Chapters,
Convents, Colleges of any Churches, before them to their Tribunal, Audience,
Chancery, Counsel, or Parliament, against the Rules of the Canon Law; as also
those who for any cause, or under any pretext, or by pretense of any Custom or
Privilege, or any other way, shall make, enact, and publish any Statutes,
Orders, Constitutions, Pragmaticks, or any other Decrees in general or in
particular; or shall use them when made and enacted; whereby the Ecclesiastical
Liberty is violated, or any ways injured or depressed, or by any other means
restrained; or whereby the Rights of us and of the said See, and of any other
Churches, are any way directly or indirectly, tacitly or expressly prejudged.

16. Also those who upon this account directly or indirectly hinder
Archbishops, Bishops, and other superior and inferior Prelates, and all other
ordinary Ecclesiastical Judges whatsoever by any means, either by imprisoning
or molesting their Agents, Proctors, Domestics, kindred on both sides, or by
any other way, from exerting their Ecclesiastical jurisdiction against any
persons whatsoever, according as the Canons and sacred Ecclesiastical
Constitutions and Decrees of General Councils, and especially that of Trent, do
appoint; as also those who after the sentence and decrees of the Ordinaries
themselves, or of those delegated by them, or by any other means eluding the
judgment of the Ecclesiastical Court, have recourse to Chanceries or other
secular Courts, and procure thence Prohibitions and even Penal Mandates to be
decreed against the said Ordinaries and Delegates and executed against them;
also those who make and execute these Decrees, or who give aid, counsel,
countenance or favor to them.

17. Also those who usurp any Jurisdictions, Fruits, Revenues and Emoluments
belonging to Us and the Apostelick See, and any Ecclesiastical persons upon
account of any Churches, Monasteries, or other Ecclesiastical benefices; or who
upon any occasion or cause sequester the said Revenues without the express
leave of the Bishop of Rome or others having lawful power to do it.

18. Also those who without the like special and express license of the Pope of
Rome impose Tributes, Tenths, Talleys, Subsidies, and other Charges upon
Clergymen, Prelates, and other Ecclesiastical persons, and the Goods, Fruits,
Revenues and Emoluments of them and of the Churches, Monasteries, and other
Ecclesiastical Benefices; and exact them by diverse artifices, or even receive
them so imposed from the Clergy, although they should of their own accord grant
and give them: Also those who by themselves or others directly or indirectly
fear not to do, execute or procure the said things, or to give aid, counsel or
favor to them, of whatsoever pre-eminence, dignity, order, condition or
quality they be, although they be Emperors, or Kings, or Princes, Dukes, Earls,
Barons, and other Potentates whatsoever, even Presidents of Kingdoms,
Provinces, Cities and Territories, Counselors, and Senators, or invested even
with any Pontifical Dignity. Renewing the Decrees set forth concerning these
Matters by the Sacred Canons, as well in the last Council of Lateran, as in
other General Councils, together with the Censures and Punishments contained in
them.

19. Further, We excommunicate and anathematize all and every Magistrates and
Judges, Notaries, Scribes, Executors, Subexecutors, any ways intruding
themselves in capital or criminal causes against Ecclesiastical Persons by
processing, banishing, or apprehending them, or pronouncing or executing any
sentences against them, without the special, particular and express license of
this Holy Apostolical See; also those who extend such licenses to Persons or
Cases not expressed, or any other way injustly abuse them; although the
Offenders should be Counselors, Senators, Presidents, Chancellours,
Vice-chancellours, or entitled by any other name.

20. Farther, We excommunicate and anathematize all those, who by themselves,
or by others, directly or indirectly, under any title or color whatsoever
shall presume to invade, destroy, seize and detain, in whole or in part, the
City of Rome, the Kingdom of Sicily, the Islands of Sardinia and Corsica, the
Territories about Faro, St. Peter's Patrimony in Tuscany, the Dukedom of
Spoleto, the County of Venoso, and Sabinum, Marca di Ancona, Massa, Trebaria,
Romandiola, Campania, and the Maritime Provinces, and their Territories and
Places, and the Lands held in special commission by the Arnulfi, and our Cities
of Bononia, Caesena, Ariminum, Beneventum, Citta di Castello, Todi, Ferrara,
Comaclo, and other Cities, Lands and Places and Rights belonging to the Church
of Rome, and subjected mediately or immediately to the said Church of Rome;
also those who presume by diverse means to usurp, disturb, detain, and vex the
supreme Jurisdiction of the said Dominions belonging to Us and the Church of
Rome; also their Adherents, Favorers and Defenders, or those who any way give
assistance, counsel or favor to them.

21. Willing that our present Processes, and all and every thing contained in
these Letters, continue in force, and be put in excution; till other Processes
of this kind be made and published by Us and the Pope of Rome for the time
being.

22. In fine, none may be absolved from the aforesaid Censures by any other
than by the Pope of Rome, unless he be at the point of death, nor even then,
unless he gives caution to stand to the commands of the Church, and give
satisfaction. In all other cases none shall be absolved, not even under
pretense of any Faculties or Indulgences granted and renewed by Us and the said
See, and the Decrees of any Council, by Words, Letters, or any other Writing,
in general or in particular, to any Persons Ecclesiastical, Secular, and
Regular of any Orders, even of the Mendicant and Military Orders, or to any
Persons invested with Episcopal, or any greater Dignity, and to Orders
themselves and their Monasteries, Convents, Houses and Chapters, to Colleges,
Confraternities, Congregations, Hospitals, and Pious Places, as also to Laymen,
although they should be Emperors, Kings, or eminent in any other secular
Dignity.

23. If by chance any shall against the tenor of these Presents, de facto,
presume to bestow the benefit of Absolution upon any such involved in
excommunication and anathema, or any of them; we include them in the sentence
of Excommunication, and shall afterward proceed more severely against them
both by spiritual and temporal Punishments, as we shall think most convenient.

24. Declaring and protesting that no Absolution, although solemnly made by Us,
shall comprehend, or any other way avail the aforesaid excommunicated Persons
comprehended under these present Letters; unless they desist from the premises
with a firm purpose, of never committing the like thing; nor those, who, as was
before said, have made Statutes against the Ecclesiastical Liberty; unless they
first publicly revoke these Statutes, Orders, Constitutions, Pragmaticks and
Decrees, and cause them to be blotted and expunged out of the Archives, Rolls,
and Registers wherein they are preserved, and farther certify Us of this
revocation: moreover, that by any such Absolution, or any other contrary Acts,
tacit or express, or even by the connivance and toleration of Us and our
Successors for how long time soever continued, none nor any of the Premises,
nor any Right of the Apostolic See and Holy Church of Rome howsoever and
whenever obtained, or to be obtained, can or ought to be prejudged or receive
any prejudice.

25. Notwithstanding any Privileges* Indulgences, Grants, and Apostolic
Letters general er special, granted by the Holy See to any of the aforesaid
Persons, or any one of them, or any others, of whatsoever order, quality or
condition, dignity and pre-eminence they be; although, as was before said, they
should be Bishops, Emperors, Kings, or eminent in any other Ecclesiastic or
Secular Dignity, or to their Kingdoms, Provinces, Cities, and Dominions, for
any cause whatsoever, even by way of contract or reward, and under any other
form and tenor, and with any Clauses whatsoever, even derogatory of those which
should derogate from them; or even containing that the said Persons or Places
shall not be excommunicated, anathematized or interdicted by any Apostolic
Letters, which do not make full and express mention and exact repetition of the
said Grant, and of the Orders, Places, Proper names, Sirnames and Dignities of
the said Persons; as also notwithstanding all Customs, even immemorial, and
Prescriptions, how long soever, and any other Observances written or not
written, by which the said Persons may help and defend themselves against these
our Processes and Censures from being included in them. All which Grants, as
far as relates to this matter, and the whole tenor of them, accounting them
expressed in these Presents as if they had been verbatim inserted, nothing
omitted, we utterly abolish and wholly revoke; and notwithstanding any other
Pleas which may be alleged to the contrary.

26. But that these our present Processes may more easily come to the knowledge
of all Persons; We have caused the Papers and Parchments containing the
Processes themselves to be affixed in the City to the doors of the Church of
St. John Lateran, and of the Church of the Prince of the Apostles; that those
whom these Processes concern, may pretend no excuse or allege ignorance, as if
they had not come to their knowledge; since it is not probable, that should
remain unknown, which is so openly published to all men.

27. Moreover, that the Processes themselves, and these present Letters, and
all and every thing contained in them may become more manifest by being
published in many Cities and Places; We by these Writings entrust, and in
virtue of holy obedience strictly charge and command all and singular
Patriarchs, Primates, Archbishops, Bishops, Ordinaries of Places, and Prelates
wheresoever constituted, that by themselves or some other or others, after they
shall have received these present Letters, or have knowledge of them, they
solemnly publish them in their Churches once a year or oftener, if they see
convenient, when the greater part of the People shall be met for celebration of
Divine Service; put faithful Christians in mind of them, relate them, and
declare them.

28. Lastly, all Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ordinaries of
Places, and Prelates of Churches, as also all Rectors, and others having cure
of Souls, and Priests secular and regular of whatsoever Orders, deputed by any
authority to hear confession of sins, shall have a Transcript of these present
Letters by them, and shall diligently study to read and understand them.

29. Our farther pleasure is, that the same credit in judgment and out of
judgment, shall in all places be given to Copies, although Printed, of these
presents, subscribed by any public Notary, and sealed by the ordinary Judge of
the Court of Rome, or any other person in Ecclesiastical dignity; as would be
given to these presents themselves, if they should be produced or shown.

30. Let no man therefore infringe, or boldly and rashly oppose this our Letter
of Excommunication, Anathematization, Interdict, Innovation, Innodation,
Declaration, Protestation, Abolition, Revocation, Commission, Command and
Pleasure: But if any one shall presume to attempt it; let him know that he
shall incur the displeasure of Almighty God, and of his Blessed Apostles Peter
and Paul.

Given at Rome from St. Peter in the year of our Lord's Incarnation, One
thousand six hundred and ten, the eighth of April, in the fifth year of our
Popedom.
In the year, from the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ 1613. Indict. 11. the 4th
day of the Month April, and the eighth year of the Popedom of our most Holy
Father in Christ, and our Lord Paul V. by Divine Providence Pope, the aforesaid
Letters were affixed and published at the Doors of the Churches of St. John
Lateran, and the Prince of the Apostles, and in the field of Flora, by us
Balthazar Vacha and Brandimars Latini Cursors.

James Brambilla, Mag. Curs.

FINIS.

