THE Phanatick in his Colors: Being a Full and Final Character of a WHIG; IN A
DIALOGUE BETWEEN TORY and TANTIVY.
Tantivy. WEll, Tory; did not I tell thee we should vex these Plotting
Countermining Whigs to the heart?


Tory. You did so, and your Prophecy is fulfilled. But who would have thought
Christian Patience and those Godly Zealots should part Habitations; And that
the Whig should become as great a Separatist from that Essential of a Saint, as
he is from the True Church?


Tan. Nay, rather, who was ever so mad, to take a Phanatick for a passive
Creature, who for these 40 years and upwards, has been showing the mastery of
his heels, in spurning and kicking at a Rider that has been so merciful to that
Beast: Nay, and has been so pampered and high-fed, that though he was never so
peaceably led, he always slipped the Rein, or violently broke the Bridle?


To. It Is true, they are an awkward sort of unthankful Cattle, that were ever
murmuring in the midst of their Manna; and instead of keeping the right road to
Peace and Tranquillity, burst furiously through the hedges, and beat down its
fences; That to be in the Rear of a herd of unruly Swine, or command a drove of
yelping Turkies, seems a far more comfortable Dominion. However, me thinks,
there might be a Cure found for this Distemper.


Tan. Yes, if they were to be driven as the Butcher drives his Calf, with a
Cudgel at one end, and a Halter on the other.


To. But did you observe lately, how the Faction fretted it self in the
Character of us Tories, (as they call us) as if 't had been flead, and basted
with Vinegar?


Tan. Yes, and it seemed to be taken with Convulsions, by the drawing up its
ugly livid Chaps, and making so many wry-mouths at the Loyal Party.


To. No, no; that is only the working of our Physic. They are gripped with
Addresses, weekly Heraclitus' s, and honest Observators, and Tory Thompsons,
and cannot digest the present manner of proceedings, without a shrug and a sour
face.


Tan. I marry Sir! now you talk of a Drench indeed: This has strength enough to
purge a Trojan-Horse, and force a Traitor out of a wooden Fundament: On my
word, Tory, those will try their constitutions for 'em. I perceive, indeed,
their flesh is fallen; for yesterday I met with two Arch-Whigs, and to my
thinking they looked very maliciously and very thin upon it, just like a couple
of grim Satyrs carved upon an old-fashioned Cupboard.


To. Say you so; and do you find their Courage so cooled, since those excellent
Medicines against Rebellion were published?


Tan. Yes, those, together with some Princely Resolutions, have prevailed much;
and (saving Mr. Titus's presence) I think have been the Saviors of this
Nation; For now the poor Whig walks sleepishly about the streets, as
melancholy as an empty Bagpipe, gogling in your face like a Creature
bewitched, or a Fellow half choked, with his lop-ears hanging quite over his
eyes, like an Ass under his Load.


To. Then you are of opinion that they are supports to our present
Constitution; That they 'wake us out of a dead sleep, and are the only things
that belong to our Peace.


Tan Yes, they are our undoubted security, as they are perpetual scourges for
the Fool's back, that would bind his King in Chains, and his Nobles in Links of
Iron. They Are the unerring Clocks, that go always with the Sun, keep a constant
motion, and alarm when the Traitor touches the strings; No Birds of Prey, from
the towering Hawk to the mousing Owl, dare quetch while these Eagles are upon
the wing; They have a Charm of Truth, that lays the evil Spirits, and though they
can never hope to be beloved by the Fiends, yet they have thunderstruck them
with fear and trembling, and so made their Dominion divine over a Legion of
Devils.


To. In troth, a miraculous Change! For you may remember when they snapt us up
in every Coffee-House, like a company of peevish ill-natured Step-mothers, that
would prog for none but the Babes of their own Bodies. New measures were to be
taken both of Church and State, and they themselves were to shape the Cloth,
and cut out a Suit for a wooden Layman of their own carving. The old
Counselors were to be turned out to Nurse, and Majesty clapped into
Swadling-clouts; and instead of a Princely Inheritance, reduced to a cursed
Guardian, and a Sucking-bottle: In fine, every little Insect durst vilify the
Royal Prerogative, with a freedom so Malicious, Positive and Tyrannical, as
nothing could well justify, but a second Usurpation.


Tan. But it seems their Zeal was so hot, that they have rotten-roasted their
Cause, and it is just now dropping off the Spit.


To. I, and I believe that is the reason why the Author of the Character has
showed himself so indulgent a Father to his Generation of Vipers, and frets so
excessively at the Cooks, for spoiling the Joint that should have feasted his
Family. However, I cannot but wonder that a despicable Cur, that has had so
many of his Teeth beaten out with good sound Arguments, almost putrified with
his own matters of fact, should venture his Brains too, by snarling and barking
still at so potent an Adversary.


Tan. Alas! the Monster is hunger-starved, and fury is its last shift; so like
a parcel of desperate Rats pent up in a Buttery, when they can find no hole to
creep out at, they fly in your Face. Besides, the Whig is bewitched with his
old foundered Jade, and rides his Cause as the Monkey rides the Mule in the
Bear-Garden; and though she tumble him, and jumble him never so often out of the
Saddle, yet he is sure to get hold of the Main, or cling fast to her Crupper.
And to the boot of all this, we have torn his Fig Leaves, and discovered his
Nakedness; and nothing is more natural than for a poor Worm to come forth, when
the Earth that covers it is trampled on.


To. Why then, I perceive they are a sort of incorrigible Slaves, that swear
perpetual Revenge against their Master, because he has beaten them for running
away, and given 'em Choke cheese in their 'Prenticeship.


Tan. You have hit it. But I Will put the Case; Suppose you your self were in
pursuit of a Lady of a known Beauty, and as Eminent a Fortune, and after a
multitude of private Intrigues, Subtle Designs, smooth Plots, and plausible
Tales, you had flattered her and Fawned her into some favorable opinion of
you, and prevailed so far as to find some opportunity to escape with your
Prize; would it not vex the Liver and Lights of you, think you, to have a third
person step between, and out of a pure honest Principle to his Neighbor, come
and knock you off the Horse back with a Cowl-staff, rescue the Girl, and
restore her to her distracted Parents?


To. I confess this would be on insupportable piece of ill luck; But is this a
parallel Case?


Tan. O! the very same; For, just as this Phanatical-Renyard had got the Church
upon his back, and was running sheer away with her, in comes Loyalty and
Resolution, armed Cap-a-pee, and like two English-Champions, redeemed our
Daughter of Sion, that had been Condemned at Rome, and was going to be
Sacrificed at Geneva.


To. What? and are the Phanaticks our mortal Enemies, as well as the Papists?


Tan. Yes, and it is as true as Gospel, That our Danger is not less fatal, if
the Phanatick swells by the same blast that blows him down; it being so far
from securing either the King or the Church, that the Malignity would be only
transplanted, and two Pestilential Sores united in one; which, as it could lose
nothing of its violence, so its effects would be equally pernicious. They are
like two unruly Whelps in a Chain, that pull two several ways with the same
intent of getting loose; a couple of pure sticks, that make the same use of
each other to consumate their several ends, as two Knavish Executors, that have
both an inclination to defraud the Right Heir. These two Utensils together make
for his most Fallible Holiness a most Infallible Tinder-box; and when he would
strike sure Fire out of his Jesuitical Steel, he takes the Phanatick for his
Flint.


To. O! But he seems to be of quite another Kidney; and when he calls us
(Tories) Debauchees and Damme-boys, does he not show his zeal for Religion? Can
so much filth and nastiness lie behind so fair a Wainscot?


Tan. Alas! there is no Pretext more ancient, or more familiar; and the surest
place to find a Toad in, is to search under a Bed of Sage. Religion is his
Iron-bodies, which this crooked Disciple wears to cheat the world with a show
of Uprightness: and whatever the Meat is, this is sure to be the Sauce, and is
looked upon as his best Ingredient, to make a savoury Frigacee of a stinking
Dish. And now, since my hand's in, I Will give him one turn more; take off the
long Robe that hides his Cloven-foot, and show you the Canvas on the backside
of his Doublet.


To Come on; It Is as comfortable a Scene, to have a Knave stripped before one,
as to see the casing of a Rabbet after a long Fast.


Tan. Well then; upon the true Faith of a Christian, a Phinatick is a Canibal,
a State-man eater, a Land-Cormorant, that by blasting our good Name would
swallow us alive; a sly Sheep-biter, that feeds upon nothing but Blood and
Vitals, first sucks out our Reputation, and then leaves our Carcass for the
Crows. He Is the Offil of old Nol, that is wheeled about in a Tub to infect the
People, and feed the savage Bears. He Is Powder-Monkey to a Regiment of Rebels,
and attends the Camp with Lectures against Loyalty, and Aspersions on the
Clergy, as the best. Ammunition to blow up the Government, and Cashier
Monarchy. He Is a Coffe-House-Recorder, that Arraigns Regal Power, like Felons
at the Old Bailey, and is sure to sum up the Evidence like a Knave, and give
Sentence against Prerogative; But if you touch upon Property, he grins like a
Deaths-head in a 'Pothecaries Shop; and like a sullen Baboon, chatters if you
do but finger the Chain. This is a sort of Leaf-gold, which he never produces
to the standers by, but they must stop their Breath, upon pain and peril of
being registered for TORIES. He is an Infallible Almanac, that points out the
motions of the Dog Stars, and other Intemperate dissaffected Planets; and shows
us how to find out a Rebel for ever. He Is a downright Cheat, and should be
Cursed by the Congregation for removing his Neighbors Landmark, and
Transplanting the Sacred Right of Kings; for he, to make the Fools Lamp burn,
steals the Oil from the Lord's Anointed, and like an Impudent Prometheus,
Snatches his fire from Heaven, to give life to his Image of Rye-dough. He Is a
State-lowse, with a black list upon his Back of the well-affected, that Crawls
to and fro, and would drop in ill Principles; like Nits in the cleanest Linen.
He Is a sure stick for a new Oliver to build a Scaffold on, and has a Head as
round as one of his Shillings; and for love of the Usurper has kissed the Coin,
till you may see the Impress of the Breeches upon his Face. He Is a fair Copper
Plate of the late times, with the Brewer on the one side, and Republica on
to'ther. He Is the Lion in the Fable, that invites all the Wild Beasts to a
Solemn Feast, that he himself may be sure of a Meals Meat, dissembling his own
Hunger, under general bounty, and cloaking private Interest with public good.
He Is the Son of a Succubus, half Witch half Devil, throwing the State into
Convulsions, and envying that Peace in others which he himself cannot
accomplish. A Malicious Dog, that Barks at the Moon because it Shines. A buisy
Bawd, that Preaches up Innocence, that he himself may have the better
opportunity to Debauch it. He Is a Puritanical Jacket-Scowrer, that uses railing
against the Pope, as his Iullers-Earth, to fetch the Spots out of his own
Cloth; or at least, so far to obscure them, that they may not be seeen by the
less Curious and Discerning Eye. He Is the best Prosecuter of Popery for several
Reasons, especially that of set a Thief to Ca^^h a Thief; and like an old
Stanch'd Villain knows, that to Cry Stop the Rogue, is the best way for himself
to get off with the Prize. He Is B -- r's Boar-Catt, that not only Mouses for
his Master, but like a Lascivious Representative Puss, goes a rutting to the
Housetop, and Cat-calls the whole Faction. He Is a traveling Juggler, that
would not only make the world believe the Moon's made of Green-Cheese, but that
it is cut out into Penn'orths, and sold off as it wastes; Preaching up the Whig
for the True Protestant, who is but the stinking fishy part of the Mermaid.
He Is a turbulent Wasp, and nothing will please him but a change of Government,
which would be as sweet to him as a Hony-pot. He Is a Puritanical shark, and can
stare Majesty in the face, while he picks his Pocket; A Phanatick indeed by
Profession, but by Principle a Jew; and would pervert his Mosaic Laws to
Circumcise the Church, and Cut off all decency like a foreskin: and as, on the
one hand, he can think it no offense to ease himself in the Popes Triple Crown;
So, on the other, he would not stick to wipe his B -- with the Bishops Sleeves.
In fine He Is a Sirreverence in my way, which in my own defense I stop my Nose
at, till he is washed away by the next Shower.


To. Well, Heaven deliver me, both from the Popish Hawk, and this Phanatick
Buzzard; for it is as plain as the Nose on ones Face, that there is never a
Barrel the better Herring. And now, Honest Tantivy, give me thy hand; and since
we must part, I tell thee, thou have learnt me to distinguish the Rebel from
the Royalist; The Parasite from the Preacher; The Jew from the Gentile; The
Pharasee from the Publican; H Reformed Church of England man from a Crop-ear'd
Presbyterian; A Pulpit from a Tub; A long Coat from a Jump; An Oath of
Allegiance from a Scotch- Covenant; The Blessing of a King from the Curse of a
Commonwealth; Religion from Roguery; and the Devil from a Saint.


LONDON: Printed for N. Thompson. 1681.


