The Famous CONCLAVE, WHEREIN Clement VIII. Was Elected POPE: WITH THE
Intrigues and Cunning Devices OF THAT Ecclesiastical Assembly.

Faithfully Translated out of an Italian Manuscript, found in one of the
Cardinals Studies after his Death.

LONDON: Printed by E. C. and A. C. for Samuel Lowndes, over against
Exeter-House in the Strand, 1670.

To his much Honored Friend WILLIAM PAWLET of the Middle Temple, Esquire
SIR,
THis Production of Wit, having been Fatherless these seventy eight years, is
come to seek out your Protection: Neither can I disapprove its choice, knowing
the candor of your Soul, Clement viii. was Elected January 30. 1592
and your innate humanity, which reaches even to those that are most strangers
to you. You shall see in it, as in an Epitome, the various Jarrs, Events, and
Successes that attend a Political Body, compounded of several Humors and
Tempers, and by one hours reading in your Study, not only Travel as far as
Rome, but also be admitted into the most secret place of it, which is the
Conclave; wherein it is not lawful for any stranger to enter, and out of which
School to carry Tales, is a capital Offense. The truth of this secret History
had the good fortune to fall into the hand of a notable Wit and Pen, if I do
not mistake; as for my part I challenge nothing in it, but the changing of its
Italian Habit into an English Dress: I shall think my self well rewarded for my
pains, if the Public takes as much pleasure in the reading of it, as I have
done in my particular: and if you please to guess by this, the natural
inclination I have to deserve the title of

Your Affectionate Friend, and humble Servant, GARENCIERES.

To the Reader.
READER,
I Present thee here with a matter full of curiosity, but more replete with
Instructions. It is the Conclave, wherein Clement VIII. was Elected Pope. I
have selected it from many others, the Manuscripts whereof I have in Italy
perused; in which you shall discover an admirable representation of that
intricate Closet-War, the Garland of which Victory is the supremest Diadem in
the Christian World: In which War, although there be not an issuing Flux of
Blood, yet there is as large an outlet of Deceit and Policy as is in any War
besides. Moreover, I find in it an object of admiration, when I observe an
immediate tract of Divine Providence, and how the Election of Santa Severina, a
man of the highest estimation in the Spanish Favor, and being assisted with
the advantage of Votes, both for multitude and validity, should yet be
overthrown even by an infused blindness in those Cardinals that undertook to be
his Supporters: insomuch that having diverse times attempted to reduce their
Votes into a contracted number, they were so confused among themselves, that
they gave opportunity to the French Faction to work the declination of some of
his Voices, and so the Election did become abortive. This being now made
public in this conjuncture of time, wherein the present Conclave has held the
World so long in suspense, I doubt not (Courteous Reader) of your acceptance
of it as it is, and hope you will make a particular estimation of it. For Santa
Savarina, read Santa Severina in the following Discourse.


THE CONCLAVE Held during the Vacancy of POPE INNOCENTIUS IX. For the Election
of POPE CLEMENT VIII.
MY LORD,
IN obedience to your Lordships commands, I have undertaken to render you a
Succinct Relation of the Proceedings of the Conclave in their Election of Pope
Clement the Eighth. In the beginning whereof I must ingeniously confess my self
perplexed with astonishment and fear, when I consider the brevity of man's
life, and how often we find Joy and Tears to be each others successors; seeing
that in the little space of 18 months we have seen five Popes, Sextus, Urbanus,
Gregorius, Innocentius, and Clement: which accident, it is possible, never yet
did happen: and they do the more affright me, as being the scourges of a
Celestial Power upon us, to admonish us of our deceits and grievous sins. And
if ever there were a Conclave full of turbulency, contentions, danger and
difficulty, fit to beget a Schism amongst us, certainly this was the most
terrible and dangerous; in which every thing had gone topsie turvy, had not the
Divine Providence interposed his right hand, and made use of his Omnipotency in
the composure of all discords, and uniting in a happy Concord those
dispositions that were before at variance: not alone to the amazement of those
that saw it, and were active in it; but to them also that have heard, or shall
hereafter hear of it. Pope Innocent the Ninth, a man of innocent life, and
eminent virtue, having attained the Popedom at the age of 73 years, did
surrender his soul unto the Sovereign Creator, within the space of two months,
to the great grief of all Rome, being deprived of that great hope she had
conceived of his equity and prudence, of which virtues (to the alacreous
comfort of the Inhabitants of Rome) he had begun an happy demonstration;
insomuch that it seemed unto them that God had only showed, and not bestowed
him upon them. From hence there being a necessity to Elect a Successor unto
him, the Cardinals were all repleat with various thoughts, and perplexed with
disturbant cares; not only because there was not in the world a more important
business, but also because they were extasied with distractions amongst
themselves, Every one intending to procure an Election according to his own
Inclination and Interest. But it was a rare and exemplary thing, that amongst
so many divisions, they should all, or the most part, aim at the Election of
the ablest and most honest person: As an evidence that all Contrarieties must
subscribe to honesty and virtue. And if at that time we have seen one that was
the most worthy of the Popedom (as we may say) and yet to see him eclipsed, we
cannot but discern some occult and Divine Providence, to which we must submit
our best endeavors.

The Cardinals were divided into three Factions: the first was of Spain under
the Conduct of Madruzzo, with whom also did side diverse others that were either
that Kings Subjects, Pensioners, Kinsmen, or Dependents. The intent of the King
(as his Ministers did avouch) was very good, who was only desirous of a Pope
that was honest and zealous for the glory of God: As also (it seemed) that all
other Princes did desire it. But in truth, to examine their Proceedings more
narrowly, the scope of every ones intent was to desire one to whom he himself
had the nearest relation. In which deceit the Royal Ministers, resolving to
approve themselves solicitous and expert in managing their Masters affairs,
concluded that no other should be Pope than one of these, that is, Columna,
Como, Palioto, Santa Savarina, and Madruzzo. And although outwardly they did
most appear for Santa Savarina, yet it was easily discernable, that they were
inwardly more inclinable to Madruzzo; as conceiving him the man that they had
more trust in, hiding nevertheless with great subtilty this their secret
intention: But that you may the better understand how things were at that time,
you shall know, that the Cardinals of the Spanish faction (were it either
diffidency, or jealousy, or any other passion) were extremely divided amongst
themselves, one standing for one Pope, and a second for another; in which
division there were some that did not only refuse all the prenominated persons,
but would have introduced others in whom the King could not confide; as is
apparent by examination of the effects, without any further search into the
particulars at the present. There were some that were of an opinion, that that
faction had at that time another misfortune and impediment, which is, that
Madruzzo being the Pilot of that Ship, and aspiring to the Popedom, it may be
more by the persuasion of others than any inclination of his own, did conceal
his thoughts with a great deal of subtilty; and did not endeavor the promotion
of others, but did rather craftily prevent them, that thereby the way of
exaltation may be the more facile and open unto him; although others say, that
these were but false rumors and suspicions.

The second Faction was that of Montalto, chief of the Creatures of Sextus the
fifth, joined with the Spaniards, Venetians, and Tuscans, with a resolute mind
to make Santa Savarina Pope, which was his Resolution at the former Conclave,
(as it is manifestly apparent) for, at which time there was a talk of the
Adoration of Santiquatro, he then asking Mendoza, who was then the head of the
Spanish Faction, Which would be more acceptable to the King, of Santiquatro or
Santa Savarina? Mendoza wittily answered him, That they were both fair in
respect of the King. And Montalto demanding again, Which of the two would be
more willingly received by the King? Mendoza immediately answered him, That
they stood both equal in the Kings estimation: Insomuch that all Scruple being
removed from Montalto, he went and did unanimously concur with the rest in the
Adoration of Santiquatro. Here many will wonder at the Alteration of Montalto,
who was in a possibility of making Santa Savarina Pope, when Gregory the
fourteenth was elected, and have engaged Spain, Tuscany, and diverse other
Creatures unto him, yet would never apply himself to his Favor, showing that
he did abhor his Nature and Severity, and fear that his Exaltation would be his
Depression, and that the same thing should displease him now, which before was
so plausible to him; and that he would now so much confide in him, whom he had
so much distrusted before. But Miracles must be Passive, where the Hand of God
is Active, who is the sole Director of all humane Affairs, and his Works above
the Search or Apprehension of Man's Capacity: Yet there have not been wanting
acute and subtle Wits to search out the Cause of this Mutation in Montalto;
some are of opinion, that this alteration in Montalto did proceed from this,
that he was now better informed of the good D^sposition of Santa Savarina than
he was before; others attribute it to the great Instance of the great Duke, who
desired no other to be Pope than Santa Savarina, assuring him, that he being
once invested in the Papacy, would assume him as much into his Favor and good
Esteem, as ever he was in the opinion of Sextus. Others report, that he did it
to ingratiate himself with Spain, who desired likewise that he should be Pope,
Mentalto being resolved altogether to depend upon the Protection of that Crown,
having considered that he could not make choice of a more secure Protection
than this for himself and Family. Others did conceive it did proceed from the
Fear that Montalto did always stand in of Paliotto, doubting that the
Spaniards would set him up again, and pitch upon him or else upon Santa
Savarina, or upon Madruzzo or Come, all which he did equally loath, as a sick
Man does bitter things. There have been some besides that esteemed this
Practice of his to be a Stratagem, that he might by that bait of Santa Savarina
invite the Spaniards to confide in him, and to induce them to accept him for
one of their Creatures, in case that he should not make any of the other
aforenamed to be Pope; Montalto intending with that Art to cousen the Art of
the Spaniards, seeing that the Report went, that they would join with him, with
Intention to make use of his favorable Endeavors; but that he should not do
the like of theirs unless it were by Constraint; and to make themselves secure
by that Union, of those Subjects that were absolutely excluded by them
Salviati, Verona, and Mondovi, that none of them might by chance be made Pope
against their will. But leaving off these Considerations unto them who are
desirous to examine them, we shall see that the Intention of Montalto is really
to make Santa Savarina Pope; and in case he could not accomplish that, then to
settle it upon some Creature of his own, aiming chiefly at Aldobrandino, as the
more probable man by reason of his good Nature and excellent Virtues; as also
because of the prompt Inclination of the whole College expressed to him in
former Conclaves, and for the excessive Love he always bare unto him, having
always reputed him as his Father; although with a great Prudence he did strive
to conceal that Affection, fearing to give offense unto the rest of his Faction.

The third Faction was that of Sforza the chief of the Gregorians, amongst whom
there were excellent Men; but unfortunately they were opposed by the Spaniards,
not through any deserts of their own, but because of their particular interest,
and reasons of State: from whence Sforza considering all these things, and
observing the great difficulties that opposed him, he conceived it altogether
impossible to promote any of his Faction to the Papacy; wanting for that
present, the favor and assistance of Montalto, with the help whereof he had
obtained all his former Victories; he saw that at that time he had not one of
his Eaction that had the countenance of Spain for his support, as formerly he
had: as Santo Marcello who was after Urban VII. Cremona who was Gregory XIV.
and Santo Quatro who was Innocentius VIII. elected one after another with the
help of the Nomination and Favor of Spain, and of Montalto: He perceived that
at that time the only aim of Spain was to exclude the chief of his Faction; he
did consider that in all reason the College should make some equal Dividend of
their Favors amongst the other Factions. But the thing that did only disgust
him was, that Santa Savarina, a man by him extremely disaffected, was in all
probability likely to be preferred, Pope Innocentius being then dead. Montalto,
Madruzzo, Gaietano, Monti and many others, together with Cessa Catholic
Ambassador began to practice openly in behalf of Santa Savarina, with such a
Fervor, that they publicly said, They had the Papacy in their hands: either it
was that they did verily believe it, because of their powerful Faction; or else
it was to terrify their Adversaries from attempting to exclude him: which way
was more hurtful to the Cause of Santa Savarina, seeing it proved an Irritation
and Spur to thrust his Adversaries into Despair, and so excite them by all
possible means to hinder him: from whence it is a thing in this place
remarkable that it is more secure to make his way by plausible and smooth
Actions, than by violent and thundering, and rather to esteem of his Enemies,
than to contenmn them. Therefore Sforza, Altempos, Arragona, Colunna,
Alexandrino, Sfondrato, and others of their Adherents, being incensed not only
to see so much Favor for Santa Savarina, but also that they would make him
Pope in spite of them, made an Union and a League amongst themselves to oppose
his Greatness, giving Assurance to each other by Oath, to resist him to their
utmost power, and not to decline that Union upon any Accident whatsoever. And
certainly it is a miraculous thing, to consider, that they should engage
themselves in Opposition to an Occasion of such Difficulty that it was almost
impossible for them to overcome. Nevertheless guided by the Holy Ghost they did
resolve to attempt it, applying themselves with all Industry against Santa
Savarina; and to destroy his Practices they did propound to the Cardinals his
extreme Severity, with the Damage and Ruin that must accrue both to the
public and the private, if he were made Pope. After that, they did endeavor
to put a diffidence between him and Montalto, and the Faction of Spain and the
Florentine, under diverse Colors and Arguments: And to dissuade and take off
Montalto from him, they attempted him with Glory and Interest, and to advance
one of his Creatures to the Papacy: they did invite Madruzzo likewise with the
same Stratagems and Promises; as also not being wanting to insinuate into the
Minds of all his Competitors the Facility they might find in procuring the
Papacy for themselves, wherein they would be assistant unto them: which
Suggestions were very powerful and would have been greedily swallowed by any
who had not a more divine Illumination to conclude, the Intention of these
combined men was to excite on all sides Confusions, Divisions, and
Distractions, to divert and break in some part the Plots and Practices of Santa
Savarina. These Contentions were pleasing unto those who out of a
self-conceitedness did believe out of these Revolutions to work a way to their
own ends: and if any had reason to hope, Madruzzo was not to be debarred his
share of Expectation; for if Santa Savarina should be once excluded, Montalto
(in respect of the King's Favor) would in all probability cast a favorable
Aspect toward him: Nevertheless the Practices of Santa Savarina went on with
such a heat, as can hardly be imagined, because Montalto was every day more
solicitous in it; the great Duke had Intention to no body but to him; the Count
of Olivarez Catholic Ambassador, before he went to be Viceroy in Sicily,
planted a great Foundation for him both in Rome and Spain. A wonderful thing
that two Princes that were of different Spirits should concur with such
earnestness in the same Subject, that it was almost impossible to discern which
was the most forward in his Favors toward him: Neither were these Favors
secret but open, neither was it a new thing, but continued a long time, and
confirmed by the greatest desires of these Princes, and the greatest Endeavors
of their Ministers. The Cardinals which did exclude Santa Savarina were few,
but they were united, they were sixteen in all, viz. Arragona, Colonna,
Paleotto, Cemo, Altemps, Canano, Mondovi, Lancidotto, Ascoli, Sforza,
Sfondrato, Palavicino, Boromeo, Aequaviva, and Platta. On the contrary side he
had many Supporters, that you might have seen Kindred at disagreement;
Rusticuccio was favorable unto him, Alexandrino Opponent, the Young Colonna
did adhere unto him, the Old did abhor him. There were also some of the
Factions that were dissonant from their Heads; Farnezi a Creature of Sfondrato
voted for him, and Sfondrato his Chief excluded him; on the other side, Ascoli
and Baremeo Creatures of Montalto did disagree from the same Montalto. It is
said that Ascoli did it to please Alexandrino, who was Author of his Greatness,
and Boromeo to please Altempos, who was his Kinsman and Benefactor. It is said
that Sfondrato made himself one of the Heads of the Exclusion for many Causes,
but chiefly to hinder the Increase of Gaiatano's Fortune, knowing how much he
was in Favor with Santa Savarina. The while these Practices were managing in
this manner with so many Favors and Helps that there was a general Voice in
Rome, that without doubt he should be Pope; some intimate Friends of Sfondrato
spoke to him in this manner.

My Lord, Out of the Services which we have devoted unto you, and for the
Honor and Happiness of your self and Family, we desire you to hearken with an
impartial Ear to what we shall say unto you. In making your self the Head of
the Exclusion of Santa Savarina, you expose your self to an app^rent Danger of
Ruin. The Exclusion of it self is most odious and difficult. Do you not hear
the public Voice of Rome, That Santa Savarina is Pope? Who can resist against
so many Assistants, as he has, from Spain, from Montalto, from the Florentines
and Venetians? Do not you see that you oppose that King, on whom he and the
Duke his Brother chiefly depend? Do not you see that you displease the greatest
part of the Sacred College that desires him? Do you not see that this is
against the holy Will of God, who has decreed him to be Pope, for some great
Mystery and some remarkable Benefit of his Holy Church? All the rest that are
combined in this Exclusion are engaged by their Interest, Emulation,
Contention, or Hatred, all which may be in some degree excusable; but you
having none of these Motives, the greater will be his Offense he shall receive
from you, that if by chance your Lordship have received any misinformation
against him, be not too credulous; for many times there are Spirits that under
the color of Zeal do sow Seditious Tares to raise Discords amongst the good,
and to hinder all worthy persons of the honor they do deserve. To conclude, if
you be pleased to consider the troubles that may ensue that Action, imagine
that Santa Savarina be Pope already: what displeasure and grudge will he have
in his heart for opposing him? And consider that in your adversity and
affliction you shall find very few that will be any way assistant unto you. Do
you not know that a wise man does not consider the beginning but the end of
things? Consider that it is now in your power to make him Pope, and altogether
to save the honor of those that exclude him, and to make unto your self and
the rest of the Excludents an immortal Friend of Santa Savarina. If the
greatness and fortitude of your Soul, my Lord, shall accuse us of pusillanimity
or fear, at last you will not deny that in things of a high concernment, it is
requisite to have a faithful counsel, and mature advice. Therefore we wish you
to take your recourse unto God, that he may direct you in a better course, and
to accept of our advertisements, with as benign a construction as our hearts
did dictate to our Tongues in the delivery.

Sfondrato stood attentively to hear them, and then gave them this answer: In
truth you could not give me a greater or more pregnant testimony of your love
unto me, than to discover the care you have of my proceedings both in honor
and safety. Thus have you expressed your selves as faithful and loving friends,
which I will keep always dear in my memory, and shall endeavor to merit this
your favor with the return of my Respect, and the assistance of my ablest
Fortunes. But be certain that in this business of the Election of a Pope,
neither Hatred, nor Respect, nor Suspicion, nor Prayers shall withdraw me from
the Obligation and Oath which I have made to God and his Holy Church, to prefer
always his Service before all Interest, and all humane Reasons. And let any man
say what he please, if the Holy Ghost does inspire me to give my Vote to Santa
Savarina, I will give it him readily: And so do you pray to God for me, to
direct me what is best, and dismiss all fear from you; for where it shall
please the Holy Ghost to lead, there is no danger to follow. The days appointed
for the Funerals being expired, and the Mass of the Holy Ghost having been
Celebrated in St. Peter's Church, and the Oration de summo Pontifice eligendo
having been made by the Bishop of Trasie; upon the 10th. of January, 1592. the
Cardinals went in a Procession from St. Peter's to the Conclave, with the
Singing men before them, singing Veni Creator Spiritus: the Cardinals were all
in number 52, the which being entered the Paulina, they made first devout
Prayers, and the Singing men being gone, they did remain in the Conclave in
their little Cells: others went to their Palace to Dinner. That day was
laborious and tedious, because of the great multitudes of people that did come
to visit their Lordships. And amongst others, Santa Savarina was very much
straightened, because of the public Voice and Fame that was dispersed, that the
next morning he should be made Pope; it being an ancient custom, that in the
times of prosperity every one shows himself a most ready Friend. The
Ambassadors of Princes did also sweat in their Visits and Solicitations of
their Masters several intentions. The Duke of Cessa Ambassador of Spain did
stay there till eight of the Clock, which long staying did administer cause of
diverse suspicions; some verily believed it was to confirm his Solicitation in
favor of Santa Savarina; others did more discreetly conjecture that it was
only done to passover that night without doing any thing; removing with that
delaying of time the thought, and the intention that Mantalto and his party had
that night to carry him unto the Adoration; it being the opinion of the most
Judicious, that in that first ardour or heat, and darkness and confusion, they
would without doubt have made him Pope: from whence it came, that by the long
staying of the Catholic Ambassador the party of Santa Savarina missed the
opportunity of so fair an occasion: at last the Ambassador being gone,
Montalto being weary of that inconvenience, and desirous to lead Santa Savarina
to the Adoration, was very earnest and importunate to have Madruzzo with the
same promptitude to go with him to put it in execution.

It is said that Madruzzo and Spinola, who did govern the Faction of Spain, did
give counsel to Montalto, that it was not fit to attempt the Adoration, unless
they were afresh assured of the Votes, the will of man being mutable in the
revolution of one hour, saying, That it was much better to defer it till the
morning, and rather go securely, than in precipitating of the business in so
short a time, which was against the honor of the promoted and the promotors:
but the event proved, that this Counsel was prejudicious, and that it is not
proper to retard execution after a mature deliberation: as it was done in this
case. Montalto being unwilling to disapprove of the Counsel of Madruzzo, did
protract it till the next morning, and in the mean time was not idle, but
intentive to continue his solicitation; reviewing and comforting his party, and
others that had promised him: he went to rest, but great thoughts being active
with him, made him arise before it were day, and prosecute his solicitation to
the rest. Madruzzo being unwilling to seem backward in the business, did call
together all the Cardinals of the Faction of Venice and Florence, and went with
them to the Chamber of Santa Savarina, who at that time was in Prayer: the
Cardinals, amongst which was Ascanio Colonna did salute him, and honor him as
Pope, and took him from his Chamber, conducting him to the Chapel of Paulina
to worship him; being encountered by Montalto with a great deal of joy, as one
that did hope every hour to accomplish what he desired to bring to pass. It was
a pretty thing to observe how those that did follow, did bustle to get before
him to be taken notice of, and to express their alacrity to see his Exaltation.

Being come into the Chapel, it was remembered that they should send for
Giesualdo the Dean of the Cardinals, to give the greater countenance and
authority to his Adoration; who though a little late came with a face full of
Joy, thinking that Santa Savarina with the assistance of his Adherents would
have overcome all opposition. Now as careful and laborious as these parties
were to promote the Adoration, no less active were the Excludents to hinder it.
And although they knew they were not a competent number to make good the
exclusion, yet they were not daunted continually to cry Dominus providebit.

And having no time to make a Congregation as they did design, doubting that
while they were making of it, and consulting what they should do, the contrary
Faction should establish him Pope before their face. Nevertheless in that
shortness of time they did give such orders as they thought best for to resist
their first attempt, which to be short were these, that none of them should
enter into the Paulina for fear he should be unadvisedly constrained to do what
he would not willingly have done, but that they should all keep themselves in
the Chapel of Sextus, or in the Hall; that as they were divided from the
others in will, they should be also separated in place: after that every one of
them should do his uttermost endeavor with his Friends and Kindred, to
withdraw or seduce one at the least from the other Party, seeing that one could
either give or take the Papacy: And if they could not procure one Vote, they
should at least impetrate that they could not give it that morning.

Arragona, Colonna, and Altempos being sick of the Gout, caused themselves to
be carried into the Hall, hoping thereby their presence and authority to
retract some one from giving their Vote. Sforza, Sfondrato, Boromeo, and
Aquaviva, valorous and generous Cardinals were attentive with zeal to the
solicitation; one interceding with one, and the second conjuring another:
Insomuch that amongst the Cardinals of both Factions, there were many contrary
conflicts, every one seeking to draw another to his side. Alexandrino was
invited to enter into the Paulina, who did not refuse, but did first desire to
say his Office and Prayers. Rusticuccio was prayed by the Excludents to come
into the Chapel of Sextus, where some of his good Friends were attending to
speak with him; but he answered that he could not stay because the rest were
already gone to make the Pope in the Paulina.

Altempos was sitting in the Hall, with a countenance so rigid and severe, that
it seemed to those that came in, do not make Santa Savarina Pope. The Cardinal
Del Monti hoping to mitigate him, went at his turn with a cheerful countenance
toward him, and told him, My Lord, you see that we are all here together to
worship Santa Savarina for the Pope, and that work, being guided by the Holy
Ghost, He desired his concurrence to it, and that all the honor and merit of
so great an action should be attributed to himself alone.

Altempos who could not hear a harsher note than this, turned unto him with a
distasteful aspect, and with a voice so sharp and loud, that it made every man
there to take especial notice of it: and said unto him, I have no need at all
of your counsel, Cardinal Del Monti, go you if you list, and worship the Pope
of the Devil. Which words coming forth of his mouth with such fury, did strike
them all with fear and scandal.

Santa Savarina having been conducted into the Chapel, and all the Cardinals
in a due preparation to worship him, Sforza, Sfondrato, Boremeo, and Aquaviva
stood before the door to see and observe what they were doing within, as also
to distract and disturb their minds: neither were they frustrated in their
expectation, because there arose no small fluctuation and confusion amongst
them, arising from the diversity of their interlocution, and there going to and
fro in a perpetual motion: which confusion being observed by the supporters of
Santa Savarina to be prejudicial to their proceedings, they endeavored to
appease those confusions, saying, That this was no time of Disputation and
Discussion, but of Adoration, seeing they were all assembled to make so
sanctified an Election. Then Giesualdo as Dean, with a great deal of zeal rose
up and said unto Santa Savarina, That it was convenient for him to take notice,
that in all Conclaves it was usual to have Emulations, and Contentions; because
humanity was ambitious of honor and priority: therefore that there might be a
placid progress in every respect, he both requested and exhorted him to forgive
his opponents. To which the other courteously replied, That notwithstanding the
opposition of others he was not moved in himself: Therefore he did forgive them
all; promising that he would be always respect^ve and favorable unto them. La
Rovere being not yet come into the Chapel, Montalto and Mattei went to his
Chamber to fetch him, where they found Sfondrato and Boromeo, who were
dissuading him to side with Santa Savarina, representing unto him his own
honor and greatness. And that if he did give his Vote to another, he deprived
himself of his own fortune, and his friends of the opportunity and desire they
had to make him Pope: which occasion being once omitted, would never be
revokable: Exhorting him not to despise their counsel, nor his good fortune,
remembering that Charity begins at home, and that Montalto did him a great deal
of wrong, proposing Santa Savarina unto him who was a creature of another
Faction, he being created Cardinal by La Rovere his Uncle Pope Sextus.

On the other side Montalto was earnestly solicitous with him to be faithful to
his promise, and to show himself courteous in continuing the respects of so
many eminent Cardinals. To conclude, not to blemish his own fortune, in
refusing those offers that Montalto had made unto him, to render him gracious
in the sight of Santa Savarina; This good Lord being distracted by the
diversity of these Opinions and Counsels, resolved at last as an affable and
generous man, to prefer the advice and request of Montalto to his own honor
and fortune: And therefore with the assistance of the other two Cardinals, in
putting on his Robes; he went to pass his Vote for Santa Savarina; and passing
through the Hall where Altempos was still sitting in his Chair, Altempos
looking with a rigid countenance upon him and the other two Cardinals, one each
hand of him, could not forbear virulent language against the reverend old man.
These being all come into the Chapel, the supporters of Santa Savarina began
afresh to prosecute his Adoration: on the other side Sforza and Aquaviva began
with a loud voice, and a great deal of atrogance to cry out, that they neither
ought, nor could proceed any farther, without calling the Votes unto a number,
saying, That they were certain that there was not a competent number to
complete the Adoration: And if they did proceed in the Election contrary to the
accustomed manner, they would protest the nullity and invalidity of the same:
which protestations did produce a greater murmur and confusion in the Chapel;
some saying that there was no notice to be taken of such protestations, they
not being valuable, and only done to prevent the Adoration: and so much the
rather, because it was not usual to reckon the Vote, but only after the
Adoration. Others did affirm it to be requisite to reckon all the Votes,
whereby all objections and oppositions might be taken off. In that ambiguity
and irresolution the Dean said, That things may be done Canonically, and with
the Holy Peace of God, and to remove all scruples that might be objected
against the Election, it would be a thing worthy and necessary to take the
number of the Votes. And himself at that instant went about to take an account
of them, beginning with those that were next unto him; showing by the hand, and
nominating with the voice, My Lord such a one, one; my Lord such a one, two; my
Lord such a one, three; and my Lord such a one, four. And upon that number of
four, staying, and looking back, he complained of the great noise that was in
the Chapel, seeing that not only the Cardinals were not sitting, but going to
and fro confus^dly: and after a little while he began to reckon them afresh,
saying, one, two, three, four; and being interrupted again, upon the same
number he stood, complaining, and entreating the Cardinals to keep their
places, and be silent, saying, it was impossible to reckon them in such a
confusion. To conclude, it was a miraculous thing, that endeavoring to number
them over and over, he could not get beyond the the number of four.

The supporters of Santa Savarina did protest and assure the Dean that they
were a perfect and competent number; and in the mean time some of them did
offer to go to the Adoration. The Dean said, Softly my Lords, let us do our
things well and Canonically, it belongs to me to be the first, and I do wish it
as zealously as any man; but it is requisite that all things should be done
according to Custom. Those within seeing that such impediments and confusions
did proceed from the Excludents who were at the Chapel door, perturbating
their Affairs, said, that it was therefore necessary that the door should be
shut. But Sforza and Aquaviva opposed themselves against it, saying, That the
Chapel door ought to stand open, that every one might have free ingress and
egress at his pleasure, which was spoken by them as knowing which of them were
resolved to come out. Those within did reply that no body was held by force in
the Chapel, that every one that was there was free in his Election, and
therefore advised every one that was without to enter joyfully, and so
unanimously concur to Elect a Pope; protesting that other ways they would make
him themselves: Adding, that if they thought by their objections to propagate a
Schism, they were extremely mistaken, because God Almighty would not permit it;
and they were of themselves a competent number to make an Election and
Adoration. Those without answered, Make a Pope according to your own humor,
and we will come and Worship him in St. Peter's.

In this confusion there was order given to the Secretaries of the College,
and to the Masters of the Ceremonies, to write out the names of all the
Cardinals; which going round about, and nominating, and writing faithfully,
were nevertheless mistaken amongst themselves. And it was observed for a
strange thing, that Cardinal Cuzano, a man of a noble presence, of a great
body, and greater virtue and goodness, was for all that overseen by them; or if
he were seen, was left out at already written; of which error, taking at last
notice, to rectify that error, they began with a loud voice to call my Lord
Cuzano, who answering, said, Here I am, who enquires for me? Some Cardinals did
also endeavor to take the number of their names, and the business was the more
confounded, one reckoning on the one side, and one on the other; one finding
more, and the other less; so that it became the more intricate, by the reason
that it passed through so many several hands; others with a quicker eye had
reckoned them, and found them to be a just number, but did not publish it,
leaving the care of it to those whom it did concern. It is certain that in the
Paulina there were 36 Votes, and of two and fifty Cardinals which were in the
Conclave, there was not only two parts of three, which is absolutely necessary,
but one Vote more; which the Excludents perceiving, and that they were not
sufficient to maintain the exclusion, not knowing which way to turn themselves,
and to procure any remedy, they found themselves in a grand perplexity; being
constrained to adhere to or contradict Santa Savarina, both which were
prejudicial to their former design: some of them being of opinion that there
was both more honor and safety, by the concurrence of their Votes with the
rest for Santa Savarina, thereby the more to oblige him, than by opposition to
lose on all sides. It is reported that Sforza and Sfondrato, being as it were
deprived of all hopes, called for their Rochets to go into the Chapel, to
follow there the will of God, and to have the honor also to have made a Pope.
But Aquaviva, being a man of an invincible and indefatigable spirit in all
occasions, sent the Auditor his Conclavista into the Paulina, to bring him the
just number of the Cardinals that were there; who returned with this answer,
that there were but four and thirty: but the Cardinal thinking they were more,
and that he had mistaken himself, he sent him back again, to tell them over
again, which he did with the utmost of his care, and brought him word that they
were no more than 34; although in truth they were 36: yet this did not proceed
either from malice or deceit, but from mistake. And upon this new relation he
did animate Sforza, and Sfondrato, assuring them that the Includents of Santa
Savarina were but 34. Adding, that although they had been 35, they could not
complete the Adoration, because Santa Savarina could not adore himself. Then
the Excludents went with new acclamations to the Chapel door, calling with a
loud voice the Dean; who not hearing, or not willing to hear, they were very
attentive, and did with wonderful dexterity endeavor to procrastinate the
business. They did entreat the Cardinals that were next them to call the Dean,
who told them that they might come themselves into the Chapel, and speak with
him; thinking by that bait to have drawn them into the Chapel, which would
have been held as an argument of their concurrence in the Election, But they
perceiving their subtilty, would not come in, but called for Farnezi, who at
the last came to demand what they would have? Then they assaulted him with
violent importunities that he would retire with them, but all was in vain; he
answering them like a discreet and prudent Cardinal, That in such an action he
was resolved to follow the Divine Inspiration, knowing that with it there could
be no digression. And having said thus, he returned into the Chapel without
expecting any reply.

The old Colonna being extremely afraid that Santa Savarina should be Pope, did
send oftentimes Gerlinzoni his Conclavista to tell Ascanio Collonna that he
should come out of the Chapel, and that he should not stay there to see his
own ruin: But seeing that the other would not stir, and his fear still
increasing, he sent him at length a note under his own hand, intimating unto
him his promise, that at any time when he could invest him in, or deprive him
of the Papacy, he would decline his Vote from Santa Savarina; as now he had an
opportunity: And that he would not at the request or persuasion of any other be
the Confusion of himself, his whole Family, and many others of his best Friends.

Ascanio having received the Note, and having meditated a long time on it,
whether he should declare himself for Santa Savarina or not, finding reasons
and contrarieties on all sides; at last discerning that it lay in his power to
make or not to make him Pope, did resolve (as he said) being inspired of God,
to retire himself: And in the going out of the Chapel, received a double
violence, because those within held him back, and those without pulled him
forwards. Insomuch that his Rochet was torn: And not being content to go out
only, did also say that Ascanio Colonna would not have Santa Savarina to be
Pope, because he was not appointed of God. When the old Colonna saw him out of
the Chapel, and near unto him, he kissed him on the forehead, saying, O my
dear Son, O thou honor and reputation of the Family of the Collona 's, be thou
blessed for ever. All the rest of the Excludents did embrace him, and collaud
him for so brave an action; thinking themselves at that time quite exempt from
all fear or jealousies. If the retreat of Colonna was so acceptable to the
Excludents, certainly it was to the Includents as disagreeable: By reason that
by the privation of that Vote, they were incapable to make the Adoration. And
knowing that this disaster did happen because the Chapel door being open, the
Excludents took advantage to interrupt their proceedings. And that the example
of Colonna his exition might not be prevalent with any other, the door was
presently shut, which raised new fears in the Excludents; doubting that
remaining in the Paulina with 35, they might with a public Scrutinium proceed
to the Election of him, whom they had so much aimed at; who although by way of
Adoration he could not adore himself, yet by way of Election he might Elect
himself: and therefore stood all amazed and astonished. Altempos being without
fear, and full of courage, turned himself to the young Cardinals, and said, Be
not afraid my Lords, knock, bounce, break the door in pieces. Whereupon Sforza,
Aquaviva, Sfondrato, and Boromeo began to storm, and make such a noise and
clamor, that to prevent such an inconvenience they opened the door again. Then
Sforza and Aquaviva began afresh to protest the nullity and invalidity of their
proceedings, if the door were not left open; since that by shutting the door
they kept by violence those Cardinals that were within. Here I cannot pretermit
the rare example of Santa Savarina, his great humility and constancy; who,
seeing in that holy action so many great and dangerous storms arising, said
openly, If for my sake such perturbations and rumors do happen, I pray your
Lord^hips let the door be opened, that I may be gone, and so these discords and
storms may be appeased: which was an evident testimony that there was in him no
spirit of Ambition. His supporters were still very importunate to proceed to
the Election. And the Dean began to say, Let (...) g^ven in our occasions with
a sanctified quietness. Exhorting them before any further progress be made
therein to make a Reconciliation with the Excludents, and to invite them to
come willingly to the Adoration; hoping that God would move them to it. And to
that purpose he nominated Madruzzo, offering himself to go along with him,
which motion was approved: they went and instantly entreated their Adversaries
from henceforth to put off all discontent in a business of so high a
consequence as the Election of the Vicar of Jesus Christ: and that they would
come cheerfully, because Santa Savarina had forgiven whatsoever was past, and
would prove a Father and Benefactor unto them all: and that they should make a
Pope who would be a prop and honor unto the Catholic Church; Certifying them
that they had proceeded so far in it, that without their assistance they had
made him Pope: and that they would rather resolve to come voluntarily than by
violence. The Excludents did answer, That knowing the most holy mind of the
sacred College, they were certain that their Lordships would not wonder that
not one of them would change his mind, because it was not any hate that they
did bear unto Santa Savarina, but that they did nothing but by holy
Inspiration; confiding that they should be not only excusable, but commendable
for it; seeing chiefly that there were many others in the sacred College, for
the Election of whom they would voluntarily concur. It is said, that Sfondrato
did enlarge himself so far to Madruzzo, as to tell him, That although he did
contradict the Election of Santa Savarina who was nominated by the King;
nevertheless he was confident that his Majesty as a good and Catholic Prince
would not take it ill, and would not esteem him the less his Servant for all
that: and that Madruzzo as a good and discreet Nobleman did not contradict him.
There wanted not opinions that the sending this Embassage was prudently done,
but that there was a mistake in the Election of the Ambassadors, they being
persons to be suspected that they were not well inclined to the Exaltation of
Santa Savarina.

The Embassage of Giesualdo and Madruzzo proving fruitless, and returning back
into the Chapel, they began to consult what they should do to proceed to the
Election: some did say that they could not make the Adoration, because they
were not in all above 35, and that Santa Savarina being not capable of adoring
himself, the Adoration would prove imperfect: Others said that there was no
better or securer way of proceeding than by the Scrutinium, by which Santa
Savarina might Elect himself, and so the Election be made valid and perfect,
seeing that out of 52, 35 was a complete number. That opinion was accepted
generally; and therefore it was ordained that Mass should be celebrated, and
that the Cardinals should receive the Communion according to custom. The Dean,
to whom it did belong that morning to perform those Holy Mysteries, did
withdraw himself, and went to his hours of Prayer, and Confession: all which
things did take a great deal of time. In the mean time order was given to the
Excludents, that they should come to Mass, and to receive the Communion, and
that they should be assistant to the general Scrutinium, according to the
ancient custom; who did answer, That they did wonder that those Holy Rites were
not performed before, as by the Bull it is commanded: Therefore they were also
resolved to hear Mass, and receive the Communion in the Chapel of Sextus, as
they did by the hand of Sfondrato, refusing in any manner to join with the
rest, s^aring that unadvisedly they might fall into some act which might be
prejudicial unto them. At length the Dean having said Mass, and celebrated the
Communion in the Paulina, himself, Sans, and Montalto as chief of the Orders
went to fetch the Votes of the Excludents, who to secure themselves of any
suspicion and stratagem; as also to hear how things went and to resist them if
need were, They sent Sforza and Aquaviva to be present at the Scrutinium:
before whose coming the Dean said unto Santa Savarina, That out of his great
zeal and piety he should do well to forgive all them that had been opponent
against his Exaltation: who answered, That the first thing he learned in his
infancy, in the Rules of Christianity, was to forgive injuries, and therefore
he did again with all his heart forgive all, and would at any time give them
all possible satisfaction. Verona being a good and zealous Cardinal, did
beseech him besides that he would not take exceptions against Boromeo for any
thing he had done in this business, because it did not proceed from any ill
intention, but only to comply with Altempos. Santa Savarina did answer and say,
That he always loved him, and that he would love him afterward as his own Son,
because he did so nearly resemble that great Cardinal Boromeo, who was the
greatest Light, and rarest president of Piety that was in the Church of God for
many years. Whereupon Verona being overcome with this mildness, asked what name
his Holiness would be pleased to assume? who answered, Clement. And Verona said
that the assumpsion of that name was very proportionable to the benignity and
clemency of his mind.

It was reported that Gaetano went to the Chamber of Canano, where he lay sick
of the Gout; entreating him to give his consent for Santa Savarina, wherein he
should perform as meritorious and heroical an action as could be imagined.
Canano excused himself, saying, He was not able to go out of his Cell, being
tormented with extremity of pain in his feet, Gaetano said, That that should be
supplied by carrying him in a Chair. Canano answered, That the pain lay in one
of his toes, which he could not stir without a violent disturbance. But Gaetano
perceived that Canano his Disease lay more in his head than in his heel, and so
unsatisfied, took his leave and left him. Santa Savarina his Conclavista
although not prosperous, deserves to be remarkable for his cunning herein, who
perceiving a great probability of Santa Savarina his being Pope, went to the
Chamber of Canano, telling him that he was Elected Pope, and desired to see
him: but this craft of his was countermined by the subtilty of Canano, who
craftily answered him, That he would take seem convenient time to consider of
it, yet for all that did not stir. It was certainly a miraculous thing, and an
evident testimony that Santa Savarina was not destined to be Pope; seeing that
amongst so many applauses and gratulations, and having that morning been
carried from his Chamber by the two chief heads Madruzzo and Montalto, with
thirty and odd Cardinals, and conducted into the Paulina to be adored: And
having been so long a time saluted and esteemed as Pope, and Cardinal del Monti
having gone out of the Chapel to give notice to all the several Conclavista's
to break open the doors and walls of the Conclave, because Santa Savarina was
made Pope; yet for all these tokens and advices, not one of the Conclavista's
would stir, or pack up any Clothes, as is usually done in such actions to
prevent the plundering of the Soldiers in the Chambers of the Cardinals, when
they come into the Conclave after the Election of the Pope.

The death of Gonzaga and Mendoza are apparent evidences that he was not like
to be Pope, they both being his chief supporters; the former dying few days
before the vacancy, the other at the time of their going into the Conclave: and
besides the not coming of the Cardinal of Austria from Germany, as was daily
expected; for by the assistance of any one of them he would have been Pope.
Moreover to observe the incredible constancy and unity of the excludents, and
the murmuring they made; protesting that they had rather be exposed to any
torment than go to his Adoration.

The Cardinals were yet sitting in the Paulina every one in his place, the
Faction of Santa Savarina did urge and propound that the Scrutinium might be
made publicly, because already every Cardinal had published his Vote, and
given his consent, having raised him out of his Cell, saluting him Pope, and
bringing him into the Paulina to worship him: and that none could retract,
neither did the retreat of Colonna any way invalidate his former consent which
he had given for so many hours, and by so many signs. Sforza and Aquaviva
knowing that this was the direct and certain way to make him Pope, seeing that
none of them durst have denied their Vote in a public Scrutinium, for fear of
proving ungrateful and unfaithful in his promises, with all possible ardour did
oppose themselves against it, calling that a new and unknown way contradicting
all ancient and accustomed proceedings, contrary to the Liberties of Cardinals,
who in giving their Votes are not to comply with any man, but only to satisfy
their own Consciences: therefore that the Scrutinium ought to be made secretly,
otherwise they protested the nullity of the Election, calling the masters of
the Ceremony as public persons to take notice of their protestations.

In these new contradictions it was a mavelous thing that 34 Cardinals that
were in the Paulina on the behalf of Santa Savarina, either by too much
confidence of themselves, or rather by a Divine Providence should subscribe
unto two Cardinals in a deliberation wherein did consist the loss or victory of
each party: and so much the more, there being no Bull that did prohibit to make
the Scrutinium publicly in such a case.

The opinion of making the Scrutinium secretly being prevalent, all fortune
presently departed from Santa Savarina, notwithstanding his protestation which
he made in these words, Sine tamen praejudicio prior is meae Electionis. The
Votes that were given on his behalf were 28, with that of Montalto and Pinello
30: insomuch that he wanted 4 Votes, which with his own after would have made
35, which would have been a complete and perfect number to have made his
Election in a public Scrutinium.

His supportors did remain all in confusion, and replete with shame to have
been so grossly deluded, and durst neither speak nor lift up their heads;
attributing to themselves the fault that the Scrutinium should be made
secretly. On the other side the Excludents were overcome with joy for having
obtained such a victory, they having been 8 hours in contention about it. Then
the Cardinals being weary went to their several Cells to their dinner. Now to
give Virtue her due praise, we must not omit that Santa Savarina in that large
field of favors and dis-favours showed always such a composition and
moderation of mind, and a spirit so undaunted, magnanimous, and generous, that
as he was not puss'd up with any good, so was he not dejected with any adverse
fortune; accepting every thing as best for his Salvation. And whereas he went
before to the Chapel attended with a great number of Cardinals to be
worshipped as Pope, now he returns unto his Cell alone; and that too he found
plundered by the servants of the Conclave, who had left him not a bit of bread
for his Dinner: Then considering the state that he was in before in the
Paulina, and the condition he was now in in his naked Cell; it is reported that
as being a man he could not choose at one point of time both to admire and
laugh at the infallibility of Fortune: yet it did not escape him without some
tears. Every one stood amazed how it was possible that Santa Savarina, who went
in the morning into the Paulina, Pope, should in a few hours after return a
single Cardinal. The opinions amongst them were diverse, as also the faults that
were alleged; some did attribute it to the errors that were made in the
reckoning of the Votes, others to the defect of Zeal or Industry of his
supportors, in protracting the Adration, and giving ear and time to the
Excludents: For had they proceeded directly to the Adoration, all impediments
had been removed* by which means the Excludents had received no encouragement,
nor young Colonna deserted: Others did impute it to the imperfection of those
who failed to give their Votes, in the secret Scrutinium; others to the too
great confidence of those who consented that it should be made secret: But
howsoever it were we cannot err in saying it was not the pleasure of God, who
rules and disposes all, and to whose blessed will all humane discourses ought
to submit in all humility.

For all this Montalto, who of all the rest was the most unsatisfied, did not
leave off his Robes, but rather with a greater fervor took the practice again
in hand, and with the advice of his Friends did Congregate his Faction into the
Paulina; entreating them for the love of God, for their own reputations sake,
and for the affection they did bear unto him, that they would remain constant
in unity of mind for the Election of Santa Savarina to be Pope; because by
their constancy they would overcome the obstinacy of their enemies: and going
about to examine every ones opinion, when it came unto La Rovere his turn, he
said unto Montalto, That as he was, and perpetually would remain his true and
obliged servant, so he conceived it to be his duty freely to declare his
opinion in this occurrence; the sum of which was, That, they having already
done for Santa Savarina, all what was possible to be done, if he should proceed
any further on the behalf of that only subject, it might very well be concluded
from thence, that he esteemed none of his Creatures besides to be worthy of the
Papacy, there being amongst them many deserving and worthy men: upon any of
which Creatures of his he was willing to afford his concurring Vote; but in
case none of them should stand, that then he might be left at liberty, to
dispose his voice upon any other to whom his Conscience should direct him.

Madruzzo and Montalto being now more inflamed than ever toward the Election
of Santa Savarina, did resolve with all solidity to use their endeavors for
his advancement, hoping to overcome the opposition, partly by the coming of the
Cardinal of Austria, who was every hour expected; and partly by the confidence
they had to procure some of the Excludents to be on their party: as Montalto
did endeavor with all manner of subtilty with Paleotto, and Ascoll,
representing unto Paleotto the zeal of Santa Savarina, and his goodness: That
he had taken him already to himself without any invitation from him the said
Montalto; and that now his Lordship declining the assistance of Santa Savarina,
either by his compliance with others, or for his own advancement, he would
thereby detract from his own worth, and hazard the repute he had obtained in
the estimation of diverse of the other Cardinals. And to Ascoll he said, that
there was nothing more detestable in a man, nor inconformable to a Christian,
than ingratitude; intimating unto him the obsequious respect he ought to bear
to the sacred memory of Sextus the fifth; and consequently to Montalto himself,
who was the original occasion of his being created Cardinal. These arguments
although powerful, were (as is is reported) by them refuted by many strong
arguments: and certainly it was very miraculous to all men, that these two
should so strongly oppose these attempts of Montalto; but it was more to be
admired, that in that morning, in which the heavens did look so favorably on
Santa Savarina, that for more than seven hours together he was Pope, if his own
party had taken notice thereof: that neither they, nor any of the Excludents
for any manner of respect did depart from what they had undertaken. After that
came into the Conclave the Cardinal of Joyeux, a Frenchman, who presently was
assaulted and enticed both by one and the other Faction; the Includents hoping
to get the victory by his Vote, and the Excludents the confirmation of their
Exclusion: But he resolved to declare himself for neither side. And it is said
that it was the advice of Altempos: upon which irresolution the business was
left in the Conclave, upon the same terms as they were before.

While the Includents were so earnest about concluding the business for Santa
Savarina, and did their uttermost endeavors on his behalf, it was a wonderful
thing to observe the indefatigable vigilance and industry that Sforza,
Sfondrato, Boromeo, and Aquaviva did perform in opposition of them; having an
eye not only on the power of the adverse party, and to all those great attempts
which they made, but also to the danger they were in, and the great doubt they
amongst themselves had, that if any one of them should be seduced either by the
rediousness in their proceedings, or by hope, or by fear, they should then be
all involved in one confusion and shame: Therefore to prevent all dangers, they
did confirm amongst themselves their former faithful Union, disposing with
admirable order and prudence, the watches that every one of them was to observe
both day and night: and to take continual notice of all the Practices,
Combinations, Goings, Discourses, and all Designs of every Cardinal and
Conclavista. It was a strange thing to see how diligently they did attend the
actions of the Conclave all day and all night, also with Tapers in their hands;
extolling beyond moderation as well the Porters of the adverse party, as they
did those of their own: endeavoring to discover by them, what Cardinals were
to be there, and what stratagems they had in hand; so great a danger requiring
no less diligence. It is said that those young Cardinals at that time tempting
Platta, told him, My Lord, it is said that Madruzzo and Montalto are boasting
themselves to be secure of your Vote on their behalf; we cannot in truth give
credit unto it: and he wisely answering, said, It neither is, nor ever shall be
true; I am real, and my life shall fail before my word shall be infringed; and
the obligation in which I am bound to my Lord Sfondrato: whereupon they with an
open arm embraced him, and kissed him. A little while after the Cardinal La
Rovere dyed, a man in truth of great qualities, and upon whom many had fixed
their resolutions: But the Divine Providence was pleased to provide a better
Crown for him. Aldobrandino was present at his death, who as being the chief
Penitentiary, and as one that loved him as tenderly as his own Brother, did
perform all kind of pious Offices for him, in putting him in mind of the
welfare of his soul, and of his salvation; which death as it was dear unto him,
so was it a Memorandum to all the other Cardinals to be prepared for death,
especially considering how they were involved in an abundance of troubles and
perturbations even in the Conclave it self.

The Excludents perceiving that the design of Santa Savarina was still on foot,
and prosecuted with a great deal of ardency, were still dubious, fearing every
moment the coming of the Cardinal of Austria, and that at the end every thing
should fall out contrary to their desires or wishes: whereupon to acquit
themselves from that inconvenience, they became daily solicitors to Montalto to
alter his resolutions; desiring him to pitch upon any other of his Creatures,
and they would unanimously serve him in the Election. On the other side they
attempted Madruzzo with persuasions for him likewise to decline that business,
seeing that this Enterprise was desperate; and the more cunningly to invite
him, they did promise him their several Votes to Elect him Pope: But he did
exhort them to content themselves with Santa Savarina, being a subject of so
much desert and virtue, and being desired by so many Princes. And they answered
him, that to consider any more of that, were to prolong the time, to waste away
the Cardinals, and to ruinate the people and the City, who had spent so much
time in Expectation: therefore they did entreat him, that he would conform
himself with the Divine Will, and accept of the Grace of God sent unto him, as
it was offered by them in a spontaneous and free will, to employ all their
endeavors for his Lordships greater advancement. Whereupon Madruzzo being
assaulted by so many rational instances, knowing that it was not fit to hold so
long in suspension the Conclave, and all Christendom, upon the only expectation
of Santa Savarina. And did acquaint Montalto and the rest, that if within 3
days they could not bring their practice to effect, they would then consider of
some other subject. In that time every one did their uttermost toward it, and
the term being expired without seeing any effect produced in the behalf of
Santa Savarina, but rather that their party began to decline, those that
desired to have Madruzzo Pope, thinking to have a great advantage, considering
that the Excludents would afford them their Votes, and that they thought to
have also those of Montalto, as well for the promise he made to the Duke of
Cessa, to concur to it at any time that the occasion should offer: as also for
the good intention that they had found by discourse with his Creatures toward
Madruzzo: That he was always in the good opinion of Montalto, and that they
would not fail to the occasion. Thereupon Spinola acquainted Montalto that then
was the time to advance Madruzzo, seeing that it only lay in him to make him
Pope: intimating unto him the goodness and affability of that Lord; The promise
that he had made and confirmed many times to the Catholic Ambassador to help
him. The great confidence that in all reason he ought to repose in that Lord,
who by all expres;s;ions would acknowledge, what favor he should receive from
him. Montalto receiving this motion unexpectedly, neither trusted nor
mistrusted Spinola, but cunningly gave him good words, and took time to answer,
that he might consult with his Creatures, excusing himself that he could not
alone compass so great an Enterprise; his Creatures upon the motion being made,
for the most part showed themselves averse unto it. And some of them, as
Morozino, Giustiniano, Camerino, Monte, Fiorenza and others did cheerfully
undertake his Exclusion: therefore going back a little while after to give his
answer to Spinola, Montalto told him, that for his part he would be always
ready to be an assistant to Madruzzo, but that he could not prevail with his
Creatures to condescend unto it, saying, that they would forsake their relation
to him. This answer and some other impediments did quite overthrow Madruzzo's
hopes, who nevertheless was so wise and so phlegmatic, that dissembling his
displeasure he did appear to have been fully satisfied with Montalto, passing
it outwardly very joyfully, and making show as if he did not aim at all at the
Papacy; although many did advise him to break with Montalto, but he wisely
would not do it, first to prevent any occasion that the world might take to
think him to be ambitious of the Popedom. And secondly, seeing that this thing
might prove prejudicial to the King of Spain his affairs, in giving occasion to
Montalto to make a Pope in those troublesome times that the King could not
confide in, and because he would not in any case digress from his Majesty's
Instructions, which were still to preserve unity with Montalto: And that they
should not consult of any subject without the advice one of the other, and that
they should proceed with all possible speed to the Election of a Pope.

After that they nominated Como and Paleotto, being both men commended by the
King, and both worthy and deserving men; although they were both unfortunate,
through the vain suspicions of the world; from whence it happened that their
competition was but of a small continuance; some sparkles of grudging that
Montalto and others had kindled against them in some former Conclaves for their
particular interests and fears were not yet quite extinct, but both deserved
nevertheless great praise, because they did voluntarily submit themselves to
the will of God. Many attempts were made after that for the old Colonna, some
believing that the thing might be happily compassed, supposing that they had
three firm and solid assistants: The first was that of the Excludents, by
reason of the obligement between Colonna and them for their adherence. The
second was that of Madruzzo with the Votes of Spain, Colonna being one
nominated by that King. The third was that of Montalto, because of the affinity
that was between the houses of Colonna and Peretta; because Colonna was a man
full of maturity of years, piety in condition, and solidity in judgment: but
when the time came that his assistants should be put to the test, he found that
there was such a profundity of consultation amongst them, that he conceived it
better to retreat with honor, than to charge on to destruction. Montalto did
not show himself any way backward in it, but was rather zealous in good offices
to promote it, complaining yet of some of his own Creatures and others that
would not adhere unto him: Therefore it is a general rule, that whosoever puts
himself upon imaginary hopes, and not on real assurances, most commonly
deceives himself. It was furthermore discoursed both within and without the
Conclave, that in these confusions Rusticuccio might have been advanced unto
it, being acceptable to Montalto, Spain and other Princes, beloved of the
sacred College, experienced in the Affairs of the Papacy, and carrying with
him an apparency of a short life. But that discourse held not long, their aims
being of more eminency.

The Excludents seeing that Madruzzo could not proceed because of the Creatures
of Montalto, of the Venetians, and the Tuscanes, opposing him, and that after
Paleotto and Como were rejected by Montalto, and that Colonna with so many
encouragements could not attain it; and considering by the same reasons that
there was no room for Salviati, nor for Verona, nor for Mondovi, they conclude
that of necessity it must be given to one of Montalto's Creatures: and whether
Madruzzo will or nor, he will be constrained to condescend unto it: therefore
being then desirous to put an end to the Conclave, and to free themselves of
the fear continually they were in of Santa Savarina, they sent word to Montalto
that he would defer it no longer, but would nominate one of his own Creatures,
promising him faithfully all their Votes. Therefore Montalto now perceiving
that he had the Crown of glory in his hand, at which he had so long time aimed,
although it was never known that his intention was to make Aldobrandino Pope,
did accept with a great deal of alacrity both their advice and assistance which
they offered unto him; telling them openly, that amongst his Creatures
Aldobrandino seemed the most competent man for it, for his most worthy
qualities, and for the estimation that the sacred College held ever of him for
his person and virtue. All of them did unanimously congratulate that Election,
and with great promptitude embrace it, saying, that they were content with it;
and gave order that with all industry the design should be so managed, that it
might be carried without the opposition of any of the rest of the Cardinals.
Montalto did communicate this Election of his with some of his Creatures, who
unanimously also did presently agree with all their possible endeavors to
confirm it, which gave him the animation thereunto: After that he spoke to
Madruzzo, telling him that seeing there were so many divisions in the Conclave
concerning the subjects that had been before Elected, it was in all probability
the way to defer the Election for a long time to the ruin of the people, the
scandal of the good, and the hazard of more Cardinals lives. And that therefore
if his Lordship would be pleased to concur upon one of his Creatures, he hoped
that there would be a short period to so long a labor. And having said thus
unto him, propounded Aldobrandino, a person just, and fearing God; who although
he were not of that number that were nominated by his King, yet he would be his
friend, and would always be graciously protectant of his Majesty, and of all
his Estates, knowing him to be the only defensor and supportor of the Catholic
Religion: and that being conscious of his integrity and sincere inclination to
the Kings Service, he himself would be his security.

Madruzzo was nothing troubled with this proposition, but rather seemed
willingly to approve it; answering that being not able of himself to give a
final resolution, he demanded some time to communicate it with his friends, to
understand their opinion in it: And then recollecting himself, he began to
consider the circumstances, alleging for it, or concluding against it: for
his refusal he had these Motives; That it was derogatory to the honor of the
King his Master, for him to concur in the Election of one that was not
nominated by him. That it would conclude him very much to blame to give his
Vote to the Election of one to be Pope, who had not only not given any
demonstration of Fidelity to his Masters Service, but might rather be suspected
not to be in a condition of neutrality. Besides that, he knew not so distinctly
what was the private resolution of Aldobrandino toward the world, toward the
dependency of Princes, toward his own kindred; whether he were not ambitious
to raise them, how he stood inclined: Besides that, being conscious of his
former excluding him, and depriving him of the Papacy in the Conclave of Urban
VII. when the greatest part of the Cardinals did concur in the Election of
Aldobrandino, and when he was in his Chamber for two hours space ready to be
adored as Pope. Contrariwise he had these Motives to accept him, he did
consider that the intention of the King was so holy, that although he nominated
only some few, yet he did not by that exclude any of the rest that might be
conceived fit for it: but only these who for their interest, or their
dependence, or for some other lawful cause might be suspected by him: and the
Honor and Service of God being the Honor and Service of the King; and that
Aldobrandino had indeed never been opposite, but rather assistant to the Kings
designs, as he showed manifestly in Polonia, when he went Legate thither;
procuring with all his endeavors the liberty of Duke Maximilian. He considered
further, that by the relation of very faithful men as far as he could
penetrate, his disposition was altogether affable and meek; neither proud, nor
very much addicted to study, devotion, and good works, that he had never in
public or in private preferred France before Spain, or Spain before France:
but as an Ecclesiastic man, and a true Column of the Holy Church, had ever
cherished the public good of Christendom in general, the public peace and
quietness, a King in France, most Christian in effect as in Title, the
extirpation of Heretics and all Rebels against the Catholic Religion, the
exaltation of the Holy Sea, his Dignity and Authority, having never been
interessed or subjected to any Prince or Cardinal: his Conversation having been
always with spiritual, grave, and learned men, having banished from his company
all men that were deceitful, factious, adulators, murmurators, and the whole
crowd of vain and ignorant persons, having always in peace and gravity governed
his own house, having neither admitted in his Family any seditious humor or
quarrelling that were blemished in reputation, nor having ever permitted any of
his Servants to domineer in his house, but kept them always attentive to the
glory of God, and the service of their Master, as if his Family had been a
Monastery; besides that, although he was known to have two Nephews, one from
his Brother, the other from his Sister; nevertheless they were bred to so much
humility and civility, that both within the City and abroad they were held as
an Ornament unto him. It did please Madruzzo also, that Ald^brandino had never
showed any hatred or spleen against any of them that had excluded him before,
but rather all respect and favor. From all which motives Madruzzo drew this
conclusion, that from so good a tree, bad fruit could not proceed; and that he
that can well govern his own house, is fit to bear rule in the Church of God.
Besides all these considerations, Madruzzo began to be weary, having seen all
the hopes or means that could be made either for himself or those that were
nominated by the King to be deluded. He saw that to prolong the Conclave any
longer, was to irritate and break off with Montalto, and to fall from one evil
to a worse. He saw that amongst the Creatures of Montalto none was like to
prove so well as this. He saw that in satisfying Montalto in this particular,
he obliged him much unto himself. He saw that proceeding in the Election of
Aldobrandino cheerfully and with alacrity, would prove a duplicite engagement
upon him. He saw that the King would approve of so good and zealous a Pastor.
Finally, knowing that this Election was given miraculously from God, he
resolved to give his consent to it: And having imparted the same unto his
friend ^he found them as cheerful and alacreous as he could wish. Besides that
Alessandrino and Razivil a Polonian, did concur to it with a wonderful
cheerfulness; the first in consideration that Aldobrandino was the Author of
his preferment; the other by reason of that League of Amity wherein he was
linked with Aldobrandino at the time of his being Legate in Polonia. This
proceeding did continue some two days, by reason there were some of opinion
that it would not be attained, he being none of those that had been nominated
by the King of Spain: and partly as others said, because Madruzzo would first
give an account thereof to the Duke of Cessa to have his approbation, who
though it was believed that he was of himself prompt enough therein, yet it was
thought that Father Toledo was a principal Instrument about him to advise him
to it; assuring him that Aldobrandino would prove a very good Pope, and a true
Friend to the King of Spain, in the defense and increase of the Catholic
Religion. And it was said also that although Montalto with his Votes, the
Excludents, the Venetians, and a part of the Gregorians could procure him the
Papacy without the assistance of Madruzzo; yet out of his respect to the King
he would not do it without the consent of the Duke of Cessa. It was indeed a
thing remarkable, that amongst so many evident appearances of his preferment,
Aldobrandino did nevertheless as much as in him lay, exclude himself, the
heavens being at that time propitious to that sanctified advance, upon the 30.
of January 1592. about one of the Clock Montalto did publish in the Conclave
Aldobrandino to be Pope; whereupon Madruzzo, the Excludents, Montalto his
Friends, and the Venetians, went unanimously to his Cell, to advertise and
congratulate his Holy Election, who neither in face, word, nor gesture gave the
least symptom of alteration, which was an evident testimony of his moderation,
and that he had no absolute aim at the Papacy. Now we may observe for a further
Example of astonishment, that it was rather a stupefaction than a rejoycement
that he had imposed on him the supremest honor with the greatest burden in
Christendom, which was apparent after his Election; for the Masters of the
Ceremonies going to demand by what appellation he would be entitled, and
(according to custom) to know if he had admitted his Election to the Papacy?
his Holiness kneeling before the Altar to the most Holy Crucifix, with a Flux
of tears fr^^ his eyes was not at all attentive to the Masters of the Ceremony;
whereupon the Cardinals that were nearest unto him answered, I, I, he is
willing to accept of it. And the Masters of the Ceremony replying that it was
not judicially satisfactory, unless proceeding from his Holiness own mouth.
Then his Holiness deploring with excess of humility said thus, Thou O Lord God,
who see the hearts of all men, and to whom all secrets are revealed, if the
Election that has been made of me thy most unworthy Vicar, be not to thy Glory
and Service, and the salvation of all the faithful: I beseech thee that my
tongue adhaereat faucibus meis. If also thou see that it is advantageous to
thy Holy Name, and to thy Holy Church, I upon the confidence of thy assistance
expose my self to thy blessed will. His Holiness having in that manner given
his consent, he was arrayed in his Pontificalibus; and being sat upon the seat,
was adored by all the Cardinals with a general acclamation. Afterward, the
Ceremonies being ended, he was demanded, What appellation he would assume?
Clement, he answered. Then was he carried to St. Peter's, and was met in the
Portal by the Canons and Prelates saluting him with these Holy words, Ecce
Sacerdos Magnus, the Te Deum Laudamus following him. As soon as he came into
the Church, he performed his Orizons at the Altar of the most Holy Sacrament:
and afterward his Holiness was carried ad limina Apostolorum; where having
made his Orizons, he was again set upon his seat, and adored by the Cardinals.
In the interim, his Election was divulged all over Rome, whereupon every one
came to see him, blessing and praising God for so Holy a Pastor, who being
replete with Charity and Alacrity, gave them a general Benediction: and by his
Countenance assuring them, that he would afford them Justice, and procure
Plenty unto their Bodies, and Salvation unto their Souls. His Holiness being at
last conducted to the Vatican, confessed himself to Father Gio Franbordine
della Valicella his Confessor, and then said Mass, (as he usually did) with
great Devotion. It is not to be omitted to declare the words his Holiness spoke
unto his Confessor, which were, That he desired him to pray unto God, that if
such fruits should not proceed from his Papacy as might be advantageable to his
Holy Church, that he would be pleased the sooner to deprive him of his life:
demonstrating openly, That his desire and aim was not to rule, but to serve his
God, and to feed his Flock. This Conclave then which was begun with so many
divided wills, contentions, fury and strife, that it was feared it would have
proved a Schism, was at last, by the assistance of the Holy Ghost, concluded
and terminated into a most holy Peace, and Union; of which always the praise,
honor, and glory be ascribed to the Divine Majesty, the giver of all good
things.

A Note of the Cardinals that were present at this Conclave.
ILLustrissimo Giesualdo Decano. Aragona. Marc Antonio Colonna. Como. Paleotto.
Altemps. Aless indrino. Madruzzo. Sans. Santa Severina. Gonzaga. Castruccio.
Aldobrandino. Ascoli. Gallo. Cosenza. Morasino. Sarnano. Ano. Rusticuccio.
Simecello. Dezza. Fiorenza. Canano. Salviati. Verona. Mondovi. Spinola. Terra
Nova. Lancilotto. Gaettano. Sauli. Monte. Pepoli. Camerino. Montelparo. Sforza.
Gioisa. Montalto. Matei. Giustiniano. Ascanio Colonna. Boromeo. Cusano.
Razzivil. Sfondrato. Farnese. Aquaviva. Platti. Santiquatro. Pinello. Austria.
Rovere who died.
FINIS.

