A FAMOUS VICTORY OBTAINED ^y the Citisens of Coventry, and the Parliaments
Forces, under the Command of the Lord Brooks, and colonel Hambden, against the
Kings Army, August 22. Read in the House of Commons upon Wednesday, being the
24. of August.

Declaring the manner of the meeting of the two Armies, the Parliaments forces
slaying above 80. Cavaleers, with little loss, and taking captain Leg and
others prisoners, with two pieces of Ordnance, diverse Wagons, and great store
of Ammunition, putting the whole Army of cavaleers to flight.

Also the manner of His Majesty's forces blowing open the Gates, and how the
city was preserved by throwing their Household stuff into the streets, to keep
out the horse and diverse of the Cavaleers being slain thereby.

Ordered that this be forthwith printed and published

John. Brown. Cler. Parl.



Printed for R. Wood, August 25. 1642.

A famous Victory obtained by the Trained Band of Coventry against the
Cavaleers, August 22.
Upon Wednesday the 24. of Austust, information was given to the honorable
House of Commons, of all such eminent passages that has happened since his
Majesty came to Coventry. viz. That on Saturday last about 9 of the clock in
the morning, with an Army consisting of about 17. or 1800. Horse, his Majesty
came to Coventry, which were [the only strength of all his forces that came
with him out of Yorkshire.

And the Citisens of Coventry having intelligence of drawing near the said City
with a great army, every man that bore arms in the city, together with about
500. of the trained Bands of the County presently put themselves into a posture
of defense, resolving to spend their lives for the King and Parliament, and in
maintenance of the Laws of the Kingdom, Whereupon the Major and diverse of the
Aldermen and chief Commanders in the City, met his Majesty at the Gates thereof,
and showed their dutiful respect to His Majesty, proffering their service at
His feet, expressing their earnest desire to acommodate His Majesty in the
maintaining of his just Rights and Prerogative, offering His Majesty free
intercourse into the City with a complete Guard for the safety of His Royal
Person. But he demanded entrance with His whole Army, and caused the
Proclamation to be read, proclaiming them traitors that should oppose him
therein. But the Cavaleers being impatient of any delay, thinking to have had
present admittance made presently an attempt to enter the Gate, but quickly
were driven back, and the Gate shut against them. At which his Maj. seethed to
be very much moved, and after some consultation with his General and other
Commanders, they planted six pieces of Ordnance against the Gate, and played
upon it all that day, the Cavaleers thretning to fire the town, or beat it down
about their ears, if it were not presently rendered up. But the Citisens hearing
that some forces from the Parliament were repairing thither to aid and assist
them were resolved to stand it out, although they had not above 3. pieces of
Ordnance in the town, and those were unmounted This day being far spent, his
Majesty repaired to a Knights house near Dunsmore about 4. miles from Coventry,
and on Sunday morning the Cavaleers began again to play upon the Gates of the
city, and drove open the South-Gate thereof, and began to march into the city,
not doubting but to make a prey thereof, thinking it impossible to be withstood;
yet we may see Gods wonderful hand of providence toward us in stirring up
the soldiers within the city with such courage, and true affection to the
Parliament, That at the first entrance of the cavaleers into the Gate they
welcomed them with such a voley of shot, that 7. of them were slain, and many
more of them hurt, whereupon they were forced to retreat, and the women and
others that were unfit to fight, brought a bundance of household stuff, as
tables, stools, and other lumber, and threw them in the street, which quickly
made the way unpassable, so that the horsemen durst not sally any more into the
town, but played upon it with Canon and sometimes came riding up to the walls
thereof.

The L. Brooks, Col. Hollis, Col. Hambden, Col. Fines, and Col. Goodwyn, with
their Regiments, both of horse and foot. having intelligence hereof (being at
Banhury) marched toward Coventry with all speed, and the Kings Army fearing
that they would fall on the backs of them, presently raised their for^es from
against Coventry, carrying their Ordnance with them, and came to meet the
Parliaments Forces, which met on Monday last about 8. of the clocg in the
morning uprn Dunsmore Heath, about 4. miles on this side Coventry, which when
Col. Hambden and the rest of the commanders perceived, they divided the army
(consisting of about 6. or 7000. horse and foot) into 4. squadrons, placing 3.
pieces of Ordnance on the right wing, and 3. pieces on the left wing, the
Cavaleers with their troops of horse falling on them very furiously, and the
other side defended themselves as stoutly, but in a very short time (the
ordnance of the Parliament forces playing so hot on them) scaled their Horse,
and put them in such a combustion, that scarce a man of them knew how to keep
their rancks, and being in an exceeding great confusion, there was slain of
the Cavaleers about 80. men, 9. of them being those that guarded the Kings
person, capt. Leg and many others being taken prisoners, also two pieces of
their Ordnance were taken, with some wagons and ammunition; and thus being
rooted with the loss of very few of the Parliaments side, they all dispierced
themselves, and so fled for their lives.

And although his Majesty at the raising of his Army from before Coventry gave
them 3. days Respit for the Rendering it up; yet it is thought the Cavaleers
will scarce come again to demand it, for as yet it is not certainly known
which way they are gone, many of them being lately fled from Warwick, and it is
Reported by some that come out of those parts, that the Earl of Northampton
will fly away before the Parliament Forces come thither, although they are not
above six miles from Warwick.

The Sheriff being Summoned to Raise the power of the County to aid and assist
his Majesty appeared not therein, neither came any of that County in to him.
But the Country were exceedingly terrisied with fear of the Cavaleers, which
Ride about pillaging the Country, and are under no Command; but the Parliament
Forces do daily increase, and especially in Warwickshire, who are in great
hopes suddenly to suppress the Rage of the Disturbers of their peace.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons, That this be printed and published.

John Brown Cler. Parliament. Hen. Elsing Cler. Par. D. Com.



