A LETTER SENT OVT OF IRELAND.

To one Mr. BELL, a Merchant, at this time living in St. Thomas Apostles.

BEING, A true Relation of the present Estate of Ireland, as it now stands
under the present Persecution of the Papists.

ALSO, Their carriage toward Dublin, and their cruel and most tytyrannicall
burning of Armath.

SENT Over by a Gentleman from Ireland, unto a worthy Merchant of this City in
a Letter, the which Letter was openly read on Friday last, upon the Royal
Exchange in London, and the Contents confirmed by a Gentleman, who but lately
arrived from Ireland, and was a spectator of most of those bloody and Tragical
proceedings.

London, Printed for John Smith. 1642.

THE RELATION Of the State of IRELAND as it now stands under the present
persecution of the Papists.
THe many false and uncertain Reports of the State of Ireland has much abused
the truth of things, and so possessed the Readers with a praejudicate opinion,
that men are almost ashamed to relate a truth, although never so certain. I
will not trouble the Reader with any fictitious Battle fought betwixt this and
that great Lord, nor flatter my Countrymen with the good success the
Protestants has had of late against the Romish Rebels. Only you shall here
understand, the true and real Estate of that Kingdom, as it now stands; being
the just and most true Extract of a Letter sent from thence by a Gentleman now
resident in Cork, unto a worthy Merchant of this City.
WORTHY SIR,
I Am sorry that my pen cannot present unto you my service, accompanied with
better news, then that which the misery and calamity of this distressed
Kingdom at this instant affords. The insolency of the papists is now grown to
that height of mischief, that it spares neither man* woman, nor child, but
most cruelly puts all to the sword, affording no quarter at all upon any
condition. The Protestants of Dublin had until within these few days some
hopes of deliverance from their most inhumane and barbarous cruelty, but now of
late are so circumvented by the rebellious forces, that they or we can
conceive very small hopes to escape their cruelty, unless there be some
speedy reply to relieve them, they have taken away from them all manner of way
for relief: so that they must either be enforced to yield unto them, or give
them present battle, which we conceive they are most unable to do.

The narrow seas they have so blockt up, and stopped, that there is no possible
means to convey any release unto them by sea, and their forces have so
surrounded it by Land, that they are driven to a great and miserable penury,
both for want of victual, and all other provision whatsoever. A bushel of
wheat was sold within the walls of that City a week ago for 23. s. and meat
they can scarce provide at any rate; for the enemy is so vigilant round about
them, that without great hazard men cannot make any attempt to supply them
with necessaries, the danger of the enterprise cannot countervaile the benefit
of the supply.

Long they cannot hold out, but we hope, and do expect every day assistance,
and relief from his Majesty, the which unless it speedily come, it will be
fruitless, and to no purpose at all; for all will be ruinated, and as we may
justly expect by their former dealings, be brought to extreme and utter
confusion.

The calamity of this Kingdom is general, and I doubt not but that you have
bin sufficiently possessed already with all the proceedings of the Papists
there.

About a fortnight since their forces pitched before the City of Armagh (where
by the vigilant care, and religious preaching of Doctor Usher Archbishop of
that See, were great store of well disposed Protestants, and zealous Professors
of true Religion, true in heart both to their God and King) they were not long
before they did take that City; but after their entrance, their carriage was so
inhumane, that no age can parallel it.

The Inhabitants at the surrendering of the Town desired Quarter, and that they
might be dismissed thence with their lives and liberties and with that small
convenience of moneys to provide them necessaries, which they could convey
along with them.

This more then barbarous enemy, thirsty after blood, and breathing nothing but
murder, and destruction denied unto them all Privileges of Arms whatsoever*
but immediately after their entrance began to fall upon the prey, putting the
Inhabitants to most cruel and fearful deaths, ravishing their wives before
their husbands faces, killing their poor Infants, and with many most
opprobrious languages. After they had thus butchered the Inhabitants, they
began to pillage and plunder the city, and what they could not themselves make
use of, they made most shameful havoc and waste of. They were not content
with the lives of the inhabitants of that city, whereby they slew about the
number of 160. but after their inhumane dealing with their persons and
possessions, their malice extended to the very buildings of that City, fearing
least posterity in aftertimes should receive any benefit by them, they set all
the houses on fire, and have so destroyed them, that in all that great City
there now remains not one house to demonstrate where the City was. You cannot
perceive where the city did stand, but by the lamentable spectacle of the
ruins, which can scarce be called ruins, being now made level unto the very
ground. Thus do they proceed in mischief, and in this miserable estate the
poor distressed inhabitants of this Land are plunged, the integrity of their
minds and consciences being the only cause of this their great and heavy
calamity. You cannot expect that I should certify you any thing concerning our
trade here, you may conceive how poor it must needs be by the extremity of
the times. I was forced my self to leave Dublin, foreseeing the danger that
they were like to be in very suddenly. I am now in Cork, and am as yet safely
sheltred under the careful protection of the right Honorable the Earl of
Cork* whose care is very vigilant, and industrious to preserve all who do
betake themselves unto his custody. We expect the enemy to assault us, but if
they do come, I hope we shall find such good provision to entertain them, and
such a company of faithful and honest hearts to manage that provision, that we
hope we shall be able to defend our selves from their oppression and tyranny. I
hope the Lord will fight for us, whose cause and right we do maintain: I am
afraid I have troubled you too long with such unwelcome news, but I thought it
a part of my service to let you understand in what case we stand at this
present, I hope we shall see better dais, for these times are very miserable.
Thus ceasing to trouble you any longer, I rest

Dated at Cork Jan. 9. 1642. Your faithful servant to command, JACOB FARMER.

FINIS.

