THE Fanatics Dream.
MY weary Carcass being sorely oppressed by the malice of Catchpoles, I laid me
down to sleep, setting my Fancy Sentinel, who walking the Rounds of my Mind, in
an instant conveyed me into a mighty Forest, tenanted with Beasts of prey; the
first that presented it self to my view was a Crocodile preying upon a Lamb,
and having eat his Body, he distilled tears over his Head, as if he was grieved
to be his Executioner, who had deserved it by encroaching upon his Territories.
But I saw this was but as sour Sauce to whet his glutted Appetite, for after it
with more eagerness than ever he devoured the rest; then I thought that my self
must next be sacrificed to his Lust: But these Jealousies were extinguished by
a hideous noise which I heard, then looking about me I saw a great number of
savage Beasts, viz. The Panther (which by his subtilty tyrannized over others)
going first, his Skin was of a lovely Color, and curious to behold, but his
Head was deformed, and dyed in Blood; then followed twelve Lions of Cleonia
roaring, with an innumerable Company of Dragons, Tigers, Leoperds, Bears,
Wolves, and Camelions, all likewise with their Mouths dyed in Blood; thus they
marched, till at last they came to a pleasant Island surrounded with a Crystal
River, into which my Fancy led me, and I beheld it abounding with Flocks of
Sheep, and Parks of stately Deer, Nature having constituted a Warlike Heart for
the Defender, whose endeavors were continually to preserve the Sheep from the
Beasts of the Forest. But methoughts the Panther did endeavor by allurements
to entice the Heart to behold his beautiful Skin, thereby to make him his Prey.
But the Heart discovering his intrigue, which the Panther perceiving, with all
his Retinue entered the River, furiously assaulting the Heart, but the Heart
behaving himself courageously caused them with shame to flee to the Forest for
shelter. Nevertheless presently I saw a Dragon hasting to the Island to destroy
the Sheep, but was happily prevented by a Fawn, then the Dragon with anguish
gnashing, cast forth fire and fired the Sheepfold, insomuch that the Sheep
scarce escaped with the Wool on their backs, and then he hasted to the Forest
for his escape. But not long after came over a Bear, and some Wolves, who
killed one of the best Sheep in the Flock, and grievously tore many others,
which with patience they endured; but their silence was a motive to the Fawn;
for he valiantly encountered and slew them, by which he incurred the great
displeasure of a Stag; which having ranged the Forest, had no small kindness
for the Panther; therefore the Stag chased him out of the Island, and caused
him to cross the River; but not being safe there, he returned and lived
securely amongst the Flock. A little Evet also did endeavor to enfatuate the
Brook where the Heart used to drink, but two Rams laid hold of him, and had
stain him, had not a Deer coming in to help them, made them let go their hold;
in process of time, methought the Heart dyed, and violently came in the Beasts
of the Forest, with whom the wild Deers joined, and devoured the Sheep: But
the Fawn, with some of the choicest in the Flock fled, and were miraculously
preserved. But the Beasts of the Forest not willing to lose such a prey as
were the Deers, slew them also; and they being thus exalted with their fat
pasture, had continual jarrings among themselves, till at length, they
beginning to devour each other, then methought the Fawn with his Sheep returned
again into their banished Island, valiantly, and triumphantly extirpating them,
and flourished more than ever. So I Awoke.

FINIS.

