THE HISTORY OF PORTUGAL, From the first Ages of the World, to the late great
REVOLUTION, under King JOHN IV. in the Year MDCXL.

Written in Spanish, By Emanuel de Faria y Sousa, Knight of the Order of CHRIST.

Translated, and Continued down to this present Year, School. By Capt. JOHN
STEVENS.

LONDON, Printed for W. Rogers and Abel Roper, in Fleet Street; J. Harris and
J. Nicholson, in Little-Britain; T. Newborough, in St. Paul 's Churchyard; and
T* Cockerill, in Paternoster Row, MDCXCVIII.

TO RICHARD MINSHULL, OF BOURTON, In the COUNTY of BUCKS, Esquire
SIR,
AMidst that great Variety of Reading, wherewith Learned Men have furnished the
World, to the end that each Person may be provided of a Subject suitable to his
Genius, there is none so universally pleasing, or, indeed, more profitable than
History. It is a general sort of Learning, fitted for all Capacities; the
Meanest are-not below, nor the Greatest above it, because it contains nothing
so abstruse, that may not be easily comprehended; nor any thing so trivial,
that may not be worth observing. All Arts and Sciences are purchased by much
Study and Labor; and, even so, they are not attained in any Perfection, but by
those whom Nature has particularly molded to receive such an Impression.
History alone delights at once, and instructs; it informs, without perplexing
the Understanding; it improves, without burthening the Memory; it rectifies,
without thwarting the Will; and, in short, it leads away our Affections,
without misguiding them. The Advantages we reap by it are inestimable, in
regard we receive a perfect Knowledge of what was before us; and are thereby
enabled to make a Judgment of what will be after us: For, as the Wise Man, so
many Ages since, said, There was nothing new under the Sun; so may we believe
there neither is in our Times, nor will be in those to come: For the Lives and
Actions of Men are only a continued Repetition of those that preceded them;
because all this inferior World is but a perpetual Concatenation of the
self-same Revolutions, however surprizingly disguized in the Dress and Methods.
Now, to know what passed since the Creation, and thence judiciously to infer
what is likely to ensue till the final Consummation; and this not only in one
City or Kingdom, but throughout the vast Circumference of the Universe, is a
sort of Knowledge that appears to be somewhat more than Humane; or rather, not
far removed from Divine. It is a Knowledge so important, that God himself did
not disdain, for our Benefit, to fill up the greatest part of his Sacred Volume
with History, whereof he himself was the Compiler. God himself it was, that,
through the Mouths of the Prophets, transmitted down to us the History of the
Creation, and Restoration of Mankind, the Genealogy of the first Patriarchs,
the Acts of the Children of Israel, the Lives of their Judges and Kings, and
all that is Historical in Holy Writ. Nay, to come nearer; What are the Four
Gospels, and the Acts of the Apostles, but the History of our Blessed Savior,
and those his glorious Followers. Thus the Prophets and Evangelists seem to
authorize and recommend History, they themselves being Sacred Historians. Nor
is it only on this Religious Foundation, that its Credit is supported: To omit
many things that might be urged to testify its great Value, let us only
consider whence it is that we have the Knowledge of our Original, and what it
is that has eternized the Memory of Great and Worthy Persons; and we shall
find, it is all due to History alone. To this also must those who now live, and
are ambitious of perpetuating their Memory, owe the Transmitting of their Names
and Merits to Posterity. To this Kings and Princes are beholding, for the rare
Examples it furnishes them with of their Illustrious Predecessors; thereby
stirring up their Minds to imitate their Heroic Actions, and become Partakers
of their lasting Praises. To this, Statesmen are obliged, for the politic
Presidents it affords them to govern themselves by in all extraordinary
Exigencies of State. To this, all accomplished Persons stand indebted for the
Ornament of their Discourse, and for the perfecting them in the true Knowledge
of the World. And, to conclude, From this, the Generality of Mankind is
furnished with Variety of Instances exciting to Virtue, and deterring from
Vice. But, though too much cannot be said upon so deserving a Subject, let this
suffice, since it is not to inform, but to obtain a favorable Acceptance, that
so much has been said.

If then, Sir, the Dignity and Value of History be such as I have represented,
well may it merit an Honorable Patronage from Persons of Worth. Empty Titles
are not the Worth I mean; those too often are bestowed upon the vilest of Men,
and even for submitting to the most infamous of Crimes. That is true Worth,
which, being derived from Honorable Ancestors, though without the Addition of
gaudy Epithets, is preserved unblemished, and without Stain. To ascend to those
the World calls Honors, such as Lordships, Earldoms and Dukedoms, by indirect,
scandalous and unjust Means, is rather to descend: To embrace them, offered
under those Circumstances, is the Act of an abject, rather than a noble Spirit;
and to aim at, and aspire to them through those Means, rather betokens a sordid
Pride, than a generous Ambition. Such Patrons are neither capable of Receiving
or Communicating Honor; their Names, in History, are branded with Infamy, not
to be covered by all the Sycophant Addresses and Flatteries of a Dedication:
And even the Work which seeks Shelter under them, sucks in the Infection of
their poisonous Shadow. Malice may, perhaps, endeavor so to pervert my Words,
as if they implied a Reflection upon Great and Honorable Persons; but it is
plain, only Malice can so mis-interpret my Meaning, as to force it to such an
invidious Sense. Those who are truly Noble, cannot suffer in the Character of
such as only mimick their Grandeur; and they alone will find themselves
affected, whose Consciences shall accuse them of having aspired to a
Counterfeit Nobility, through mean and sordid Practices.

These, Sir, are the Men, whose Names I most abhor to prefix to my Labors;
from them I fly to your Protection, as to one whom Envy it self cannot asperse
with Want of real Honor, or with affecting that which is not such. If
Illustrious Birth and Parentage be Honor, yours is too well known, to be
capable of receiving any Addition by any thing my Pen can express in its
behalf. If a plentiful Fortune be the Support and Ornament of Honor, you have
received it from your Ancestors, by a Legal Inheritance; when others, to raise
their Families, found Estates upon Extortion, Fraud and Oppression. But, above
all, If Generous Actions and Virtuous Principles be true Honor, none that
knows you, is ignorant, how great a Share you possess. Nor would I pass by this
so material a Point, without enlarging upon it, but that it will not suit with
your Modesty, to hear your own, though just, Commendations: Nor will the Malice
and Virulency of our Times bear with the Mention of solid and real Praises.
What you are, and what you merit, neither is, nor will be unknown; it may prove
the Subject of an abler Pen, when those who know, shall see a fit Time to
recommend your Memory to Posterity.

All that remains, Sir, is, to beg a favorable Acceptance of the Tender I
make. It is the entire History of a Kingdom, from its first Plantation, to this
present Time. The Original was dedicated to a King: The Translation has not, I
hope, so much degenerated, but it may be worthy of you. If you think it so, I
have gained my Point; and shall reap a singular Satisfaction, if it gives you
any. I am,

SIR, Your most Obedient, Humble Servant, JOHN STEVENS.

THE PREFACE*
POrtugal, though a Kingdom of but a small Extent, and which for these latter
Years, has not furnished us with any great subject of History; yet in past
Ages, it did so largely extend its Dominions, and raised such admiration
throughout Europe, by its wonderful Discoveries and stupendous Conquests, that
it is much to be admired, all its past Glories should be Buried under its
present obscurity. Nor is it less to be wondered at, that England, which so
lately received from thence a Queen, yet living, should know so little either
of her Country, or Progenitors: This, I say, in regard, that till now there has
not appeared abroad in the English Tongue any History of that once so famous
Kingdom, unless we will reckon as such some small fragments which at several
times have crept into the World, and which seem rather to stir up our curiosity
to know, who those People were, than any ways to satisfy our desire of
Knowledge. This fault I conceive must be chiefly imputed to the Portuguese
themselves, whose care it ought to have been to deliver to Posterity and
Foreigners their own honorable Actions, so methodized, that they might delight
in seeing them together reduced into the form of a complete History. But they,
though furnishing so much matter for Authors to employ their Pens, were yet
supinely negligent in duly recording and publishing of it. It is true, they had
many Writers, who snatched their Actions from utter oblivion, by leaving that
piecemeal which ought to have been reduced into one Work; but this was a
labor most Men were averse to, as believing it above their strength, because
those Writings were partly so voluminous, that it required almost a Man's Age
to reduce them to a less compass, and partly so scattered abroad in sundry
parts of the Kingdom, that they despaired of ever being able to bring them
together.

Emanuel de Faria y Sousa, our Author, was the first that I can find ever
undertook to digest and publish to the World, the complete History of his
Country, and give a perfect account of the Actions of his Countrymen in all
parts of the World. He not only undertook, but performed it with general
applause, not only of the Portuguese who are the subject of his great
Enterprise, but even of the Spaniards, in whose Language he Wrote. This his
labor was not finished till the Year 1640. and appeared not in public till
many Years after. He has observed a strict method of History, without running
out into endless Digressions, which only serve to swell Volumes, and are no way
material to the subject in hand. Being a Portuguese, I cannot affirm him to be
altogether impartial, for there is no Man whom the love of his Native Country
does not a little sway, yet this can be no exception against him, because, if
such, all History would be liable to the same censure; and besides he was a Man
that proposed to himself no interest in flattering the great ones, living
always a private retired life, which will plainly appear in that he spares not
often to expose the Vices and Enormities of notable Persons for the sake of
their Posterity, and no where extols any, though never so mighty for the hope
of pleasing their descendants. But to be short, let the History speak for it
self, for my commendation, as being a party too much concerned in it, cannot
add much to its Reputation, and yet this I must say, that I cannot at all doubt
of its meeting applause, because having run through the Kingdoms of Spain and
Portugal, with a general esteem in its original Language, I cannot be persuaded
that the Translation can have so much detracted from its first value, as to
render it unacceptable to the judicious lovers of this sort of Learning.

Thus much may suffice as to the History in General, but to descend to
particulars, The first Book contains all that happened in Portugal, from the time
it was first peopled by Tubal, the Grandson of Noah, till the time of the
famous Viriatus. The second begins with Viriatus, and ends at the Birth of
Savior. The third reaches from the Birth of our Savior till the Conquest of
Spain by the Moors* The fourth from the Moorish Conquest, till the erecting of
Portugal into a particular Kingdom, under its first King, Alonso the First, or
rather his Father Count Henry. The fifth from the said Count Henry, till King
Sancho the second. The sixth from him till King Ferdinand inclusive. The
seventh from King John the First, to King John the Second. The eighth from King
Emanuel, till Henry the King and Cardinal, and the Governors left by him at
his Death. The ninth Book has the lives of the three Philips Kings of Spain and
Portugal, till the Year 1640. where the Author concludes, and the Supplement
begins.

Having given this short account of the main History, and named the Supplement,
I must not omit to say somewhat in relation to it. Emanual de Faria having
concluded, as has been said, just at the Year 1640. there ensued that very Year
the great Revolution, in which the Portuguese cast off the Dominion of the
Spaniards, and set up a King of their own. This mighty work was in a manner
done in a day, all places submitting to the new King, and expelling the
Spaniards with such success as is scarce credible, but that the thing is still
fresh in the memory of many persons* living. However, though the Portuguese in
so short a time had asserted their Liberty, and cast off the Foreign Yoke; yet
the consequences of so great an Enterprise, were a continual War for the space
of almost Twenty Eight Years. Now this War is the principal subject of the
Supplement, and indeed a matter well worthy to be known, as a most material
Transaction of this Age. Being a thing so remarkable and near our times, I have
been very particular in it, and therefore given an exact account of the
Transactions of every Year apart. I have not been sparing of any labor in
perusing such Authors as have writ of it, and extracting from them as much as
my intended Brevity would permit, and though I designed to have been much
shorter, the variety of accidents is such, that it has obliged me to run it out
to a much greater bulk than at first I designed. Neither have I wanted
information in many particulars touched in this Supplement, from Persons who
were present and Eyewitnesses, to the Actions therein related. Nay one of my
Authors, viz. the Count de Ericeyra, who has handled this subject very largely,
was not only a Commander in the Army, but also a Councellor of State, and
therefore a most fit Man to give an account as well of the Warlike Exploits in
the Field, as of the private Transactions at Court. But now to come to the last
part of all, which I call the Conclusion of the History, it is so distinguished
from the rest of the Supplement, in regard that therein we look back into
several Years before treated of. This, as is there said, was so ordered to
avoid interrupting the series of the War, with the relation of Factions and
Animosities at Court. And the Councels and Practices which tended to that
extraordinary change, which was made in the Government, in the imprisoning and
confining a King for many Years, being matters meriting a special observation,
I thought it better to lay the whole series of them together, so that they may
appear at one view, than to interrupt them with other Narrations.

Monarchies as all other wordly things have their rise and fall, and
consequently those which have once been glorious, ought to merit our esteem for
what they were, no less than those which are now great, are admired for what
they are. It is no disgrace to a famous General, that he is grown old and worn
out with labors; nor ought it to lessen our esteem for a Kingdom, because we
see it sunk under the too great Burden of its undertakings. This has happened to
Portugal, which being of its self but a small spot of Ground, yet adventured,
and that with success, to spread its Conquests into the four parts of the
World, to build Cities and Forts among People before unknown to the Europeans,
to traffic among Rude and Barbarous Nations, to engage Multitudes, not of
naked Indians, but such as had the use of all sorts of Firearms, to Preach the
Gospel to inhuman Infidels, who had never heard the sacred Name of Christ, and
in fine, to People the vast Ocean, if I may so call it, with their Fleets, to
pierce through dangers of unknown Seas, and to discover to us the course of the
Sun, by tracing his Carrier round this Terrestrial Globe. These are the mighty
Actions, which gained Portugal that renown it stood possessed of, and these
very exploits have helped to sink it into that obscurity, which now in a manner
hides it from us. The greatness of the attempts gained them renown, but their
own and their Neighbors boundless avarice proved the bane of all their
Glories. Their own, because being but so small a People, they yet set no limits
to their desires, but rather stretched forth their greedy hands to catch at all
the Riches of the East, and turn them to their peculiar use, without
considering how much easier it has always been found to acquire much, than to
preserve what is so unreasonably acquired. It was their Neighbors avarice, as
I said, that hastened their ruin, because there was scarce a nation of any
consideration in Europe, which did not strive to pluck a Feather from them, and
to gain footing, where such mighty prospect of profit appeared; and above all,
the Dutch have been the Cormorants that have devoured their Lands, their
Metals, and their Spice. Such was the downfall of the Portuguese Nation, raised
by their Ambition and Valor to the highest pitch of Honor, and cast down by
the Covetousness and Envy of their Neighbors. Nor has the late War, which
involved the greatest part of Europe, contributed less to the obscuring of
their Name, for all Mankind being wholly taken up with the thoughts of those
that were active, had not l'easure to cast an Eye upon a People, that lay
happily obscured under the Blessed cloud of Peace. Yet though the calm they have
of late enjoyed, may have put them by the Honor of any fresh martial
Atchievments, an Honor it is their greatest felicity to want; nevertheless
their more glorious former Exploits are not worthy to be buried in Oblivion.
The Empires of the Assyrians, Persians, Greeks and Romans, have long since
perished, and still we read their Actions with Delight and Admiration. The
Kingdoms of the Parthians, the Goths, the Huns, and other barbarous Nations,
are now no more, and still the remembrance of their Valor, their Victories,
and their success is the subject of many Volumes. Portugal still stands an
independent Monarchy, and though but the skeleton of what it was, still its
former Glories merit to be Recorded, either for what that Kingdom then was, or
for what it may possibly be again.

But it is high time I look about for fear of transgressing in too long a
Preface. Hitherto something has been said concerning the Author, concerning his
Works, and concerning the Kingdom he treats of. What now remains is to remove
some objections which may be raised by such as would have all Histories as
infallible as the Holy Scripture, both as to Time and Actions: This is what all
Men may wish, but none ever yet could attain to. He that would read no History,
in which there is a fault, may resolve to spare his Eyes, or apply them to some
other study. The first thing I find in this Book, which may be carped at, is
the account of the first planting this Kingdom, and the succeeding race of
Kings, till the coming in of the Carthaginians. Nothing more can be said in
defense hereof, but that all Antiquity at such a distance is obscure, every
Nation has labored to deduce it self from the nearest time to the Flood it
could; and what is most; even the Ancient Josephus writes, that Jobel or Tubal,
the Grandson of Noah, came into Spain, and other Greek and Latin Authors make
mention of Spanish Kings here named; therefore in such a mist of Antiquity, it
may be reckoned a great Happiness, that such lights as these can be found to
lead us to any part of it that we may rely upon. The next objection will be
against many passages of somewhat a latter date; as for example, the strange
life of Abidis, the coming of Nebuchadnezer into Spain, and several other
things very incredible to those who have not heard of them before. The answer
is, That these things, though strange to us are not at all impossible, that
they are left to us upon credit of very Authentic Authors, and that if in them
there be any thing fabulous, yet that must not blast the Reputation of this
History, no more than the English Chronicle ought to be wholly condemned for
the far fetched History of Brutus and his Trojans, or Livy for his Poetical
Noursery of Romulus and Remus by a Wolf. What follows till the Birth of our
Savior, and some time after, will not be liable to much censure, by reason
there is little in it, but what has been delivered by Roman Writers, who have
for the most part passed current in the World; or, if any of them have not, it
is no way the Business of this work to vindicate them. After the first
Preaching of the Gospel, we shall here and there meet with some account of
Miracles wrought, which perhaps, may not suit with all Palates. Most Christians
do allow, that the first spreading of Christianity, was wrought with the help
of stupendous Wonders, God so ordaining it for the convincing of the hardened
Painyms, who being carnally Educated, could never be brought to comprehend the
sacred Doctrine of Christ, unless they had been convinced by the working of
some supernatural Operations. Most Christians, I say, do allow of this at least
in the Infancy of Christianity, and these I believe will not much reflect upon
the credit of such as they shall here meet withal; and for those pretended
Christians, who cry down all that is not suitable to their own Enthusiastic
Notions, it is not material whether they give credit to these things or not,
since many of them have had the profane Impudence with sacrilegious Tongues
and Pens, to endeavor to abolish the use of the Lord's Prayer and Creed; and
it is no discredit for a Christian Author to be disesteemed by those who made
so little account of Christ himself, and his Apostles. However, I do not urge
this to oblige the believing of all such miraculous Relations, as shall occur
in this History; it will appear, I am not over-fond of them my self. Doubtless
in all parts of the World, God permitted Miracles to be wrought for his own
Glory, and for the Salvation of Souls, but whether the same, or in the same
manner, as they are here related, is left to every one to believe or
dis-believe at his pleasure. To proceed, there follows for some hundreds of
years, after the Redemption of Man, a most obscure and uncertain account of
what happened not only in Portugal, but throughout all Spain. From the total
Conquest made by Augustus, till the coming of the Barbarous Goths, Suevians,
Vandals, Alans, and the rest, there was for the most part a continual Peace
throughout Spain, which being, during that time, a Province subject to the
Empire, either yielded no matter worth the Writing, or else wanted Writers to
transmit it to Posterity. The barbarous Nations above mentioned, were so far
from the thoughts of recording their own Acts, that their greatest care was to
root out and destroy all Learning and Civility; for which reason, their History
is transmitted to us so interrupted and imperfect, that scarce any Connection
can be found in it. But when these Savage People by the receiving of
Christianity had been somewhat Civilized, and it might have been hoped the
Clouds of ignorance would have been dispersed, then their grievous Sins called
upon them a heavy Judgment from Africa, which was an inundation of Moors, who
in the space of eight Months, overran all Spain, destroying not only Books, but
all Monuments of Antiquity that were then remaining, and driving the miserable
Christians into Dens and Caves upon the Mountains; whence afterward issuing
out, they had so much continual employment for the Sword, that none had time to
perpetuate with the Pen, what the Sword performed. Hence followed such a
profound ignorance in this Kingdom of Portugal, the perpetual Wars taking away
all thoughts of Learning, that for many Years after it had Kings of its own,
yet it wanted Writers to perpetuate their Memory.

These are in short the defects of this History, if they may be termed such,
since as we have said before, there is none perfect in the World, and those I
think are sufficiently answered to satisfy such reasonable persons as will not
expect impossibilities. Of the Supplement it will be needless to add more than
has been already said, unless it be a word touching the conclusion of it, and
in relation to the account there given, of the hard usage of the unfortunate
King Alphonso. Yet because I think, as much has been said there, as is
requisite to justify what I have Written, I will not tire the Reader's
patience, only once for all, assure him, that nothing has been there Writ by me
for Favor or Affection, since I may rather expect to be condemned than
rewarded for any thing that seems to vindicate that unhapy Prince. I must
confess, I could not without Concern, read a Book published here in the Year
1677. and Entitled, The Portugal History: Or, a Relation of the Troubles that
happened in the Court of Portugal in the Years 1667. and 1668. For in that
Treatise, I find King Alphonso treated in so cruel a manner, that it would
afflict the hardest Heart that has any remorse or consideration for the Majesty
of Kings. It was not the imprisoning and dethroning of that poor Prince, which
was the hardest part of his Misfortunes; this Book I mentioned, and others like
it, have yet gone farther, by blasting his Memory to posterity, and
representing of him as a Monster, rather than a Man. These enormities I have
labored the best I could, to rectify by giving the truest Character of that
Prince I could, and the most impartial account of his Misfortunes. In this part
I have made use of other impartial Authors, and also of authentic
informations, from such persons as knew that King, and were Witnesses to the
whole contrivance of his Deposition and Imprisonment.

Thus much may suffice to inform, not to prepossess the Reader. All Books that
appear in public are exposed to Censure, and few or none escape it, even the
best are not exempted, and therefore I cannot hope this should. But let it take
its Chance, there are sundry sorts of tastes among Men, what one likes, another
loathes; and even so it falls out in Books, some Men extol, and others cry them
down; this cannot be so unfortunate, as not to please some body. Those who like
it, will have their reward in pleasing themselves, and such as are disgusted
with it, will have no recompense for their Dissatisfaction.

THE HISTORY OF PORTUGAL.
The First BOOK.
CHAP. I.
Of the Dispersion of the People after the Deluge. The Coming of Tubal into
Spain: His Life, Death and Burial. The Succession of Iberus, Jubalda, Brigus,
Tagus, Gerion, and his Sons.
AFter the World had suffered the just Punishment of its Guilt in the Universal
Deluge, Noah's Flood.
the Wrath of Heaven being appeased, and the Elements restored to their first
Harmony, the Ark that for the space of a Year had preserved in its Bo^els the
Hopes of the Propagation of Human Kind (...) vast Ocean of the over-flowed
Earth, at length (...) on the top of the famous Mount Ararat, in Armeni^^ Noah
coming out, offered Sacrifice to GOD, to incli^e him to bestow new Bounties and
Mercies upon him. H^ving received a Promise, he descended from that (...)
Height, to a Plain called Sennaar, at that time covered with Carcases; in
horrid Scene of Humane Vanity. Those few Restorers of Mankind, and small
Remnant of that wonderful Desolation, cleansed the Place, and laid the
Foundation of the first City in the World, after its Destruction. That it was
called Saga Albina (as the Rabbis will have it, whom some learned Authors
follow) is very uncertain, as are all other Things depending on Humane Faith,
which is very fallible, though depending on the Credit of that very Age; much
more, when delivered so long after. The Infallible, as being Divine, Historian
clears this Doubt, when he calls it Babel; for this Name belonged to the City
before the Erecting of the Tower, which was no more than a part of the other.
It is no less uncertain that Araxa, a Daughter of Noah, (according to the same
Authors) remained as Sovereign of that City; when the Inhabitants, being grown
too numerous, were obliged to divide, and spread themselves farther about the
Earth.

2. It was not so much their Multitude that obliged them to separate, W^^ the
Of-(...) of Noah dispersed.
as the Discord that began to grow among them; and even their Vices; for they
all rather chose to follow the Example of their wicked Ancestors, who had
suffered, than to take Warning by their Punishment. Even the Memory of that
Chastisement, instead of reclaiming, served only to make them the more guilty:
For, after having begged and obtained Mercy from God, they proudly attempted to
raise Works against Heaven, and brave his Omnipotence. They had the Presumption
to believe they could secure themselves against another Deluge, without the
Assistance of God: And whereas the surest Fence Mortals have against the just
Indignation of the Almighty, is, his Mercy, when humbly sued for; yet they
began that so famous Tower; which, as it was a Work prodigious for Men in that
Infancy of their Reparation, so it ^roved so mere a Nothing to GOD, that He
made (...) of no other Engines to destroy it, but the Tongues o^ the Builders.
Hence, many Ages after, sprang that Greek Fable, Of the Giants destroyed with
Lightning, for ^^^mpting to climb up to Heaven by laying Mountains upon
Mountains. Thus the most favored Part of the Creation^ in Heaven and on Earth,
both Men and Angels, (...) gave themselves up to Pride and Rebellion.

3. Nimrod, The Tower of Babel built.
Grandson to the wicked Cham, was the Founder of this fond Structure, which
perished before it could be finished. Wherefore, finding now, that GOD needed
no other Power against the Machinations of Men, but themselves; and Discord
still increasing more than the People, which yet multiplied to Excess, Life
being granted for so long a Term of Years; they concluded there was no Way to
escape the Hand of GOD, without they could find out Means to avoid one another;
the greatest Grievance being then, to tolerate themselves. This made them
resolve to spread themselves farther than the narrow Bounds of the adjacent
Provinces, to seek the remote Parts of the Earth, and commit themselves to the
Sea, in Vessels made after the Pattern of the Ark. So they marched into distant
Countries, and touched remote Shores; still stretching farther and farther,
till they had filled the Circumference of this Terrestrial Globe. The Heads of
this first Transmigration were, the Sons of our Second Father, Sem, Cham and
Japhet. Some say, Asia, Africa and Europe were their three Portions, which were
called the Three Parts of the World, till Experience taught us they were but
one of the two Continents which divide this Lower World, and may seem to have
been divided into three Parts, in respect to them three.

4. After these three first Universal Planters had separated themselves, and
inhabited the nearer Regions, the Multitude still increasing, their Children
thought of sub-dividing, and traveling to find out some remoter Habitations,
where every Head of a Family might erect himself a Sovereignty. Tubal lands in
Portugal.
Among these, Tubal, the fifth Son of Japhet, sailing the Mediterranean, passed
out of the Mouth of the Streight^; and leaving the Cape formerly called
Promontorium Sacrum, now Cape St. Vincent, behind, landed in the most Western
Part of Europe; and being invited by the Pleasantness of the Soil, and
Sereneness of the Air, founded on the Edge of the Sea, not far from the Mouth
of Tagus, the City Setubal. Other Countries pretend he first built Cities among
them; I will not dispute it with them, so I be allowed he came hither. This
happened about the Year of the World (not to be too precise in such dark
Anti^uities) 1800, about 150 Years after the Deluge, and ^070 before Christ;
and, till the time that the Divine WORD was made Flesh, we will reckon thus,
diminishing still the Years.

5. These first Antiquities to most Men seem fabulous, and therefore I will
lightly run them over, till those Times that afford us more Light of History;
there being no solid Grounds to fix the Credit of what passed before the Time
of the Romans and Carthaginians. Only, as for the first Peopling of Spain, by
Tubal, we have the Authority of Josephus; who says, That of Jobel came the
Jobeli, afterward called Iberi, Celtiberi and Spaniards.

6. The first Form of Government, as the most perfect, was Monarchical; and
that not confined, or restrained, as, since, the Insolence of Subjects has made
it; but absolute. There were no Laws to bind the Sovereign, or People; the Will
of the Monarch was positive Law. Princes at first studied rather how to
maintain, Tubal the first King of Spain.
than enlarge their Dominions. In this manner Tubal governed Spain the Term of
an Hundred Years, and then gave them a Form of Law, or rather Advice, in Verse,
to be transmitted to Posterity. He also settled a Form of Divine Worship; as
knowing, that The Fear of GOD is the Beginning of Wisdom. Tubal having reigned
155 Years, 2009.
died, and was buried in that farther Part of Spain, which, in respect to his
Ashes, was called Promontorium Sacrum; and which, for many Ages, the Natives
thought it profane to tread: And this Name continued, till the first King of
Portugul, Don Alfonso Enriquez, changed it to that of Cape St. Vincent.

7. By the Death of Tubal, Iberus the second King
the Monarchy of Spain devolved upon his Son Iberus; of whom, some say, the
River Ebro took Name; and Spain, that of Iberia. He invented the Art of
Fishing, reigned 37 Years, and died in the Year 1972. 1972.
before Christ. Observe always, that the Year one died, the other commenced his
Reign.

8. Jubelus, Jubelus the third King.
Jubalda, or Idubeda, Son and Successor to Iberus, spent most of his time in
the Study of Astrology, or Natural Magic, and ended his Days, having reigned
64 Years.

9. Upon the Death of his Father, 1907.
Brigus took upon him the Sovereignty, Brigus the fourth King
who built many Towns and Fortresses which still preserve his Name, as appears
in Lacobriga, Conimbriga, Medobriga, Brigancia, and others. From his erecting
so many Castles, it is supposed Castile still retains a Castle for its Arms.
1875.
He reigned 32 Years.

10. Tagus succeeded his Father Brigus, Tagus the fifth King.
and bent all his Cares to the extending and improving his Dominions. Hence he
was Surnamed Orma, which signifies a Building, or Monument. From him the River
Tagus took its Name, and in his time the Portuguese began to stretch themselves
through the yet uninhabited Country, and to People and till many at that time
waste Mountains and Valleys. His Reign lasted 29, or 30 Years.

11. His Successor was Betus, Betus the sixth King.
which signifies Happy or Fortunate. Of him Spain was called Betica, which Name
is still continued to the Province of Andaluzia, and in the famous River Betis.
The Multitude being now greater than Portugal could bear, they spread
themselves into Andaluzia, where Betus founded several Towns, the Inhabitants
whereof were called Betuli, or Bastuli. Till this time the Portuguese
acknowledged one only God, without worshipping Idols, or following other
Superstitions, which then were rife in other parts of the World.

12. This was the happy Estate of Lusitania, Gerion c^m^s into Portugal.
when a wicked and vicious Man came out of Africa into Spain, his Name was
Gerion, which, in the Chaldean Tongue, signifies a Stranger; and with him came
others. 1830.
He durst not at first enter Lusitania, but fixed his Abode near it in the
Island Erithrea, Ernea, or Junonia, lying in the Western Sea, which in the Year
of Grace 580. overflowed it. The Piece of Land called Erithrea (which Name fell
afterward to the Island of Cadiz) afforded such rank Pasture, that the People
were obliged at certain times to bleed the Cattle, lest they should die being
overflowed with Blood. Gerion passing over from, thence to the Continent, began
to commit Violences, carrying away some Cattle, which the Portuguese, unskilled
in Arms, had no way to prevent, but by removing their Habitations. He growing
bolder, committed so many Robberies, till he was forced to enlarge his
Territory to contain his Flocks, which, in the Infancy of the World, was the
greatest Treasure. But being taken with the Delightfulness of the Island, he
only watched the Death of Betus, which happened the 31th Year of his Reign.

13. Gerion lost not the Opportunity he had wished for, Gerion becomes K. of
Portugal.
but immediately, upon the Death of Betus, passing over into Portugal, and
bountifully bestowing upon the Natives what he had got by his Robberies, so far
gained upon them, that they suffered him to assume the Title of King. He
introduces Idolatry.
He, to establish his Sovereignty, introduced a new Superstition and Sacrifice
never before known to the People; and they, looking upon him as more than Man,
took him for their Legislator. All other parts of Spain followed the Example of
the Portuguese, and received him as their Sovereign. Of him it is thought the
City Girena took its Name. But he having usurped the Crown, held it like a
Tyrant; and the People, feeling the Oppression, wished, but knew not how, to
get rid of their unsupportable new Lord.

14. The People of Andaluzia meditating how to deliver themselves from this
Oppression of the Usurper, 1794.
and hearing that Osiris victoriously ranged the World, making it his business
to assist the distressed, gave him an Account of their miserable Condition,
worse in the Apprehension of what was like to follow, than even in their
present Sufferings; for the Dread of what a known Tyrant may do, is a greater
Calamity than what he does really act. Osiris soon accepted the Invitation, and
flew with Diligence to the Relief of that Distressed People. Gerion
understanding the Danger that threatened him, Osiris comes into Spain, kills
Gerion, and gives the Crown to his three Sons.
sent before his three Sons, with some chosen Troops, to give a Check to
Osiris, while he came up with the main Body of his Army. The two Hosts met upon
the Banks of the River Guadiana, where they charged one another with such Fury,
that Osiris was near losing the Honor he had before gained by so many notable
Victories. For Gerion and his Sons were brave, and the Lusitanians, though not
then used to handle Weapons, were strong of Body, and bore the Brunt with
Resolution. But the Fortune of Osiris never failing, and Gerion being slain,
his Men despairing of Success, placed all their Hope of Safety in Flight.
Osiris used this Victory with such Clemency, (a Quality inherent to such as
fight for Justice, and do not conquer to tyranize*) that he appeared to the
Conquered, rather as a merciful Judge of their Differences, than an haughty
and successful Commander; and therefore yielded the Crown of Spain to the three
Sons of the Deceased Gerion, who were called Lominii.

15. This was the End of Gerion, such will that of all Tyrants be. Some Authors
are of Opinion he was slain by Hercules the Grecian; and the reason of this
Mistake is, that then the Name of Hercules was rather titular to all Heroes,
than peculiar to any one. Gerion was the first in Spain that made Account of
any Treasure besides Cattle, discovered Mines of Gold, and taught the Value of
it. From the Riches he thus gathered he got the Name of Chryseus or Deabus,
which, in the Lybian Language signifies a Man of Gold, or Lord of great Riches.
This Humanity of Osiris, in restoring the Sons of Gerion to the Crown, so far
gained upon the Portuguese, that in return they gave up their very Souls,
receiving the new Worship which the Idolatrous Osiris brought among them. Of
him they learnt to make their Year but of Four Months, after the manner of the
Egyptians; which Custom continued in Spain, till the Romans, having subdued it,
reduced the Account to their own Form. Osiris is allowed to have taught the
People an easier way of Tilling and Sowing than they used before. Gerion
reigned 34 years, and was the first that oppressed and fleeced the People, the
Property of Usurpers, who when they do best, treat their Subjects with more
Cruelty than Lawful Princes do at worst. Osiris returned to Egypt, Osiris
returns into Egypt.
leaving behind him some of his Companions, who were Ar^^^ of those called
Scenitae, and took their Seats near the Mouth of the River Guadiana. From them
Cape St. Vincent was also called Promontorium Scen^^icum. This Battle fought
between Osiris and Gerion near the place where Tarifa now stands, was the first
that ever happened in Spain. Gerion was buried by his Sons in the Island
Erithrea, in the same manner as is used at present, and was the first so
interred in Spain. Some will have the Family of Osorios to be descended from
Osiris; but that is hard to prove, and no Task of mine.

CHAP. II.
Of the Lominii, Hispalus, Hispanus, Hercules, Italus, Sic-Orus, Sic-Anus,
Sic-Celeus, Lusus, Sic-Ulus, Lisias, Licinius, Palatuus, Gargoris, Abidis,
Argentorius, and Baucius Capetus, Kings of Lusitania.
1. THE three Gerions, 1780.
or Lominii, began their Government with such Brotherly Love, The Lominii,
three Sons of Gerion, reign.
and such perfect Union, that they gave occasion to the Fable, That Spain was
ruled by a King with three Heads. Such was the Entrance of their Sway, that it
seemed they were resolved to preserve with Justice, what their Father had
gained with Violence: But it was not long before it appeared they had rather be
thought Sons of such a Father, than Fathers of their Subjects. They were good
no longer, than till they had the Power to be wicked; which was, till Osiris
was removed. Then remembering the People of Andaluzia, Aragon and Valencia had
been the Cause of their Father's Death, by calling in Osiris, they removed
toward those parts, on pretense of Affection, but in reality to wreak their
Revenge.

2. Osiris, being basely Murdered by his Brother Typhon, his Son Orus Lybicus
succeeded him, having slain the Murderer. The People of Andaluzia, now again
oppressed by the Tyranny of the Lominii, who upon the departure of Osiris, were
exercising their revenge on those their Subjects, Orus Lybicus, or Hercules,
comes into Spain, (...) the Lominii, (...) makes his Son Hispalus King.
sent for and to Orus Lybicus, called also Hercules, who speedily came to their
relief, as his Father had done out of Africa, where he had killed the Giant
Anteus, and marched after the Enemy who were retired to the Fastnesses of
Lusitania, and there resolutely waited his approach. The Lominii had posted
themselves in a secure place, called formerly Saltus Tercenorum: Hercules,
seeing them in place almost inaccessible, resolved to save his Men, and avoid
the hazard of a Battle, by challenging the three Brothers to fight him hand to
hand, which he did, and they accepting of it, were all three slain
successively. 1718.
The Portuguese seeing their Princes slain, began to move to revenge their
Death; but Orus making use of persuasions, rather than force, appeased them,
and calling the Nobles to him, he made a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving. This done,
he advanced as far as the Promontorium Sacrum, where he built a magnificent
Temple, wherein the Egyptian Ceremonies taught by the Founder were for many
Ages after Religiously observed. The People in acknowledgment for the Benefits,
received by Hercules, or rather swayed by fear, joyfully received his Son
Hispalus for their King, who continued in Lusitania with many of his Egyptians.

3. Hispalus was installed 42 Years after the Gerions had begun to Reign, and
being peaceably seated on the Throne, his Father Orus Lybicus marched away for
Italy. The gentle Government of Hispalus, was the reviving of the hearts of
that People after so many Calamities, but Prosperities are not durable, for he
died the 17th Year of his Reign: Among the memorable Customs introduced by him,
were those of Burying the Dead, and wearing Mourning for them; what sort of
Mourning it was appears not, but that which many Ages after was used till the
time of King Emanuel of Portugal, and Ferdinand of Castile was on the lightest
occasions rough Canvass, and the deep used for Kings and such like occasions,
of the coursest Sackcloth, and that always White, as is still used in China.

4. Hispanus succeeded his Father Hispalus; and was Proclaimed in the Temple of
Hercules with great Ceremony. The Spaniards in those days held it a crime to
look upon the setting Sun, therefore those that lived upon the Coast, used to
turn their backs toward it; those who lived near the Promontorium Sacrum,
retreated at Night far off from it, believing the Gods spent the Night there in
Sport and Pastimes, not to be seen by Mortal Eyes: Only the Priests and the
King on the Night of his inauguration, were permitted to stay on that point of
Land, and look toward the West, but as soon as the Sun quite disappeared, they
prostrated themselves on the Ground* and then retired to the Temple, where they
continued till break of day, when the King returned to the same place, and
continued there till the Sun again spread its Beams over all that part of the
Country. Then he returned joyfully to the People, offered Sacrifice, and was
thence forward esteemed wiser than all others, as being one that had seen
Divine Secrets and Hidden Mysteries. It is a common Opinion among the vulgar,
that Hispalis now Sevil, was built by Hispalus, and that the Name Hispania came
from Hispanus, 1169.
who died when he had Reigned 32 Years, leaving no Issue.

5. Hercules, Hercules Governs Spain, and leaves the Crown to Hesperus
after the Death of his Grandson Hispanus returned to Spain, which he Governed
Nineteen Years in Peace with singular Wisdom and Goodness, and finding his end
draw on, he appointed Hesperus, one of his Officers, his Successor. The Funeral
Obsequies being performed, 1650.
Hesperus took upon him the Sovereignty, but the giddy People being
dissatisfied with his Government, revolted from him to his Brother Atlas
Italus, who came out of Italy, pretending a right as being the Elder Brother,
though neither had any other Title, but the choice of Hercules which was of the
Younger. Hesperus deposed, and Atlas set up in his place.
By this desertion of the Subjects, Hesperus was easily deprived of the Crown,
and flying into Italy, outlived not long his Misfortune. Italus having Reigned
in Portugal the space of Ten Years, returned into Italy, 1618.
leaving the Dominion of Spain to his Son Sic-Orus, He leaves the Crown to his
Son Sicorus.
during whose Reign the Noise of Arms was not heard; he left his Name to that
River of Catalonia, that washes the Walls of Lerida, and is now called Segre,
but formerly Sicoris, and a great part of that Country was of him long after
called Sicoria, he Reigned 55 Years.

6. Sicanus the Son of Sicorus succeeded his Father; Sicanus Succeeds them, and
Sicceleus him.
he is reported to have waged War in Italy, and thence to have passed over and
conquered Sicily; which, of him, our Author will have to take the Name of
Sicania, and he to have Reigned 31 Years. His Son Sicceleus immediately entered
upon the Government, and of him also is continued that Romantic Story of going
into Italy with an Army, where also he is said to have died in the 44th Year of
his Reign, 2453 from the Creation; 797 from the Flood; and 1509 before the
Birth of Christ. 1509.


7. After the Death of Sic-Celeus his Son Lusus was proclaimed King, Lusus
ascends the Throne.
and for the singular Affection he showed to the Western part of Spain, where
he spent the most of his life, that Country took his Name, being afterward
called Lusitania. Under this Name was comprehended all the Country between the
Rivers Guadiana and Duero; the main Ocean bounded it on the West, and its
limits on the East were formed by an imaginary line drawn almost straight from
the turning of the River Duero near Castrominho, down to Guadiana, which River
divided it from the Province Betica. Nothing else is recorded of Lusus, but
that he reigned 33 Years, Siculus the next King.
and dying, left the Kingdom to Siculus, who being born in Lusitania, preserved
the same Affection his Father had done for that Province and People. He also is
supposed to have passed over into Italy, and to have overthrown the Aborigines,
whence sailing into Sicily, 1416.
he subdued that Island, and left his Name to it, where he ended his Days,
having reigned 61 Years.

8. The Death of Siculus was so much resented by the Spaniards, and
particularly the Lusitanians, that, he leaving no Heir, An interregnum for 100
Years.
they resolved not to submit themselves to another King. Above an Hundred Years
they lived at their Liberty, referring all Controversies to the ancientest Men,
Bacchus in Spain.
and standing to their Decision, till Bacchus the Son of Semele, with a
numerous Army of sundry Nations came into Spain. The Fame of so mighty an Army
terrified the Spaniards, but they were no less delighted with their Luxurious
manner of living, all their Martial Exercises being intermixed with Pleasures
and Delights. Hence the Sports used to this day in Portugal, called Folias, are
supposed to have deduced their Original, which consists of Dancing. Taboring,
and Singing: The Word is either derived from the Latin, Folia, or leaves,
because the Bacchanals were so Crowned, or from the Italian, signifying
Madness, which is proper enough to such Divertisements, and to the Feasts of
the Bacchanals.

9. Bacchus finding the Lusitanians, opposed his Command, and cut off many of
his Army, retiring to the Mountains after doing the Mischief, employed his
Tutor Silenus to work upon them by fair means, which he did so effectually,
that they submitted themselves to him, only upon condition he should not use
the Name of King, which they would allow to none since the Death of their
beloved King Lusus. However, Bacchus finding them an Ignorant and Credulous
People, persuaded them that the Soul of Lusus was transmigrated unto his Son
Lisias, Lisias made King.
who for the Love they bore him, was returned to Reign over them. This Fiction
so took with the People, that they put themselves wholly into his Power,
congratulating with themselves the Happiness of having recovered their admired
King. Bacchus returned into Italy, and his Son remained possessed of this great
part of Europe, which he enjoyed not full Three Years: 1299.
He dying, the Lusitanians would not admit any other King, but chose for their
Commander, Cacus chose General.
one Cacus a bold Fellow, and one of Lisias his Companions; he raising a
powerful Army, marched against Palatuus King of Andaluzia, whom in a Bloody
Battle he overthrew, and by that means remained possessed of the greatest part
of all Spain; puffed up with this Success, he became Insolent and Cruel, which
rendered him Odious to the People.

10. Palatuus, who lay lurking in the Mountains, laid hold of this opportunity,
sent some to sound the affections of the Multitude, and finding them well
inclined toward him, adventured to raise Forces and march toward Lusitania.
Hercules the Theban in Spain overthrows Cacus.
At the same time, Hercules the Theban, with the rest of the Argonauts, being
by stress of Weather cast ashore in Spain, near the mouth of Guadalquivir, was
lovingly received and entertained by Palatuus; this Courtesy obliged him to
espouse his Quarrel, and so joining their Forces, they overthrew the Tyrant
Cacus, or Licinius, who fled into Italy, whither presently after Hercules
returned. Still the Lucitanians preserved their Liberty as before, as they did
whilst Erithreus, whom some call the Son, others the Cousin of Palatuus reigned
in the other parts of Spain. Palatuus seems to have Reigned 67 Years, and
Gargoris is said to have been his Son, but for this there is no manner of
Authority.

11. The Tyranny of Cacus or Licinius, lasted Thirty Six Years, which are to be
included in the 70 of Palatuus his Reign, and many more Lusitania remained free
from any subjection, being governed only by the Rules of Reason, 1158.
and some of Tubal's Laws which remained in Verse. Gargoris finds the use of
Honey and its making.
It fell out accidentally, that a Man called Gargoris (which formerly signified
a burning Coal or Flame) found a Swarm of Bees in a hollow Oak, and discovering
their Honey, taught the use of it to the People. This sweet Discovery was worth
a Crown; which the Multitude, i^ Requital for that Benefit, freely bestowed
upon him. He was afterward, by the Latins, called Melicola, for discovering to
the Spaniards the Use of Honey. Whilst Gargoris reigned, he had a Daughter got
with Child by some Gallant, or, as some thought, by her own Father; for as soon
as the Child was born, Abidis exposed; Brought to Court; Teaches the People to
yoke Oxen, plow and sow.
he caused it to be exposed to the Wild Beasts: But they, instead of
destroying, nourished the Infant; of which he being informed, caused him to be
cast into the Sea; and that Element, milder than the Grandfather, carried it up
the River Tagus, as far as Santarem, formerly called Scalabis, where it was
suckled by a Do. Of her, being grown up, he took to a natural Swiftness; so
that they that hunted in the Mountains admired to see in him the Figure of a
Man, and the Wildness of a Beast. Gargoris hearing hereof, and not imagining it
was his Grandson, caused him to be taken in a Gin; and being brought before
him, he, by known Signs, perceived it was the same he had exposed. His Hatred
now turned into Love; he called him Abidis, causing him to be carefully
instructed: And he was so great a Proficient, that it was he who first
civilized that barbarous Multitude: He also taught them to yoke Oxen, to plow
and sow.

11. Troy being reduced to Ashes, 1130.
Ulysses, with a part of the Grecian Fleet, driven by Storms out of the Mouth
of the Streights, arrived at length at the Mouth of the River Tagus; Ulysses in
Portugal.
and entering, landed; where he found, already built, a City on the Hill; to
which he left his Name, which remains to this Day, being called Vlyssippo,
which is the famous City Lisbon. Here, in Memory of the Favors received of the
Goddess Minerva, he built a stately Temple, and dedicated it to her. Gargoris,
upon the News of his Arrival, marched toward him with an Army; but they both
meeting, and conferring together, parted Friends: And not so content, Gargoris
gave to Ulysses his Daughter, the Mother of Abidis, in Marriage. However, the
Greeks committing several Insolences in the Country, they became odious to the
People, who rising up in Arms against them, Ulysses stole away to Sea, leaving
his new Wife behind. How long Gargoris reigned, cannot positively be set down;
the best Guess that can be given, is, Seventy seven Years. 1105.
At the same time that Ulysses sailed out of Tagus, Diomedes entered the River
Mino, in the North of Portugal: There he founded a City, which, after the Name
of his Father Tideus, he called Tide; and in process of Time, by Corruption, is
now called Tuy.

12. The wonderful Abidis succeeded his fortunate Father Gargoris, Abidis
reigns.
in the Kingdom of Spain; and, in Gratitude to the Mountains, where he was
bred, built the City Santarem; and reigned 35 Years, much beloved of his
Subjects. 1038.
About this time happened that wonderful Dearth in Spain, A wonderful Dearth.
which lasted 26 Months; during which time it never rained. Some there are, who
extend this to 40 Years; others, to 30. Such it was, that all the Country
became Desert, the Inhabitants either perishing for Want, or fleeing to other
Places. Long after this, 952.
a Multitude of the Celtae, the ancient Inhabitants of France, came into the
Southern Parts of Portugal, where they built several Towns, and re-edified
others, before ruined. They, being mixed, and well united with the Natives,
stood them in good stead when the Phoenicians possessed themselves of the
Island of Cadiz. Sidonians in Spain.
Not content with settling themselves there, they began to incroach upon the
People of Andaluzia, and fortified themselves at Sidon, now Medina Sidonia;
whence they were expelled by the united Forces of the ancient Natives, 752.
and intruding Celtae. Which done, the Lusitanians chose Argantonius for their
King* who governed them many Years, with general Applause; some Authors
stretching his Life to 140 Years; others, only to 120.

13. The Celtae inhabiting Lusitania, The Celtae settle in Portugal.
being vastly increased, so that the Country they possessed could not contain
them, passed over the River Tagus, with their Flocks and Families, with a
Design to settle along the Seacoast, beyond the Promontory of the Moon, now
called the Rock of Sintra. Those People fearing their intruding Guests, marched
out to oppose them; but being overthrown, were forced to submit to those that
came with Intention only to be their Companions. The Turduli, for so those
People were called, joining with the Inhabitants of Lisbon, formed another
Army; and joining Battle with the Celtae, gained the Field, but with such Loss,
that they had no reason to boast of their Victory. Both Parties considering the
Loss sustained, came to an Agreement, and divided the Province betwixt them.

14. The Turduli thought themselves secure after this War with the Celtae, when
a more dangerous Enemy assaulted them. The Mountainous People descend into the
Plain.
These were a savage Mountainous People, who having, till then, lived upon the
Milk of their Goats, and Wild Fruit, came down to seek a better Country to
inhabit; but being defeated, they passed the River Tagus: There the Celtae cut
off a good Number of them; which obliged the rest to march along the River
Tagus, to the Seaside, where, finding no Body to oppose them, they settled
themselves: And from them, that Cape near Setuval was called Promontorium
Barbaricum, now Cabo^de Espichel.

15. Nabuchadonosor having taken Jerusalem, Nabuchodonozor in Spain.
and subdued a great part of the then known World, came at last into Spain with
his mighty Army, composed of all Nations. Having besieged the Island of Cadiz,
where the Phoenicians inhabited, by Sea and Land, he was driven thence by the
united Forces of Spain; and so, with his whole Army, put to Sea again. He had
before overrun the greatest part of Spain; and now departing, left behind him
the greatest Plague that ever infested it. Thus was a great Number of Jews,
dispersed in several Parts of it; who fixing then, could never since be rooted
out. The Phoenicians delivered of the Danger of Nabuchodonosor, refused to pay
the Lusitanians, whom they had called to their Aid; who offended thereat,
demanded more than was their Due. The Controversy came to be decided by Blows,
wherein the Lusitanians were worsted, yet not so discouraged, but that,
gathering fresh Forces, they came on again so furiously, that having vanquished
their Enemies, they put them all to the Sword, without Mercy. By this Victory
they became Masters of the greatest part of Andaluzia; so that great Numbers of
them went over, to inhabit there, calling it Turdetania; where they built many
Cities.

16. In the mean while, The Carthaginians come to relieve the Phoenicians.
the Phoenicians, shut up in the Island of Cadiz, craved Aid of the
Carthaginians, their ancient Allies, against the Lusitanians, who Lorded it
over all Andaluzia. The Carthaginians were not backward to undertake this
Expedition, but Rigging a mighty Fleet, sent it to their Relief, under the
Command of Mezerbal, a valiant and wise Captain. At their first Landing, in
some Skirmishes, our Men found their Valor would not avail against the
Africans, without some Martial Discipline: Therefore they made Choice of one
Baucius Capetus, (or, as others call him, Bachius Carupus,) a Man of a
Gigantick Stature, and great Conduct, for their General. He observing the
manner of the Carthaginian Warfare, instructed his Men accordingly. About Break
of Day the two Armies joined Battle, with terrible Outcries, and no less
Effusion of Blood. Mezerbal observing his Troops disordered, and giving way,
with some chosen Bands renewed the Fight, and made the Victory more bloody than
it would have been, had not so great a General commanded: Yet, at last, The
Carthaginians defeated.
he was forced to give way, and save his Life by Flight. Baucius having pursued
the Enemy, and taken the Spoil of the Field, returned Victorious, and erected
lasting Trophies in the Temples of his Idols. The future Actions of Mezerbal,
being the Beginning of the Carthaginian Dominion in Spain, require a new
Chapter. These Things were done about the Year of the World, 3403; after the
Deluge, 1747; which is 559 Years before the Birth of Christ.

CHAP. III.
The Actions of the Carthaginian Governors, Mezerbal, Sappho, Hanno the First,
Himilco, Gisgo, Hannibal the First, Hanno the Second, Boodes, Maherbal,
Hamilcar Barcinus, Asdrubal, and Hannibal the Second: The Planting of many
Colonies; and Beginning of the Roman War.
1. MEzerbal and Carthaginian, though overthrown, quitted not his Pretensions;
but contrived, by Policy to compass what he had failed of by open Force. He
began to treat amicably with the Lusitanian Turduli; 559.
and sped so well, that they entrusted him with several Places of Consequence;
Mezerbal subdues Portugal.
whereof being once possessed, he began to Lord it over them. This was the
Beginning of the African Dominion in Spain. Mean while, that barbarous People
who inhabited along the Coast of Setuval, invented a new and bloody Sacrifice,
which continued for many Years: 550.
The Sea cast up a Whale, of a wonderful Bigness; whereat that ignorant People
being terrified, and thinking it had been some Sea-God, A barbarous Sacrifice.
they killed a Young Man and a Maid, and left them by the Whale: The Tide
rising, it carried away the dead Bodies, which they looked upon as an
Acceptance of their Sacrifice, and therefore they every Year after repeated it,
even after the Coming of Christ.

2. About the same time 15000 of the Turduli, seeking new Lands to inhabit,
passed into the Territories between Cerolico and Trancoso; but finding it
difficult to settle in that wild Country and among (...) People so rude,
Se^^ral People plan^ new Colonies.
that they scarce understood one another's Language at two Miles distance, they
waded over the River Coa, and there Peopled all that Country, building several
Towns The Barbarians of the Coast of Setuval understanding that the Turduli
wandered to find new Seats, they passed-over the Tagus, to possess their Lands.
Those who were left behind endeavored to oppose them, but in vain; and finding
they looked not after Towns, but lived in the open Fields, they desisted. But
the Barbarians, with the same Ease, passed on; and crossing the River Mondego,
settled about Viseo, stretching by Degrees to the River Duero. The Greeks also,
that inhabited Galicia, attempted to pass the River Minho; but they were
repulsed by the People of the Province, with a great Slaughter on both sides.
It will not be amiss to give an Hint of the Customs of those People.

3. Their Idols were, Customs of the Inhabitants.
Mars and Minerva, for the obtaining of Valor and Wisdom. To them they offered
the Right Hands, and sometimes the Bodies, of their Enemies, taken in War. In
the Entrails of the Sacrifices they made their Observations of future Events.
In their Feasts, an He-Goat was a great Dainty; and they did eat upon Round
Tables. Whilst the Dinner lasted, some played upon Noisy Instruments; and any
Guest might rise, and dance. Their Sports were, Wrestling, Running, and
Pitching the Bar. The Young Men sung the Praises of those that died in Battle.
Their Weapons were Swords and Daggers; and they gave Battle drawn up in close
Battalions. Their Apparel, in Times of Peace, was long and wide; and their Hair
long* The Women wore Gowns down to the Ground, and Mantles on their Shoulders,
which served them for Beds. Their manner of Dancing, was, in a Ring. Marriages
were made to please the Bridegroom, not the Father, or Friends: The Portion
was, a few Goats: And the Chastity of the Women was such, that Adultery was
scarce to be heard of. There were no Physicians among them; But the Sick were
set in a public Place, and all that passed by advised what they thought best
for them. Criminals were stoned to Death: And all Passengers were obliged to
cast a Stone, to complete the Burial of the dead Body. No Money was used; but
all dealt by way of Barter. They passed Rivers, and fished, in Boats made of
one Tree, hollowed, like the Indian Canoes.

4. The People inhabiting between the Rivers Duero and Minno, 480.
passed over into Gallicia; and having, in a bloody Fight, wherein the Women,
as well as the Men, showed exceeding Valor, vanquished the Greeks who
possessed that Country, they settled amongst them. Twelve Thousand Spaniards
were entertained by the Carthaginians, in their Expedition against Gelon, King
of Sicily; but they, and all that Fleet, perished. The Carthaginians then bent
their Thoughts upon the Conquest of Spain, Sappho the Carthaginian gathers Gold
in Spain.
whither they sent Sappho General; who gathering much Gold in the Mines,
enriched his Country; but was forced to return against those Africans who
demanded a certain Tribute, which, they said, Queen Dido paid at the Foundation
of the City. He carried with him 7000 Spanish Foot, and 400 Horse, who did him
good Service, and returned home victorious. Sappho being called away, the
Carthaginians sent in his Place Hanno and Himilco. Hanno coasting along Spain,
landed at Cape St. Vincent, where he showed great Reverence to the Place, to
win the Hearts of the People; and having discovered the Country, and traded
with the Inhabitants, returned home. Himilco sailed forward to Cape Espichel,
where some of his Men landing, to get fresh Provisions, were, for the most
part, cut off by the savage People. Thence they continued their Voyage, and ran
up the River Tagus; where being well received, and furnished with Pilots, they
made Cape Cascais, and the Berlings. The Carthaginians had some Commerce with
the Turduli, living between the Rivers Tagus and Duero; and of them had some
Information about the Inland Parts. Hamilco continued his Course to the River
Mondego, and by Stress of Weather was forced to put into the Vouga, on whose
Banks he found a Colony of Greeks; and so continued his Discovery to the River
Minho. After sounding all the Coast of Lusitania, many of his Ships perished in
a Storm; the rest were put into the Port Gaya, so shattered, that several of
them sunk there, but the Men were saved. Part of them put to Sea again with
Himilco, who went away to his Brother Gisgo, in Andaluzia: The rest staid among
the Natives, The City Braga founded by the Carthaginians.
and afterward founded the City Brag^ in Memory of the River Bragada, in
Africa, running through their Country. Some will have this City to be first
built, and take its Name of the Gauls, called Braccasi. Hannibal the Elder
succeeded Himilco, in the Government of the Affairs of Spain. He hearing of the
new Carthaginian Colony, resolved himself to visit the utmost Point of Europe,
or Cape St. Vincent; and there founded a City, upon a convenient Bay, which was
called Hannibal's Port.

5. After this, 420*
the Lusitanians and Andaluzians fell at Variance; Several great Battles
for those Turd^tani who had settled in that part of the Country, endeavoring
to extend their Limits to those Plains, which afterward took Name of the
Vandals, were opposed by the ancient Inhabitants, and, after much Blood spilt,
put to Flight, leaving behind them a rich Booty. But they seeking Revenge,
gathered a Multitude of the bordering Lusitanians. And the Andaluzians, to
oppose them, called Hanibal, with his Carthaginians, to their Aid. These
powerful Armies encountering, fought most obstinately the whole Day, till Night
parted them; leaving the Field covered with 80000 dead Bodies, among which was
Hannibal himself. This so weakened the Lusitanians, that those barbarous People
living along the Seacoast, durst take Arms against them, and overthrew the
Celtae, who first offered to withstand them. The Turdetani retiring out of
Andaluzia, and joining with the Celtae, they fell upon the victorious
Barbarians; of whom they made such Havoc, that few returned home to carry the
News of their Defeat.

6. The Carthaginians, 403.
in their Wars with the Agrigentines, among other Spaniards, used the Aid of
3000 Lusitanians; by whose Valor they destroyed that City. With the like
Number they overthrew Dionysius, the Tyrant of Sicily: But Sickness did what
the Sword had not done, for none of those Men returned home. In the mean while,
Great Dearth and Storms.
Spain suffered by the Indignation of Heaven; for the Storms and Dearth were so
excessive, that the Wild Beasts came out of the Deserts, to the Towns, to look
for Shelter and Provender. Hanno the Second came from Carthage, to govern
Andaluzia; and landing at Hannibal's Port, in Lusitania, raised 7000
Lusitanians, to subdue the Andaluzians, who had revolted, provoked thereto by
the Avarice of their late Governor. Soon after, 400.
the Celtae of the Province of Alentejo, their Territories being thronged by
the Turdetani who came out of Andaluzia, resolved to move farther into the
Country; and to that purpose made a solemn Sacrifice, and swore ever to
continue Friends. Whilst they were busy in that Solemnity, they descried four
Sail, which made toward the Shore; and understood they came from Laconica, in
Peloponnesus, seeking some Place to settle in: The Celtae received them into
their Society; and they together passing the Tagus, and coming to the River
Mondego, left there a Company of the Lusitanian Turdetani, called Colimbrii, or
Columbri, who there settled a Colony, which, of them, was called Colimbria, now
known by the Name of Condeixa the Old: the Ruins which still are to be seen
about it, being a Testimony of its former Grandeur. Yet some will have that
City to have been built by Hercules Lybicus; Several Towns founded.
others, by the Carthaginians. The Lusitanians and Greeks going on* they
founded Eminium, now Ageuda, a great City, and a Bishop's See in the time of
the Romans and Goths. They also were the Founders of Talabrica, now Aveyro; of
Lavara, of Lameca, or Laconia, now Lamego; and some other Places, whereof there
is now no Memory. The last Place named was built by the Greeks and the Celtae,
who continuing their Progress, fell at Variance (forgetting the Oath made at
their Setting out) in such manner, that in cruel Battle among themselves the
greatest part of them perished. Such as remained spread themselves about that
Country, and some of them are supposed to be the Founders of Araduca, now
Guimaraens.

7. The Lusitanians and Africans about the Port of Hanibal were at Peace, 359.
when Boodes came to succeed Hanno the Carthaginian, Commander in Spain. He
introduced himself politickly by fair means into the Affections of the People,
The Progress of the Carthaginians in Spain.
and they together sacrificed to Hercules. Having thus settled Friendship,
Boodes, with the Consent of the Natives, built a Town called Lacobriga in
Algarve, now Lagos. After Boodes came Maherbal, who so managed the People, that
he became absolute over all that part, which is now the Kingdom of Algarve; and
hearing of the Greatness of the City Elvas, marched thither with a good Body of
Men, and by Kindness so won the Hearts of the Inhabitants, that they wholly
submitted themselves unto him. Maherbal falling sick here, was told by the
Diviners, that there was no way to recover his Health, but building a Temple to
the God Cupid, which he did, and recovered. This Temple was famo^^ many Ages
after, and the Idol called Endovellicus. T^^ Image had its Eyes shut, a Heart
in its Mouth, and Wings on its Feet. The Priest when he sacrificed to this God
stripped himself naked, and then put on a loose Garment which trai^ed on the
Ground, his Back and Left Arm remaining naked; then with the Right Hand he
ripped up a Lamb, and took out his Heart, which, with the Left Hand, he cast
into the Fire.

8. The City Tire being destroyed by Alexander the Great, 318.
15000 of the Inhabitants were saved by the Sidonians who served in his Army.
Some of them by means of the Carthaginians came into Lusitania, The City
Mirtiri built by the Tyrians.
where they founded a Town which they called Mirtiri, that is, New Tire, now
Mertola. This same Year Gatelus sailing from Egypt with his whole Family, is
reported to have landed in Portugal, and it is supposed it was at the City
Porto. He had two Sons Iberus and Humecus, the first of them some will have to
have sailed into Ireland, and given the Name Hibernia to it; these are mere
Suppositions. Some Years after the Greeks between the Rivers Duero and Minho,
310*
increased by the coming of the Celtae and Turdetani, finding their Multitude
too great for that Province, by common Consent sent their Sons to find new
Seats. Some of them settled in the Mountains of Asturias, and others along the
Banks of the Rivers Erla. 303.
The Carthaginians being at War with Pyrrhus Prince of the Epirots, who was
possessed of Sici^y, drove him thence by the Assistance of the Spanish
Auxiliaries, among whom were 2000 Lusitanian Celtae.

9. Hamilcar Barcinus, a Man extraordinary well qualified, was sent from
Carthage to promote the Interest of that Commonwealth in Spain. His mighty Zeal
in the Worship of their Idols endeared him to the People, and the more to
oblige them, he resolved to marry a Woman of the Country by her he had Hannibal
the Second by Name, but far the greatest in Renown. His Project of marrying a
Lusitanian to gain the Affection of the Natives, Hamilcar subdues all Spain.
was so highly approved of by the Carthaginians, that returning home he was
sent back to finish what he had so well begun. He brought with him his Wife, by
whom he had Five Children, Hannibal, Asdrubal, Mag^, Hanno, and a Daughter.
After he had settled the Affairs of Andaluzia, he passed thence into Lusitania,
intending to make (...) ^he Seminary of Soldiers. Having gathered a might^
Army, he set forward so fortunate, that he subdued all the Country from the
Streights of Gibraltar to the Pyrenean Mountains. Hanibal, then a Youth, was
present at these Exploits, and then learnt his first Military Rudiments. In the
mean while the Vectones, who lived betwixt the Rivers Duero and Coa, down as
far as Tagus, and were ancient Enemies to the Celtae of the Province of
Alentejo, and to the Turdetani, considering that the Flower of these People was
drawn out under Hamilcar Barcinus, laid hold of this Opportunity, and invaded
their Territories. The Celtae asked leave of their General to return Home to
defend their Country; and he careful of their good Fortune, marched back with
them. The Vectones being strengthened with Supplies, waited his coming in a
convenient place, with a great number of Carts loaded with Wood before them, as
if they had been upon the March. Hamilcar admired their Resolution, but
understood not the Stratagem. He caused the Celtae to give the Charge; but
neither their Courage nor Martial Discipline availed them; for the Vectones
setting Fire to the Wood, the Oxen being frighted, ran so furiously with the
Flaming Carts into the midst of them that they were put into Confusion,
notwithstanding their General did all that was possible to restore the Battle.
In the heat of the Action he was killed, leaving a bloody Victory to the
Vectones. Asdrubal his Son-in-law and Hannibal gathering the Relics of the
Army, fell upon the Phocentians, who had assisted the Vectones; but these
coming to their Relief, the two Generals were obliged to raise a greater Power,
with which they not only subdued the Phocentians, but put all to the Sword that
were able to bear Arms. This done, he marched toward the Vectones, who
continued to insult the Celtae, and sufficiently revenged their Wrongs. But the
Celtae not so satisfied, ceased not to destroy the Enemies Country. This
obliged the Vectones to choose one Tagus for their General, under whose
Conduct, for some time, they put Asdrubal to his Shifts, till in one Battle he
cut off most of their Horse. Thus Tagus was constrained to make Overtures of
Peace, which being admitted and sworn to, Asdrubal, contrary to his Oath, made
Tagus, and many of his principal Men, Prisoners. They, resolving to sell their
Lives at a dear rate, put many of the Carthaginians to the Sword; but, in
Conclusion, were all foully murdered by Asdrubal. He remained Governor in
Spain, and Hanibal went over into Africa.

10. The Romans, envying the Fortune of the Carthaginians in Spain, by the
Mediation of the People of Marseilles, joined in League with the Sanguntines,
and other Cities. This made Hanibal haste back into Spain, where he found his
Brother-in-law Asdrubal was dead, Hannibal settles in Spain.
as he had deserved. For a Slave to that Tagus, whom he perfidiously slew,
stabbed him as he was sacrificing, in revenge of his Masters Death. Nor did he
afterward endeavor to escape; but, being put upon the Wrack, bore all his
Torments with a Countenance unmoved, Hanibal made it his Business to gain the
Good Will not only of the Africans, but of the Natives. To this intent he
contracted Friendship with one Viriatus (not he that held War so many Years
against the Romans) who was a principal Man, or little Prince among the Celtae,
of the Province of Alentejo. Next to bind the Andaluzians faster, he married a
Wife among them, called Himilce, born at Castulon, now a poor Village, known by
the Name of Carlona. By her he had his Son Aspar. Having thus secured his
Interest, and gathered a mighty Army from all parts, his next Thought was to
break the Peace made some Years before with the Romans. In order to it he
resolved to invade Saguntum, a City in League with them. By the way he subdued
the Vocei, and other Nations. From them he marched against the Vectones, who
had killed his Father, and laying Siege to Salamanca, so distressed it, that
the Inhabitants were forced to buy their Peace. This Accord was broke by the
Lusitanians, who getting into the City, violated the Conditions; whereupon the
Siege was again continued. At length the Besieged capitulated to depart with
only their Apparel, and unarmed. They marched out, but the Women carrying the
Weapons under their Garments, and delivering them to the Men, they made such
use of them, that had not Hanibal's Army been so numerous, it had been dubious
which side should have been victorious; but the Multitude overcame Valor, and
most of the Vectones perished. All things succeeding prosperously, Hanibal sets
down before. Saguntum with 150000 Foot and 20000 Horses. Saguntum destroyed.
After a Siege of Eight Months he took and destroyed that City, which made the
War between Rome and Carthage to be no more doubted of* Hanibal gathered
supplies from all parts, and many out of Lusitania; Viriatus, that little King,
going in Person with a good Body to accompany him. Asdrubal, Hanibal's Brother,
drew together considerable numbers of those rude People between the Rivers
Duero and Minho. Nor were the Vectones, with whom his Father and Brother-in-law
had such cruel Wars, backwards, being most willingly entertained by him for
their extraordinary Valor. Balarus a Lusitanian commanded a brave Body of
Light Horse.

CHAP. IV.
Hanibal's Actions in Italy, the Romans come into Spain, the Carthaginians
expelled thence. The Wars between the Romans and Lusitanians from the
Expiration of the Carthaginian Command, till Viriatus began to Sway.
1. HAnibal having subdued Spain, Hanibal marches* to Italy.
leaves his Brother Asdrubal there with 12000 African Foot and 2500 Horse; he
sends 15000 Spanish Foot and 1200 Horse to Carthage, and marches himself over
the Pyreneans with 102000 Fighting Men. Five Months he spent, in his long and
tiresome march through France, and over the Alps, with the loss of 36000 Men:
With the rest he enters Lombardy, forces the Consul Cornelius Scipio, who came
to oppose him, to retire to Plansencia, and overthrows him, being joined by T.
Sempronius, at the River Trebia, killing 30000 Romans. This done, he passes the
Apennine, where with watching and labor, he lost an Eye, and coming to the
Lake Thrasim again Defeats the Roman Army under the Consuls C. Servilius, and
C. Flaminius. Qnintus Fabius sent against him with a fresh Army, tired him
without Fighting, next came the Consuls Emilius Paulus, and ^erentius Varro,
who through the rashness of the latter, adventuring to give Battle, 216.
were totally discomfited with the loss of 50000 of their Men.

2. Whilst Hanibal victoriously traversed the best part of Italy, Gneyus Scipio
was sent from Rome into Spain, with him Asdrubal Hanibal's Brother had several
Conflicts, and after some fortunate Successes, was forsaken by Fortune, The
Romans come into Spain.
and forced to retire into Lusitania to raise new Forces* there he joined in
League with a King called Mandonius, with whose assistance he checked the
Progress of Scipio. Yet Asdrubal marching with an Army toward Italy, was
overthrown by him, and returning again to Lusitania, gathered fresh Forces,
with this Power he not only curbed the Romans, but having killed the two
Scipio's, Cornelius and Gneius, took most of the Roman Garrisons in Catalonia
and Andaluzia. Besides, the Calamities of the War, Spain labored under the
Miseries of Plague and Famine, which principally raged in Lusitania: After
which ensued a general Earthquake throughout Europe, on the same day the
Battle at the Lake Thrasimenus was fought, which though so violent, that it
ruined many Towns, was not felt by the two Armies that were engaged.

3. Such was the posture of Affairs in Spain, The Carthaginians expelled by the
Romans.
when Claudius Nero was sent thither from Rome, and after him Publius Cornelius
Sipio, who was very successful against the Carthaginians. Asdrubal marched with
a great power out of Portugal, to retreive those losses at such time as
Massinissa landed with a number of Numidian Horse, and some Elephants to join
him; all this mighty Multitude was overthrown by the Fortune and Valor of
Scipio. Asdrubal thus broke, resolved to march into Italy, to the assistance of
his Brother Hanibal, leaving the Command in Spain to the other Asdrubal, the
Son of Gisgo, who as he was directed, retired with the Carthaginian Forces into
Lusitania, and having made up a body, he broke into Andaluzia, but was there
discomfitted by Marcus Sillanus Scipio's Lieutenant. Mago understanding that
Asdrubal his Brother, with the whole Army he led into Italy, had been cut off
by the Consuls Claudius Nero, and Livius Salinator, and despairing of
maintaining the War in Spain, shipped himself with his Forces at Cadiz, and
having done much harm along the Ligurian shore, returned to Carthage: Scipio
now in Africa, threatening the City Carthage, Hanibal was called home to defend
his Country; there having in vain treated of Peace, he was in Battle
overthrown, and flying to Prusias King of Bithinia, there Poisoned himself,
fearing to be delivered up to the Romans.

4. When the Africans had for 300 Years lorded it in Spain, 196.
they were at length expelled thence and out of Italy by the Romans. Spain
divided by the Romans.
The Senate divided Spain into two Provinces under as many Pretors, calling
them Citerior and Vlterior; the first lying between the River Ebro and the
Pyrenaean Mountains, the latter extending from that River to the Ocean. Several
of these Pretors being unsuccessful, the Consul Marcus Porcius Cato was sent
over with a Consular Army; he gained much among the Lusitanians by his Valor
and Conduct, as still appears by several Inscriptions on Stone, bearing his
Name. 192.
Scipio Nasica succeeded him in the Command, and had it prolonged to him after
the Expiration of his time, with the Title of Propretor: In his time the
Celtiberi entering into Arms, persuaded the Lusitanians to give the Romans a
Diversion in Invading their Province, and by that means forcing them to divide
their Forces. Nasica marched first against the Lusitanians, whom overtaking
loaded with Booty, 190.
and tired with long Marches, after a most bloody Fight, he Discomfitted,
taking 134 of their Colors: The next year came into Spain, Marcus Fulvius as
Praetor, who twice Defeated the Lusitanian Vectones; Encouraged with these
Victories, he laid Siege to Toledo, where the Vectones assailing^ him, were
again after a doubtful Fight overthrown. Lucius Emilius Paulus being come
Propretor into Spain, the Noise of Arms began to be heard in Portugal; Paulus
marching against the Bassetani on a sudden, found the Lusitanians upon him; the
Battle was furious, insomuch, that had the Day lasted, none of the Romans had
escaped to carry the News. But Paulus retiring in the Night, was again the next
day assaulted by the victorious Enemy, who pursued him in great disorder, which
proved his good Fortune; for he slew of them 20000, and by this Action, humbled
the Lusitanians, so that they stirred not in two Years. After which time, on a
sudden, they broke out, bearing down all that owned the Roman Government,
particularly in Andaiuzia, where the City Asta Regia, for fear of their power,
joined with them. Here Caius Catinius gave the Lusitanians Battle and routed
them, but attempting to Scale the Walls of Asta, was himself killed, and the
Lusitanians joining with the Celtiberi, appeared again stronger in the Field
than before.

5. Caius Culpurnius Piso, The Romans defeated by the Spaniards.
the Praetor, hearing of this great Power, sent to the other Praetor Lucius
Quincius Crispinus, with all possible speed to join him, which he accordingly
performed. Being joined* they marched into the Province of Carpentania, which
is about Toledo, where after several Skirmishes, the Spaniards cut off certain
Roman Forragers, which the Pretors perceiving, sent speedy succor to them, and
by this means, both parties still increasing, at last both Armies joined
Battle, wherein the Romans were put to Flight and lost 5000 Men. Had the
Spaniards known how to make use of their Victory, as well as how to obtain it,
the Romans might have been expelled Spain; but they, proud of their Success,
spent the time in Sports: In the mean while the Pretors gathered their
dispersed Forces, and engaged the Spaniards near the River Tagus, gave them
such a fatal Overthrow, that 30000 of them were put to the Sword; the Pretors
returning to Rome, Triumphed over Lusitania. 180.
The Pretorships of Aulus Terentius Varro, and Publius Sempronius Longus, and
of Publius Manlius, and Quintus Fulvius Flaccus were not very remarkable; at
length Lucius Postumius, and Tiberius Sempronius Longus came into Spain. The
first spent two years in War with the Lusitanians, sometimes Victorious, and
sometimes Worsted: He understanding that the Vauci joined in League with the
Interamnenses, to equal the Romans, with wonderful celerity, entered Lusitania,
where finding the Enemy ready to march, he Entrenched: Then he sent out a
Squadron of Horse to Skirmish with the Enemy, who received them so hotly, that
the Praetor himself coming out to their relief, he was glad to secure himself in
his Camp, making a disorderly retreat. 174.
Night coming on hindered any further Action, but with the day, Postumius
assailing the Lusitanians, put them to flight, 35000 of them being killed this
and the day before.

6. The Fortune of Rome and Lusitania continued various, till Marcus Manilius
came Praetor; and the Lusitanians, 153.
chiefly stirred up by the Bracarenses, began again to make head. These chose
for their General one of their Citizens, whom one Author calls Africanus; and
another, Apimanus. Under his Conduct they gathered, to a mighty Number; and
breaking into the Roman Provinces, they carried all before them. Manilius
advanced out of Andaluzia, to meet the Enemy, then loaded with Booty; which
Apamanus considering would be a great Obstacle toward obtaining the Victory,
he caused it to be burnt; reserving nothing but the Arms of his Soldiers, and
Provision for four Days. The Lusitanians enraged at this Loss of their Plunder,
152.
so desperately charged Manilius, The Romans twice defeated.
that they put him to flight, with the Loss of the greatest part of his Army.
Calfurnius Piso being sent from Rome, to retrieve this Disgrace, he increased
it with his own Defeat, and the Loss of 6000 Romans. This Victory made the
Lusitanians so absolute Masters of the Field, that they wasted all the Country,
from the River Guadiana, to the Streights of Gibraltar; and they persuaded the
Vectones of Estremadura to join in League with them. Having subdued all the
open Country, they next applied themselves to the Taking of Strong Holds, and
leaving Garrisons in them, in Imitation of the Romans. Apimanus assaulting the
Town of Blastofenizes, was killed; and the Army wanting such a General, broke
up; each Company taking its own Way home.

7. Apimanus being slain, as is before said, the Lusitanians chose for their
General one Caesaro, a Man capable of so great a Trust. He acquitted himself
well of it, recruiting the Army with which his Predecessor had been so often
victorious, and invading the Roman Territories; where he raised such an Alarm,
that the Senate of Rome, in great Haste, sent away the Consul, Quintus Fulvius
Nobilior, Quintus Fulvius overthrows the Spaniards.
with a great Army, to subdue the Celtiberi, and particularly the Numantians,
whom they began to grow jealous of. With Fulvius, came Lucius Mummius, as
Praetor of Hispania Vlterior. In his Army were 15000 Romans, with whom he
marched, thinking to oppress Caesaro, loaded with the Booty of Andaluzia.
Caesaro, to save his Prey, retired toward Lusitania. Mummius, who was still at
his Heels, at length overtook him at the Ford of Guadiana; and he ordering the
Prey, with some Troops of Light Horse, to be conducted over the River, advanced
with another Body to Villaviciosa, and there kept the Praetor in play till they
that had carried off the Booty returned: Then he drew out into the Plain, and
there began a bloody Battle, but the Lusitanians, not able to bear the Force of
the Romans, were put to flight; Mummius pursuing them with a mighty bloody
Slaughter. Caesaro played all the Part of a bold Soldier, and a prudent
General; sometimes facing his Enemy, and at other times calling upon his Men:
The Spaniards return and rout the Consul.
At length, what with Entreaties, and what with Threats, having formed a Body,
he charged the Romans, then dispersed, and out of Order, with such Gallantry
that they were drove back to their Camp, with the Loss of 5000 Men. The
Lusitanians taking Heart, and again gathering Strength, assaulted their
Trenches, and beat them thence, killing 5000 more of them, but not without the
Loss of 10000 of their own Men. Caesaro returned to Lusitania, victorious; and
Mummius, with 5000 Men, retired to an Eminence, strong by Nature. Thence his
Men came down, and defeated some Parties of Lusitanians, who dragged the
Colors they had taken in their sight; and several Colors, and part of the
Booty was recovered. Caesaro returned, and though he met with great Opposition,
obliged the Enemy to ascend the Mountain for Safety. Then Mummius vowed, if he
were victorious, to build a Temple in that Place to Proserpina; and charging
the Lusitanians, discomfited them, killing their General Caesaro. In pursuance
of his Vow, he there built a Temple to Proserpina, which is supposed to have
stood near the new Church of St. James the Apostle, by Villaviciosa, if it be
not the same.

8. Whilst Mummius was busy in building his Temple, 151.
the Lusitanians, nothing dismayed, chose for their General a Citizen of
Lisbon, called Canchenus. He immediately marched to the City Cunesturgi,
(situate near the Place where the Town of Niebla now stands) where was a Roman
Garrison; and in a few Days he made himself Master of it, putting many to the
Sword, and exercising great Cruelty. Proud with this Success, Canchenus marched
to the River Guadalquivir, without meeting any Opposition; and thence, in like
manner, to Gibraltar, plundering all the Country. Here the Army was divided
into two Parts, one designed to make a Conquest in Mauritania; the other, to
expel the Romans out of Andaluzia. Whilst the Former were employed in building
Vessels to carry them over the Streights, the Latter marched into the Province:
And being come to the City Oraelis, (suppos^^ to be Origuela, among the
Bastetani, they found the Enemy encamped, and well fortified, before the Town.
The Army being sat down before them, many of the Forces marched out to plunder
the neighboring Villages. Mummius laying hold of this Opportunity, ^ifteen
Thousand Spaniards ^^in by Mummius.
fell upon them, laden with Booty, and killed about 15000 of them; the rest
fled into Lusitania, robbing the open Towns as they went. The Lusitanians, who
inhabited that part of Estremadura where the Tagus runs into Portugal, ravaged
all the Lands of C^stite: But Mummius, with his usual Celerity, coming upon
them, and finding them dispersed, made a mighty Slaughter of them, and so ended
his Praetorship with Honor. 150.
Marcus Atilius came from Rome, to command in Lusitania, which he found in
Arms, and the neighboring Provinces cruelly invaded. Atilius again overthrows
them.
Atilius gave them Battle, and, though they behaved themselves with much
Bravery, the Romans had the Victory. Atilius then laid Siege to the City
Ostraze; and taking it by Assault, left no Creature alive that was in it: Nay,
the very Stones he so dispersed, that nothing remains of that City, but the
Name. This Desolation brought the Lusitanians to treat of Peace; and, upon
tolerable Conditions, they submitted themselves to the Romans. Many others also
followed their Example.

9. This Peace was not lasting; for the Vectones perceiving that Atilius was
far from them, they so managed the Affair, that they prevailed with the
Lusitanians who lived about Ostraze to violate the League so lately made.
Winter hindered Atilius from putting a Stop to their Proceedings; and Sergius
Galba, his Successor, was now come into Spain: He, jealous of the Power of the
Lusitanians, resolved upon a piece of Treachery, which laid an Eternal Blot
upon the Honor of Rome. Actions of the Lusitanians in Africa.
But whilst the Winter passes, let us see what was done by the other half of
Canchenus's Army, left at Gibraltar, to pass over into Africa. Their first Work
was, to pillage and ransack all the open Country; then laying Siege to Tangier,
they soon became Masters of it; but finding little to satisfy their Avarice,
they embarked again, and returned over into Spain. At that time the Consul
Lucullus was, with his Army, among the Turdetani, who inhabited along the Coast
of the Ocean, from Guadiana to S^^ill. He immediately marched against them, and
killing some, the rest retired to a strong Hill; which the Consul finding to be
inaccessible, he laid Siege to them, and they began to be pinched with Hunger:
Therefore, in Despair, they came down with such Fury, that they broke through
the Roman Army, but left many Prisoners behind. Lucullus, after this, pierced
into Lusitania, without meeting any Opposition, it being then Winter, when the
Romans used not to wage War.

10. Sergius Galba, Galba governs the Province.
the Praetor, having taken a rich Booty, returned to Andaluzia. No sooner did
the Spring begin to appear, but the Lusitanians, desirous of Revenge, broke
into the Roman Province, obliging the Praetor to take the Field sooner than he
had designed. He thought to have surprised them, but they received him in good
Order, and a bloody Battle ensued, in which the Lusitanians was put to the
Rout; Galba pursuing them with more Fury than Discretion: They that fled,
observing his Army disordered, taking the Advantage, faced about with such
Courage and Fortitude, that the victorious Romans were cut down, only the
Praetor, with a few Horse, escaping. Galba gathering 2000 Men, and perceiving
the Enemy followed their Husbandry in great Security, he passed the River
Guadiana, near Ayamonte, and brought his Army amongst the Turdetani of Algarve,
burning all before him. The People being unprovided sued for Peace; which
Galba, with a treacherous Design, seemed to approve of; promising to admit of
them as Friends, and to make an equal Distribution of Lands among them: To
which purpose they were all appointed three several Places where to meet him,
that each Man might receive his Proportion. Accordingly they met in three
Valleys, not far distant from one another, but covered by the Mountains that
encompassed them. Here Galba, with fair Speeches, persuaded them first to lay
down their Arms; which done as was directed, and his Army divided into three
parts also, he caused each of them to fall upon one of those Parties of
Lusitanians; who being before disarmed, were slaughtered like Sheep, to the
Number of 9000. Amongst the few that escaped was Viriatus, afterward the
Terror of the Romans; in killing whom, Galba had done his Country more
Service, than in the Slaughter of all the rest.

CHAP. V.
The Exploits of the Great Viriatus, his several Victories over the Romans,
with his last Actions, Death, and place of Burial.
1. THE Renowned Viriatus, who as has been said, escaped from the Massacre,
committed by Galba in the three Valleys, was a Lusitanian without the mixture
of any other Nation. Some Authors say, he was a common Robber, Viriatus his
Original.
others will have him a Carrier, others a Sheperd, and lastly, others say, he
went through all these mean Employments. Whatsoever he was before, at the time
that Galba offered Peace to the Lusitanians, and Murdered so many in Cold
Blood, he was one of them that were willing to hearken to his Proposals, and
made his escape from the Slaughter. His mind burning with desire of Revenge, as
soon as he heard that Galba was departed, he returned to the place of the
Massacre, where causing his Companions to thrust their Hands into the yet fresh
wounds of some Maidens, they swore by their Souls, not to desist from seeking
Revenge as long as they were able to bear Arms. This done, Viriatus ranging
throughout Lusitania, stirred up the People, raised a good Body of Men, and
breaking into Carpertania destroyed all as he went, and returned home with a
rich Booty. Then he caused his followers to reiterate the Oath they had taken,
Sacrificing one of their Prisoners, and a Horse; and so every Man passing by,
thrust his Hand into the Belly of each Sacrifice, vowing to do the like to the
Roman Army.

2. It was now the beginning of the Year, 148 before the coming of Christ, 3114
from the Creation, and 2281 from the Deluge, when the Praetor Marcus Vetilius, a
Man of known Valor, came to suppress the Tumults in Lusitania. Viriatus with
10000 Fighting Men was entering Andaluzia rather as every Man's Companion, than
Commander, as not daring to chastise them; with his Example and good Words,
endeavored to draw back those that scattered to Plunder; but his Men not
subject to Command, could not be contained within Bounds, which the Praetor
perceiving, he he fell upon them, He is worsted by M. Vetilius.
and having killed a great number, easily put the rest to flight. Viriatus
gathering the remains of his scattered Forces, fled to a City near, and there
provided to oppose the Enemy: It was not long before the Romans came and
assaulted the City, but finding they had sustained great loss, the Praetor
resolved to carry it by a long Siege: So far had he prevailed, that some
principal Men among the Besieged began to treat of a Surrender, without
consulting Viriatus, for as yet, they owned him not for their Superior.
Viriatus understanding there was such a design, but not who were the Managers
of it, having in a raging Posture ran about, and in that manner gathered the
Multitude to him, so efficaciously persuaded them to stand upon their Defense,
and to have no Faith in the Romans, that they lifted him upon their Shoulders,
and carrying him about the Walls, with loud cries, Proclaimed him their General.

3. The next day after he was proclaimed General, Viriatus drew out 1000 Horse,
which was all he had, and facing the Romans made show as if he designed to
break through them, which Vetilius the Praetor perceiving, he kept his Men in a
readiness to receive him. But Viriatus's design being only to amuze the Enemy,
whilst his Foot escaped out of the City, he continued in the same Posture the
greatest part of the day. At length understanding there was no Man left in the
City, all his Foot being got into the Mountains, he stood the Enemies Charge,
and kept them in play till Night, when through by-ways he hasted to the City
Tribola, whether he had sent his Foot. This City stood upon the Coast between
the Mouth of Guadiana and Gibraltar, whence may be inferred that the other
whence he came, was not far off. Vetilius in the Morning followed Viriatus, who
having by the way increased his Forces, lay in wait on the Mountains that hung
over a Valley, into which there were two narrow Passes, capable of only three
Horsemen going in abreast: Into this place the Romans entered without fear, and
turning their Horses to grass, took themselves to their rest. Viriatus giving
the Sign to his Men to fall on, the Romans on a sudden found themselves beset
on all sides, and being unarmed armed, Vetilius Routed and Slain.
were put to the Sword without Mercy. Among them dyed the Praetor; his Questor
with such as escaped the Slaughter, and some Andaluzians, thinking to Revenge
this Disgrace, engaging with Viriatus, lost 10000 Men. The next Year, Viriatus
with Fire and Sword ranged all Carpentania as far as Toledo, 147.
without meeting any Opposition. Thus was he employed when Caius Plaucius the
Roman General, who came to Command in Lusitania with 10000 Foot, and 1300
Horse, thought to have surprised him and his Men, being now mostly dispersed
about in burning the Country. Viriatus tho weak, kept the Romans in play still
retiring till getting into the Mountains, on a sudden they had lost him.
Plaucius sent 4000 Men to pursue and impede his March till he could come up
with the rest of the Army; but he turning upon them, cut them all off before
the Praetor could Relieve them, and having gained the Ford of Tagus, speedily
passed over it, and returned into Lusitania. Viriatus having gathered Strength,
encamped in a strong place, now called Pomares, near Evora, whither Plaucius
followed him, and was so received, that his whole Army turned their Backs.
Viriatus defeats Plaucius.
The Praetor fought with much Bravery, and with his Example brought back his
Men, but all in vain, for they were again put to flight, and Plaucius himself,
with difficulty escaped.

4. Now was Viriatus master of the Field, ranging about Spain, 146.
and the Romans shut up in their Garrisons, when Claudius Vnimanus, a most
expert Captain, was sent by the Senate to command in Lusitania: He Overthrows
Cl. Unimanus.
Viriatus Marching with a strong Body of Lusitanians, the Praetor with a mighty
Army met him, but soon found how little confidence was to be placed in a
Heartless Multitude, for in the Field of Ourique he was overthrown, scarce any
of his Army escaping Death or Bondage. This done, Viriatus returned Victorious
into Lusitania. In the mean while Vnimanus sent to Cajus Nigidius, the Praetor
of the other Province, to give the Enemy a diversion. He entered the Territory
of Riba de Coa, and marched along the River destroying all before him. Viriatus
with all speed made toward him, and overtook him near to the City Viseo; where
Nigidius in a plain, strongly entrenched himself. There Viriatus kept him
besieged till Hunger forcing him to break out, Nigidius escapes from him* with
Loss.
he with Difficulty escaped, having lost the best part of his Army, and all his
Ensigns. About 1000 of those that fled, gathering together, began to plunder
the Villages, as they passed; and meeting 300 Lusitanians, laden with Booty,
fell upon them; But they were so hotly received, that having lost 300 of their
Men, and killed but 70 of the Enemy, they were glad to suffer the rest to march
off with their Plunder. Another Body of the Romans, having taken a rich Booty,
led 500 Captives away, the one half whereof were Women, who observing that no
great Regard was had of them, only their Hands bound behind, in the dead time
of the Night they unbound one another, and afterward the Men; then seizing the
Arms of the Romans, buried in Sleep, put most of them to the Sword before they
waked; only a few escaped by the Favor of the Night. Next Morning the Victors
put the Armor of the Romans upon their Women. Ormia, a modest Lusitanian
Woman, being taken by another Party, and long courted by her Keeper to consent
to his Lust, she at length seemingly complied; wherewith being delighted, he
put himself into her Power; so that she waiting her Opportunity, when he slept,
with his own Sword cut off his Head, and carried away both to her Husband, as a
Token that she had preserved her Chastity: Which done, not so content, she
killed her self before his Face.

5. Caius Lelius, 145.
a Man of great Valor, came Praetor into Spain; but Authors do not mention any
Success he had against Viriatus: Perhaps it was thought enough that he lost
nothing. 143.
Two Years after, Fabius Emilianus was sent, with a Consular Army of 18000 Men,
to put an End to the War. Viriatus, hearing of his coming into Andaluzia, broke
into the Roman Province, doing greater Harm than before, and took two Cities,
into which he put Garrisons. Fabius, that the Gods might be favorable to his
Undertakings, went to offer Sacrifice in the Temple of Hercules, at Cadiz;
strictly charging his Officers, upon no Account to stir out of the Camp before
his Return. The next Day Viriatus appeared before the Roman Army, at such time
as certain Foragers were returning, with a Guard; of whom he cut off the
greatest part: A good Body of Horse issuing out of the Camp, to relieve their
Companions, drove back the Lusitanians to their Main Body; but they were there
so fiercely charged, that few of them returned back. Fabius coming from his
Sacrifice, stormed that his Orders had been disobeyed. Fabius Emilianus obliges
Viriatus to retire.
Some Days after, about Midnight, he marched, in great Silence, two Miles
forwards, and surprising the Lusitanian Camp, obliged Viriatus confusedly to
retire to Vecor, a strong Place; where not thinking it safe to attack him, he
marched away to recover the two Cities lately garrisoned by the Lusitanians.
The Inhabitants of the Province between Duero and Minho took up Arms against
those of Galicia: Hostilius Mancinus overthrows 30000 Spaniards*
Lucius Hostilius Mancinus, the Consul, Emilianus's Colleague, fearing lest
they should invade the Vaccei and Celtiberi, came so suddenly upon them, that
he, without any Difficulty, overthrew 30000 of them, killing many, and putting
the rest to flight. Popilius succeeded Emilianus in the Government of
Lusitania, when Viriatus finding himself weak, made some Overtures of Peace
deceitfully, for at the same time he stirred up the People about Numantia to
make War; and he, in the Territories of Riba de Coa, committed all manner of
Cruelties upon the Romans, even upon those that submitted themselves to him.
Popilius routed.
Popilius hasting to their Relief, was in a pitched Battle shamefully put to
flight, with the Loss of the best of his Army.

6. Viriatus was far entered into Castile; but understanding that the new
Praetor, 141.
Quintus Pompeius, was marching toward Lusitania, he turned back to defend his
own Country. Viriatus put to (...) by Pompey.
The two Armies met near Evora, where a bloody Battle was fought; Pompey
obtained the Victory, and Viriatus fled to the Mountain of Venus: Here he
gathered new Strength; and encouraging the Ticii, Vaccei and Beli, who followed
him, he marched again to meet the Romans, whom he forced to take Shelter in
their Trenches, leaving behind them 27 Ensigns, and 4000 Men slain, whereof 500
were Horse. The Praetor thus shut up within his Works, Viriatus entered
Andaluzia, and summoned Vtica, which was kept by a strong Roman Garrison, who
answered him with Scorn, calling him Robber. He, the better to compass his
Revenge, marched away in great haste, as if he had fled, certain Troops of
Horse, sent from the City, pursuing him in the Rear; whom he, without halting,
repulsed; and so they returned to their Garrison: But in the Dead of the Night
he marched back; and cro^^ing several Valleys, distant from the City, he left
his Foot in an Ambuscade, himself, with the Horse, appearing before the City,
so that many Morasses lay betwixt him and the Walls, which were impassable to
any that knew them not as well as he. At Break of Day his Party being decried
from the Walls, they were supposed to be some Straglers of the Lusitanian Army,
and therefore the Garrison sallied out upon them: Viriatus at first
withdrawing, as if he had fled, drew them into the Marshes, where, when they
were fast stuck, he faced about, and put them all to the Sword. Those of Vtica,
after this Action, expelled the Roman Garrison, and received one of the
Lusitanians. Viriatus moving thence, toward the Streights of Gibraltar, wasted
the Territories of the Bastetani, Pompey not offering to oppose him.

7. The Consul, 140.
Quintus Fabius Maximus Servilianus, was sent from Rome, with an Army of 20000
Men, to prosecute this War; and Micipsa, the African King, came to his Aid,
with 10 Elephants, and 300 Numidian Horse. With this Force he marched to Vtica,
where Viriatus lay; who, after some Skirmishes, his Provision^ failing, retired
into Lusitania, to secure the Harvest, In the mean while, a good Body of his
Men, commanded by two noted Captains, called Curious and Apuleyus, broke into
Andaluzia. The Consul, with his whole Army, marched toward them; and for the
more Expedition, left his Baggage behind him, with a small Guard. Fabius
Maximus defeats the Spanish A^m^, and kills Curious, their General.
The Lusitanians informed thereof, took another Way; and with a Compass,
deceiving the Consul, plundered his Baggage. He turning suddenly upon them,
whilst they were busy in robbing a Convoy of Provisions, put them to flight,
killing Curious, their Captain, and recovering the Booty. Thence the Consul
moving, he took five Towns, Garrisoned by the Lusitanians, upon Articles, which
he performed not, turning them over to the Fury of his Soldiers. Viriatus
hasted to revenge this Breach of Faith; and being come in sight of the Consul,
he drew up his Foot in a Square Battle* with his Horse on both Wings, but far
advanced before the Foot, whom he ordered not to stir till they saw how the
Horse behaved themselves against the Elephants. They charged the Roman Horse,
forcing them to retire to their Elephants; 139.
at the sight of which, Another Defeat of the Romans.
the Spanish Horse disorderly fled, the Enemy fiercely pursuing: The Foot drew
back in good Order; and Viriatus perceiving the Enemy's Battle broke in the
Pursuit, rallying his Cavalry, he gave such a Charge, that Servilianus, with
his Elephants, fled, leaving 6000 Men dead. Soon after this, Servilianus
pursuing a Lusitanian Robber, called Corroba, besieged him in a strong Place,
where Hunger forced him to surrender, upon Promise not only of Life, but that
his Men should march off with their Arms; yet so, as to swear, never more to
employ them against the Romans. But the Consul, unmindful of his Promise, when
he had all the Troop of Robbers, consisting of 500 Men, in his Power, cut off
all their Right Hands, except the Captain's.

8. Spring coming on, all Lusitania was full of Warlike Preparations. Viriatus
marched against the Consul, who had besieged the City of Erissana; and with
wonderful Cunning, made his Way into it; where having well encouraged the
Defendants, he sallied out so furiously, that Servilianus was glad to retire to
a Place of Advantage. Viriatus makes Peace with the Romans.
Here he was so straightened, that he made Proposals of Peace, which were agreed
upon, and Viriatus allowed a Friend of the People of Rome. This done, the
Armies parted, one into Andaluzia, the other into Lusitania. One of those who
approved of the Peace concluded, was Quintus Servilius Cepio, the Consul's
Brother; yet afterward considering how dishonorable it was to Rome, he openly
blamed his Brother, and by that Means obtained the Consulship, and a numerous
Army, to better the Affairs of the Romans in Lusitania. The Peace broken.
Cepio kept his Designs so private, that the Lusitanians thought of nothing but
their Country-Affairs. They were awakened by the News brought, that the Consul
had, by Storm, taken the City of Arsa not far from Sevil. Viriatus was then at
Valencia, who immediately marched with some Troops toward Lusitania. By the
Way he reduced Segorbe, which had revolted; when Cepio appeared with a mighty
Army: He finding himself too weak for so powerful an Army, with his Horse
amused them, till his Foot were got into the Mountains. Cepio pursued him, to
cut off his Retreat into Portugal. He, as he fled into the Heart of Spain, used
excessive Cruelty to all that bore the Roman Name: But finding this turned not
to Account, he sent an Ambassador to Cepio, to put him in mind of the Peace, so
solemnly, and so lately concluded. The Consul having heard the Ambassadors, and
sounded their Dispositions, with mighty Promises prevailed upon them to murder
Viriatus. Their Names were, Dictalcon, Minurus and Aulaus; all three Captains
of Note among the Lusitanians. Viriatus killed by Treachery.
These three having undertaken this base Action, returned, and for some time
kept Viriatus in hand with the Hopes of Peace, till, waiting their Opportunity,
in the Dead of the Night, they entered his Tent, and slew him as he lay asleep.
Thence they fled, to give the Consul an Account of what they had done, whose
Countenance they found altered; as it generally happens to Traitors, after they
have committed the Treason.

9. In the Morning, the Lusitanians missing their General, they went into his
Tent, where finding him dead, the whole Camp was filled with Lamentation; and
in Revenge of his Death, they put all the Roman Prisoners to the Sword. His
Funeral-Pomp.
To perform his Funeral-Rites with all imaginable Pomp, in the midst of the
Field, they raised a vast Pile of Timber, leaving a Place for the Body. The Top
of the Pile was adorned with Ensigns, and other Trophies of Arms. Then their
Idolatrous Priest going up to the Top, called upon the Ghost of Viriatus; and
killing some Captives, with their Blood sprinkled the Arms; which done, he came
down, and set fire to the Pile, which in a Moment consumed the Body. The
Funeral-Rites thus performed, the Army chose one Tantalus for their General;
but he wanting the Fortune and Conduct of Viriatus, could not so much as lead
back his People into their own Country. Servilius, to gain the Reputation of a
merciful Conqueror, was content that the Lusitanians, delivering up their Arms,
should be dispersed into several Parts. Viriatus, as to his Person, was of a
large Stature, strong Limbs, curled Hair, large Eyes broad Eyebrows, a stern
Countenance, and a large hooked Nose. As to his Qualities, he was modest,
liberal, prudent, of a ready Wit, and quick of Invention. Some of Viriatus's
Soldiers gathering up his Ashes, brought them back into his own Country, and
buried them, together with his Sword. In the time of King John the III. who
reigned from the Year 1521 till 1557. in the Territory of Belas, two Leagues
from Lisbon, and in the Lands of Peter Machado Carregueyro, in turning up
certain old Ruins, was found a Stone Chest with this Inscription; Hic Jacet
Viriatus Lusitanus Dux. In it was found a Sword, on which certain Characters
were Engraven: The Prince and many other persons of Note saw it, and Machado
offering to sell the Sword, they would give nothing for it, so he gave it to a
Friend of his of the Island Madera, and by that means it was lost. The Chest
was broke in pieces, and no part of it remains.

CHAP. VI.
The Actions of the Lusitanians after the Death of Viriatus, from the Year 133.
before Christ till the Year 80. when Sertorius takes upon him the Command, with
his Exploits till the Year 70.
1. THE Lusitanians not loosing their Courage, 130.
though they had lost their General, Tantalus Commands the Lusitanians.
broke out again under their new Commander Tantalus, but not with the same
Fortune as before, being easily suppressed by the Consul Decius Junius Brutus,
who reduced then to sue for Peace. It was granted upon tolerable Conditions,
one whereof was, that he should assign them Lands to live upon: These Lands
were along the delightful Southern Coast, upon the River Turia, now
Guadalaviar, where they built the most famous City Valencia; the foundation
whereof is therefore assigned to Brutus the Consul. This Army thus Disbanded,
Brutus entered Lusitania, without meeting any opposition, till he came to
Eburobricium, a City seated on the Seacoast near to which now stands the Town
of Alfazeyran; the Inhabitants of this place adventured to come out a League
from their Walls, and give the Consul Battle. He in the heat of the Fight,
vowed he would there build a Temple to Neptune, if he obtained the Victory; and
having without much difficulty overthrown his Enemy, performed his Vow: He laid
Siege to the City, and soon was Master of it.

2. The next Year, Brutus with his victorious Army, passed over the rapid River
Duero, and coming unexpectedly upon the People that inhabited between that
River and Minho, made a great slaughter of them, which obliged such as could
escape to fly to the Mountains. Thence in Parties they came down, and cut off
many of his Men, nay, the very Women showed such Valor, that the Consul was
obliged to kill a great number of them; but perceiving the harm was done him
from the Mountains, he fell to Burning all the plain Country, with such Fury,
that People were glad to beg a Peace, which was easily granted: Thus the Consul
was at leisure to Besiege the City Labrica, Brutus the Roman Consul takes the
City Labrica.
the Inhabitants whereof immediately submitted, but no sooner had he turned his
back, than they began to fortify themselves, and falling upon such Romans, as
were left in their Neighborhood, cut them in pieces. This News being carried
to Brutus, he turned back, and encompassing the City, forced the Inhabitants to
come out without Arms into the open Field; there taking them into the middle of
his Army, and having severely reproved them for their Perfidiousness, when they
expected nothing but present Death, he ordered them to return again to their
City, and be more faithful for the future. From that time forward they
continued in Subjection, but could not be brought to serve against their own
Country.

3. The Roman Army advanced to Braga plundering the Country, 125.
but the Citizens sallying out in a good Body, surprised and carried away a
Convoy of Provisions that was going to the Camp. Brutus, in revenge, destroyed
all before him, and the Bracarenses more offended then terrified, marched six
Miles out of the City to give him Battle; the Women here played the part of
most valiant Soldiers, and after the Fight had long stood doubtful* the Romans
were put to flight: The Bracarenses over-secure in their Victory, lay about the
Fields without any Watch, He destroys the Country about Braga.
which Brutus imagining, having rallied his Forces, he came upon them, and
having well revenged his Disgrace with the Death of many, the rest fled to the
Shelter of their Walls. He assaults the City which the Inhabitants disdaining,
the Men sallied out, leaving the Women to guard the Walls; but they resolving
not to be outdone by the Men, rushed out after them, and so together repulsed
the Romans to their Trenches. This made the Consul give over the Attack, and
changing his manner of proceeding, wasted all the Country about; in this manner
the Consul came to the River Lina, formerly called Lethe. It was the common
Opinion, that those who passed it, forgot their Countries; for which reason,
Brutus his Soldiers could not be persuaded to enter the Ford. He to undeceive
them, snatching an Ensign from the Bearer, set Spurs to his Horse and passed
over; then calling to his Soldiers, told them many things of Rome, to convince
them he had not forgot it, and by this means he persuaded them to venture over
the River. The Camponeses who inhabited on the other side, came to hinder their
passage, but were repulsed, and the whole Army gained the farther Bank. N^ar
60000 Galicians destroyed.
The People of Galicia, to the number of 60000, coming to the relief of their
Neighbors, were by Brutus in their passage over the River Minho so entirely
overthrown, that the greatest part was either Drowned, put to the Sword, or
made Captives. The loss of this powerful succor so discouraged the
Lusitanians, that they suffered the victorious Army to range about at pleasure,
taking many Towns without the least opposition.

4. The City Cinania stood resolutely upon its Defense, and Brutus offered them
Peace if they would buy it. Their Answer was, That their Ancestors had left
them their Swords and Valor to maintain their Liberty, not Gold to purchase
it: Certain it is, this City was many Years after destroyed by another Power.
Brutus, spent two Years in those parts, 122.
his Command being still prolonged to him, because he was Fortunate: He now
stiling himself Conqueror of Galicia and Lusitania, marched against the
Inhabitants of the Province of Beira, Brutus Conquers Lusitania and Galicia,
and triumphs at Rome.
who being a fierce Barbarous People, put him to much trouble in passing
Rivers, and piercing the uncouth Mountains, till at last coming to a Battle, he
was worsted; yet recovering again, he obtained a Victory, but at so dear a
rate, that he would gladly have been without it, rather than have sustained
such loss. After this, he again passed over Tagus, and resided three Years in
the City Morus, then standing where now the Castle of Almourol is; he ended his
Government with such Reputation, that the Roman Senate unanimously voted he
should triumph over the Lusitanians and Gallicians.

5. Whilst the Proconsul Decius Junius Brutus triumphed, and Rome wasted with
Civil Wars, could not carry on its Foreign Expeditions, the Senate sent
Governors, who might supply their want of strength by policy and obliging the
Natives. The project proved ineffectual, for a powerful Army broke out of
Lusitania, consuming all that stood in its way belonging to the Romans; 120.
Caius Marius the Proconsul, The Lusitanians revolt, and are reduced
who had gained Reputation at Numantia, put a stop to this Torrent. He brought
not numerous but choice Forces from Rome, and joining them to those he found in
Spain, marched to repress the fury of the Lusitanians; he worsted them, but
they assembling a greater power again, gave him a considerable Defeat:
Nevertheless, the Proconsul nothing terrifyed, as being well used to the
various Fortunes of War, calling together the Celtiberi, and drawing his old
Soldiers out of the Garrisons, in several rencounters, overthrew the
Lusitanians in such manner; that for some Years, we have no account of them.
After that time of silence, they again began to disturb the Province of
Hispania Viterior, 109.
so that Calfurnius Piso was sent from Rome against them; it is natural to
guess he had no great success, because very soon after Servius Sulpicius Galba
was sent to succeed him; neither is it likely that Galba sped much better, for
in the Town of Condeixa, there is still an ancient Inscription which denotes
some hot piece of service, in which Galba lost many Men of Note. 107.
His Successor was Quintus Servilius Cepio, Son to him that dishonourably
contrived the Death of Viriatus; the particulars of what he did are not known,
104.
but sure it was much, since he was allowed to triumph at Rome. A powerful
Roman Army ranged in Lusitania, but with such ill success, that not a Man
escaped to carry home the News of their loss. 99.
This fatal stroke produced a quiet Peace for four Years, which ended in a
great Victory obtained over the Lusitanians by Decius Junius Silanus. 97.
Yet the vanquished gathering new Forces, L. Corn. Dolabella again subdues them.
made a mighty havoc in all the Province of Hispania Vlterior. Lucius
Cornelius Dolabella was sent in have Proconsul from Rome, to remedy this
growing Evil. He behaved himself so prudently, that the Lusitanians were
obliged to lay down their Arms, and keep within their own Borders, for which it
was granted him to triumph at Rome.

6. All these Calamities were not enough to subdue the Lusitanians, and
therefore the Romans designing utterly to extirpate them, sent the Consul
Publius Licinius Crassus against them. He behaved himself so well, that he was
continued in that Government four Years, doing incredible harm in the Country,
and at last triumphed at Rome: 90.
The chief service that acquired him that Honor, was the War with the People
between the Rivers Duero and Minho. There he had first knowledge of the Islands
called Cassiterides, which some imagine to be those of Bayona in Galicia, The
Islands of Bayona in Galicia.
and other believe they were swallowed by the Sea; they were ten in Number, one
of them only inhabited; the Natives of a swarthy Complexion, their clothing a
long Gown down to the Feet, girt upon the Breast, all of them carried Staves in
their hands. 87.
They traded with other Nations, particularly the Carthaginians, for Hides, and
Lead, and Tin, whereof they had great Plenty; still the Proconsul Licinius
Crassus, by fair means, drew them to the Roman Friendship. The cruel Wars
between Marius and Sylla, hindered the Romans from sending Supplies into Spain;
85.
the Lusitanians took hold of that opportunity, and with a numerous Body
breaking into the Roman Provinces, exercised the utmost Cruelty, sparing
neither Sex nor Age, and this made the Roman Commanders quit the weaker places,
and retire to those of more safety. But in the height of this their prosperity,
83.
came Caius Annius, (sent by Sylla after Sertorius) who in two great Battles,
though with much difficulty, overthrew the Lusitanians; This made them
sensible, that they only wanted a General, and therefore pitched upon
Sertorius, who was then in Mauritania.

7. Sertorius was well known in Spain for the share he had in the War of
Numantia; Sertorius his Origin.
he was born in Italy among the Sabini, of an indifferent Family, neither Great
nor Despicable: His first Years he spent in the Schools, the best and last in
the Army. Being ill treated at Rome, he fled into Spain, and then into Africa,
where in the City of Tangier, he found the body of the Giant Ant^us, and other
pieces of Antiquity: Here Ambassadors sent from Lusitania found him, and in the
Name of the People, invited him to come and Command them, which he immediately
accepted, and came over with the Ambassadors. At his first Arrival, he gained
the good will of all Men, He comes into Lusitania.
by his Affability and Bounty, and chose Evora for a place of Arms; when he had
taken an Oath of Fidelity of the Lusitanians, he visited the Province,
accompanied with 700 Horse and 4000 Foot, and with all possible Diligence,
provided all Necessaries for War: The Neighboring People perceiving it,
offered him their Service, as did others farther off, moved by their Example.
Among them the City Osca, which Tradition will have to be that in Aragon, a
strong Place, where Sertorius settled an University: This he did for his own
Security rather than the Instruction of the People, that he might there have
the principal Youth of the Country together as Hostages; His Practices.
for the fixing of this University Professors of all Sciences, came from
several Countries. To strenghten his Enterest the more, he made use of another
practice, which is, that having a Hind brought him, he made her so tame, that
she followed him in the Army, amidst the Noise of Arms, and the People admiring
thereat, he gave out, it was sent him by the Goddess Diana, to give him advice
how to behave himself in the War. When he understood that any of his Captains
had gained a Victory, he caused the Hind to be Crowned with Flowers by him, he
entrusted with the Secret, and as soon as let loose, she would run to him, and
he putting his Ear to her Mouth, would discover what he had been told before,
saying, Diana gave him that intelligence by the Mouth of the Hind: This Fraud
made the People follow him, as if he were somewhat more than Man.

8. Sertorius having thus gained the Affections of the Lusitanians, His Warlike
Exploits.
and secured their Children, as Hostages, at Osca, ventured to take the Field,
against the Romans, with only 8000 Men, whereof 5000 were Lusitanians, the rest
Italians and Africans. Nine Years he maintained War against Rome, and against
four of its best Generals, who brought over 7000 Horse, and 122000 Foot,
besides the Spanish Auxiliaries. His first Exploit, was, the subduing most part
of the Province of Carpentania; where he found little or no Resistance. Next,
he defeated Cota, the Roman Admiral, who kept the Streights of Gibraltar, and
hindered Supplies from coming to him out of Mauritania. Sailing victorious up
the River Guadalquiver, he surprised, at Break of Day, the Roman Army, under
the Command of Didius, who lay encamped upon the Banks of the River, and put
the greatest part of it to the Sword. Herculeus, one of his Captains, was sent
out by him, against Lucius Domitius, who, by Order of the Consul, Quintus
Metellus Pius, destroyed all the Country between Andaluzia and the Pyrenean
Mountains. Herculeus pursuing, overtook him in Aragon, where he overthrew his
Army, and killed him. The Fame of this Defeat moved Manilius, Proconsul of
Gallia Norbonensis, to pass the Mountains with a mighty Army of Romans and
Gauls, in hopes to gather together the few scattered Remnants of Domitius's
Army. But the Victor, flushed with his late Success, met him near Lerida, where
a most bloody Battle was fought, and Manilius routed, with a terrible Slaughter
of the Roman Legions; but, above all, of the French Horse. In the mean while,
Sertorius stuck close to Metellus; who perceiving himself to be still upon the
Losing Hand, resolved to alter his Method of Carrying on the War, and laid
Seige to Lacobriga, now called Lagos, in the Kingdom of Algarve. Want of Water
pressed the Besieged; but Sertorius, with great Rewards, prevailed with 2000
Soldiers to break through the Roman Camp, with each of them a Skin-full of
Water. This Supply encouraged the Lacobrigenses, till Sertorius could come to
raise the Seige: But Metellus, hearing of his Preparations, marched away, and
left it. Want of Provisions forced him to depart; for Sertorius had cut off a
Legion that was coming to him, with a Convoy. Metellus marched into Andaluzia,
Sertorius keeping close at his Heels, and came to Osca, where the Lusitanian
Youths were, designing to take that Place; but it was well provided: Besides,
the Lusitanian Army being upon his Back, he marched away to Cartagena; and
Sertorius returned to Evora. Thus it appears, that Osca, where the University
was erected, was not in Arragon, as some will have it; but in Andaluzia. At
Evora, Sertorius received Ambassadors from Mithridates, King of Pontus: He
proposed to settle Amity, for the subduing of Italy; offered Ships, and asked
some Lusitanian Soldiers: Besides, he offered to Sertorius the whole Dominion
of Asia. Sertorius received the Ambassadors with Majesty, promised the Supply
of Soldiers, and afterward sent it. The Ambassadors being dismissed, Sertorius
employed himself in making Provision for the next Campaign, and exercising his
Men; knowing he could not expect long to enjoy Peace.

9. In the mean time came Pompey the Great, from Rome, and was joined by
Metellus. Marcus Perpenna came also from Sardinia, with 30 Veterane Troops, to
the Assistance of Sertorius. The Lusitanians, encouraged with this Aid, and
lying now in sight of the Romans, pressed their General to lead them out to
Battle: But he weighing the mighty Power of the Enemy, meditated how to gain
some Advantage by Policy. Part of his Army, carried away with Heat, and
forgetful of good Discipline, adventured, contrary to his Orders, to charge the
Romans, but came off with Dishonor; which nothing displeased Sertorius. Here
it was, that he convinced his Men, by the Example of two Horses; One, very lean
and poor, he gave to a lusty Young Man, ordering him to pull out the Hair of
his Main and Tail; which he attempting to draw out by Handfulls, labored much,
but profited little. The other, being a beautiful, strong Horse, he gave to an
ancient Man, for the same purpose; and he plucking Hair by Hair, did that with
Ease, which the other could not do with great Pains. Thus, he said, they were
to proceed against the Romans, whom it was impossible at one Stroke to
overthrow; but easy to compass at many. Sertorius laid Seige to Laurona, (now
Leiria,) 4 Leagues from Valencia, on the Banks of the River Xucar. Pompey and
Metellus came to raise the Seige, but lost 10000 Men in the Attempt; and
endeavoring to gain a Rising Ground, which lay opportunely for putting of
supplies in the Town, they found Sertorius had prevented them. Next Pompey
designed to besiege the Lusitanian Army, hemming it in between his own and the
Town, but Sertorius having left 6000 Men in Ambush, they attacked him in his
approach; so that he was glad to return to his Camp, and look on whilst the
City was taken and Burnt. The Roman Army consisted of 1000 Horse and 30000
Foot, but the Lusitanians were 70000 strong.

This done, Sertorius returned victorious to Evora, which Place he fortified
with strong Walls, and brought Water to it from several Springs, through a
stately Aqueduct. His whole Family, at this time, consisted of an old Nurse,
and three Slaves: And though he was Sovereign in Portugal for some Years, he
had no House of his own. Now it was, he built one so small, that it would not
contain an ordinary Gentleman of our Times. He married at Evora the Daughter of
a Noble Citizen, called Firmius Liberius; by whom he had no Children.

10. Spring coming on, 72.
Pompey and Metellus drew out of their Winter Quarters; and marching through
Andaluzia, separately strove to recover those Places which Sertorius had
Garrisoned. But he, losing no Time, advanced against Pompey, and met him on the
Banks of the River Xucar. Pompey resolved to fight, that Metellus might have no
Share in the Honor of the Action: And Sertorius thought best to have to do
with them apart. Sertorius worsted by Pompey and Metellus.
Thus agreed, they drew out; Sertorius facing Afranius, and Perpenna, Pompey.
The Charge being given, Sertorius began to gain upon Afranius; when
understanding that Perpenna gave way to Pompey, he hasted thither, and
presently put the Enemy to flight. In the mean while, Afranius, encouraging his
Men, had almost routed that Wing which Sertorius left near possessed of
Victory; but he returning thither, soon restored the Battle. Now had Pompey's
Army been entirely cut off, but that Metellus appearing, Sertorius stayed his
Soldiers from the Pursuit, and said, Halt, halt; for I would have sent this Boy
to Rome, well scourged, had not that old Woman snatched him out of my Hands.
However, Metellus did not attempt any thing upon the Victors; contenting
himself to have saved the flying Army. Sertorius returning to his Camp, missed
his Hind, lost in the Hurrey of the Battle, which made him extremely
melancholy: But some time after, certain Countrymen bringing him Tidings of
her, he ordered them to conceal the Matter; and, at a certain Time appointed,
to turn her loose: Then calling together his Chief Officers, he told them, The
Goddess of the Woods had appeared to him, assuring him, that the Hind should
return, with Instructions how he should behave himself. Whilst he was yet
talking, the Hind, set loose, came running to him; and laying her Head betwixt
his Knees, licked his Hands.

11. It is incredible, how much the whole Army rejoiced at the Return of the
Hind: And Sertorius, to make use of that Heat, marched toward Valencia, where
Metellus was, wasting the Country. He so hemmed him up in a Plain, that he must
either perish, or fight. However, he sent Mummius, with a Party of Horse, to
conduct a Convoy of Provisions to him. Sertorius having Notice thereof, marched
out by Night; and in the Morning, putting the Guard to the Sword, he took the
whole Convoy. Metellus contemning Sertorius, marched to seek him; and Perpenna,
after him. Thus they were soon engaged, with such ill Success on the Romans
side, that they began to fly. The old Metellus, disdaining to be thus
disgraced, did Wonders exceeding his Age, till he fell wounded with a Dart:
Sertorius routed by Metellus.
And the Shame of losing their General bringing back his Men, they so fiercely
charged the Lusitanians, disordered in the Pursuit, that they recovered the
Day; putting them to the Rout, with great Slaughter. Sertorius did all that
Metellus had done before, to stay his Men; but could only stop the victorious
Romans, till his Army escaped: Which done, he followed after, to a strong City,
standing on an Hill. Metellus encompassed the Place, thinking to starve it; but
Sertorius had before laid in sufficient Stores. A few Days after, with a Party
of Light Horse, he made his Escape, deceiving the Roman Guards, and returned
safe into Lusitania, where he was received with unexpressible Joy.

CHAP. VII.
The remaining Actions of Sertorius, from the Year 70, before the Birth of
Christ, till his Death, which was in the Year 68. What else happened in
Lusitania, till the Coming of Julius Caesar; and his Exploits, till the Year
57, before Christ.
1. THE following Year Sertorius put to Sea with a Fleet, 70.
resolving to destroy all the Ships he found in the Roman Harbors; The Romans
sustain great Losses by Sertorius.
and in a short time, scouring the Mediterranean, he did great Harm. This was a
great Loss to Pompey and Metellus; but a greater they sustained by the Means of
Herculeius, a Lusitanian Captain, who cut off six Troops of Horse and a Legion,
which, under the Command of Probus Emilianus, were conducting a great Convoy of
Provisions. This put the Roman Generals upon taking new Methods; Pompey went
away to Navarre, whilst Metellus gave an Account of his Losses to the Senate of
Rome, and pressed for considerable Supplies. 69.
They came accordingly; and the two Generals took the Field again. Metellus
marching apart from Pompey, near Italica, (which was not far from Sevil,) was
met by Herculeius, and so pressed, that he betook himself to a Mountain. The
Lusitanian Army lay at the Foot of the Hill, daring the Romans to give Battle.
Metellus waiting an Opportunity, took it so aptly, that he killed and made
Prisoners 20000 of Herculeius's Army, driving the rest out of the Field; and
was so delighted with this great Success, that he caused Images of Victory, as
he came into every Town, to be let down artificially, with Garlands of Flowers
to crown himself; as also, his Praises to be publicly sung. Sertorius
immediately marched to seek the Victor, who was on his Way to Catalonia: He did
not overtake him, but cut off a Party of Horse that was carrying the News of
the Victory, and some of the Prisoners, to Pompey. Herculeius was so much
ashamed of his Defeat, that he absconded, and would not be seen; but Sertorius
comforted him, and, with much Difficulty, prevailed with him to appear again.

2. Sertorius leading a mighty Army against Metellus, who was in the Kingdom of
Murcia, by the Way destroyed all the Province of Andaluzia; Metellus retiring
to Valencia, where Pompey then was; who sent a Party of Light Horse, to
discover the Strength of Sertorius, and found his Army numerous, and in good
Order. He passed the River Guadalaviar, near whose Banks the two Roman Generals
lay encamped, on an advantageous high Ground. Both Armies being resolved to
give Battle, and being drawn out in order to it, they stopped to see the Event
of a single Combat between two Soldiers, who had challenged one another:
Pompey's Soldier having killed him of Sertorius, taking off his Helmet to cut
off his Head, he found it was his own Brother; whereupon, he immediately killed
himself. This strange Accident put off the Battle for that Day; but the next
Day after, they engaged with great Resolution; Metellus and Pompey again
overthrow Sertorius.
when, in the Heat of the Action, a Soldier telling Sertorius that the General
of the Horse was killed, he struck him through the Body, that he might not
terrify others with that News: Yet neither this, nor all he could do, was
enough to prevent his being put to the Rout, with the Loss of 6000 of his Men.
It was no less Grief to Sertorius, than the Loss of the Battle, that the City
Valencia submitted to the victorious Romans; and much more, when other Places
followed the Example of it; amongst which was Guadalaxara. Hither he marched
with Speed; but the Inhabitants being fled to a Place almost inaccessible, full
of many great Caves, they scoffed at him, asking whether he had Wings to come
at them. He tried all Stratagems to reduce them, but nothing succeeded. At
length he raised great Heaps of Sand and Dust opposite to the Mouths of the
Caves; and waiting till a strong North Wind blew directly in upon them, caused
his Men, with Shovels, to cast up the Sand; which being so shaken, was by the
Wind carried into the Caves so violently, that those within, being almost
stifled, were glad to cry for Mercy. Sertorius forgave them all, and took
nothing from them, but some necessary Provisions for his Army.

3. This last Action gained Sertorius great Reputation, as well of Policy to
overcome, as of Clemency toward the vanquished; but his Forces being very much
broken, some of the principal Romans that followed him, proposed to come to an
accommodation with Pompey. Sertorius utterly rejected their Advice, saying,
Since the Romans would not treat with him in his Prosperity, he would never
condescend to fue to them in his Adversity. And that his Actions might suit
with his Words, though then weak and lately overthrown, hearing that Pompey had
distressed Palencia, he hasted to the relief of the Besieged, and without
loosing time, he Assaults the Romans, and his Men being much disordered in the
Confusion, he was got so far among his Enemies, that his Horse being killed, he
had inevitably perished, had not a Body of Lusitanians offered to Sacrifice
their own lives for the defense of his. They desperately forced their way to
the place where he was Fighting, and taking him into the midst of them, carried
him off in safety. He thus brought back to his Men, so encouraged them with his
presence, He recovers and worsts the Romans.
that they obliged Pompey to quit his Camp, and with it his Tents and Engines:
Had not the Night been so near, few Romans had escaped, but they under the
shelter of it, got away to places of safety. In the mean while Metellus laid
hard Siege to Calahorra, but the victorious Sertorius drove him thence by main
force, with the Slaughter of 3000 of his Men, and entering the Town, Commended
the Fidelity of the Inhabitants. Here he was informed, that Metellus and Pompey
joining their Forces, lay before Osca or Huesca his University; thither he
hasted and Encamped at a small distance from them, so carelessly, that Metellus
forced him to take shelter in the Besieged City in great Confusion, leaving
behind him many Arms and Horses, and much Ammunition: This frown of Fortune
moved the Romans, who had hitherto followed Sertorius, to conspire against him.
Here by the way, it is to be observed, That doubtless there were two Osca's,
since we Read, that before this time, they Fought in Andaluzia near Osca, and
now again being in the Territories of Aragon, Sertorius fled to Osca.

4. Perpenna, that Roman who had hitherto so faithfully served Sertorius, now
tempted by the promised rewards, undertook to kill him: Sertorius himself in
some measure forwarded his Design, by putting to death the Sons of many
Spaniards, who had revolted from him to the Romans, which rendered him odious to
the People, and ministered an opportunity to Perpenna to compass his intended
Treachery. Sertorius understanding there was a Conspiracy against him,
Sertorius Murdered.
gave an account thereof to the Lusitanians, who were his Guard, and they
immediately put to Death Ten of the Conspirators. None seemed more to commend
this Execution, than Perpenna, who as it were, to divert Sertorius, invited him
to a Supper, whither he, suspecting nothing, went; and; in the height of his
Mirth, was killed with 21 Wounds. The first that struck him was a Roman, called
Antony: There was no less mourning at his Death among the Lusitanians, than had
been for Viriatus, and many killed themselves at his Funeral. The Hind that had
always followed Sertorius, seeing him Dead, smelling to him, and heavily
Groaning, at length forbearing all Sustenance, fell down Dead by his side. The
Lusitanians gathering his Ashes into an Urne, returned to Evora, where they
were Honorably Entombed. The Magistrates of Evora, then the chief Government
of Lusitania, consulting how to secure the Commonwealth, resolved not to alter
any thing, till they saw what was done by Perpenna, with whom was the greatest
part of Sertorius his Army, though many had forsaken him, seeing Pompey pressing
upon them with a mighty Power.

5. Perpenna failing of the promised Reward of his Treachery from Metellus, 68.
was not content to have Murdered his General, unless he also usurped his
Command. Therefore calling together the Heads of the Army, after inveighing
against the Cruelty and Perfidiousness of Sertorius, he offered himself for
their Leader: Many of them before bribed by him, easily consented, and others
seeing Pompey so near, complied with necessity least they should want a Head in
that time of Danger. Pompey resolving the first thing he did to make an end of
Perpenna, Perpenna chosen General of the Lusitanians.
accordingly marched hastily toward him, and he nothing Daunted, advanced to
meet him: Both Armies being in sight of one another, fell to Fortifying their
Camps. The Work ended, they spent the time in Skirmishes before they would
hazard a pitched Battle; but Perpenna's Forces decreased much, many by night
Deserting, which obliged him to offer the Enemy Battle before he was quite
forsaken: Though Pompey doubted not of the Victory, yet to make it secure, he
laid an Ambush, and retiring, drew Perpenna into the Danger of it. Thus when he
thought himself Victorious, he was fallen into the Snare, and immediately put
to the Rout; he himself fled, and was as much afraid of his own Men, He is
va^qu^shed by Pompey, and put to Death.
as of the Enemy. The Romans followed the Chase without giving any Quarter;
certain Horsemen carried on with this heat, found Perpenna among the Shrubs and
Briars. He falling down, begged his Life, assuring them, He would make great
Discoveries of principal Men in Rome, who kept Correspondence with Sertorius,
which he could prove under their hands. The Captain of those Horse acquainted
Pompey therewith, who ordered his Head to be immediately struck off, and those
Papers to be brought to him: The being accordingly performed, Men of Note, whom
their Conscience accused, were in a great Consternation in Pompey's Army, for
that they had secretly favored Sertorius; But, he fearing the ill consequence
of such a Discovery, publicly Burnt all those Papers, and so quieted their
Apprehensions.

6. Afranius, a most Valiant Captain, by Pompey's Order, entered Lusitania; but
finding the Camponeses were fled to the Mountains, and left all the plain
Country Desert, he suspected rather Policy than Fear, had carried them; Pompey
subdu^s many places.
wherefore he returned to inform Pompey, and both of them came before the City
Caucia, which offered to embrace the Friendship of the Romans, but refused to
admit a Garrison. Pompey requested, that whilst they could agree upon Articles,
his sick Men might be admitted into the City, which being granted, he sent in a
Number of his best Soldiers privately Armed, who being let in, possessed
themselves of the Walls, and so the Town was obliged to receive a Garrison, and
pay a Sum of Money: With such like Arts, Pompey gained admittance into many
Towns of Lusitania: Both Pompey and Afranius laid Siege to Oxama (now Osma)
where no fair means prevailing, the place was furiously Battered, then
Undermined, and a sufficient Breach being made, it was pertinaciously defended
as long as any of the Inhabitants were left alive. They all died to the last
Man, and Pompey having none left to kill, vented his passion upon the
Buildings, leaving the place in a confused heap of Rubbish; then the Army
marched to Calahorra, but whilst they lay before it, Metellus sent to Advise
Pompey, it concerned him more to return to Rome, than linger the time there: He
leaving Afranius to continue the Siege, in his way, laid the Foundation of
Pamplona, in Navar, and so went away to Rome, where it was allowed him to
Triumph, as he had well deserved. Afranius left at Calahorra, though he suffered
much by the Weather, it being then Winter, and also for want of Provisions, yet
he reduced the Besieged to that extremity, that having eaten all the Leather
and Hides in the City, they killed and eat their Wives and Children.
Nevertheless, Afranius broke in upon them, and found many Inhabitants looking
rather like Ghosts than Men, and many quarters of Women and Children hanging up
for Food.

7. The Roman Senate thought the Victories of Pompey and Metellus, 67.
had sufficiently secured Spain; therefore they sent thither Publius Piso
Praetor, a Man more addicted to Peace than War. He found all things quiet, but
after a while, understanding that Warlike preparations were making in several
parts of Spain, he sent his Questor Lucius Flaccus, to visit and put all
Garrisons into a posture of Defense; in the mean while he gathered an Army of
Romans and Andaluzians, and taking the Field in several places, Defeated the
Spaniards; but Authors do not mention the particulars. ^000 Lusitanians slain
by Pub. Piso.
Certain it is, he vanquished a Body of Lusitanians, that had been plundering
the Country and killed 5000 of them. His success was doubtless more
considerable, since it appears he triumphed at Rome. 63.
Cneus Piso succeeded Publius, he by his ill Government lost the Affections,
not only of the Natives, but of the Romans, and marching into Lusitania, had
his Legate cut off by some Light Horse of the Country, none of his Army
stirring to rescue him. The next Praetor was Quintus Calidius, who defeated
several Parties of Lusitanians, 61.
that Plundered the Country; after him came Tubero, who brought with him as his
Questor Julius Caesar, to whom his future Fortune was foretold at Cadiz; For
visiting the Temple of Hercules, and falling asleep in it, he Dreamed that he
lay with his Mother. This the South-sayers interpreted to Denote his becoming
Sovereign of Rome, his Mother Country, which he should deprive of its Ancient
Liberty. There also seeing the Picture of Alexander the Great, he wept
considering that mighty King had subdued so considerable a part of the World,
at that Age which he then was of, and had yet done nothing worthy of Fame. 60.
These considerations made him quit his Employment and return to Rome to aim at
greater. A great Earthquake.
About this time happened on the Coast of Galicia and Portugal, so terrible an
Earthquake, that many Buildings being overthrown, the People fled to the
Mountains for Safety. The Sea also broke in and drowned several places. At Cape
St. Vincent, a Mare brought forth a Monster with the Head, Breast, and
Fore-feet of a Bull, the Body of a Horse, and the Hind-feet like a Man's: This
Monster was thought to foreshew the Calamities that afterward befell Lusitania.

8. Some Years passed, that the Romans sent no Commander of Note into Spain,
which the Lusitanians observing, they broke into Castile with a great Power,
putting all the Country to Fire and Sword. The chief among these People were
the Herminii, inhabiting the deep Valley and high tops of the Mountain
Herminius, now called Serra de Estrella, which crosses the greatest part of
the Kindom of Portugal. Julius Caesar comes into Lusitania.
The next great Man that came was Julius Caesar; he to spread a Terror spared
none of the Lusitanians that ranged in Castile and Andaluzia, but put all to
the Sword, which made those that escaped home, give the Alarm to prepare the
People for the Storm that threatened them. Caesar overrunning all the Province
of Alenteio, with his Victorious Army, used the utmost severity; the
Andaluzians that followed him, revenging the wrongs before done to them by the
Lusitanians; only the inhabitants of the Mountain Herminius perplexed Caesar.
Though this Mountain, as was said, runs almost through the Kingdom, the chief
habitation of those People was about the place where now stands Haramenha,
which is near Portalegre and Marvan. The place of it self was inaccessible, and
the People resolute, therefore Caesar sent Ambassadors to persuade them to come
down and inhabit the plain: they kept these Ambassadors till they had shown
them their Weapons, the strength of the Place, and number of the Defendants,
and then dismissed them, with assurance that they would trust only to their
Weapons and Courage. Caesar disdaining to be Braved by those Mountaineers, to
appease the other Lusitanians, much offended for that his Soldiers had
plundered the Temple of the God Endovelicus, caused all that had been taken
thence to be restored.

9. This done, he marched against the Herminii, who were in a readiness to
receive him, and found the place much more difficult than it had been
represented to him. He subdues the Herminii.
Understanding that the Herminii had placed their Wives, Children and weak
People in a remote place of safety, he with great Gifts persuaded certain
Lusitanians Enemies to the Herminii, to lead a number of Men through a private
path to that place. Whilst they upon Hands and feet climbed the rough Rocks, he
drew out his Army, and began to ascend so as to divert the Defendants from
minding those that were sent about. An advanced party was so hotly received by
the Mountaineers, that they were forced to quit the attempt, and fly disorderly
back to the Camp, Caesar never offering to relieve them for fear of running
more Men into the Danger. The Mountaineers, proud of this success, braved the
Romans; but Caesar trusting to those he had sent about, regarded them not: The
third Night after they set forward, the Party that was sent to climb the Hill,
fell in upon the Old Men, Women and Children, putting many to the Sword. But
day appearing, and discovering how few had done that harm, the Women fell upon
them, and their Husbands taking the Alarm, quitted the Pass they defended to
protect their Wives and Children. Caesar seeing the Pass clear, mounted the
Hill till he came to a plain on the side of it, whilst the Herminii put all
those Romans that had climbed the other side to the Sword. When they thought to
return to the place they had quitted, they found Caesar possessed of it,
wherewith they were so terrified, that though they were above him, and might well
have defended themselves, they sued for Peace; thereupon he commanded them to
go down and inhabit the Plain, keeping 200 of their Women as Hostages.

10. The Fame of this unexpected Conquest made many of the Neighboring People
resolve to quit their Dwellings, And routs a vast Multitude.
and passing the River Duero, seek out new places to inhabit, if not more
fruitful than their own, at least more remote from the Enemy. This they did in
such numbers, that the Province was almost unpeopled; they marched in great
Order, fearing the pursuit of the victorious Army, which soon o^ertook them, at
such time as they had passed over the River most of their Old Men, Women,
Children and Baggage, on Planks, Skins blown full of Wind, Mares and Oxen.
Caesar gave them not leisure to follow their Families, but falling upon them,
was so hotly received, that his Army began to give way, till a Veteran Legion
coming up, the Battle a long time stood doubtful. Caesar who could not be
satisfied to part upon equal Terms, broke himself into the midst of his Enemies
with such Resolution, that his Forces following the Example given, soon made
him Master of an absolute Victory.

CHAP. VIII.
The remaining Actions of Julius Caesar, the Coming and Attempts of Cneus and
Sextus, the Sons of Pompey the Great, and other Occurrences from the Year 57.
before the Birth of Christ, till the Year 27.
1. CAesar concluded his late Victory, had wholly put an end to the Toiles of
War in that Province, 57.
when he was given to understand that the Herminii, or Mountaineers revolted
again, had put to the Sword the Romans that Quartered about them, and stirring
up their Neighbors to do the like, were now assembled in an infinite Number.
The remaining Actions of Caesar in Spain.
He instantly marched toward them, and escaped all their Ambushes, being
forewarned of them: The Lusitanians divided themselves into two Bodies, each
numerous enough to maintain a long and dangerous War against a greater Power
than that of the Enemy. The lesser of those Armies was sent toward the Ocean,
with all the Women and Children as their Guard. The Roman and Lusitanian Armies
meeting, stood a while looking upon one another, till Caesar who never knew
what fear was, gave the Signal of Battle, and both sides gave the Charge with
extraordinary Fury. Caesar, though hard pressed a while, remained Master of the
Field, but by reason of the approaching Night, could not do so much Execution
as might otherwise have been. The Lusitanians knowing all the Passes of the
Country, made their way, and soon joined those that marched toward the Ocean.
Thus the 4th Day they discovered a Peninsula (now called Peniche) into which
they all passed; so that when Caesar came, there was none behind on the shore.
The distance between the Island and the shore, is at present above 500 Paces,
which at low Water can be forded; Caesar waiting the Ebb, sent an Officer with
a choice party to gain a Post from those in the Island, who bravely defended
themselves: The Tide returning, the Romans fought up to the middle in Water,
and Caesar stood on the Shore calling upon them. When they would have returned,
the Water was so high, that they were forced to land in the Island, where they
were all cut off to one Soldier, who though Wounded, swam over to the other side.
A Spanish Author calls him Sceva, but Dio, names him Publius Scevius: It was
hard to gain the Island, without bringing Ships from Cadiz, but hunger began to
prick the Multitude who had made no Provision, when they retired into that
place. This and the sight of the Ships made them deliver themselves to Caesar,
barely upon Discretion: He not only forbid any Wrong to be done them in their
Persons or Goods, but supplied them with all they wanted, and so dismissed them
wholly devoted to him, for this unexpected Clemency. At this time was found
that wonderful Horse, which having his Feet like a Man, would afterward suffer
no body but Caesar to mount him, and when he died, Caesar caused him to be
Buried, as if it had been a Man, and his Statue in Brass to be set before the
Temple of Venus.

2. Caesar having thus with Courtesy, as well as Force subdued Lusitania,
departed to Rome to make interest for the Consulship, 56.
where we will leave him. Tubero left to Govern the Province, Pub. Cincinnatus
succeeds Caesar.
as Propraetor, kept it in Peace till the coming of the Proconsul Publius
Cincinnatus, in whose time the Lusitanians began again to raise Arms, but
Authors do not give us any particular Relation of the Event of those
Commotions, till the Time of the Praetor, Publius Cornelius Lentulus Spinter.
About the same time there marched a mighty Army out of Spain, whereof a
considerable part were Lusitanians: Crassus destroys near 40000* Spaniards
The Gauls, oppressed by Julius Caesar, had called them to their Assistance.
Publius Crassus, Caesar's Legate, overthrew them, killing and taking Prisoners
almost 40000. Whilst this was done in France, Quintus Cecilius Dentatus, the
Praetor in Lusitania, raised a dangerous War, by endeavoring to carry a great
Quantity of Corn out of the Country, which moved the People to take up Arms;
but having forced him to retire, and fortify himself in the Mountain of Venus,
(now called Pomares,) near Evora, they came to a Composition, he promising not
to carry away the Corn. 52.
Quintus Cecilius Metellus was Successor to Dentatus, and governed both
Provinces of Spain. The Vectones of Estremadura, and the Vaccei of Old Castile,
revolting, he overthrew them; but with so little Loss on their side, that being
recruited, they came upon him, then besieging Clunia, (now Corunna,) and drove
him from the Siege: 51.
He, in like manner, making up his Forces, returned, and gave them a second
Rout. Tubero succeeded Metellus, 30.
as Proconsul. He continued the War against the Vectones and Vaccei, and was by
them, in Battle overthrown. The Tumults raised by the Vaccei and Vectones,
moved the Senate to send Pompey to pacify the Province: But whilst he prepared
to set forwards with the Grandeur becoming him, three Legates came; one of them
was Petreius, whose Province was Lusitania, and the Care of quelling the Vaccei
and Vectones: With him joined the People of Beyra, and, together, they forced
their Enemies to sue for Peace. After which, Petreius went to the Assistance of
those of the Province of Beyra, 47.
against a great Number of the People that came from between the Rivers Duero
and Minho, who were going over to settle among them; and (though with
considerable Loss) he secured the Pass, and drove them back.

3. Julius Caesar having drove Pompey out of R^me, was now coming again into
Spain: The Legates having Notice thereof, prepared to oppose him; and Petreius
joining Afranius, they together made up near 60000 Men, as well Romans as
Spaniards. Caesar sent his Legate Caius Fabius, to gain the Passes of the
Pyrenean Mountains; which he performed so successfully, that Pompey's Party
lying about Le^ida, saw Cesar's Colors before they had heard of the approach
of his Army. Caesar returns, and expels Pompey's Party.
Soon after came Caesar himself, who reduced the two Legates to that Necessity,
that they surrendered themselves into his Power; he using no other Severity
toward them, than to order them to lay down their Arms, and depart Spain: And
they accordingly went away to Pompey, then raising Forces in the East. This
done, 44.
Caesar returned to Rome, leaving the Government of Portugal and Andaluzia,
with the Title of Pro-Praetor, to Quintus Cassius Longinus, a Man naturally
cruel, and an Enemy to the Spaniards. He accordingly exercised his Hatred and
Avarice, and at last laid Seige to the City Mirobriga, which offered to buy its
Liberty; but he set it at so high a Rate, that they having 11 Days granted them
to resolve in, chose rather privately to fly away to the Mountains. The
Pro-Praetor finding the City empty, followed the Inhabitants, where he took
from them all they had before saved. The Herminii thus plundered, their Number
increasing, resolved to possess themselves of the Plains along the River Tagus,
turning out the ancient Proprietors. A great Number of them were cut off by the
Citizens of Lisbon, as they endeavored to pass that River: Then the
Mountaineers desisting from their first Purpose, encamped about Lisbon; but
being there surprised in the Night, by their Enemies, almost all of them
perished.

4. Cneus and Sextus, 43.
the Sons of Pompey the Great, came into Spain, Cneus and Sextus, the two Sons
of Pompey, in Spain.
invited by the general Consent of the People. The Eldest was declared General
at Cartagena, and set out thence with a good Army, Garrisoning all the strong
Towns. Sextus Pompeius was left at Cordova. Julius Caesar's two Legates, Pedius
and Fabius Maximus, observed the Motions of the two Pompeys, and gave Caesar an
Account of all that passed; and he traveled with all possible Speed into
Spain. In the mean time, Philo, a Lusitanian, raised Men, and joined himself to
Cneus. The Celerity of Caesar was incredible; yet came he not so soon, but that
his Legates were before defeated by Cneus Pompeius, with a mighty Slaughter.
The Legates fled to their Camp, where Pompey assaulted them three times, and
was as often repulsed: At last he understood they stole away by Night, but in
such good Order, that he durst not pursue them; especially, hearing that
Caesar* was come to Saguntum, and that Andaluzia began to mutiny. Understanding
that Caesar marched toward Cordova, he directed his Course thither; and to
march the lighter, he left all his Sick at Capara. By the Way he laid Siege to
Vlia, (now Montemayor;) but it being relieved by Caesar, he removed toward
Cordova, 15 Miles distant; where he found his Enemy, expecting that the
Towns-People would have delivered the Place to him; but the Vigilance of
Sextus, and the Arrival of Cneus, prevented the Design. Caesar thus
disappointed, removed, and laid Siege to a strong Place, which Pompey had made
his Magazin: It was then called Ategua; and now, Teba the Old. Pompey marched
to relieve it; but finding the Besiegers too strong, returned with Speed to
Cordova; yet, being sent for by the Besieged, he returned again to Ategua, and
sent in some Succor, and Munacius Flaccus, to govern in the City: He, seeing
no Hopes to hold out, surrendered himself and the City to Caesar upon
Discretion. This so enraged Pompey, that upon light Surmizes he put to Death
almost 80 Men of Note; and by this Means made himself odious to all that
followed him; whereof, many deserted.

5. In this manner their Affairs went on, Caesar overthrows Pompey at Munda
till Caesar and Pompey met at Munda, (now a little Town, called Monda,) five
Leagues distant from Malaga. This City was Garrisoned by Pompey, and in it
consisted all his Hopes; wherefore he lay to secure it with 60000 Men. Hither
Caesar came, to engage Pompey; and the Battle began most furiously: Pompey
behaved himself so gallantly, that Caesar was once in doubt whether he should
not kill himself, as despairing of the Victory: But considering better, he
lighted off his Horse; and, snatching a Buckler from a Soldier, ran desperately
into the thickest of his Enemies; saying to his own Men, This Day will I end my
Life; and you, the War: Thus lay your Arms across, since you have lost all
Sense of Shame, and leave me in the hands of two Boys, after you had been
victorious over all the Power of Spain. In this manner he broke into the Body
of his Enemies, where he had perished, but that his Horse coming in, rescued
him, wounding Pompey on the Shoulder. Yet had not Caesar gained any Advantage,
till Rogud, an African King, who followed him with his Troops, assaulted
Pompey's Camp. Titus Labienus, a brave Captain, drawing out of the Battle, to
oppose Rogud, the whole Army of Pompey thought he had fled, and they
immediately took to their Heels; some fled to Munda, others to the Camp, 30000
were slain, whereof 7000 were Lusitanians. Pompey wounded, and overthrown, fled
with 150 Lusitanians of his Guard, that were left. Being come to Algezira,
Publius Calvicius sent him in an Horse-Litter to Cortega; the Inhabitants of
which Place would have delivered him to his Enemies, but he escaped in a
Galley. Didius, Caesar's Admiral, pursued him so close, that he was forced to
fly to Land; where he was hard chased by Cesonius Lento, till, not being able
to go farther, he hid himself in a Cave, where he was betrayed by a Servant of
his own. Cesonius carried his Head to Caesar, then at Sevil, who caused it to
be honorably buried.

6. Many Lusitanians who had escaped the Hands of Cesonius, in the Pursuit of
Pompey, not knowing what had happened, as soon as they perceived the Romans
were gone, returned to the Cave to look for him; and finding only the Trunk of
the Body, resolved to revenge his Death. Didius the Admiral having left
Cesonius, was then Careening his Vessels on the Shore, without suspecting any
Danger; but one Night the Lusitanians came down upon him in three several
Bodies, and firing his Ships, put the Men to the Sword, and the Head of Didius
they sent to Philo, their General. As soon as Sextus Pompeius, at Cordova,
understood the Death of his Brother, he marched out of the City with all his
Forces; and joining with the Lusitanians that were dispersed thereabouts, he
met Cesonius, who beheaded Cneus, and put him to flight. In the mean while,
Caesar went to take Possession of Cordova; and returning to Sevil, he found
Philo, with the Lusitanians. in it; who was forced to fly, after massacring
many of the Citizens. He fled into Lusitania, to raise Forces; where, in the
City Lenius, he found Cecilius Niger, with a good Body: Both together got into
Sevil, surprising the Roman Army; but paid for it with the Loss of all their
Men. This done, Caesar peirced into to Portugal; Caesar conquers the
Lusitanians; and settling Peace at Beja, calls that City Pax Julia.
and with his Clemency toward the conquered People, won their Hearts. At Beja
he granted Peace to the Lusitanians; whence that City was afterward called Pax
Julia. Thence, he went to Evora, which, of his Bounty toward it, took the Name
of Liberalitas Julia. In like manner, he left his Name to other Places: Mertola
was called Julia Mirtilis; Santarem, before Scalabis, Julium Praesidium; and
Lisbon, Faelicitas Julia.

7. Asinius Pollio, 42.
a valiant and wise Man, was left Governor of the Provinces of Andaluzia and
Lusitania, in Caesar's Absence. He soon quelled some Troops that ravaged the
Country about the Mountains of Algarve. About the same time Sextus Pompeius
came out from among the Lacetani, where he had been hid after his Defeat, and
was by Niconius Saxo conducted to Hannibal's Port, now Vill-nova de Portemao,
in Algarve; where he continued in a miserable Condition, till a Ship of Pirates
came into that Place: Sextus Pompeius appears again, an^ makes great Commotions.
They, at the Instance of Saxo, received him for their Captain; and
understanding who he was, set out joyfully, and took some Prizes, plundering
the Coast, he gathered Strength; till coming to Cartagena, a whole Roman Legion
joined him, besides many Companies of Spaniards. Caesar hearing hereof, sent
Cartina to crush Pompey; but he was himself overthrown. Pompey hearing of the
Death of Caesar, gathered all the Power he could, and defeated the Praetor,
Asinius Pollio: But being now almost Master of all Spain, he was called away to
Rome by the Senate. After some Success at Sea, he was routed by the Triumviri;
and flying into Asia, had his Head cut off by Ticius, one of Mark Antony's
Commanders. 36.
Whilst these Things were doing in the East, all Spain, Great Floods, Storms
and Sickn^ss in Spain.
but particularly Lusitania, suffered much by Floods, Storms, Sickness, and
several other Calamities. Many that lived near the Coast, thinking to fly from
these Miseries, ran headlong into greater; for, breaking in upon the Va^^ei of
Old Castile, they were repulsed with great Slaughter, by Cneus Domicius, Legate
to Lepidus. Near this same time, one B^llas, who had been Quaestor to (...),
fearing to be called to Account for his Extortion, Pogud the African (...).
fled into Africa, and persuaded King Bogud to invade Spain. He took the
advice; and having plundered the Coast of Andaluzia, retired with a great
Booty, upon the News that the Romans and Spaniards had assembled a great Power
against him. 33.
Three Years after he returned, but was repulsed with Loss, and retired to
Tarifa; where having recruited himself, he set Sail for Hannibal's Port, in
Lusitania; which being abandoned, he plundered, with the Country about it. Not
content with this, he turned to Cape St. Vincent; and coming to Setuval,
without the least Opposition, ransacked it, putting all he found in the Place
to the Sword, and then setting fire to it. Some that fled to the Mountains,
gathering more Strength, came down to revenge their Losses on the Mauritanians;
but he was then sailing up the River of Alcazar, where he robbed and rased a
Temple of the Goddess Salacia. Scarce was he returned to his Ships, when a
violent Storm arising, destroyed the greatest part of his Fleet; those few
Wretches that escaped the Fury of the Sea by swimming, being cut in pieces upon
the Shore.

8. The Inhabitants of the City and Territories of Tuy, 28.
in Galicia, The Galicians overrun the most part of Lusitania.
passing the River Minho on a sudden, thought to have made themselves Masters
of the Lands then possessed by the Bracarenses, and other People, between Duero
and Minho. These, though surprised with the unexpected Invasion, gathered in a
great Body, and went out to meet the uninvited Guests. Between them passed many
Skirmishes; but at last, coming to a Battle, the Interamnenses were overthrown,
with great Slaughter. The Victors pursuing their Fortune, without Resistance,
passed on to the Banks of the River Duero. The Inhabitants of the City of
Porto, terrified at the Fame of their Success, sent Ambassadors to sue for
Peace, and Friendship; putting them in Mind, they were all originally Greeks.
This took so well with the conquering Galicians, that they allowed of the
Kindred, and so exempted the City of Porto from being plundered and burnt, as
all others they came at were. But a violent Pestilence raging among the
Galicians, so wasted them, that they were obliged to return home, carrying the
Contagion with them; so that the Harm they did at home was greater than the
Profit of their Expedition.

9. The Bracarenses delivered from the Fear of two terrible Enemies, the
Plague, and the Galicians, resolved to be revenged on the People of Porto, War
betwixt the People of B^aga and Porto.
for having joined with those of Galicia, only for their own Preservation. War
being declared, the Aggressors had the better; till in one Battle, those of
Porto took some Prisoners, on whom they exercised their Cruelty. Many of them
they tied to Stakes upon their Walls, and in the sight of their Enemies, shot
them for Sport. Moved at this Sight, the Bracarenses sent certain Troops to
take Revenge on them; but they being either killed or taken Prisoners, served
only to revive their Sorrow. Among these were a Son and a Father-in-Law, whose
Death so troubled the Wife of the one, and Daughter of the other, that
associating her self with some desperate Women, and a good Number of Soldiers,
she, in the Night, laid an Ambush, not far from the City; and scaling the
Walls, silently stole thence the two Bodies: But being discovered by the
Sentinels, she was pursued by the Townsmen, whom she led to the Place of the
Ambush, where most of them were killed, or made Prisoners: The Prisoners she
carried in Triumph to Braga, and there, on the Walls, made them suffer the same
Death which their Countrymen had inflicted on her Friends. This done, she
honorably buried her Father and Husband, and then killed her self. Now the
Citizens of Porto, finding themselves hard beset by the Bracarenses, prayed Aid
of Norbanus Calvius, Legate to Augustus, in Lusitania; with whose Assistance
they twice overthrew their Enemies. Many Cities, seeing that of Porto
victorious, sent to congratulate and curry Favor with them. One of the Cities
that followed this Counsel was Cinania, lying nearer to Braga than Porto; but
they had afterward Occasion enough to repent.

CHAP. IX.
The total Conquest of all Spain, by Augustus Caesar: With all other
Occurrences, from the Year 27, before the Birth of Christ, till his Blessed
Nativity.
1. MOre were the Bracarenses grieved to see their Neighbors slighted them,
than at the Loss they had sustained; and therefore, gathering again their
Forces, they marched toward Porto: An Hundred and fifteen Women and 200 Men,
made up a Party of Light Horse, which, leaving the rest of their Army in
Ambush, went to draw the Enemy out. Norbanus Calvius* marched out with all his
Force, that Body of Horse beforementioned sometimes flying, and sometimes
fighting, till they drew the Romans to the Place of Ambush, where a mighty
Slaughter was made of the Romans, and the People of Port. Norbanus was killed
by a Woman, who retur^ed to Braga with his Head and Right Hand; as did several
others, with those of several Men of Note. The Bracarenses used their Victory
with Insolency, The People of Braga subdue Porto.
oppressing the City of Porto in the heavy Conditions of Peace they prescribed
to them. Being delivered of that Enemy, they bent their Force against Cinania,
in Revenge for their having joined with those of Porto; and laid Siege to the
City. The Besieged were not unprovided, nor did they want Resolution; so that
many brave Attempts were made on both sides. At length, Hunger beginning to
pinch the Besieged, and the Besiegers being sensible thereof, the Case grew
desperate: When the Cinanians had devoured all that was to be found in the
City, rather than submit themselves to the Cruelty o^ their Enemies, they set
open their Gates; and rushing out like hungry Lions, failed but little of
obtaining the Victory; but at length, oppressed with the Multitude they were
all put to the Sword, without Distinction o^ Sex or Age. Nor was this all, for
the Victors executed their Rage upon the very Stones, overthrowing the Walls,
and rasing all the Buildings to the Ground.

2. Octavius Caesar having now brought all the Roman Empire under his
Subjection, found that only three Nations in Spain opposed his Authority; and
those were, the Biscainers, Galicians, and Lusitanians, who inhabited between
the Rivers Duero and Minho. Augustus Caesar comes into Spain.
To the subduing of these, he came in Person, with a mighty Power; but being
taken in Biscay with a violent Hypochondriack Distemper, he left there two
Legates to continue the War, and went away to take the delightful Air of
Andaluzia, where he gave himself up to the Care of his Physician, Anthony Musa;
who effecting a great Cure upon him, was magnificently rewarded. Whilst he was
under Cure, his Legates overthrew the Biscainers, betrayed to them by the
Tragicini. Such as escaped, fled to Lancia, a City near Oviedo in Asturias,
where they made some Opposition, but at last were forced to submit. Thence the
Victors advanced, bearing down all before them, quite through Galicia. We have
no particular Account, how the People between the Rivers Ducro and Minho were
subdued; whether they submitted, terrified with the Example of the others; or
else were included in the Conquest of Galicia.

3. Augustus, Emerita Augusta ( now Merida) founded by Augustus.
thus become Lord of the World, to reward his old Soldiers, who had served him
so many Years, he assigned them Lands, and founded a City, which he called
Emerita Augusta, (now Merida,) which he made the Metropolis of Lusitania, and
gave it mighty Privileges. Some will not have Augustus to be the Founder, but
rather Repairer of Merida. In Gratitude for this his Bounty, they raised
Temples to him, and dedicated Priests to his Service. All the Cities in Spain
followed their Example. That of Porto used all manner of Flattery, to oblige
him to their Assistance, in order to cut off the heavy Yoke imposed upon them
by their Enemies, the Bracarenses. Their Ambassadors were favorably heard, and
brought back an Answer, such as they could have wished, that Caius Antistius
and Marcus Agrippa were upon their March, to their Assistance. This so
encouraged the Inhabitants of Porto, that before the Roman Forces could join
them, they not only ravaged the open Country, but entered the City of Braga,
with great Slaughter; those Citizens suspecting no such thing: Yet, laying hold
of their Weapons, they pursued them to the very Walls of Porto. Scarce had they
encamped about the City, when they perceived the Romans upon them, so numerous,
that they were forced to fly with all speed, and take the Shelter of their own
Walls, providing for a dangerous Siege. Before the Romans could take their
Posts about the City, the Bracarenses sallied out, and much Harm was done on
both sides. Among the Prisoners taken by the Romans, was a young Maid, who had
acted like a Virago: She was taken by a Trooper; and the Roman General, by her
Beauty; who would have set her at liberty, promising to pay her Ransom: The
Trooper pressed, he might either have the Money, or Liberty to make use of his
Captive: She snatching a Poniard out of his Hand, ran to kill him; but missing
her Stroke, stabbed her self. The Bracarenses retiring, the Romans took their
Posts; and many Skirmishes passing between them, it happened that Antistius,
one of the Roman Generals, was taken, and fell into the Hands of the Father of
that Maid abovementioned; who, for that he had honorably buried his Daughter,
sent him away free, and honorably presented. Agrippa, to requite the Kindness
shown to his Colleague, raised the Siege, and obtained many Favors of
Augustus, for the City; persuading him, that those of Porto were in the wrong.
Thenceforth it was called Augusta Bracara; and had the Privilege of a Roman
Colony.

4. The Emperor Augustus being at Tarragona, Augustus acknowledged Emp^ror of
the World, and Temples erected to him.
received there Ambassadors from all Parts of the then known World,
congratulating his happy Accession to so great an Empire. Then it was, he
concluded himself an absolute Monarch, being complemented, flattered and fawned
upon by all Nations; in so much that they begged Leave to erect Temples to him,
and give him Divine Honors. He granted their Request; and, among that
Multitude, to the Ambassadors of Lusitania. At Santarem a Temple was built, in
the manner of a Fort; which was afterward thought to denote a greater
Inclination to War, than to Devotion. On this Account, Accidius Cestius,
Augustus's Legate, obstructed the building of another at Lisbon. The People, to
remove his Suspicion, erected it on the Rock of Sintra, upon the Ocean. No less
than for these stately Structures, Augustus was renowned for the Computation of
Time begun from him, and commonly called Aera^* The Reason of this Name, is not
our Affair to decide: Certain it is, it continued in Arragon till the Year of
Christ, 1358; when K. Peter IV. ordered the Computation of Time, for the
future, to be from the Birth of our Savior. K. John I, of Castile, followed
his Example, in the Year of Grace, 1383. And King John I, of Portugal, imitated
them both, in 1415.

5. It was two Years before the Birth of Christ, when all Portugal, Portugal,
how divided by Augustus.
entirely subdued, enjoyed perfect Peace. Augustus had divided the Kingdom into
four Provinces, subject to as many Courts of Judicature: These were, Merida,
Santarem, Braga and Beja: In each of these was a Praetor, and other Officers of
Justice. Augustus was still at Tarragona, when he published that memorable
Decree for numbering of all the People in his Empire, and imposing on every
Head a Tribute, or Poll-Tax; which, as some compute it, was, to the value of
about 4d. according to others, 4d. half Penny; or, as others say, 9d. The first
Court in Lusitania, where the Edict was published, was Santarem. By the Lists
it appeared, that in Lusitania there were 5068000 Heads of Families; a
wonderful Number, if true; but much to be doubted.

6. About this time, Corocota, a fam^ous Robber.
in the Province between the Rivers Duero and Minho, there started up a
Lusitanian, called Corocota; who gathering a parcel of Outlaws together, after
committing several Outrages, durst venture to give the Romans Battle in open
Field: But being defeated, they fled to Biscay, where they, in Warlike manner,
followed the Trade of Robbing. Octavius the Emperor promised 3000 Crowns, and a
Pardon for all Crimes whatsoever, to any that should apprehend him. He fearing
there could not be wanting Criminals desirous of Pardon, nor covetous Persons
who would attempt any thing for Interest, resolved to gain the Reward and
Pardon by a magnanimous, though dangerous Action: He presented himself to the
Emperor, demanding both the Reward, and promised Pardon, since he delivered
into his Hands Corocota, whom, perhaps, no Man else could have put into his
Power. With which that generous Prince was so taken, that he proved much better
than his Word; for he not only pardoned him, and gave him the Money, The Birth
of o^r Savior.
but admitted him into his Guards.

7. It was now the Year of the World 3952, according to Bid, and the Hebrews;
according to Eusebius, 5199; according to Orosius, 5200; according to Isidorus,
5219; according to the Astronomers, 5328; according to King Alphonso, 6980;
according to John Lucidus, 3960, (such is the Variety of Computations;) and
according to others, 3962. This last being, in my Opinion, the best Account,
and followed in this History, it must then be 2432 Years after the Flood, when,
on the 25th of December, about Midnight, the REDEEMER of Mankind was born in
the Stable at Bethlehem; wonderful Signs preceding his Birth. The Angels
descended, singing, Glory to GOD on high, and on Earth, Peace unto Men of Good
Will: They spread abroad the News of that wonderful Birth; and awaked the
Shepherds, to behold the LAMB of GOD. In the mean while, the Three Kings of the
East traveled, conducted by a miraculous STAR, to pay their Adoration to the
KING of Kings. Signs of our Savior's Birth in Spain.


8. Spain wanted not its particular Signs of the Blessing communicated to
Mankind that happy Night. That very Night was enlightened with a glorious
bright-shining Cloud, which not only diffused a Light equal to the
Noon-day-Sun, but also an Heat nothing inferior to it. This Cloud drove away
to the West, and set in the Ocean; at such time as the Morning-Beams appearing,
no Distinction could be made between Day and Night. And that Portugal might not
want some singular Tokens of the Coming of the GOD of Peace, the Idol of the
false God Endovelicus, whose Temple was near Villaviciosa, fell from the Altar,
to the Ground; and though of Massy Silver, it was broke into several Pieces,
which, for the Rarity, were sent to Rome, where many other Idols had been
destroyed at the same Hour. Besides this, an extraordinary Light appeared (like
that which was seen all over Spain) upon the Promontory called Barbaricus, now
Serra da Arabida.

The End of the First BOOK.
Note, That hitherto we have diminished the Years, from the Flood, till the
Coming of CHRIST; henceforward we shall increase them, from his Birth, to the
End of the History.

THE HISTORY OF PORTUGAL.
The Second BOOK.
CHAP. I.
All that happened remarkable in Lusitania under the Roman Emperors, from the
Birth of our Savior Jesus Christ, till the Year of Grace 260.
1. THE whole Universe being restored to Peace by the Birth of the King of
Peace, Peace after the Birth of Christ.
Augustus Caesar caused the Gates of the Temple of Janus to be shut. This was
the third and last time those Gates were closed, and Augustus the remaining
part of his Life, enjoyed a wonderful Felicity. Our Lusitania had its share in
this Tranquillity, having entirely submitted it self to the Roman Yoke, and now
reaping the Fruits of Peace under its Government. Quadratus, and Titus Flavius
Caudianus were Legates or Pretors at this time, as appears by several Ancient
Inscriptions found upon Stones. Not far from this time the Lusitanians
inhabiting Vouga, or Vacca, made an expedition as far as the Cities Assota, and
Lacedemona, in whose Territory they founded a Town, which of the Name of their
own Country they called Vacca. and being delighted with the pleasantness of the
Place, they added the word Chara, whereby it came to be called Charavacca. The
News of the Death of the Emperor Augustus, being brought into Lusitania, his
Funeral Honors were performed with no less Grandeur than they had been at
Rome. Hispania Vlterior which includes Portugal, was at this time Governed by
the Proconsul Vibius Serenus, whose unlimitted Avarice was the cause he
exercised many Cruelties toward the People; nor were the Spanish Mines and
Rivers, yielding Yearly three Millions of Crowns in Gold, sufficient to satisfy
his unmeasurable Covetousness.

2. Tiberius having succeeded Augustus in the Empire, Tiberius succeeds
Augustus in the Empire.
appeared no less insatiable than his Lieutenant. The Lusitanians by their
Ambassadors, asked leave to Erect a Temple to him and his Mother Drusilla,
which he, pretending Modesty, refused: But in Reality was more desirous of
their Gold, than of their Adoration. To show that Learning was then esteemed
here, several Lasitanians went into Italy, only to see the famous Historian
Titus Livius; with them went Ambassadors from Lisbon, to give an Account of a
Prodigy there seen. It was a perfect Man coming out of the Sea, who sitting
upon the Rocks, sounded a great Shell as if it had been a Horn, so loud and
shrill, that it drew the People thither to see who it was. Admiring the sight
of that Creature, they sent that Embassage, which is a token no such Creature
had been seen before; though Authors affirm that several have appeared since. The
Roman Emperors were Lords of our Kingdom of Lusitania for some Ages, but for
Brevity sake, I will not mention them all as they succeeded one another, but
only speak of those, who left something memorable among us.

3. After Tiberius, Caius Caligula.
the Imperial Crown was put upon the Head of Caius Caligula, whose horrid
course of Life made the wickedness of his Predecessor be looked upon as
innocence. Caligula in the 4th. Year of his Reign was Murdered, St. James the
Apostle in Spain.
as had been his Predecessor: During his Reign, St. James the Apostle came into
Spain, where he Preached the Gospel, and converted many by virtue of the mighty
Miracles he Wrought. Among the rest, he is said to have raised to life a
Citizen of Braga by extraction, a Jew called Samuel the Younger, or Malachias
the Elder Son, to the Prophet Vrias, who had been Buried near 600 Years; him he
called Peter, and constituted the first Bishop of Braga, and the first in all
Spain: 44.
This Bishop suffered Martyrdom at Rates, four Leagues from Braga, and is
therefore called St. Peter of Rates. Another of his Disciples St. James left in
the Church of Cinania, once a populous City, now a poor place scarce the
shadow of what it was, between Braga and Guimaraens upon the River Ave. In
this same place he was Martyred by the Neighboring People, in memory whereof,
they to this day as it were acknowledging the crime, resort to his Church
barefooted, and with Cords about them. The Martyrs name was Torquatus, now
corruptly called Torcade; St. James embarking at Corunna, sailed into England,
in whose absence Peter the Archbishop of Braga, having spread the Faith made
several Bishops. 46.
As the Nuptials of a little King's Son were Celebrating on the shore of
Bouzas, not far from Porto, the Bridegroom being on Horseback among many
others, suddenly there appeared a Ship at Sea; When it drew near, the
Bridegroom was carried away by his Horse through the Water, and suddenly
appeared upon the Ship covered with Crosses and Shells: Wondering what this
should mean, he asked of those in the Ship, who told him, They brought the Body
of St. James the Apostle, who had wrought that Miracle to convert him and the
Neighboring People; and a voice from Heaven said, it was the Will of God, that
all those who went to visit the Apostle's Sepulcher, should be so adorned with
Crosses. The Bridegroom returned ashore, his Horse treading the Water, as if it
had been firm Land, whereupon he and all present were Baptized: Thus much may
suffice as to the Preaching of St. James the Apostle, and the bringing of his
Body after his Death into Spain.

4. After Caligula Reigned, 56.
Claudius, a Prince as foolish as his Predecessor was wicked; The Emperors
Claudius and Nero.
no Memory of him remains in Portugal, it had been well if there were none in
the World. Of Nero, his Successor, there are still many Monuments in Lusitania,
and also of his Mother ^g^ippina, for to her they Erected Statues. In the time
of Nero, Silvius Otho Governed Portugal, the Emperor conferred that Honor upon
him, the more freely in his absence to enjoy his Wife Popea, whose incontinency
gave occasion for him to fall in love with her Beauty. Ten Years did Otho
Govern this Province, with so great Equity and Moderation, that he obliged the
People afterward to assist him toward obtaining the Empire. A great number of
Martyrs suffered under this cruel Emperor, as well in Spain, as in other parts:
Galba.
Next to Nero, Galba ascended the Imperial Throne, rather for the hatred all
Men bore his Predecessor, than for any Merit of his own. Otho then Governor of
Lusitania, in Revenge of the wrong done him in the Person of his Wife Popea,
assisted him: Nevertheless, once possessed of the Government, he grew as odious
as he had been before desirable, and therefore having held it but Eight Months
was Murdered. Otho.
His Death opened the way for Otho, who had won the hearts of all Men, with
much Bounty and Clemency, to aim at the Crown. Otho, to gratify the Affections
of the Lusitanians, granted great Privileges to many Towns, but particularly
to Merida, then the Metropolis of the Province; only three Months lasted the
Sovereignty of Otho, for understanding that Vitellius with the German Army, by
which he was saluted Emperor, was marching against him, he in despair Slew
himself; Vitellius.
nor did Vitellius hold it above Eight Months.

5. Vespasian succeeded Vitellius, Vespasian
and by his Prudence and Moderation, cheared the hearts of all his People:
Lusitania was particularly favored by him, for he adorned it with noble Works;
one of them was the great Road he made from Braga to Orense the space of
Fifteen Leagues, which breaking through many rough and uncooth places, runs so
smooth, there is not the least Ascent or Descent in it. Near to the Town of
Chaves (of him called Aquae Flaviae) he built a Bridge over the River Tamaga,
80.
with a large Inscription on it: Vespasian died, having Reigned Nine Years and
a half, and left the Empire to his two Sons, Titus and Domitian
Titus the Good, and Domitian the Wicked. During their sway, Lusitania was
divided into three Districts, whose heads were Merida, Beja and Santarem. In
the three were Forty Six Towns of Note, five of them were Roman Colonies, to
wit, Merida, Medellia, Norba Cesarea near Alcantara, Braga and Santarem,
besides others that had the Liberties of Rome or Latium, under the Name of
Municipia. The Limits of Lusitania were along the Sea Coast from the Mouth of
the River Guadiana, to that of Duero, and thence to the River Minho: Toward
the inland, it ran from Guadiana to Medina del Campo, including the City
Salamanca with all Estremadura, bordered by the River Duero. Nerva.
Nerva, the succeeding Emperor, much mended the state of Rome and the whole
Empire, but chiefly by adopting Trajan the Spaniard, so that still a better
Emperor followed a good one. Portugal retains no Monument of Nerva; only it
appears by a Stone found in the Ruins of Atilia, which was between Genoa and
Tortona, that several Troops of Lusitanians served under the Imperial Banners.

6. Though Trajan began his Reign with great moderation, Trajan.
yet as is usual in great Empires, many places Rebelled, which were afterward
subdued by his Generals. He adorned this Kingdom with many Public and
Majestic Structures, not laying the Burden of the Expense upon the People, but
defraying it out of his own Revenue; among these Works is still famous the
Bridge he Built over Tagus, called the Bridge of Trajan, till the Moors gave
it the Name of the Bridge of Alcantara. It consists of six Arches, the two
middlemost whereof being the largest reach over the River, when there are no
Floods: The length of it is 670 Foot, the Breadth 28, and the height above 200;
the Stones are all of one Bigness, four Foot in length, and two in Breadth.
Between the two middle Arches on both sides, is an Inscription in Marble, to
this Effect: To the Emperor Caesar Augustus Nerva Trajanus, Son to the Divine
Nerva, Conqueror of Germany and Dacia, high Priest, Father of his Country, who
was Eight times Tribune, and Six times Consul: On both sides of this
Inscription, were the Names of the Towns that contributed toward the Fabric;
near to the Bridge is a Church, though little in it self, yet considerable in the
Workmanship: It is but twenty Foot in length, and ten in breadth, but being cut
out of the Rock, consists of only one Stone. It is now Dedicated to St. Julian,
formerly to all the Gods as the Rotunda at R^me; in it is a Roman Inscription
containing these Words* Con^ecrated to the Emperor Nerva Trajanus, Caesar
Augustus, Germanicus, Dacicus. Another Bridge, begun by Vespatian, at Chaves,
was also finished by Trajan; as appears by the Inscriptions upon it.

7. The Lusitanians, The Lusitanians revolt, and are reduced by Trajan.
under the usual Pretense of Oppression, broke out into open Rebellion, and
committed many Insolences. For the suppressing of whom, Trajan sent 14
Legions, which utterly destroyed many populous Towns and Cities. One of these
Cities was Lamego, which now stands not far from its ancient Seat, on the South
side of the River Duero; and is one of the best Bishoprics in the Kingdom. In
the 14 Legions were many Lusitanians, who, in that common Calamity, helped much
to the preserving their Country from utter Extirpation. Trajan died a natural
Death; which was then looked upon as no small Rarity. His Fleets had before
sailed down the Rivers Tigris and Euphrates, into the Persian Gulf, and thence
into the Indian Ocean; where taking some Vessels that came from Bengale, he got
much Information concerning those Countries: Age, and other Cares, hindered him
from making a farther Progress in those Discoveries.

8. Adrian next ascended the Imperial Throne; Adrian.
who thinking it impossible to maintain all the Conquests of the Empire, he
wholly abandoned them. To secure the rest of that vast Monarchy, he placed
Foreign Governors over all the Provinces. Over the Lusitanians, he placed
Andaluzians; and over them, Lusitanians: These governed so well, that two of
them had Statues erected to their Memory. Quintus Pontius Severus, one of the
two, was born at Braga: And Caius Caretius Fusius, the other, at Chaves. Other
Monuments there are of Adrian, in Portugal, but not material to History. He
reigned almost 21 Years. 140.
Antoninus Pius, his Successor, Antoninus Pius.
held the Empire 22 Years, but left no Memorial in Portugal. About these Times
was laid the first Foundation of the City Basto, (afterward Basta,) among the
Bastetani: As also Basto, between the Rivers Duero and Minho; whereof only the
Name is now preserved, in a miserable poor Village. Then also, or soon after,
an Heretic, called Mark, labored to infect the People of Valencia, in the
same Province, between Duero and Minho; and though driven thence, failed not of
some Followers among the Women, but those of the meanest sort; 162.
for the others abhorred him. Great Troubles happened in Spain, Marcus Aurelius.
but most in the Province of Lusitania, during the Reign of Marcus Aurelius. A
vast Multitude of Mauritanians, The Mauritanians ravage Spain.
being in Rebellion against the Emperor, came over into Spain; and having
robbed the Seaport Towns, they boldly pierced into the Inland. Portugal was
so involved in this Calamity, that it came near to utter Desolation: All that
lay along the Coast, from the Cape of St. Vincent, to the Mouth of the River
Duero, was consumed with Fire and Sword: Lisbon held out several furious
Assaults, by the Strength of its Situation: Porto, after a vigorous Resistance,
was forced to Article. After having committed all manner of Outrages, the
Africans put to Sea, for fear of the Roman Legions, and Lusitanian Forces,
which were upon their March toward them. For above 70 Years, in which 13
Emperors reigned, till Maximin, we are in Darkness as to the Affairs of
Portugal: For, though there are some old Inscriptions extant, they only serve
to prove there were such Emperors; which is not to our purpose, since our
Subject is only what relates to Portugal.

9. The Memory of Maximin, 239.
the Successor of Alexander Severus, Maximin
is preserved in the City Braga, in a Street and Gate of his Name. He also made
several Ways and Bridges in that Country, as appears by Inscriptions upon
Stones. Some other Reigns passed, without any thing remarkable. 269.
In that of the careless Galienus, Galienus.
a Plague came out of the East, bearing down all to the West; and raged so
violently in Lusitania, that the Cities were almost left desolate, and the
Fields untilled. Galienus, awakened at this Scourge, ordered the Persecution
against the Christians, which had been continued ever since the Time of Decius,
to cease. This Persecution had filled Heaven with Martyrs; Persecution under
him.
and also terrified others in such a manner, that they renounced the Faith.
Among the latter, were, Marcialis, Bishop of Merida; and Basilides, of Astorga.
Elianus, or Lelius, Deacon of Merida, a Man of great Learning and Virtue,
assembled a National Council in that City; where the two Idolatrous Bishops
were deposed. They, to recover their Honor, feigned Repentance: And St.
Stephen, then Pope, believing the Fiction, ordered them to be restored; but his
Command was not obeyed by the Council, who therein took the Advice of St.
Cyprian, then Bishop of Carthage. Another Council was held at Braga, to decide
whether the Baptism of Heretics, done with an Intention, was valid: And it
passed in the Affirmative. After the Plague, followed a no less Evil; which
was, an Inundation of Germans, over all the Provinces of the Empire. Most
Places now known in Portugal only by their Ruins, were by them overthrown, and
not by the Goths: For, the Germans designing to return home, spoiled all they
could not carry away; whereas the Goths, coming to settle, spared much, for
their own Use. Thus ended the Empire of Galienus.

CHAP. II.
The Heresy of Priscilian. The Coming into Spain of the Vandals, Alans,
Suevians and Goths. The Kingdom of the Suevians settled in Portugal. And all
other Passages of Note, from the Year 271, to the Year 448.
1. Claudius II. and Aurelianus were Successors to Galienus, 271.
in the Empire. Claudius and Aurelianus.
The latter was he that overcame the most Warlike Zenobia, Queen of Palmira.
Under these Emperors suffered Martyrdom nine Sisters, the Daughters of Lucius
Catelius, or Caius Atilius, Governor of Galicia and Lusitania; as some Authors
have it, born at Braga; but others say, he was a German. These things are very
obscure, and uncertain; as are all the Affairs of Lusitania, till the Time of
Constantine the Great. Only this is certain, That a a great Number of Martyrs
suffered under the Heathen Emperors, 311.
throughout all Spain; and consequently, Portugal had a great Share in them.
Constantine the Great.
The Emperor Constantine, after quieting the Troubles of Spain, the better to
settle the Spiritual Government, assembled a National Council at Toledo: The
Church settled.
In it the Metropolitan Churches were settled; which were, Braga and Merida,
for Lusitania; Toledo, Sevil and Cordova, for the rest of Spain. Another
Council was afterward held at Iliberi, which was near Granada, for settling
many Things relating to the Affairs of the Church. There met at it 19 Bishops,
3 whereof went out of Portugal; which were, Vincentius, of Ossonoba, in
Algarve; Januarius, of Alcazar de Sal; and Quincianus, of Evora. Constantine
regulated the Government of the Empire, reducing it to a better Form than any
of his Predecessors had done. He employed Spanish Forces in remote Parts: In
Egypt was a Body of Spanish Horse, and another of Lusitanian Foot: Also Spanish
Horse, in Arabia; and others, in other Places. Constantine favored Lusitania,
bestowing great Privileges on it and eased it of heavy Taxes. These are all the
Memorials that remain of him, in this Kingdom: Nor is there any of five of his
Successors.

2. In this Age, Priscilian the Heretic condemned.
the Heresy of Priscilian was condemned at Rome, in France, and Spain; he
having before suffered Death for it. This Heresy was first broached in Egypt,
and thence brought into Spain, by one Mark, who soon gained the Affections of
some. Ladies, because he allowed (among his other Tenets) that Married People
might be divorced, only upon Dislike of one another. A certain Lady, called
Ag^^pe, was the great Favourer of this new Doctrine, and in her House it was
taught; one Helpidius, a Grammarian, being the chief Professor. Priscilianus,
born in Galicia, with some Smattering he had of Rhetoric and Philosophy, and a
little Skill in Magic, of a Disciple, in a few Days became so absolute a
Master of this Heresy* that it ever after took Name of him. A Synod, assembled
at Zaragoza, condemned all the Professors of this Heresy; yet they prevailed
so far against this Decree, that Priscilian was made Bishop of Avila: Upon
Complaint made to the Emperor Gracian, he ordered that Priscilian, and the
other Heretical Bishops, should not only be expelled their Sees, but all Spain.
After this, Priscilian, with Bribes, obtained an Order from one of the
Emperor's Secretaries, to be himself restored to his Bishopric; and the same
for one of his Companions, the other being dead. The Catholic Bishops flying
to the Emperor for Redress, Priscilian was* not only deposed, but beheaded for
his Contumacy. The other Bishop, called Instancius, recanted. Some of
Priscilian's Disciples brought his Carcass into Spain, where he was reverenced
as a Saint; and their most solemn Oaths were made by him. The Emperor Maximin
would have put them all to the Sword, but St. Martin opposed it, being very
angry that the Spanish Bishops had prosecuted Priscilian to Death:
Nevertheless, Maximus defended the Bishops, and was offended at St. Martin for
opposing them. 391.
A second Constantine filled the Imperial Throne, in the Person of Theodosius;
so equal was their Justice, Clemency and Religion. About this time there is
some Account, that the Lusitanians of Ambracia built Placensia, in the Province
of Cantabria. There is still a Town there of this Name, and we find one
Protasius Bishop thereof, mentioned in the Fifth Council of Toledo. But let us
come out of this Obscurity, though not into full Light, yet to somewhat more
Clearness, and speak of the Coming of the Goths into Spain.

3. The Goths were descended of Magog, Goths, who they were.
one of the Sons of Japhet, and Brother to Tubal, who first planted in
Scandinavia, that vast Northern Tract of Land which, in the manner of a
Peninsula, contains Sweden, Norway and Gothland: Out of the last came the
Goths, well known in the World, no less for their many Victories, than for
their beastly Barbarities: After this, broke out the Suevians, The Suevians,
Vandals, Alans, Burgundians and Selingi.
driven out of Sweden, by the Goths: And lastly, came that Inundation of
Vandals, Alans, Burgundians, Selingi, and other Northern Nations, out of the
Countries about the River Tanais and the Palus Maeotis. Whilst these Nations
were yet employed in Germany and France, the Roman Army in Great Britain
saluted two of their Generals, Marcus, and Gracianus, Emperors, successively;
and then killing them both, promoted Constantius; who fearing the like End as
the others had met with, passed over into France; where joining with the
greatest Men, he made himself Master of most of that Country. Encouraged with
this Success, he sent out several Commanders of Note to possess themselves of
Spain, expelling those that governed there for the Emperor Honorius. There had
been no Difficulty in compassing his Design, but for Didimus and Verinianus;
who being then in Lusitania, hasted with a good Power, to secure the Passes of
the Pyraenean Hills. However, Constans, the Son of Constantius, with certain*
Veterane Legions, and some Troops of Alans and Suevians, all in Rebellion
against the Empire, forced their Way: The two Brothers pursued; and overtaking
him, they came to a Battle, in which the Imperialists were overthrown, and
Constans obtained a complete Victory. Thus the Spaniards were forced to submit
themselves to Constans. The Guard of the Pyraenean Hills was committed to the
Su^vians and Alans that they might keep out the other Barbarous Nations,
dispersed throughout France. Thus flushed with the rich Booty they had got in
Spain, they invited the Vandals, Alans, Suevians and Selingi, whom they were to
have kept out, into Spain. 416.
Those People, though under several Commanders, unanimous in the same purpose,
passed the Mountains: Guadericus was King of the Vandals* Hermenericus, of the
Suevians; and Resplandianus, of the Alans. They overran all the Country,
gaining several Victory; so that the Roman Authority was wholly abolished, and
Spain entirely brought under that barbarous Tyranny: All the Civility and
Policy learnt of the Romans, reduced to a Brutal Disorder; and most of the
ancient Natives destroyed by Sword, Pestilence and Famine.

4. The Vandals and Silingi planted themselves in the Province of Betica: Alans
and Suevians in Lusitania.
The Alans and Suevians, in Galiciae and Lusitania. In this universal
Desolation, the Relics of the Saints being destroyed, together with the
Churches, Panoracius, Archbishop of Braga, gathered a Synod of some Bishops,
and ordered them to hide the Bodies of the Saints, so that some Memory of the
Places might be preserved to better Times. This was the First Council of Braga.
First Council of Braga.
In the mean while, the Invaders took Lisbon, Coimbra, Idanha, Merida, Astorga,
and afterward the rest. Having divided the Lands, Kings of the Alans and
Suevians.
and Resplandianus, King of the Alans, dying, Attaces succeeded him in the
Kingdom of Lusitania, and settled his Court in the City Merida. Hermenericus,
King of the Suevians, Rept Lisbon, and all as far as Algarve, with a part of
Galicia. Both these Nations, in process of Time, became more tractable, and
joined with the Natives. Attaces now grown powerful, became terrible to his
Neighbors; sometimes breaking into Celtiberia, and sometimes into Carpentania:
Lastly, he fell upon Hermenericus, King of the Suevians, residing at Lisbon:
From him besides other Lands, he took the City Colimbria, seated then where now
is Conderia the Old. To ennoble this his Conquest, he laid the Foundation of
another City, on the Banks of the River Mondego, which is now the University of
Coimbra. This Prince, being an Arian Heretic, obliged the Catholics, and even
the Prelates before taken, to work at this Building. Whilst he was busy at
this Structure, Hermenericus having gathered Forces, and joined with
Gundericus, came as far as Porto, Porto rebuilt.
then an Heap of Ruins: But fearing lest Attaces should there encounter him, he
fortified himself, and that so effectually, that People flocking thither, the
City was rebuilt, and called New Portucale, and Fistavole, which, in the
Suevian Language, signified, the New Shore* This was the second Foundation of
Porto. Hermenericus perceiving that Attaces came not to molest him in his new
Work, marched to disturb him; but being overthrown, he was glad to sue for
Peace. The Conditions were such as pleased the Alans; but particularly, that
which contained his marrying Cindasunda, the Daughter of the Suevian King, a
Lady of incomparable Beauty and Virtue. Hermenericus carried the Bride to the
new City Coimbra, where the Nuptials were solemnized with the greatest
Magnificence that had been seen among the Barbarians.

5. Attaces, to express to his Father-in-Law how firmly he intended to observe
the new-settled Friendship, caused Cindasunda to be painted on his Colors,
standing upon a Pedestal; with a Green Dragon on the one side, and a Red Lion
on the other. By those two Creatures, were signified, the two Kings, before
Competitors, now united by her: The Workmen, to flatter their King, carved the
same upon many Stones; which have been so preserved, Arms of Porto.
that it is now the Coat of Arms of that City. Cindasunda, who was a Catholic,
privately favored those that the King forced to labor at his Structures: But
particularly, she took Compassion on the Priests and Bishops; and among them,
the Bishop Elipanidus, and the Priest Esenus. She, with her Beauty and
Entreaties, so mollified the King, that many Catholics were delivered from
that Slavery. They lived some Time together very unanimously: He employed
himself in endeavoring to subdue such Provinces as yet remained subject to the
Roman Empire; but the Romans, joining with the Goths, defended themselves; as
will appear by the Sequel.

6. The Emperor Honorius, 417.
then at Ravenna, seeing the mighty Decay of the Empire, for Constantius was
possessed of a great part of France; while, Ataulfus, the Goth, held Gallia
Narbonensis; and the Vandals, Suevians and Alans, Spain. Against all these
Enemies, he made choice of Constantius, a Noble Roman; who besieged Constantine
in Arles, and drove him, for fear, to enter into Orders: Yet this availed him
not, for he was put to Death. Constantius designed next to turn his victorious
Arms against Constans, but understood that he was killed by Geronicus, who
rebelling, had proclaimed Emperor a Friend of his own, called Maximus. This
Geronicus passed over into France: And hearing that Constantius, having slain
Constantine, was coming upon him, he returned into Spain, and, in Scorn, was
murdered by the Roman Legions. Maximus fearing the like Death, fled, and ended
his Days in Misery. In the mean time, Honorius having, by his General
Constantius, reduced France and Great Britain, he employed him against
Ataulfus, King of the Goths, The Goths enter Spain
in Gallia Narbonensis. The Goth hard pressed, by the Way of Roussillon, broke
into Spain, committing greater Outrages than the Alans, Vandals, Suevians or
Silingi had done. 418.
After many Events which appertain not to our History, the Goths came to
Composition with Honorius. But it was not so with the Alans, who possessed the
greatest part of Portugal, and continued their Conquests; treating the Vandals
and Suevians, not as their Fellows in Arms, but as their Vassals. This put all
Spain into a Flame, every one standing up for his Liberty, as Attaces lifted up
himself, to Lord it over all. That each Nation might be the more at leisure to
follow their desperate Designs, they all writ to the Emperor, to this Effect:
Preserve the Peace, Sir, with us all; Take Hostages from us all: Let us fight;
for if we kill one another, the Loss is our own, and yours the Fruit of the
Victory, whoever has the better: Your greatest Advantage, is, to see us all
consumed. The War was accordingly begun, the Alans commencing it against the
Vandals and Silingi. Constantius came to the War, bringing with him Walia King
of the Goths, whose Residence was in Gatalonia: And Attaces, not able to
withstand that Power, fled into Portugal.

7. The Victors pursued, and Attaces giving them Battle, was overthrown, though
joined by the Native Lusitanians: Those that escaped out of the Battle, fled;
some into Galicia, to Gundericus; others to Lisbon, to the Suevians; seeking
the Protection of those they had before prosecuted as Enemies. Thus they rested
a while, without any King: But Constantius being called away, to appease other
Troubles in Italy, the Alans and Lusitanians, before dispersed, began to take
heart, and recover what they had lost; founding also many new Towns. Among
these, were, Albuquerque and Terabrica; which last was rather repaired, being
called Alankerken, which signifies, The Church of the Alans; and now,
corruptly, Alanquer. Whilst the Alans, thus without any King, only following
their Generals, paid Tribute to the Emperor; The Suevians incorporate with the
ancient Lusitanians.
Hermenericus, the Suevian King, at Lisbon, applied himself to the repairing of
the Towns that had been destroyed; treating the Native Lusitanians no otherwise
than his own Countrymen. The Lusitanians having the free Liberty of their
Religion, and being equally admitted to all Honors with the Suevians, the two
Nations joined Marriage; and by that Means became so entirely one, that there
was no knowing the Suevian from the Lusitanian, or the contrary. Being thus
joined into one Body, they could afterward never be parted; but
notwithstanding the Invasion of the Goths, the Inhabitants of Portugal were
afterward called Suevians. Thus the Portugueses are descended from the
Suevians, no less Noble than the Goths, if either of those Barbarous Nations
deserve to be esteemed Honorable: And thus the Province of Lusitania lost that
Name, and was long after called Suevia.

8. The Alans enjoyed Tranquillity, 419.
without any King; as did the Suevians, or Portugueses, under their Sovereign
Hermenericus; till Gundericus, King of the Vandals, thinking it easy to subdue
the Alans in Lusitania, and the Silingi in Andaluzia, if Hermenericus were once
oppressed, he broke the Peace with the Suevians; and rushing suddenly, with
Fire and Sword, into their Territories; Hermenericus, though surprised at this
unexpected Invasion, gathering his Forces together, received the Enemy so
successfully, that he sent him to seek new Seats in the Islands of Majorca and
Minorca; where we will leave him, to be spoken of by those Historians to whom
it belongs. 420.
Gensericus, the Brother of Gundericus, The Suevians, Alans and Silingi join in
League against the Romans.
succeeded him: Who understanding that Etius, Honorius's General, was coming
into Spain, to revenge the Wrongs done by his Brother, he joined in League with
Hermenericus King of the Suevians, and with the Alans and Silingi; believing
none would dare to oppose their United Power. At Merida they Mustered their
Forces, Etius dreading their Multitude; but much more surprised at the death of
the Emperor, 423.
attempted nothing upon them. Thus Gensericus was left at leisure to pass over
into Africa, where he utterly abolished the Name of the Roman Empire, and
Hermenericus, 427.
whilst the Vandals were employed in Africa, enlarged the Borders of his
Kingdom to almost the same extent it now bears.

9. Valentinian the Emperor, Wars betwixt the Romans and Suevians.
who succeeded Honorius, understanding the Vandals were gone over into Africa,
Commanded his General Sebastian to invade the Alans left in Lusitania. Merida
and all that Territory was easily taken from them, as was Lisbon and
Estremadura from the Suevians. Sebastian now Victorious, forgetting his Duty,
caused himself to be Proclaimed King of what part he had recovered of
Lusitania; yet his Friends failing him, he was soon killed, and by his Death
the Alans and Suevians had an opportunity of recovering Merida and Lisbon.
Hermenericus grown Old and Infirm, caused his Son Richila to be Proclaimed
King, who proved one of the most fortunate Princes of the Suevians; whilst
Hermenericus rejoiced in the hopes of surviving in the Person of his Son,
Andebalus the Imperial General was on his march to recover what Sebastian had
lost. Richila to begin his Reign honorably, gathered a mighty Power, and
meeting Andebalus on the Banks of the River Xenil, then called Silingus, slew
him and the greatest part of his Army.

10. All Andaluzia easily submitted to the Victorious King, Richila makes
himself Master of Lusitania and Andaluzia.
as did also Merida, where there had been an Imperial Garrison ever since
Sebastian took it. All Lusitania in like manner was brought under, and Richila
became absolute in Andaluzia and Lusitania. Old Hermenericus died contentedly,
leaving such an Heir, in the Town of Britonium near Viana de Caminha on the
mouth of the River Minho. 440.
Another Author who calls him Monarch of Spain, says, he was drowned in the
River Guadiana near unto Merida. Richila being sensible how much more easy it
is to gain, than to preserve* too large a Dominion, voluntarily resigned up
Cartagena and Carpentania to the Romans, and entering into League with them, by
that means established a large and peaceable Kingdom. 448.
He died Eight Years after his Father, and left his Son Ricciarius to succeed
him, being equal to him in valor, but more fortunate in the true knowledge of
the Evangelical Law, which he professed living, and adhered to at his death.

CHAP. III.
The Kingdom of the Suevians subdued by the Goths, two Kings set up by their
consent, all again reduced under one with the other remarkable occurrences
between the Years of Grace 448 and 560.
1. RIcciarius succeeded his Father Richila, 448.
not only in the Kingdom of Portugal, Ricciarius his Reign.
but the greatest part of Spain. The beginning of his Reign was disturbed with
some Conspiracies of the Great Men, but he privately took off many of them, and
by that means secured his Life and Kingdom. He Married a Daughter of
Theodoredus, King of the Goths; her Name is not known: Ricciarius after his
Marriage, raising a great Army, made War upon those parts of Navarre, which
were yet subject to the Roman Jurisdiction, and through them he forced his way
into France, to see his Father-in-law Theodoredus. The old Man perceiving his
aspiring Spirit, gave him considerable supplies for the carrying on of his
Designs. In his return, he conquered the Province of Tarragona and Carpentania,
which his Father had abandoned to the Romans. In Aragon, he took Zaragoza, and
Lerida in Catalonia; after plundering the Province of Cartagena, he returned
loaded with Booty and Honor into Lusitania. Ricciarius being now at rest, 451.
his Father-in-law Theodoredus died, and Theodoricus his Son succeeded him: Him
Ricciarius thought to have been no less forward toward his Assistance, than the
Father had been, and upon this conceit, he resolved to conquer the other Lands
of the Empire. The Goth who was in League with the Romans, and feared the
Ambition of his Brother-in-law might involve him in his own Ruin, advised him
to moderate his extravagant desires. Ricciarius offended at this wholesome
advice, marched against his Brother-in-law with a powerful Army; Theodoricus
was not backward to meet him, being strengthened with Succors from the Kings of
France and Burgundy. He is overthrown by Theodoricus King of the Goths.
The two Armies furiously engaged in the Plains about Astorga, both Kings were
present in all places, where the greatest Danger was, Encouraging their
Soldiers, and the Men fought as those who had their Kings to be Spectators of
their Valor. At last Ricciarius was utterly overthrown with the Slaughter of
all the flower of the Suevians.

2. Ricciarius after this rout fled to the Seaside, Ricciarius his end.
and Embarking, thought to have got over into Africa, to call the Vandals and
Alans to his assistance, but by a violent Storm was drove to the River of
Porto. Those People to gain the Favor of the Conqueror, who was now subduing
the Province between the Rivers Duero and Minho, secured and delivered him up
to Theodoricus. He Governed by Passion, cut off his Head, and in him perished
the Glory of the Suevian Kingdom, so that it never after rose to any Grandeur:
His Death was the more lamented, for that he was a Prince zealous of the true
Religion. Accordingly in his lifetime, he assembled a National Synod at Aquae
Celenae, a Town in Galicia, now called St. George of Codes^da; here several
Heresies were Condemned, and particularly that of Priscilian. The Victorious
Theodoricus laid Siege to Braga, which was soon Surrendered to him: Here he left
one Aliulfus Governor, whilst he crossing the River Duero, went on to conquer
all that had been subject to the Suevian King; all yielded to him without any
opposition, except the City Merida, the Garrison and Inhabitants of which place
were so hardy, as to meet the Goths in the Field, which Theodoricus so highly
resented, that he promised to raze the City, but the Virgin St. Eulalia is said
to have appeared to him in a Dream, and deterred him from putting his design in
Execution.

3. Theodoricus was upon his return to France, Theodoricus having conquered
Spain, puts it under Governors.
when he had intelligence, that Aliulfus whom he had made Governor of Braga,
had assumed the Title of King, and raised a considerable Army to maintain it.
But giving Battle to Nepocianus Theodoricus his General lost his life: From
that time the Suevians remained subject to the Goths. All things being thus
quieted, Theodoricus went away to France, leaving Governors over all his
Conquests. The People considering the oppression they lay under, by the ill
Administration of these Governors, and wanting the power to Revolt, had
recourse to the Bishops and Clergy, praying them to intercede with Theodoricus,
that he would appoint a King over them, whom they might obey, and who yet might
be subordinate to him. The Bishops undertook the Business, and Idacius Prelate
of Lamego, having proposed the matter of the Embassy to Theodoricus in France,
he though an Arrian, respecting the Character of the Ambassadors, not only
granted their request, but allowed the People to choose a King among
themselves, to Govern them according to their Ancient Laws, only paying some
small acknowledgment to the Kings of the Goths. Two Kings set up in Lusitania.
As soon as the Bishops returned to Braga, joining with the Laity, they chose
for their King one Masdra the Son of Masila. This, which was intended for the
peace of the Country, proved its greatest Confusion, for some of the Nobility
who were not present at the Election, set up for their King one Franta, who
presently possessed himself of all the Lands along the Coast of Galicia, with
the Cities of Astorga, Orense and Iria Flavia. Masdra held all Lusitania, and
was accounted King of the Suevians; he thought by his submission and paying the
Tribute, to gain the favor of Theodoricus, and obtain Aid against his
Competitor: But, the Goth politickly thinking it better the Kingdom should be
divided, as being thereby the less capable of Rebelling against him, accepted
of the submission of them both; for Franta had sent to pay his obedience with
no less speed than the other.

4. The Kingdom of the Suevians thus divided, 457.
fell into those Calamities which commonly attend States that depend between
Competitors. Two Years the Wars continued very furious, during which time so
many Towns about the Frontiers were subverted, as might well have contented
either party; but at last both of them grown weary, 460.
gave over the strife. Masdra who had the better Title died, and left a Son
called Remismundus his Successor; he considering how little had been gained on
either side by the War, not only made Peace, but entered into League with his
Competitor. Thus with their united Forces, they conquered several parts of
Lusitania, which owned neither of them, but either followed their own Captains,
or had again put themselves under the Roman Empire. Thus done, they both
returned home satisfied, having enlarged their Dominions, which they would have
wasted by waging War upon one another. A prodigious Birth.
Two Years Franta enjoyed Peace, at the end whereof he died, leaving the Crown
to his Brother Frumarius: At this time happened a Prodigy in the Territory of
Braga, which was the Birth of two Children, each of them having two heads like
one another, and of two several Sexes. Remismundus and Frumarius falling at
variance about Precedence, took up Arms by force, whereof the latter^gained of
the other the City Flavia, now Chaves, in which and all its Territory, he
spared not even the Stones, all the Country was consumed with Fire and Sword.
Remismundus was satisfied with doing as much harm in his Enemies Country, as he
received in his own; he took by open force the Cities of Orense and Lugo, in
which he exercised the utmost Efforts of his Fury.

5. This Desolation continued for the space of two Years, 464.
when Death put a stop to it by taking away Frumarius, The Suevian Kingdom
again united under Remismundus.
and his subjects having left him, for whom before they had forfeited their
quiet, submitted themselves to Remismundus, who thus became absolute and sole
King of the Suevians. He presently thought of recovering all that remained of
Lusitania, and passing over the River Duero with his Army, marched to the
Ancient Coimbra, now Condeixa, which the Romans had Rebuilt and Fortified. It
was then a place impregnable, and accordingly put a stop for a while to
Remismundus; but he persisting before it, had it at last surrendered upon
Honorable Conditions; though, contrary to his Faith given, he broke the
Conditions, robbing the Garrison, and rasing the City. Lisbon made such a
vigorous Defense, that he began to despair of carrying it; but a Citizen called
Lusidius privately, gave him Entrance into it, so that he was within before the
Townsmen could put themselves in order to oppose him. Remismundus thus
possessed of all those Dominions before divided, fearing least Theodoricus the
Goth might grow jealous of his great power, sent him an account of his
Victories with the best of the spoils, He Marries the Daughter of Theodoricus.
assuring him of the continuance of his Fidelity to the Gothish Kings.
Theodoricus overcome with this Generosity, sent him his Daughter for Wife, with
a great Mass of Treasure, under the charge of his Ambassador Salanus.

6. This was an unhappy Match for Lusitania, The Arian Heresy first spread in
Lusitania.
for the Suevians being before true Sons of the Catholic Church, were now
infected with the Arian Heresy, taught them by one Ajax a Galatian, whom the
Queen being her self an Arian brought with her. The love of the Queen, and the
persuasions of Ajax, wrought upon the King so effectually, that he not only
gave his Subjects the Example of embracing that Heresy, but persecuted those
that continued firm in the Faith. All the care of the Prelates for repressing
of this current was fruitless, for it spread it self during the space of 100
Years, in which time the Catholics suffered Oppression, Banishment, and cruel
Deaths. There is no further memory of the Actions of Remismundus, after his
Marriage till his Death; nor much of his Successors, Theodulus, Varamundus,
Mirus, Faramirus and others, till Theodomirus, during the 100 Years that the
Arian Heresy continued. 490.
In the Year 490, some Fishes were taken in the River Minho, which on their
Scales had certain Characters, expressing that same number of Years. 497.
Not long after came into Spain, Euricus King of the Goths, with a design to
subdue all the Country, and began with Lusitania, where having made great
havoc, he returned Victorious into France and died at Arles. Amalaricus, 530.
Grandson to Theodoricus, succeeded Euricus, he being Married to Crosilda ^he
Daughter of Clouis, and Sister to ^^hildebert, Clotarius, and Clodomirus Kings
of France, treated her ill, because she was a Catholic, he being an Arian. She
complained her Brothers by the means of Ausbertus Archbishop of Braga; 531.
Childebert hereupon came into Lusitania, and having overthrown and slain his
Brother-in-law, returned into France laden with Booty, and carrying away his
Sister, who died by the Way:

7. In the Year 549, 549.
Agila was Proclaimed King of the Goths, he being overthrown at Cordova,
retired into Lusitania. There he raised new Forces to withstand Athanagildus, a
valiant ambitious Captain, who being possessed of Sevil, styled himself King of
Spain: He was supported by Roman Forces, under the Command of Patricius
Liberius, a General in esteem with the Emperor Justinian. 554.
Near to Sevil they came to a Battle, wherein Agila was otherthrown, and
afterward Murdered by his own Subjects at Merida. 555.
Athanagildus thus became Sovereign of all that part of the Kingdom of the
Goths, which lies between the Mouth of Tagus and Cape St. Vincent. The greatest
part of this Dominion was again recovered by the Romans, notwithstanding that
Athanagildus did all he could to oppose them, till he died at Toledo in the
Year 567. 567.
In these times were famous for Piety and Learning, Men famous for Learning.
the Bishops St. Julian of Evora, Lucenius of Coimbra, Aprigius of Beja,
Idacius of Lamego and Ausbertus of Braga, a Fleming by Birth: Also the famous
Orosius born at Tarragona in Catalonia, flourished at Braga. The Prelates of
Spain finding it not only convenient, but necessary to consult with St.
Augustine then Bishop of Hippo in Africa, for the better settling and adjusting
of matters of Religion, then much perplexed with Doubts, and Controversies;
Baleonius at that time, Bishop of Braga, made choice of Orosius to be sent to
him with this Message. The chief point given him in charge, was about the means
of extirpating the Heresies then spread about Spain; St. Augustine having
therein given his own Opinion, ordered Oresius to pass over into the Holy Land,
there to take the advice also of the other Pillar of the Church St. Hierome,
who resided there at that time. There Orosius found the Priest Avitus a
Lusitanian, who for the love he bore his Country, sent by Orosius at his return
some relics of the Protomartyr St. Stephen, whose body had been about that
time miraculous^^ ^ound out. This may be supposed to be the same that was held
in Veneration at Ossel, which Town some will have to be in the Territory of
Beja and others of Bajadoz.

CHAP. IV.
The Reigns of the Tributary Suevian Kings, from the Year 560, till 585, when
Lusitania was again subdued by Leovigildus, the Goth. And the Government of the
Gothish Kings, till the Year 672.
1. WE are now come to the End of the 100 Years, which Historians pass over,
without any considerable Mention of our Portuguese, or Suevian Kings. In
Theodemirus, 560.
the Memory of our Princes is happily renewed, Conversion of the Lusitanians
from Arianism.
since through his Means most of the Subjects returned to the true Faith. At
the Beginning of his Reign he was an Arrian, but miraculously converted. He
removed his Court to the City Braga, where his Son being desperately sick, and
no Medicines availing, he asked, one Day, which had been the Religion of St.
Gregory of Tours; this Saint being then famous for Miracles: It was told him,
he had been a Catholic. Immediately four Gentlemen were sent, with as much
Gold and Silver as the sick Person weighed, besides other Gifts, to offer at
the Shrine; with a Promise, That if the Prince recovered, he should embrace the
Catholic Religion. The Sickness hereupon decreased, yet the Prince recovered
not perfect Health: Whereupon, the King begged some Relick of the Saint;
promising to renounce his Heresy. The Relick was refused the Ambassadors; and
they, at Night, spreading a thin Veil over the Sepulcher, said, They would
reverence it as a Reliok, if in the Morning its Weight were considerably
increased. Accordingly, the next Morning they found it as heavy as if it had
been made of some weighty Metal. This Veil the Ambassadors brought with them;
and the same Day they landed, the Prince perfectly recovered. The King
performed his Promise, embracing the Faith; and by his Example, and the
Preaching of another St. Martin, who then came out of France, according to some
Authors; or, as others will have it, out of Greece, most of the People were
converted. Theodemirus had before erected a Church, in Honor of St. Martin of
Tours: Of this Church he made the other Martin Abbot first, and then Bishop;
whence he was preferred to the Archiepiscopal See of Braga.

2. Two Years were spent in the Embassages, and other pious Works of the King,
Several Synods.
for his Son's Health; and all things being now in Peace, he ordered Lucrecius,
Archbishop of Braga, to assemble a Synod, for the better regulating the Affairs
of the Church. 563.
Eight Bishops being met, they again condemned the Heresy of Priscilianus; and
took Order for the propagating of the Faith. 569.
Another Synod met after that, at Lugo, to appoint the Limits of every Diocese;
which were afterward confirmed, in the general Distribution made throughout
Spain, 570.
by King Wamba. Theodemirus dying, the Crown came to his Son Ariamirus; who,
with the Approbation of St. Martin, now Archbishop of Braga, ordered another
Synod to meet in that City; which was accordingly done two Years after: 572.
Twelve Prelates assembled there; and one of the principal Matters handled,
was, the fixing the due Time of Observing of Easter. After settling the Affairs
of the Faith, the King raised Forces; 577.
and invading the People called Rucones, now Rieja, subdued them. Luiva was now
King of the Goths, and took for his Companion, and Successor, his Brother
Leovigildus: Which done, he returned into France, leaving Leovigildus in Spain,
to secure his former Conquests, and add others to them. He victoriously
traversed the greatest part of Spain, and at last entered Galicia, Ariamirus in
vain striving to put a Stop to his Progress; who now perceiving how ineffectual
Force proved, thought better to try if Fair Means would prevail: Therefore he
sent Ambassadors to Leovigildus, to put him in mind of the Peace and Alliance
established betwixt their Predecessors, and to desire the Renewing thereof.
Leovigildus, content with this Submission, curbed his aspiring Thoughts,
concluded a Peace, and retired.

3. Leovigildus had now two Sons, Hermenegildus and Recaredus. The first was
married to Ingunda, Daughter of Sigebert King of France, and his Wife
Brunechilde. Upon this Marriage, he lived apart from his Father, and had the
Style of a King given him at Merida. There, by the Means of his Wife, who was a
Catholic, and of his Uncle St. Leander, Archbishop of Sevil^ he embraced the
Catholic Faith; and, in Baptism, was, called John. Leovigildus the Goth Wars
upon his Son Hermenegildus, on Account of Religion.
His Father being an obstinate Arian, was so offended at his Conversion, that
he deprived him of the Regal Dignity. The Prince fled into Portugal, and was
there protected by King Ariamirus, who was a Catholic. Hermenegildus raised
Forces; but his Father coming speedily upon him, he fled, with 3000 Men, to
Ossela, a Place thought impregnable: But Leovigildus, for all that, entered it
by Force, put all to the Sword, burnt the Town, and carried away his Son
Prisoner to Toledo. From thence he made his Escape to Sevil, where he fortified
himself. King Leovigildus laid Siege to that City, being assisted by King
Ariamirus of Portugal; and having forced his Way into it, carried away
Hermenegildus to Tarragona, where he was put to Death, in the Year 586. Which
Passage is here related, to avoid interrupting the Narration.

4. Our King Ariamirus died at that Siege, 583.
and his Son Eburicus, then very young, succeeded him in the Crown of Portugal,
under the Protection of Leovigildus the Goth. Endeca usurps the Crown of
Portugal.
Endeca, a Nobleman in great Power at the Portuguese Court, taking Advantage
of the King's tender Years, married Sisegunda the Queen-Dowager; and with the
Help of his Friends, possessed himself of the Government, upon pretense of
managing it for the young King. But having, in Process of Time, secured his
Interest, he usurped the Regal Title, and put Eburious into Prison at first,
and soon after obliged him to take the Habit of a Monk, that so he might
forfeit his Pretensions to the Crown. The Tyrant Endeca fearing Leovigildus the
Goth, who was Protector to the deposed King, joined in League with Gunteranus
the French King. But the Goth, whose Courage was not to be shocked, sent his
Son Recaredus against the French, and himself invaded the usurping Suevian. He
is deposed, and shorn a Monk, by Leovigildus the Goth,
He soon took him Prisoner, and obliged him to take the same Habit he had
before forced upon the Rightful King, and to enter into Holy Orders, banishing
him to the City Beja, then possessed by the Goths. Yet Leovigildus, though he
was thought to have conquered that Kingdom for Eluricus, kept it for himself;
adding it to his other Dominions. Thus ended the Kingdom of the Suevians, after
it had, with various Turns of Fortune, lasted about 180 Years: 585.
It expired in the Year 585. The People, dissatisfied with Leovigildus, rose up
in Arms, and proclaimed a Nobleman, called Malaricus, King; but he being soon
overthrown, and taken Prisoner by the Forces of the Goth, the Kingdom of the
Lusitanians, or Suevians, was entirely brought under the Dominion of the Goths.
He persecutes the Catholics, but dies one himself.
The Lusitanians at this time continued firm in the Faith, and Leovigildus
ceased not to persecute the Professors thereof; deposing the Catholic
Prelates, and filling their Places with Arians, who perverted many of the
People. Leovigildus having reigned 18 Years, died at Toledo, a Catholic,
though he had lived an Arian. His first Wife was Theodora, Daughter of
Severianus, Governor of Cartagena, and his Wife Theodora, Daughter to
Theodoricus, King of the Ostrogoths, in Italy; and Sister to Isidorus and
Leander, Archbishops of Sevil; and of Fulgentius, of Cartagena. By her he had
Hermenegildus, whom he put to death; and Flavius Recaredus, who succeeded him.

5. Recaredus, 586.
born at Sevil, in the Year 566, now, in the 20th of his Age, Recaredus
succeeds.
inherited his Father's Throne. He proved an excellent Prince; and having
embraced the Catholic Faith, restored all those that his Father had expelled.
He becomes a Catholic.
His pious Intention of Assembling a National Synod, was, for some time,
obstructed by the Treasonable Conspiracies of the Heretics. The first Council
was held at Merida, under the Direction of Claudius, who governed the small
Remainder of the Roman Empire along the Seacoast of Lusitania. Suna the Arian
Archbishop, being now compelled to resign that See to Mansona the Catholic,
before expelled by Leovigildus, conspired with other Heretics, to murder him
and Claudius. Witericus, who was afterward King, now one of the Conspirators,
laying his Hand upon his Sword, to execute his Purpose, he could not draw it;
whereat being moved he discovered the Treachery, and was therefore pardoned.
Suna, the Heretical Archbishop, was banished, as were the other Accomplices,
and their Estates confiscated. Amidst this Confusion, Gunteranus King of France
made War upon Recaredus; sending against him an Army, under the Command of his
General Bossus. Claudius, a Man fortunate in War, marched to oppose him, and
overthrew him near Carcassonne, with a great Slaughter. Some will have it, that
Claudius, with only 300 Men, defeated Bossus, who had 60000: But let every one
judge thereof as he pleases.

6. Recaredus having thus subdued his Enemies, both at home and abroad, was at
leisure to assemble the Council he had before designed at Toledo. 589.
Seventy two Prelates met together there, A Syno^ at Toledo.
St. Leander, Archbishop of Sevil, presiding. The King himself made an Oration
at the Opening of the Council. Now the Arian Heresy was totally extinguished,
the Catholic Faith triumphed, and Recaredus, for his singular Piety, had the
Title of Catholic, or Most Christian King conferred upon him. 601.
After triumphing over his, which were the Enemies of Christ, Recaredus dies.
our Religious King Recaredus died at Toledo. He was born at Sevil, in the Year
565; reigned 16, and lived 37. His Coin has been seen in our Age, at several
Places: Some at Lisbon, with this Inscription on the one side, RECAREDUS REX;
and on the Reverse, OLISIBONA PIUS. Others at Evora, with RECAREDUS REX; and on
the Back, ELBORA JUSTUS. Recaredus had two Wives; The first, before he came to
the Crown, was Balda, Daughter to the famous King Arthur, or to Fonto, a
Gothish Lord. The Second was Clodosinda, Sister to Ingunda, the Wife of his
Brother, Prince Hermenegildus. Her chiefest Portion was, the Peace established
between Spain and France, then at War. By his first Wife (though some will have
him to be Illegitimate) he had Liuva, who succeeded him in the Throne; and was
of such excellent Beauty of Person, and such amiable Behavior, that all his
Subjects rather adored than obeyed him; except Witericus, whom the late King
had pardoned for discovering the Conspiracy at Merida. This Man, before enured
to Treachery, now compassed his wicked Designs, apprehending his natural Lord,
cutting off his Right Hand, and depriving him of his Crown and Life, in the
Second Year of his Reign.

7. Witericus thus Tyrannically possessed of the Government and Regal Throne of
all Spain, 603.
held it seven Years; Wetericus usurps.
which ended in an ignominious Death, yet such as he deserved: He died,
miserably dragged about the Streets of Toledo, 610.
by the People. Flavius Gundemarus, of the Blood of Recaredus, Flavius
Gundemarus reigns.
in that Right ascended the Throne, and proved no way inferior to him for
Valor, Moderation and Piety. He desiring to honor the Church of Toledo, 611.
made it the Metropolitan of all the Province of Cartagena: To which purpose, a
Synod was held at Toledo, in which it was ordained, that Criminals should have
the Benefit of Sanctuary. In this City Death cut him off so early, that it is
doubted whether he reigned full two Years. 612.
Our Lusitania, then subject to the Gothish Kings, Lusitania governed by
Lieutenants.
was governed by their Lieutenants, whereof there was one in every Province,
and some Comites, or Counts; for then this Title began to be honored for being
rare, as now it is little regarded for being so common. It is to be observed,
that at this time the Name of Comites was not Titular, as now; but denoted a
Power and Jurisdiction over Lands of the Crown. In Spain there is no Title
given by the Kings, that is of 400 Years standing. Gundemarus, Sisebutus chosen
King
though married to Hilduara, leaving no Heirs, Sisebutus was chosen his
Successor, by the Prelates and Nobility. 616.
He immediately, upon his Accession to the Crown, commanded all the Jews to
embrace the Christian Religion: Almost 100000 were baptized; and as many chose
rather to be banished Spain. Sisebutus, though absent from Portugal, adorned it
with many Structures: Two Towers, with his Name on them, remain still at Evora,
of the Walls then by him built. Some of his Coin is also extant, on the Reverse
whereof is a Cross, and about it. CIVITAS EBORA DEUS ADJUTOR MEUS. He ordered
Ships to be built upon the Coast of Lusitania; and having obtained some
Victories, which appertain not to our History, 621.
died when he had reigned 8 Years and an half, much lamented, as
extraordinarily beloved of his Subjects.

8. Sisebutus left a young Son, called Recaredus; who dying soon after his
Accession to the Crown, 622.
left it to Flavius Suintila, Flavius Suintila 's Reign.
Son to the Holy King Recaredus; so worthy a Man, that Silebutus always
committed to him the Command of his Armies. No sooner had he grasped the
Scepter, He utterly expels the Romans.
but he changed it for the Sword, and soon drove out of Portugal the small
Remains of the Roman Empire, which still, in much Variety of Fortune, had
retained some small Hold there. During the first five Years of his Reign, he
behaved himself with that Justice and Piety, that, among other honorable
Titles, he obtained that of Father of the Poor. Some of his Coin, in Gold, I
have seen; whereof, one Piece had this Inscription, SUINTILA REX EBORA VICTOR:
Another, SUINTILA REX EMERITA PIUS. This King stained the Honor of the first
five Years of his Reign, by the Lewdness of the ensuing five; which so incensed
his Subjects, that he was forced to fly, and end his Days in Misery, in
Lusitania, as some will have it; or in Toledo, according to others: Yet other
Authors say, he and his Son Richimirus were killed by Sisenandus, their
Successor. Some Writers affirm, that Sisenandus was Brother to Suintila.
Certain it is, 631.
he obtained the Crown by Election, with the Assistance of Dagobert King of
France, Sisenandus succeeds in the Throne.
whose Favor he had purchased with a great Sum of Money. At the Beginning of
his Reign he made himself loved, and feared. He assembled a National Synod at
Toledo, at which 72 Prelates met: Here, in regard of what Sisebutus had done
with the Jews, it was ordained, That none should be forcibly constrained to
embrace the Catholic Faith. 635.
Sisenandus died at Toledo, having reigned four Years.

9. It is doubtful whether Sisenandus was Father or Brother to Chintila, King
Chintila holds two Synods.
his Heir. Two Synods were held in his Days. He reigned three Years and an
half, and died at Toledo, much lamented of all Men. His Son Tulga succeeded
him; 638.
who holding the Crown but two Years, His Son Tulga succeeds.
could not do so much as was expected from his Justice, Prudence and Valor. He
departed this Life at Toledo, leaving no Issue. Chindasuindus, by Force of
Arms, 640.
possessed himself of the Kingdom. At Toledo he gathered a Synod of 40
Prelates. Chindasuindus possesses himself of the Kingdom by Force.
Rensiberga, Daughter to Evancius, the Brother of St. Eugenius Archbishop of
Toledo, was Wife to this King: By her he had three Sons, viz. Recesuindus, 650.
Theodofredus and Favila. Having reigned 10 Years, he died at Toledo, and was
buried in the Monastery of St. Romanus, founded by himself, between Toro and
Tordesilas. 655.
Two Synods were assembled at Toledo during the Reign of Recesuindus, Two
Synods held by Recesuindus
the eldest Son of the late King: In the First were 52 Bishops, from all Parts
of Spain. In the Second Council were first heard Debates and Disputes
concerning the Primacy of all Spain: Braga pretended a Right to that Honor: It
was decreed, that the Archbishop of Braga should be Metropolitan of all Galicia
only. Another Council was assembled at Merida, to the same effect; but the
Church of Braga still went down. About this same time the Gascoigns invaded
Spain, but were overthrown, and expelled, though no Particulars of the Action
are to be found in History, nor of any thing that happened in the Space of
almost 20 Years, which end with the Life of Recesuindus. 672.
He was buried in the Church of St. Leocadia, at Toledo. Some of his Coin is
still to be seen. His only Son Theodofredus was left so young, that he was
thought incapable of inheriting so great a Monarchy, as will appear in the
Sequel. It is here very remarkable, that Pontamius, Archbishop of Braga, not
content that he had done 9 Months private Penance, accused himself openly, in
the Synod, of committing Incontinency; wherefore he was deposed from his
Dignity, with extraordinary Horror of all the Prelates who heard the
Accusation, though from the Mouth of one so penitent. So rare was it then to
see a Prelate guilty of any Crime; So rare now to see them endued with any
Virtue.

CHAP. V.
The Succession of the other Gothish Kings in the Monarchy of Spain, till
Roderick the last of them, from the Year of Grace 672 till 711.
1. NOw was the Monarchy of Spain in a dangerous Condition, Theodofredus the
Son of Recesuindus (if there were any such, for it is dubious) being left so
Young, that he was wholly incapable of managing the Government; the Nobility
consulting what was to be done, asked advice of the Pope, who by Divine
Revelation, answered: It was the Will of God that Wamba should be preferred to
the Crown. Wamba his strange advanc^ment to the Crown.
He being a Man not known, many went out in search of him, and at last found
him near Idanha, then a famous City in Portugal: he was then busy at Plow with
a pair of Oxen. They told him what they came about, and he taking it for Jest,
or believing it impossible, answered: That when the Goad he held in his hand
Blossomed, Wamba would be a King. The Goad accordingly shooting out Flowers, he
was immediately carried away and Crowned at Toledo. At the time of Anointing
his Head, a Vapor like a Cloud was seen to rise from it, and in the midst
thereof, a Be which ascending into the Air, at last vanished: This is in
short, what some Authors relate, as to the Election of Wamba. Others wholly
rejecting all that is miraculous therein, say, He was a Great Man at Court, and
others, That he was Son to the late King Recesuindus, and proclaimed the 3d.
day after his Death, so that there could not be time to repair to the Pope, and
the working of the Miracles. These latter are the most suitable Opinions to
Reason, and there is nothing certain in these Antiquities; every Man may
believe as he pleases.

2. Wamba (howsoever it was) being placed on the Throne, His Wars in France and
Spain.
the People of Navarre, and other their Neighbors, took up Arms to shake off
the Gothish Yoke; but the New King taking the Field against them, soon quelled
that Rebellion. In the mean while, the Count Hilpericus revolted in the City of
Nismes, which is in Gallia Narbonensis, then subject to the Dominion of Spain;
which made Wamba raise new Forces against that Rebel, and gave the Command of
them to Paul a Valiant Grecian. He being Master of the Field, instead of
punishing the Count, rebelled himself, and with him Ranosindus Governor of
Tarragona and Hildigisius the Civil Magistrate. By these he was Proclaimed King
of Spain, and Crowned at Narbonne with a rich Crown, offered by the Holy King
Recaredus at the shrine of St. Felix Martyr of Gironne. Hilpericus the first
Rebel, and all Gallia Norbonensis joned with the others; the same did Catalonia
and Navarre. Paul strengthened with the accession of so many Provinces, had the
boldness to send a Challange in most insolent Terms to King Wamba. He at that
time was in War with the People of Navarre and Biscay, and having caused the
Challenge to be Read in an Assembly of his chief Commanders, though most of them
advised to the contrary, he resolved to march with speed against the rebellious
Enemy; none hesitated to follow the resolute Prince. They entered Navarre, which
they entirely subdued in seven days, and being come into Catalonia, the King
divided his victorious Army into three parts; one took the way of Perpignan,
another that of Ausetania, and the third kept along the Sea Coast. The King
himself stayed behind with certain choice bands to be ready to repair to the
place where most Danger was. He took Barcelona by Force, and was peaceably
received into Gironne, for the Tyrant believing that Wamba would not have the
Courage to come to meet him, and that he should soon be there himself, had sent
to order Amador the Bishop, That he should acknowledge as his Prince the first
that came to the Walls. Wamba being the first, the Prelate did as he was
ordered, and the King said to him, Paul has prophesied my coming hither.
Immediately he advanced to the Pyrenean Hills, and at the foot of them took
Colibre and other strong places.

3. Whilst Wamba reduced the Rebels, The Rebels in France subdued by him.
Paul retired to Nismes, leaving all he had provided for his Defense behind him
at Narbonne. All that was not sufficient to secure that City to Witimerus, whom
he had left there as his Lieutenant^, for Wamba to avoid the Effusion of Blood,
having offered him some good Terms, and he obstinately refusing, an Assault was
given, which lasted three hours, at the end whereof the City was taken, and in
it Witimerus with others of his Associates. The same happened at Magalona, Agate
and other strong holds, all taken by force and with much Slaughter. Nismes held
out longer despair fighting for Paul, but at last it submitted to Wamba. The
French in the Town thinking they were betrayed by the Spaniards in hope of
Pardon, fell upon them, and so they slaughtered one another, whilst the
Besiegers breaking in, put them all indifferently to the Sword. 673.
Paul quitting the Royal Robes, retired to an Amphitheater, a strong Roman
Work, where he stayed two days, the Victors only keeping Guard least he should
escape thence. The King coming to the City, Argebatus, Archbishop of Narbonne,
one of the followers of Paul, came out to meet him in his Pontifical Robes, and
casting himself at his Feet, begged Pardon for himself and all the rest. This
action somewhat appeaseth Wamba, who Pardoned him and promised to moderate his
anger toward the rest. He entered the City in Triumph, where Paul was brought
Prisoner and fell down prostrate before him, as others did; their lives were
granted, but they were committed to custody till it were resolved what
punishment to inflict upon them; all the French were set free, and the City
ordered to be repaired. It was voted, that Paul and his Associates should have
their Eyes put out, their lives being before granted them, but Wamba was
content they should only remain perpetual Prisoners. When he entered Toledo in
Triumph, they were all carried before him upon Camels, and Paul in the midst of
them barefooted, with a Crown of black Leather on his Head, instead of that of
Gold he had aspired to; all their Beards long, and their Heads shaved;
Penalties usually inflicted on Traitors at that time, and thus Peace was
restored.

4. After this he assembled a National Council, 675.
wherein the bounds of all the Bishoprics of Spain were determined, The
Africans invading Spain destroyed.
which continued in the same form, till the Moors conquered Spain. The same
Year another Synod was held at Braga to reform Abuses; much about this time the
Africans with a great Fleet scouring along the Coast of Spain, did much harm:
The King sent his Forces against them, by whom they were overthrown, their
Fleet burnt, and all their power both by Sea and Land consumed. It is thought
that one Count Ervigius a Grecian, banished by the Emperor of Constantinople,
was the cause of their coming; he aspiring to the Crown, thought that the Goths
thus invaded, would easily have submitted themselves to him, because he had
married a Niece of King Recesinudus, and that Wamba was then very Aged. Failing
of his design, he gave Wamba a sort of Poison that disturbed his Brain, and at
the same time prevailed with him to appoint him his Successor. Besides these
his Contrivances, Wamba desirous of himself to lay down the burden of a Crown
to him grown unsupportable, voluntarily quitted the regal Authority, and took
the habit of a Monk in the Monastery of Pampliega, betwixt Burgos and
Valladolid, on the Banks of the River Pisuerga, where he approved himself as
good a Religious Man, as he had been a King. Eight or more Years he Reigned,
and lived Seven in the Monastery; it is not known that he had any Children, nor
so much as a Wife, he was Buried at Pampliega. King Ferdinand the Saint,
designed to Translate him to Toledo, and his Son D. Alonso the Wife, put it in
Execution. There are two Tombs now in the Chapel of St. Leocadia, in the
Cathedral of that City, one supposed to be Wamba,'s, and the other of King
Recesiundus. King Philip the II. causing them to be opened in the Year 1575,
one of the Bodies was found clothed in the habit of St. Benedict, which was
therefore concluded to be that of Wamba, because he wearing that Habit whilst
living, was doubtless Buried in it. Some Authors will have him to be Buried at
Cinanium, or Citania, a City in the Midway betwixt Braga and Guimaraens.

5. Ervigius Successor to Wamba, 681.
was Son to Ardebastus, Ervigius (...) Wamba.
whom Ancient Records call Count, who was married to the Daughter of King
Chindasuindus. Though he deserved not the Crown as being an unjust Usurper, he
afterward seemed worthy of it for his good Government, his ensuing Virtues
attoned for his former Crimes. One of his first Actions was the assembling of a
national Counsel, 682.
the chief intent whereof was to secure the Crown he had wrongfully got. 684.
Two Years after he called together another Council, which confirmed all the
Acts of the former. A third also met the following Year to receive the Decrees
of the sixth General Council of Constantinople against the Heresy of
Apollinarus. His Actions
Ervigius though well settled in the Throne, the better to secure himself,
married his Daughter Cixilona to Egica Wamba's Nephew, being the Son of his
Sister Ariberga. A great part of Portugal was at this time Governed by Sala, a
Noble and Valiant Commander: He repaired the Walls and Bridge of Merida, and
other public Structures. King Ervigius himself Built almost from the Ground
the Walls of Idaria; Ervigius Reigned Seven Years, and died at Toledo the same
Year as did King Wamba at Pampliega.

6. Egica the Nephew of King Wamba, 687.
the more to express his Aversion to Ervigius, King Egica
whom he succeeded in the Throne, put away his Daughter, whom, as was said, he
had Married; whereupon her Children were as ill treated, as were those of her
Father. All the Brethren felt the want of right in their Father, being cast out
and not respected so much as Noble Men. However, Egica gave them some ease till
such time as a Council could be assembled to order what ought to be done with
them. 689.
This Counsel at length meeting, Decreed the King might lawfully prosecute all
that were guilty of the Treason, whereby Ervigius ascended the Throne; Several
were punished in different manners. Hereupon ensued a Conspiracy against the
King, in which Segibertus Archbishop of Toledo was the principal Actor. This
design being discovered, Egica called together another Counsel to be the better
able to proceed against the Archbishop. Sixty Bishops met, among whom were Ten
Portuguese, who gave Sentence against the Archbishop, Excommunicating,
Banishing, and Deposing him from his Dignity. 693.
Some dangerous Commotions happened in Gallia Narbonensis, then subject to the
Spanish Monarchs, fortune therein favoring the Rebels. These troubles were
followed by Plague and Famine: The Jews conspire against the King, and are
punished.
The Jews who were then numerous in Spain, took occasion herefrom to conspire
against the King, and for the carrying on their Designs, held correspondence
with others that lived in Africa, and other Foreign parts. The King informed
thereof, called another Counsel at Toledo, 694.
to punish the Guilty, excepting those of Narbonne, because of the Plague and
Famine that consumed them. The Plot being proved, the Criminals were Condemned
to serve as Slaves throughout all Spain, and to have their Children taken from
them at Seven Years of Age, to be instructed in the Christian Faith.

7. About this time, Witisa Son to Egica Reigns in Portugal.
one Count Vitulus rebelled in that part of Galicia, that joins to Portugal:
His design was to usurp the Monarchy of the Goths, but his Power being too
small, he soon suffered the penalty of his Rashness. To prevent the like
Practices for the future, the King gave the Kingdoms of Portugal and Galicia to
his Son Witisa, the Grandson of Ervigius, being then of Age to Govern. To
himself he kept the rest of Spain and Gallia Narbonensis; Witisa went into
Portugal, and kept his Court in the City Braga, where by his unjust Actions, he
raised many Troubles and much Blood was spilt, his Father having sent him
thither to prevent Discord, which he seemed rather to sow. This Country was
eased by his absence, for he removed to Tuy in Galicia, where he lived till the
Death of his Father. It is no new thing for a virtuous Father to have wicked
Children; King Egica, besides Witisa, had Opas Archbishop of Toledo, famous for
assisting to the Destruction of Spain; he was also Father of Fandina, Wife to
the unfamous Count Julian, and Mother to Florinda, the only cause of that
lamentable Tragedy.

8. Witisa being possessed of the Government of all Spain, 701.
became so insolent, After (...) Death, he is Monarch of all Spain.
that giving way to all manner of Vice, discouraging Virtue, and laying open
all places of strength in the Kingdom, he may well be styled the Spanish Nero.
I will not go about to relate all his Cruelties and lewd Practices, but must
not omit to say, he cast off all Obedience to the Pope, and gave great
Privileges to the Jews, so that they returned to Spain, and erected
Synagogues: The Inhabitants of Braga sent Felix their Archbishop to Toledo, to
Petition the King that the Walls of their City might not be Demolished, as he
had ordered. He was not admitted to speak with the King, but only with Count
Julian, then the great Favorite, of whom he obtained what he went about. This
lascivious King, killed Favila, the Father of Pelayus, and Duke of Cantabria,
thinking by that means the better to enjoy his Wife D. Luz; His Cruelties.
he put out the Eyes of Theodofredus, Father to King Roderick and D. Luz,
thereby to make him incapable of inheriting the Crown; but, Roderick did the
same by him, 711.
so that he died Blind, having Reigned Ten Years. There is no Account who was
his Wife, but it appears he had two Sons, which were Evan and Sisebutus, who
being Banished by King Roderick into Africa, fled to the Protection of Requila,
Commander of Tangier their Father's Friend; and thence came over a Commander
among the Moors that destroyed Spain, and so died: Those Calamities require
another Chapter.

CHAP. VI.
The Reign of King Roderick from the Year 711, till the coming of the Moors in
714; all Spain subdued by them in Eight Months; the Restoration began by
Pelagius and his Successors till the Year 783.
1. SOme Writers who have obtained no small Credit, 711.
name Acosta or Aconsta, as Successor to Witisa; yet others there are who
absolutely exclude him as fabulous. If any such was, he was Eldest Son to
Theodofredus, and Brother to King Roderick; however it is, we have no account
of his Actions, and if any were, being so dubious, Roderick last King of the
Goths.
they are scarce worth relating. Roderick then may be allowed immediate
Successor to Witisa; he was Granson to King Chindasuindus, and Son to
Theodofredus Duke of Cordova, by his Wife Recilona: Favila Duke of Cantabria
was Brother to Theodofredus, and had Pelagus or Pelagius by his Wife, and Niece
to the Lady Luz. Thus the Subversion and Restoration of Spain, had their
Authors proceeding from the same stock; for as Roderick was cause of the
Destruction, so Pelagus was the first that laid his Hand to the Reparation of
it. Roderick ascended the Throne with no small hopes, conceived by his
Subjects, of a better Government than had been before, Count Julian Favorite to
Roderick.
but the event made him more odious than his Predecessor had been. Count Julian
the great Favorite and prime Master to Witisa, continued in the same Post under
King Roderick: Julian was Father to her, whom the vulgar calls Cava, and our
Historians Florinda; of her, Roderick became enamoured, that so the greatest
Desolution might not happen without the help of a Woman. Having chosen her for
his Wife, it fortuned that Egilona or Eilata an African Princess, or according
to others, a Goth was droven by Tempest into a Port of Spain; she being brought
to the King, her Beauty so captivated him, that forgetting Florinda, he took
her to Wife: Thus she who thought to have been Queen, continued at Court as one
of the Queen's Ladies. Julian her Father enraged beyond measure, immediately
contrived how to be Revenged, and in order to it, persuaded the King to
Dismantle all the strong places left standing by Witisa, and disarm his
Subjects, which was accordingly done.

2. Soon after the King sent Julian Ambassador to Muza in Africa, Julian sent
Ambassador into Africa.
to request of him not to protect Evan and Sisebutus, the Sons of Witisa: The
more to move Muza, he thought it proper to send him some considerable Present,
and being informed, that in a Tower near Toledo, great Treasures were of
Ancient time reported to be hid, the Doors having many locks upon them, because
it was a received Opinion, that when they were opened, great Calamities would
ensue, the King resolved to enter this place. In it was found nothing but a
Chest, containing only a Picture representing Men a Horseback in Moorish
Apparel, with several sorts of Weapons, and an Inscription denoting, that when
those Gates were opened, Spain would be Invaded and Conquered by that sort of
Men. The King thought the Prediction would be Averted by locking up the place
again with what it contained, but it proved otherwise. Julian being gone upon
his Embassage, King Roderick relapsed into the love of Florinda, and courted
her, but without receiving any Favor, Frandina her Mother perceiving it, and
desiring to be her self the Mistress of a King, caused one Bigamota, an
attendant of hers, to deliver some Messages to the King as from Florinda,
Roderick ravishes Florinda Daughter to Julian.
tending to meet him in some convenient place, where shrouded with Darkness,
she might supply the place of her Daughter; the King encouraged by those false
invitations, watched his opportunity, and finding Florinda alone, ravished her.

3. Florinda now doubly wronged first of the Throne, and then of her Honor,
was touched with the highest Resentment; her Mother soon discovered the effect,
being sensible of the cause and changing her love to the King into hatred,
persuades Florinda to acquaint her Father by Writing with the loss of her
Honor. 712.
Julian hereupon hasts back into Spain, Julian meditates Revenge.
dissembling his Rage, and appearing joyful before the King, having succeeded
in his Embassy, obtained fresh Favors: He begged the Government of the Towns
held in Africa, and thither he went with his Wife, leaving his Daughter at
Court to prevent all suspicion. Julian treated with Muza about betraying the
Kingdom of the Goths unto the Caliphs, and he having received instructions from
his Prince, agreed upon the Conditions without much difficulty; the Traitor not
only encouraging the Barbarian to pass over into Spain, but drawing over many
great Men in his Government to take part with them. Having settled these
Affairs at Malaga, he came to Court and obtained leave to carry away his
Daughter with him, He brings the Moors into Spain.
the King nothing mistrusting any Treason. Muza in pursuance of what was agreed
upon, sent over 6000 Arabs under the Command of Tarif Abenzarca, to make the
first incursion into Spain; 713.
these being joined by the like number of the Rebels, broke through Andaluzia
into Lusitania, where nothing being less thought of than War, Men, Women and
Children were seen in droves flying to the Mountains. King Roderick alarmed
with this invasion, sent his Nephew D. Inhigo Sanchez with some number of Men
armed only with Staves and Stones; yet such as they were, they had several
rencounters with the Enemy, but at last their Commander being slain, and they
overpowered, were put to flight. The Victorious Arabs returned into Africa with
Booty and many Captives; this was the first Scene of the wicked Count's
Revenge, and of the overthrow of the Spanish Monarchy.

4. Whilst Count Julian and the Caliph prepared for a more powerful Expedition,
King Roderick now awake, raised the greatest number of Men he could, and with
all possible speed provided Arms and Fortified his Towns. He thought the
Barbarians would have given him more time, but they immediately passed over the
streights of Gibraltar with a wonderful Fleet; 200000 Foot and 40000 Horse of
them encamped on the Spanish Coast. 200000 Foot and 40000 Horse of the Moors
land in Spain.
The King's Army consisted of 120000 Foot and 10000 Horse, a sufficient number
had they been well Armed, and Disciplined Men; he Encamped betwixt Xeres and
Medina Sidonia, leaving the Sea open at the Enemies backs, whereby they
received Succors: Upon Saturday the 1st. of September in the fatal Year 714.
the two Armies came in sight of one another. The King's Army consisted of
120000 Foot and 10000 Horse.
That day was spent in taking up their Lodgments along the River Guadalete; on
Sunday with the day began the Battle, which continued very Bloody till Night
parted them; all the Week the fight continued, still renewed with the Day as it
was broke off by the Night. 714.
King Roderick appeared in all parts in his Royal Robes; A great and bloody
Battle.
over his Armor he wore a rich Garment, a Crown on his Head, a Scepter in his
Hand, on his Feet Golden Buskins set with Pearl and precious Stones; he was
carried in a high Ivory Chariot as was the manner of the Gothish Kings in
Battle, and thence encouraged his Men, who the 2d. Sunday began to faint. The
King perceiving them give way, left his Chariot, and mounting upon a Horse, he
called Orelia, rushed courageously into the thickest of his Enemies, making
them give way to his Valor. The Spaniards overthrown*
The Spaniards encouraged at this sight, came on so vigorously, that the Battle
for some time continued doubtful; but at Sunsetting, the Vigor of our Men
quite failing, Victory appeared on the Enemies side, and the Darkness gave the
Christians an opportunity to fly.

5. I cannot forbear remarking how fatal the number Eight has appeared upon
this occasion; A remark upon the number Eight.
Eight days the fight lasted, Eight months the Barbarians spent in subduing all
Spain, and 800 Years it cost the Spaniards to recover it. The King seeing he
labored in vain, fled to a Mountain, where he changed his Apparel with a
Shepherd: In this condition he came to the Monastery of Cauliniana, two Leagues
from Merida, on the Banks of the River Guadiana. Here overcome with Trouble and
Sorrow for his Sins, he fell into a Swoun, and was brought to himself by one
Romanus a Holy Monk. With him he fled into Portugal, where they took up their
Habitation on a Rock upon the Sea Coast, near the Town of Pederneira. They took
two different Cells about a Mile from one another, where both of them ended
their Days. Here, as is said, was found an Image of our Blessed Lady, in the
Time of Alonso, our first King; and a Tomb, with this Inscription, HIC
REQUIESCIT RUDERICUS ULTIMUS REX GOTHORUM; that is, Here reposes Roderick, the
last King of the Goths. Thus far our Author, Emanuel de Faria, setting down
this as an approved and undoubted Opinion: But many others, and those of good
Note, reject this, as fabulous; most Men agreeing, that King Roderick was
drowned in the River Gundalete, where most of his Royal Apparel was found; he
being never after heard of. Many more strange Stories have been spread abroad,
as it commonly happens in such Cases, where the Bodies of Princes, in such
Universal Calamities, are not found; but they are rather Romantic, than
Historical, and therefore not fit for any, but least of all for the Brevity of
this History.

After the Victory, The Moors overrun all Spain.
the Moors spread themselves over all the Province, committing inhumane
Barbarities; not without losing, in several Rencounters during the eight Months
of their Conquest, 80000 Men, besides 20000 before slain in the great Battle.
The chief Resistance was made at Merida: The Defendants, whereof many were
Portugueses, that being then the supreme Tribunal of Lusitania, were commanded
by Sacaru, a Noble Goth. Many brave Actions passed at the Siege; but at length,
there being no Hopes of Relief, and Provisions failing, the Town was
surrendered upon Articles. The Commander of the Lusitanians, with such as would
follow him, traversing Portugal, came to a Seaport Town; where gathering a
good Number of Ships, he put to Sea; but to what part of the World they were
carried, does not appear. There is an ancient Fable of an Island, called
Antilia, in the Western Ocean, inhabited by Portugueses, which could never yet
be found; and therefore we will leave it, till such time as it is discovered;
but to this Place our Author supposes these Portugueses to have been driven.
Fortune having now wholly forsaken Spain, the Moors easily overran all that
remained, as far as the River Minho, under the Command of Abdalaziz, Son to
Muza: Yet the Andaluzians and Lusitanians, Muza being absent, rose up in Arms,
and put to the Sword the Moorish Garrisons of Sevil, Beja and Ilipula; which
done, being assembled to a great Number, they took Merida by Force, killing all
they found therein. Muza, who was then at Zaragosa, hasted to quell this
Commotion; which was easily done. Merida he spared; Sevil suffered much; at
Ilipula there was not one Stone left upon another; but what he did at Beja, is
not known, though it may be supposed not to have escaped, having been the Place
of Rendesvouz for the People of Sevil.

7. The famous Actions of D. Pelayo, Pelagius the first that opposed the Moors.
or Pelagius, and the miserable Ends of Count Julian, his Wife, and Daughter,
the principal Actors in this Tragedy, are treated of in the Chronicles of those
Kingdoms to which they appertain. Pelagius, during the 19 Years he reigned, had
no Command in Portugal, where the Moors were so predominant, that there were as
many Kings as Cities. But because the Actions of Pelagius were so great in
themselves, and in the Consequence of them, we will give some Hints of what
others write at large. Pelagius was in the great Battle, with his Cousin-German
King Roderick: After which, he fled, with 1000 Christians, to Asturias de
Oviedo, where he took Shelter in a vast Cave, now called Covadonga, among the
Mountains of Auseva; and was, in that miserable Condition, by his Men
proclaimed King of Spain; a mighty Title, for so poor a Beginning; and yet here
began those Victories, which, in the Space of 800 Years, recovered all Spain.
Pelagius had a Sister, whose Name is not known; but Muza, Governor of Gijon, in
Asturias, being taken with her Beauty, enjoyed her, upon Promise of Marriage.
The Desire of Revenging this Wrong first moved Pelagius to appear in Arms: Thus
it fell out, that as one Lady was the Cause of the Destruction of Spain, so
another was the Motive of its Restoration. Pelagius was the Son of Favila Duke
of Cantabria, Third Son of King Chindasuindus, and of his Wife D. Luz, the
Daughter of Theodofredus Duke of Cordova, and Brother to Favila. He was born at
Toledo, and bred at Alcantara, by Grafes, Brother to the Lady Luz, his Mother.
This was the first King that we find had the Title of Don annexed to his Name.
His Wife was, Gaudiosa, of Cantabria; Fourth Grandchild to Ofilon, Brother to
Stephen, the happy Father of the Archbishop St. Ildefonsus. By her he had
Favila and Ermesenda, who succeeded him in the Regal Dignity. 722.
He took Leon in the Year 722: And hence came the Title of Kings of Leon, and
the Bearing of a Lion for their Arms. 737.
He died at Cangas, at the Foot of the Mountain Auseva, in September, 737; and
lies buried in the Church of Covadonga, built by himself, and his Wife, and
dedicated to the Virgin Mary.

8. Favila, Favila succeeds Pelagius.
who succeeded his Father Pelagius, had not Time to perform any great Actions,
being killed in the Second Year of his Reign, by a Bear, as he was hunting. He
lies buried in the Church of the Holy Cross, founded by himself, at Cangas. He
married Froilivua, and either had no Sons, or, at least, they came not to the
Crown; for his Sister Ermesenda succeeded him, and took to Husband, and King,
D. Alonso, Son to D. Peter, Duke of Cantabria, descended from Recaredus J.
During the foregoing Years, the Christians in Portugal enjoyed full Liberty of
Conscience. Several Moorish Great Men ruled over them: Aliboacen, Grandson to
the General Tarif, was Lord of the City Coimbra, and all the Territories
betwixt the Rivers Alva-Mondego and Agueda; governing with Tyrannical Power.
Thus the Portuguese lived in Subjection, when Heaven gave them Hopes of
recovering their Liberty. Happy was the Kingdom in falling to Ermesenda, for
that she was the Mother of the Victorious and Religious King Alonso, who
conquered a great part of Castile, King Alonso successful against the Infidels.
Galicia and Portugal. He entered Galicia with a powerful Army, and took the
Cities of Lug^ and Tuy: Then passing over the River Minho, he overran all the
Country, as far as Duero; entering the Cities and Towns of Braga, Porto, Agueda,
Viseo, and Chaves; besides other Places of Importance: No Quarter was given to
the Moors; and the Christians were carried away to Asturias, he not designing
to keep all he gained. This was the first King, after the Destruction of Spain,
that had any Jurisdiction in Portugal. Thus he reigned, 757.
with great Honor, 17 Years; and died at the Age of 64. His and his Wife's
Bodies were buried in the Church of Covadonga. He had Issue, Fruela, who
succeeded him; Wimaranus, Aurelius, and Adosinda. By a Slave he had Mauregatus,
who proved more like the Mother, than the Father, as will appear in the Sequel.

9. Fruela, K. Fruela kills 60000 Moors.
who inherited his Father's Valor, as well as his Kingdom, marched to meet a
mighty Army, sent against him by Abderramen King of Cordova, (the first that,
in Spain, durst cast off the Authority of the African Calyph,) under the
Command of Omar, to revenge the Harm done by the late King Alonso, in Portugal
and Galicia. He met with no Opposition in Portugal: But in Galicia, King Fruela
discomfitted his mighty Army, killing him, and 60000 of his Men. This done,
crossing Portugal, to besiege Setuval, he overthrew Aliaben Talib, who came to
put a Stop to his Proceedings* with 1500 Horse, and 14000 Foot: Of the Moors,
8000 were slain in the Fight; and of the Christians, 2300. This Victory laid
that Country open; and the King, after an hard Siege, had Setuval surrendered
to him. This is his last Action, we know of, in Portugal: In other Places he
performed many great Exploits. He forbid Priests to marry, which had been
allowed since the Time of King Witiza; and was the Founder of the City Oviedo.
All his Virtues and Trophies were obscured by his putting his Brother Wimaranus
to death, upon bare Suspicion that he intended to rebel, because he was
exceedingly beloved by the People, for his extraordinary Endowments. Most
Authors agree, that this Wimaranus was Father to Bermudo the Monk, afterward
King. Fruela was married to Monina, the Daughter of Eudo Duke of Guienne, in
France. Their Children were, D. Alonso, and the Lady Ximena. This King had also
a Bastard-Son, called Raimund. He prospered no more after the Death of his
Brother Wimaranus; for Abderramen, King of Cordova, recovered all that Part of
Portugal which lies betwixt Cape St. Vincent and the River Tagus. 768.
After this Loss, he was murdered at Cangas, by his Brother Aurelius. His Body,
and that of his Wife, were buried in the great Church of Oviedo, founded by
himself. He reigned 11 Years in great Esteem with his People; and two more
after the Death of his Brother, no less hated than he had been beloved.

10. We have no Account of any thing remarkable, Particular Affairs of Portugal
done by Aurelius, the Successor of Fruela, in Portugal. But about this time,
Marvan Ibenzorat reigned in Coimbra: And Theodus, a Nobleman, descended of the
Gothish Kings, was Governor of the Christians in these Parts, with the Title of
Count. Aurelius reigned six Years, died at Cangas, and was buried in the Church
of St. Michael. 774.
He leaving no Children, Adosinda, the Daughter of King Alonso and Queen
Ermesenda, and his Sister, succeeded him. She married Silo, whose Parents are
not known; but so he came to be King. He entered Portugal, to make War upon the
Moors; and took from them the City Merida, in Estremadura. Thence he marched
against the People of Galicia, who were in Rebellion; and finding great
Opposition, after the Victory, he treated them with much Severity. Having
obtained these Victories, the King gave himself up so entirely to his Ease,
that the Queen managed all the Government. They had one Son, called Aldegastus;
who, with his Wife Brunilda, built the Monastery of St. Mary d' Ovanna, in the
Territory of Tineo, for their Burying-place. 783.
The King died when he had reigned Nine Years, and was buried in the Church of
St. John de Pravia, founded by himself. His Epitaph is thus: H. S. E. S. S. S.
T. L. Each Letter stands for a Word; and are, HIC SITUS EST SILO SIT SIBI TERRA
LEVIS.

CHAP. VII.
The succeeding Kings, from the Year 783, till 924. The Battles they fought,
and their Conquests upon the Moors; but more particularly, in Portugal.
1. QUeen Adosinda considering the good Qualities of her Nephew D. Alonso, the
Son of Alonso the Catholic King, 783.
she appointed him her Successor. Mauregatus, the Bastard Son of the same
Alonso, begotten on a Slave, Mauregatus the Bastard usurps the Crown.
soon deprived him of the Crown. To compass his Design, he entered into a
League with the Moors, and became Tributary to them, the Tribute consisting of
100 Noble Maids, to be delivered to them yearly: In case he gave not the Maids,
in lieu of every one, he was to pay 500 Pieces of Money, supposed to answer to
as many Crowns in our Days. This Tribute was conveyed to Cordova, and gathered
and secured in several Parts of Asturias, Galicia and Portugal. Now some
Authors affirm, this Tribute was paid in the Year 770; and if so, it must be in
the Reign of Aurelius, who governed from the Year 768, till 774; and then
Mauregatus did not institute, but only continued to pay it. Whenever it
began, certain it is, it continued till the Year 788, which was the last of
Mauregatus's Reign. 788.
He died without Issue, and was buried at Pravia.

2. Bermudo, Bermudo, advanced to the Throne, overthrows the Moors.
then in Deacon's Orders, Grandson to the Catholic Alonso, being Son either to
Wimaranus, or Fruela, his Brother, was promoted to the Crown after Mauregatus.
The first Action of this King was very honorable; for Abderramen, King of
Cordova, sending to demand of him the Tribute of the Maids, he not only refused
to pay it; but, with a small Number, encountering an Army of his, of 60000 Men,
under the Command of Muza, overthrew it, and so recovered the Honor of Spain,
delivering it from that heavy Imposition. Bermudo, though a Deacon, was married
to Ousenda, or Vsenda; by whom he had Ramiro, afterward King; and a Daughter,
named Christina: He had also a Bastard-Son, called D. Nunho. Though the Action
we have spoken of was great, 793.
his last was incomparably beyond it; He resigns the Crown.
for he not only resigned the Crown, but, having Children of his own, gave it
up to D. Alonso, Son to King Fruela; from whom it had been wrongfully taken by
Mauregatus. 795.
This done, he took the Habit of a Monk, in the Monastery of Sahagun; where he
died, and was buried, but afterward translated to Oviedo.

3. D. Alonso, who was restored to the Crown by Bermudo, Alonso* the Chaste.
was born in the Year 758. Though married to the French Lady Berta, he had no
issue, having lived continently with her; and therefore he was called, The
Chaste, a Name rare among Princes. This Name of Alonso, as it was fortunate to
Spain in general, so was it also to Lisbon in particular, 798.
for its Recovery, Restoration and Defense. His Conquests.
This King took it from the Moors, killing a great Number of them in the
Assault, and in several Battles he fought to come to it. Some Authors will have
it, that Charlemaigne came over out of France, in Person, to his Assistance:
Others deny his Personal Presence: But all agree, his Army was so great, that
the Infidels could never make Head against it. The following Year, 799.
the King took the Cities of Viseo, Lamego, Coimbra, Braga, and other Places
about Porto. Omar King of Merida, with a great Power, laid Siege to Benavente;
but he and the greatest part of his Army were put to the Sword by Bernard del
Carpio, commanding the Forces of King Alonso. In the mean while, Aliatan, by
the Way of Estremadura, entered Portugal, putting all to Fire and Sword, with
such Success, that he took Lisbon the 8th Year after it had been gained by King
Alonso. Many other Places submitted to the Barbarian; and he left Alchama, King
of Badajoz, or Beja, to command there. This Alchama afterward making an
Expedition out of his Province, was killed by Bernard del Carpio, 812.
at the City Zamora. Aliatan, to revenge this Loss, raised great Forces in
Barbary, which he divided into two Bodies; whereof, the one entered Castile;
the other, Portugal; making great Havoc in both Places: Both these Armies were
cut in pieces; one, in which Alahaban commanded, by the King, near the River
Cefa; the other, conducted by Melich, by Bernard, 813.
in the Plain of Narnon. Abdalla, Governor of Valencia, and Mahomet, of Merida,
rebelled at once against King Aliatan: He marched against Abdalla; but whilst
he was there engaged, Mahomet joined in League with King Alonso; whereby he
became powerful enough to conquer a good part of Portugal and Estremadura.
Aliatan returning with a mighty Army, overthrew the Rebel, and possessed
himself of all which he had conquered betwixt Merida and Lisbon.

Mahomet thus expelled his Dominion, fled with such as would follow him to King
Alonso, submitting himself to him as his Vassal. The King sent him with one
Raymund, to subdue certain places then in Rebellion in Gallicia; they easily
overcame the Mutiniers, and the King ordered Mahomet to reside in those parts,
hoping to make his advantage of him against the King of Cordova, 814.
as he did for some time: But Mahomet finding himself powerful, thought to
recover what he had lost, and therefore privately conspiring with Raymond, they
both Rebelled, usurping great part of Galicia: The King hasted thither with a
considerable Army, Raymond presently submitted himself, and was not only
Pardoned, but Married the King's Kinswoman. Mahomet though he had then 60000
Men, durst not give Battle in open Field, but retired to the strong Castle of
St. Christina, two Leagues from Lugo. There the King Besieged, and Hunger
forced him to come out and give Battle, in which his Army was entirely routed
and he Slain. About this time was found the Sepulcher of St. James the Apostle,
and Patron of Spain, which had been hid almost 800 Years; it was discovered by
Theodemirus Bishop of Iria. King Alonso removed it to Compostela, which he made
a Bishopric, erecting there a Church capable of so great a Relick. Thus
Crowned with Victories, and loaded with Years, for he lived Eighty Five, 843.
and Reigned Fifty Two; he died at Oviedo, Trial by Ordeal in use.
and lies Buried in the Church of St. Mary de Recasto, his own Foundation. At
this time the old Gothish Law of trying People by Fire was in use in Portugal,
as appears by the Trial of Elosinda, accused of Adultery by her Husband
Ariovigildus, she after this manner clearing her self, and he being Condemned
to be Burnt, as she should have been if Convicted. Pope Honorius the III.
abolished this Custom, yet afterward, another worse started up, which was,
that the Woman accused, should assign a Champion to fight the Accuser, and that
party which had the Victory was held innocent.

5. King Bermudo by an incomparable Act of Justice, had taken the Crown from
his own Children, to give it to Alonso, to whom of right it appertained; and
God to reward this rare Equity, ordained that Alonso should live Chaste, King
Ramiro his Actions.
and restore it to Ramiro, the Son of the same Bermudo. Scarce was he seated on
the Throne, when Count Nepocianus rebelled in Austurias, and usurped the regal
Title: The New King with all the speed he could, marched against him, and
having defeated and taken him Prisoner, put out his Eyes and thrust him into a
Monastery. Soon after he overthrew the Normans, who destroyed the Coast of
Galicia, and the English who had laid Siege to Lisbon: Returning to the River
Duero, he vanquished Mahomet Cid Atauf, Lord of the Fort and Town of Gaya, and
also Muley Achim of Agueda more to the Southward. Zuleyma Ibon Muza, the
tributary King of Lamego, and Tarif Iben Rages of Viseo were admitted to grace
upon their submission. Alhamar King of Coimbra, boldly standing upon his
Defense, was overthrown, and all the Country reduced, which done, Ramiro
leaving good Garrisons in his Conquests, returned to Oviedo; in his way, he
visited John the Abbot of the Monastery of Lorvan, and bestowed Lands upon the
Monastery. The principal part of the Gift was the Town of Montemayor the Old, a
strong place, the Garrison whereof the Abbot was obliged to maintain. In this
Town was one Garcia Yannez, a foundling brought up by the Abbot, and by him
preferred for his Valor. This Fellow envying the Honor of D. Bermudo the
Abbot's Nephew, and Governor of that Territory, fled to Abderramen King of
Cordova, offering not only to renounce the Faith, but also to put into his
hands Montemayor, and the other Conquests of King Ramiro.

6. Whilst Garcia Yannez was with the Moorish King, the Abbot and his Nephew
Bermudo, took the two Rebel Counts Alderedus, whose Eyes he put out, and
Pinelus whom with his Seven Sons, he put to Death, as being more obstinate in
their Crime. Knowing that Rages of Viseo was joining in League with other
Moorish Commanders, he assaulted his City, and rased it to the Ground.
Sebastian Bishop of Salamanca, with the Abbot's Consent, afterward repairing
of it, is said to have found there the Tomb of Roderick, the last King of the
Goths. Garcia Yannez having renounced the Faith, and calling himself Zulema,
had the Command of an Army given him to execute what he had proposed. He entered
Portugal, committing greater Barbarites than the Infidels, and laid Siege to
Montemayor which was bravely defended by the Abbot and his Men. Hunger
beginning to pinch, they thought of an Expedient more to be wondered at than
imitated, which was, that they slew all their Women and Children, the Abbot
beginning with his Sister and Nephews. This done, they sallied out upon the
Enemy with such Fury, that they soon put them to flight: The Rebel Zulema was
killed by the Abbot, many of his Men were drowned in the River Mondego, and
most of them perished by several means, so that few returned Home; 76000 were
destroyed, and Night stopped the pursuit of the Victors. Morning discovered the
Fields covered not only with dead Carcasses, but with plenty of rich Booty:
This was a small comfort to them that had imbrued their hands in the Blood of
their Wives, An incredible relation
Children and Relations, but some that had hasted to the Town after the
Victory, brought back the News, that all those they had killed, were
miraculously restored to life, and so all returned joyful with the Victory and
Recovery of their Friends. The Abbot stayed in the place where he obtained the
Victory, and there Built a small Hermitage, and ended his days in Sanctity. His
Monks endeavored it, but could not remove his Body, and our first King D.
Alonso Enriquez Founded a Monastery in that place, which was finished by his
Son and Successor D. Sancho, and given to the Cistercian Order. This is what
related to Portugal in the Reign of King Ramiro; he obtained many other
Victories, particularly the memorable one, called of Clavijo, in which St.
James the Apostle is said to have been seen fighting for the Christians, and
was thence called the Patron of Spain. 850.
The King Married Paterna, whose extraction is not known; he left the Crown to
his Son Ordonno, and died at Oviedo, where he lies Buried.

7. D. Ordono was no way inferior to his Father for Valor, King Ordono
Rebuilds many Towns.
and being at full Age when he died, was very acceptable to all the States. His
first care was to repeople the Cities of Leon, Astorga, Tuy, Amaya and others,
855.
almost left desolate in the late Invasions; this done, he obtained two notable
Victories, one over the rebellious Vascones, and the other over Muza by
extraction a Goth, but turned Mohammedan. This Muza had possessed himself of the
greatest part of Spain, but was entirely defeated by our King in the Plains of
Alvelda or Albayda, 857.
two Leagues from Logronno. Many Moors upon this Defeat sent to Congratulate
the Victor, He is overthrown by the Moors.
and others stood to see the Consequences of it. Mahomet King of Cordova,
alarmed at this success of the Christians, drew mighty succors out of Africa,
and with a formidable Army began to conquer the Christian Territories. Ordonno
met him in Estremadura, near the River Tagus, and though he killed double the
number that he lost, was forced to leave the Victory to the Barbarian, who
recovered much of what the Christians had before taken. He took Santarem, Irena
and Rotas; then returning toward Cordova, he took and Fortified many Towns
betwixt the Rivers Guadiana and Tagus; the next Year was not so favorable to
him, for the best part of his Fleet was cast away on the Coast of Galicia, and
his Army was overthrown on the Borders of Navarre, 859.
by the King thereof D. Inigo Ximenez Arista. Irena is supposed to be the Town
now called Leyria and Rotos Roda near Redina. Many Christians at this time
obtained the Crown of Martyrdom, under the power of the Moors, but especially
at Cordova. King Ordonno was Married to the Lady Munia, by whom he had D.
Alonso his Successor, D. Bermudo, D. Nunno, Odvarius and Fruela, whose Eyes the
King their Brother caused to be put out for conspiring against him. He had also
a Daughter called Aragonta, Wife to Sancho Abarca, King of Navarre. King Ordono
was troubled with the Gout, and died of it at Oviedo, 863.
having Reigned Twelve Years, his Body was Buried in the Chapel of King Alonso
the Chaste.

8. Authors do not agree upon the Age of King Alonso the III. King Alonso III.
called the Great.
when he came to the Crown; some say Nine, some Fourteen, and some Seventeen
Years. The most is too little for the great Actions performed by him
immediately after his Accession to the Crown; his Valor and other Virtues
purchased him the Surname of the Great, only attributed to him among all the
Kings of Castile and Leon. Fruela Bermudez a great Man in Galicia rebelled and
came down so suddenly to Oviedo, that the young King was forced to fly to
Alava, where haing gathered his Forces, the Rebels put to death their Leader,
and submitted themselves to him: Then he repaired the Cities of Oviedo and
Leon, and built many Castles. In the mean while Count Eylon rebelled in Alava,
but was oppressed by the King's Celerity: During this time he was at peace with
the Infidels, Mahomet King of Cordova, and Lot or Lope the Son of Muza King of
Toledo, being at War among themselves. They two being agreed, the King of
Cordova sent Albucazen and Alemandarin his Generals, the one into Biscay, the
other into Galicia, where they made great havoc, the People flying before them
from the Plains to the Mountains. But King Alonso marched with such expedition,
that he oppressed them both, before they thought he had been moving toward
them; this success produced Peace, which he employed in rebuilding ruined
places, among which were Braga, Porto, Chaves and Viseo, all in Portugal. The
King of Cordova coming down suddenly with an Army, took Viseo first, and then
Salamanca, and so returned to Cordova, refusing to give our King Battle, who
thereupon wasted all the Country of Toledo: Then turning into Portugal, he
retook Viseo, and had Coimbra yielded to him.

9. It appears, by a Grant of his to Sisenandus Bishop of Compostela, that the
Territories betwixt Duero and Minho, and that called Tras os Montes, or Beyond
the Mountains, were Desert, from the first coming of the Moors till his time,
when he Peopled and made them fit to with stand the Enemy. At this sametime the
King continued the Structure of the stately Church of St. James the Apostle.
The Church of St. James the Apostle in Galicia Dedicated.
Seventeen Bishops were present at the Dedication of it, above half of them
were Portuguese. Next by Order of Pope John the VIII. the King held a National
Council at Oviedo, to provide for the Bishops that were Expelled from their
Diocesses, and erect the Bishopric of Oviedo into an Archbishopric; after
which the King again applied himself to Peopling of the Country, 903.
and was come as far as the River Tagus, when he understood his own Sons
conspired to depose him, being encouraged by their Mother and some of the
Nobility. He voluntarily performed what they intended to extort from him; The
Christian Dominions divided betwixt the two Sons of King Alonso.
to D. Garcia he gave Oviedo, Leon and Castile, to D. Ordono, Gallicia and
Portugal. Having resigned his Kingdoms, he went in Pilgrimage to Santiago, and
at his return, asked of his Son Garcia, some Forces to make an incursion into
the Moorish Territories, which he performed successfully. He entered into League
with the Kings of France and Navarre; to the latter he gave his Sister Vrraca
in Marriage, and married himself Ximena, Daughter either of France or of D.
Ynigo Ximenez Arista of Navarre. His Sons were Garcia, Fruela, Ordonno, Ramiro
and Gonzalo, who was Archdeacon of Oviedo. He Reigned 48 Years, died at Zamora,
914
and was Buried at Astorga, where his Tomb is still to be seen, though the Body
was translated to the Chapel of King Alonso the Chaste in Oviedo, where also
lies his Wife Ximena.

10. D. Garcia having wrested the Scepter out of his Father's hand, Garcia has
for his part Galicia and the North of Portugal.
enjoyed it but three Years: Though he got the Crown by unlawful means, he
Governed well, overcame Ayola Lord of Talavera, and is said to have obtained
other Victories; he died at Zamora, was Buried at Recasto of Oviedo, and had
been Married to the Lady Nunna, His Brother Ordonno Succeeds him.
Daughter to the Count D. Nunno Fernandez de Amaya, but left no-Issue. His
Brother Ordonno in his time Governed so much to the satisfaction of the People,
that after his Death, he was unanimously allowed his Heir. He had not only
preserved the Conquests on this side Tagus, but passing that River, took the
City Beja, putting all the Inhabitants to the Sword, which so terrified the
Neighboring People, that they abandoned the Towns before he came near them.
Having received his Brother's Kingdom, after some other exploits, he returned
into Lusitania and wasted all the Country along the River Guadiana. Among other
places, he took the Castle called Alhaje, where all the Treasure of the Moorish
Kings lay as in a place inpregnable, whereby he so humbled all the Infidels
throughout Estremadura, and as far as Algarve, that they submitted themselves
as tributaries to him; after which he returned to Leon. No sooner was he gone,
but they encouraged by Abderramen King of Cordova revolted, but King Ordonno
speedily returning and ravaging the Country, they as soon submitted themselves,
begging Pardon. The chief of these were the People of Merida, Badajoz and the
Territories adjacent then so fruitful and plentiful of all things, that thence
came the name of Badajoz, He twice overthrows the Moors
being a corruption of Beled Aiz, two Arabic words, signifying, The Land of
Life. King Ordonno hearing that Abderramen was marching toward him, advanced
to meet him, and in a Battle near Talavera slew 25000 of his Men. This done, he
returned to Leon, and applied the spoils of the War to Building the great
Church there. Mean while Abderramen having drawn vast supplies out of Africa,
laid Siege to Santistevan de Gormaz; but the King surprising him in the Night,
forced him with great Slaughter to fly back to Cordova. Still the Moore
recruits his broken Army, and having wasted all the Country, sits-down before
the City Porto, which was bravely defended by Count Hermenegildus. Our King
came to his relief, and made a great Slaughter among the Besiegers, 920.
yet so, that he was not assured of the Victory, till the next day he found the
Enemy had quitted the Field, leaving their Tents, Baggage, and warlike Engines
behind them. Having obtained this Victory, the King returned to Leon.

11. Early the next Year, 921.
Ambassadors came to Ordonno from the King of Navarre, Ordonno vanquished by
the Infidels, recovers and spoils their Country.
to crave aid against a great power of the Infidels. He thought not enough to
send, but went himself in Person, and Fortune here forsaking him, was
overthrown near Valdejunquera, many Captives were taken by the Infidels, among
whom were the Bishops of Salamanca and Tuy, and the Kings themselves escaped
narrowly. Our King grieved at this loss, the following Year broke into the
Moorish Territories, driving all before him even to the Walls of the City
Cordova, which it was feared he would Besiege. Having struck an universal
Terror into his Enemies, he returned to Zamora. He had a Daughter called
Ximena, who falling in Love with a Courtier, ran away with him, carrying all
her Jewels along with her, and he left her on a Mountain, having fulfilled his
desires. She traveled on, and took up with a Farmer as his Servant, from which
he raised her to be his Wife. The King long after, Hunting that way lost
himself, and fell into this Cottage, where he was entertained, his Daughter
making a sort of Puff-past she knew he loved, and putting a Ring well known to
him into it; the Ring caused him to suspect somewhat, and examining the matter,
he found that was his Daughter, whom he forgave, and preferred her Husband,
whose Name was Tello, and the place of his abode called Meneses. Hence some
will have the Family of Meneses to proceed; others Write that this passage
happened to the Lady Teresa Sanchez, bastard Daughter to King Sancho the First,
and Wife to D. Alonso Tellez de Meneses, whom they esteem the Progenitor of
this Family. King Ordonno had three Wives, the first Elvira, whose Parentage is
unknown; by her he had D. Sancho, D. Alonso, D. Ramiro, D. Garcia and D.
Ximena. The second was Aragonta of Galicia, whom he is said to have put away,
suspecting she knew of the flight of his Daughter Ximena. The third was Sancha
Daughter to the King of Navarre, by these two he had no Children. 923.
The last Action of his life darkn'd all the Glory of his former Triumphs: He
sent for four Counts who governed Castile, upon safe Conduct, to Carrion, and
there cut off their Heads: Which so incensed the People of Castile, that they
only wanted an Opportunity to rebel, and take Revenge: But Death prevented
their Designs, 924.
taking him away at Zamora. His Body was buried in the great Church of Leon;
which City he had so entirely loved, that he took its Name for the Title of his
Kingdom, leaving that of King of Oviedo and Galicia.

CHAP. VIII.
The Succession of the Kings of Castile and Leon, from the Year 924, till 985:
With the Revolt of Count Fernan Gonzalez: And the Desolation made in Portugal,
by Alcoraxis and Almanzor, the Moors.
1. D. Fruela II. was Successor to his Brother Ordonno; Fruela II. usurps the
Crown.
usurping the Crown from his Children, who were then very young. He was nothing
like to his Brother in Valor, for he ceased the Prosecution of the War against
the Infidels; but was not unlike to him in the last Action of his Life; for, as
Ordonno unjustly put to death the forementioned Counts, so Fruela wrongfully
executed certain Gentlemen, called Olmudes. He became so odious to the
Castilians, that the Nobility, Castile separates from Leon. and creates a
Government under Judges.
joining together, rebelled, and separated themselves from the Crown of Leon.
To this purpose, they chose two Judges to rule them: The two first were, Nunno
Rasura, and Lain Calvo. They were of the Middle Sort of People, neither of the
Greatest, nor Meanest; that so they might neither be too powerful, nor become
contemptible: Yet, from them are the Kings of Spain descended. At the same time
that this Government was instituted in Castile, we find Counts governing in
some Parts of Portugal; as, D. Gutierre Arias, at Porto; and Hufo Hufez, at
Viseo. A Leprosy consumed King Fruela so fast, 925.
that he died at Leon, having reigned scarce a Year; and was buried in the
Cathedral. He had two Wives, D. Munia, and D. Vrraca: By them he had Issue
Ordonno, Alonso and Ramiro. King Ramiro II. put out all their Eyes, and thrust
them into the Monastery of St. Julian, either upon Suspicion, or Proof, that
they conspired against him. He had also a fourth Son, called Fruela.

2. Alonso IV, Alonso IV. resigns the Government to his Brother Ramiro.
Eldest Son of King Ordonno II, after the Death of Fruela, recovered his Right,
and Kingdom. He was not wicked, as his Predecessor; but as unprofitable to his
Kingdom as he. His best Quality was, That he was sensible of his own
Insufficiency; and therefore, first sent his Brother Ramiro to govern Portugal,
and afterward resigned the Kingdom to him, and became himself a Monk. Ramiro
had chosen the City Viseo for his Residence in Portugal, whence he made Inroads
into the Frontiers of the Moors; and by his gentle Government, gained the
Affections of the People. Here he received Letters from the King, his Brother,
calling him to Court, in order to resign the Crown to him; for that his Son,
Prince Ordonno, was but an Infant. D. Ramiro fearing his Brother's Inconstancy,
hasted to Zamora, that he might not have Time to repent. The King immediately
put the Crown upon his Head, and was the first that did him Homage, as his
Subject: Which done, he took the Habit of a Benedictine Monk, in the Monastery
of Sahagun; and is therefore called, Alonso the Monk. He was married to Ximena,
the Daughter of King Sancho Abarca, of Navarre; and had by her, Ordonno, who
came to be King; and D. Alonso, who died young. He died in the Monastery of St.
Julian, and lies there buried: But we shall see him repent, and disturb his
Brother's Reign.

3. King Alonso being become a Monk, 928.
and repenting, Alonso repents, and raises a Civil War.
his Brother Ramiro, now possessed of the Crown, resolved not to part with it:
and thus began a Civil War, which was the Cause of much Mischief. The Moors
making their Advantage thereof, recovered the Cities of Lam^go, Braganza and
Porto, with all the Country lying between the Rivers Tagus and Duero. The
Castilians also made use of this Opportunity, (their Judges, Nunno and Lain,
being dead,) to raise up in their stead the Count Ferran Gonzalez. King Ramiro
politickly winking at this Affront, 932.
which he could not revenge upon the Authors, invaded the Kingdom of Toledo,
destroying all before him with Fire and Sword. King Alonso the Monk, held out
two Years in Leon, against his Brother Ramiro: But then, despairing of Success,
he stirred up Alonso, Ordonno and Ramiro, the Sons of his Predecessor Fruela,
to raise a Rebellion in Asturias and Biscay, believing that would draw away the
King, his Brother, from attending upon him. Nevertheless, the King continued
the Siege, obliged him to surrender, and afterward put him into Prison. This
done, he found Means to apprehend the three Brothers; and to prevent future
Designs, put out theirs, and his Brother the Monk's Eyes. Two Years Alonso
lived blind: But the King repenting of this Cruelty used toward his Brother,
to testify his Repentance, built the Monastery of St. Julian.

4. Two Months are said to have passed in the Year 934, 934.
in which Time the Light of the Sun was scarce seen; Prodigies in the Sky.
at the End whereof a Breach or Yawning appeared in the Sky, along which great
Flames of Fire were seen to run; and the Stars seemed to wander in the Region
of the Air. Many Judgments were made upon these Prodigies; but most agreed,
they portended, the End of the World to be at hand. At last the Sun shined out;
and whilst the Christians appeased God with Prayers, the Moors consulted their
Wizards. Alfarani, of Meca, affirmed to King Abderramen, that this Prodigy
threatened the Downfall of Christian Princes, if he would take in hand to pull
them down. Diviners foretell what, they know, is pleasing to Princes; and
Princes believe that which pleases them. Abderramen declares War, and makes
mighty Preparations for it, drawing great Succors out of Africa, under the
Command of Almanzor. With an Army almost innumerable, he broke into Portugal,
bearing down all before him, and putting the Christians to most cruel Deaths.
King Ramiro having gathered the greatest Power he could, set forward to meet
the Enemy, whose Multitude obliged him to retire to the Mountains of Clavijo.
Ramiro destroys a great Army of Infidels
Here the Apostle St. James is said to have appeared to him, promising, he
should obtain a wonderful Victory in that Place. In the Fight, the Apostle was
seen on Horseback, making great Slaughter among the (...). This Victory, some
will have, to be the Cause of his being taken for Patron of Spain; though
others say, it was that in the Time of King Alonso I. as was before observed.

5. There is a very strange Story about this King, A Romantic Story of King
Ramiro.
which, because it looks rather Romantic, than Historical, I will lightly pass
over: It is as follows; King Ramiro was married to the Lady Vrraca; but
understanding that Alboazar, a powerful Moor, had a most beautiful Sister,
called Zara, he fell in Love with her by Hearsay. He demanded her of Alboazar;
but being denied, had her betrayed to him for Money; then putting away his
Queen, he married her. Alboazar, to revenge this Wrong, surprised and carried
away Queen Vrraca, who was left at Millor, on the other side the River Duero.
Ramiro hearing hereof, filled his Galleys with the choicest of his Men; and
running up a River, near which she was kept, he planted the Galleys, all
covered with Green, close under certain Trees that over-shaded the River: Then
having laid an Ambush, and ordered them to lie close till he sounded a Cornet
he carried with him, he in Disguize approached the Castle where the Queen was
kept: There he met a Maid belonging to the Queen, carrying a Pitcher of Water
for her; whereof, with the Maid's Consent, he drank, and dropped a Jewel into
it well known to the Queen. She seeing the Jewel, caused him to be brought up
to her; and having yielded her self up before to the Lust of Alboazar, she now
betrayed the King into his Hands. Ramiro seeing himself taken, begged Leave
only to sound his Cornet; which being granted, his Men that lay in Ambush broke
into the Castle, killed Alboazar, and carried away the Queen, whom the King
caused to be cast into the Sea, with a Stone about her Neck; because, asking of
her why she looked so melancholy; she answered, It was for the Death of the
Moor, who was a better Man than he. To this Relation, let every Man give the
Credit he thinks it may deserve. This King Ramiro had two Wives, besides the
Moor we have now spoke of: The First was, the Lady Vrraca; and by her he had
Ordonno, his Successor, Sancho and Bermudo. The Second was, Teresa, Daughter to
Sancho Abarca, King of Navarre: Her Issue were, Sancho, Audonio and Elvira. By
Artida the Moor, he had Alboazar Ramirez, and Artiga Ramirez. King Ramiro
reigned 19 Years; 950.
he died at Leon, and lies in the Monastery of Our Holy Savior, founded by
himself and his two Wives, Vrraca and Teresa.

6. King Ordonno III. was Successor to Ramiro II. King Ordonno III. disturbed
by Rebels, subdues them.
The Beginning of his Reign was blessed with Peace, which lasted not long; for
he was soon disturbed by his Brother Sancho, who aimed to usurp the Crown,
assisted by the Count Fernan Gonzalez, who took part with him through Malice,
and contrary to Right, and the Ties of Affinity, for Ordonno had married his
Daughter Vrraca. The Count was guilty of many Enormities besides this,
notwithstanding the vulgar. Opinion of his extraordinary Virtues and Merit. D.
Garcia Sanchez, King of Navarre, and Uncle to Sancho, as well as Brother to his
Mother, favored his Designs. With these Aids Sancho presumed to assume the
Regal Style, and entered the Kingdom of Leon, wasting that very Country where
he intended to reign. King Ordonno soon repulsed the Invaders; and the better
to be revenged of the Count, he was divorced from his Daughter, and sent her
back to him. Some Towns in Galicia had also rebelled; but the King reduced
them, with a great Slaughter of the Rebels. No sooner had he quelled the
Rebels, but he marched through Portugal, as far as Lisbon, whither no Christian
King had reached, since D. Alonso the Chaste. He takes Lisbon.
After a fierce Assault, he took the City by Storm, and gave the Plunder
thereof to his Army: Which done, he returned to his Court, laden with Spoils,
and bestowed them in rewarding those that had deserved best, and in Religious
Works. Convenience made the King and Count Fernan Gonzalez, who had been long
at Variance, agree, and unite their Forces against the King of Cordova. They
came to a Battle near Gormaz, where the Christians obtained a glorious Victory;
which brought Peace to their Frontiers, before subject to continual Incursions.
This was the Posture of Affairs, 955.
when Ordonno died at Zamora. He lies buried in the Church of Our Blessed
Savior, at Leon, by his Father, with his two Wives, Vrraca, from whom he was
divorced; and Elvira, whose Parentage is unknown: By her he had D. Bermudo, and
Teresa, a Nun in the Monastery of St. Julian, in Leon.

7. Sancho, Sancho, (...) Usurper, called The Fat.
the Brother of King Ordonno, usurped the Crown from Bermudo, the late King's
Son, then a Child. This Sancho was excessively swelled with the Dropsy; and
thence, though improperly, called, The Fat. He had not long enjoyed the Crown,
when those very Rebels who had unjustly set it upon his Head, 957.
took it thence, Ordonno, Surnamed the Wicked, advanced to the Crown.
to bestow it upon D. Ordonno, Surnamed The Wicked, Son to King Alonso the
Monk. The Rebel Count Fernan Gonzalez was the chief Actor in promoting him to
the Throne, and therefore gave him to Wife his Daughter Vrraca, before put away
by the other King Ordonno. King Sancho fled to Navarre, and thence to Cordova,
Sancho returns, and expels him.
where there were famous Physicians, who cured him of his Dropsy. Being
recovered of his Indisposition, he gathered an Army; and was so fortunate, as
to take the Count Fernan Gonzalez, and his Son-in-Law Ordonno. Though he had
them Prisoners, he would not presently put them to Death, but kept the Count in
Custody. D. Sancha, his Wife, coming to see him in Prison, changed Clothes with
him, and by that Means he escaped, leaving her in his stead. A great Rebellion
was raised by the Counts that governed Portugal; but the Presence of the King
soon reduced them. Only Count Gonzalo, who governed beyond Duero, durst march
with an Army, to meet his Sovereign; yet finding him too strong, he made a
feigned Submission, and was pardoned. It was not long before he compassed by
Poison what he had failed of by the Sword. The Portuguese Counts being accused
of this Treason, to clear themselves, challenged D. Gonzalo; and Count Fruela
Vermuiz, their Champion, overcame him at the Town of Salas, near the City of
Perto. King Sancho perceiving his Death draw near, ordered himself to be
carried to Leon, 96^
but died by the Way, at the Monastery of Castrillo, where he was buried, but
was afterward translated to Leon, where his Queen was also interred. Queen
Teresa was Daughter to Assure Fernandez, Count of Monzon. By her the King had
Issue, D. Ramiro III, his Successor; Vrraca, married to Count Nepociano Diaz;
and Ermesenda, by whom the King, her Brother, is said to have had D. Sancho the
Hairy. About this time Castile revolted from the Crown of Leon. Authors write,
that the Cause was, because the King could not pay Count Fernan Gonzalez for an
Horse and an Hawk he had sold to him upon Credit: But it appears very fabulous,
that a King should part with a Kingdom upon so slender an Account. The true
Reason was, the Rebellion of the People, headed by the wicked Count.

8. King Ramiro III. Ramiro III succeeds, under the Tuition of his Mother and
Aunt.
succeeded his Father, when he was but six Years of Age; his Mother, Queen
Teresa, and his Aunt Elvira, the Nun, managing the Government with such
Prudence, during his Minority, that there was no Want of him to be perceived.
Besides, there was then a Truce with Hiscen King of Cordova, then but 11 Years
of Age, and under the Tuition of the famous Ahagis, Surnamed Almanzor, a most
cruel Enemy to the Christians. The Normans invade Galicia, and are cut in
pieces.
This Tranquillity was disturbed, by the Normans invading Galicia: But the Count
Gonzalo Sanchez, falling upon them with a great Force, left not one of them to
carry the News of the Defeat. At this time the City Coimbra was subject to the
Kings of Leon; and the Christians about it, possessed their Lands in Peace.
After all things had thus remained quiet 7 or 8 Years, 975.
Alcoracis (supposed to be King of Sevil) broke into Lusitania with such a
Power, that the Christian Counts, not able to withstand him, fled from the
Plains, to the inaccessible Mountains. The Barbarians, destroying all the
Country as they went, passed even the River Minho, and laid Siege to
Compostela, where the Plague so violently raged in their Army, that few of them
returned home. 978.
King Ramiro being come to Age, he showed himself so incapable of the
Government, Civil Broils.
that the Counts of Portugal and Galicia took Occasion to proclaim another
King, which was, Bermudo, Son to King Ordonno III, by his Second Wife Elvira.
The King awaking at the News of this Rebellion, met the Rebels, 981.
and a Battle was fought between them, which lasted the whole Day: Night parted
the Armies, and each returned home, neither victorious, nor overthrown. In this
Fight perished the Flower of the Spanish Cavalry, that used to withstand the
Moors. Coimbra was not concerned in this Rebellion; it then enjoyed Peace,
under Portuguese Governors: The Chief, who commanded all the rest, was, Count
Gonzalo Moniz.

9. The Civil Broils we have spoken of, 983.
encouraged the Moorish General Almanzor, spurred on by the Fugitive Count D.
Vela, who had been expelled his Lands, to break the Truce. Many Places in
Portugal taken and destroyed by the Moors.
Many notable Places in Portugal were again brought under, by the Infidels; and
among them, Coimbra, Porto, Braga, and Britonium, which was laid level with the
Ground, so that only the Memory of its Name remains. The same Fate attended
Lamego, and Viseo, in the Province of Beira. The King adventuring to give the
Moors Battle, was overthrown, and forced to retire to the Mountains, being
almost reduced to the miserable Condition that Pelayus, or Pelagius, had been,
when first Spain was overrun. Count Garcia Fernandez, Lord of Castile, being
persecuted by D. Vela, and his Adherents, always kept the Field, against the
Moors; but being forsaken by the People of Leon, was not able to prevent the
Loss of many Places. In Portugal only, the small Province between the Rivers
Duero and Minho, and the Mountain-Country of Beira, now adhered to D. Bermudo,
who still called himself King in Galicia. To these Parts, many great Men, who
before lived in the Territories of Coimbra, withdrew themselves. The
unfortunate King thus thrust into a Corner by D. Bermudo on the one side, 985.
and by the Moors on the other, died at Leon, in the 33th Year of his Age, and
28th of his Reign, was buried in the Monastery of St. Michael of Distriana,
founded by his Grandfather, King Ramiro II; and 200 Years after, translated
thence, by King Ferdinand, to the Cathedral of Astorga. He was married to the
Lady Vrraca, of whose Parentage we have no Account; nor did she leave any
Issue. By his own Sister, Ermesenda, he had, incestuously, a Son, called D.
Sancho el Velloso, or The Hairy.

CHAP. IX.
The Succeeding Kings from the Year 985. till 1037. with the coming of the
Gascons into Portugal, and their exploits against the Moors; many places
recovered by them, and others from the Infidels.
1. KIng Ramiro dying, 985.
D. Bermudo was left sole Possessor of the Crown. Bermudo (...) many places,
and (...) by Almanzor
At the beginning of his Reign, he wholly applied himself to the Government,
but soon after he became so entirely given up to his Vices, and especially to
incontinency, that he was slighted by his Subjects, 989.
and became contemptible to his Enemies. Almanzor laying hold of this
opportunity, and prompted by the fugitive D. Vela, invaded again the Christian
Territories, and without any considerable opposition, subdued all the Towns
between the Rivers Due^^ and Ezla. Here King Bermudo came upon him so
unexpectedly, that he put his vast Army to the rout; but Almanzor perceiving
how disordered the Christians pursued, rallying some of his scattered Forces,
changed the fortune of the Day, and drove those that before were victorious, to
the Gates of Leon. That City had immediately fallen into the hands of the
Infidels, had not the matchless valor of Count William Gonzalez, a Portuguese,
placed there Governor by the King, defended it against the fury of the
Infidels, though the King then lying at Oviedo took no care to relieve the place.
In the year 996. 996
Almanzor again encamped before the same City, resolving not to depart thence,
till he were Master of it. Above a Year the Count held out against all the fury
of Almanzor's Assaults and Batteries, in so much, that the Moore was about
quitting the Siege, and had certainly done it, had the King either come or sent
any Succor to the Besieged. At length a great part of the Wall shaken with a
continual Battery, fell down, and the Moors gave a furious Assault, which
obliged the Count, though then sick in Bed, to cause himself to be carried, as he
was, to the Breach, to give the necessary Orders, and encourage his Soldiers.
Three whole days did he make good the Breach with great Slaughter of the
Assailants, till another Breach being made, the Infidels broke in overpowering
the Defendants. All the Inhabitants were put to the Sword, the City Plundered
and laid level with the Ground. The same fate attended Astorga, which done,
Almanzor with his Army loaded with Booty, returned to Cordova to Winder.

2. Ataulphus Archbishop of Compostel^, A strange trial of an (...) Archbishop.
being wrongfully accused before the King, he ordered him to be exposed to the
fury of a wild Bull, who coming to him, instead of Tossing him upon his Horns,
left them both in his Hand, which was a sufficient Testimony of that Prelates
innocence. Almanzor again broke out like a Torrent, overturning all that the
Christians had repaired of the former Ruins, and destroying what was before
untouched. Montemayor the Old, Viseo, Lamego, Porto and Braga, were rased down
to the Ground: The Barbarian entering Galicia, Almanzor again makes great spoil.
made a Font in the Church of St. James the Apostle serve for a Manger, and
sent away the Gates and the Bells of the Church upon the shoulders of
Christians to Cordova; but presuming to profane the Sepulcher of the Apostle,
he was drove back by flames which issued out of it. Almanzor returning through
Protugal heavy with Plunder, was overtaken with vengeance from Heaven for
profaning the Church of the Apostle. A mortal Flux destroying great part of his
Army; the rest marched leasurely in several Bodies: King Bermudo sent some
light Troops, who made such havoc among them, that not the 20th. part of that
great Army returned to Cordova, all the Country the way they went being covered
with dead Carcasses. Count Fruela Vermuiz (who, as has been said, overcame
Count Gonzalo that Poisoned King Sancho) fell upon Almanzor himself, who led
the choice of the Army, and put him to flight with great Slaughter of his
People. King Bermudo at length awaking out of his dead Sleep, joined his Forces
with the King of Navarre and Count Garci Fernandez. They expected the coming of
the Enemy near Aleantaroz, 999.
four Leagues from Osma; here they fought from Morning till Night, and then at
length victory inclined to the Christians, who slew of their Enemies 70000 Foot
and 40000 Horse. Almanzor flying toward Toledo, died of Grief near Berlanga;
soon after, his Son Abdel Melich, to revenge him, invaded the Christian
Territories, but being met by Count Garci Fernandez, was defeated and fled back
to Cordova. King Bermudo had two Wives, the first called Velasquita, by whom he
had no issue; the second Elvira, her Children were Alonso, Successor to his
Father; Teresa married to Abdala, King of Toledo, and afterward a Nun, and
Sancha a Nun also. The King gave great Scandal by keeping two Sisters at the
same time publicly as his Mistreses, one of them was Mother to Elvira, the
other to Ordonno. By Velasquita, a Peasant, the King had a Daughter called
Christina; he died in the Year 999. at Villabuena in Galicia, very penitent for
his sins. There he lay Buried till his Son King Alonso translated him to Leon,
where he lies with his Wife in the Church of St. Isidorus.

3. Let us look a little back to see the coming of the first Strangers, The
Gascons come into Portugal and assist the Christians
that assisted the Natives of Portugal in expelling the Moors. These were the
Gascons who came in a mighty Fleet, and were Commanded by D. Moninno Viegas.
There is a great dispute among Authors, whether this D. Moninno was a Gascon or
a Portuguese, and whether he came with those People, or only headed them after
their coming, he being by some supposed to be then a great Man in Portugal. All
that is said on either part, being rather Suppositions, than Proofs, we will
pass by this Dispute, leaving it free to every one to believe as he shall be
inclined. This Fleet cast Anchor in the River Duero, on the one side whereof
was the Castle of Gaya, Demolished by King Ramiro II. when he killed Alboazar,
and on the other, the City Porto destroyed long before by the Moors. Here they
landed, and their first care was to repair the City, then only a heap of
Rubbish; in the highest part of it they built a Castle, supposed to be the same
that is now the Bishop's Palace. The compass of the Walls was but small, and
they weak for our times, but then considerable; some part of them is still to
be seen in the midst of the City, which being increased, has hemmed them in.
Two of these Ancient Gates are still standing; the one called St. Ann's Gate,
the other our Blessed Ladies, over which is an Image of the Blessed Virgin,
with our Savior in her Arms, which Image between two Towers is the Arms of
that City. Having Repaired and Fortified this place, the Natives and Strangers
began jointly to conquer the Neighboring Country. Men remarkable among them
were, Sisenandns, Brother to D. Moninno, and D. Nonego of Vendosme. The first
that felt their fury were the Moors, who possessed the Territories of Resende,
and Bienviver, and all up the River Duero; this done, thinking their Conquest
secure, they chose Sisenandus Bishop of the City, and yet he ceased not to
appear in Arms till he died at Bienviver, and was Buried in the Monastery of
Villaboa. D. Nonego of Vendosme, also a Bishop, carried on his Conquests on the
other side, and four Leagues from Porto in the Mountain, built a Castle which
he called Vendosme, and so straightened the Moors, that they were forced to
abandon all that Neighborhood. The Castle is ruined by time, but the name of
Vendosme still continues in the Mountain. In this exercise he continued till
his Death, and was Buried in the Monastery of Aviaos. The conquered Lands were
equally divided, as well among the Auxiliary strangers, as among the native
Portuguese.

4. King Alonso V. succeeded his Father Bermudo; 999.
he is the first of the Alonsos that appears without some Surname; King Alonso
V.
for the First was called the Catholic, the Second the Chaste, the Third the
Great, the Fourth the Monk. Not that this deserved less Titles, for he might
have been called the Brave for his Valor; the Legislator for giving good Laws
to his People; the Restorer for repairing Leon, and in fine, the Desired as
being one who left the greatest desire of himself, and was most lamented by his
People. He was Six Years of Age when he began his Reign, Under Tuition.
under the Tuition of Count Mendo Gonzalez and his Wife the Lady Mayor, who had
great possessions in Galicia, and some in Portugal, and Governed so well, that
the King's minority was no prejudice to his Kingdom. The Christians in Portugal
began to be so powerful, that under the conduct of some notable Commanders,
they repaired many places before ruined, and conquered others possessed by the
Moors. 1000.
D. Alboazar Ramirez Son to King Ramiro II. by Zara or Artida, Many places
recovered from the Moors
whom he stole from the Lord of Gaya, as was said before, wi^h many Gentlemen
and Forces maintained at his own Charge, entered Portugal and drove the Moors
out of all the Province betwixt the Rivers Duero and Minho. He took St. Roman,
Gastro de Avioso, and Castro de Gondomar: Beyond the River Duero he forced them
to retire as far as St. Martin de Moras and Lamego, making room for the
Christians to dilate themselves. The lands of Arouca and that Neighborhood
were again Peopled; the Year following, he overthrew the Moors in many places,
1001
took the City Braganza and other considerable Towns in those Mountains, and so
extended the Christian Dominions, that he deserves to be accounted one of the
principal Restorers of Portugal. His two Sons D. Trastamiro and D. Hermigio, or
Hermiron Alboazar accompanied him in these Conquests, of whom are descended
some Honorable Families in Spain.

5. The tranquillity the King's Tutors endeavored to preserve in the Kingdom,
Count Froila a Portugues Rebels.
during his Minority, was disturbed by the Portuguese Count Froila Vermuiz, who
took up Arms against the King. They came to a Battle in the Territory of Mafra,
betwixt Villanueva and Betancos, where Froila got the Victory. The King now
grown bigger, was much incensed against Count Froila, and his anger was
increased by the insinuations of Q. Elvira, his Wife and Daughter to Count
Mendo Gonzalez. Froila being in disgrace, had again recourse to Arms, which not
a little troubled the King, and the more for that at the same time, he received
the News, that another had rebelled in the City Oviedo. Thither the King
hasted, leaving Froila till he was more at leisure: But he marched directly
after the King, and overtook him at such time as he was ready to Assault the
City. The King was advised to forbear the Assault, least in the heat of it,
Froila should fall upon him behind, His Submission.
but he Answered, Let the Assault be carried on, for the Count is so much a
Gentleman, that he will not fall upon the backs of his Enemies. As he said, it
fell out, for Froila overcome by that Generosity, joined his Forces to the
King's, and so forwarded the attack that the City was immediately carried. In
this Action the Count behaved himself so bravely, that he lost both his Eyes,
at which the King was exceedingly grieved, and bestowed large possessions on
him, in some measure to recompense his loss: About this time, Count Garcia
Fernandez of Castile, was killed in a Battle betwixt Alcozar and Langra, having
behaved himself with great Bravery, he being one of the most notable Commanders
of that Age. His Son Sancho succeeded him as well in his Courage, as Dominions,
and often revenged his Death upon the Moors. There being several pretenders to
the Kingdom of Cordova, he seemingly sided with each of them to have the better
opportunity to ruin them all. The fugitive Count Vela, who used to stir up the
Moors against the Christians was now dead, and his Sons Roderick, James and
Innigo were restored to their Estates, and served the Count as their natural
Lord. He the more to Honor them, made the Eldest Godfather to his own Eldest
Son D. Garcia, and yet he afterward behaved himself like a Traitor, as his
Father had done before.

6. The Divisions among the Moors at Cordova, were very advantageous to the
Christians of Leon, Castile and Portugal. Those that had escaped the desolation
made by Almanzor about Coimbra, dealt with the Infidels, and bought Lands of
them at a very low rate; it appears by the original Deeds still extant, that
Oborez a Moore, sold the Town of Botam to Arias Prior of the Convent of Botam
for a Mare and her Fool; 1012.
either the Mare was worth much, or the Town very little. Till the Year 1020,
1020.
we have no account of any thing remarkable in Portugal. Out of it the King
repaired the City Leon, and gave it a Charter, and great Privileges to all
that would come and inhabit there. 1026.
Six years after was Born the renowned Captain Roderick de Bivar, Roderick de
Bivar, commonly called Cid, his Birth.
commonly called Cid, which in Arabic signifies Lord, of whom mention will be
made hereafter. The Christian affairs throughout Spain were in a flourishing
condition; the King entered Portugal, recovering many Towns in the Province of
Beira, till he came and encamped before Viseo. 1027.
The City was obstinately defended, and the King going out in the Evening
unarmed, to view the Enemies Works, was shot through the Body with an Arrow
from the Walls. King Alonso slain.
Some write that he died there presently, others that he was carried to Porto.
His death we shall hereafter see revenged as far as it could be. His body was
laid in a stately Tomb at Leon; he lived Thirty Two Years, and Reigned Twenty
Eight; being bred in Galicia by Count Mendo Gonzalez, Lord of Vierzo, he
married his Daughter: By her he had Bermudo his Successor, and Sancha who
afterward came to be Queen; he had also a Bastard Son, called Nunno Alvarez de
Amaya, or Roderick Anzures, Lieutenant of Asturias, and Lord of Gijon.

7. Bermudo III. Bermudo III. Succeeds.
of the Name, succeeded his Father Alonso V. but so young, it was much feared
his tender Years might produce some notable Disorders in the Government. His
extraordinary Abilities far above his Years, soon dried up the Tears his
subjects shed for his Father, and made them rejoice in so unexpected a
Blessing. He was extremely Religious and Devout, and therefore applied himself
to the re-establishing of many ruined Churches. Being of Age to Marry, he took
to Wife the Lady Ximena or Teresa, younger Daughter to Count Sancho, Lord of
Castile, by whom he had D. Alonso, who lived but a few days. He concluded a
match between his Sister the Lady Sancha and D. Garcia, An inhuman Murder.
the Son of Count Sancho of Castile. King Sancho of Navarre, who was
Brother-in-law to D. Garcia, bore him Company to Leon to honor his Marriage.
The next day after their Arrival, the Bridegroom went out with the Bishop to
hear Mass; in the way, he was assaulted by the Sons of the traitor D. Vela,
before spoke of, and by them stabbed in several places, his own Godfather
being the first that wounded him. This News being carried to Court, the Bride
forgetting her Grandeur, ran out to the place, and pitifully lamenting her
loss, it was thought she would have given up the Ghost upon the dead Body. She
railed at the Murderers, which Count Fernan Flavino hearing, had the impudence
to strike her on the Face. The Murderers for the present escaped, but Sancho
King of Navarre, afterward getting them into his power, burnt them alive,
declaring all their progeny for ever infamous.

8. D. Garcia thus murdered, and no Heir Male remaining to the Earldom of
Castile, Sancho King of Navarre possessed himself thereof in the Right of his
Wife, the Lady Elvira, Wars betwixt the Christian Kings of Spain.
Sister to the late Count. Grown Great with this Accession of Power, he made
War upon King Bermudo, about the Limits of Castile and Leon; and conquered much
of the Country, betwixt the Rivers Pisuerga and Cea. More had been won by him,
but that Sancha, 1034.
only Sister to King Bermudo, was given in Marriage to Ferdinand, Second Son to
King Sancho. This Lady swore she would never consent to the Match, unless Count
Fernan Flaminio, who struck her on the Face as she lay upon the Body of the
dead Count Garcia, was delivered up to her. This was accordingly done; and she,
with her own Hands, put him to a cruel Death, 1035.
but well deserved by him. The King of Navarre dying, Ferdinand of Navarre
kills King Bermudo and becomes sole Monarch of Castile, Leon, Portugal, Galicia
and Navarre.
and his Son Ferdinand succeeding him, King Bermudo was in hopes to recover
what Ferdinand's Father had taken from him. They came to a Battle in the Valley
of Tamara, near Fromista, where, after a bloody Fight, King Bermudo was killed,
and his Army overthrown. Ferdinand, now victorious, immediately laid Siege to
Leon; and having made himself Master thereof, he was there Crowned King of
Leon, Galicia and Portugal, in the Right of his Wife Sancha, the lawful Heiress
of those Kingdoms. Thus, for want of Issue Male to the Kings of Leon, and Earls
of Castile, those two Dominions fell to the House of Navarre, 1037.
by the Female Line.

9. What I am about to relate, happened in the Reign of King Bermudo; but in
what Year, is not certain: Two Grandsons of Prince Alboazar Ramirez, Son to
King Ramiro III, called Tedon and Rosendo, with a Body of resolute Men, broke
into that part of the Country that lies betwixt the Rivers Tavora and Duero.
Having drove the Moors thence, A Stratagem of the Christians against the Moors.
they began to Till the Land; and knowing well that the Infidels would not
suffer them quietly to rest there, they fortified themselves on a Rock, over
the River Tavora; which running round great part of it, makes it a sort of
Peninsula; which, with the Steepness of the Rock it self, renders it
inaccessible any Way but one. Here they built their Habitation, and hence
infested the Country of the Moors. At length, on Midsummer-Day, which is much
reverenced even by those Infidels, in Honor of St. John the Baptist, the Moors
of the Town of Paredes resorted, in great Numbers, to sport and divert
themselves on the Banks of the River, and to bathe themselves in it. D. Rosendo
clothing his Men in Moorish Apparel, passed the River, out of sight, and lay
close in Ambush till he saw all the Banks covered with the Barbarians: Then, by
degrees, coming out, as if he had been some of their own Company, he suffered
his Men to mix with the Enemy, who took them for Friends. Being all mixed, the
Christians fell upon them, and turned their Pleasure into Sorrow: However, many
stood, and made a good Defense; and others coming to their Aid, the Success was
doubtful, till D. Tedon, fording the River, with his Men, ended the Dispute,
with the Slaughter of most of the Moors. This, and other Victories, put the two
Brothers in Possession of many Lands in that Country: And in Memory of the
Action, they took to themselves the Name of the River, which still continues in
the Family of the Tavora's.

10. The Fame of the Exploits of D. Tedon, particularly that upon the River,
together with that of the Comeliness of his Person, reaching the Ears of
Ardinga, the beautiful Daughter of Aliboazen King of Lamego, she fell in Love
with him by Hearsay. The Effects of Love.
Love persuaded her to quit her Father's Palace, and, disguised in the Habit of
a Man, through bye Ways, she found out the Abbot Gelasius, a solitary Hermit.
She told him who she was, and the Cause of her Coming; and he baptized her,
promising to persuade D. Tedon to take her to Wife. This took not effect, for
her Father closely pursuing her, overtook, and put her to death. Tedon hearing
of her Love, had promised to marry her, and she being dead, would take no other
Wife; but was afterward killed by the Moors, near a small Brook, which, of
him, was called Tedo: So he took his Surname from one River, and gave his Name
to another. There being nothing else remarkable, recorded in Portugal, during
the Reign of King Bermudo, and he being the last King thereof of that Name, I
must not omit to remark, that Bermudo is the same Name with Veremundus, which
the Spaniards call Veremundo; so that, to make it Bermudo, there is, corruptly,
an e and an n omitted; and to use B for V, is common in Spanish. Thus Bermudo
and Veremundus appear to be the same Name.

CHAP. X.
The remaining Kings, from the Year 1037, till the Year 1108, and till the
Establishment of Count Henry of Burgundy in the Sovereignty of Portugal, where
begins the Line of the Portuguese Kings, and ends the Second Book.
1. FErdinand Prince of Navarre inherited the Crown of Leon, King Ferdinand
called The Great.
in the Right of his Wife, the Lady Sancha, Daughter to King Alonso V, and
Sister to King Bermudo III, who died without Issue. The Earldom of Castile fell
to him by his Mother, the Lady Nunna; and the Crown of Navarre he inherited,
from his Father: Three Crowns were united in him, and he was well worthy
thereof; purchasing, by his Piety, Valor and Bounty, the Title of The Great.
The Moors believing King Ferdinand was wholly employed in reconciling his new
Subjects in Castile, Leon, Galicia and Portugal, broke into Lustainia; but
hearing he was provided to receive them, they retired hastily. He, once
provoked, would not put up his Sword without doing Execution. His Conquests
over the Infidels.
He took the Town of Sea, and the Cities Merida, Badajoz, Beja and Evora,
without any Resistance. Viseo, guilty of the Death of King Alonso, and fearing
a Revenge, was strongly fortified, and governed by Cid Alafun, a notable
Commander. The King sat down before it, resolving not to stir thence, till he
were Master of it. Eighteen Days the City was battered, and bravely defended;
at the End whereof, being the Eve of the Feast of St. Peter and St. Paul, it
was entered by Force, and never after returned under the Yoke of the Infidels.
The Man that shot King Alonso being taken in the City, had his Eyes put out,
and both his Hands and one Foot cut off; which done, he was shot to Death. The
Governor Alafun had, in Consideration of his Valor, Lands given him to live
upon, paying a certain Tribute. His Name is still preserved in those Parts, in
the Mountain called Alafun, the Council of Alaf^^^, and other Places.

2. The City Lamego held out no less obstinately, during Twenty Five Days, at
the end whereof it was surrendered upon Articles the 22th Day of July. It was
not then used to expel the Moors, but to bring them to pay a moderate tribute.
After these Conquests, the King crossed the Province between the Rivers Duero
and Minho into Galicia, to visit the Sepulcher of the Apostle St. James, 1039.
and make his Offerings there: The following Year he conquered many places in
the Province of Tras os Montes, and pierced down even to the River Tagus. King
Ferdinand made glorious Conquests the ensuing Years; but they being out of
Portugal, do not appertain to us. Coimbra taken by the Advice and Assistance of
the Monks of Lorvan.
Two Monks of the Monastery of Lorvan advertised the King, that the City
Coimbra was ill provided, and worse fortified, and therefore it would be easy
to gain it. King Ferdinand marched in December, 1063, and laid Siege to it,
where he continued till July following; so that 7 Months were spent in the
Siege: 1064.
And it may be supposed, the Moors, before unprovided, upon Notice of his
Coming, had prepared to receive him. Provisions grew so scarce in the Army
toward the latter end of the Siege, that the King was about raising it, and
departing: But the Monks of the aforesaid Monastery of Lorvan supplied him
plentifully, and the City was taken the 8th Day after. The King offered the
Monks to take what they pleased, in requital for their Intelligence and
Supplies; but they modestly begged only a Church in the City: However, he gave
them many rich Gifts, and confirmed all the former Grants made by his
Ancestors. In token of Gratitude, the Monks presented the King with a Golden
Crown, which Count Gonzalo Moniz, Governor of the Province between Duero and
Minho, had offered to their Church: The King restored it, with 10 Marks of
Silver, to make a Cross. Roderick de Bivar, Surnamed Cid, that famous Captain,
was at this Siege, and Knighted by the King, in this City. Here was also the
renowned Portuguese, Roderick Frojas, Contemporary, and not much inferior to
the other for Warlike Exploits.

3. The King returning to Leon, left Sisnandus, a noble and valiant Man,
Governor of Coimbra. He made War upon Abudad, a resolute and powerful Moor, who
had much disturbed the King at the Siege; but being subdued, became a most
loyal Subject. Soon after, the Moors, 1065.
under the Command of Benalfagi, a great Lord in Estremadura, repaired the
Fortifications of Montemayor the Old, that it might be a Check upon Coimbra.
This Place was so obnoxious to it, that King Ferdinand was forced to come with
a powerful Army, wherewith he laid Siege to it for many Days. 1066.
Here Roderick de Bivar took great Pains to supply the Camp with Forage, all
the Country about being kept by great Multitudes of Moors. Montemayor taken,
and demolished.
At length the Besieged surrendered, upon Promise of their Lives; and the King,
offended at the Resistance he had found there, demolished the Walls. The
Governor Sisnandus repaired them again, in the Reign of King Alonso VI. King
Ferdinand was born in the Year 1007; and in 1030, married the Lady Sancha, by
whom he had the following Children, in Order as named, Vrraca, El^^^a, Sancho,
Alonso and Garcia. By a Daughter of Raymund, Lord of Savoy, he had Ferdinand,
who was a Cardinal; and D. Mininno Fernandez of Toro. Ferdinand dying, divides
his Dominions.
The King finding his End draw near, divided his Kingdoms among his Sons: To
Sancho he gave Castile; to Alonso, Leon; and to Garcia, Galicia and Portugal:
To the Lady Vrraca he left the City Zamora, with half the Principality of Leon;
to the Lady Elvira, Garcia is King of Galicia and Portugal.
the other half, ^^d the City Toro. Having thus settled his Affairs, King
Ferdinand died, in the 60th Year of his Age, and the 30th of his Reign; and was
buried in the Church of St. Isidorus, 1067.
where, a Year after, his Wife Sancha was also laid.

4. King Ferdinand foreseeing, that the Division of his Kingdoms could not but
produce Discord among his Sons, bound them by Oath to stand to this
Distribution; leaving his Curse upon him that should attempt to alter it. But,
of what Force are Oaths, against Ambition? The three Brothers fall at Variance.
None of them was satisfied. Sancho, the Eldest, thought himself wronged, as
having a Right to all. Garcia was grieved that the Cities of Toro and Zamora
were given to his Sisters. Alonso was offended that Sancho should think he had
Right to his Dominions. Garcia was the youngest, and therefore the last in the
Distribution: But he proved the first that took up Arms against his Sisters,
and invaded the Lands of Toro, and others along the River Duero, which he would
have to belong to Portugal. D. Sancho soon followed his Example in taking the
Field, not to defend his Sisters, but to strip them all. King Sancho, before he
undertook this Enterprise, asked the Advice of all his Noblemen; who
unanimously dissuaded him from the Undertaking, for fear of incurring his
Father's Curses. However, finding him not to be moved, they counseled him to
continue in Amity with King Alonso, and ask Leave of him to pass through the
Kingdom of Leon, into Portugal. To this purpose he met his Brother Alonso, at
the Monastery of Sahagun; but could not prevail to have Passage granted him:
Nevertheless, upon second Thoughts, they both agreed to conquer Portugal. 1069.
Our King Garcia, taken up with his own ambitious Designs, had no Leisure to
look into the Practices of his Brothers. What was yet worse, his Subjects were
discontented, for that he made Account of none but his Favorite Verna, by
whose Advice he began the War of Toro unsuccessfully.

5. The Portuguese Nobility and Gentry consulted together, The Portuguese
Nobility insult their King, on account of his Favorite.
how they might remove this mighty Favorite; and it was resolved, that D.
Roderick Frojas, a mighty Man in those Days, should discourse the King upon
that Matter. When he had made a long Harangue upon the Subject, all the Answer
the King made, was, to turn his Back upon him, and go away. D. Roderick seeing
how little his Words had prevailed, soon after killed Verna in the Palace. The
Death of Verna troubled not the King so much, as the News that King Sancho was
marching against him, and the small Confidence he had in his Subjects,
especially for the Brothers of that D. Roderick conspired together to oppose
his punishing the said D. Roderick. Necessity obliged the King to wink at
Offenses, and send for D. Roderick, who was fled into Navarre, designing for
France. He immediately returned, and came to Coimbra, then the Court of
Portugal, at such time as King Sancho's Forces began to range in Galicia, and
in the Province of Beira, without meeting with any Opposition. 1071.
The two Earls, D. Nunho de Lara, and D. Garcia de Cabra, advanced to the Walls
of Coimbra, with some Troops of Horse. The King would have gone out to fight
them, The Forces of Castile overthrown by those of Portugal.
but D. Roderick Frojas said, It was not fit for him to hazard himself, where
there was no King against him. D. Roderick went out, with his two Brothers,
Peter and Vermui, to meet the Enemy; and in the Field called Agua de Mayas,
overthrew them, killing 600, among whom were many of Note: 200 Portuguese were
slain; and Frojas himself received many Wounds.

6. King Garcia was gone to Santarem, when King Sancho, to revenge the former
Loss, pierced through Portugal, with a numerous Army. Some advised to protract
the War, and not hazard a Battle; but D. Roderick Frojaz, now recovered of his
Wounds, was positive for Fighting. A Plain, not far from Santarem, was chose
for that Purpose; where was fought as bloody a Battle as has been seen in any
Age. The greatest Fury was, King Sancho overthrows his Brother Garcia and takes
him Prisoner.
when the Portuguese strove to gain the Standard of the Castilians. King Sancho
came thither in Person, to defend it; and being unhorsed by D. Egas Gomez de
Sousa, was taken Prisoner by D. Roderick Frojaz, who delivered him up to King
Garcia. No sooner had he delivered his Prisoner, but he fell down dead of the
Wounds he had before received. King Garcia put his Brother into the Custody of
certain Gentlemen, whilst he pursued the flying Enemy: But King Sancho making
his Escape from them, made his Way to join Roderick Diaz de Bivar, called Cid,
who was then coming up with fresh Troops, that had not been engaged: These
charging the Portuguese, before tired, and now dispersed in the Pursuit,
changed the Fortune of the Day: However, the Fight, thus renewed, lasted till
Night. D. Peter and D. Vermui, Brothers to D. Roderick Frojas, were killed, and
King Garcia was taken by his Brother, who not long before had been his
Prisoner, and who now knew better how to secure him than he had been kept
himself. Thus the Castilians recovered the Day, and the Portuguese, before
victorious, were put to the Rout. King Garcia continued in Prison 10 Years,
when he was released by Death. There are Authors who write, that King Sancho
enlarged his Brother Garcia, contenting himself that he should be Tributary to
him; and that D. Alonso, Brother to both, returned him to Prison, in the Castle
of Luna, where he died, with Irons on his Legs: With those very Fetters, at his
own Request, he was buried in the Church of St. Isidorus, at Leon.

7. King Sancho having obtained the Victory over his Brother Garcia, all the
Kingdom of Portugal and Galicia submitted to him. This Kingdom being subdued,
he turned his victorious Arms against King Alonso of Leon, Sancho, after
subduing Portugal, ^onquers Leon, and becomes sole Monarch.
who well deserved it for consenting to the Destruction of his Brother. The War
continued bloody for some time, with various Success, till at length King
Alonso, overthrown, was taken Prisoner. To deliver himself from that Misery, he
retired to Sahagun, pretending to become a Religious Man. Soon after, finding a
fit Opportunity, 1072.
by the Advice of Count Peter Anzures, King Alonso of Leon flies to the
Protection of the Moors.
he fled to Toledo, where the Moorish King Alimaimon entertained him with Royal
Magnificence. Nothing now remained to disturb King Sancho's ambitious Thoughts,
but his Sister Vrraca's possessing Zamora. He laid Siege to that City, and had
now reduced it to Extremity; but here, in this last Act, God permitted the
Curses of his Father to reach him; for, in the Height of his Confidence, a
Traitor, called Vellido Dolphes, coming out of the City, upon pretense of
revealing some Secret to him, took his Opportunity to strike him through the
Body with a Spear, whereof he fell down dead. King Sancho reigned six Years,
and was murdered in 1073. 1073.
He was called The Brave, and was married to the Lady Blanch, Daughter to his
Uncle Garcia Sanchez, King of Navarre; or, according to others, to Alberta of
France. His Body lies in the Church of our Blessed Savior at Onna.

8. King Alonso being generously protected by the Moor, Alimaimon King of
Toledo, lived in hopes of better Fortune; when Advice was brought him from
Zamora, by Order of his Sister Vrraca, of the Death of his Brother, Alonso,
after his Brother's Death, return, and is received by the People a^ their King.
King Sancho. He immediately came to take Possession of his Kingdoms, and was
received with general Applause: Only Roderick Diaz de Bivar, called Cid, would
not take the Oath of Allegiance to him, till he swore he had no Hand in the
Death of King Sancho. It is strange, amidst the universal Satisfaction, the
King should have need of one Man: But he resented this Affront so heinously,
that he afterward banished him; in which Exile, Roderick gained much Honor.
King Alonso, the 6th of that Name, being settled in quiet Possession of his
Kingdoms, approved himself worthy of greater Dominions, being one of the most
victorious Princes of Spain, and that farthest extended his Conquests. He
seemed rather to have fled to Toledo as a Spy, than for Protection; for he took
that City from the Infidels, and valued himself so much upon it, that from
thenceforwards he styled himself Emperor; 1085.
and was the Honor of the Spanish Monarchy.

9. King Alonso had six Wives: Alonso's W^ves, and Issue.
The First was, Agnes, her Parentage unknown, and she left no Issue. The Second
was, Constance, Daughter to Duke Robert II. of Burgundy: She had a Daughter,
called Vrraca, afterward married to Count Raymund of Burgundy; and her Portion
was, the Kin^^^om of Galicia: Her Husband came to Spain, with her Mother; and
they had Issue, Sancha, and Alonso the Emperor. King Alonso's Third Wife was,
Berta, Daughter to Philip I, King of France: By her he had the Ladies, Sancha
and Elvira; the First married to Count Roderick Gonzalez Giron; the Latter, to
Roger I, King of Naples and Sicily. The Fourth Wife was, Elizabeth, Daughter to
the Emperor. The Fifth, Beatrix, a French Lady: Neither of them had any
Children. The Sixth was, Zaida, her Christian-Name Elizabeth, Daughter of
Almucamuz Aben Hamet, King of Sevil: She bore him a Son, called Sancho, killed
at Twelve Years of Age, in the Battle of Velez, in the Year 1100. The King, in
his Youth, had to do with the Lady Ximena Nunez de Gusman, Daughter to King
Garcia VI, of Navarre: By her he had three Daughters; The First, Elvira,
married to Count Raymund of Toulouse; her Portion was, a great Sum of Money,
with which he returned to France. The Second Daughter was, Teresa, Wife to
Count Henry, the Progenitor of the Kings of Portugal, Grandson to Robert I.
Duke of Burgundy, being the Fourth Son to Henry, Eldest Son to the Duke. Of the
Third Daughter we have no Account, unless it was one that was married to
Ferdinand Mendez the Elder, Son to M^m Alao, Lord of Braganza. Some Authors
would make the Lady Ximena to be lawful Wife to King Alonso; but there are
undeniable Proofs to the contrary in old Records, specifying the Time when each
Wife was married to the King, wherein none is left for this Lady, who,
doubtless, was no other than a Mistress.

10. Count Henry, Count Henry marries the Bastard Daughter of King Alonso.
after he had married the Bastard-Daughter of King Alonso, served the King in
his Wars, and was some Times sent Governor into Portugal; as were several
others, from the Year 1072, till 1098. For, though the Count was married in the
Year 1072, the Kingdom of Portugal was not absolutely assigned over to him till
after the Birth of his Son Alonso, which was in the Year 1094: And we find,
that from the Year 1099, the Count continued settled in Portugal, as absolute
Lord and Proprietor thereof; whereas before, being only Governor, at certain
Times he used to follow and serve King Alonso in his Wars. This King Alonso was
born in Galicia, in the Year 1035; was married the first time in 1076; died at
Toledo in 1108, having reigned 35 Years, and lived 73. His Body lies in the
Monastery of Sahagun, with that of his Son Prince Sancho: There also lie four
of his Wives, Agnes, Constance, Beatrix and Zayda; the other two, Elizabeth and
Berta, in the Church of St. Isidorus, at Leon. Now we shall be almost 500 Years
without returning to Castile, for now begins to bud the Tree of the most August
Kings of Portugal; a Tree which has shaded much of the World.

The End of the Second BOOK.
THE HISTORY OF PORTUGAL.
The Third BOOK.
CHAP. I.
The Country, Extraction, Life and Death of Henry first Earl of Portugal, and
progenitor of all the Kings thereof, Opinions concerning Henry the Progenitor
of the Portuguese Kings.
from the Year 1067 till 1112.
1. HEnry the first Founder of the Portuguese Monarchy, is by all Men allowed
to have been of noble Extraction; but others very much differ both as to his
Country and Family. As to his Family, the Bishops D. Roderick Sanchez, and D.
Alonso de Cartagena say, he was of the House of Lorrain, but do not name his
Parents. Duarte Galvan, our Ancient Chronologer, affirms, He was second Son to
a King of Hungary, which Opinion the famous Poet Camoens, in his Lusiads
follows: Damianus de Goes, in the life of King Emanuel, says, he was Son to
William Baron of Joinville, and Duke of Lorrain, and Abida of Champagne. James
de Valera, and Antony Beuter, bring him from Constantinople, grounding their
Opinion upon the History of Spain, writ by King Alonso, mistaking a Quotation
of the Archbishop D. Roderick, who Writes that he was of the Bisontine
Province, meaning Besancon, the Capital of the Dukedom of Burgundy, which they
take for Bisantium or Constantinople. Wolfangus Lazius writes he was of
Limburg; Duarte Nunnez de Leon endeavors to prove he was Grandson to Reginald
Earl of Burgundy, by his Son Guido Earl of Verneuille in Normandy. Lewis Gollut
in his History of that Earldom, says, he was Brother to Raimund, both Sons to
Earl William: All these doubts are cleared by the Ancient Manuscript of Fleury,
which being a fragment of French History, was writ in the time of our Count
Henry, for the Author of it brings himself as an Eye Witness of the three Suns
that were seen at the Town of Scyrs, on the Banks of the River Garonne, in the
Year 1108. It was writ by a famous Benedictin Monk of that Convent, and reaches
from the Year 897, till the Year 1110. Petrus Piteus a learned Man, published
it with other like Manuscripts, and it was Printed at Francfort in the Year
1596. By this Ancient Manuscript it appears, that Robert the first Duke of
Burgundy, younger Brother to King Henry I. of France, had by his Wife
Hermengarda, one only Son called Henry, who died before his Father, leaving
five Sons by his Wife Sibila, Daughter to Reginald Earl of Burgundy: These were
Hugo, who was heir to his Grandfather, but being left a Widdower without
Children, became a Monk of Cluni, and so died in the Year 1092. Eudo or Odoa,
who succeeded his Elder Brother, Robert Bishop of Langres, Henry our Earl, and
Reginald an Abbot; many other Authors too long to insert, have hinted that he
was of the House of Burgungy, though perhaps none specified it so particularly.
His Family once allowed to be that of Burgundy, it will need no further proofs
to show his Country; besides, that it is more likely he should come out of
France, which joins with Spain, than from Hungary or Constantinople so remote.
It is also a sufficient proof of his Country, that all his followers were
French, which could not have been, were he a stranger to them.

2. The Portuguese strive to clear two points for their Honor, A remark upon
some Conceits of the Portuguese Authors.
in which there is great difficulty, or rather an imposibility, for that all
arguments are against them; the one is to make out, that the Sovereignty of
Portugal was granted to Count Henry without any acknowledgment to Castile; the
other that Teresa was lawful Daughter to King Alonso. The Arguments for the
first, are, That no Records are to be found in Castile or Leon, to prove the
Title to such acknowledgment, and that their King Alonso the first, was
anointed King by Christ himself, and therefore owed his Crown to him. These
proofs are merely Suppositious; for as to the first, whether such Record
remains or not, it is not credible that a King would alienate a Kingdom to a
Bastard Daughter, so as to reserve no Sovereignty to himself, nor if he had, is
it in the power of a Prince to give away the right of a Legitimate Successor to
one Illegitimate? The second instance about Christ giving a right to the Crown,
seems so extravagant a Notion, that as it carries no proof, it needs no
Confutation. The other point insisted upon, is the Legitimacy of Teresa the
Counts Wife, but that has been spoke of already; no Author of Note has named
her otherwise than an unlawfully begotten, and the computation of the time her
Father was married to, and lived with his six Wives, makes it impossible to
allow of a Seventh. There is another doubt about Earl Henry's going to the Holy
Land, which some Pertuguese Authors insist upon without any sufficient Grounds,
or rather without any probability; but whether he did or not, is not easy to
decide, nor worth the discussing; let us go on to his Life, or rather to the
small fragments that remain of it, as of all other things before his time, but
we begin now by degrees to come into days of more light.

3. By what has been said, Count Henry of Burgundy.
it appears that Earl Henry was a Burgundian, the Son of Henry, Son to Robert
the first Duke of that Country, and Hermengarda Daughter to Count Reinald of
Burgundy. There he was Born in the Year 1035. being descended by the Fathers
side of the Royal Family of Hugh Capet, and by his Mother from the Earls of
Burgundy. The cause that moved Henry to pass over into Spain, was the desire of
Glory to be purchased in the continual Wars, betwixt the Christians and the
Moors. Authors do not agree about the time of his coming, but it appears by
Ancient Records, that he Governed Portugal in the Year 1073, His coming into
Portugal.
so that he must have been in Castile when King Ferdinand died, and when the
fame of Roderick de Bivar's exploits, 1067.
incited strangers to come from Foreign Parts to imitate his Actions. Roderick
was then near Fifty Years of Age, and Henry about Forty: The Author of the
Manuscript above mentioned, says, That succors were sent out of France to King
Alonso, at his request to King Philip I. being then pressed with the War made
by the Almoravides. It is likely that Henry came with the Command of these
Troops, and having gained esteem, had the Government of the Province between
the Rivers Duero and Minho committed to him, other great Men governing the
others at the same time. After the death of King Ferdinand, who divided his
Kingdoms among his three Sons, Sancho King of Castile having taken Portugal
from his Brother Garcia, and Leon from Alonso his other Brother, obliged him to
fly for safety to the Moors. 1071.
Henry accompanied him in all misfortunes, till Sancho being killed, Alonso was
not only restored to his own, but seated in the Thrones of Castile and
Portugal. 1073.
King Alonso considering, that he who follows a Prince, Gains the Affection of
King Alonso.
deposed in his misfortunes, does something more than Man, concluded that Henry
was a prodigy among mortals, and therefore from that time, resolved to suit his
reward to his Fidelity.

4. Beatrix the second Wife of King Alonso dying, 1076.
a match was agreed for him with the Lady Constance, Alonso marries his Aunt.
Aunt to Earl Henry, and he was sent to France to conduct her into Spain. With
him went Raymund Earl of Toulouse, and with them both came Raymund Earl of
Burgundy, which is the reason some Authors write they came all together;
whereas the other two had been long before in Spain. Thus Henry became great at
Court, the King being his Friend, and the Queen his Aunt, which his power he
used with such moderation, that he was beloved by all Men. 1081.
He accompanied King Alonso at the memorable Seige, and taking of Toledo, as
also at the Battle of Sagulias near Badajoz, 1087.
where the King was overthrown. 1090.
To reward all these Services, the King at last gave him to Wife his Bastard
Daughter Teresa, He takes to Wife Teresa Bastard Daughter to Alonso, and has in
Dower the City Porto and its Territory.
whom he had by the Lady Ximena Nunnez de Gusman. Her Dower was the City Porto
with its Territory, then the best part of what was gained in Portugal, giving
him leave to retire thither, and live with his Wife: His Age was the cause that
he died, leaving Teresa young to marry a second Husband, which much disturbed
the public Peace. Soon after the Christian Princes joining in League to
conquer the Holy Land, Earl Henry was chosen General of the Forces sent by King
Alonso, in which employ he gained great Honor. He returned from this
Expedition to Toledo, where the Court of Castile was then kept in the Year
1099. King Alonso at this time being of a great Age, sent his Son Prince
Sancho, being but Twelve Years of Age, under the direction of D. Garcia Count
of Cabra, with an Army to oppose Almanzor the Moor. With them went many Persons
of Quality, among which the chief was Earl Henry; they came to a Battle in the
Plains of Veles, where the Prince was unhorsed and killed, 1100.
though Henry and Garcia exposed themselves to save him. Overthrows the
Infidels and takes Almanzor prisoner.
Earl Henry meditating Revenge, met Almanzor again in the Field, whom he
dismounted and took Prisoner, delivering him to James Ordonnez for to carry him
to the King; this done, Henry broke through the Infidels, putting them to
flight, with a mighty slaughter.

5. As it is doubtful whether Henry went to Jerusalem with the other Christian
Princes, so is it also, whether he was present at the taking of Lisbon,
Santarem, Sintra, and other strong places by King Alonso, but that he was at
these latter Expeditions as most properly appertaining to him is most likely.
For his good services he receives other Territories of King Alonso.
But his great Age requiring some rest, the King at last gave him leave to
retire to Portugal, giving to him for himself and his Heirs, all that was
conquered there, which was the Cities Coimbra and Viseo, and the three
Provinces; that betwixt the Rivers Duero and Minho, Beira, and Tras os Montes,
with that part of Galicia as far as the Castle Lobeira, and leave to conquer as
far as Algarve. Earl Henry settled his residence at Guimaraens, taking the
Title of Earl of Portugal; The Portuguese encouraged by the presence of a
Prince of their own, did much upon the borders of the Province betwixt the
Rivers Duero and Minho, till then not entirely subdued, but we have no
particular account of their Actions. Hecha Martin King of Lamego, being a
tributary to Henry rebelled; and drawing together a powerful Army, did much
hurt in the Christian Territories. The Earl with Egas Moniz, a Gentleman then
famous, and afterward Tutor to King Alonso, marched to recover the Booty he had
taken, and overtook him in a Valley near the Monastery of Arouca. The Moor for
greater security, in case of any misfortune, placed his Wife Queen Axa Anzures,
and all the Prey on the top of a Mountain he thought unaccessible, called
Sierra Seca. The Christian Army encamped along the River Alarda and Egas Moniz,
seeing the Enemy advantagiously posted, undertook with a good party by Night,
to go about the Mountains, and at break of Day, to be ready to fall upon them
on the top, Another overthrow given by him to the to the Moors.
whilst the Christian Army charged the Enemy below. This was accordingly put in
Execution, and after a bloody Fight, the Queen was taken above and the King
below; they becoming Christians, the Earl bestowed the City Lamego upon them,
they paying tribute for the same.

6. The Moors rebelling against their King for changing his Religion, 1103.
he fled to Guimaraens to crave aid of Earl Henry, A Moorish King restored by
him.
who by force took the City Lamego, and restored him: He fearing in the Earl's
absence his Subjects would again revolt, desired of him to leave some
Portuguese Gentlemen to secure those Lands, which was accordingly done, and the
Country People with Inhabitants brought from the Province betwixt the Rivers
Duero and Minho. He performs other great Actions.
This year some Writers will have it, that Earl Henry went to the Holy Land
with Guy of Lusignan and other Princes; all the likelihood there is thereof,
is, That we have no account of him in Portugal from the Year 1103. till the
Year 1109. King Ali Haben Joseph, with a numerous Army, laid Siege to Coimbra,
which he furiously battered during a Month. Earl Henry marched to their relief,
and coming to a Battle, overthrew the Infidels with a great Slaughter. Cintra
and other places revolted and were overcome, but rising again, they could not
easily be subdued: Whilst our Earl was diverted in the Wars of Galicia and
Leon, where he took some Towns, Cyrus King of the Arabs taking the opportunity,
laid Siege to Santarem, whither our Forces hasting to relieve the place, were
by him overthrown, and so the Town being distressed, Surrendered. The Earl took
several places in Leon, so that King Alonso was glad to abandon that City upon
promise to relieve it in four Months. He overthrew King Alonso of Navarre in
defense of Queen Vrraca, and about the Government of Prince Alonso; soon after
Henry being dissatisfied with the said Queen, took part with the King against
her, and defeated Count Gomes who espoused her Quarrel.

7. Whilst he was absent from Astorga, those People of the Kingdom of Leon that
he had subdued revolted, 1112.
and he returning, His Death and Character.
laid Siege to Astorga. In the heat of the Siege, he died, and his Son Alonso
rising with his Army, went away to Bury him at Braga. Thus Astorga with all its
Territory was lost: The death of Earl Henry was much lamented of his Subjects,
for that he was a Prince of extraordinary Piety, Valor, and Generosity. He
overthrew the Moors in Seventeen several Battles, and took from them many
Cities and places of Strength. He lived Seventy Seven Years, Governed Portugal
with the Title of Earl above Twenty, and was Governor of part thereof almost
as many more. He was of a middle Stature, a beautiful and awful Presence, his
Complexion fair, his Eyes blew, and his Hair yellow, inclining to red: In his
ancient Pictures, he is represented with his Sword in his hand; his Body lies
in the Cathedral of Braga, with a modern Inscription on his Tomb, which
mistakes his Country and Parentage. The Countess Dowager governed this Dominion
for some years, as being her Dower, and her Son being under Age. She might have
ruled longer, had she not Married, or proposed to Marry the Earl of Trastamara
D. Ferdinand de Trava; this or some other cause, produced Civils Wars betwixt
the Mother and Son, which ended in her overthrow, her Son without regard to the
duty he owed to a Mother, when she was made Prisoner, keeping her in the Castle
of Lannoso, with Fetters on her Feet, till she died in the Year 1130. and was
Buried by her Husband.

8. The Issue of Earl Henry was, His Issue.
First, Alonso Enriquez, taking his Name and Surname from his Father and
Grandfather. This being his Heir, is named before the Sisters, though they
preceded him as to Birth. Secondly, the Lady Vrraca Wife to D Bermudo P^^z.
Earl of Trastamara. Thirdly, the Lady Sancha, Wife to D. Ferdinand Nunnez, a
great Man in the Kingdom of Galicia; they left no Children. Fourthly, the Lady
Teresa Married to D. Sancho Nunnez, Son to Count Nunno de Celanova. Fifthly, he
had a Bastard Son by a Woman of Quality, his Name was Peter Alonso, of whose
brave Actions we shall hear in the life of his Brother. Earl Henry for some
Years wore a plain white Shield, till after he had obtained renown by his
Sword, he added to it a plain blew Cross.

CHAP. II.
The Birth of Alonso first King of Portugal, he takes upon him the Government,
is proclaimed King by the Army, his wonderful Victory over the Moors at
Ourique, he takes Lisbon, Santarem, and many other places, all from the Year
1094. till the Year 1148.
1. IN July, 1094.
or according to others on the 15th. of August 1094. was Born D. Alonso
Enriquez only Son to Earl Henry, The Birth of Alonso Enriquez Son to Count
Henry.
and his Lady Teresa, at the Town of Guimaraens. He is said to have been Born
with both his Legs cleaving together from the Knees down, and that his
Governor Egas Muniz having devoutly begged of Heaven to loosen his Feet, the
Blessed Virgin appeared to him, bidding him carry the Child to an old ruined
Church at Carquere near Lamego, and that restoring the place, and setting the
Infant upon the Altar, he should recover his Limbs. Egas for the space of five
Years did as he had been ordered, and the Child recovered: 1105.
This Prince was but Fourteen Years of Age, when he began to follow the Wars
under his Father, and was with him when he died at the Siege of Ast^rga, as has
been said before. 1112.
Having paid the last Honors to his Father, to express his great respect
toward his Mother, he committed the Government to her, though then of Age to
undertake it himself. St. Bernard ha^^ng at his Convent of Claraval in France,
had a vision of St. John Bapist, M^nks of Claraval came into Portugal.
directing him to send some of his Monks to found a Monastery in Portugal, in
the place that should be shown to them by one John Cerita, whom they should
find there, he accordingly sent seven of his Monks. They found Cerita who lived
an Austere Eremitical life, and conducted them to Prince Alonso, by whom they
were honorably received, and encouraged in their Foundation. 1120.
Being dismissed, they settled in a deep Valley, encompassed with high
Mountains near the River Barosa, almost two Leagues from Lamego, where they
built a Chapel Dedicated to our Savior, which is still in being in the
Village called Pinegro. 1121.
The following Year, they built in a place where they had seen cert^^^ Lights,
during Nine Nights, as had been foretold by St. John Baptist to St. Bernard.
Here Prince Alonso visiting them, enlarged the Structure at his own cost; John
Cerita took the order here, and reduced several who lived an Eremitical Life in
the Mountains to follow his Example. The number of Monks thus increasing, he
founded another Monastery called St. Christopher de Lafoens. Both these
Churches were afterward Consecrated, and great Gifts offered in them at the
Solemnity.

2. Prince Alonso having now weilded a Sword long enough to gain Renown, 1125.
thought it requisite to be Knighted according to the Custom of those days,
Alonso Knights himself.
and thinking there was none about him great enough to Confer that Honor on
him, by putting on his Armor, and girding on his Sword, as was then the
Custom; he laid the Arms upon an Altar, and taking them thence, put them on
himself, so taking the Honor at his own hands. Prince Alonso's Mother being
about to marry the second time, it bred such Animosities betwixt them, that
they finally came to Battle near the Town of Guimaraens; 1128.
the Mother overthrown, fled to the Castle of Lannoso, He besieges his Mother,
takes and puts her into Irons.
which is hard by, and was there Besieged by her Son. Alonso VII. King of
Castile and Leon, came to her relief with a powerful Army. The Portuguese
Alonso was not unprovided, but meeting him in the plains of Valdevez, put to
the Sword the greatest part of his Forces, took seven Earls Prisoners, and the
King himself hardly escaped, having received two Wounds. This done, the young
Prince returns to the Siege of the Castle, which being yielded to him, he put
his Mother into Irons. She provoked at this dis-respect, as her Bolts were put
on, prayed to God that his Legs might be broke, and her Prayers were heard as
will appear hereafter.

3. Alonso now grown absolute, Being himself besieged by King Alonso of
Castile, he Articles for his deliverance, and breaks his Faith.
and having provoked the King of Castile by the late overthrow given him, to
revenge the Affront, that King marched with a Powerful Army, and besieged
Prince Alonso in the Town of Guimaraens. There being no hope of relief, nor
possibility of holding out, Egas Muniz was sent out by the Prince to treat of
some accommodation with the King, which Business he managed so Dexterously,
that the King upon Promise and Articles, that Prince Alonso should hold that
Country of him* and do him homage for the same in a certain time prefixed,
raised his Siege and departed. Prince Alonso delivered of that danger, thought
of nothing less than performing the Articles agreed upon. Porteguese Authors
will have it, that Egas Muniz, who managed this Treaty, because it was not
performed, presented himself to the King of Castile, with a Halter about his
Neck, for him to punish that breach of Faith, and was pardoned by the King. But
this is as Romantic as what our Authors writes, that the whole treaty was
concluded without the privity of Prince Alonso, as if the King could be so
infatuated to treat with a private Man stolen out of a Town, where his Prince
was closely Besieged, without seeing his Commission, or to conclude Articles,
and depart upon his bare word without the Ratification of the principal Points.
These Chimerical Notions are better passed by than to interrupt the course of
History with them; however I would not wholly omit this wild imagination of the
Author.

4. Albucazan King of Badajoz did great harm in the Province of Beira, 1131.
and took the Town of Trancoso before Prince Alonso could come to relieve it.
War with the Moors
However, our Prince soon retook it, and repulsed the Moor who came to have
hindered him from fortifying of it. In his return from this place, Alonso was
worsted by the Moors, but recovering himself near the Town of Guimaraens, he
overthrew a great multitude of them, and so entered that Town victorious, 1135.
where he hunged up the Colors taken in the Church. Th^n with Castile.
The War broke out again betwixt Castile and Portugal, in the Reign of Alonso
VII. of Castile called the Emperor, and much harm was done on both sides,
though with no great advantage to either. 1136.
At last our Prince broke into Galicia, where King Alonso meeting him, was in
Battle overthrown, and the Earl D. Roderick Vela made Prisoner: After this our
Alonso valiantly defended Coimbra, besieged by the Moor Eujuni, so powerful a
Prince, that he is said to have covered all the plains about the City, with an
Army of 300000 fighting Men: But a violent Plague raging among his Troops,
forced him to break up and depart much weaker than he came. Our Prince thus
delivered, entered the Territory of Leyria, which place, though strong, he took by
Escalade, putting most of the Defendants to the Sword. This being the first of
his notable Conquests, he offered it up to God, delivering it to Theotonius,
Prior of the Monastery of Santa Cruz, whether after the taking of Torres Novas,
he returned to repose himself in order to prosecute greater Designs.

5. Ismar or Ismael, 1139.
a powerful Moor, was Sovereign of all the Country beyond the River Tagus, A
Fabu^ous Relation.
called Alentejo. Our Prince passed that River, and made great Havoc in the
Territories of those Infidels; Ismael assembled twenty petty Princes, subject
to five little Kings who were all under his Dominion. Each of those Kings led
80000 Men, wherewith they covered all the plains. With our Authors leave it is
wholly incredible, That such inconsiderable Princes, as they must be, whose
Dominions extended not to above half the limits of Portugal, should raise so
prodigious a Multitude, for it amounts to no less than 480000. This may perhaps
be added to gain the greater Reputation to those strange miracles he talks of
in the Sequel. The Christians were not above 13000, and those wholly dismayed
(as well they might) at the sight of such an Army as they could not be capable
to number. However, Prince Alonso reposing his confidence in God, ceased not to
encourage and animate his fainting Forces. They encouraged with his undaunted
Contenance, and resolute Expressions, took heart and offered their ready
service: It was then Night when the Prince retiring to rest, read the History
of Gideon and fell asleep* in a Dream there appeared to him a venerable Old
Man, promising him Victory, and being awakened, was told there was such an one
pressed to speak with him; being admitted, he found it was the same Man he saw
in his Dream, and that he came to give him the same assurances. At break of day
he went out of his Tent, and looking toward the East, saw a mighty Brightness,
in the midst of which appeared our Savior on the Cross surrounded with Angels,
who promised him Victory over the Infidels, and commanded him to accept the
Title of King, if offered to him by his Army. Soon after the Portuguese flocked
about him, Alonso saluted King.
demanding the signal of Battle, and unanimously saluted him King. He at first
seemed to refuse that Title, but it being the consequence of the Vision he had
seen, soon admitted it: Let every one give that credit to this strange relation
he shall think fit, I have briefly set it down, that I might not wholly cut off
so extraordinary a passage in my Author; yet would I not extend it to that
length as he has done, because I believe most Men will give as little credit to
it as I do.

6. Alonso thus encouraged, drew up his Army into four Bodies, the Enemy making
twelve: The charge was seconded by a most hideous cry raised by both Armies,
The Battle of Ourique.
an incredible clattering of Weapons, and such showers of Darts and Arrows, as
seemed to darken the light of the Sun. No Christian sought to save himself, all
their study was to kill; the King encouraged all Men by his example, and every
Man sought to outdo another. Six hours the fight lasted, in which time the
plain of Ourique, where they engaged was all covered with dead Bodies, which
almost floated in a Pool of Blood. At length the Victory fell to the
Christians, and was one of the greatest ever obtained against Infidels.
Reflections upon this Battle.
It is very hard to reconcile the account of this Battle to any thing of
probability; for whereas the Author says but a little before, there were five
lesser Kings and one Sovereign of them all, with each 80000 Men* which amounts
to 480000; now he says, they were above 600000. Doubtless there must be willful
mistakes in these Numbers to magnify the Action, which would seem great if not
rendered incredible; Besides he reckons six Kings which are those of Silves,
Merida, Sevil, Badajoz, Lisbon, and Algezira, whereas all other Authors agree
they were but five, and give that for the reason that the Portuguese Arms
contain five small Scutcheons within the great one; nor is it any excuse to
say, there were five Kings subject to one that was supreme over them, for the
principal could not be omitted in the Number, and if he was not, than the
others must be but four. Another reason makes me incline not to credit this
Story, which is, that we see the King's of Castile, Aragon, and Navarre have
often joined their Forces to oppose a much less power than is here spoke of,
and it is not credible that such a Multitude could be now amassed on a sudden
without their knowledge, or much less that they knowing of it, should make no
provision to oppose that Torrent. Nor was there ever such a number of Moors in
one body heard of from their first invading Spain, till their last expulsion.
In fine, I cannot be reconciled to this monstrous Story, and could show many
other reasons against it, but look upon it as needless, this being only a
project to gain credit to the Miracles pretended for the founding of that
Kingdom, which serve only to cover its revolt at that time from the Crown of
Castile and Leon. I will insist no more upon it, but return to the course of
the History.

7. Ismael provoked with this loss, and desiring revenge, battered the City
Leyria, which he took, putting all the Defendants to the Sword, except D.
Pelayo Guterrez the Governor, whom he kept Prisoner. He fortified this place to
strongly, that King Alonso found much difficulty to recover it, but at length
drove the Moors out of all that Territory. King Alonso VII. of Castile seeing
that erected into a Monarchy, which but a little before was only the Portion of
his predecessors Bastard Daughter, thought it convenient in time to pull down
that rising greatness before it was too powerfully cemented together. Thus
breaking into Portugal by the way of Galicia, he came to the plains of
Vald^vez, where the Castilians had been before overthrown, 1140.
and where our King now again gave him Battle. Alonso (...) the King of Castile.
The King of Castile was defeated, and several Persons of Note taken Prisoners.
A French Fleet consisting of 70 Sail, arrived in the Harbor of the City Porto.
The King invited them to assist him in the taking of the City of Lisbon, 1141.
which having some years before been made tributary, A (...) of French at Porto.
was again revolted: This united power of Christians attempted to scale it, but
without any success, being forced to desist for that time. 1142.
The Moors obtained a Victory at Sour over the Knights Templers, and among the
Prisoners carried away to Santarem Martin Vicar of Sour esteemed a Holy Man,
whose Father Aires Manuel, when his Wife died, led an Eremitical Life.

8. Ansciri a valiant Moor Governor of the Town of Santarem, 1144.
with his often Excursions, had highly provoked King Alonso, who long meditated
how to surprise that place. At length being at Coimbra, he took only four men
of Quality with him into a Field, where having consulted with them of the
method of putting their design in Execution, The taking of Santarem.
he charged them upon pain of death, not to reveal to any Man what they had
discoursed about. As they returned home along the Banks of the River Mondego,
an Old Woman said to others that were with her so loud, that the King and his
company heard it; Do you know what the King and Noblemen have been about? They
are consulting how to take Santarem; the King hearing this, said to those
Gentlemen, if any one of you had gone a step from me before I heard that Old
Woman, I would have cut of his head. So hard a matter is it for a Secret to be
concealed. The King being resolved to gain that strong Town, 1145.
made a vow if he succeeded to build a stately Monastery at Alcobaza, and endow
it with all the Land he could see at the time of making the Vow. At the minute
he made this Vow, St. Bernard who was then at C^aravallis in France, by
Revelation from God, sent two Monks to begin that Monastery. Five days the King
spent marching from Coimbra to Santarem, and made himself Master of it in an
hour; some of his Men had Scaled the Walls before they were discovered, and
then in the confusion had time to break open a Gate, at which the King entered.
The Booty was very considerable, and the Town remained in the power of the
Christians; several lesser places followed the fortune of Santarem, but the
King now bent his thoughts upon greater Conquests.

9. Our King being at the Rock of Sintra with an ardent design to possess
himself of the City of Lisbon, discovered a mighty Fleet at Sea, A Fleet of
English, French, and Flemings, in the River of Lisbon.
which made toward the mouth of the River Tagus. This Fleet appearing* he
understood was composed of English, French and Flemings, under the Command of
William Long Espe, and other inferior Captains. Some Authors report, that Henry
King of Denmark, a Duke of Burgundy, and Theodoricus Earl of Flanders were also
in it. After struging with a Storm, they were coming to Water and recruit
themselves at the foot of that Mountain; the number of Vessels was 180 sail
containing 14000 men designed for the Holy War; the King made proposals to them
for conquering the City of Lisbon; they accepted, and the Siege was formed. The
strangers encamped on that side, Alonso joins his strength to theirs and takes
Lisbon.
where now the Church of St. Francis stands, and the King where is at present
the Church of St. Vincent. For five Months the City was valiantly attacked, and
no less resolutely defended. On St. Vrsula's Day, being the 21st. of October, a
most furious and bloody Assault was given to the City on all sides, with such
mighty Resolution, that above 200000 Infidels are said to have fallen that day.
But it is impossible the place then could contain near that number of all Sexes
and Ages, and yet my Author seems to speak only of Men. On the 25th. following,
being the Feast of St. Crispin and Crispinian, the King entered the City in
Triumph over the dead Bodies of his Enemies.

10. The particulars of this famous Action would doubtless have been
delightful, Some particulars of the Siege.
as they were great, but time and the want of Writers have Buried them in
Oblivion. It will not therefore be just to omit one glorious exploit, whereof
the memory still remains. Martin Moniz entering a Gate* found such opposition
from the Moors, that they were forcing him back and shutting to the Gate: to
prevent which, being himself not able to oppose their Force, he let himself
fall a cross the entrance, and so lying in the way, the Gate could not speedily
be put too, and his Men coming on, beat off the Infidels* making their way over
his dead Body; nor must the Strangers be robbed of their part of the Glory*
Many of them ended their days in this exploit, among them was one Henry of
Bonneville near (...) at whose Tomb in the Church of St. Vincent, many Miracles
are reported to have been wrought; many others were buried, where now is the
Church called that of the Martyrs from those that were buried there. The King
according (...) what had been before agreed, offered to the Strangers half the
City, but they satisfied with the Booty and some other rewards, departed to
prosecute their holy designs, ^or to their own Countries. Such as would stay,
had Lands assigned them; many other strong places were taken soon after in this
current of the King's good Fortune, 1148.
the chief of them were, Mafra, Almada, Palmela, Cintra, Obidos, Trancoso,
Alenquer, Serpa, Beja, Elvas, Coruche and Cezimbra. Thus the Pride of the
Mahometans began to be humbled, and this Christian Kingdom to lift up its head.

CHAP. III.
Continues the mighty Actions of the victorious King Alfonso, the Kingdom
confirmed to him by the Pope, his Death, issue and description, all from the
Year 1148. till 1185.
1. SInce we cannot give the particulars of all the Heroical Actions of this
King, Alonso overthrows the Moors with a handful of Men.
let us at least in two of them represent somewhat of the grandeur of the rest.
He sat down before Aleazar do Sal, with a small handful of Men; 500 Moorish
Horse and 10000 Foot came to raise the Siege, whom he went out to meet with
only 60 Horse, and a proportionable number of Foot. With this small Body, he
put his Enemies to flight, but was himself wounded in the Leg, most misfortunes
always lighting upon his Legs ever since his Mother laid that Curse on him, as
was said before. After this Victory, returning to the Siege, he took it at the
end of two Mon^hs; this done, he went with 60 Lances and a few Cross-bow-men to
take a view of the Fortress on the Rock of Palmela. Being before the place, he
discovered the King of Badajoz coming down a Hill with 400 Horse and 60000
Foot, Another like exploit
but without any order. Our King lay a while betwixt certain Rocks out of
sight, considering their disorderly march, whilst his Company meditated on
their Numbers. At length breaking out suddenly with that handful, he soon
covered the Hill with dead Bodies, and the Infidels believing a greater Army
had followed, fled in confusion, leaving all their Baggage to a few above 60
Conquerors. Palmela upon the News of this defeat, immediately surrendered upon
only promise of Life. 1160.
The City Tuy left him by his Father, and now revolted, he reduced to his
Obedience, and at the same time, concluded a match for his Daughter Mafalda,
then 12 Years of Age, with Raymund Prince of Catalonia.

2. Some time before, he had subdued the City Beja, after a tedious Siege, but
the Moors who are faithful no longer than compelled by necessity, finding now a
fit opportunity, 1162.
rebelled. Certain valiant Commanders, imitating the example of their King,
assaulted this place by Night with such resolution, and so unexpectedly, that
they carried it making great slaughter among the Inhabitants. A Gentleman of
Quality called Giraldus, living like an outlaw on account of certain crimes he
had committed, A number of Christian Outlaws (...) Evora.
entered into hopes of regaining the King's Favor, by some extraordinary
action. Considering therefore that the City Evora was not guarded by the
Infidels with that circumspection that was requisite at such a time, he
resolved to surprise it. There was a Watchtower, where the Sentinel was kept
by a Moor and his Daughter by turns; Giraldus knowing this, Scales the Tower
alone, and killing both Father and Daughter, who were asleep, returns with
their heads to his Men, being 500 Horse and a good number of Foot. They
encouraged by this success, scaled the Walls then unguarded, and breaking open
one of the Gates, let in their Companions: Thus with a mighty slaughter made of
the Inhabitants, the City was gained. The King not only Pardoned, but Rewarded
all those Outlaws, and made their Captain Governor of the City.

3, King Alonso thus become terrible to the Moors, fell at variance with his
Son-in-law Ferdinand the Second King of Leon, 1168.
and thereupon entered Galici^ in the 75th. year of his Age. War with Leon.
Here he took the Towns of Lima and Turon, and putting Portuguese Garrisons
into them, turned his Forces against Badajoz, then a tributary City to the King
of Leon. This City he assaulted and entered, but not the Castle: Mean while King
Ferdinand came to defend that place which fell within the limits of his
Conquest. The Portuguese Army encountering him in the Field, King Alonso put to
flight, breaks his Leg, fulfilling his Mothers curse when he put Fetters upon
her.
was overthrown, and King Alonso forced to fly into the City, whence thinking
to make his escape, he struck his Leg against a bolt of the Gate so violently,
that he broke it, and here his Mothers Curse reached him fully. Nor was that
all, for in that condition, he was taken by the King of Leon, who treated him
with extraordinary courtesy, and was content that he should restore to him only
such places as he had wrongfully taken in Galicia and Leon, though he offered
others in Portugal. Our Author will not allow that King Alonso promised any
acknowledgment to the Crown of Leon for his Dominions, but all Spanish Authors
are positive he did. Certain it is, that from henceforward he remained lame, so
that he never after could ride a Horseback, but was carried in a Chariot.

4. The King had some time since taken the City Beja, but it was soon after
lost. Gonzalo Mendez de Maya, called the Combatant, 1170.
about this time made a Road into the territory of Beja, where was a great body
of Moors, under the Command of Almo^^^mar, a Soldier of Reputation. These two
Bodies encountered, and Maya remained Master of the Field; scarce had he
vanquished this Enemy, when he was met by Alboazem King of Tangier, who was
coming to the assistance of the vanquished. The fight was renewed on the same
spot of Ground, and a second Victory added to the former. Maya was 95 Years of
Age when he obtained these two Victories, but died immediately of the Wounds he
had received* which made his Army return home in mornful manner. Albaraque King
of Sevil made bold by the King's lameness, (...) Santarem by the Moors, (...)
drawing a vast multitude out of Andaluzia, presumed not only to wast the
Country beyond Tagus, but to set down before Santarem, where the King then in
the 88th. Year of his Age reposed himself; he caused himself to be carried out
in his Chariot to give the Besiegers Battle. The fight was so obstinate, he was
forced to quit his Chariot, and appear at the head of his Men with his Sword in
Hand. Hereat his Soldiers took so much Courage, that they soon put their
Enemies to the rout with a great slaughter; St. Michael the Archangel is said
to have been seen by his side, hewing down the Infidels. Hence he went to the
Monastery of Alcobaca, to return thinks to God for this success, and staying
there a Month, is said to have instituted a new order of Knighthood, called
that of the Wing, for that in the Battle he saw a winged Arm near him fighting
against the Moors, which the King supposing to be St. Michael, or his Guardian
Angel, he dedicated the order to them both. The chief Rules were, that the
Knights should wear a red Wing embroidered with Gold; that none but Gentlemen
of Note should be admitted to the Order; that in fight they should carry the
Royal Standard; that they should take the Oath of Allegiance administered by the
Prior of Alcobaca, who was to be superior of the Order; that they should every
day say the same Prayers, as did the Converts of that Monastery; that their
Feast should be observed on Michaelmass Day. The King and principal Men were
enrolled in this Order, but it was not lasting.

5. At this time there was in the Portuguese Court, Gonzalo Hermiguez his
actions.
a Gentleman called Gonzalo Hermiguez, much esteemed of the Ladies for his
Eloquence and Art in Poetry, and no less envied of the Men, as well for those
Qualities, as for that his extraordinary Actions had purchased him the Title of
Moor Swallower. This Gentleman with a party that used to follow him, passed
over the River Tagus, before it was light on Midsummer Day from Lisbon to
Almada, and there lay in Ambush. The Moors according to their Custom coming out
that Morning with their Women to be merry upon the Banks of the River; he
suddenly rushed out upon them, expecting no such Entertainment, and made a
great slaughter of them. The Infidels strove to defend themselves, but in vain,
for he carried off a rich Booty to his Boats. Being ready to put off, he espied
a Moor carrying away a beautiful Woman, and leaping again ashore, he forced her
from him, and so made over to Santarem with his Prey. Of all the booty he took
nothing to himself, but the fair Captive, whom Baptized, he made his Wife: She
soon after dying, he was so afflicted that leaving the World, he took upon him
the habit of St. Bernard, in the Monastery of Alcobaca, and out of his own
Patrimony, having no Children, founded the Monastery of St. Mary de Tumaray^
near Ourem. Much about this time it is recorded, that the King being near the
mouth of the River Mondego, found a small Chapel with the Image of our B.
Lady, which restored to life one of his Servants killed with a fall from his
Horse. An old Hermit told him it was the same that had preserved all the Women
and Children, killed by John the Abbot (as was said in its place) when he
sallied out of Montemayor, and unexpectedly overthrew a multitude of Infidels.
This moved the King to erect a Monastery there; called at present St. Mary de
Seica, and the Image being several times removed from the poor Chapel, to the
magnificent Church of this Monastery, is said always of it self to have
returned to its own place. Peter the King's Bastard Brother ranging abroad, met
a party of Moors conducting a Beautiful Lady with much Treasure, all which,
having routed them, he took. Cide Achim a Moor of Silves, who courted this
Lady, begged her of the King, or else desired him to keep him also for his
slave. The King referred him to his Brother Peter, who not only restored to him
the Lady, but all the Treasure taken with her upon condition he should send no
succors to Lisbon, which it seems was not then taken.

6. Peter, of Peter, Bastard Brother to Alonso.
Bastard Brother to King Alonso was sent into France, to prevail with St.
Bernard, to use his interest with the Pope for to obtain his investiture and
confirmation of the new Kingdom of Portugal. To omit what is too Romantic
concerning this Peter, he is said for his extraordinary valor to have been
admitted into the number of the 12 Peers of France, and that preparing to
accompany that King to Jerusalem, he was diswaded by St. Bernard, who advised
him, rather to act against the Moors in Spain. He followed his advice, and was
at the taking of Santarem, Lisbon, Trancoso, Badajoz, and other great Actions:
After this he was chosen Master of the new instituted order of Knighthood,
called that of Avis, which Honor he obtained of the King, that he might not be
obliged by him to Marry. Returning one day with a party from an Engagement with
the Moors, he laid down in a Field and fell a Sleep, at which time St. Bernard
appeared to him in a Dream, persuading him to take upon him the Habit of his
Order, which he accordingly performed, and lived 13 Years in the Monastery of
Alcobaca, with an extraordinary opinion of Sanctity.

7. The Dominions of Portugal being now enlarged from a small Dower, given by
the King of Leon, with his Bastard Daughter to the proportion of a considerable
Kingdom, King Alonso sued to Pope Alexander III. for his invessiture in the
same, offering to pay to the Sea of Rome for ever, two pound of Gold yearly, as
an acknowledgment of his holding that Crown of the Pope. His Holiness granted
his request, and accordingly expedited his Bulls to that effect in the Year
1172. 1172.
Hereupon the Cortes or Parliament was assembled at Lamego, Pope Alexander
grants the Investiture of the Kingdom of Portugal to Alonso under a Tribute.
in which pursuant to these Bulls, the King was crowned with a Crown of Gold by
the Archbishop of Braga, and all the States there assembled, unanimously voted
their Kingdom independent of the Crown of Leon. For the better regulating of
the succession, it was enacted, That the King's Sons should inherit, and for
want of them his Brothers, whose Sons should not succeed them, without consent
of the People. That Daughters might Inherit, provided they Married not out of
the Kingdom; that their Husband should not be called King, till the Queen had a
Son; that he should not wear the Crown on his Head in Parliament; that if she
Married a Foreign Prince, she should not inherit, least the Crown should be
transferred to Strangers.

8. About this time the King made an incursion into Algarve, The body of St.
Vincent translated to Lisbon.
as far as the Promontorium Sacrum, or Cape St. Vincent, desiring to translate
the Body of that Saint which he understood to be there, but he could not
perform it, and retired: Afterward the Council of Lisbon sent People to
discover it, who brought it away to that City, where it is kept with great
Veneration, a number of Crows following the Body, from the Mountain to the
great Church where it lies, and there they also continue to this Day. Abenjacob
Son to the Miramamolin, or Emperor of Morocco, with a mighty Army, besieged and
much straightened the Town of Abrantes, but certain Portuguese Gentlemen raising
the greatest Power they were able, gave him Battle and put him to flight. D.
Fuas Roupinno commanded in the Castle of Puerto de Mos, at such time as Gami
King of Merida came to attack it. D. Fuas hearing of his approach with a small
body, went out and lay close in Ambush. The Moor giving an Assault to the
Castle, he fell upon him so unexpected and furiously, that most of the Moors
being slain, Gami and many others were made Prisoners. Gami and his Brother
were sent for a present to old King Alonso, who then reposed himself at
Coimbra. This same D. Fuas being Admiral at Sea, destroyed the Galleys of
Mauritania the first time near Cape Espichel, 1182.
and brought nine of them to Lisbon; others he burnt in the Sea of Ceuta.
Engagements by Sea.
Returning thither afterward with 21 Galleys, he fought 54 of the Enemy, but
was totally destroyed, and found a Grave where before he had raised Tropheys.
Joseph Aben, Jacob Miramamolin of Morocco, Andaluzia, Murcia and Valencia, with
13 Kings, and the mightiest Army that till then had been seen, to revenge the
harms suffered from the Portuguese, passed the River Tagus, and having
destroyed Torres Vedras, 1184.
and whatever else stood in his way, laid Siege to Santarem, where Prince
Sancho then was. During 6 or 7 days, he incessantly Battered the Town, and gave
several assaults to it, so that many of the Defendants were killed, the Prince
wounded, and the Walls shaken. At this time King Alonso being 91 years of Age,
came to relieve the Town, but scarce had the occasion to draw his Sword, the
Infidels flying precipitously at the very sight of him. Both the Father and Son
pursued the flying Enemy with such Execution, that the River was dyed with
their Blood. The Miramamolin ended his days, in the very River, being first
wounded by the Prince.

9. The most glorious King Alonso having Governed 17 Years without the Title of
King, and 46 with it, and having lived 93, at length departed this life in the
month of December, 1185.
and year of our Lord 1185. In his life time he is said to have overthrown 30
Kings, The Death of King Alonso.
besides a number of lesser Princes and inferior Commanders. It must be
observed, that most of these were Kings of particular Cities. His Piety appears
in the great number of Churches he Erected, reported to amount to 150. He
instituted two Military Orders, that of the Wing before spoken of, which for
want of Revenues died with the first Knights. And that of Avis (as our Author
will have it, though I find no other to confirm this Antiquity) which continues
to this day. To the Knights Templers and Hospitallers, he assigned considerable
Revenues. As to his Person, he was 11 Spans High, a Gigantick Stature, his Hair
Red, a large Mouth, long Visage, and large sparkling Eyes. He lay in the Church
of the Holy Cross at Coimbra in a wooden Tomb, till King Emanuel erected one
more Majestic for him. His Sword and Buckler are there still to be seen; His
Arms
the Arms he bore on his Shield were Argent, 19 Scutcheons Arzure, 10 of them
in the nature of an Orle, the other nine in Cross and in Saltire, all joined
together with twists of Silk, running from one to the other; each Escutcheon
charged with Thirteen Bezants.



10. King Alonso was 53 Years of Age when he Married Mafalda, His Wife and
Issue.
the most Beautiful Lady of those times, and second Daughter to Amadee, 5th.
Earl of Marienne, and first of Savoy. This Queen followed the example of her
Husband in erecting several Churches and Monasteries. By her, the King had
Issue, Henry who died young: Sancho who inherited the Crown, John, Malfalda
Wife to Alonso the second King of Aragon, Vrraca Wife to King Ferdinand the
second of Leon, from whom she was divorced on account of Consanguinity after
she had by him Alonso who inherited that Crown. Teresa, second Wife to Philip
the first Earl of Flanders, and Sancha; his Bastard Children were Peter Alonso,
Teresa married to Sancho Nunnez, from whom her Father took her, and married her
to Ferdinand Martinez, the brave Lord of Braganza, and the Lady Vrraca married
to Peter Alonson Viegas, the Grandson to Egas Moniz the King's Tutor.

CHAP. IV.
The life and Reign of King Sancho I. from the Year 1154. till 1212, all his
Actions in Peace and War, his Arms and Issue.
1. KIng Alonso had enjoyed the regal Title 15 Years when his Wife Queen
Mafalda bore him his second Son and Successor Sancho. 1154.
He was Born at Coimbra the 11th. of December, Sancho succeeds his Father
Alonso.
which being St. Martin's Day, he had that Name given him, together with the
other. From his very Infancy, he was bred in the Field amidst the noise of
Arms, and surrounded with Dangers. His Actions under his Father.
At the Age of 13 he engaged with the King of Leon, in the Plains of Arganal,
and though not Victorious, came off with Honor: He was the first Christian
Prince, after the Conquest of Spain by the Moors, that advanced to the Walls of
Sevil. His Father King Alonso had ordered him to pass the River Tagus, to
defend that plentiful Country. The Moors suffered him to pass undisturbed by
Evora and Beja, but having passed Sierra Morena, he was met by the King of
Sevil with a numerous Army in the plain of Axarafe; here they came to a Battle,
which was obstinately fought on both sides till the valor of the Christians
overcame the multitude of their Enemies, whom they pursued to the Gates of
Sevil, making that River run Red with the blood of Infidels. In his return to
Portugal, the Prince wasted all the Country carrying a vast Booty, without
meeting any opposition. By the way he laid Siege to Niebla, and had now reduced
it to great extremity, when advice was brought him that the City Beja was
distressed by the Moors. Thither he hasted, and charging the Besiegers, put
them to the rout, and relieved the City. The King of Bajadoz had sent Ravadan,
a famous Commander, with an Army to spoil that part of Portugal, which he
performed as was expected from him; being on his return, he was overtaken by
the Prince, and forced to quit the Country, and his Booty with more have than
he came. This Prince valiantly defended Santarem against the Miramamolin, till
his Father came to raise the Siege, and they both entered the place in Triumph.
These were his principal Exploits till his Accession to the Crown, which was in
the Year 1185. 1185.


2. The third day after his Father's Death, in the 30th. Year of his Age, and
the 10th. after he was married, Prince Sancho was Proclaimed King in the same
place where he was Born. Since this is the first King that died in Portugal, we
will set down the manner of public lamentation made for his Death which
continues to this day, The manner of lamenting the death (...) a King.
leaving the Formalities of the inauguration of the new King for another place.
The Judges and their Officers walk a foot from the Townhouse, with long
mourning Cloaks, with Hoods to them on their head. After them the Town Standard
Bearer on a Horse with mourning trappings, with black colors on his Shoulder,
the end whereof trails upon the Ground. Then follows the Sheriff with two
others in Mourning like the others, each of them carrying a Bucler over his
head. Next to them come the Aldermen, followed by a multitude of People; in
this manner they proceed to the great Church, where the Sheriff having made a
short Speech, declaring the King's death, and their great loss, he lets fall
the Buckler from his head upon the Stones, and breaks it to pieces, at which
the People raise a hideous lamentation. Then they go to the Mint, and so to the
great Hospital, at both which places they perform the same Ceremony, which
done, they return to the great Church and hear Mass. The third day after, is
performed the Ceremony of inauguration, which shall be spoke of in another
place. This Ceremony was now performed at Coimbra, where Martin then Bishop
crowned King Sancho and his Queen Dulcis according to the custom of those times.

3. The first action of the new King was paying his Obedience to Pope Urban
III. 1186.
after which he so much addicted himself to repairing of Towns and Castles and
building others anew, He repairs and builds many Towns
as also to encouraging of Tilling, that he was called the Peopler, and the
Farmer or Tiller. To the Military order of Santiago, he gave the Towns of
Alcazar, Palmela, Almada and Arruda; to that of Avis, Alpedriz and Alcanede; to
the Templars Idanha. He repaired the great Town of Covillam, to whose
jurisdiction 300 Villages are subject, and gave a Charter to it, as he did to
Gouvea, Viseo and Braganza. Ferdinand King of Leon entered into Portugal, 1187.
with greater force than success; for after several repulses, he was defeated
in the Country of Cerolico Bebado, now called la Vera: The Governor of
Villota, a Town on a Hill near the City Guardia, observing the King of Leon's
Army dispersed about the Villages for Plunder, gatherered all the Forces near
him, and marching from Trancoso, recovered all the Booty, killing many, and
putting the rest to flight. A Fleet of English, Flemings and Danes consisting
of 53 sail, 1188.
Commanded by Jaques Lord of Avesnes, entered the Mouth of the River Tagus,
being designed for the Holy Land. The King supplied them with all they wanted,
and designing the Conquest of the City Silves the Metropolis of Algarve, Silves
in Algarve taken with the help of a Foreign Fleet.
and refuge of all the Moorish Pirates, he proposed advantageous terms to these
Strangers if they would assist him in that Expedition. They consented,
Articling for the Plunder of the City, if taken: Forty Portuguese Galleys were
joined to the Foreign Fleet, besides Tenders carrying Provision and warlike
Munitions. The King marched with his Army by Land, whilst the Fleet made the
best of its way at Sea. Both being come before the City, they furiously
Battered, and gave several Assaults to it for the space of two Months, meeting
a vigorous resistance in the Defendants. At the end of that time the Moors
pressed with Hunger, and the continual attacks of the Christians delivered up
the City, capitulating only for their lives.

4. This City of Silves taken, 1189.
as has been said, was again lost the ensuing Year: Algarve subdued, King
Sancho adds that Title to Portugal.
King Sancho soon returned into Algarve, and not only recovered it, but took
also the Town of Albor and Castle of Abenabacci, besides other places. This
Country thus conquered, King Sancho styled himself King of Algarve, and to the
Royal Arms of Portugal, added an Orle of Castles. Some of his Coin has been
seen, which in the Orle has 7 Castles, which number is still used in the Arms
of Algarve, when separated from those of Portugal. King Alonso III. added more,
making the Number uncertain; but King John II. long after fixed the Number
again at seven. Betwixt this Year and that of 1200 were repeopled the Towns of
Penamacor, Pinel, Torres Novas, Azambuja, Penucova, Gondomar, Ermelo,
Covellinas, Soto de Panoyas and Povos. M^ntemayor the New was now first Built,
as also the City Guarda on the side of the Mountain formerly called Herminius,
now Serra da Estrella. 1190.
King Sancho entered Andaluzia a second time, laid Siege to the Town of Serpa,
overthrew the Moors that came to relieve it, and yet was forced to rise without
taking it. Soon after it was taken by the Knights of the Order of Avis; Peter
Fernandez de Castro, that famous Castilian, who taking offense at his King,
often led the Moors against him, being now General for the King of Morocco, did
great harm in Portugal. All the territory of Tomar was wasted, and Abrantes
plundered: As he was retiring loaded with rich Plunder, Martin Lopez a famous
Commander encountered him, and after a most sharp dispute, recovered all the
Prey and took him Prisoner.

5. The Miramamolin again overwhelmed this Kingdom with an Army of 400000 Horse
and 500000 Foot (I could wish a Cipher were cut off from each Number, and it
would appear more credible.) He took Torres Novas without opposition, but Tomar
was bravely defended by Galdin Paez, Master of the Templers, who had done
notable service in the Holy Land. The Moor offered to exchange the places he
had taken for the City Silves, but this proposition being rejected by King
Sancho, he in a fury laid Siege to Santarem, where the Plague raging in his
Army, Robert Labril and Richard Cambil Englishmen with a fleet of 63 Ships
arrive at Lisbon, and assist the Portuguese against the Moors.
he was forced to break it up and depart; 63 Men of War from the Northern parts
arrived at Lisbon, commanded by two English Men of Note, called Robert Labril*
and Richard Cambil. The first ten that came in, aided the King at Santarem
against the Miramamolin; the others being joined to them, there arose such
contention betwixt them and the Portuguese, as might have been the cause of
much Bloodshed, had not the King prudently prevented it, and sent the Strangers
away well contented. A most terrible Plague and devouring Famine followed all
these great successes, and not only destroyed Men in their Houses, but even the
wild Beasts in the Woods, or else they ran to the Towns for Prey whilst Men
fled to the Mountains for Shelter. 1191.
The Monks of Alcobaca perceiving they must of necessity Perish, Great Famine.
hid an Image of our Lady in the Mountain, which being afterward found, A
total Eclipse of the Sun.
a Church was built there, and called Our Lady of Help. To be brief, a great
part of the Kingdom was altogether unpeopled; all this was foreshown by a total
Solar Eclipse.

6. As if all these Calamities had not been sufficient to humble so small a
number of People and so narrow a Country, the Miramamolin Abenjoseph, Brother
to him that besieged Santarem, assisted by the Kings of Cordova and Sevil,
entered Portugal with 400000 Men. The Moors ravage the Country.
All the open Country was by him miserably wasted, and the Towns of Alcazar,
Almada and Palmela taken with all that the Christians had before gained in
Algarve. Our King not able oppose so puissant an Enemy, concluded a Truce with
him for five Years, which ended in a wonderful Eclipse of the Sun. This was
followed by Earthquakes, Earthquakes, inundations, and Storms for 8 Years
Floods, Storms at Sea, and many other Calamities for the space of 8 Years. Men
labored under a horrid Distemper, for their Entrails consuming they died
raving. A considerable body of Portuguese was at the famous Battle of Alarcos
in Castile against the Moors, 1195.
commanded by D. Ganzalo Viegas Master of Avis, who died honorably in that
glorious Action. A multitude of Arabs after the Expiration of the Truce,
overran a great part of Portugal, 1196.
consuming all that was not before spoiled, and putting to the Sword all the
Monks of the Monastery of Alcobaza. 1197.
King Sancho at last provoked by these losses, marched out with his Forces,
took Roca de Palmela and recovered Elvas, not long before taken from him. Next
he made War on the King of Leon his Son-in-law, having obtained of Pope
Celestin III. 1200.
the Croisade for all that fought against him, as a favourer of Infidels
against Christians. He took from him the City Tuy, and Towns of Pontevedr^ and
St. Payo de Lombeo and recovered Contrasta, now called Valencia, before taken
by the King of Leon. At length these two Kings were reconciled through the
mediation of the King of Aragon, who to that effect came to Coimbra, 1208.
then the Court of Portugal. Some time after there ensued Civil Wars in
Portugal betwixt certain great Men; the most considerable betwixt Peter
Rodriguez de Pereyre and his Cousin Peter Mendez de Poyares, who coming to a
Battle near Valongo, two Leagues from Porto, the latter was there slain with
many other Men of Note.

7. The Holy City of Jerusalem being taken by Saladin, the Christian Princes
made preparations for recovery of it, and our King Sancho designed to have gone
thither himself; but being dissuaded, sent supplies and encouraged the knights
Templers and Hospitallers to proceed vigorously in that religious Enterprise In
this King's time was used in Portugal the weight called a Talent, A Talent used
in Portugal.
but less than the Roman, Greek, or Hebrew, being worth but four Ducats. I have
seen silver Coin of this King's with his Image a Horseback on the one side, his
Sword held up a cross on his Reins, and about it these Words: In nomine Patris
and filij and spiritus Sancti; On the reverse, the Arms of the Kingdom and this
Inscription, Sanctius Dei Gratia Rex Portugaliae. King Sancho fixed not his
abode in any one place, but often removed, that so all might equally enjoy his
presence. He was a great Patron to the religious and Military Orders, careful
of rewarding Merit, a Friend to the Poor, an Enemy to Idleness, and true Father
of his Country. The misfortunes during his Reign, and his own bounty might well
have exhausted the Treasure; yet so well did he manage it, that at his death he
distributed 7^8000 Crowns and 1400 Marks of Plate, and 100 of Gold. His
Legacies extended to Rome and Jerusalem; The death of King Sancho.
he was of a middle Stature, and strongly set; he Reigned 26 Years and lived
57, died in March, and lies Buried in the Church of the Holy Cross at Coimbra,
opposite to his Father, whose Tomb is on the right side of the Altar. His Tomb
being opened by King Emanuel to put him into a new one 400 Years after his
Decease, the body was found uncorrupted.

8. Some Years before the death of his Father, His Issue.
he married Dulcis or Aldonza, Daughter to Raymund Berengarius Earl of
Barcelona, by whom he had issue, Alonso his Successor. Ferdinand married to
Joanna, Countess of Flanders, Daughter and Heiress to Baldwin, Emperor of
Constantinople. Peter who married the Daughter and Heiress of Earl Armengaud,
in whose right he had the Earldoms of Vrgel and Segorbe, and Island of Majorca.
Henry that died young, and Raymund that lived a short time. His Daughters were
Teresa, married to the King of Leon, and parted from him on account of
Consanguinity, when she had three Children by him, she is esteemed a Saint.
Mafalda married to Henry I. King of Castile, and divorced as well as her Sister
on the same account of Consanguinity; she lies buried in the Monastery of
Arouca, and is Worshipped as a Saint. Sancha who converted her own Palace at
Alenquer into a Franciscan Monastery, which was the first in Portugal, that
holy Man being then alive. She also built the Monastery of Celas near Coimbra,
and lies Buried at Lorvan with the same esteem as her Sisters. Blanch Lady of
Gaudalajara in Castile where she died, but was translated to the Church of the
Holy Cross at Coimbra among her Parents. Berengaria died young at Lor^an, and
lies there. His illegitimate Children were Martin Sanchez Earl of Trastamara,
Vrraca Sanchez Wife to Laurence Suarez. Teresa Sanchez, second Wife to Alonso
Tello the Elder. Giles Sanchez, who became a Priest* Constance Sanchez finished
the Monastery of St. Francis at Coimbra. Ruy Sanchez killed in Battle, as will
appear in the year 1245. Nunno Sanchez, and Mayor Sanchez; All these the King
had before he was Married, by a Lady of Quality, called Mary Paez.

9. King Sancho left out all the small Scutcheons used by his Father in his
Arms, His Arms.
only retaining the five principal in form of a Cross, with the strings that
bind them together.



In his time the Orders of St. Dominick and St. Francis first founded in
Portugal, and those of the Holy Trinity and Carmelites were then also admitted.

CHAP. V.
The Life and Reign of King Alonso II. of the Name and third King of Portugal,
his actions and death, from the Year 1183. till 1223.
1. ALonso Eldest Son to King Sancho, 1185.
and his Wife Queen Dulcis, The Birth of King Alonso II.
who was the third King of Portugal, and second of the Name, was Born the 25th.
of April, in the famous City Coimbra: He falling desperately sick, and being
given over by the Physicians, his Father had recourse to Heaven for his Health,
which was obtained through the Prayers of the Holy Nun Sennorina, then living
in the Mountains of Basto, of the Province betwixt Duero and Minho, as an
acknowledgment for which benefit received, the King bestowed Lands and
Possessions on that Church, as did some of his Successors. Soon after his
miraculous recovery, his Father sent him General against Torres Novas, whence
the Infidels used to make Excursions, and Ravage all the Neighboring Country.
The young Prince gave good proof of his Valor at this Siege, and became Master
of the place by plain force. King Sancho perceiving his Son to be worthy to
continue the race of Portuguese Kings, gave him to Wife Vrraca, Daughter to
Alonso VIII. of Castile. The Bride and Bridegroom could not lawfully be Married
without a Dispensation, being Cousins in the fourth degree of Consanguinity;
yet without any, they had a Son the following Year 1208. 1208.
King Sancho lived but four Years after, and our Prince succeeded him, being
then Twenty Six Years of Age. The first thing he did, was to give the Town of
Avis to the Military Order of that Name; Ferdinand Y^nez being the Master of
it, who removed thence from Evora, where he had resided till then.

2. King Sancho perceiving that his Son Alonso did not well agree with his
Brothers and Sisters, as he left him the Crown, so he provided for them, giving
the Brothers Money and Jewels, and to their Sisters the Towns of Alenquer and
Aveiras. King Alonso attacks the Towns given by his Father to his Sisters.
King Alonso not satisfied with the Crown, pretended his Father could not
alienate any Towns from it, to give to his Sisters. The Brothers fearing his
Power, fled, Ferdinand to Castile, and Peter to Leon, and then to Morocco. The
Sisters Fortifying the Towns, left them by their Father, provoked their
Brother, who by force of Arms, took the Town of Aveiras. This done, he sent
Forces to Besiege Alenquer, and sat down himself before Montemayor: These
Sieges lasted four Months, the King of Leon who had Married Teresa, Sister to
our King, forced him to quit that Enterprise. He marched with Prince Peter,
through the Province between Duero and Minho, wasting all that Country, and
besieged King Alonso as he lay before Montemayor. He is routted by the King of
Leon.
Much Blood was shed, and all the Country ruined, but at last coming to a
Battle, our King was Worsted, and the victorious Army in their return took the
Towns of Valencia. Melgazo, Fulgoso and Freixa, with other places of less Note,
which they Plundered, and Burnt what they could not carry away. The Portuguese
in the absence of the King of Leon, again provoked him to send his Forces.
Martin Sanchez, Brother to our King, but offended at him, commanded the Army of
Leon, being that King's Lieutenant. All things being in readiness to give
Battle, he refused to Fight against his natural Prince in Person, who being
informed thereof, withdrew himself to the City Porto: The Army left to Engage
Martin Sanchez, was commanded by Mendo Gonzalez de Soufa, John Perez de Maya,
and Giles Vasquez de Soverosa. The King being gone, the Fight began, in which
singular acts of valor were performed. D. John Perez de Maya with his Lance
overthrew seven Horsemen; Recovering defeats the Army of Leon.
in short, the Portuguese obtained the Victory in the Plain called Vareza,
betwixt Duero and Minho. The second day they Engaged near Braga, and the third
hard by Guimaraens, with the like success; so that the Enemy retired into
Galicia. These and the like misfortunes, moved the Sisters to solicit Pope
Innocent III. to interpose his Apostolical Authority, to oblige the King to do
them Justice. Nevertheless the Power of the Sword prevailed beyond Equity, or
Spiritual Weapons.

3. Ten Years were spent in these Domestic Broiles, He is reconciled to his
Brethren.
at the end of which the King was in some measure reconciled to his Brethren,
and had leisure to attend other Enterprises, from which Civil Discord had
diverted him. Though he could not go in Person to the famous Battle of Navas in
Castile against the Infidels, he sent some Forces under the Command of Gemez
Ramires. Our King being now disposed to advance his Conquests on the Infidels,
Heaven ordered it so, that a Fleet of 100 Sail from the North, under the
Command of Walter de Avesnes, was drove by stress of Weather into the River
Tagus. The King ordered the Bishop to relieve and cherish them, and then both
persuaded them to give their helping hand toward the gaining of Alcazar do
Sal. The King being hindered by Sickness, sent the Bishop General of 20000
Portuguese, who marched by Land whilst the Strangers steered the same course at
Sea. At the first attacks, many fell on both sides, but the Besieged fearing so
great Power, sent advice of their distress to the Kings of Badajoz, Jaen, Sevil
and Cordova, who came to their relief with 15000 Horse and 40000 Foot, besides
10 Galleys well provided. Providence ordered it so, that at the same time,
Thirty Sail of French and Flemings arrived at Setuval; these immediately moved
to aid the Christians, who gave the Enemy Battle whilst another part attacked
the Town. All the first day the Christians had the worst, but the next renewing
their strength and courage, they obtained an absolute Victory with the
slaughter of 30000 Infidels and two of the Kings, supposed to be those of
Badajoz and Cordova, because the other two soon after appeared before Elvas. A
bright Cross carried like the Standard of a Troop of Angels, with White
Garments crossed with Red, is said to have been seen this day in the Air, not
only by the Christians, but by the Infidels themselves, several of them
confessing it after the Battle. The Victors prosecuted the Siege, and carried
on a Mine, which being discovered by the Defendants, much Blood was shed under
Ground; at length the Town was taken on St. Luke's Day, and the Governor
having seen the strange signs mentioned, in the Sky, became a Christian.

4. The Kings of Sevil and Jaen, The Moors vanquished at Elvas.
with a numerous Army, Encamped before the City Elvas, confiding they should
carry it by their Multitude. Our King disappointed their expectation, giving
them Battle, and overthrowing them in open Field, after which he entered
Andaluzia victorious, overruning that Province with Fire and Sword. This done,
he returned home in Triumph, and his Army laden with Plunder; this Action so
daunted the Infidels, that they never after invaded that part of the Country.
Nevertheless, Moura and Serpa were soon after Besieged by the Moors, but they
were forced from both places with great loss by the King in Person. Out of the
last Engagement, he was drawn almost stifled, being very corpulent and
oppressed with the heat of the Weather, and weight of his Armor. Afterward he
overthrew the King of Badajoz near Alcozer, killing 30000 of his Men. He ^et
(...) a Fleet to Sea, for the War in the Holy Land. To be short, in all his
undertakings, he came off with Honor, as became the Son and Grandson of such a
Father and Grandfather. Many other his Warlike Exploits are Buried in Oblivion.

5. Of the excellency of his politic Government, there are sufficient
Testimonies. Till his time, this Kingdom was Governed according to the private
Laws of every Town. Laws are enacted by him.
He was the first that instituted general Laws, in the first Year of his Reign,
holding a Parliament for that purpose at Coimbra. In these Laws great regard
was had to the Churchmen, the prices of all things necessary for the support
of life were settled, so that the meanest might buy as cheap as the greatest;
the Extortions of public Ministers were retrenched; Plaintiffs if cast, were
ordered to pay a Fine; Sentence of Death passed by him, was appointed not to be
Executed till 20 days after, to prevent the Effects of Passion. This King used
extraordinary severity toward the Churchmen, 1221.
for which being reproved by Stephen Suarez de Silva Archbishop of Braga,
instead of amending, he set Officers to destroy all the Possessions of that
See. He persisted so obstinately in this fury, that Honorius the third wrote a
Letter to him full of most severe Expressions, calling him Tyrant: In fine, the
King died before he was reconciled to the Clergy, His Death.
or his own Sisters, the Kingdom at that time lying under an interdict. He
lived 48 Years, and Reigned 21: His Body lies Buried with the Queen his Wife,
in the Royal Monastery of Alcobaca, in a plain Tomb without any Epitaph or
Inscription, as were all the first Kings of this Nation. Of Body he was
extraordinary gross, and therefore called the Fat; yet his Gigantick Stature
carried it off, his Countenance was Comely, his Forehead High, 1223.
his Eyes Cheerful, and his Hair Yellow, which he always wore long.

5. King Alonso Married Vrraca, His Wife and Issue.
the Daughter of Alonso VIII. of Castile, called the Noble and Good, a most
virtuous and beautiful Princess. His Issue by her was Sancho, who succeeded in
the Throne; Alonso Earl of Bolen, in right of his Wife Maud, whence he was
called to Govern the Kingdom by reason of the insufficiency of his Brother,
whom he succeeded: Ferdinand called de Serpa, married to Sancha Fernandez,
Daughter to Ferdinand Earl of Lara. Lastly, Elenor who was Queen of Dacia. The
King had one Bastard Son, called John Alonso, of whom there is no other memory,
but that he lies Buried in the Church of Alcobaca. Though it be said before at
the end of the last King's Reign, that then the orders of St. Dominick, St.
Francis, the Blessed Trinity and the Carmelites came into Portugal; our Author
repeats it again in the Reign of this King, which is the most likely.

CHAP. VI.
The Life and Reign of King Sancho II. he is deposed by his Brother, flies to
Toledo, and there ends his days, all betwixt the Years 1207 and 1246.
1. SAncho II. of the Name, 1203.
and Fourth King of Portugal, Sancho II. ascends the Throne.
Eldest Son to King Alonso, was Born on the Eighth of September at Coimbra. He
was called Capelo, because being sickly in his Childhood, his Mother confiding
to obtain his Health, through the intercession of the Holy Father St. Augustine,
caused him to wear that Habit. His Weakness rather than want of Years, must be
the cause that he appeared not in any Military Action with his Father, for we
have no account of him till he ascended the Throne, which was about the 20th.
1223.
or 21st. Year of his Age. His first Action was a Reconciliation with the
Clergy, who had suffered much under his Father, but he soon followed his
Example. After this agreement with the Church, the Ecclesiastical Censures were
taken off, and those who died during the interdict, were now Buried in hallowed
Ground. The controversies also between the late King and his Sisters ceased,
they now swearing fealty to the King for the places they possessed. His next
care was to visit his Kingdom, which he did taking a Progress through it
leasurely, doing justice to all Men, and giving prudent Orders in all places.
Then laying aside for a while the Civil Affairs, he applied him to the
Military, making several incursions upon the Moors, whence he returned with
Honor. Our King, and Ferdinand of Castile met at Sabugal to adjust certain
Differences, which they amicably put an end to; King Ferdinand delivering up
the Town of Chaves which had been engaged to him.

2. Still the Arabs ranged about the territory of Elvas, He entirely defeats
the Moors at Elvas.
wasting the Country and destroying the Villages. King Sancho assembling his
Forces, soon drove them thence, but no sooner was his back turned then they
came again, laid Siege to Elvas, and carried it by Assault. Our King returning
with speed, utterly discomfitted those Barbarians, so that they never again
attempted any thing there. Nor did he desist till he had Juremenha, 1226.
Serpa, and other Castles, which had often been gained, and again fallen into
the Enemies hands. For four Years there was nothing of Action, but in the Year
1230, 1230.
he made War on the Moors, in the Province of Alentejo. The following year he
advanced into Algarve, to recover what his Grandfather had conquered there,
and was now again fallen into the hands of the Infidels. 1232.
Some places he re-took, consecrated the Churches, and placed therein
Evangelical Pastors. 1235.
After this, by his Commanders, the chief whereof was Payo Perez Correa, he
took Aljustrel which he gave to the Military Order of Santiago; 1239.
then the Towns of Mergola, and Alfajar de Penna, which also he bestowed on the
same Order. Of late Years the insolences of Favorites were grown
insupportable, they abusing the King and their Kindred and friends them. Common
complaints when subjects will rebel.
The Subjects were treated worse than conquered Moors, their Persons
Imprisoned, their Estates Wasted, their Children Murdered, unless redeemed for
Money, and their Wives and Daughters openly Ravished. Nor was the Sanctuary of
the Church any refuge, for even in those Holy Places, all Villainies were
committed: The King knew nothing, but what his Favorites told him, and it was
their study to keep him in ignorance, and hence proceeded the ruin of this
unhappy Prince.

3. In the Year 1240. Cacela and Ayamonte were taken by Assault, 1240.
in which Actions D. Payo Perez Correa particularly signalized himself,
Complaints made to the Pope and all things adjusted.
wherefore the King gave those places to the Military Order of Santiago,
whereof he was Commendary. During this current of Affairs, the King was highly
commended, and received Spiritual Favors from Pope Gregory IX. The Spiritual
Graces were for such as died in the War, and for the King himself, who lay
under Ecclesiastical Censures, for having proceeded unjustly against Peter
Bishop of Porto, who carried his complaints to Rome. Besides, he seized the
Ecclesiastical revenues on pretense of urgent necessities, and of punishing
Clergy Men who kept Women in their Houses. Silvester, Archbishop of Braga, had
hereupon made application to the Pope, who therefore wrote to the King, and
recommended the charge of reducing him to certain Bishops. But he prevented
them by submitting himself, and so all differences were adjusted. The King
considering the great merit of D. Payo Correa, before spoken of, made him
General for the conquest of Algarve. He acted therein with the success that was
hoped of his conduct taking several strong holds, among which were Estombar and
Alvor. Garcia Rodrigues who had traveled that Country as a Merchant, was his
principal Guide, having forsaken the pursuit after Riches, to purchase Honor
with his Sword. Paderne was also taken, but cost dear, the success remaining a
long time dubious. The Enemy having proposed a Cessation of Arms it was
granted, because our forces fatigued with so many expeditions required some
time of refreshment. During this Truce, the Commendary Peter Perez with five
Gentlemen went out to hunt in the Mountains of the Village of Antas. In their
passage by Tavira, a City belonging to the Moors, they were set upon by a
greater number of Infidels. Garcia Rodriguez, the Merchant above mentioned,
passing that way, hasted to their succor, and after a brave resistance, they
were all killed upon the place. D. Payo Correa could not come time enough to
save their lives, though upon the first advice of the accident he hasted
thither. Seeing his Friends could not be saved, he fell upon the Enemy for
revenge, and they flying to the City, he entered it together with them, and
though he met with a vigorous resistance, made himself Master of it. King
Sancho hearing of the taking of Tavira, gave it to the Knights of Santiago.

4. The conquest of Silves only was wanting to complete our General's Glory.
Silves again recovered.
His Policy and Celerity brought it about, the Enemy offering him a favorable
opportunity: The Inhabitants of that place went out to assist King Aben Afan at
the Siege of Estombar, D. Payo instead of relieving the Besieged, attacked
Silves then forsaken of its Defendants, and easily made himself Master of it.
The Moorish King hasting to succor the City, came late for his design, but in
time for D. Payo, who rushing out of the City, put him to flight, so
precipitately, that he was drowned on the Coast, which in memory of him is to
this day called the Sea of Abenafan. Thus all Algarve was brought under the
power of King Sancho: The Pope about this time having invited all Christian
Princes to join their Forces against the Tartars, 1244.
King Sancho provided a Gallant Army for that Expedition, but all his
Preparations were disappointed, for he went not as he had designed. Roderick
Sanchez, Son to King Sancho I. having been long at variance with Giles de
Soverosa, a powerful Man in those days, they met with armed Troops near the
City Porto, and after a sharp Engagement, the dispute ended with the life of
Roderick Sanchez, who was there slain. In this Encounter, Roderick Fafes, a Man
of Note, having lost his Horse, asked Gonzalo Rodriguez de Abreu to give him
his; he gave it upon condition the other should give him his Daughter Mencia in
Marriage, which according to promise, Fafes afterward performed.

5. The King continued to bestow liberally most rich Possessions on the Church.
The subjects ripe for rebellion, though the King was blameless.
His goodly Actions deserved no less love of his Subjects, than any of his
Predecessors, but it is not always Merit that gains esteem among Men. Envy
toward his Favorites produced Malice against him, nor was the fault in his
Government, or in choosing such Ministers, but that all who aspired to it,
could not be Favorites. There never is wanting a pretense to subjects disposed
to rebel. The King easing himself on his Favorites, the Portuguese gave out
he was incapable to Govern, and therefore proposed to erect a Lieutenant to
manage affairs for him, and made application to the Pope hereupon, having fixed
upon the King's Brother Alonso to fill that place and succeed him. It was want
of Loyalty in them, and not of capacity in him that produced this Resolution.
One objection raised against King Sancho by his Enemies, They cavil at all his
Actions.
was, That he had married a Wife below his Quality, and was too fond of her.
Weak motives to a Rebellion, especially considering his Queen was the Daughter
of D. Lope Diaz de Haro Lord of Biscay and of Vrraca, bastard Daughter to
Alonso IX. King of Leon, so that she was equal to him either as being both the
Offspring of the same King's Bastards, or as to grandeur, her Father wanting
nothing but the usurped Title of King, to make him as great as he of Portugal.
It is true, the Queen favoring those who had been instrumental in advancing
her to the Crown, hid some miscarriages from the King, which gave occasion to
the multitude to commit several insolences, and the King not punishing them
whilst he could, had not afterward the power to do it when he would. Some
would have it that the Queen had given her Husband a Potion, the more to secure
his love to her, and to divert him wholly from the care of the Government.

6. The tumultuous Cries of the People not prevailing, The Clergy joins in the
Rebellion with the Laity.
the Clergy took upon them to espouse their Quarrel, and had recourse to Pope
Gregory IX. who thundered out Ecclesiastical Censures against the King on
account of his being Married to Queen Mencia, who was his Kinswoman within the
prohibited degree. The King making no account of the Spiritual Weapons, the
People mutinied, being headed by Raymund Viegas Portocarreo, a Man of quality,
The Rebels seize the Queen.
and breaking into the Palace at Coimbra, took away the Queen and put her into
the Castle of Ourem. This exasperated the King to that height, that gathering
what force he could, he endeavored to recover her, but all in vain, for the
Rebels conveyed her into Castile. The King betrayed by all his Ministers.
Now it plainly appeared, that King Sancho was rather Unfortunate, than unfit
to Govern, for even the Ambassadors he employed abroad, betrayed him. He sent
John Egas Archbishop of Braga, and Peter and Tiburicus Bishops of Porto and
Coimbra to Rome, and they forgetting they were sent by their Prince, became
Sollicitors for the Rebels, who held correspondence there. Hereupon a Council
was held at Lions in France, assembled by Pope Innocent IV. and King Sancho
having sent thither his Ambassadors Ruy Gomez de Briteiros, Gomez Viegas, Peter
Alonso, a Franciscan and Dominick de Braga, a Dominican, they joined with the
mutinous Prelates, Alonso Brother to King Sancho, made Vicar of the Kingdom by
the Rebels.
and thereupon Count Alonso, Brother to King Sancho, then Married in France to
Maud Countess of Bolen, was at Paris Sworn Vicar of the Kingdom, and as such,
confirmed by the Pope, yet so that King Sancho should still retain the Title
and Pre-eminence of King, and his Sons if he had any, should inherit. This new
Substitute brought more harm than good to the Kingdom, for his followers
treated him as a King, and he assumed that respect which did not belong to him,
whilst others acknowledged the true King, so that this difference came to be
decided by the Sword.

7. The Dominicans and Franciscans were appointed to put in Execution this
unjust decree, and one Giles a Dominican durst notify it to the King. King
Sancho flies into Castile.
He seeing himself deprived of his Wife and Government, and the People in
Rebellion fled to Toledo, then the Court of Ferdinand the Holy King of Castile.
By the way, King Sancho reposing himself at Moreira, certain Gentlemen came to
him, offering to stand by him, and support his cause, provided he would put
away his Favorite. The King disapproving of this conditional Loyalty, no
better then open Rebellion, continued his Journey. At Toledo he spent the
remainder of his life in works of Grandeur and Piety. He expended a great
Treasure in Alms, and Building the Royal Chapel in the Cathedral: having done
extraordinary Penance for his Sins, and given singular marks of great Piety,
His Death.
he departed this life the Thirty Ninth Year of his Age, and the Thirteenth of
his Reign, reckoning in those that his Brother Governed for him. He is said to
have had a special Devotion to S. Lazarus, and also that he appeared twice to
him in his lifetime, and was present at his Death. In the beginning of his
Reign, he peopled the City Idanha, which had been destroyed by his Grandfather
King Sancho when he took it from the Moors. He maintained the City Aleazer
against the Infidels who Besieged it, who after much loss sustained, begged a
Truce. He not only preserved his Kingdom, but recovered many places that had
been lost, and may be accounted amongst the best of our Princes.

8. In this King ended the direct line of the Kings of Portugal, His Person
described.
he being the Fourth King, and Second of the Name. His Countenance was
Beautiful, his Hair fair and long, his Forehead high, his Eyes green and
cheerful, his Nose large, and his Complexion inclined to pale. In his Ancient
Pictures, he is represented in Scarlet Robes, a Crown on his Head, a Book in
one Hand, and in the other, a Scepter with a Pigeon on the top of it, as the
commonalty would have it, or else it might be a Stork as many Ancient Kings
used, denoting by the care that Bird has of its young ones, the love of a
Prince toward his Subjects. He built from the ground the Monasteries of St.
Dominick, in the Cities of Lisbon and Porto. Some say his Queen accompanied him
at Toledo, and others affirm, she was never heard of more after being taken
from him. He had no Issue, and consequently his Brother suceeded him.

CHAP. VII.
The Life and Reign of Alonso the third of the Name, and Fifth King of
Portugal; his Actions and Death, from the Year 1210. till 1279.
1. D. Alonso the Third of the Name, Alonso III. his Birth and Actions till his
assumption to the Crown.
and Fifth King, was Brother to King Sancho, whose lot it was to have a Crown
without the power of the Government, and a Wife without Issue. He was Born in
the City of Coimbra, on the 5th. of May, was the second Son of King Alonso II.
and Married Maud Countess of Bolen in France, 1210.
then Widow of Phillip the curled Son of Philip Augustus King of France, and
Grandson to the Duke of Maravia, whose Daughter Queen Mary was. 1245.
His thoughts were employed upon the Holy War, when he was called to the Crown
of Portugal. The Kingdom being in confusion, the Nobles made suite to Pope
Innocent the III. that Alonso might ascend the Throne instead of his Brother
Sancho. The Pope not to deprive the King of his right, and being informed he
was not of Ability to Govern, consented that Alonso should have the Authority
of Regent, but Sancho should still have the regal style and pre-eminence, and
his Children if he had any should inherit. At Paris, Alonso took Solemn Oath as
Regent, which was to this Effect: That he would preserve the Privileges of the
Clergy, Nobility and Commonalty; That he would constitute upright Judges,
without Favor or Affection; That such as had committed Crimes against Priests,
should be punished; That their Estates should be restored; That all Buildings
erected to the prejudice of Prelates should be Demolished, and nothing for the
future should be taken from them. This was the promise made, and consequently
such were the miscarriages then in the Government, so that the King suffered
for some miscarriages in his Ministers.

2. Alonso having taken upon him the Title of Regent, Alonso received as Regent.
set out from Paris, and returned to his Country, where he was received by most
places; yet several having more regard to their Loyalty, than the present
Danger, held out long after, and some till King Sancho died at Toledo. Alonso
possessed of the Kingdom, He puts away his Wife, and Marries another.
like an ungrateful Man, put away his Wife Maud, the Countess, who Married him
when he had nothing, and took in her place Beatrix, Bastard Daughter to King
Alonso the Tenth of Castile. Some Authors say, the Countess was contrary to all
Human and Divine Laws put away on account of Barrenness, but that is a mistake,
for it will appear she had Children. Pope Alexander the Fourth thundered out
Censures against this second Marriage as unlawful, but all to no purpose, the
King continuing obstinate till the Death of Maud, put an end to the dispute.
Alonso with the ambition of rule, pressed all Governors to deliver up their
Forts into his hands, and yet they that did so, were accounted no better than
Traitors, and such as held out against him, were afterward most esteemed even
by him. Obidos was the first Town Besieged by Alonso, but what the event was,
1247.
is not known. Ferdinand Rodriguez Pacheco, valiantly defended Cerolico de los
Bebados, or Bebado, and being reduced to great want one Morning, a Bird of Pray
dropped a large Trout before him taken out of the River Mondego. The Governor
sent it as a present to Alonso, who judging thereby there was plenty in the
Town, raised the Siege and departed. Thus the Besieged were left at liberty to
look abroad for Sustenance, so that the Trout may be said to have fed them all.

3. The Regent removed to Coimbra, A notable example of Loyalty.
where he met with no better success, being opposed by the invincible Loyalty
of D. Martin de Freitas. Both Parties resolved not to give way to one another.
The Siege lasted long, and the Defendants wavering, their noble Governor
performed more than Man to retain them in their Duty, insomuch that one day he
brought out to the Parade his Daughter, telling the Soldiers, That if want of
Women obliged them to think of a Surrender, they might make use of that one.
This act wholly confirmed the minds of the Garrison to him, insomuch, that they
resolved to live and die with him. Such was the posture of affairs when News
was brought of the Death of King Sancho at Toledo. The great Freitas demanded a
Truce, whilst he went to Toledo, to be assured of the Truth. There he caused
the King's Grave to be opened, and seeing him Dead, delivered to him the Keys
of the City he had entrusted him with, and asking leave to deliver them to his
Brother, 1248.
took them again: Being come to Coimbra, he opened the Gates to King Alonso,
who admiring so unparallelled a Gallantry, restored to him the Command, without
demanding Homage of him for it, which favor he extended to his Heirs; but he
knowing how hard it was to make a return suitable to such a favor, refused to
accept of it, and laid his Curse even to the fourth Generation, upon such as
should admit of it.

4. Alonso now become absolute King by the Death of his Brother, resolved to
imitate his Predecessors, or if it might be to out-doe them, by adding to his
Dominions the Kingdom of Algarve, and not suffering it to be lost again as had
happened to them. D. Payo Correa with the Forces under his Command, had already
taken several places in that Kingdom, the King joined him, and both together
laid Siege to the Town of Faro. 1249.
The King observing the place might be relieved by Sea, King Alonso conquers
Algarve.
placed some Vessels at the Mouth of the River to guard the Passage, and then
began to batter the place on all sides. The Besieged perceiving no hope to hold
out, began privately to treat of a Surrender with the King; he taking only Ten
Gentlemen that were privy to the Treaty, ventured into the Town so secretly,
that none of his Army knew it. D. Payo Correa missing the King, and hearing no
account of him, furiously assaulted the place, the Portuguese fighting like
Lions instead of being discouraged at the absence of their Sovereign. Many were
killed, and more had perished, but that the King appeared on the Walls, holding
out the Keys of the Town. Thus this place was reduced, submitting to pay the
same tribute it had before paid to the Miramamolin. The Government of it was
given to Stephen Perez de Tavares. D. Payo Correa was sent before to invest the
Town of Albufiera, and had signalized his Valor when the King came to second
him. Both together finished the Conquest of the place, which was given to D.
Payo for his good Service. I guess the motive of the King's staying behind, was
the Beauty of the Governor of Faro's Daughter, with whom he fell in Love when
he received the Keys of the Town; for by his Lady he had D. Martin Alonso
Chichorro, from whom is Descended the Family of Sousa of that Name. Fortune now
bent upon favoring our King, caused other places to submit to him, before he
could appear before them. 1250.
Loule surrendered, but not without some Bloodshed; Algezar, Perches, and other
places were all reduced. The King before his departure placed trusty Governors
in all the Towns with sufficient Garrisons, so as to secure that new conquered
Kingdom, which never after offered to revolt from him.

King Alonso having nothing now to employ his Arms within his own limits,
entered Andaluzia and took the Towns of Arouche and Ara^na. 1251.
This Action moved King Alonso, the Wife of Castile and Leon, to invade the
Kingdom of Algarve which he conquered. 1252.
After much contention betwixt the Crowns of Castile and Portugal, Differences
betwixt Castile and Portugal, (...) to Pope.
Pope Innocent the Fourth composed all Differences, so that the King of Castile
was to hold Algarve during his Life, and he of Portugal to marry his Bastard
Daughter. Both Kings were so willing to embrace this accommodation, that they
never considered the Bride was not Twelve Years of Age, and the Bridegroom
above Forty, nor that the Countess of Bolen was still alive. It is true, Pope
Innocent approved of this Match, and yet afterward Pope Alexander would not
allow of it. All Military Employment now ceasing, the King applied himself to
the Civil Affairs, and held a Parliament at Leiria. Next he took a Progress
through the Kingdom, 1255.
repairing the Forts, Towns and Churches that had been ruined during the War,
He spared neither cost nor labor in those public Works; he built from the
Ground the Monastery of Santarem, the Towns of Estremoz, 1258.
Odemira, Monforte, Valencia del Minho, then called Contrasta, 1259.
and Viana de Lima. His whole study was bent upon the good of the Government,
and knowing how necessary Trade is to support it, ordered many Fairs, and
cleared the Roads of Robbers to secure Commerce.

6. In the midst of these Employments came to him two Gentlemen to Freilas, The
King's cruelty toward his lawful Wife.
where he then was, sent by Maud the Countess his first and lawful Wife, to
advertise him, that she perceiving he did not send for her to his Kingdom, and
hearing he was Married again, was come of her self to find him out, and lay
then at Cascais. The King who had for the sake of his new Wife, regarded
neither Divine nor Human Laws, sent her such an Answer, that she was forced to
return to Bolen, leaving a Letter for him, wherein, she taxed himwith
Ingratitude and False-hood, threatening him with the censures of the Church, the
Power of Christian Princes, and the revenging hand of God. Authors add, that
she brought with her two Children she had by him, whom in revenge she left
exposed upon the Rocks, which are ever since called Cachopos, that word in
Portuguese signifying Boys. That the Countess had Children by him is proved by
the authority of Ancient Authors, and there is no proof, but bare surmises to
the contrary; besides, that a Tomb has been seen with an Inscription, denoting,
it contained a Son of theirs that followed him into Portugal, and was entirely
beloved by him. King Alonso of Castile, 1260.
Father-in-law to our King, having composed the difference about Algarve,
marched into Andaluzia, his Son-in-law assisting him both by Sea and Land. In
return for this kindness, the Castillian resigned up to him all his Title to
Algarve, and delivered the Towns to D. John de Aboin, and his Son D. Peter Anes
de Portel, upon condition the Portuguese, should during his life, be obliged to
assist him with Fifty Lances whenever he should demand them. This obligation
was also taken off when his Grandson Prince Denis being Seven Years of Age
visited him at Sevil, and desired to be knighted by him. 1263.
Before this time to prevent Broils and Animosites, the bounds of the Kingdoms
of Leon and Portugal were marked out.

7. About this time happened an unparallelled wonder, A strange action of a
jealous Woman.
a Woman perceiving she was not beloved by her Husband, acquainted a Jewish
Woman therewith, desiring her assistance. The Jew persuaded her, that when she
received the Blessed Sacrament, she should keep the Host and bring it to her,
wherewith she would work her relief. She tied the Host in the end of her
Head-cloaths, and going home, the Blood trickled down, and she not observing
it, was told of it by those that met her. Being come home, she locked the
Bloody Hood with the Host in a Closet. In the dead of the Night, her Husband
awaking, saw a great light upon the Chest, and calling upon his Wife, asked
whether she saw it not? She then declared the truth to him, and he rising, ran
to the Parish Church, and to the Dominicans. The Friars still preserve the
White Hood or Veil bloody in a Glass Case; the Parish keeps the Host and Blood
gathered on a Ball of Wax. Some Years after the Prior of that Church, which is
Dedicated to St. Stephen, going to show that Relick to the People, found it
shut up in a Cristalline Pyramidal Case, with a hole so small, that neither the
Host nor Ball could be put in unless it were miraculously. The Ball is still to
be seen round with drops of Blood on it, the Host is bent and Bloody. Many
Persons of Credit, have affirmed, That they have there seen our Savior in
several Postures of his Passion. Another Miracle is Recorded of a Christian,
who was slave to a Moor, and daily recommended himself to St. Dominick of
Sovereira. His Master every Night loaded him with Irons, and laid him in a
Chest upon which he made his own Bed. One Night this Chest with the slave in
it, and the Master upon it, was brought to the Door of the Chapel of that
Saint in the Town of Penamacor. This Miracle so wrought upon the Moor, that he
embraced the Faith, and the Slave and he lived there as Hermits all the residue
of their lives. The Chest and Chains are still kept in that little Church.

8. No sooner was the King seated on the Throne, Alonso resumes his former
gifts, and opposes the Clergy.
but he made it appear, that what he had before bountifully bestowed, was only
to secure himself, and not to reward those that promoted him. He took from the
Military Orders what he had before given them; neither did he make account of
what he swore at Paris in order to be Regent for his Brother; 1268.
for he so treated the Clergy, that several of them had recourse to Rome for
Redress, of which were the Bishops of Braga, Coimbra, Guarda, Porto and Viseo.
Pope Clement the Fourth, and after him Gregory the Tenth, 1272.
reproved his oppressing the Clergy, and forbidding the Jews and Moors under
severe Penalties not to turn Christians. The King at first shunned the Pope's
Commissioners, but when he could no longer do so, appointed to hear them before
the Cortes or Parliament summoned to meet at Santarem, where he showed some
disposition to obey them, though at the same time he designed nothing less. The
Pope offended at his proceedings, 1274.
issued out Bulls, containing the highest Censures, and in case the King was
not reclaimed within three Months, absolving his Subjects from their
Allegiance. The King continued obstinate, and the Nuncio went away leaving him
Excommunicated, 1175.
and the Kingdom under an interdict. The Pope died, and the King no way
relented. 1276.
Pope John the 20th. or 21st. Born at Lisbon, was promoted to St. Peter's
Chair. He sent a Spaniard his Nuncio to persuade the King by fair means to
comply. The Nuncio accompanied by Dominican and Franciscan Friars, of which
latter order he was, attended the King, and found him as obdurate as ever. 1277.
Sickness made the King begin to relent, and Death surmounted all difficulties.
At his Death the King ordered his Son to perform all he had refused to do.

9. During this King's Reign, certain devout Women went from Evora to Rome, to
obtain of the Pope the confirmation of a Monastery of Bernardin Nuns in that
City. A battle betwixt private Men and their forces
There wanted not Civil Broils among the Subjects; for Peter Estevas de
Tavares, and Ferdinand Alonso de Cambra, fought a Battle in the Plain of
Gouvea, in which much Blood was shed and many Persons of note killed; the
latter obtained the Victory. The Holy Laurence Mendez, a Dominican of the
Province betwixt the Rivers Duero and Minho, walking in a Field, an Angel
appeared to him, and gave him a small Box, which he said, contained many
Relics brought from a City then fallen into the hands of Infidels. Which
Relics are still preserved in the Monastery of Guimaraens, where the said
Laurence placed them.

10. King Alonso was of such extraordinary Stature, King Alonso described.
that all Men admired when King Sebastian caused his Tomb to be opened. His
Countenance was Majestic, his Eyes little, but Sparkling, his Hair black, his
Complexion fair. He died at Lisbon on the 20th. of March 1279. 1279.
being 64 Years of Age, His Death.
and having Reigned and Governed 34. Ten Years after his Death, King Denis his
Son translated him to the Monastery of Alcobaza, near to his Father, and
opposite to his second Wife Queen Beatrix, whose Tomb being afterward opened,
she appeared as Beautiful as if she had been a live. His Issue, His Issue.
by the first Wife most Authors agree he had two Sons, as they do in calling
the second Robert, who they say, succeeded his Mother in the Country of
Bologne. About the Elder they vary, some calling him Ferdinand, others Peter,
and lastly, others say, he is the same with Alonso Denis, counted among the
illegitimate.

By his second Wife, he had Denis, who succeeded in the Throne. Secondly, D.
Alonso Lord of Portalegre, who lies buried in the Monastery of St. Dominick at
Lisbon. Thirdly, Sancha; Fourthly, Mary; Fifthly, Vincent who died young,
Sixthly, Ferdinand who died also in his Infancy, all these Buried at Alcobaza;
Seventhly, Blanch Abbess of Lorvan first, and then of Huelgas at Burgos;
Eighthly, Constance Buried at Alcobaza; Illegimate he had Ferdinand, a Knight
Templar; Giles Alonso, Alonso Denis, Martin Alonso gotten on the Governor of
Faro's Daughter, as was said before; Ellenor Alonso, Vrraca Alonso, Elenor for
whom her Father built the Monastery of St. Clare at Santarem, where she was
famous for Sanctity, and Roderick Alonso who died Young.

11. The Arms of the Kingdom of Algarve, His Arms.
given by this King, were Sanguine Semee of Castles Or. Over these he placed
the Arms of Portugal, so that the Castles of the former made an Orb to the
latter. He also made an alteration in the number of Bezants, in each Escutcheon
of the Portuguese Arms, leaving but Eleven in each, whereas before there were
Thirteen. He was the first that styled himself King of Portugal and Algarve.
Men famous in his time.
Men famous for Sanctity in his time were St. Gonzalo, St. Laurence Mendez, and
St. Giles, all three Dominicans, at least the two latter without dispute. Also
St. Walter of the Order of S. Francis; Pope John the 21st. famous for his
Learning and Dignity, was Born at Lisbon. Many Men were famous for Military
Exploits, the chief whereof was D. Payo Perez Correa, Master of the Military
Order of Santiago.

CHAP. VIII.
The Life and Reign of Denis the first of that Name, and sixth King of
Portugal, his Actions and Death, from the Year 1261. till 1325.
1. KIng Denis, King Denis his Birth and Succession to the Crown.
Eldest Son to Alonso III. and Queen Beatrix, was born at Lisbon on the 9th. of
October, 1261. and was so called from the Saint whose Day that was. From his
Infancy he was educated in all those Virtues and Accomplishments that make an
Excellent Prince. In Truth, Justice, and Liberality, he exceeded most of them
that had been before him. His Father dying when he was but Eighteen Years of
Age, though he honored his Mother in all other Respects, he would allow her no
share in the Government. She resenting this as an Affront, went away into
Castile, pretending her Journey was only to pay a Visit to her Father. That
King, desiring to please her, took a Journey to Badajoz, and sent to desire
King Denis to come as far as Elvas. Thither the Princes Peter, Sancho, Jayne,
and his Brother Emanuel repaired to him, by whom the King of Castile desired
they might meet at Badajoz. King Denis having entertained them magnificently
for the space of three Days, sent them back, saying, He would soon be after
them, but suddenly returned to Lisbon, thinking it a better Expedient not to
meet his Grandfather, than to deny his Request. The Queen thus disappointed,
went away with her Father to Sevil, where she continued, being convinced her
Son would admit no Partner in the Throne.

2. The King being Twenty Years of Age, He Marries Elizabeth, the Daughter of
King Peter of Aragon.
sent his Ambassadors to Peter III. King of Aragon, to ask his Daughter
Elizabeth, then but Eleven Years old, in Marriage. His Request was easily
granted, and the Bride conducted to Braganza, where she was received by Alonso
the King's Brother, who conveyed her to Trancoso, where the best King of
Portugal, and one of the best Queens in the World were married. His next Care
was, ^o complete what his Father had begun, which was to dear the Kingdom of
Robbers and Outlaws, and to Protect the meaner sort against the Insolences of
Great Men, and particularly the Country People, whom he called the Sinews of
the Commonwealth. For this Reason, and because he built many Castles, he was
called the Husbandman and Father of his Country. Having at his Entrance into
the Government passed many extravagant Grants, when he came to the Age of 22,
he recalled them all. 1283.
He had some Difference with his Brother Alonso, who refused to make any
Acknowledgment for the Towns left him by his Father, Has Differences with his
Brother Alonso.
and had some Pretensions to the Crown, pleading that Denis was Born before the
Death of the Countess of Bologne, and consequently must be Illegitimate,
whereas he was Born after her Death, when the Pope had ratified the Match. They
both took Arms, and Alonso was besieged by his Brother in Portalegre, yet at
last they agreed. The chief Articles were, That Alonso should be allowed 30000
Crowns a Year out of the King's Revenue, and instead of the Towns he possessed,
should have Sintra and Ourem, for that the others were more dangerous to the
King, as lying on the Borders of Castile. Thus ended those Civil Broils.

3. A War broke out with King Sancho the Third of Castile, War betwixt Castile
and Portugal.
called the Fierce, for that he performed not the Covenants about the Marriages
of the Princes, for Security whereof he had put into Portuguese Hands the
Cities of Badajoz and Truxillo, as also the Towns of Moura, Serpa, Caceres,
Allariz, and Aguiar de Neiva. All these Places he again suddenly surprised, and
made several inroads into Algarve, and into Portugal, by the way of Leon,
destroying all the Country before him. King Denis being then wholly unprovided
for War, sent Ambassadors to adjust Affairs, but to no effect. King Denis now
moved to Wrath, challenged King Sancho, and at the same time caused his Forces
to do much harm in the Enemy's Country. Sancho designed to answer the
Challenge, but was prevented by Death, at which time he ordered all that had
been before stipulated, should be performed. Ferdinand the Fourth, his
Successor, not answering what was expected from him, King Denis sent his
Ambassadors to demand the Restitution of the Towns taken by his Predecessor,
and in case of Refusal, to fix the Challenge upon him. Restitution being
denied, the Challenge was accordingly given, and the Ambassadors withdrew. This
done, King Denis with a Puissant Army marched from the City Guarda, and entered
Castile, committing all manner of Hostilities. Prince Henry, who was Governor
to the young King Ferdinand, put a stop to our King's further Progress, making
him advantageous Proposals, and referring the Conclusion to Cuidad Rodrigo,
where the two Kings met with the Queen Mother of Castile, and concluded all
Articles; the Towns demanded by the Portuguese being put into the Hands of
Ferdinand Longominh^, as a Pledge for performing all other parts. But this
Compliance on the part of Castile being the Product of Fear, and not of any
Friendly Intention, nothing of what had been promised, was performed.

4. King Denis draws together his Forces again, Denis enters Castile the second
time.
and furiously enters Castile, and with him Prince John, who styled himself
King of Leon, as Son to King Alonso the Tenth, and John Nunnez de Lara, who was
in Rebellion against his Prince. Our Army being in the Province of Beira, near
the Frontiers of Castile, there came to the King, Margaret, Daughter to the
Earl of Narbonne, Wife to Prince Peter, the Son of King Alonso, and with her,
her Son Sancho de Ledesma, who offered to serve our King, being disgusted with
his own. Yet, tho he was much honored, and received great Bounties from King
Denis, he soon returned to his own Master, and served against him of whom he
had received such Favors. King Ferdinand understanding that King Denis had
invaded his Dominions, sent his Fleet from Sevil, under the Command of that
Sancho we last spoke of, to Lisbon, where he surprised some Portuguese Vessels.
Our Admiral having gathered what Force he could, pursued and overtook the Fleet
of Castile without the Bar. The Fleet of Castile worsted by the Portugueses.
There was fought a most obstinate Battle, till the Castillians were worsted,
and their Commander, D. Sancho, brought back Prisoner. In the mean while K.
Denis, without Opposition, ranged about the Territories of Cuidad Rodrigo and
Ledesma, where he took the Castle of Torres, putting all the Defendants to the
Sword. He passed by Simancas, where King Ferdinand was, and laid Siege to
Possaldes, where neither Sex nor Age was spared, nor was any Reverence paid to
the Churches, where the Altars were stained with Blood, nor did their
Sacrilegious Hands abstain from Plundering those Holy Places. The Castilians
were not idle, 1296.
for many great Men laid waste our Borders. Alonso Perez de Guzman, who
Commanded on the Frontiers about Guadiana, with a good Body of Andaluzians,
shed much of our Blood, and carried away great Spoils. The Master of Avis, met
him with some Portuguese Forces, but was overthrown, and almost One Thousand
Prisoners carried away, who were ransomed at an easy rate, not to retard the
course of their Victory. He also recovered the Castle of Torres, where he
spared no Portuguese, and thus Fire and Sword raged in all Parts. King Denis
understanding hereof, committed the greater Cruelties in the Villages, about
Salamanca, where he then was. The Inhabitants fled to the Mountains, and to the
Churches, but neither Churches nor Mountains could protect them, rage bore down
all Divine, as well as humane Considerations.

5. The Moorish King of Granada laying hold of this advantage, Peace concluded
betwixt the Kings of Castile and Portugal.
broke into Andaluzia, took Fifteen Castles, and retired with a mighty Booty.
Mary the Queen Mother, and Prince Henry, Governors to King Ferdinand, now
sensible of their Danger, offered King Denis all manner of Satisfaction, as to
the Points before promised, which were, That King Ferdinand should marry his
Daughter Constance, and Prince Alonso, Beatrix Sister to Ferdinand, and for
performance they gave him sufficient Hostages. King Danis in his return, to be
in some sort revenged on D. Sancho de Ledesma, took from him all the Towns he
possessed in the Province of Riba de Coa. The King of Castile sent Alonso Perez
de Guzman to the Portuguese, 1297.
to solicit that they might meet at Alcanizes, where this Discord was to have
an end. There both Kings accordingly met honorably attended. A Peace was
Concluded for Forty Years, and it was Stipulated, that whosoever did infringe
it, should be delivered up to the Party aggreived. The Towns of Olivenza,
Campo-Mayor, and S. Felices, were delivered up to the Portuguese in lieu of
Aroche and Aracena. That King Denis should still hold all the Towns of the
Province of Riba de Coa, and for the Title the King of Castile might claim to
them, he resigned up to him Valencia, Ferreyra, Esparragal, Ayamonte, and other
Places in Leon, and Gallicia.

6. Articles being signed, The Peace confirmed with mutual Alliances.
King Ferdinand presently Married the Portuguese Princess Constance, and
delivered his Sister Beatrix to her Father-in-Law, as Wife to Prince Alonso,
who expected the event of this interview at Trancoso. The Portuguese Princess
being left in Castile, King Denis, with the Castilian, returned to Coimbra,
then the Seat of the Portuguese's Court. Till the Princess came to Age. for
Marriage, the King assigned her a competent Revenue, and appointed Martin,
Archbishop of Braga, and Count Martin de Sousa, his Standard Bearer, her
Governors. The Day she was delivered to the Prince, the King added to what he
had before given her, the Towns of Viana, Terena, Ourem, and Armamar. King
Ferdinand of Castile, made this Accommodation in good time, being then pressed
by the neighboring Princes, in favor of D. Alonso de la Cerda, Grandson to
King Alonso, X. from whom Sancho, Father to Ferdinand, and Uncle to the said
Alonso, had Usurped the Crown, so that Alonso de la Cerda was the rightful
Prince, and Ferdinand then in possession, and Usurper. The dispossessed Prince
gave the Kingdom of Leon, to his Uncle John, and that of Murcia, to Jayme or
James, King of Aragon, upon Condition they should assist him to recover his
right. Both those Princes endeavored to possess themselves of what was
allotted them, before the Injured Prince could be Re-inthroned. King Ferdinand,
overwhelmed with these Enemies, craved Aid of our King Denis, and that they
might meet at Fuente Guinaldo, and Badajoz. There having declared his wants,
our King presented him with a great Sum of Money, a Cap made of an Emerald of
inestimable Value, and sent him such supplies of Men, as gained him a
Superiority over his Enemies.

7. Pope Benedict XI. sent his Legate to compose these Differences, King Denis
chosen Mediator betwixt the of Castile, and the lawful Heir, then Banished.
and with the general Consent of all Parties concerned; our King Denis was
appointed Mediator between them. It was agreed that all Parties should stand by
his Determination, to which purpose a solemn Instrument was signed, and
Cautionary Towns given on all sides. King Denis set forward toward the Plain,
where the Conference was to be held, with an Honorable Retinue, to the number
of One thousand Persons, and to avoid all disorders that might happen in Towns,
lay all the way in Tents, 1304.
in the open Field. King Ferdinand met him at Cuellar, they traveled together
to Soria, and there parted; our King proceeding to Torrellas, in the Kingdom of
Aragon, where Jamye or James, King of Aragon, and Blanch his Queen received
him. Here King Denis entertained them with such Magnificence, as had scarce
been seen in Spain. The Arbitrators and Parties, being come to Taracona, the
Kingdom of Murcia, An unjust Sentence given by King Denis, against the rightful
Heir.
was by them divided betwixt the Kings of Castile, and Aragon, and several
Towns were assigned to D. Alonso de la Cerda, and he ordered to forbear stiling
himself King of Castile. This Sentence of King Denis, our Author admires for
its equity, as if it could be any justice to deprive the rightful Prince of
Three Kingdoms, and give him the Revenue of a few Towns in lieu of them, and
those Towns to be held of that same Usurper who kept him out of his right.
Judgment being given, they went away to Agreda, where King Ferdinand was with
his Mother. There Kings dined at one Table, and Three Queens at another, which
were those of Castile, Aragon, and Portugal. Hence King Denis went to
Valladolid, to see his Daughter, Queen Constance, and so returned to his
Kingdom.

8. King Ferdinand now at Peace with the Christians, resolved to employ his
Arms against the Moors of Granada; To this effect he craved Succors of King
Denis, who sent him Seven hundred Horse, 1305.
Commanded by D. Martin Gil de Sousa, his Standard Bearer, and lent him
Seventeen thousand Marks of Silver, for which Badajoz, Alconchel, and
Burguillos, were given in pawn. This expedition was well begun by the taking of
Gibraltar, but its Progress was stopped; First, by want of Provisions, and
next, by the Death of King Ferdinand. Phillip the Fair King of France, placed
Clement V. (before Archbishop of Bourdeaux) in St. Peter's Chair, 1309.
upon Condition he should remove the Papal Seat to Lions, that he should
publicly burn the bones of his Predecessor Boniface VIII. give him the rents
of the Church Revenues, The cruel suppression of the Knights Templars.
for Five Years, and suppress the Order of the Knights Templars, that he might
seize their Revenues. This Pope not willing to perform that part touching the
burning of his Predecessor, thought to make the King amends, by falling the
heavier on the Knights Templars. To this purpose, at the instigation of the
King, those Knights were charged with most heinous Crimes, and their great
Master with Sixty Knights were publicly burnt at Paris, to the astonishment of
all the World. The Pope had sent Orders to all Parts, that these Knights should
every where be apprehended on the same Day, but the Kings of Castile, Aragon,
and Portugal obeyed not, esteeming the merits of that Noble Order, above the
unjust Commands of a Biased Pope. Yet after much Debate, the Order was wholly
suppressed, their greatest Crime being their Riches, which nevertheless, in
Spain were for the most part bestowed on the Knights Hospitallers of St. John,
now called the Knights of Malta. But King Denis, begged of the Pope that the
Revenues of the Knights Templars in Portugal, might be given to a new Order of
Knighthood, he then instituted to serve against the bordering Moors. His suit
being granted, this Year 1310. was erected the Order of Knights of our Savior
Jesus Christ, 131^.
the King besides the possessions of the Templars, bestowing on it several
Towns and Churches, that were in his gift. This from time to time, has been so
increased that at present, the Order enjoys a Revenue of about 500000 Duccats,
divided into 500 Commendaries, to Encourage Gentlemen with this reward, to the
Conquest of Africa At present, those thoughts are quite laid aside, and those
Revenues are almost become Hereditary: Many of the Knights Templars being found
innocent were admitted to this New Order; and a Master of it created. At first
these Knights were obliged not to Marry, but that vow was abolished in the time
of King Emanuel, by Pope Alexander VI.

9. King Denis, King Denis at (...) with his Son.
in his latter Days, had much Contention with his Son Prince Alonso. This
Prince took for the occasion of his Disgust, the great Favor that Duke Alonso
Sanchez, and Count John Alonso, the King's Bastard Sons were in with him.
Having drawn Peter, another Bastard Brother to his Party, the Prince presumed
to ask of the King, to resign to him the Power of the Administration of
Justice. Being justly denied so unreasonable a Demand, he drew over his
Mother-in-Law, Queen Mary, to assist him toward obtaining his desires by
Force, to which purpose she asked leave of his Father for him, to come to her
into Castile, and being refused, the Prince went to her, to Cuidad Rodrigo,
against his Fathers Consent. Being returned to Portugal, the Queen sent to
demand of the King, what he had before refused to his Son; and now again denied
to her. This Project failing, the Prince contrived by his Servants, an
Information to be drawn, as if left by a Man that died at Magaula: containing a
Design of the Elder Bastard, the King's chiefest Favorite, to Poison the
Prince. A Copy of the false Information he sent to the King, who having
examined the matter, found it was a piece of Forgery. Being again disappointed,
he persuaded some of his Followers to Murder Alonso Sanchez, saying his Father
negotiated with the Pope, to exclude him the lawful Heir, and leave the Crown
to a Bastard; but he in this did not succeed neither. All these practices
failing, the Prince betook himself to open Hostility, robbing the King's Loyal
Subjects, ravishing Women, sacrilegiously ransacking Monasteries, killing
Giraldus, Bishop of Evora, and committing many other Enormities, without the
reach of Justice, as acted under the Heir of the Crown. The Prince proceeds in
his Disobedience.


10. The King advertised Pope John XX. of his Son's Disobedience, and he
dispatched his Bulls, admonishing him to desist from force, and submit to his
Father; but all to no effect. For he gathering a number of Criminals, and
Outlaws, pretended to go in Pilgrimage to the Church of St. Vincent without
Lisbon, designing to surprise that City. The King having timely Advice of it,
hasted thither to prevent him, and the Queen after him to Mediate betwixt the
Father and the Son. The Prince thus prevented, turned away toward Sintra, and
his Father after him. Both Bodies stood as if they designed to give Battle, but
on a sudden the Son marched off; and though the King might have overtaken him, he
persued not. Being come to Coimbra, the Prince sent away his Princess to
Alcanizes in Castile, and then gave out that his Father intended to kill him.
After disabusing the World of the falsehood of that Report, his Father declared
all such as should adhere to the Son, Traitors; and knowing that the
Inhabitants of Leyria had entertained him, he hasted thither, where Nine of the
chief, as Rebels, had their Hands and Feet cut off, and were afterward burnt.
The Prince went away to Santarem, and flying thence before his Angry Father,
possessed himself of the Castle of Coimbra, of Monte-Mayor the Old, of Feira,
Gaga, and Porto, whither came to him his Bastard-Brother Peter, out of Castile.
Guimaraens was defended against him, by Mem Rodriguez de Vasconcelos. In the
mean while the King laid Siege to Coimbra, which obliged the Prince to quit
Guimaraens, and return to relieve that City. Here were to be seen all the usual
dire effects of Civil Wars. The Holy Queen Elizabeth ceased not to pass betwixt
the Two Armies, mediating for a Reconciliation, 1323.
which at last she compassed, the King giving to the Prince, the Cities of
Porto, and Coimbra, and the Old Town of Monte-Mayor, with some additional
Revenue. Pardon was given on both sides, and the Prince took an Oath to be
Obedient to his Father for the future. But notwithstanding this reconciliation,
the Prince pressed his Father to call the Cortes, or Parliament, and yet would
not be present at it, but went from Santarem, toward Lisbon, with armed
Troops. The King came out in the like manner, commanding him to return, which
he refusing, 1324.
the Trumpets sounded, and both Parties Engaged. Yet the Queen rushing through
all dangers came to her Son, and upbraiding him with breach of Faith, and
Obstinacy, at length the Battle was parted, and the Father and Son once more
were Reconciled. That this agreement might be the more lasting, D. Alonso
Sanchez, the King's Bastard-Son, was sent out of the Kingdom, and went to the
Town of Albuquerque, which he possessed in Castile, by that means becoming a
Subject to that Crown.

11. King Denis fortified many Towns and Cities, King Denis his Structures, and
other Works.
encompassing them with beautiful Walls, as is to be seen at Porto, Braga,
Guimaraens, Miranda, and other Places. He Built from the Ground, above Fifty
Castles, and some Towns, besides those he new Peopled. Neither did he forget
pious Work, and therefore he endowed many Churches. Pope John XXII. granted him
the Tenths of Church Revenues for 3 Years, to the end he should keep his
Galleys in the Streights of Gibraltar, to hinder the Moors from passing into
the Kingdom of Granada. He was addicted to Learning, especially to Poetry, and
it was he that first erected the University at Coimbra. His Liberality was such
that it became a Proverb, As liberal as Denis. The Presents he made to Kings,
Queens, and Nobility, when he went to compose Affairs betwixt the King of
Castile, and Duke Alonso de la Cerda, were inestimable, and cannot be reckoned.
After that, a Gentleman of Castile telling him that none but himself had fallen
short of his Bounty, he gave him the Silver Table whereon he dined. To reckon
up the particular acts of his Generosity were too tedious, it may suffice to
say, this above the rest was his peculiar Virtue, in which he exceeded most
Princes. He knew all the Product of his Kingdom, and valued it so much, that he
never desired to be supplied from abroad, with any thing that he could have at
home. Of the Gold gathered in Tagus, he made a rich Crown and Scepter. But
notwithstanding his prodigious Liberality he never oppressed his Subjects with
heavy Taxes. He was of a middle Stature, his Hair black, full Faced, not so
Beautiful as Majestic. He died at Santarem, the 7th. of January, 1325. at the
Age of 64 Years, 1325.
having Reigned 46. It became a Proverb, That Denis could do all he would. His
stately Tomb, built by himself, is in the Monastery of Odivelas, of Benedictine
Nuns, near Lisbon, of the Invocation of St. Denis.

12. Elizabeth, His Wife, and Issue.
Daughter to King Peter III. of Aragon, and his Queen Constance the Daughter of
Manfredus King of Naples, and Sicily, was the only Wife of King Denis. He being
extremely addicted to Women, she bred up all the Children he had by them, as if
they had been her own; by which her patience she made him afterward forbear
that Vice, and punish it severely in others. To be short, she was a most holy
Woman, and an excellent Queen, and was Canonized in the Reign of Phillip IV. of
Spain. By her the King had, Alonso his Successor, and Constance, Wife to King
Ferdinand IV. of Castile.

His illegitimate Issue were, by Aldonza Rodriguez, Alonso Sanchez, created
Earl of Albuquerque.

By the Lady Grace, Peter, Earl of Barcelos, the first Title of that kind given
by the Kings of Portugal; another Peter, called also Earl.

By other Women, John Alonso, Ferdinand Sanchez, the Lady Mary, Married to Duke
John de la Cerda; another Mary, a Nun at Odivelas.

CHAP. IX.
Yhe Life and Reign of Alonso the Fourth of the Name, and the Seventh King of
Portugal, his Actions and Death, from the Year, 1290. till 1357.
1. THE Favor that King Denis showed to Learning made him reside where he had
caused it to flourish. King Alonso the 4th. wholly addicted to his Pleasure.
Having therefore resettled the Court at Coimbra, on the Eighth of February,
1290. was Born to him in that City, of his Wife the holy Queen Elizabeth, his
Son Alonso 4th. of the Name, and the Seventh King of Portugal, 1290.
who for his forward and fiery spirit, was called the Fierce. He, who as we
have seen, was so eager to Rule whilst his Father lived, after his Death cast
off all the care of Government; giving himself wholly up to his Pleasure, and
particularly to Hunting. Upon his Accession to the Crown, instead of settling
the Affairs of the Kingdom, he went away to the Forest of Sintra, 1325.
where he spent a whole Month among the wild Beasts. Returning to Court, and
appearing at the Council Board, instead of the Business of that Place, he gave
them an Account of his Sport. Hereupon, one of the Counselors took the
Boldness to reprove him with threatening Expressions, which the King being
offended at, all the Council stood up and said they would choose another King,
if he did not alter his Course of Life. The King, tho he then went out in a
Passion, being grown cool, thought good to curb his Inclination. Our Author
here extols the Bravery of those Counselors. I find nothing to admire in the
matter, but the Insolency of wicked and haughty Subjects, and the want of
Resolution in him, he styles a Magnanimous Prince. The King, not satisfied with
having, during his Father's Life, unjustly Persecuted his Bastard-Brother, and
Expelled him the Kingdom, At Variance with his Bastard-Brother.
still persisting in his ill grounded Malice toward him, laid many things to
his Charge, and by formal, though unjust Process, Condemned him to forfeit all
his Possessions in Portugal, at once endeavoring to deprive him of his Fortune
and Honor. D. Alonso Sanchez, modestly sued for Redress, but none was to be
had from a biased Judge. He was now powerful, and beloved in Castile, and
Leon, and therefore raising a good Force, entered the Territory of Braganca,
with Fire and Sword, whilst others of his Troops did the like from Medellin,
and Albuquerque, in the Country about Guadiana. 1326.
This done, he returned to his Town of Albuquerque, where he Fortified himself,
and made preparations for open War. D. Gonzalo Vaz, Master of the Knights of
Avis, being sent against him by the King, was put to the rout; and Duke Alonso,
falling Sick returned to Medellin. In the mean time the King Besieged the
Castle of Codesseyra, near Albuquerque, which being basely delivered to him by
the Governor, was rased to the Ground.

2. The King proposed a Match betwixt his Son Prince Peter, 1327.
and Constance the Daughter of D. John Emanuel, who was of the Blood Royal of
Castile, and his Wife of that of Aragon. King Alonso IX. of Castile, broke off
this Match, contracting himself to her, for she was under age, and yet
afterward he contemned her, and was Married to Mary, Marries his Daughter to
the King of Castile.
Daughter to King Alonso of Portugal. To that effect he came into Portugal, and
received the Princess at the Town of Alfayates, whither her Father had
Conducted her. At this Place a Match was concluded betwixt Henry, 1328.
Prince of Portugal, and the Princess Blanch, Henry Prince of Portugal, marries
Blanch, Aunt to the King of Castile.
Aunt to the King of Castile. The following Year, the Portuguese received her
at Fuentegrinaldo, where he again met with her Father Prince Peter, about some
alterations to be made in the Hostages given for exchange of the Ratifications.
Two Years after the King of Castile was Married to our Princess, he became so
entangled in the Love of the Lady Ellenor Nunnez de Guzman, 1330.
that he treated her as Queen; and the Queen as if she had been but a
Concubine. Our holy Queen Elizabeth met him at Xerez de Badajoz, to endeavor
to reclaim him, but could obtain nothing but promises; for he continued
obstinate in his Amors. 1332.
D. John Emanuel desiring to be revenged of the King of Portugal, for that
giving his Daughter to the King of Castile in Marriage, he had caused his
Daughter Constance to be put by, made his interest with the Lady Ellenor the
King of Castile's Mistress, persuading her to prevail with the King to marry
her; for his Marriage with the Princess of Portugal was void, by reason of
Consanguinity. But that Lady considering the danger of aspiring, to rise from a
Mistress to a Queen, slighted his Advice.

3. It was now found in Portugal, Blanch divorced from the Prince.
that the Princess Blanch, by reason of the Tissick, was unfit for Matrimony;
and the King of Castile having sent his Physicians to examine into it, they
agreed in the Point. This Prince being on this score disengaged from that
Bride, 1334.
it was proposed he should marry the Lady Constance, He Contracts with the Lady
Constance Daughter to D. John Emanuel.
Daughter to D. John Emanuel, whom the King of Castile had before put away.
This King was consulted with thereupon, but he advised the contrary, yet seemed
to allow of whatsoever ours should do. The Portuguese took this for Consent,
whilst the Castilian used all possible means to obstruct the Match; telling her
Father he designed her for the Prince of Navarre. Both seemed to mean as they
spoke, and each designed to deceive the other. D. Gonzalo Vaz, Master of the
Order of Avis, and Ambassador from Portugal, came to D. John, to conclude the
Match. The King of Castile, sent D. John Orders, to apprehend the Ambassador,
as coming without his leave with armed Men, and having committed Extortion on
his way. D. John doubting, the Ambassador advised him to conclude their Affair,
and he would go deliver up himself to the King at Burgos. They agreed, D. John
offered with his Daugter, 300000 Doubles. The Articles were, That the Lady
Constance should be absolute over the Lands assigned her in Dower: That the
Prince should keep no Mistress whilst his Wife was of Age to bear Children, or
did not appear to be Barren: That there should be a League Defensive betwixt
the Father, and Son-in-Law, that he might go visit his Daughter, whenever he
pleased, and that the Second Son should inherit D. John's Possessions in
Castile, or else the First should inherit, in case she had but one.

4. The Ambassador went immediately away to Burgos, 1335.
and presenting himself before the King, was satisfied with feigned excuses. At
this time came one Martin Catina, craving leave of the King, A single Combat.
to Combat with Gonzalo Rodriguez Ribeiro, one who follows the Ambassador,
and had killed his Brother. The King would have made them Friends, but Ribeiro
opposing it, they were allowed to enter the Lists according to the Custom of
those Days; where Catina had his Head clove asunder by his Adversary. Many
other notable Acts were performed by this Ribeiro, and Two of his Companions,
in a solemn Tilting, wherein they gained much Reputation to the Portuguese
Nation. But the King of Castile, ceased not all this while, underhand, to
endeavor to break off the Match, writing to the King of Portugal by way of
Advice, That he should not be too hasty herein; The King of Castile obstructs
the Marriage of the Lady Constance.
for that D. John was rich, and would increase the Portion if he was backward.
At the same time, he blamed D. John for offering so much, and lastly, with his
own Hand he wrote a Letter to the Lady Constance, assuring her of his sincere
Affection to her, and declaring he had been ill advised in marrying the
Princess of Portugal, but that by Reason of Consanguinity, that Marriage was
void, and he would not fail to be always hers. The Lady sent the Letter to her
Father, who dictated an Answer, to this effect. That he had much wronged her
Innocence, having by false insinuations gained her Love. That his ill
Inclinations, did appear by his unjust proceedings toward Queen Mary, his
present Wife. That she had so often found him false, that she could now find no
Reason to give any Credit to his Words; and that she gave Thanks to Almighty
God, who had delivered her from being his Wife, that she might not suffer as
the Queen did, by his inordinate Affection, to the Lady Elenor Nunez de Guzman,
who had entertained other Lovers before him.

5. It was agreed betwixt the King of Portugal, and D. John Emanuel, that the
Lady Constance should be brought into Portugal, in June, and the Bride and
Bridegroom were contracted by Proxy. Ambassadors were sent to Valladolid, where
the King of Castile was to be acquainted with the Conclusion of the Match. He,
tho much Displeased, expressed great Satisfaction, sent Presents to the
Ambassadors, and ordered public Demonstrations of Joy to be made. The
Portuguese sent Martin Lopez Machado, his Ambassador, to return thanks for
those Courtesies; But still the Castilian resolved to hinder the Bride's
Journey into Portugal, and to that purpose guarded the Roads, always pretending
other Reasons for so doing. The King of Portugal, to remove this Obstacle, sent
another Ambassador, who being killed about Play at Valladolid, his Tutor, for
he was a Young Man, continued his Journey to the Court of Castile, where he
delivered to that King his Master's Letter, containing how evidently he was
convinced of his ill Intentions, and made great Threats, in case he persisted
to obstruct the Lady Constance's Journey into Portugal. The Castilian showed
that Letter to the Lady Ellinor his Mistress, who, with that Liberty that is
Natural to such Women, spared not to blame his unjust Proceedings in that
Particular; yet he forbore not to stop the Princess, though he excused himself to
the Portuguese. Our King, already disgusted at this ill Usage, was yet farther
provoked, for his Admiral, Stephen Vaz de Barbuda, pursuing certain Pirates
with five Ships, and three Galleys, was driven by stress of Weather to Cadiz,
where, instead of a kind Reception, his Vessels were taken by the Fleet of
Castile, under the Command of Peter Ponce de Marchena. Our King gave Advice
hereof to D. John Emanuel, and he making suit to his King, that he would suffer
his Daughter to depart, received no Answer, whereupon he openly declared
against his Sovereign. The Portuguese demanded of the Governors of the
Cautionary Towns, for Performance of Articles, that they should deliver them up
to him, since the fault lay on the side of Castile. They consulting together,
sent one of their number to the King, to represent to him how unjustly he dealt
with the Portuguese. He answered, That if they delivered the Towns, they would
incur an infamous breach of Fealty, and that he would not depart from the Siege
he had laid to D. John Nunnez de Lara's Garrison, till he had his Head. Yet
considering the Difficulty of that Design, he intimated he would desist, if the
King of Portugal should request it of him. Queen Mary advertised her Father
hereof, and he immediately wrote to the Castilian, desiring him to raise the
Siege, and promising to make D. John Nunnez submit himself as soon as the
Princess was sent into Portugal. The Queen her self carried the Letter to the
King, and he answered angrily, that he would raise the Siege for no Man. Which
made her return disconsolate to Burgos. But tho some of the Nobles contrived
that D. John might escape, yet the King was so watchful, they were disappointed.

6. The King of Portugal, War betwixt Castile and Portugal.
impatient of longer Disappointments, sent a Challenge to him of Castile,
grounded upon these Reasons: That he treated ill the Queen his Wife, that he
gave out, he would be divorced from her, and Marry the Lady Ellenor de Guzman,
that he designed to declare Peter her Son his Heir, and that he hindered the
Princess Constance from going into Portugal. While his Ambassador executed his
Commission, he made all manner of Warlike Preparations both by Sea and Land. He
laid Siege to Badajoz, and at the same time his Parties ravaged all the Country
about Arauna, Aroncha, and Cortegana. The Siege being tedious, the King left
sufficient Forces to continue it, and he with the rest of the Army overran a
great part of Andaluzia as far as Sevil, which done, he returned to the Siege.
His Brother, Count Peter, did the like in Galicia, the Archbishop, and other
Commanders in vain endeavoring to oppose him. Numerous Forces were raising in
Castile to relieve Badajoz, when the King, considering the difficulty of the
Enterprise, and that Peter Alonso, one of his Officers, had been defeated,
raised the Siege, and returned dissatisfied to Portugal. But whilst he prepared
to return thither stronger than before, the Queen, without his knowledge, went
away to Badajoz, where the King of Castile, her Son-in-law, then was, thinking
her Prayers might prevail with him to desist from War, and comply with her
Husband. The King received her with Respect, but demanded such Conditions as he
knew could not be granted. Scarce was she gone from Badajoz, when the Castilian
followed as far as Elvas, ravaging all the Country. Two days he spent
Plundering that Territory, and then laid Siege to Aronchez, but understanding
that the Portuguese Parties infested the Neighborhood of Xerez, Badajoz,
Burguillos, and Alconchel, he removed to meet them. Not meeting with them, he
besieged Olivenca, and being taken with an Ague, was forced to depart, and
return to Sevil, leaving his Forces to do all the harm they could. Some Troops,
under the Command of the Brothers, Ferdinand, and John Roiz de Castro, pillaged
all the Country betwixt the Rivers Duero and Minho, till being met by the
Archbishop of Braga with 1400 Portugueses, D. John de Castro was killed, with
300 of his Men, and a great Booty recovered. At Sea, 20 Galleys, carrying 2000
Men, put into Lepte in Andaluzia, where they landed, Plundering the Country,
and being met by D. Nunno Portocarrero, there ensued a hot Fight between them,
in which 26 Portugueses and 80 Castilians were killed. Camello, the Portuguese
General, was taken; and by the Portugueses, two Castilian Commanders, for whom
he was exchanged. The Castilians set out 40 Sail to Revenge this Affront, but a
Storm dispersed and wrecked both Fleets. Another Portuguese Squadron, commanded
by Misser Emanuel Pissano, a Genoese, had spoiled the Coast of Galicia, and was
now again sent against the Spanish Fleet, that did no less harm in the Kingdom
of Algarve. They met about Cape S. Vincent, and fought with extraordinary
Resolution, till the Portuguese Admiral, and many more, were taken, and the
Castilian returned Victorious to Sevil. At the same time, Ferdinand Arraez
lying in Ambush, took 70 Portugueses, and killed 180.

7. Our King, King Alonso enters Castile with an Army.
leaving an Army to Besiege Salvaterra, pierced as far as Orense, destroying
all before him, whilst Peter Fernandez de Castro, who commanded on those
Frontiers for the King of Castile, refused to oppose him, on pretense of the
Favors he had received from him and his Father. The Castilian, always ready to
take Revenge, with 10000 Horse, and a number of Foot broke into Algarve, and
having in vain besieged Castro Marin, laid waste without Mercy all the Country
along that Coast. 1337.
Pope Benedict XII. sent Bernard, Bishop of Rhodes, his Nuncio, to endeavor to
bring these two Kings to some Accommodation. Philip the Fourth, King of France
sent the Archbishop of Rheims upon the same Errand. The Castilian turned them
over to Portugal, and the Portuguese to Castile. Both were desirous of Peace,
but neither would ask it. The Portuguese carried himself highest with the
Nuncio. At length a Truce was concluded for a Year. A Truce for a Year.
After much Debate, the Pope was chosen Arbitrator betwixt them, but the
Castilian fearing the Revolt of his Nobles, and an Invasion from Africa,
required of the Portuguese to send his Ambassadors to him, and they would
agree, without going so far as Rome, 1340.
or Avignon. Hereupon three Ambassadors were sent from Portugal, who meeting
with the Commissioners of Castile, concluded a Peace upon these Conditions.
That all Places taken since the War, and Prisoners on both sides, should be
restored; That neither, without consent of the other, should make Peace with
the Moorish King Banarin; That the Princess Constance should be permitted to go
into Portugal; That the Princess Blanch, being unfit for Wedlock, should return
into Castile; That all former Articles should continue in force; That the King
of Castile should restore all due State to his Queen, and put away the Lady
Ellenor Nunnez. The Castilian performed all Points, except putting away the
Lady Ellenor, yet he behaved himself better toward the Queen.

8. Aliboacem, Alonso in Person aids the Castilian against the Moors
King of Morocco, being about to pass into Spain, as being sent for by the
Moorish King of Granada, the Castilian sent his Queen to ask Succors of her
Father the King of Portugal, who immediately marched thither in Person with a
better disciplined than numerous Army. The King of Castile having notice
hereof, visited him at Jurumenna in Portugal. Our King was received at Sevil by
the Clergy, singing Benedictus qui venit in nomine Domini. Here a Council of
War was held, to consult whether it were fit to fight the Moors, who besieged
Tarifa, and were an innumerable Multitude, or no. While some were of Opinion to
yield Tarifa to them, our King's Opinion prevailed, that the Place should be
relieved. All the Mountains and Plains about Tarifa were covered with
multitudes of Infidels, yet the King of Castile was overjoyed to understand
they had resolved to give the Mohammedan Battle. Both the Christian Kings
advanced, and passed the River Guadalete. Being there joined by some Troops
that were not before come up, on Sunday, the 27th. of October, they marched to
Penna de Cuervo, where they first discovered the Barbarians, covering all the
Land as far as they could see. It was agreed the Castilian should attack the
King of Morocco, who lay along the Shore, and the Portuguese him of Granada,
that was at the Foot of the Mountain. On Monday, the 28th. at break of Day the
Army heard Mass, many received the Sacrament, and the Archbishop of Toledo
exhorted them to expose their Lives in Defense of the Faith. Being come before
their Enemies, both Kings made short Speeches to their Men. This done, the
Armies engaged with such terrible shouts, that the Mountains seemed to shake.
Nor was the noise of clattering of Arms less hideous. Vast numbers of Dead were
soon trod under foot, and the wounded, in that Confusion, were scarce sensible
of their hurts. The two Christian Kings overthrow the Infidels.
Our King, rushing into the midst of the Enemies, made such havoc, that the
Moors soon turned their backs, and fled to Algezira, the Portugueses making a
greater slaughter in the Pursuit, than they had done in the Fight. The King of
Castile, with no less Bravery, thrust himself into the midst of his Enemies,
till stopped in his rash Carreer by the Archbishop of Toledo. Yet so did he
press Aliboacem, that despairing of Success, he fled to Algezira, and not
thinking himself safe there, passed the Streights over into Africa. Both the
Christian Princes followed the Chase as far as the Rivers Britabotellas and
Guadamicil, which they dyed with the Blood of Infidels.

9. Queen Fatima, with many other Moorish Ladies, were killed by the Soldiers
in their Tents. Some Princes also died, and two were taken. The quantity and
value of the Booty is not to be expressed, The number of the Infidels, and
greatness of the Booty.
for they came to divide Spain among them, and brought over above 100000
Families, besides their innumerable Army, all which was so great, that they
spent five Months in passing the Streights, sixty Galleys being continually
employed in Transporting them, and twelve Galleys were fifteen days in carrying
back the Remnants of this Overthrow. 450000 Infidels are said to have died in
this Battle. Of the Christians so few were missing, that it will be scarce
credited, if the Number were reported. The Victorious Kings entered Sevil in
Triumph, the chiefest of the Captives dragging the Colors that were taken.
Many Carts followed laden with Spoil, and then a multitude of Moorish Horses
with all their Accoutrements. Several Colors and Horses were sent for a
Present to Pope Benedict. The seventh day after the Victory, the Portuguese
being obliged to return home, the Castilian laid all the Booty before him, to
take what he liked best; whereof he only took some Arms, one of the Captive
Princes, 1347.
and five Colors. The Prince he released without Ransom, E^lenor, second
Daughter to K. Alonso married to Peter, King of Aragon.
and hung up the Colors in the Cathedral of Lisbon.

10. King Peter the Fourth of Aragon, by his Ambassadors, demanded of our King
his Second Daughter Ellenor in Marriage. His Request was granted, and her
Portion settled at 50000 Doubloons. The King of Castile endeavored to hinder
this Marriage, but failing of his Design, the Princess was carried to Valencia,
and there married with great Solemnity. 1348.
The three following Years Portugal was infested with that Universal
Pestilence, A great Plague.
which began by the opening of the Earth after a terrible Earthquake in the
Eastern Countries, whence issued such a destructive stench, as infected those
Parts, and thence diffused it self into these. The Princess Constance dying
after she had brought forth three Children, our King found that Discord at
home, which had before drawn him thence. He thought to Marry the Prince, to
strengthen the Succession to the Crown, but found he was in Love with the Lady
Agnes de Castro, a Kinswoman, and one of the Ladies to the late Princess, and
that enjoying her Person, he refused a second Wife; and enquiring farther into
it, K. Alonso his Eldest Son privately Marries the Lady Agnes de Castro.
he was informed they were privately married by Giles, Bishop of Guarda, and
yet the Prince, fearing his Father's Displeasure, denied it, though he promised,
if it were really so, to treat her as Princess. The Nobility envying the Lady
Agnes her Happiness, persuaded the King to oblige his Son to Marry another
Wife, or else to kill her; alleging, that if she came to be Queen, her
Brothers, Ferdinand, and Alvaro, would destroy the Prince^s Son Ferdinand, that
one of their Nephews might Inherit the Crown. They also said, the Lady Agnes
was not of sufficient Quality to be a Queen; but in this they wronged her, for
she was of Royal Blood, and her Sister came to be Queen of Castile. Upon these
Pretenses her Death was contrived, and though the Prince had notice given him
hereof by the Queen his Mother, and the Archbishop of Braga, yet he thought
none durst attempt such an Action whilst he was in the way. The King, overcome
by Persuasions, set out from Monte-Mayor, and went to Coimbra with a great
number of armed Men, at such time as the Prince was gone out a Hunting. The
Lady Agnes was in the Palace called S. Clare, The Lady Agnes cruelly murdered.
and understanding the King came to kill her, went out to receive him, and
falling at his Feet with the three Children she had, bathed them with her
Tears. This sad Spectacle moved the King, and he turned back to depart. But
those who had persuaded him to this Action, the chief whereof were Alvaro
Goncalez, James Lopez Pacheco, and Peter Coello, blamed the King's Remissness,
and so earnestly pressed him to give them leave to execute what they came
about, that he condescended, and they immediately, with more than barbarous
Inhumanity, struck off her Head.

11. The Prince returning from Hunting, The Prince begins his Revenge.
for some time was almost distracted with Rage. Being come to himself, he began
to execute his Revenge, destroying all the Country betwixt Duero and Minho,
where those Cruel Executioners had their Estates, with Fire and Sword. The City
Porto he spared, for the sake of the Archbishop, who had given him notice of
the Design. Thus King Alonso's Disobedience toward his Father, was now with
more Reason punished by his own Son. The Prince marched to the Town of
Canaveses, where the Queen his Mother, and the Archbishop met, and reduced him
to submit to his Father, and disband his Followers, conditioning that both
Parties should Pardon all Offenses, and that in all Places where the Prince
was, all Acts of Justice should be performed in his Name. It was visible
enough, that the Prince would some time or other be revenged on the Murderers
of the Lady, The Murderers fly into Castile.
therefore the King, being near his End, advised them before his Death to shift
for themselves. They thereupon fled to Castile, and we shall hereafter see what
became of them. This was the end of King Alonso, an Unnatural Son toward his
Father, The Death of King Alonso.
and a Barbarous Father toward his Son. Yet he was an excellent King, either
for Peace or War. He coined a new sort of Money, called Alfonsines, worth, in
English Money, about Three Shillings. Many wholesome Laws were instituted by
him, and his Government was equitable and just. He had a large Forehead, but
with wrinkles in it; his Visage long, a proportionable Nose, a large Mouth, his
Hair reddish, and curled, his Beard forked and long, his Limbs gross, and his
Presence Majestic. He died at Lisbon in May 1357. being 67 Years of Age, 1357.
and having Reigned 31 Years and a half. His and his Queen's Tombs are to be
seen in the Quire of the Cathedral of Lisbon.

12. Queen Beatrix, (...)
Wife to King Alonso, was Daughter to King Sancho the Fierce, of Castile, and
of Queen Mary, the Daughter of Prince Alonso de Molina By her the King had
Issue, 1. Alonso, who died Young, 2. Denis, died much at the same Age. 3. John,
died in his Infancy. 4. Mary, who was Queen of Castile, Wife to King Alonso XI.
and Mother to King Peter. 5. Peter* who Succeeded his Father; 6. Elenor, Queen
of Aragon, Second Wife to King Peter IV.

This King reduced the number of Castles in the Orle being the Arms of Algarve,
His Arms.
to 8. and the Bezants in each Escutcheon, to 10.

CHAP. X.
The Life and Reign of Peter the First of the Name, and the Eighth King of
Portugal, with his Actions and Death, from the Year, 1320, till 1367.
1. KING Alonso, King Peter the first his Earth.
and his Queen Beatrix, were Unfortunate in their Children, who all died Young,
But Peter the 5th. who was Born at Coimbra, on the 19th. of April, 1320. He was
by some called the Cruel, by others, 1320.
Executor of Justice, and this last Title most properly appertained to him. His
Accession to the Crown was in the 37th. 1358.
Year of his Age, being twice a Widdower by the Death of his two Wives;
Constance, and Agnes. His First care was to secure Peace with his Neighbor,
1357.
the King of Castile, which was accordingly Ratified. The following Year, it
was farther Confirmed, Peace concluded with Castile.
and it was agreed that Ferdinand, Prince of Portugal, should marry Beatrix,
Eldest Daughter to King Peter of Castile; and the Princesses Constance, and
Elizabeth, should marry John, and Denis, Sons to the Lady Agnes de Castro; That
both Kings should Aid each other by Sea and Land; That the Portuguese should
not join with the Aragonian, or any other Prince, without acquainting the
Castilian; That he should assist him against the Aragonian, with whom he was
then at War. King Peter having now the Power in his Hands, He punishes the
Murderers of his Wife the Lady Agnes de Castro.
and being at leisure to meditate his Revenge, for the Death of his beloved
Agnes, was grieved at nothing more, than that he thought the Lives of the Three
Murderers, too small an Expiation for the Death of her, in whom he had lived.
Yet for some farther Satisfaction, he resolved to make up in Torments, what was
wanting of Life in them. We saw in his Fathers Life time, how far he proceeded
in his Revenge, so as to raise a Civil War; But scarce was he now seated on the
Throne, when the Three Murderers, Peter Coello, James Lopez, and Alvaro
Gonzalez, were Attainted of Treason, and their Estates Confiscated. Next he
contrived how to get them out of Castile, and soon found the means to effect
it; for Peter Nunnez de Guzman, Lieutenant of Leon, Mem Roiz Tenorio, Ferdinand
Gudiel de Toledo, and Fortun Sanchez Calderon, being f^ed from Castile, were
then in Portugal: He knew that King was no less desirous to reach them, than he
was to have the other Three; Therefore he agreed with the Castilian, that both
should at the same time secure the Fugitives of the other, which was
accordingly put in Execution.

2. James Lopez Pacheco, had the good Fortune to be abroad a Hunting, the Day
the others were taken. He being missed, Guards were set upon the Gates, that
none might give him Notice; but a Beggar got through unregarded, and not only
informed him of what had happened, The Murderers Racked.
but changing Clothes with him, he got away with a Carrier to Aragon; and
thence into France. Alvaro Gonzalez, and Peter Coello, were carried to
Portugal; as were the Four Castilians taken there, conveyed to Sevil. King
Peter was at Santarem when the two Prisoners were brought to him: He instantly
put them to the Rack, to force them to, discover their Accomplices: But they
continued silent or else answered far from the purpose; which caused the King
to lash Coello on the Face; to which he returned nothing but reproachful
Language. The King smiling hereat, said to the standers by, Bring me Vinegar
and Onion for this Rabbet; for Coello in Portuguese, signifies a Rabbet, and
that was the Sauce then used, giving them thereby to understand he should be
Burnt. Whilst they were yet Living, their Hearts were cut out, one at his
Breast, and the other at his Back. Lastly, he caused them to be Burnt, and the
Table he dined at to be set in sight of the Fire. Nor did King Peter's Amorous
Flame expire here. But before we show what farther Effects it had* we must
observe in this Place, that the Kings of Castile, and Aragon being ready to
break into War, our King sent his Ambassadors to the latter, 1360.
to Mediate a Peace. That Prince complained to them, that their Master should
take part with Castile against him, yet offered, in regard of the Ancient
Friendships betwixt the two Crowns, and in respect to the Pope, to give ear to
Conditions of Peace.

3. This was the posture of Affairs when our King discovered the Love he still
entertained for the Lady Agnes, The Funeral Pomp, for the Lady Agnes de Castro.
by performing her Funeral Obsequies. Being in the Town of Cantannede, in the
Presence of several Persons of Note, he solemnly Swore, That he had taken to
Wife the Lady Agnes de Castro, at Braganca, Six Years before that time. Then he
caused the Witnesses of the Marriage, which were Giles Bishop of Guarda, and
Stephen Lobato Master of the Robes, to be Examined. This done, the Bishops of
Lisbon, Porto, and Visco, the Prior of Sancta Cruz, and other Persons of Note,
meeting together published the said Marriage, and the Causes why it was
concealed; as also, the Dispensation granted by Pope John the 22th. in regard
that they were within the forbidden Degrees of Consanguinity. An authentic
Instrument to this purpose being formed, several Copies were dispersed, and the
Original is still preserved among the Records at Lisbon. Not content herewith,
he caused two Tombs of the whitest Marble, and most exquisite Workmanship, to
be erected; One of them for himself, and the other for the Lady Agnes, whose
Image stood on the Top, with a Crown on her Head, that she might appear like a
Queen after her Death. These Tombs were placed in the famous Church of
Alcobaca. Then entering the Church of S. Clare at Coimbra, he caused the Body to
be taken up, and being Crowned, and Clothed in Royal Robes, placed it on a
Chair, where his Subjects kissed those Bones that were once beautiful Hands, as
being the remains of their lawful Queen. After this Ceremony, being put into a
Hearse, the Corpse was conducted to Alcobaca, to be placed in that rich Urn, with
the noblest Attendance, and greatest Grandeur, that has been seen; vast numbers
of Noblemen, and Gentlemen, in long Mourning Cloaks, and Ladies in White
Mourning Vailes, attended the Funeral. From Coimbra to Alcobaca, it is 17
Leagues, and yet all that Distance was filled with many Thousands of Men, in
two Rows, making a continued Lane, with lighted Flambeaus in their Hands.

4. The Unfortunate King Peter of Castile, being drove out of his Kingdom by
his Bastard-Brother Henry, assisted by the French, King Peter of Castile,
flying from his Rebellious Subjects, is refused Protection in Portugal.
and flying from Sevil, after loosing all the Treasure he had amassed, arrived
at the Town of Coruche in Portugal, with his two Daughters, Constance and
Elizabeth, and thence sent to Advertise our King, then at Coimbra, of his
Arrival: That King's Daughter Beatrix, was Traveling another way, to be
Married to the Portuguese Prince, her Father not having any forethought of what
happened to him. This Accident much surprised the Portuguese; some were for
protecting a rightful King, their Neighbor and Confederate; others were for
more safe than honorable Courses, not to embroil themselves in the Quarrels of
others. This Advice was followed, and our King made the best Excuse he could,
for not entertaining that Unhappy Prince. He failing of this Refuge, withdrew
to Albuquerque; but neither was he to be admitted there. He sent to ask a Pass
of our King, to Travel through his Dominions into Galicia, and the Earl of
Barcelos, and Alvaro Perez de Castro, were sent to Conduct him: But they not
only forsook him by the way, but stole from him Elenor, the Daughter of his
Bastard-Brother Henry, whom he carried with him. From Galicia he passed over
into England, where he so grievously Complained to the Prince of Wales against
the King of Portugal, that he was forced to send Ambassadors to Vindicate
himself. In the mean while, the New King, or rather Usurper, Henry, Solicited
the Friendship of Portugal; and Ambassadors meetting to that Effect, betwixt
Badajoz and Elvas, a Treaty was Concluded; And it was Stipulated, That the
Castilian should solicit an Accommodation betwixt Aragon and Portugal; and
also, That the Aragonian should suffer the Portuguese Princess Mary, Widow of
Prince Ferdinand, to return to her Country, if she thought good.

5. About the end of October, Prodigi^^^ seen in the Sky.
almost Three Months before the Death of our King, was seen a prodigious
Alteration, or rather Confusion in the heavenly Luminaries. On the 27th. Day at
Midnight, all the Stars in a Body began to run from East to West; then suddenly
dispersing, they wandered through several parts of the Sphere; next, falling
nearer to the Region of the Air, the nearness made them appear like vast Globes
of Fire; so that the whole Heaven seemed to be in a Flame, and the Earth
threatened to be reduced to Ashes. The Sky in many places seemed to gape, the
Stars being removed. This Spectacle lasting a considerable time, Men stood
amazed, expecting the Dissolution of the Universe. Three Months after this
Prodigy, King Peter's Death
our King died. It will not be amiss, to give some Instances of his Justice and
Magnificence. His Justice and Magnificence.
He was not, as some have called him, Cruel; but a zealous lover of Justice,
punishing Crimes with the utmost Severity, and rewarding Virtue with
Liberality. The Punishments he inflicted, though in appearance terrible, were
necessary, and well applied. A Young Man having struck his supposed Father, and
the King hearing thereof, called the Mother, and pressed her to tell him who
was the Youth's Father; for it was impossible it should be her Husband. She
confessed, in some time, a Friar had got him. Thereupon the King went in Person
to the Monastery, and putting the Friar into a Case of Cork, sawed him in two.
One of his Favorites lived in Adultery with a Judge's Wife, for which the King
caused his Privities to be cut off. A Priest being suspended for killing a Man,
he caused him to be put to Death by a Mason; saying, That the Ecclesiastical
Judges condemned a Priest, for killing a Man, to be suspended from his Office;
but he, in his Tribunal, would suspend the Mason from Working, for killing the
Priest. The Bishop of Porto he scourged, for having to do with a Citizen's
Wife. He caused a Gentleman to be beheaded, for staving a Country-man's Cask,
that was full. A Clerk of the Treasury was hanged, for receiving a small Bribe.
Hearing a Woman upbraid another with being forced, he asked the cause; and
being told, her Husband ravished her before they were married, he caused him to
be hanged. Knowing that a Merchant's Wife cuckolded him, one day, when the
Merchant was at some Public Feast, he surprised his Wife, with her Gallant,
and burnt them, and then congratulated the Merchant, that he was revenged. A
Bawd having procured a Young Woman for the Admiral, Lancelote Pessana, the Bawd
was burnt, and the Admiral hardly obtained Pardon, after several Years absence.
A Countryman complaining, that a Gentleman, to whom he had lent certain Silver
Cups, would not restore them; the King kept him in hand a Year, and then caused
the Gentleman to pay him Nine times the value, which was then the Penalty of
Thieves; and farther told him, he should be always answerable for the
Country-man's Life. A Pursivant complaining, that in the Execution of his
Office, a Gentleman had struck him, and torn his Beard, the Gentleman was
immediately beheaded.

6. The Laws he instituted, Laws established by him.
were religiously observed. One of them condemned Judges, who received Bribes,
to Death. To avoid delays in Suits, he established, there should be no
Counselors, Sollicitors, nor Attorneys. He went about the Kingdom in Person,
to administer Justice impartially to all Men. Though so much subdued himself by
the Love of the Lady Agnes de Castro, he suffered no Crime of Incontinency to
pass unpunished. Several new Pieces were coined by him, on the one side
whereof, was his Effigies sitting in a Chair, holding a naked Sword; on the
reverse, the Royal Arms, with these Inscriptions, Peter, King of Portugal and
Algarve. God assist me, and make me Victorious over my Enemies. He was so
Bountiful, that, like the Emperor Titus, he thought himself not a King the day
he gave nothing: To this purpose, he kept always much Plate. He was much
addicted to Music, and used to go abroad at Nights, and dance to the sound of
Trumpets. Notwithstanding his great Liberality, he left a considerable Treasure
to his Successor, which he gathered without the least dissatisfaction to his
Subjects. In fine, such was his Life, that his Death was generally lamented;
and it was in all men's Mouths, That such Ten Years Government never were, nor
would again be seen in this Kingdom. Others said, That either he should never
have been born, or never have died.

7. This King was of great Stature, His Person, and Interment.
a Majestic Presence, his Forehead large, his Eyes black and beautiful, his
Hair reddish, which he wore long, his Mouth small, his Visage long. He somewhat
stammered in his Speech, was addicted to Poetry, and some Verses of his are
still extant. He Reigned Ten Years, wanting Two Months, and died in January,
1367. 1367.
He is buried by the Lady Agnes de Castro, and his Picture, to the Life, on the
Tomb. The Lady Constance, his first Wife, lies in the Church of S. Francis at
Santarem. By her he had Issue* 1. Lewis, who died an Infant. 2. Ferdinand, who
succeeded in the Throne. 3. Mary, married to Ferdinand Prince of Aragon, Son to
King Alonso the Fourth.

His Children by the Lady Agnes de Castro were 1. Alonso, His Issue.
who died a Child. 2. Denis, who refusing to kiss the Hand of Queen Ellenor,
Wife to King Ferdinand, went away to Castile, where he married Joanna,
Bastard-Daughter to King Henry. 3. John, who by the Advice of Queen Ellenor,
killed the Lady Mary Tellez de Meneses, his own Wife, and the Queen's Sister.
He should have succeeded King Ferdinand, but that King John of Castile kept him
Prisoner, and in the mean while his Bastard Brother, called also John, usurped
the Crown. In Castile he married Constance, Bastard Daughter to King Henry. 4.
Beatrix, Wife to D. Sancho, Earl of Albuquerque, Bastard Son to King Alonso XI.
of Castile.

King Peter had one Bastard Son, called John, Master of the Military Order of
Avis; who, after the Death of King Ferdinand, usurped the Crown.

CHAP. XI.
The First Part of the Life and Reign of Ferdinand the first of the Name, and
ninth King of Portugal, from the Year 1340. till 1373.
1. FErdinand was the Second Son of King Peter, King Ferdinand his Birth.
and his Wife Constance. He was Born in the City Coimbra, and succeeded his
Father at 27 Years of Age. The Peace and Treasures King Ferdinand inherited,
1340.
were not at all lasting; 1367.
for he engaged himself in a War against Castile, He engages in a War against
Castile.
pretending a Right to that Crown, after the Death of King Peter, as Great
Grandson to King Sancho, Henry, the present Possessor, being a Bastard and
Regicide. Many Persons of Note, who fled out of Castile, encouraged him in this
Enterprise, and many Towns not admitting Henry, offered themselves to
Ferdinand. He bestowed vast Possessions on several of the Castilians that came
over to him, as particularly to Ferdinand, Earl of Castro Xeres, and
Brother-in-law to King Henry, he gave Fifteen Towns, to D. Alvaro Perez de
Castro, his Brother, Eight Towns, the Earldom of Arroyolos, and the Office of
Constable; to Ferdinand Alonso de Zamora, Nineteen Towns, and so to many
others, too long to recount, besides Gifts in Money and Jewels, which exhausted
the Treasures left by his three Predecessors. Many Cities and Towns also of
Castile declared for our King, where he immediately coined Money, bearing the
Arms and Titles of both Kingdoms. Our King, in outward appearance, pretended
more Zeal to Revenge the Murder of King Peter, than Ambition to join that
Kingdom to his own. To inculcate this Opinion, he sent Ambassadors to the Pope,
the King of England, and other Princes, laying before them the heinousness of
the Crime, as committed by a Brother against his Brother, and by a Subject
against his Sovereign.

2. Whilst the Ambassadors were on their way, Enters into League with the
Moorish King of Granada.
the King concluded a League with the Moorish King of Granada for Fifty Years,
during which time they were to assist one another, and neither was to pretend
any Right to whatsoever Places of Castile were taken by the other; nor was
either of them, if assisted with any Troops by his Confederate, to allow them
any Pay. For farther Security, King Ferdinand asked of King Peter, the
Aragonian, his Daughter Ellenor in Marriage, and Ambassadors were sent on both
sides to agree the Articles, though that Lady was before betrothed to John, the
Eldest Son of King Henry. The Princess was married by Proxy to our King at
Lisbon, the Aragonian Ambassador representing her Person. The Articles of
Marriage were, That she should bring 100000 Florins Portion; That her Father
should make War on Castile two Years; That the Husband should give three Months
Pay to 3000 Horse in his Father-in-law's Service. Some Places in Castile were
also allotted to the Aragonian, for every Man gives freely of what he has not.
Soon after, the Bridegroom that was to have been, but never was, sent a Rich
Present to Barcelona for the Bride, without expecting the Payment of the 100000
Florins. He also sent Eighteen hundred weight of Gold to be coined, to defray
Charges there. To Convoy the Bride, seven beautiful Galleys were fitted out,
whereof that which was to carry her, had her Sails of Silk, wrought with Gold,
and all that was above Water was gilt. The Rowers were clothed in the King's
Livery, and many gallant Gentlemen went as Volunteers. Among other things of
value there was carried a Crown of inestimable price for the Bride. D. John
Alonso Tello, Earl of Barcelos, attended by the Bishops of Evora and Silves,
and the Abbot of Alcobaca went Ambassadors, and performed the Ceremony of
marrying the Princess in his Masters Name. But her Father put off the
delivering of her till the Pope's Dispensation was obtained, and times
altering, all came to nothing.

3. King Ferdinand began the Wars in Galicia with a small Power; Coruna, and
other Places, voluntarily submitted to him. Monterrey was taken by Force, after
it had made a vigorous Defense. But understanding that King Henry drew near
with numerous Forces, Ferdinand went away by Sea, to Porto, leaving D. Nunno
Freyre, Master of the Military Order of Christ, with 400 Horse in Coruna,
Alonso Gomez de Lira at Tuy, and others in other Places. 1369.
Henry to bring our King to Peace, Henry of Castile, invades Portugal.
left them and entered Portugal, burning all the Country as far as Braga, where
Lope Gomez de Lira made a vigorous Defense, but was forced to abandon the
Place, after loosing 48 Men, because he was not releived, and the Town was not
Walled nor Garisoned; having Articled to Surrender, if not releived by a
certain time. Henry finding the Place was not Tenable, Burnt it, and removed to
Guemaraens, which being better Fortified held out against him: Seeing he
prevailed little by Force, he thought to take it by Stratagem, and to that
purpose James Gonzalez de Castro, got into the Place disguished like a
Countryman, but being discovered was put to Death, and his Body exposed to the
Dogs. Now it was that Count Ferdinand de Castro, Brother-in-Law to King Henry
carried about by him as a Prisoner, made his Escape into the Town with his
Keeper Ramiro Nunez, and both went into the Portuguese's Service. King
Ferdinand, who was then at Coimbra with a numerous Army, with all speed made
toward the Castilian, sending before a Herald to Challenge him, but he drew
off by the way of Braganca, Vinaes, and Outeyro, which Places he took. Miranda
was Surprised by certain Castillians, who in Carriers Habit were admitted in:
Cedavin after a vigorous resistance was Betrayed by Vasco Estevez, but his
Treason though not discovered in time to prevent the Loss of the Place, was so
soon found that he was Hanged for it. Henry having secured Braganca, hasted to
Castile, for that the King of Granada was now acting with a great Power in
Andaluzia.

4. Ferdinand having missed of his Enemy, Several Military Expeditions.
divided his Army under several Commanders, Garrisoning all Places he was
suspicious of. He had recovered most of what was lost, but the People not
satisfied with his Proceedings, complained he only knew the way betwixt Lisbon,
and Santarem, because he often went from the one Place to the other, whence it
became a Proverb, That the Fool goes and comes betwixt Lisbon, and Santarem;
when they would express a Man often does the same thing to no purpose. Giles
Fernandez with 60 Horse, and 400 Foot, made an Incursion toward Medellin,
where he took so great a Booty, that fearing to loose it if pursued, he caused
his Uncle Martin Yannez, to feign himself to be Prince John, and as such to
discharge several Prisoners, who reporting his being there with a greater Force
than really was, deterred the Enemy from following him. Gonzalo Mendez being
General, took this Giles Fernandez with him to make an Inroad to Badajoz. The
Garrison issued out upon them, and both sides fought with great Resolution. In
this Action a Butcher of Lisbon, called Laurence, killed several Castilians. In
the mean while Prince John forcing his way into the Suburbs of Badajoz, Burnt
them. Gomez Lorenco de Avelar, on the side of Cuidad Rodrigo, took S. Felices,
Inojosa, and Cerralvo. Here John Roiz Portocarrero, with only 23 Horse, killed
or took almost 80 of the Enemy from Ledesma. This Year ended with a Fire at
Lisbon, which Burnt down all the then Smiths Street, it is now the
Confectioners.

5. As the Last Year ended in Fire, 1370.
so this began with storms of Rain and Wind, Great Storms.
which were so Violent, that the Gate of the Cathedral, though fastened with Iron
Locks and Bolts, was carried into the middle of the Church; the Ships in the
Harbor being drove from their Anchors were dashed into pieces; but the Galleys
escaped better by lying in the Mouth of the River Guadalqui^ir. The great
Rains, and also the Moors who infested his Frontiers, obliged King Henry to
quit the Siege of Cuidad Rodrigo. The Queen his Wife in Person had distressed
Alonso Lopez de Tejada, in Carmona, so that he agreed to Surrender the Place it
not releived by a Day prefixed, and gave up his Two Sons as Hostages. Misser
Gregorio a Campomor^o, with only 60 Men, made his way through the Camp into the
Town, at the Day prefixed, the Queen threatened to execute his Sons; he bid her
do so, for he was able to get others; and so he persisting Obstinate, they were
beheaded; all Men calling that Barbarity, which he thought would be accounted
Magnanimity; but it could not be such, being a breach of Promise. Thirty two
Portuguese Galleys had been a Year upon the Coast, under the Command of the
Admiral Lancelot Pessano, a Genoese. The Castilians, when this Fleet appeared
before Barrameda, scoffed at our Men, for that having refused Aid to King
Peter, The Portuguese Fleet, wastes the Island of Cadiz.
whilst living, they now pretended to Defend him after he was Dead. But they in
Revenge, destroyed the Island of Cadiz, and the Shores of the Continent, till
the severity of the Winter and Diseases almost consumed them. The Fleet of
Castile coming out of Sevil, took a Portuguese Ship that had Money and
Provisions on Board, and then shut up our Admiral Pessano in the River, to
oblige him to Fight in that narrow Place. He fitted out Two Fireships which
dispersed the Enemy, and in that time he escaped, having lost one Galley.

6. Carmona still held out, 1371.
but fearing the Power of King Henry, sent a Gentlemen to our King Ferdinand
for Succor, according to his promise. This being refused, the Town was obliged
to Surrender. There was in it a considerable Treasure of King Peter's, and Two
of his Bastard-Sons who were cast into Prison. Pope Gregory the 11th. sent Two
Nuncio's to Mediate a Peace betwixt the Two Kings, which was concluded at
Alcoutin in Algarve, upon these Conditions, Peace concluded at the instance of
the Pope.
That they should be obliged to assist one another; That the Portuguese should
be a Friend to Charles King of France, that he should take to Wife Ellenor,
Henry's Daughter; That he should have with her Cuidad Rodrigo, Valencia de
Alcantara, Monte-Mayor, Alhariz, and a Sum of Money; That a general Pardon
should be granted on both sides. Thus our King broke his Word with him of
Aragon, who in revenge kept all the Treasure that had been sent to his
Daughter. King Ferdinand finding his Treasures exhasted, called in the Old
Money, and enhanced the Value of the New, which did great Harm, and much more
when he endeavored afterward to rectify that Error. The Five Months allowed
for the Princess Ellenor to come out of Castile were now expiring, when the
King falling in Love with the Lady Ellenor Tellez de Meneses, forgot his Bride.
This Lady Ellenor Tellez was Wife to John Lorenco de Cunha Lord of Pombeyro. He
fell in Love with her at his Sister's, the Princess Beatrix, where he was
always so assiduous, as gave occasion to suspect him guilty of a more than
Brotherly Affection. This Lady being about to return into the Country, whence
she came, the King ordered her Sister who attended the Princess, to stay her in
Town, for he would marry no other Woman. The Sister objected, that he was
engaged to the Princess of Castile, and her Sister Married. The First, he
replied, might be easily put by; and as for the latter, he said, she being
Married to a Kinsman without Dispensation, the Marriage was void. All which
gave the Lady Ellenor to understand the King's Affection was not at all Nice.

7. Scarce had she consented when her Marriage being called in question, The
Lady Ellenor being divorced from her First Husband, the King marries her.
and the Husband not opposing it, Judgment was easily obtained for the K.
Hereupon her Husband went away to Castile and there publicly wore a pair of
Golden Horns. In fine, Ferdinand Married the Lady Ellenor. The whole Kingdom
was astonished at this Action, but Lisbon showed it self above all other
Places. Here a Tailor, called Ferdinand Vasquez, a bold well-spoken Fellow,
gathered 3000 of the People, and with them went to the Palace, nothing being
heard but Reproaches against the New Queen. A great meeting at Lisbon on
account of the Marriage.
To appease them, the King protested he was not Married to her, and promised
the next Day to hear them, when they were Calmer, at the Church of S. Dominick.
By Day, the Multitude was in the broad Place before that Church; but the King
fearing the popular Fury, was already gone away to Santarem. When the People
understood it, they vented their Malice in Reproaches, and this made the Queen
stir up the King to Revenge. The Tailor was apprehended, and many of his
Followers; some whereof had their Hands, others their Feet cut off; many more
fled, now too late understanding, that Subjects ought to have no other Redress
against the Miscarrages of their Sovereigns, than by their Prayers to God. In
the mean while, the King traversed the Kingdom with his beloved Consort, till
being come to the pleasant Monastery of Leca, Two Leagues from Porto, he then
declared, what he denied at Lisbon; to wit, That he was Married to the Lady
Ellenor, and assigned her a greater Jointure than any Queen before her ever had.

8. All the Nobility kissing the Queen's Hand, only Prince Denis Son to the
late King, by the Lady Agnes de Castro refused it, for which the King offered
to Stab him, but was prevented, and the Prince fled to Coimbra. Tho many of the
Multitude were punished, the clamours of the People against the King's Marriage
ceased not, nor were they continued without reason, for that Marriage was in
reality unlawful; she being the true Wife of John Lorenco. Ferdinand at last
remembering he was contracted to the Princess of Castile, sent to inform her
Father, That tho he could not perform that Article, he would fulfill all the
rest. That Prince did not seem at all to be concerned, but Ambassadors were
sent on both sides to Ratify the Peace. The New Queen gains Friends by her
Generosity.
The New Queen having gained a Crown by her Beauty, sought now to gain the
Affections of the Nobility by her Bounty, and she attained her end in a great
Measure, for many who before railed, having tasted of her Favors, began to
extol her Generosity. Besides, the more to bend them to her, she married all
her Relations among the Nobility.

9. King Ferdinand still pursuing his inconstant Humor, King Ferdinand joins
in League with John of Ghent against Castile.
began again to break with Castile, taking some Ships of that Crown in the
River of Lisbon, and entering into a Confederacy with John Duke of Lancaster,
Third Son to Edward the Third King of England, and married to Constance the
Eldest Daughter of King Peter of Castile, in whose right he styled himself
King. It was agreed, they should jointly make War upon the Kings of Castile and
Aragon; That they should bear an equal part in the expense of the War, and that
King Ferdinand should have all he could take in Castile, excepting Towns and
Castles; That each should have what he could gain in Aragon. King Henry sent an
Ambassador to Protugal, to protest against these proceedings, but to no effect.
Hereupon, Henry marched with his Army toward Lisbon, his Admiral Misser
Ambrosio Bocanegra at the same time entering the River Tagus with 12 Galleys.
About the middle of September he set forward from Zamora, Henry of Castile
invades Portugal
and by the way took Almeyda, Pinnel, Linnares, Cerolico, and Viseo, where
Prince Denis offended at King Ferdinand, offered his Service to him. They
marched to Coimbra, from whence Ferdinand was newly gone to Santarem, and here
Henry quartered in the Suburbs. Our King being less forward to Fight than he
had been to give the Occasion; 1373.
Henry marched without observing much order, He Quarters in the Suburbs of
Lisbon.
toward Lisbon, about the end of February. The King, and those that were with
him, could from the Walls of Santarem discover the Enemy marching toward
Lisbon, yet had not the Courage to attack them. Lisbon being surprised, Henry
entered at S. Antony's Gate, and took up his Quarters in the Monastery of S.
Francis; the People retired to the stronger parts of the Town. Our Fleet had
been sent to hinder the Castilian Squadron from entering the Port, but our Ships
were taken by them, and only 4 of our Galleys escaped, saving themselves in the
Creeks. The People of Lisbon understanding there was a design to betray the
City; dragged one of the Conspirators about the Streets, and then cut him in
pieces; another was exposed to the sails of a Mill, which cast him into the
River. The Franciscan Friars, where the King quartered, thought to have
expelled him thence; but their design being discovered, he put them into Boats,
without Sails or Oars, and exposed them to the mercy of the Sea; yet they got a
Shore. The Castilians possessed the Skirts of the Town, and many Skirmished
daily happened. In the mean while, the Earl of Gijon, King Henry's Son, took
Cascaes at the Mouth of Tagus, whilst several Parties wasted the Country. Most
of the City Burnt
The Lisbonians not able to expel the Enemy out of the Suburbs, fired the
Houses; and they, in requital, set Fire to the Rua-nova, or New Street, and so
the greatest part of the City was Burnt. The Country betwixt the Rivers Duero
and Minho, was no less infested by the Forces of Galicia, which routed a
Portuguese Body that came to oppose them.

10. Such was the posture of Affairs, Peace concluded.
when in the Month of March, Guido of Bononia, a Cardinal, was sent by the Pope
to compose these Differences; and toward the latter end of that Month the
Peace was concluded, upon these Conditions. That both the Kings should join
with him of France, against the King of England, and Duke of Lancaster; That
the Portuguese should furnish a Fleet, for Three Years, to be maintained by the
Castilians; That the English should not be supplied with Ammunition from
Portugal; That the Portuguese should expel the Castilians that followed him;
That a general Pardon should be granted on both sides; That the Princess
Beatrix, Sister to King Ferdinand, should be married to Sancho Lord of
Albuquerque, Brother to King Henry, The Two Kings meet in friendly manner.
The two Kings met upon the Banks of the River Tagus, and parted in Friendly
manner. In pursuance of the Treaty of Peace, Count Sancho married the Lady
Beatrix, and the Wedding was kept with great Solemnity. A Match was also agreed
betwixt Elizabeth, Bastard-Daughter to our King, and Alonso Earl of Gijon,
Bastard-Son to King Henry. Thus ended the War, to the Satisfaction of both
Kings; but with the Desolation of their Kingdoms.

CHAP. XII.
The remaining Part of the Life and Reign of Ferdinand the First of the Name,
and Ninth King of Portugal, from the Year 1373. till 1383.
1. KIng Ferdinand had not yet forgot the Treasure detained from him by the
King of Aragon, 1374.
in return of his Mutability. Ferdinand enters into a League with the King of
Castile, against the King of Aragon.
He thereupon meditated Revenge, but it was hard to compass. It happened the
King of Castile fell at Variance with the Aragonian, and our King joined in
League with the former against the other. But the Castilian knowing the
inconstancy of Ferdinand, soon came to agreement with the Aragonian. The more
to bind the Portuguese to him, he proposed a Match betwixt our Princess
Beatrix, and his own Bastard-Son Frederick. 1375.
This Match being approved of by the Cortes at Leyria; they were married by
Proxy, and the King of Castile Swore to perform the Articles of the Treaty,
1376.
on the 19th. of January. 1377.
Our King being forsaken by the Castilian, Prince John privately marries Mary,
Sister to Queen Ellenor.
concluded a League against Aragon, with Lewis Duke of Anjou, Son to the King
of France. Prince John of Portugal, falling in Love with the Lady Mary, Sister
to the then Queen Ellenor, raised also by her Beauty to the Throne, he was
privately married to her. But Queen Ellenor, instead of rejoicing at the
Advancement of her Sister, fearing that the King dying without Issue, she might
come to be Queen, contrived her Death; and to compass her ends, she persuaded
the Prince she would Marry him to the Princess Beatrix, the King's only
Daughter, and by that means secure him the Succession of the Crown. At the same
time she accused her Sister of defiling his Bed. He Murders her.
The Prince, moved with Hope and Revenge, hasted to Coimbra, and breaking in
upon the Innocent Lady, murdered her as she leaped naked out of Bed, and taking
Horse, fled to secure himself and his followers. As soon as the News of this
Action came to Court, 1378.
the Queen went into deep Mourning. The Prince easily obtained his Pardon, and
coming to Court, began to solicit the Conclusion of the Match before proposed
to him by the Queen, with the Lady Beatrix; but finding nothing in her but
Deceit, he retired to the Province that lies betwixt Duero and Minho, and
thence fled to Castile, where he was kept from the Crown of Portugal, which
would have fallen to him, as we shall see in the next Reign, had he not fled
for killing his Wife.

2. A mighty Solar Eclipse preceded the Death of Henry, A great Eclips^ of the
Sun.
King of Castile, which happened on the 30th. of May. Ambassadors went
immediately from Portugal, to propose to John, the new King, a Match betwixt
his Eldest Son Ferdinand, then a Year old, and Beatrix, Princess of Portugal,
though she was before contracted to Frederick, 1380.
King Henry's Bastard Son. The Castilian approving of this Proposal, sent his
Ambassadors to Portugal, who concluded upon the Articles of Marriage. But
notwithstanding this so late Capitulation, King Ferdinand underhand treats with
the Dukes of Lancaster and York about subdu^ng of Castile
King Ferdinand, hoping to gain some Advantage over the Young King, resolved
upon War. John Fernandez Andeyro, one of them expelled Portugal, upon the
Pacification with King Henry, was at this time in England, to whom private
Instructions were sent, to treat with the Duke of Lancaster, and Edmund, Duke
of York, for Succors. They espoused the Cause, and Andeyro came away with the
News to Portugal, where the King being at Estremoz, kept him up in a Tower,
that the Design might not take Air, nor he seem to Entertain any of the
Fugitives. It fell out the Queen spoke sometimes with Andeyro in this
Retirement; and as Queens are but Women, their Familiarity became scandalous;
for she who had forsaken her Lawful Husband for a King, now abandoned that King
for a Private Man, whom she raised to the honor of an Earl. After some time,
the King ordered him to appear publicly at Leyria, as if newly come from
England, and there, as had been agreed, he was apprehended for coming into
Portugal without leave. Within a few days he was again set at Liberty, and it
was given out, he should lose his Head if he stayed in the Kingdom. Under this
Pretense he returned to England, to solicit the execution of the Treaty
concluded.

3. King John understanding that Edmund, Duke of York, raised Forces in
England, to Conquer Castile for his Brother the Duke of Lancaster, who had a
Right to it by his Wife, the Daughter of King Peter, and that he intended to
assist the King of Portugal; marched now as far as Zamora, fitted out his Fleet
at Sevil, and sent Ferdinand Osores, Master of the Knights of Santiago, to
secure Badajoz. The King of Portugal had already fitted out 22 Galleys at
Lisbon, and sent Commanders to all the Frontiers. The first Action of King
Ferdinand was the demolishing the Walls of his own City of Evora, which were so
strong, that three Years were spent in that Work. The Portuguese Fleet,
commanded by the Earl John Alonso Tello, the Queen's Brother, set out from
Lisbon, and in the Sea of Algarve met with the Fleet of Castile, consisting of
17 Galleys, under the Command of Ferdinand Sanchez de Toar. He being inferior
in number, endeavored to shun coming to an Engagement: But our Admiral pursues
and comes up with him off of Saltes, All the Portuguese Fleet, except one
Galley, taken by the Castilians.
having left behind 8 Galleys, that went to take in some Fisher-Boats. Toar
seeing our Galleys dispersed, bravely boards and takes 12 of the first that
came up, and afterward, Seven of the Eight that were behind. Only one of our
Galleys escaped, to bring the News to Lisbon, the rest were carried in Triumph
to Sevil. Few were killed in this Engagement, but the Prisoners amounted to
6000. In the mean time, the Master Ferdinand Osores, infested the Frontiers
with frequent Excursions from Badajoz. Peter Alvarez Pereyra, Prior of Crato,
marched with 1000 Lances, and 4000 Cross-bow-Men in quest of him, but came too
late, for he was retired to Badajoz. King John straightly besieged the Town of
Almeyda, thither came to him Prince John, who was fled from Portugal on account
of killing his Wife, and offered, with the assistance of some banished
Portugueses, to cause Lisbon to be delivered up to the King. Upon this, he
appeared before Lisbon with six Galleys, but being disappointed of his Design,
returned back to Sevil.

4. King Ferdinand sent his Chancellor, Laurence Yannez Fogaca, into England,
to hasten the promised Succors. The Duke of York set Sail from Plymouth with
3000 Men, 1381.
and entered the River of Lisbon on the 19th. of July. The Duke of York arrives
at Lisbon with 3000 Men
With him came the Princess his Wife, and many Ladies, as also his Son Edward,
and some of the banished Portugueses, among whom was Andeyro, who came not so
much to serve the King in his Wars, as the Queen in her Amors, the King's
Sickness administering a favorable Opportunity. The King went aboard to receive
the new Guests, who were lodged in the Monastery of S. Dominick, where Rich
Presents were bestowed upon them, and they were sumptuously entertained. The
King was by the Treaty obliged to furnish the English with Horses, and he gave
them more Mules than Horses, for there were scarce any in the Kingdom, and he
gave such as could be had. The Duke of York advised our King to adhere to Pope
Urban, and disown the Antipope Glement, which the King willingly complied
with; A Schism in the Church. The Duke of York's Son contracted to the Princess
Beatrix.
for there being then a Schism in the Church, the English would not hear the
Masses said by Portuguese Priests, because they acknowledged the Antipope.
Edward, the Duke's Son, was solemnly contracted to the Princess Beatrix, they
being both about six Years of Age. Elvas was at that time besieged by the
Castilians, who hearing of the Arrival of the English, raised the Siege, and
departed. The English committed many Outrages in Lisbon, and being ordered to
March against Castile, did no less harm in the Country as they went, which was
the cause that many of them were cut off by the Pertugueses. D. John Alonso,
Earl of Ourem, and the Queen's Brother, dying, the Queen gave his Title and
Honors to her Gallant, John Fernandez Andeyro. He was a married Man, and his
Wife in Galicia. The King, to take him from the Queen, caused his Wife to come
to Court, and the Queen endeavored to gain her with Gifts, which she received,
yet at the same time openly spoke of the Queen whatsoever her Jealousy
dictated.

5. This Year another Powerful Fleet of Castile from Biscay entered the River
Tagus, 1382.
and meeting no Opposition, destroyed some Vessels; The Fleet of Castile again
ravages the Coast.
then Landing, they burnt three Royal Palaces, and ravaged all that Coast. At
lengh, Peter Alvarez Pereyra, Prior of Crato, with 200 Horse, cut off almost
all the Party of the Enemy, and recovered the Booty they carried away, which
was some check to them for the future. Nunno Alvarez Pereyra lay in Ambush with
24 Horse, and 30 Foot, near the Bridge of Alcantara, there he put to flight 20
of the Enemy, who fled to the Shore. The Enemy increasing to about 250, his Men
refused to Engage at such odds, and he, to draw them on, run upon them alone,
where his Horse fell upon him, but his Men coming to his Rescue, brought him
off, the Castilians at the same time retiring to their Vessels. The Queen
having in Public rent a Veil in two, and given one half to her Gallant, John
Fernandez Andeyro, and the other to Count Goncalo, for that they were sweaty,
and had no Handkerchiefs to wipe their Faces, for it seems they were not then
used in Portugal; Gonzalo Vasquez de Azevedo, her Cousin, reproached her with
it; and she, in Revenge, accused him, and John, Bastard Son to the late King,
of holding Intelligence with the Spaniards. Hereupon they were both committed
to Prison. She contrived to put them to Death, but failing in her Projects, set
them at Liberty, and showed extraordinary Kindness to them both, the better to
disguise her Practices against them, as also since she had failed to destroy
them, to bind them to her Interest.

6. The Master of the Knights of Avis being now at Liberty, The English and
Portuguese take Towns in Castile.
joined with some English, and making together 200 Horse, and 4000 Foot, they
marched to Castile, and laid Siege to Lobo^, which they took, the English being
the first that entered. Cortijo fell into their hands, and was more hardly used;
for tho the Priests appeared on the Walls with the Blessed Sacrament, the
English put all to the Sword, in Revenge of one of theirs that was killed. The
Kings of Castile and Portugal were now at the Head of their Armies, the former
at Badajoz, the latter at Elvas, ready to decide their Quarrel by Battle. King
Ferdinand Knighted 24 of his own People and the English; but being told, he
could not, though a King, confer that Honor, because he had not received it
himself, he caused the Duke of York to Knight him, and then repeated the
Ceremony to those 24 Knights. The whole Day was spent by both Armies looking
upon each other, and at last, the one drew back to Badajoz, and the other to
Elvas. What the cause of parting so should be* cannot certainly be assigned;
but some said, The Castilian feared the English, who had been before victorious
in Castile, to which the Duke of Lancaster had a good Title, and had been once
proclaimed by part of the Army. Whatever it was, a Treaty of Peace was
immediately set a foot, none knowing who had first moved for it. Ambassadors
being sent on both Sides, the Articles were at length agreed upon, without the
Knowledge of the English; Peace concluded without the Knowledge of the English.
and were, first, That the Princess Beatrix, lately contracted to Edward, Son
to the Duke of York, should marry Prince Ferdinand, King John's second Son,
having before been promised to the eldest. But this Match was better liked, to
prevent the Union of the Two Crowns. Secondly, That the Twenty two Galleys,
taken by the Castilians, should be restored. Thirdly, That a general Pardon
should be granted on both sides. Fourthly, That the King of Castile should
furnish Ships to carry the English Home, as if he had sent for them. When these
Articles were to have been ratified, the Castilian demurred, as to restoring
the Galleys, and sending Home the English: The Ambassadors hereupon challenged
him, in their Master's Name; and he scornfully answered, I did not think he had
so much Courage. Nevertheless, through the Persuasion of the Master of the
Knights of Santiago, he ratified the Peace.

7. The Peace was proclaimed at Elvas, which made the English rail, After the
Peace, King Ferdinand again submits to the Antipope.
for that it was concluded without their Knowledge; and the King put them off
the best he could. At this time came to the Court Cardinal Peter de Luna, an
Aragonian, sent by the Antipope Clement, requiring King Ferdinand to
acknowledge him again, for he had cast him off at the Request of the English.
The King assembled some learned Men, and the worst Advice was followed, for he
again submitted himself to the Schismatical Pope. 1383.
In the mean while died Ellenor Queen of Castile; The King of Castile marries
the Daughter of King Ferdinand.
and King Ferdinand forgetting he refused his Daughter to the eldest Son of
Castile, to prevent Disputes about the Succession* now offered her to the
Father. His Offer was accepted, and this Princess at last found a Husband, the
fifth time she had been contracted: For she was first promised to Duke
Frederick; secondly, to Henry Prince of Castile; thirdly, to Ferdinand his
Brother; fourthly, to the Duke of York; and now lastly to King John. She proved
a Pattern of Chastity, for her Husband dying whilst she was yet very young, and
being courted by several Princes, she answered, That Women of Honor did not
marry twice. The Archbishop of Santiago came to Portugal to receive the Bride,
the King being then at Salvatierra, upon the River Tagus. It was agreed, That
in case King Ferdinand died without Heirs, his Daughter should inherit, and
after her her Issue; but if she had none, then King John should succeed; and
that if King John, his new Queen, and the Princess Ellenor, Wife to the Prince
of Navar, died without Heirs, before King Ferdinand, then he should inherit the
Crown of Castile. That till the new Queen of Castile had a Son Fourteen Years
of Age, Queen Ellenor her Mother should govern Portugal. Thus it appears, the
future Pretensions of the King of Castile to the Crown of Portugal, were just,
as were Queen Ellenor's to the Government; and that the succeeding King John
was an Usurper, having no lawful Title to the Crown.

8. King Ferdinand being Sick, King Ferdinand falls sick.
his Queen Ellenor conducted the Princess, then not full Thirteen Years of Age,
to Elvas. When both Parties had sworn the Performance of Articles, the King and
his Bride met, in Tents near that City. Such was Queen Ellenor's Beauty, that
the Castilians seeing her said, King Ferdinand were much to blame, had he not
loved her, having seen her; or if, having loved her, he had not made her a
Queen. Here the Cardinal of Luna produced a Dispensation for them to marry,
they being within the prohibited Degrees of Consanguinity; after which there
was a most splendid Entertainment. Then they returned to Elvas, where the
nuptial Rites were solemnly performed with extraordinary Pomp; and after all
public Testimonies of Joy, and Demonstrations of Grandeur were over, the King
of Castile gave rich Presents to all the Portuguese Gentry. Queen Ellenor
returning to Almada, where King Ferdinand lay sick, and intimating, That she
liked not the King of Castile; The Master of the Order of Avis, commended his
Sense and Modesty; to which she answered, That is true, but I would have a Man
be more a Man. At last, King Ferdinand being convinced of the extravagant
Familiarity that was betwixt the Queen, and Count John Fernandez Andeyro, and
being unwilling by punishing to expose her Weakness, or to lose her he so
passionately loved, he ordered the Master of the Knights of Avis to make him
away privately. But though he performed not at this time what was enjoined him,
yet afterward he murdered him in the Revolution that happened when the Order
was void.

9. The King now spent with Sickness, removed from Almada to Lisbon, 1383.
where he died very Penitent, on the 24th. of October, 1383. Ferdinand dies*
He was almost Forty four Years of Age, reigned Seventeen, and was buried with
Pomp, in the Quire of the Monastery of S. Francis, at Santarem. His Presence
was so Graceful and Majestic, that through any Disguise he appeared to be a
King, his Visage was long, his Complexion fair, as was his Hair, and his Eyes
sparkling. His Character*
The great Expense of his Wars obliged him to enhance the price of the Money,
whereof he coined several Sorts; but after his Wars ceased, all the Coin was
restored to its intrinsic Value. He removed the University, erected by King
Denis at Coimbra, to Lisbon, but it afterward returned to the same Place from
whence he brought it. He was rather Prodigal than Liberal, which may appear by
the many Towns we have mentioned he gave to the Castilians that came over to
him. As to his other Gifts, one Instance will serve to demonstrate the rest. To
John Alonso de Moxica, one of the Castilian Gentlemen that came over to
Portugal, besides Towns and Lands, he gave, in one Day, 50 Horses, 30 Mules, 3
Suits of Armor, 30000 Marks of Plate, and 4 Sumptures loaded with rich
Tapistry. He pulled down the Roman Walls of Ebora, to build New. And thus,
though unfortunate in all his Undertakings, he secured to himself the Love of
all Men.

10. His lawful Issue was, His Issue.
first, Beatrix, married to King John the first of Castile; they wronged her
who said she was Daughter to Count Fernandez Andeyro, for she was Eight Years
of Age when he begun to be familiar with the Queen. Secondly, A Son, who died
in his Infancy. Thirdly, Another in the same nature. One Bastard Daughter he
had, married to Alonso, Earl of Gijon, Bastard Son to King Henry the second of
Castile, from whom sprung the Family of the Noronhas.

The END of THE THIRD BOOK.
THE HISTORY OF PORTUGAL.
The Fourth BOOK.
CHAP. I.
The Birth, Education, and Actions of John, Bastard Son to King Peter of
Portugal: His Promotion to be Protector of the Kingdom; and Wars with Castile;
from the Year 1357. till the end of 1384.
1. JOHN, Bastard Son to King Peter, by Teresa Alonso of Galicia, was born at
Lisbon, on the 22d. of April, 1357. 1357.
In his Infancy he was kept by Laurence de Lyria, John, Bastard Son to King
Peter, aspires to the Crown.
a noted Citizen; then delivered to Nunho Freyre de Andrade, Master of the
Order of Christ, who presented him to the King at the Age of Seven Years,
asking for him the Mastership of the Order of Avis, then vacant, by the Death
of D. Martin de Avelar. This was the first time his Father saw him, and having
Knighted him, gave him that Honor. He was sent to receive it at Avis, a
Convent of that Order, and was there educated, till of Age to bear Arms. His
Actions till the Death of King Ferdinand, have been related; it now remains to
recount what he did afterward. The late King, in his Will, left the
Administration of the Government to his Wife Queen Ellenor, in pursuance of
what had been Stipulated with King John of Castile, upon his marrying the Lady
Beatrix, lawful Daughter to King Ferdinand; tho the unbridled Malice of the
Multitude Defamed her with the Name of Count John Fernandez Andeyro his
Daughter. Queen Ellenor entered upon the Government with Extraordinary tokens of
Grief for the Death of the King her Husband. The Council of the City of Lisbon
advised her not to be so negligent in the Government as her Husband had been;
and she answered them so graciously, that they went away well satisfied. The
King of Castile immediately sent Ambassadors to condole her Loss, and at the
same time to require himself to be proclaimed King in the Right of his Wife,
and in pursuance of the late Capitulations. Scarce was this mentioned
throughout the Kingdom, when a general reluctance appeared in the Countenances
of all Men. D. Henry Manuel de Villena, Earl of Sea, and Uncle to the King
Castile, was ordered to Proclaim him in Lisbon, but was opposed by D. Alvare
Perez de Castro, in behalf of King Peter's lawful Issue by the Lady Agnes de
Castro. The same happened at Santarem, Elvas, and in most Places of the
Kingdom. King John proposed his Title, by his Ambassador, to the City of
Lisbon, but it was not favorably received.

2. The First contrivance of the Master of Avis, Before his Assuming the Crown,
he Murders Count John Fernandez Andeyro.
with some others, was to Murder the Count John Fernandez, the Queen's
Favorite; and the said Master being appointed General of the Country, betwixt
the Rivers Tagus and Guadiana, he marched Three Leagues from Lisbon, whence
suddenly returning with armed Men, he rushed into the Place, and there Murdered
the Unhappy Count. The Queen, when she heard it, said, He has died a Martyr,
and I will to Morrow, in proof of it, undergo the Trial of Ordeal. Next, she
went to know of the Master, whether she also must die; and a civil Answer was
returned, to quiet her. The Rabble, raised by the clamours of one of the
Master's Pages, who cried he would be killed in the Palace, flocked thither,
and would certainly have destroyed the Queen, had not D. John, the Master of
Avis, looked out at the Window. He seeing the Multitude on his side, went away,
followed by them to the great Market, called Recio, to Dine with the Queen's
Brother, the Earl of Barcelos, who was consenting to the Murder. The Bishop of
Lisbon was then also at Dinner at his House, and with him the Prior of
Guimaraens, and a Notary of Silves. They hearing the Tumult, got up into the
Belfrey, where the People seeing them, called out to have the Bells ring. They
not regarding to obey these Tumultuary Shouts, the Rabble broke in, and cast
them headlong from the Tower, then dragged them to the Market called Recio,
where they lay naked and exposed to the Dogs, till the next Day. D. John, after
Dinner, went to Court, to beg the Queen's Pardon for murdering the Count. She
took little Notice of him, but threatened the Kingdom with the Power of Castile;
yet fearing the Rabble, she went away from Lisbon to Alenquer, praying to God,
at her departure, that she might see the City burnt.

3. Don John fearing the Power of the Queen, resolved to go away into England;
but the more this was rumoured, the more the Multitude pressed him to stay, and
protect them against Castile. He made some seeming opposition, but was soon
brought to comply. A Council was named, where it was resolved that D. John
should marry Queen Ellenor, for defense of the Kingdom; and that if the King of
Castile had ever a Son by Queen Beatrix, the Government should continue in D.
J^^n and the Queen, till that Son came to Age. Here ceased all the Reproaches
that had been cast upon the Queen, who when this Overture was made to her,
rejected it with Scorn. Nevertheless he was declared Protector of the Kingdom,
He is declared Protector of the Kingdom.
by the Commonalty, in the Church of S. Dominick; and because most of the
Nobility were absent then, they were summoned to meet in the Townhouse, where
the chief of them being dubious what to do, one Alonso Jannez, a Cooper, stepped
into the midst of them, and laying his Hand on his Sword, threatened such as
should refuse their Consent; and they fearing the Multitude, consented to what
had been done in the Church of S. Dominick. Thus was D. John, Master of Avis,
entrusted with the Government and Defense of the Kingdom. His First Action that
gained him Reputation, was the Prudent Choice he made of Counselors, not
according to Men's Quality, but their Ability. Next, to secure many of his
Party, he distributed a considerable Treasure belonging to those that followed
the Queen, or sided with Castile, amongst them, and promised a general Pardon
for all Crimes but Treason; not considering that the only Treason was to
support him.

4. The Queen began to think herself in Danger at Alenquer, The Castle of
Lisbon taken by the Protector*
and therefore leaving Vasco Perez de Camoens Governor there, she went away to
Santarem. Here Nunno Alvarez Pereyra who had been Educated by her, forsook her
and went away to Lisbon, where he was admitted into the Council of State. D.
John Alonso the Queen's Brother was Governor of the Castle of Lisbon, and
Martin Alonso Valente was within as his Lieutenant. Alonso Yannez Nogueira got
in with some Men, sent by the Queen to Reinforce the Garrison. These refusing
to deliver up their Trust to the New Protector, they were Besieged, and the
Assailants threatening to Sacrifice their Wives and Children, before their
Faces, if they held out; they surrendered the Place. The Nobility who opposed D.
John, called the Commonalty, that followed him, The People of the Messiah;
because they seemed to Adore him. And the Rabble termed them Schismatics and
Traitors. Several Places then in the Hands of the Nobility, were easily wrested
from them by the Commonalty, as Beja, Portalegre, Evora, and others. Now the
Rabble being uppermost, began throughout the Kingdom to commit the most
execrable Villainies, Barbarities of the rebelliou^ Rabble.
under the Pretense of defending their Country. It was an unpardonable Offense,
even to name Castile; And the Lady Joanna Perez Ferreyrim, Abbess of the
Monastery of Castres, seeing a Man ill used for that pretended Crime modestly
reproved their Cruelty, but such was their Rage, that though she fled into the
great Church, and embraced the Sanctuary, in which the Holy Sacrament is kept,
there they gave her several Wounds, then dragging her from the Altar, tore off
her Vail; next they cut off her Coats so high, as modesty forbids to utter,
which done she was dragged into the Market, and there hewed in pieces; Lastly,
the Body was dragged to the Place where they shut up the Cattle, and left
there; till some Charitable Body buried it by Night. To complete this Sacrilege
they returned to the Monastery, designing to Murder all the Nuns, but they
withdrew themselves from their Fury.

5. Queen Ellenor seeing her self in manifest Danger, Queen Elenor flies to
Castile.
fled to her Son-in-Law the King of Castile, who espoused his own Quarrel in
her. The First thing he did was to secure Prince John, Son to the Lady Agnes de
Castro; by that means to cut off the Hopes the Portuguese might have of a
lawful Successor. But the Portuguese ceased not to Encourage D. John to proceed
in the Defense of the Kingdom, and he the more to try them seemed doubtful, and
spread some Reports, as if he would depart the Country. But finding an
inclination in the Multitude toward Prince John, the more to exasperate them
against Castile, he caused a Standard to be made, in which that Prince was
drawn to the Life, loaded with Chains; The Protector his contrivances to Usurp
the Crown.
which being carried about the City, enraged the People against the King of
Castile. Thus pretending to Revenge the Wrong, done to the Prince, he gained
the means of Establishing himself in the Throne; and stirred up all the Kingdom
to defend it self, against Castile. The Commonalty every where took his Part,
but not the Nobility. Yet he believing he could not prevail without Foreign
Aid, asked it of Richard King of England, at the same time persuading the Duke
of Lancaster, to assert the Right he had to the Crown of Castile, by his Wife.
The Embassador's Proposals were admitted, and much Money advanced to them for
the Expense of the War, with which, and some good Troops they returned. The
Earl of Gijon, Bastard-Brother to the King of Castile, and Elizabeth his Wife,
Bastard-Daughter to the late King of Portugal, were both secured in Castile, on
Account of holding Correspondence in Portugal. The King and Queen of Castile,
removed from Puebla de Montalvan, to Toledo, where against their being
proclaimed, Standards were made with the Arms of both Kingdoms. And now it was
debated in Council, whether Portugal ought presently to be invaded. The wiser
sort were for trying all obliging Methods First, but the hotter Youths, allowed
of nothing but force of Arms; and this Advice as followed.

6. The King marched to the City Guarda, which was delivered to him by the
Bishop, but Alvaro Gil, Governor of the Castle would not Surrender. The Towns
of Cerolico, The King of Castile invades Portugal.
Bedado, and Linhares, were also put into his Hands. Some other Places
submitted conditionally, that the King should fulfill the Articles of Marriage.
Queen Ellenor sent to persuade the King to proceed, and meet her at Santarem.
Several Places submitted themselves to him in his way, and being come to
Santarem, the First Resolution of Queen Ellenor was, to request he would
revenge the (...) done to her. The K. answered, he could not (...) quarrel,
unless she would resign up the (...); which she accordingly did, and then they
(...) Town. Here the King took (...). On the right side of the Royal (...),
were the Arms of Castile and Leon, and on the left, those of Portugal. The
Royal Seal ran thus, John King of Castile and Leon, of Portugal, of Toledo,
etc. Money was also coined after that manner. Many of the Nobility adheared to
the King of Castile, and he was possessed of the best Part of the Kingdom; but
the Multitude generally was inclined to the Bastard, D. John, Master of the
Order of Avis. The King of Castile sent D. Peter Fernandez Cabeca de Vaca, with
1000 chosen Horse, and a proportionable number of Foot, to invest Lisbon. These
Troops being advanced as far as Lumiar, John Fernandez Moreyra engaged them
with a small Party, but was himself Killed with some others; many Prisoners
were taken, and the rest fled. And now D. John the Protector, marched out to
meet the Enemy; but they not expecting his coming, fled in great disorder to
Alenquer, and T^rres Vedras, leaving all behind them.

7. At First the Castilians behaved themselves modestly at Santarem, but after
a few Days, they turned the Inhabitants out of their Houses, pillaged them, and
abused their Wives and Daughters; and there being no redress, the Town began to
be abandoned. The Office or chief Rabbi among the Jews being vacant, Queen
Ellenor begged it of the King for one Man, and he gave it to another,
recommended by his Wife, Queen Beatrix. This repulse, and their different
Humors, set Queen Ellenor at Variance with the King; The King of Castile and
Queen Ellenor at Varia^^^.
and she now repented her calling him in, and resigning the Government into his
Hands, in so much that she advised many of her Followers to go over to the
Master of Avis, telling them he was their Natural Lord. The King and Queen went
away to Coimbra, which City had promised to receive them; yet when the King was
Quartered in a Monastery without the City, A Conspiracy against the King of
Castile, discovered.
they refused to admit him. Here a Conspiracy was laid to Convey Queen Ellenor
into the City, and Murder the King. This Design was betrayed by a Jew; some of
the Conspirators fled, and Queen Ellenor was sent Prisoner to the Monastery of
Tordesillas near Valladolid. As soon as the News of Queen Ellenor's
imprisonment was brought, the Town of Alenquer revolted to the Protector; but
the King being Reinforced, marched to Besiege Lisbon. At Aruda 40 Portuguese
hid themselves in a great Cave, and Fire being applied to it, most of them
died. Two hid themselves in the House where the King Quartered, designing to
Murder him, but being discovered, were Hanged. Many Places in the Province of
Alentejo, held for the Protector, and sent to him for one to Command over them;
he sent N^nho Alvarez Pereyra, with an absolute Power, who having visited some
Places of his Charge, and hearing that a great Body of Castilians was upon
their March to Besiege the Town of Frontera, he hasted with a much smaller
number to relieve that Place. His Men knowing how much more numerous the Enemy
was, at First refused to follow him; but being encouraged by his Resolution,
they gave the Charge, and put the Castilians to the Rout, killing many, and
among them several Persons of Note. This done, he took Aronches by Force, and
Alegrete was surrendered to him.

8. The Protector understanding that a mighty Fleet was coming from Castile,
ordered the Archbishop of Braga to over-see the Equipping of his Vessels;
Lisbon Besieged by Sea and Land*
which performed with great industry, so that Twelve Galleys, some Galliots,
and Seven Ships, were fitted out. The King of Castile spread his Army about
Lisbon, where one of his Parties approaching to S. Augustin's Gate, was
defeated by 200 Horse that Sallied out of the City. About the end of May, 13
Galleys, and 40 Ships of Castile appeared in the River of Lisbon. The King drew
nearer to the City, and encamping at the Foot of Mount Olivet, wasted the
Country; then encompassing it on all sides, resolved to Starve it. In the mean
while, a considerable Fleet was setting out at Porto, for the relief of Lisbon;
and the King having notice thereof, with the Advice of his Commanders, resolved
to give the Enemy Battle in the River. The Portuguese Fleet consisted of 17
Galleys, and as many Ships, which entered the River in this order: First 5
Ships, then the 17 Galleys, and after them the other 12 Ships. The Portuguese
Fleet, stops up the River to Lisbon.
The Castilians furiously assailed the 5 Ships, where they met with a most
vigorous Opposition, yet they took 3 of them; but whilst they were intent upon
them, the rest of the Portuguese slipped by, and got safe up the Harbor. Soon
after, the King's Fleet was reinforced by several Vessels; so that now it
consisted of 60 Ships, and 17 Galleys, besides Carracks, which made the
Protector lay aside all thoughts of engaging.

9. The Fort of Almada opposite to Lisbon, after enduring great extremities for
want of Water, was at length Surrendered to the King, who entered into that Place
on the 1st of August. 1384.
At this time, Ruy Freyre, and others discovered to the Protector a Design of
betraying the City to the Castilians, carried on by D. Peter de Castro, Son to
Count Alvaro Perez, and his Accomplices, who were all apprehended. Many also
deserted to the King, and among them, D. Alonso Enriquez, who at Coimbra had
plotted to convey away Queen Ellenor. Hunger now began to pinch in Lisbon, and
was hard to be remedied, but that at the same time the Plague raged in the
Castilian Army. Overtur^^ of Peace reje^^^d.
Overtures of Peace were also made by the King to the Protector; but he would
hearken to none. Nunho Alvarez Pereyra having ventured to pass the River in a
Boat, through the midst of the Fleet of Castile, returned thence to Ebora, and
had the Town of Portel betrayed to him by 3 Citizens. Twice he attempted
Villaviciosa, but was both times repulsed with Loss. The Protector lay before
Torres Vedras* and Nunho Alvarez understanding that several Parties of the
Enemy provided to fall upon him, he hasted to his Succor, which the Castilians
understanding, they gave over that Design; however the Protector was forced to
quit the Siege. Nunho returning to his Ch^rge, took Monzaraz, defeated a
Castilian Party near Badaj^z another before Almada, and made himself Master of
Roca de Palmela, and Couna.

10. The Scarcity was now so great at Lisbon, that they turned out the Poor,
and unserviceable People to the Enemy, who sent them back well lashed. No hopes
now remained; but that the Plague raged so violently among the Castilians, The
Siege of Lisbon raised, when it had lasted five Months.
that Two hundred died in a Day, and of them very many of Quality. But the King
no way moved hereat, continued the Siege, till the Infection touched the Queen
and then he raised it, having lain Five Months before the City. Being come to
Santarem, he sent Troops to reinforce the Garrisons of such Places as still
held for him; but passing by Torres Novas, he was not admitted into the Town by
Goncalo Vasquez de Azevedo, who before kept that Place for him. His Wife went
out to visit the Queen, and there promised to reduce her Husband; and not
prevailing, she returned to the Camp, and the King sent to bid him Farewell,
for that his Wife was going to Castile. He fearing to lose his Wife, delivered
himself and the Town; but the King carried him and his Son away Prisoners,
leaving their Wives behind, and a New Governor in the Place. Whilst the King
marched home, the Protector granted large Immunities to the City of Lisbon, in
recompense of its Fidelity to him. Next, he contrived how to recover some
places out of the Hands of the Castilians. He marched by night, to surprise
Sintra, but was disappointed by a violent Storm, and Floods that swelled the
Rivers above their Bridges. Soon after, Almada was surrendered to him;
notwithstanding that the King had carried away the Children of the principal
Inhabitants as Hostages. Alcnquer summitted to him also, after having made some
Defense; But Torres Novas held out against all his Attemps, and to add to his
Grief, he understood that Nunho Alvarez had been also repulsed at Vil^avi^iosa,
that the Master of the Order of Christ, the Prior of Crato, and Alvaro Gonzalez
Camello, were taken Prisoners at Torres Novas; and that Two Galleys of Castile,
stealing into the Port of Lisbon by night, had ^urnt Three Vessels there.

CHAP. II.
John the Bastard-Son of King Peter, of Protector is declared King; he
continues the War with Castile successfully, from the Year 1384. till 1393.
1. ABout the beginning of the New Year was discovered a Conspiracy against the
Protector. 138^.
Peter Earl of Trastamara, A Conspiracy against the Protector discover^^^
was stirred up by the King of Castile to kill him, as he lay at the Siege of
Torres Vedras. The Count communicated this Affair to D. Peter de Castro, John
Duque Governor of Torres Vedras, John Alonso de Baeza, Garcia Gonzales de
Valdez, and several others, of whom only 3 Men were apprehended, and one of
them burnt. In Revenge whereof John Duque sent out six Portuguese he had in
Torres Vedras, with their Hands and Noses cut off. The Protector raised the
Siege of T^rres Vedras, in order to go to Coimbra, to meet the Cortes or
Parliament he had caused to be thither Assembled, and most of the Inhabitants
about Torres Vedras went away with him. In his way, Leyria refused to admit
him; but he was well received at Monte-mayor, and Coimbra. In this City, (...)
about proclaiming the Protector King.
some were for proclaiming the Protector King, and others for the Princes, John
and Denis, lawful Sons to King Peter; but all agreed the present Protector
should continue as long as Prince John should be Prisoner; and in case neither
he nor his Brother could come to Portugal, then the Protector was to be
received as King. Dr. John de Reg^as, a famous Civilian, made two Harangues on
behalf of the Protector, casting scandalous Reflections upon Queen E^lenor, to
incapacitate her Daughter. Queen Beatrix, from succeeding in the Throne; the
same he did on the Lady Agnes de Castro, Wife to king Peter, with an intent to
exclude her Sons, the Princes John, and Denis. Some little Opposition was made
at first, by several of the Nobility; but at length they all consented the
Protector should be proclaimed King; the so much celebrated Nunho Alvarez
Pereyra, having offered to Murder Martin Vasquez, chief of the adverse Party,
only because he stood up for the lawful Heirs.

2. The Protector with a counterfeit Modesty seemed to excuse himself from
accepting of their Offers, but it was only to heighten their Zeal; and so on
the 6th. of April he complied with them. He immediately showed great Favor
toward the Cities of Lisbon and Porto, for having so constantly adhered to
him. Thus it appears how little hopes of Salvation there can be left for
Lawyers, who by false Interpretations invert Justice, as it appears in the case
of this John de Reglas beforementioned, who standered the Queens, Beatrix and
Ellenor, and the Princess Agnes de Castro, and excluded the Lawful Heirs, the
Princes John and Denis, only for his own private Interest, in promoting the
Bastard Protector, who could have no Title to the Crown. I think it were better
to breed up Children Thieves than Lawyers, for the former will at least Repent
at the Gallows, but the latter are never permitted by Worldly Interest to
Repent. All Parties thus agreed, The (...)
the Protector was solemnly Proclaimed King of Portugal, and accordingly chose
all his Officers of State, and of the Household. Marching into the Field, he
mustered 6000 Men, a small number, but resolute and unanimous; and Nunho
Alvarez Pereyra, now made Constable of Portugal, was ordered to Sea with a
Squadron from Porto, to engage the Castisian Fleet before Lisbon. Missing of
that Enemy, he sailed back to the Province betwixt the Rivers Duero and Minho,
to recover part of that Country, then holding for Castile. Here he took Neyva
and Ponte de Lima by force; Villa Nova de Cerveyra, and Moncon opened their
Gates to him.

3. The new-made King went from Coimbra to Porto, where he was received with
great Joy. (...) the new King.
Here he consulted with Alonso Lorenzo de Carvallo, a Man then Powerful at
Guimaraens, about betraying that Place to him, which was accordingly performed.
The Castle held out some time, but there being no hopes of Relief, at last, it
surrendered. The City Braga mutinying, drove their Governor into the Castle,
and sending to the new King, offered to receive him. He ordered Nunho Alvarez
the Constable, to take Possession of the City, and force the Castle, which was
accordingly performed. The same happened at Ponte de Lima. The King of Castile,
now at Cordova, having twice sent his Fleet against Lisbon, ordered a strong
Party to enter Portugal by the way of Cuidad Rodrigo. They plundered all the
Territory of Trancoso, and the City of Viseu; but as they returned laden with a
Rich Booty, they were charged by a Portuguese Body, much inferior to them in
Number, yet with such Resolution, that of all the Castilians, only 200 escaped,
not one Portuguese being lost in the Action (if Credit may be given to such a
Relation, after affirming the Fight was obstinately maintained.) In the mean
while, the Fleet of Castile, consisting of Forty Ships, Ten Galeons, The
Castilians enter Portugal
some Galleys, Twelve Barks and other small Vessels, rode in the Harbor of
Lisbon. That King also marched from Cordova with a numerous Army, and appeared
before Elvas, which was resolutely defended; and now finding the general
Aversion of the Portuguese to him, it was debated, whether Portugal ought to be
invaded at all, but at last it was resolved to enter it by the way of the
Province of Beyra.

4. The new Portuguese King understanding the approach of the Castilians,
marched out of Guimaraens to give them Battle, having drawn together his Forces
from Coimbra, Porto, and other Places. On the 14th. of August in the Morning he
entered the Plain of Aljubarrota, where he Knighted several Gentlemen. The
Castilians designed not to fight, intending to march directly to Lisbon, T^^
Fam^^^ B^^^^^ ^ A^jubar^^^
yet after some Consultation, they resolved to Engage. There was a great
disproportion in Numbers, for the Castilians are reported to have been 33000
strong, and the Portuguese but 6500; besides which Disadvantage, they had the
Sun and Dust in their Eyes. The Sun was going down when these two unequal
Armies engaged. The Castilians at the first Charge broke through our Vanguard,
but the new King then coming up, not only with Words, but with his Example, so
animated his Men, that in less than an hour that multitude of Enemies was put
to the rout. The King of Castile, who began the Fight on a Mule, being then
troubled with an Ague, was forced to take a Horse to save himself. Most of the
Portuguese who sided with Castile, and were in the Front of the Army, were put
to the Sword, for no Quarter was given to them. The Royal Standard of Castile
was taken, but many pretending to the Honor, it could not be decided by whom.
The full Number of the slain is not known, but it was very great on the part of
Castile, of whom about 3000 Horse are reckoned to have perished, and very many
Men of great Account. This is the Famous Battle of Aljubarrota, so called, for
that it was fought near the Village of that Name. The Booty was vastly Rich.

5. The Victorious King continued three days in the Field of Battle, erecting
Trophies, it being then the Custom so long to expect the return of the Enemy.
The King of Castile fled with speed from Aljubarrota to Santarem, which is
Twelve Leagues, and having rested there a short time, went down the River to
his Fleet, then Riding before Lisbon, where he continued two days, and on the
17th. of August left that Port, attended by Seventeen Galleys. He arrived at
Sevil, and tired there with the Clamours of the People, went away to Carmona.
Now we have heard what the Portuguese Authors write of this Battle, The Account
given of this Battle by the Spanish Historians.
which seems altogether incredible; but let us give an hint of what those of
Castile write, which is much more probable. They say, the King of Castile
advancing toward his Enemy, found him posted in an Advantageous Ground betwixt
two Morasses, out of which Place he could not be drawn, because much inferior
in Number; That he was above 12000 strong, and before the Engagement made
Overtures of Peace: That the Castilians would not be dissuaded from giving
Battle in that Place, so disadvantageous to them, because they exceeded their
Enemies in Number; and in fine, that they lost the Day through their own Pride
and Rashness, in assailing an Enemy so well posted, when they might have ranged
all the Country at their own pleasure. This, I believe, to all Impartial Men,
will appear nearer to the Truth, for we must allow all Authors to magnify the
Exploits of their own Country, and so let us return to our History. The new
King coming to Santarem, had it delivered to him, and finding there many
Ladies, whose Husbands were in the Service of Castile, he gave them all Liberty
to go to them, which they gladly embraced.

6. The Portuguese King's next care was to Reward those who had signalized
themselves in the Battle, The Constable of Portugal upon the Frontiers of
Castile.
the chief whereof was the Constable, to whom he gave large Possessions, and
the Title of Count of Ourem. He, encouraged by this Honor, resolved to invade
Castile. Having gathered 4000 Men, he met and defeated the Master of Calatrava,
D. Martin Yanez de Barbuda, who had entered Portugal with a strong Party; and
pursuing his Success, took the strong Town of Villa Garcia. Thence he marched
to the Plain betwixt Magacela and Villa Nueva de la Serena, where he had a
terrible and long, as well as doubtful Battle with D. Peter Moniz, Master of
the Order of Santiago. Three several times the Fight was renewed, and lasted
almost two days with incredible Obstinacy, but in the Conclusion, the
Portuguese obtained a most Glorious Victory. This done, he went away to aid the
King, then lying at the Siege of Chaves, which was surrendered to him. Moving
thence, they laid Siege to Coria, but after having battered it some days with
great Fury, were forced to rise and depart, the Constable to the Province of
Alentejo, and the King on foot in Pilgrimage to Our Lady's Church at
Guimaraens, as he had promised before the Battle of Aljubarrota. Most of them
that held any Fortresses for Castile, surrendered themselves now to the new
King. He laid Siege to the Town of Chaves, whereof Martin Gonzalez de Atayde
was Governor, who held it out till he had no Water left, 1386.
and then articled to Surrender in Forty days, if not relieved from Castile;
and by consent of that King he at length delivered up the Place.

7. The Portuguese Ambassadors in England stirred up the Duke of Lancaster to
lay hold of this Opportunity to assert his Right to the Crown of Castile, The
Duke of Lancaster, invited by the Portuguese, Lands in Galicia with 2000 Horse,
and 3000 Archers.
to which he had a most Legal Title by his Wife, the Lady Constance, Daughter
to King Peter, from whom Henry the Bastard had usurped that Kingdom. The Duke
having this Right to the Crown of Castile, set Sail from Plymouth with a
numerous Fleet, and arrived at Coruna in Galicia on the 25th. of July, where he
landed 2000 Horse, and 3000 Archers, besides some other Forces, and several
Persons of Note. The Duke was Sixty Years of Age, without any gray hairs, was
tall and well shaped, affable, modest in Discourse, of an excellent Deportment,
and in all respects answerable to his Royal Extraction. With him came his Wife
Constance, and his two Daughters, Philippa by his first Wife, and Katherine by
the second. Scarce was he landed at Coruna, when that Place owned him for its
Lawful Sovereign, as did the City Santiago, and the greatest part of this
Kingdom of Galicia. Our King was at Lamego when the Duke landed in Spain. The
New King John and Duke of Lancaster meet.
Thence he removed to Porto, and having agreed to meet the Duke at Ponte-Mauro,
set forward with a numerous Retinue. They met upon the First of November, in a
Plain near Melgazo. There it was agreed, That if the Duke succeeded, he should
give the Towns of Ledesma, Montilla, Melgazo, Plazenzia, Grimal, Canaveral,
Caceres, Mendao, Fuente del Maestre, Zafra, Torres de-Medina, Fegenal, and
other Places with their Territories to the King of Portugal; as Dower with his
Daughter Philippa. The Pope's Dispensation being come, whereby the King was
loosed from his Vow of Chastity, made as Master of the Military Order of Avis;
and the Princess Philippa, being conducted to him they were solemnly married
upon Candlemas-Day. Immediately the Queen's Household was settled, and a
plentiful Revenue assigned her; 1387.
which afterward some other Queens of Portugal enjoyed.

8. The King having spent Two Months with his Queen at Porto, went with her to
see her Father at Braganca, and thence sent her back to Coimbra. Many of the
English were dead of Diseases. With the King, were 3000 Lances, 2000 Cross-Bow
Men, and 5000 Foot. They entered the Dominions of Castile, and took Castro
Calvo, M^^tila, R^sales, Valderas, and Villalobos. Though Galicia had received
the Duke as lawful King, yet no Place in Castile admitted him, but by
Constraint. Hereupon the King told him, That to make an absolute Conquest, it
was requisite he should return to England for greater Forces. The Duke approved
of his Advice, and they returned to Cuidad Rodrigo. By the way, they defeated a
Party of the Enemies, consisting of 500 Horse, and some Foot. Another Skirmish
happened near the City, upon the Passage of a Brook, with the same Success. The
Duke being now in Portugal, Ambassadors came to him from the King of Castile,
Prince Henry of Castile, marries the Daughter of the Duke of Lancaster. Peace
is concluded.
offering, that Prince Henry, Heir to the Crown, should marry Katherine the
Duke's Daughter, that so all Pretensions to the Kingdom might cease. The Duke
assented, and Articles being agreed upon and performed, the War betwixt him and
Castile ended. He being with the King at Coimbra, a Castilian was there burnt,
for contriving to Poison him. Soon after, he returned to England.

9. The King having held the Cortes or Parliament at Braga, 1388.
set out to recover some Places which still held for Castile. Melgazo having
held out to the last; was then delivered up, the Defendants having only leave
to depart without Arms. It was remarkable at this Siege, that Two Women, A
combat betwixt two Women.
one of the Town, and the other of the Camp, challenged each other, and fought;
the latter was Victorious. Hence the King marched to Lisbon, and in September,
to the Province of Alentejo; where about the middle of October, after a stout
Defense, the Town and Castle of Campo-Major were taken by force. At the
beginning of the following Year, 1389.
the King being at Lisbon, one of the Queens Ladies, called Beatrix, was found
to have admitted Ferdinand Alonso, one of the King's Bedchamber, and his
Favorite, to her Bed. Hereupon he was apprehended, and having made his Escape
from the Officer, took Sanctuary in the Church. Thence the King himself went to
drag him, and though he urged he was married, caused him to be burnt. The Lady
went away to Castile to her Mother. Ambassadors came to the King, being then in
the Province between the Rivers Duero and Minho, proposing a Truce for some
Months, and so Commissioners were appointed to treat with him; and in the mean
while, the King, to lose no time, Besieged and took the City Tuy in Galicia.
139^.
At length a Cessation was concluded for Three Years, A Cessation of Arms,
betwixt Spain and Portugal, for three Years.
and some Places restored on both sides, but more to the Portuguese.
Nevertheless, the King of Castile ceased not to make mighty preparations for
War; but his Designs were prevented by Death, which happened to him by a fall
from his Horse. After the expiration of the Three Years, the Nobles of Castile,
1393.
and the Governors to King Henry, Son to the late King John, by his First
Wife, the Lady Ellenor, advised him to desist from his Pretensions to Portugal,
since he was not Born of Queen Beatrix, on whom that Title was grounded.
Ambassadors were sent to this Effect to Portugal, where a Peace was concluded
for Fifteen Years; all Prisoners on both sides to be released, and all Damages
done, during the late Cessation, to be made good; and then Hostages for
performance, were given on both sides.

10. But these Articles were not faithfully performed on the Part of Castile,
The Truce not duly observed.
neither as to restitution of Damages, nor releasement of Prisoners; wherefore
the Portuguese resolved to do himself Justice, by taking some Towns; and
accordingly surprised Badajoz, and Albuquerque Ambassadors sent from Castile,
promised performance of Articles upon Restitution of those Places; and it was
only done to amuse the King, for at the same time Vessels were fitting out in
Biscay against Portugal, and two Portuguese Ships laden with Warlike Stores,
were taken off of Cape S. Vincent. At the same time, the Castilians made
Incursions, wasting all the open Country; But the Constable defeated a Party of
400 of them that was returning home with a rich Booty. Campo-Mayor was soon
after taken by the King. Having thus secured themselves against their Enemy,
the King and Constable gave themselves some Repose. The latter distributed most
of what the King had bestowed on him for his Services, on such Gentlemen as had
always adhered to him. On the contrary, the King now established on the Throne,
took back to himself much of what he had bestowed on many great Men for their
good Service in the War. As the Constable had received most, this fell heaviest
upon him; and therefore he resolved to depart the Kingdom; but the King
returning part of what he had taken from him, with difficulty persuaded him to
stay. The taking of Badajoz, and Albuquerque before mentioned, had renewed the
War, and the Country was now again in Hostile manner wasted on both sides,
wherein many notable Skirmishes happened.

CHAP. III.
The remaining Part of the Life and Reign of King John, the First of the Name,
and Tenth King of Portugal, from the Year 1393. till 1433.
1. MAny great Men disgusted for that the King, as was before said, Had since
his establishment recalled part of the Grants made to them during his
Necessity, went over to Castile; where settling themselves, they became the
Heads of Noble Families. The King having taken Salvatierra, laid Siege to Tuy,
which after a vigorous Defense, was surrendered to him. In the mean while,
Denis, Son to King Peter, enters Portugal with an Army.
Prince Denis, Son to King Peter, by Lady Agnes de Castro; was by the King of
Castile sent into Portugal with an Army, and the Title of King. At the same
time, the Castilian Admiral, James Hurtado de Mendoza, entered the River Tagus
with a Fleet of Forty Ships, and Fifteen Galleys. Nunho Alvarez Pereyra, with
all the Forces he could make, marched to oppose Prince Denis, who upon the News
of his approach returned to Castile. The King had given to the Constable the
sole Government of the Province of Alentejo, and Algarve, which he for some
time held, but soon after resigned, and went away to the King to assist him at
the Siege of Tuy; but it was taken before he arrived there. 1398.
Misser Ambrosio Marines, a Genoese, was sent Ambassador from Castile to settle
a Peace; in order to which a Cessation was agreed upon for Nine Months. 1401.
This Term expired, and nothing was concluded. Hereupon the King, about the
middle of May, laid Siege to Alcantara; but was forced, after some Days, to
desist from that Enterprise.

2. A Treaty of Peace was again set on Foot at Segovia, Peace concluded betwixt
the Two Crowns.
where, after long Debates, it was concluded upon the following Conditions:
That no Money should be demanded of Castile, on account of former Breach of
Articles; That Towns and Prisoners should be exchanged on both sides; That the
Castilian Hostages should be restored; That the Portugueses who fled to Castile
should return to their Estates. On these Terms a Truce was concluded for Ten
Years, Not observed.
and Hostages were given on both sides for Performance. But this Cessation
produced no more quiet than the former; continual Hostilities were exercised,
though the Actions seem not very considerable; for there is no particular Account
of them; but the 4th. Year after the conclusion of the last Truce, a perpetual
Peace began to be discoursed of. King Henry of Castile was then dead, and Queen
Katherine, Sister to the Queen of Portugal, had the tuition of King John the
Second, not yet a Year Old. In her Husband's Life time, she had always advised
Peace, and she now moved, That Ambassadors from both sides might meet on the
Frontiers of the Two Kingdoms; who did so accordingly, but came to no
conclusion, because the Castilians Demands ran high. After many Messages had
passed on both sides, and much time spent, the Treaty was again set a Foot, and
now Ambassadors employed to manage it, who at length agreed upon Articles,
whereof the chiefest was, 1411.
That the Subjects of both Crowns, who had served against their Princes, should
be restored to their Countries and Estates. Peace now established, and the
Crown secured, Peace at length established.
application was made to the Pope for Absolution of the Censures laid on the
Kingdom, upon Account of promoting King John to the Throne, he being a Bastard,
and having professed in the Order of Avis. Pope Boniface the 9th. granted his
Request, and Absolved the Kingdom. The King had a Bastard-Son called Alonso;
whom he loved no less than his lawful Issue, and therefore gave him to Wife
Beatrix, the only Daughter of the Constable Nunho Alvarez Pereyra. They had a
Daughter called Elizabeth, who was Wife to Prince John, Son to King John the
First; and two Sons, which were Alonso, afterward Earl of Ourem; and
Ferdinand, Earl of Arroyolos, and First Duke of the House of Braganca.

3. The King now fixed in his Throne, The King bent upon public rejoycings for
the Peace.
had bent his thoughts upon solemn entertainments, and public rejoycings,
designing to Knight his Five Sons with all imaginable Solemnity. But they
advised him to expend that Money on some Foreign enterprise, since all was
quiet at home, and it would be more honorable for them to be Knighted in the
Field, 1412.
than in the Court. The Design they fixed upon, was the taking of Ceuta on the
Coast of Africa, which they acquainted the King withal, and he approving
thereof, enjoined them to keep it secret. To this end, Two Gallyes were sent to
view the Place, and sound the Port, and to conceal what they went about they
continued their Voyage to Sicily, as had been at First given out. Great
industry was used in fitting out Vessels at Lisbon; and many more of Galicia,
Biscay, England, and the Low Countries, were hired. The Young Princes at the
same time, raised Forces in all Parts of the Kingdom. Various judgments were
made of the Intent of these Preparations, Castile began to grow jealous; the
Aragonian was not well satisfied and the Moorish King of Granada feared all the
Storm would fall upon him. The Rumor of these preparations drew many Martial
Men from Foreign Parts, to gain Honor in this Enterprise. The Plague in
Lisbon, the Queen dies of it.
At this time the Plag^e had spread it self throughout Lisbon, and having
entered the Palace, Queen Philippa died of it. Her Body was found Fifteen
Months after not only uncorrupted, but yielding a most Fragant smell. Her Life
was a Pattern of Piety and Virtue; her happy Death was on the 18th. of July
1415, 1415.
in the 64th. Year of her Age. Many looked upon her Death as an ill Omen to the
Enterprise in Hand, and therefore advised to desist from it; but the King and
Princes could not be moved.

4. On the last Day of July, 1415.
the Fleet sailed from Lisbon, A great Fleet sails from Lisbon, for the
Conquest of Ceuta.
the 7th. of August it came to Faro, and the 14th. the City Ceuta was taken, to
the Wonder of all Europe, and Terror of the Enemies of Portugal. The
particulars of this Action, which are not many, the Place being taken in Four
Hours, are to be found in the Portuguese Afric. The King returning home,
created his Second Son Peter, Duke of Coimbra; and his Third Henry Duke of
Viseo. This done, he went to Ebora, and was there received in Triumph by the
Princes John and* Ferdinand, and the Princess Elizabeth. The Ratification of
the perpetual Peace with Castile, had been delayed till that King came to the
Age of Fourteen, and took the Government upon himself. 1419.
He being at that Age, this Year 1419, Ambassadors passed to and fro, and after
much Debate, concluded a Truce for Eleven Years; conditionally, That both Kings
should be obliged, if they designed to make War at the expiration thereof, to
notify the same to the other Party Eighteen Months before. Several discoveries
had been of late Years attempted through the industry of Prince Henry; 1420.
and now this Year 1420, the Islands of Puerto Santo, and Madera, were First
found; such were the beginnings that gave Encouragment to the Discovery of
India and America. But of these Discoveries we have writ particular Books. 1422.
In the Year 1422, the King changed the computation of time till then used in
Portugal, which was from the Reign of Augustus, to that of the Year of our
Lord, in imitation of King John the First of Castile, who had made the like
Reformation there before.

5. This same Year, the Constable Nunho Alvarez Pereyra, being 62 Years of Age,
took upon him the religious Order of the Carmelites, 1423.
in the Monastery of Lisbon, built by himself. Peace ratified betwixt Castile
and Portugal.
There he lived a very exemplary Life the space of 9 Years, and died aged 71
Years. To secure the Peace with Castile, the King sent his Ambassadors thither;
but one of them being overthrown, and almost killed at the exercise of Tilting,
the Castilian sent an Ambassador to Portugal, who exchanged the Ratifications.
War now ceasing, 1424.
Prince Peter, the Kings Second Son, resolved to Travel; and setting out with a
Train suitable to his Quality, he ran through a great Part of Europe, Asia and
Africa. Four Years he spent in this employment, having been nobly entertained
in the Courts of all Princes. These Travels being then rare, especially in such
Persons, gave occasion to many fabulous Relations thereof, afterward spread
abroad, which rendered the Truth it self suspected. The King in the mean while
applying himself to the Civil Government, Enacted many good Laws. 1428.
Prince Edward was now 26 Years of Age, and yet unmarried; Prince Edward
contracted to Ellenor, Sister to Alonso King of Aragon.
therefore a Match was at this time concluded for him with the Princess
Ellenor, Sister to Alonso King of Aragon, and Naples. Her Dower was 200000
Florins. At the same time also, the Lady Elizabeth, Daughter to the Earl of
Vrgel, and Grandchild to Peter the Fourth, King of Aragon, was contracted to
Prince Peter, coming home after his Travels, and the following Year she was
Conducted to Portugal. This same Year, Philip of Burgundy, 1429.
Earl of Flanders, being the second time a Widower, sent to ask the Princess
Elizabeth in Marriage; which was granted, and she sent into Flanders, with a
Portion of 150000 Crowns.

6. The King sent two Ambassadors to mediate a Peace betwixt the Crowns of
Castile, 1430.
Arragon, and Navarre, the two latter whereof were hard pressed by the other.
The Castilian also, that he might not seem to proceed upon unjust Grounds,
dispatched an Ambassador to the Portuguese, to acquaint him with the
righteousness of his Proceedings. 1431.
Now at last came the final Conclusion of the long-desired perpetual Peace with
Castile; for the ratifying whereof, Peter Gonzalez Malafaya being sent thither,
he accompanied that King in his Expedition against the Moors of Granada. At
their return from that War, the Peace was proclaimed in Castile, and an
Ambassador came thence into Portugal, to see the same performed there. This was
the end of those Pretensions which had alarmed these two Kingdoms for the space
of almost Fifty Years. The victorious King John at length, overcome with Age,
King John falls sick.
fell sick of his last Malady. He was removed to Alcouchete, to try whether the
Air would do him good, but perceiving his Death draw on, he caused himself to
be carried back to Lisbon. There on the Fourteenth of August, 1433. 1433.
having performed all the Parts of a good Christian, His Death.
he gave up his Ghost. ( Yet with the Authors leave, I cannot conceive with
what Piety an Usurper can die, not having made Restitution.) The News of his
Death being spread through the City, it is impossible to express the Sorrow the
City was filled with. His Body was carried to the Cathedral, on the Shoulders
of his Sons, the Nobility, the whole Multitude of both Sexes, and all Ages,
following.

7. He had a pleasing Aspect; His Character.
his Stature large, and his Strength proportionable; for his Helmet, kept to
this Day, is too large for any Head, and his Battle-Ax too weighty for any Arm.
Prosperity and Adversity he bore equally; was Constant, Magnanimous, Merciful,
Bountiful and Religious. His Buildings were fair and sumptuous, as appears by
the Monasteries of Pe^^longa and Carnota, and the Palaces of Lisbon and
Santarem, and above all, the prodigious Structure of the Church of our Blessed
Lady of Batalla, or of the Battle, erected in Memory of the famous Victory
obtained at Aljubarrota. To describe this wonderful Pile would take up too much
room in the small compass of this short History, therefore we shall pas^ it by.
To this Place was the deceased King, with mighty Pomp, translated by his Son
King Edward, just the Day 12 Months after his Death, that is on the 14th. of
August, 1434.

8. King John had Eight Children by his Wife Philippa, His Wife, and Issue^
Daughter to John Duke of Lancaster: 1st. Blanch, who died in her Infancy.
2dly, Alonso, Born at Santarem, and lived but 10 Years. 3dly, Edward, who
succeeded him in the Throne. 4thly, Peter Duke of Coimbra, a Man so learned,
that he wrote several Books; he also traveled a great Part of the then known
World, as was said before, and married Elizabeth the Daughter of the Earl of
Vrgel, which also has been above intimated. Being Governor of the Kingdom
during the Minority of his Nephew King Alonso, he gained many Enemies, and was
at their instigation put to Death by that King. 5thly, Henry Duke of Viseo and
Master of the Order of Christ, who being studious in the Mathematics, fitted
out Ships at his own cost, to discover the Coasts of Africa, wherein he made a
great Progress, and occasioned the Discovery of India. To the end he might
wholly addict himself to these Affairs, he settled his abode at Sagres, near
C^pe S. Vincent, in the Kingdom of Algarve, where he died. 6thly, John, Master
of the Order of Santiago in Portugal, and Constable. 7thly, Ferdinand, Master
of the Order of Avis, accounted a Martyr for his great Sufferings, and Death in
slavery among the Moors of Africa. 8thly, Elizabeth, married to Philip the
third, Earl of Flanders, and Duke of Burgundy. This King's Bastard-Children
were, Alonso, Earl of Barcelos, and first Duke of Braganca; and Beatrix,
married to Thomas Earl of Arundel, in England.

9. This King reduced the ten Bezants, His Arms.
before used in each of the five Scutcheons of the Arms of Portugal, to five,
the Cross of Avis appearing underneath, in Memory that he had been Master of
that Order; and because he received the English Order of the Garter, which is
of S. George, he used for his Crest, the Head of a winged Dragon; and from that
time forward, the Portuguese use to call upon S. George in the time of Battle.

10. Discoveries in this King's time were made by John Gonzalez Zarco,
Discoveries, made in his time.
Tristan Vaz Teixeira, and Bartholomew Perestrello, who being drove they knew
not whither by a storm, found the Island they called Puerto Santo, in the Year
1418; and two Years after, that of Madera, where they found a little Oratory,
and Inscription, declaring that one Machin, an Englishman, had been there
before. Giles Yanez attempting what none durst before him, passed beyond Cape
Bojador, and there planted a Cross.

CHAP. IV.
The Life and Reign of Edward the First of the Name, and Eleventh King of
Portugal; his Actions, and Death, from the Year 1391, till 1438.
1. KIng Edward was Born at Viseo, Birth of King Edward
in the Year 1391. He was with his Father at the taking of Ceuta, and married
Ellenor Daughter to King Ferdina^d the first, of Aragon, 1391.
in the Year 1428. The Body of King John being deposited in the Cathedral of
Lisbon, 1428.
on the 14th. of August, the next Day his Eldest Son Edward was proclaimed
King. 1433.
An Astrologer advised him to pass by that unfortunate Day, An Astrological
Prediction.
for that all the Constellations were Conspired against him. But he religiously
^lighting these Predictions, went on with the Solemnity, and was Crowned that
very Day. Then began the Astrologer publicly (as he had before done in
private) to denounce, that his Reign would be short as to time, but tedious for
the Misfortunes which would happen in it. The New King went to divert himself
at Sintra, where his Son Alons^, not full 20 Months Old, was Sworn Heir to the
Crown by the Nobility. This was the only time the like Ceremony was performed
without the Concurrence of the Commonalty by their Representatives. He was also
the first that had the Title of Prince given him in Portugal; Alonso, Son to
King Edward the first that (...) the Title of Prince* in Portugal.
his Father following the example of the other Courts of Christendom. The first
that used it, was that of England, where the Heir of the Crown was called
Prince of Wales. From Sintra, the King sent his Summons to all the Prelates and
Nobles, for them to meet, in order to attend the Translation of his Father's
Body, to a noble Sepulcher designed for it in the Church of Batalla, belonging
to the Dominicans, and of the invocation of the Assumption of our Blessed Lady,
built by that King, in Memory of the Victory obtained in that Place.

2. It will not here be amiss, The Funeral of King John.
in short, to say something of his Funeral, which may show the Custom of those
times. All the Nobility and Clergy Assembled at Lisbon. The Mourning then used,
was either white Sackcloth, or raw Canvas. Such was the Apparel of all the
Nobility, and their Families. The Palace was all Hung with Black. On the 25th.
of October, all the Company marched in orderly Procession, from the Palace to
the Church, with great silence; the Bells of all the Churches ringing. At the
Church, after a short Sermon, the Body was placed on a Mausoleum, and then the
Divine Office for the dead, performed with great Solemnity. Prince Peter, and
many other great men, stayed in the Church all Night with the Body, and next
Day, after Mass and Sermon, a costly Offering was made of Gold, Silver, and
rich Brocados. This done, the Body was placed on a Triumphant Chariot, which
was drawn through the Streets by the King, his Brothers, and the Nobility. In
the New Street, and in the great Place called Recio, Scaffolds were erected, on
which Learned Men made Funeral Orations suitable to the Occasion. At S.
Vincent's Gate, Four Horses were put to the Chariot. Four times the Funeral
halted betwixt Lisbon and the Church of Batalla; at Odivellas, Villafranca,
Alcoentre, and Alcobaca. The Fifth Day it came to the Church of Batalla,
whither the Cortes or Parliament was summoned and there all that great Assembly
assisted at Mass, and the other Funeral Rites.

3. The King hasted away to Leyria, King Edward holds a Parliament.
flying from the Plague, for here began his Misfortunes. The Cortes or
Parliament was held at Santarem, where the King gave general Satisfaction. Then
he applied himself to the cares of the Government. He caused also the Laws to
be epitomized, and reduced to one Volume, taking special care that they should
be put in Execution. His next care, was to moderate excess in Apparel and Diet;
and then he Ordered, That only one of the Princes, and such of the Nobility as
were named, should attend at Court at one time; the rest being sent away to
their Estates, and they to relieve the others in their turns. 1434.
Thus the ensuing Year was spent. A general Council.
Pope Martin had before this time, summoned a general Council to meet at Basle,
for Uniting the Greek and Latin Churches. 1435.
To this Council were sent Six Ambassadors from Portugal. The Union of the Two
Churches took Effect, but was not lasting; for the Greeks not finding those
Supplies they expected from the Pope against the Turks, soon fell off. The
Portuguese Ambassadors obtained a Grant of the then Pope Eugenius, That the
Kings of Portugal might be Crowned and Anointed in the same manner as those of
England, and France. This same Year, the King designed his Sons should receive
the Sacrament of Confirmation, with great Pomp and Solemnity; but News being
then brought, that the Kings of Naples and Navarre, Prince Henry, and above 100
Persons of great Note, were taken Prisoners in a Sea Fight, by Philip Duke of
Milan, all public Joy ceased, and the Court was filled with Mourning;
nevertheless the Young Princes were confirmed.

4. This same Year also it was, An Expedition against Tangier.
that the Princes, Henry and Ferdinand, having first gained the Queen to their
Party, persuaded the King to take in Hand an Expedition against Tangier, in
Africa. It was long before they could prevail upon him; but at last, overcome
by their importunities, he took the Fatal Resoluton. A Tax was laid upon the
Kingdom, for the Expense of this War; and all the Preparations, for such an
Expedition diligently made. On the 17th. of August the Princes Embarked, and
the 22th. they sailed from Belem. 1437.
The particulars of this Unhappy Undertaking belong properly to the Portuguese
Africa, where they are to be seen at large; but the even was, The Portuguese
Army destroyed by the Moors, and the King's Brother taken.
That most of the Portuguese Army perished, and Prince Ferdinand remained in
Captivity, he being left as an Hostage, for restoring Ceuta to the Moors, upon
their suffering the Relics of the Portuguese to return home. Prince Henry the
Adviser of this Enterprise, sent Notice to the King, how he left his Brother in
Servitude, and tho he was the chief Cause of his falling into that Misfortune,
yet advised not to Ransom him at so dear a rate, as by restoring Ceuta, to the
Infidels. Those many Portuguese who escaped out of Africa, most Wounded, Naked,
and Starved, Landing on the Coast of Spain, in the dead of Winter, found such
extraordinary Charity in the Towns of Castile, The Charity of the Spani^^ds*
(...)
through which they traveled, that I dare avouch, they had not met the like in
their own Country. They were all bountifully Clothed, their Wounds dressed,
and Money liberall^ bestowed upon them. In every House they had the (...) Beds
given them, and being well recovered, were supplied with all they could desire
to carry them home. The King informed by these People, of the charitable
Entertainment they had found, ceased not to extol the goodness of those who had
shown such Favor to his Subjects, and to express his Gratitude, he sent
Letters to Sevil, and other Places of Andaluzia, where his Subjects had been
received, full of Acknowledgments and Commendations, and offering himself, and
his Kingdom, ready to require them.

5. The King, before the News came of this Disaster, was removed from Lisbon,
to Santarem, flying from the Plague that then raged in that City. The Plague at
Lisbon
Having Advice there of the danger his Forces were in at Tangier, he made all
possible Preparations to relieve them, but too late, for before any could set
out, part of the vanquished Fleet returned. 14^8.
The following Year the King summoned the Cortes or Parliament, to meet at
Leyria. He gave them in Charge, to consider what was to be done, concerning
Prince Ferdinand, left an Hostage to the Moors, for the delivery of Ceuta.
Differences in the Cortes, about the ransoming of Prince Ferdinand.
He produced a Paper written by that Prince, signifying that Ceuta could not be
maintained, and therefore it was better to give it up, then suffer it to be
taken. The Princes, Peter and John, with all the Commons, voted that the Place
should be delivered, but the Archbishop of Braga, said, That a Christian Town
could not be given away to the Infidels, for one Man, without the consent of
the Pope. Others were for deferring the Exchange for some time, and in the mean
while, to offer a Sum of Money and all the Moors in Portugal which were many,
for the Prince; and in Case this were not received, that the Pope and Christian
Princes should unite their Forces against Africa, which if it could not be
effected, then Ceuta should be delivered.

6. The King stood dubious amidst such variety of Opinions. At length he
resolved to have recourse to the Pope, and all the Christian Princes, believing
they would all together assist him to ransom his Brother. From them he received
nothing but words of Comfort and Advice, not to surrender Ceuta. The Plague was
now so diffused throughout the Kingdom, that the King wandered from Town to
Town. Being on the way to Tomar, a Letter was given him, which he no sooner
opened, but the infection it brought seized him. 14^^.
In that Town he di^^ on the 9th. of September, King Edward (...) of the Plague.
in the 47th. Year of his Age, having reigned Five Years and near a Month. In
his Will, he ordained his Brother should be ransomed with Money; but in Case
that were refused, then Ceuta should be given for him. That his Wife, Queen
Ellenor, should Govern the Kingdom, and the Prince his Son. He was well Shaped,
Strong, his Visage round, his Beard thin, his Hair black, his Eyes heavy, but
taken altogether, his Countenance was graceful. He loved gay Apparel, and
always appeard in Public with Splendor. As to his Inclinations, he was
Merciful, and a lover of Truth and Justice. For outward Accomplishments, he was
an excellent Horseman, loved Wrestling, and was much addicted to Hunting. He
writ some Treatises in Latin, favored learned Men, and was very Religious.
Several New sorts of Money were coined by him, and considering how prodigal his
Predecessors had been, in giving away the Revenues of the Crown, he confirmed a
Law invented by his Father, That no Female should inherit any Gift of the Crown.

7. His lawful Issue (as he had no other) was as follows. His Issue.
1st. D. Alonso, his Successor. 2dly, Ferdinand Duke of Viseo, Master of the
Military Orders of Christ and Santiago, and Constable of Portugal; and also
Father to Emanuel, who was afterward King. 3dly, Philippa, who died of the
Plague at 12 Years of Age. 4thly, Ellenor, married to the Emperor Maximilian,
who was Grandfather to the ever-renowned Charles the 5th. D. John de Silva and
Meneses, fell passionately in Love with this Princess, and followed her till he
saw her married; after which he became a Franciscan Friar, and led a very
exemplary Life, at Montorio near Rome. 5thly, Katherine, contracted in England
and Navarre, yet never married. 6thly. Joanna, Born after the Death of her
Father, and married afterward to King Henry the 4th. of Castile.

CHAP. V.
The First Part of the Life (...) Reign of King Alonso, the Fifth of the Name,
and Twelfth King of Portugal, from the Year 1432. till 1469.
1. KIng Alonso the 5th. The Birth of King Alonso.
Succeeded his Father being but Six Years of Age. He was born at the Palace of
Sintra, in the Year 1432. His Father in his Will, ordained, 1432.
That the Queen should have the Government of the Young King and Kingdom; His
Accession to the Crown and Differ^^^ between the Q^^^n and Nobility.
but every Nobleman striving to draw the Power into his own Hands, caused all
to run into Confusion, whence ensued greater Destruction than had been produced
by the preceding Plague. They blamed the King for committing the care of the
Realm to a Woman, she a Forreigner, and what they most resented, a Castilian,
as they termed her, though she was Daughter to the King of Aragon. The Princes,
Brothers to the late King, were the Heads of these Factions, and particularly
Prince Peter, who was always an Enemy to the Queen. Prince Alonso being
proclaimed King, in the Sixth Year of his Age, on the Tenth of September, in
the Town of Tomar, the Second Day after his Father's Death, Queen Ellenor took
upon her the Government, as had been ordained by her Husband's Will, and so far
laid aside all former Animosity with Prince Peter, that they did nothing
without his Advice, and desired him jointly with her to Sign the Writs of
Summons for the Cortes or Parliament. Before the Cortes could meet, Prince
Peter, upon pretense of Zeal to secure the Succession, in Case the Young King
should die before he was Marriageable, caused his younger Brother Ferdinand to
be Sworn Heir to the Crown conditionally, if the other died without Issue. The
Queen pleased with these outward shows of Loyalty in Prince Peter, discovered
to him, That the King her Husband had declared to his Confessor, it was his
Will, that the present King Alonso should marry Elizabeth, Daughter of the said
Prince Peter; to which she willingly consented, and desired it might be
immediately performed. The Prince, though astonished at so great a favor,
accepted the offer. No sooner was this noised abroad, but Alonso, Earl of
Barcelos, Bastard-Brother to Prince Peter, designing to marry the King to his
own Grand Daughter, prevailed with the Archbishop of Lisbon, the Queen's
Fav^^rite, to diswade her from that Resolution. Prince Pet^^ understanding the
Design, asked the Queen to confirm her Promise to him under her Hand; which
she, tho her mind was altered, easily granted.

2. The Cortes being met at Torres Novas, The Cortes meet, and instead of
settling Peace, widen the Breach.
where Peace ought to have been established, there Discord broke out* The
Nobility envying Prince Peter the Honor of marrying his Daughter to the King,
Conspired against him. However, it was carried in this Parliament, That the
Queen should have the Education of the King, and Prince Peter the Power of the
Government. She was content; but his Adversaries stickled against this
Resolution, so that they came to be divided; the Nobility affirming the Queen
ought to Govern, and the Commons asserting it was their Right to nominate the
Prince a Protector. Prince Henry mediated between them, allotting the Queen the
Charge of the King and the Revenue, appointing the Prince to Defend the
Kingdom, and allowing Earl Alonso to take Charge of the Administration of
Justice, with the Advice of the Council, and Approbation of the Queen and
Prince, directing the Cortes to meet Yearly to settle all greater Matters.
Prince Peter, though nothing was left him but the bare Title of Protector,
submitted rather than embroil the Kingdom. Earl Alonso, though he had more than
he could have demanded, was dissatisfied; and the Queen, pushed on by the
Prince's Adversaries, would part with nothing. The mutinous People obliged the
Queen to accept of what was allotted her. Earl Alonso sent his Son to demand of
Prince Peter the Note the Queen had given him, for Security of the King's
Marrying his Daughter; he, in scorn, tore it in pieces, and so returned it.

3. Ambassadors from Castile had been some time in Portugal, Ambassadors of
Castile sent away without an Answer.
and could not be heard by reason of the present Disorders. At length they had
Audience of the Queen at Lisbon, where they proposed, in the Name of King John
the Second of Castile, That the Bishops, expelled during the Schism, should be
restored; That the Military Orders of Avis and Santiago in Portugal, should
submit themselves, as they had been before, to those of Calatrava and Avis in
Castile; That some Portuguese Bishoprics, formerly subject to the
Archiepiscopal See of Sevil, should return to its Obedience. After some Debate,
they were sent away without any Answer, which was to be given by Portuguese
Ambassadors appointed to follow them. The People were not at all pleased with
the Queen's Administration, and pressed Prince Peter to take it upon himself.
She flying from the Plague, then in the City, retired to Mount Olivet, where
she was delivered of the Princess Joanna, afterward Queen of Castile, and
received Letters from the Pope, condoling the Death of the King, and advising
her not to deliver Ceuta for Prince Ferdinand. Prince Peter, stirred up by the
People to take upon him the Government, and advised to it by his Brother,
Prince John, to prevent a Civil War, delayed the time. At length, the People,
wholly averse to the Queen, The People averse to (...) Queen.
ran in multitudes to oblige the Prince to enter upon the Administration of the
Public Affairs, and he, though displeased with the Queen, pacified the
Multitude, persuading them to put off that Design till the Meeting of the
Cortes or Parliament.

4. The Queen privately writ to all the Members of Parliament to come armed,
Tumults against the Queen.
that they might suppress the Rabble. But Prince Peter understanding it, as
Protector, charged them to be ready to obey his Orders. This done, he took
leave of the Queen in a course manner, which President made her the more
slighted, she being sensible of it, speedily removed to Alenquer. The Citizens
of Lisbon elected a Standard Bearer, and held Seditious Meetings, in contempt
of the Queen's Letters. The Archbishop fortified himself against the Citizens,
they stopped his Revenue, sent Complaints against him to Rome, and he was
forced to fly to Castile. The Multitude, headed by a Cooper, declared Prince
Peter should Govern, and a Tailor ratified this Decree. Thus the Kingdom was
disposed of by a Cooper and a Tailor. The Governor of the Castle of Lisbon
held for the Queen, but being sore pressed by the People, was forced to
surrender it to Prince John. Prince Peter sent to Summons the Queen to the
Parliament; she replied, she would not go, unless he resigned all Claim to the
Government; but he rather chose to stand to the Election made of him by the
Cooper and the Tailor. Prince Peter made Regent by a Cooper and a Tailor, Heads
of the Rabble.
The Prince coming from Coimbra to Lisbon, accepted the Government at the hands
of the Multitude, which was afterward confirmed to him by the Cortes or
Parliament, to which the Young King was brought, after sufficient Security
given his Mother that he should be restored to her. Nevertheless, he was
forcibly taken from her, and she retired to Sintra. Thence she craved
Assistance of her Brothers, the Princes of Aragon, who sent Ambassadors to
intercede for her, but they were dismissed without any Answer. She ceased not
to make Friends in Navarre and Aragon, and the Prince secured Castile to his
Party. The Queen, in order to make her Escape, sent away her Plate and Jewels,
which were of a great Value, to be kept in the Castle of Albuquerque.
Ambassadors came from Castile to require she might either be restored to the
Government, or have leave to depart the Kingdom. But no satisfactory Answer
being given them, she hereupon made her Escape, with her Daughter Joanna, born
after the Death of the King.

5. The Queen being missing, Civil War in Portugal.
all was in Confusion. Crato, and all the Castles subject to that Priory, held
for her, and thus the Civil War commenced. Some Places were taken by the
Prince, and he resolved to Besiege the Queen in the Town of Crato, but she
having called some Castilian Troops to her Assistance, after making much
havoc, withdrew into Castile. Alonso, Earl of Barcelos, still held out for the
Queen, but his Son following the Prince, brought him over to that Party, though
not without difficulty. Thus, for some time, all Storms seemed to be blown
over. About this time was brought from Rome a Dispensation for the Young King
to Marry Prince Peter's Eldest Daughter Elizabeth, as also the Orders of
Santiago and Avis in Portugal were exempted from any Subjection to the Orders
in Castile. The Dispensation being come, the King was married by the Consent of
the Cortes, then sitting, to the Regent's Daughter, 1441.
at Obidos on the 15th. of August, 1441. The Bridegroom was then Ten Years of
Age, The Young King marries the Regent's Daughter.
and the Bride Seven or Eight. The Queen Dowager still pressed to be restored
to the Government, and the King of Castile sent several Embassages in her
behalf, which nothing availing, it was feared a War would ensue; but that King
dying, all that Negotiation fell to nothing. Thus the Queen Dowager being
forsaken on all hands, and having spent her Treasure in soliciting to make War
upon Portugal, went away at last to Toledo, where she lived upon Charity, and
there died, as was suspected, poisoned by the Regent, tho others say, by D.
Alvaro de Luna, then Favorite to the King of Castile.

6. The King of Castile being jealous of the Aragonian, asked some Supplies of
Men out of Portugal. They were accordingly sent him, under the Command of the
Constable Peter, Son to the Regent; but there being no use for them, they
returned home. However, the Constable, while he was in Castile, concluded a
Match betwixt that King and the Lady Elizabeth, Daughter to Prince John. 144^.
King Alonso of Portugal being now Fourteen Years of Age, King Alonso taken
upon him the Government, and confirms all that had been done by the Regent.
according to the Custom of Spain, took upon him the Government in the Assembly
of the Cortes or Parliament, thanked Prince Peter for his good Administration
till that time, and desired him to continue in it till he were of riper Years.
Next, he ratified his Marriage with that Prince's Daughter, and then went away
to Alcacaras, where the Ambassador of Castile was Proxy for his Master in the
Ceremony of Contracting the Lady Elizabeth, Daughter to Prince John, to that
King. There also the Lady Beatrix, Sister to Elizabeth, was contracted to
Prince Ferdinand, Brother to that King. Prince Peter by this time thought he
had wholly gained over all his Enemies that opposed his Advancement to the
Government, but now it appeared it was but a counterfeit Reconciliation. The
Duke of Braganza, the Earl of Ourem, and the Archbishop of Lisbon prevailed
with the King to remove him from the Government, laying Disloyalty to his
Charge, and they at the same time displaced all Officers, as well Civil as
Military, that had been preferred by him. Not so content, they accused him of
aspiring to the Crown, and so far prevailed, as to have him banished the Court;
which done, several Libels were dispersed abroad, fraught with nothing but
Reflections upon him, and many Articles laid to his charge, were Judicially
examined. Prince Henry came from Algarve to Court, to vindicate his Brother's
Honor, but to little purpose, because he was looked upon to be no less guilty
than the other, and both of them were charged with poisoning King Edward, Queen
Ellenor, and Prince John. D. Alvaro de Almada, Earl of Abranchez, in the King's
Presence challenged any Man that should lay blemish on the Prince's Reputation;
but the King was carried away to Sintra by his Favorites, that he might not
give ear to those that favored Prince Peter.

7. The King from Sintra issued out his Orders, Prince Peter, the late Regent,
in Arms, and declared Rebel.
forbidding all Persons to Converse and hold Correspondence with the Prince;
also Summoning all the Queen his Mother's Servants, who had been discarded, to
appear, and put in their Claims; and Commanding the Prince not to depart from
his own Lands without the King's leave. He was also commanded to deliver up all
the Arms that were in Coimbra, which he refused to do. The Duke of Braganza
being called to Court, was to pass through the Prince's Lands, and therefore
intended to Travel well attended; but the Prince marched out with Forces to
oppose him, and though several times Orders were brought him from the King, to
return to Coimbra, he still advanced toward the Duke, who was forced privately
to fly, 1449.
and make his escape to Santarem, where the Court then was. Hereupon he was
declared a Rebel and Traitor, and Forces were raised with Expedition against
him. D. Sancho de Noronha, Earl of Odemira, was sent with Forces against the
Constable, Prince Peter's Son, who fled to Castile, where he found not such
kind Entertainment as he expected. Queen Elizabeth being the Prince's Daughter,
studied how to save her Father, and gave him Advice, that the Fifth of May was
the day appointed to Besiege him. Then she went to the King to beg Pardon for
him, which the King said he would grant, provided the Prince himself would beg
it, acknowledging his Faults. He did so in a Letter to the King, but the Queen
showing him her Letter, wherein the Prince vindicated himself, and said, he
complied so far only to satisfy her; the King said, since he did not really
acknowledge his faults, he merited no Pardon. The Prince's Enemies, to prevent
the Queen's interceding for him, kept him as much from her as they could, and
imprisoned D. Alvaro de Castro, a Man of a most beautiful Person, and excellent
Behavior, as standing accused of too much Familiarity with the Queen, but the
King knowing well her Virtue, caused D. Alvaro to be set at Liberty, and did
him great Honor.

8. The King had now gathered a numerous Army, but could not set forward for
want of Provisions and Carriages. The King comes to a Battle with the Rebels.
But the Prince on his part set forward from Coimbra with 1000 Horse, and 5000
Foot, and came within five Leagues of Santarem without meeting any Opposition.
There he was advised to return to Coimbra, but he chose to advance toward
Lisbon, and by the way put to Death about fifty Horse of the King's, that at a
distance called him Traitor. Being come to a Brook called Alfarreveira, he
there chose a convenient Ground for a small Body to oppose a greater, for he
had not yet 8000 Men, and the King's Army consisted of above 30000. By that
Multitude he found himself encompassed on the 20th. of May. Proclamation was
made, declaring all Traitors that should thenceforth adhere to the Prince; yet
none forsook him, but some of the King's Army deserted to him. Some Shot of
Muskets and Cross-bows flying from the King's Camp to the Prince's, he
answered with some Cannon, one of the Bullets whereof falling near the King's
Tent, so enraged his Army, that they immediately, without Orders, fell on, and
in a moment broke and put to flight the Prince's Forces. He himself fighting
resolutely, Prince Peter killed.
was shot through with an Arrow, and died. His inseparable Friend, the Earl of
Abranchez, having sworn not to forsake him in Death, after having performed
incredible Acts of Bravery, was there also slain. Most of the Prince's
followers were either taken or killed. His Body was left three days in the
Field, and then being laid upon a Ladder, four Country men carried it to the
poor Church of Alverca, where it was buried. The King was received at Lisbon in
Triumphant manner. Many Persons were executed on Account of these Troubles, and
their Heirs, to the Fourth Generation, declared Infamous. The Prince's Enemies
fearing the Queen might some time or other Revenge the Death of her Father,
advised the King to be divorced from her* but he received her with all the
marks of True Love and Affection. They begged of him some Towns that had
belonged to the Prince, which he freely gave them; but the Cities of Porto and
Portalegre would not submit to be given away to any Body, and were therefore
annexed to the Crown.

9. The Princess Ellenor during this time was contracted to the Emperor
Frederick the Third, The Princess Ellenor contracted to the Emperor Frederick
the Third.
and was now delivered in the Month of August to his Ambassadors. They embarked
at Lisbon, and landed at Leghorn, whence she was conducted to Sienna, where the
Bridegroom met her, attended by Ladislaus King of Hungary, his Brother Albertus
the Archduke, and other Princes. Hence they traveled together to Rome, where
they were crowned with the usual Solemnity. 1451.
Prince Ferdinand, who was married to the Lady Beatrix, 1452.
Daughter to Prince John, privately built a Caravel, and went away in it to
Ceuta, to employ himself against the Moors, but the King soon sent for him
home, and to settle his Mind, gave him the Towns of Beja, 1453.
Moura, and Serpa. The great Monarch of the Turks, Mahomet, having taken
Constantinople, Pope Calixtus stirred up the Christian Princes to unite their
Forces against the Common Enemy. Our King offered to serve in Person one Year
with 12000 Men, but all these Projects fell to nothing. Our Queen had before
this time brought forth a Son and a Daughter, whereof the former died, 1455.
and now on the third of May she was delivered at Lisbon of another Son, whom
she called John, as the first had been, for the special Devotion she had to
that Name. He was sworn Prince, being but a Month old, with great Solemnity.
The Queen upon this Occasion obtained leave of the King, that the Body of her
Father, Prince Peter, might be placed in the Tomb he had built for himself at
the Famous Monastery of Batalla. At this time also a Match was concluded
betwixt the Princess Joanna, King Alonso's Daughter, and Henry the Fourth, King
of Castile. She was Seventeen Years of Age, and very beautiful, which was all
her Portion, and she was conducted to Castile, by Count Alvaro Gonzalez de
Atayde. Elizabeth our Queen died on the Second of December following, The
Queen's Death.
not without suspicion of Poison given her, by her Father's Enemies, fearing
she might prevail with the King to Revenge his Death. She was carried to the
Church of Batalla, with the greatest Pomp that had been used at the Funeral of
any Queen. For Beauty, Patience, Obedience, and Piety, she was inferior to
none. The Monastery of Xabregas of the religious of S. Eloy, was founded by
her. 1456.
The King ordered the Body of his Mother, Queen Ellenor, to be brought from
Toledo, to be buried at the Church of Batalla. As far as Elvas it was conducted
by the King and Queen of Castile, and there they were met by our King.

10. The Bishop of Silves brought the Croisade from Rome, 1457.
granted to Encourage Christian Princes to join their Forces against the Turks.
The Croisade brought into Portugal.
Our King made Preparations for that Expedition, and recalled Peter, the
Constable and Master of Avis, Son to Prince Peter, who was Banished to Castile.
He also coined a New sort of pieces called Cruzadoes, from the Croisade and the
Cross on them. These were of pure Gold, and great Weight, that they might pass
in Foreign Countries, but the other Christian Princes not answering on their
Part, he bent his Mind upon Prosecuting the Conquest of Africa. Tangier was
first aimed at, 1458.
but this Resolution was changed for Alcacer. Alcazer, on the Coast of Africa,
taken by King Alonso.
Twenty thousand Landmen were appointed for this Service, who set sail from
Setuval the 12th. of October, in Two hundred Sail of Ships. They no sooner
arrived than that they were Victorious, and reduced that Place; the Particulars
of which Action are in the Portuguese Africa. A Peace was now established with
the Duke of Britany, 1459.
whose Subjects had taken many Portuguese Ships, which was repaid them in the
same kind. 1460.
The following Year died Prince Henry, who first gave Encouragement, and
promoted the Discoveries on the Coast of Africa. A Year after he was followed
by Alonso, Duke of Braganca, Bastard-Son to King John the First. 1461.
The King being advertised, That it would be easy to surprise Tangier, Tangier
taken.
set sail from Lisbon in November, and tho he met with many difficulties he
became Master of that Place. The Catalonians rebelling against their lawful
Sovereign, King John of Arag^n, sent to invite Peter, Son to the Unfortunate
Prince Peter, to that Principality as being descended of the Ancient Earls of
Barcelona. He hasted thither from Ceuta, but lived not long there, and lies
buried in the Cathedral. King Alonso went over from Ceuta, to Gibraltar, to
meet the King of Castile, who craved Aid of him against his Nobility; that not
content with staining his Honor, sought to deprive him of the Crown. 1464.
Here it was agreed, King Alonso should marry Elizabeth, Sister to the
Castilian; and his Son Prince John, the Princess Joanna, but all this took no
effect. 1466.
Queen Joanna of Castile, on whom those People cast all their Reproaches,
accusing her of Adultery, only in malice to D. Beltran de la Cueva, the King's
Favorite, whom she treated with Courtesy; came to the City Guarda to crave
Aid of the King her Brother against the Rebels, who called her Daughter a
Bastard, and had opprobriously used a Statue they had erected to the King her
Husband. King Alonso intended to have succored her, but was prevented by the
Death of Prince Alonso of Castile, who had been proclaimed King, in opposition
to the King his Brother; whereupon ensued some tranquillity in the Affairs of
Castile. King John of Aragon, made great Interest that his Son Ferdinand might
marry Elizabeth, Sister to the King of Castile. Our King Alonso, also sent
Ambassadors to demand her according to the Articles concluded at Gibraltar. But
these Ambassadors could not prevail, for she was already engaged to Ferdinand,
and much more to those who advised that Match, in opposition to her Brother,
that she might the better, with their assistance, deprive him of the Crown.
That Match was concluded in February, 1469. 1469.
This is that Elizabeth, so much admired by the Spaniards for Sanctity, and
yet, by this it appears she aimed to Usurp the Crown from her Brother, and
actually did it from his only Daughter.

CHAP. VI.
The remaining Part of the Life and Reign of King Alonso, the Fifth of the
Name, and Twelfth King of Portugal, and his Death; from the Year 1470, till
1481.
1. ON the 18th. of September, 14^^.
died at Setubal, Prince Ferdinand, Brother to King Alonso, and Father to many
Children; whereof one was Emanu^l afterward King. Soon after his Death, his
Daughter Ellenor was married to Prince John, he being Fourteen Years of Age,
and she Thirteen. Twelve Portuguese Ships now coming from Flanders, were taken
by the English; whereupon, our King ordered Reprisals to be made, and sent
Ambassadors to complain of it; which was followed by a lasting Peace. In the
mean while, Persons were sent to discover the Port of Arzila, on the Coast of
Africa, who brought an Account, that 30000 Men were requisite for that
Expedition; 24000 Landmen, besides the Seamen, were shipped on Board 308 Sail
of all sorts. 14^1.
The King sailed to Lagos in Algarve, King Alo^so (...) and Tangier.
before he discovered his Design, then passing over to Arzila, took that Place,
as he did Tangier, forsaken by the Inhabitants upon the first News of his
approach. He change^ his (...).
Upon this Conquest, the King changed his Titles, which before were, King of
Portugal, Algarve and Ceut^^ for those of, King of Portugal, and both Algarves,
that on this side, and that on the other in Africa. Prince Ferdinand, after he
was taken in the former Expedition, against Tangier, lived Six Years in
Slavery, and his Body remained Twenty more among the Infidels. But the King
gave now in exchange for his Bones, Two Wives, and a Daughter of (...) Lord of
that Place; 14^^
and afterward King of Fi^. The Bones were brought over, and buried in the
Famous Church of Batalla. King H^^ry of Cast^^e, and our King Alonso, had an
interview between Bad^^^z, and Elvas, about a Match for the Prince of Portugal,
with (...), Princess of Castile, but it had no Effect; for the rebellious
Castilians, openly declared her a Bastard, and Elizabeth, that King^^ Sister
was married to Ferdinand (...) Aragon, by the Name of Princess of Castile. It
it horrid to think, with what Impudence they durst Declare that Princess a
Bastard, seeing she was Born in Wedlock; and for what they pretended of the
King's Impotency, it was contrary to Reason; since it is notorious the Queen
was Jealous of him, and she could have no occasion for jealousy, had she found
the King unfit for the Company of Women. But the World is sufficiently
convinced, there can be no true Reason given to justify Rebellion, yet Rebels
never want pretenses to Color their Villainy.

2. King Henry of Castile met his Sister Elizabeth at Segovia, Affairs of
Castile.
and he dying on the 11th. of December following, it was generally believed he
was poisoned. In his Will, he appointed his Daughter Joanna to succeed him, and
desired the King of Portugal, to take her to Wife. At the Hour of his Death,
his Confessor pressed him to declare who was his lawful Heir; and he answered
his Daughter Joanna. Nothing more could have been done to prove her Legitimate,
but nothing will suffice against hardened Rebels. Scarce was the Princess
Elizabeth assured of the King's Death, when she caused her self to be
proclaimed Queen at Segovia. In the mean while, the Marquis de Villena, the
Earl of Benavente, and the Bishop of Siguenza, appointed by King Henry, to see
his Will executed, sent to the King of Portugal, praying him to set forward
with all possible speed, and that not only they, but many more Nobles, and the
principal Cities of Castile, would declare for him. The King was then at
Estremoz, where having consulted his Council, he resolved to accept of what was
offered; and in order thereunto, sent his Lord Chamberlain, Lope de Albuquerque
to Castile, who returned to him with fresh Assurances, in the Month of January,
the King being then at Evora. Elizabeth the New Queen, sent some religious Men
to advise our King not to engage in an unjust War (as she termed it) and to
offer him another Joanna, Sister to her Husband Ferdinand, Alonso (...) War
with Castile in (...) of the (...).
in Marriage. He answered he was resolved to stand by his Niece, being obliged
to it, as an Uncle, as a King, and as a Gentleman.

3. Whilst he made Preparations for War, he sent an Ambassador to Ferdinand and
Elizabeth, to demand that Crown, who returning with such an Answer, as he had
expected; he immediately advances to Castile, by the way of Aronches, with 5600
Horse, and 14000 Foot. With this Army he came to Plasencia, and was there
joyfully received by many of the Nobility. There he found the true Queen, and
was contracted to her, those there present, and many absent, by Proxy, swore
Allegiance to him. The King then styled himself King of Castile, and Portugal,
and nothing was wanting for Bedding with the Queen, but the Dispensation from
Rome, which Ferdinand and Elizabeth, with all their might opposed. No sooner
was this known to the Castilian King and Queen, but they also took the style of
Castile and Portugul, and sent Forces to invade that Kingdom, which having made
some spoil returned without any opposition. Queen Joanna sent her Letters, to
all the Towns of Castile, exhorting them to return to her Obedience, since they
had twice sworn her lawful Heiress to the Crown. The King marched to Arevalo,
and thence to Toro, which City held for him, and the Castle he took by force.
Zamora was delivered to him, and thither he conducted his Bride. Thence they
returned to Toro, where Queen Joanna, Mother to the Bride, and Sister to the
Bridegroom, died on the 13. of June. Ferdinand and Elizabeth raised all the
Forces they could, and had now gathered together 12000 Horse, and 30000 Foot.
With this Force Ferdinand marched and encamped before Toro, where feigning
Friendship, he sent to advise King Alonso to depart, or to decide the matter by
single Combat; neither whereof, he well knew, could as circumstances stood be
accepted. However, Peter de Avendanho so cut off the Castillian's Provisions,
that he was forced to draw off his Army to Medina del Campo. Thither came
Elizabeth to Ferdinand, reproaching him, that he had not accepted of a single
Combat, on such terms as the Portuguese allowed of. But Money beginning now to
fail them, and they fearing to tax the People, had recourse to the Clergy, who
gave them half the Plate of the Churches.

4. Some Overtures of Peace were now made, (...)
but came not to any head. Our King marching to relieve Burg^s, was recalled by
the revolt of Zamora, which Elizabeth of Castile, laying hold of, gave out that
he fled, which drew many to her Party. The Portuguese now grew weary of being
abroad, and the King wanting Money, his Subjects refused to furnish him upon
that Account; so that all his Affairs went backwards. King Alonso thus
straightened, discharged many of his Army, and many more went away without
expecting a Discharge. The Governor of the Castles on the Bridge of Zamora,
being corrupted by Ferdinand and Elizabeth, some advised to build a Wall
betwixt them and the Town, and they would perish; but the Archbishop of Toledo,
and other great Men, persuaded the King to remove to Toro, leaving behind in
the Castle, all his Equipage, because he could not then Travel with so much
Baggage. Ferdinand immediately entered the City, and attacked the Castle, but
without success. King Alonso sent him a challenge, and he refused any single
Combat, for which he was again, severely reproved by his Wife Elizabeth; she
being fitter to have been Ferdinand, than he was to be Elizabeth. 1476.
In January the Prince of Portugal came to Toro, with some Troops, and was
there received with great joy, except by the Duke of Arevalo, and Marquis de
Villena, who began to incline to King Ferdinand. King Alonso however resolved
to put all to the issue of a Battle, tho the Archbishop of Toledo, of all the
Castilian Nobility that invited him, was the only Person that stood now by him.
Fifteen Days after the Princes arrival, King Alonso marched toward Zamora to
meet King Ferdinand, leaving his Queen behind at Toro. He attacked the Bridge,
but to no purpose. Overtures of Peace were again made without any likelihood of
success, for it was decreed, no Accommodation should be purchased without
Blood. King Alonso seeing he wasted his Army, lying before a Town in the dead
of Winter, his Enemy lying close, returned toward Toro, his Forces braving the
Castilians by the slowness of their March. Ferdinand ashamed to have been so
long dared, at length sallied out to fall upon the Rear of the Portuguese Army.
Alonso suspecting no such thing, was now marched down a Hill in great disorder,
as being at the Gates of his own City. It was debated among the Castilians,
whither they ought to pursue their Enemy, who they said fled, or return to
Zamora; but the Cardinal, Peter Gonzalez de Mendoza, having from the top of the
Hill, taken a view of the Portuguese Army, said it would be a shame to return
without bidding Battle, and thereupon their Army advanced.

5. King Alonso perceiving the approach of the Enemy, (...)
drew up his Army. In the Van he placed the Castilians, and his own Household.
He himself ^ed the main Body, Prince John the left Wing, and the Archbishop of
Toledo the Right. D. John de Castro, Earl of Monsanto brought up the Rear. The
Sun was now going down, and a small Rain began to fall when the t^o Armies
engaged. Prince John gave a vigorous Charge on his side, and was received with
no less Bravery, yet forced the Castilian Wing to retire to the main Body. At
the same time the King advanced before his Men, and the Fight was maintained on
both sides for the space of an hour before any gave Ground, both Reserves
coming up to second their Princes. The Portuguese, overpowered by the number
of their Enemies, began to forsake the Royal Standard, which was taken, after
both the bearer's Hands were cut off. King Alonso in despair would have cast
himself into the midst of his Enemies, if not dissuaded by some of his
Followers. The Portuguese Army route^.
In Conclusion, the King, and those Gentlemen that could bear him Company, fled
to Castro Nunho, where they were honorably received by Peter de Avendano the
Governor. Prince John, who had defeated the Enemy's Right Wing, seeing the
rout of the Army, with what Forces he could gather, stood firm on an Eminence,
where he continued all the day. Most of the other routed Portuguese cast
themselves into the River Duero, where more perished by Water than had done by
the Sword. King Ferdinand (who never loved Fighting) did not lead his Men, but
stood with a strong Party on a rising Ground, to secure his own Escape, in case
of need, and seeing his Right Wing drove by Prince John, and the main Body hard
put to by King Alonso, he with that Body of Guards hasted away toward Zamora,
without expecting to see the Event of the Battle. Thus he came at Night to
Zamora in a Consternation, not knowing whether he was Victorious, or defeated.
Such was his Cowardice and Precipitation.

6. The Prince continued all the Night on that Eminence, (...)
we have already mentioned, by sound of Trumpets, and the light of Fires
calling together the Remains of the scattered Army. In the Morning, when he
expected to have been charged by the Castil^ans, it appeared they were gone
after the King to Z^mora; whereupon he marched away in good Order, with Colors
flying* to Toro. Finding no News of his Father there, all was in great
Confusion* ^ill Advice was brought him where (...) was. They met, and together
received a courteous Message from King Ferdinand, who sent the King all his
Equipage which he had taken in the Castle of Zamora. The Archbishop of Toledo,
who only of all the Castilian Nobility adhered to the Portuguese, asked leave
now to depart to defend his own Lands, which were wasted by King Ferdinand's
Commanders. The Bishop of Evora with his Troops was sent to Conduct him on his
way; who being come back, returned with the Prince to Portugal, to defend the
Frontiers, then much infested by the Enemy. King Alonso had sent D. Alvaro de
Atayde from Toro into France, designing to follow in Person, and crave Succor
for carrying on the War, in case this Ambassador found a favorable Reception.
King Lewis entertained D. Alvaro with such feigned Friendship, that he easily
persuaded the King his Master to go over into France. The King having resolved
upon that Journey, after settling the Government of those few Places he held in
Castile, about the beginning of June set forward for Portugal, carrying with
him his Bride, that should have been Queen, Joanna, now spoiled of her Crown.
Being come to Miranda, (...) Alonso Sa^^s into ^^ance.
she went away to the City Guarda, and he to Porto, where he intended to Embark
for France. Thither repaired the Prince, Nobility, and Clergy, dissuading him
from that Voyage, but he was not to be moved from that Resolution. He set Sail
with 21 Vessels of several sort, and in them 500 Gentlemen, and 2200 Men at
Arms. By the way he touched at Ceuta, next at Marseilles, and landed at
Colivre, where he was received with Respect by the Governor. At Perpignan, in
Honor to him, the Prison-Gates were set open. Thence he sent D. Francisco de
Almeyda to King Lewis, to appoint the Place where they should meet; and great
Honor was shown him all the way he traveled through that Country.

7. At Bourges King Lewis met him, (...)
and extraordinary Civilities passed between them. They agreed, that King
Alonso should go to the Duke of Burgundy his Cousin, to crave Aid of him, or in
case he could not grant it, by reason of the War he was engaged in with
^orrain, then to persuade him not to molest King Lewis, whilst he assisted King
Alonso. That to make the King's Title undeniable, the Pope's Dispensation
should be immediately obtained, for him to Marry Queen Joanna, true Heiress of
Castile. That each of them should appoint four Persons to adjust what Army and
Treasure was requisite for carrying on their Design. King Lewis readily offered
a good Sum of Money to Bribe all such Governors of Towns, as could by that
means be drawn to their Party. Ambassadors were immediately dispatched to Rome
to obtain the Dispensation, and King Alonso set out to meet the Duke of
Burgundy, who then lay at the Siege of Nancy in Lorrain. They met upon the
River, then frozen over, and the King being conducted to the Army with all
possible marks of Honor and Respect; the Duke there showed him, how little
Confidence was to be reposed in the Promises of the King of France, who the
next day appeared with an Army in favor of the Lorrainer. The day after, the
Burgundian was killed, and King Lewis being bent upon the Conquest of Burgundy,
sent King Alonso to Paris, where he was received with the greatest Magnificence
imaginable. All, the Ambassadors could obtain of the Pope, was, that if the
King of France would furnish King Alonso with a sufficient Force to reduce
Castile, he would then grant the Dispensation. Hereupon the two Kings met at
Arras, where Alonso plainly discovered he could repose no Trust in Lewis. He
went away to Roan, and there spent a great part of the Summer, waiting till his
Fleet was fitted out to return home. He went down the River to his Fleet, then
at Harfleur, but fearing to be stayed by the King of France, and ashamed to
return home after that unfortunate Journey, K. Alon^^ resolves (...) his (...)
at Jerusalem.
he resolved to go spend the rest of his Days in Jerusalem. On the 24th. of
September before Day, he went out to a Chapel near the City, with only four
Servants, having ordered his Chaplain, Stephen Martinez, to expect him half a
League further. There he dismissed one of the four, giving him the Key of a
Cabinet, in which were found four Letters; one for the King of France, giving
him an Account of his Design, and desiring him to favor those Servants he left
in his Kingdom. Another for Prince John his Son, charging him upon his Blessing
immediately to cause himself to be Proclaimed King. Another to the Kingdom in
general, Commanding the People to receive him as such. The last was to those
left at Harfleur, directing them to be Obedient to the Earl of Fa^^* till their
return to Portugal.

8. Monsieur de Labret, by the King of France his Order, attended upon King
Alonso, who sent out every way to find him, and having met with him the second
day, stopped him, but with all imaginable Respect. There he received a Letter
from King Lewis, by which he was persuaded to alter his Resolution, and to
return to Portugal, where, on the Tenth of November his Son was Proclaimed King
in the Town of Santarem, (...)
pursuant to the Letters he had sent to that effect. Only four days had he worn
the Crown, when his Father arrived, and he in Confusion asking, how he should
receive him? The Duke of Braganza answered, As your Father, and as your King.
The Prince accordingly met him at Oeyras, where kneeling he kissed his ^ands,
and resigned the Government up (...) Alonso would have contented himself with
the (...) of King Algarve, but the Prince persisted he would accept of nothing
during his Life. Whilst the King was abroad, Queen Elizabeth laid Siege to
Toro, which was bravely defended, till one Bartholomew, a Shepherd, discovered
to the Castilian Generals a Place, which being thought unaccessible, was left
unguarded. Wherefore Six Hundred Men in the Night, conducted by the Shepherd,
surmoun^ed all those difficult Passes, and got into the Town. The Count de
Marialva, who was Governor, quitting the Castle, fled to Castro Nunho, yet the
Lady Mary Sarmiento, Widow of John de Vlloa, who had been Constable of that
Fort, defended that Place, till seeing no hopes of Relief, she was obliged to
surrender it upon most Honorable Articles. Presently after, Queen Elizabeth
caused the other Places that held for Portugal, to be besieged, and had them
surrendered to her. In the mean while the Portuguese Forces wasted the Country
about Bad^^oz and Cuidad Rodrigo; and Alonso de Car^^^as, Master of Santiago,
did the same on the Portuguese Borders, both Parties executing the utmost
Cruel^^es usual in War.

9. Upon the return of King Alonso out of France, 14^3.
the War was revived, (...)
and he thought of Marrying the Lady Joanna, having obtained a Dispensation;
but Prince John his Son used his utmost Endeavors to obstruct it. The Bishop
of Evora going into Castile with 700 Horse, and (...) Number of Foot, to assist
the Countess of M^^ellin, (...) followed the Portugu^se Interest, was met by
the Master of Santiago, routed, and taken Prisoner, yet bribing his Keeper, he
escaped to Merida, and ever after did the Castilians much harm, till the Peace
was concluded. Both Parties being sufficiently exhausted, easily condescended
to Treat of a Peace, which was concluded at Alcacovas on the Fourth of
September, 1479.
excluding the unfortunate Princess Joanna, Peace concluded betwixt the two
Crowns
who against her will was forced to become a Nun. Yet she lived to see God's
Judgments fall upon them that drove her to that Necessity; for Prince John, who
hoped to Marry his Son to the Princess Elizabeth of Castile, and by that means
to make him Heir to that Crown, saw that same Son dragged to Death by a Horse,
and none of his Race ascended the Throne of Portugal. King Ferdinand and Queen
Elizabeth outlived their only Son John, and had only a Daughter left, who
conveyed that Crown to the House of Austria. 1480.
Nor was the Plague, that began the following Year at Lisbon, and lasted
Fourteen Years, less to be accounted of than Heavenly Vengeance. The
Castilians, contrary to the last Articles of Peace, sent a Fleet to Trade on
the Coast of Guinea. Our King sent a Squadron, under the Command of George
Correa, to obstruct them. 1481.
He met with 30 Ships of Castile upon the Coast called Mina, and after a sharp
Engagement, obtained a complete Victory, bringing several of them to Lisbon.

10. King Alonso, ever since the Lady Joanna of Castile was constrained to take
upon her a Religious Habit, fell into an extraordinary Melancholy, and had
resolved himself to turn a Monk; but returning from acquainting his Son with
his Design to Cintra, he there fell sick of a violent Fever, which in a few
days carried him off. His Death was upon the Eighth of August, The Death of
King Alonso.
in the 49th. Year of his Age, and 43d. of his Reign. He was o^ a Graceful
Presence, somewhat bulky, had a thick Beard, his Hair dark-brown, and of
Condition extremely courteous. In War he was active* in Peace negligent* a
Lover of Learning, learned himself, and was the first King that collected a
Library in the Palace. It was said of him, That he was a better Man than a
King; and on the contrary of his Son, That he was a better King than a Man. He
was Bountiful to Prodigality, temperate in Eating and Sleeping, and of such
Continence, that becoming a Widower at (...) Years of Age, he is said never
after to have known Woman. His Issue.
His Lawful Issue, and he had no other, was, first, John, who died in his
Infancy. Secondly, Joanna, who being contracted to several Princes, they all
died before she could be married, and she became a Dominican Nun at Aveyro.
Thirdly, John, who succeeded his Father.

11. The Discoveries in this King's Reign were as follows: Discoveries during
his Reign.
Nunho Tristan, and Antony Gonzalez sailed as far as Cape Blanco, in 20 Degrees
of North Latitude, whence they brought some Moors, and also Blacks, then a
Rarity in Spain. Nunho returned, and proceeded as far as the Islands of Arguin.
Lanzarote and Yanez found the Island of Garcas, whence they brought 200 Slaves.
Antony Gonzalez returning, pierced as far as the Island Tider: Alvaro Fernandez
discovered Cape Matos, and going 100 Leagues farther, slew the Lord of that
Country. Gonzalo de Sintra at Angra lost six Men, which was the first Loss
sustained in these Discoveries. Denis Fernandez reached as far as the River
Sanaga, in 16 Degrees of North Latitude, and discovered the Islands of Cabo
Verde, Buenavista, Santiago, and S. Philip. Vincent de Lagos, and Lewis
Cadamusto, a Gen^ese, found the Islands Terceras, being Eleven in number. The
Islands of S. Thomas and Principe, the Kingdom of Beni, as far as Cape
Catherine, and Sierra Leona, were also discovered. John de Santarem, and John
de Escobar, found the Country called Mina. Ferdinand Po, that which bears his
Name. The Islands Azores were now first known, so called from the many Hawks
seen there, and are Nine in number, lying due West of the Rock of Sintra. In
one of these, on the top of a Mountain, called Del Cuervo, or of the Crow, was
found a Statue of a Man on Horseback, his Head bare, his Left Hand on the
Horse's Main, the Right pointing to the West: It stood upon a stone Pedestal,
which, together with the whole Statue, was all of one piece, and under it were
certain Characters cut in the Rock, but could never be understood.

CHAP. VII.
The First Part of the Life and Reign of John, the Second of the Name; and
Thirteenth King of Portugal; from the Year of our Lord 1455. till 1491.
1. IN the renowned City Lisbon, Birth of King John the Second.
on the Third of May, 1455. was born the most excellent Prince John the Second,
King of Portugal, surnamed the Perfect and the Great. 1455.
He was baptized in the Cathedral, with the greatest pomp and solemnity, that
had till then been seen. This Prince was educated and instructed in all Arts,
that can accomplish a Person of that Character. This, and his personal Worth,
moved King Henry the 4th. of Castile, to propose a Match between him and his
only Daughter, the Lady Joanna. However the King his Father, gave him to Wife,
the Lady Ellenor of Lancaster, eldest Daughter to his Brother Ferdinand; having
obtained the Pope's Dispensation for it, and they were accordingly married on
the 22th. of January, 1470. 1470.
Soon after his Marriage, the King preparing for his Voyage into Africa, the
Prince asked, and obtained leave of him, to bear him company, where he behaved
himself with such bravery, that his Father Knighted him in the M^sque of
Arzila, then converted into a Christian Church, on the 24th. of August, 1471.
147^.
Alonso the Prince's only Son being born on the 18th. of May, at such time as
King Alonso, was marching into Castile, to marry the Lady Joanna, 1475.
rightful Heiress of that Crown; he ordained, that in case he had Issue by her,
and his Son should die before him, then his Grandson should be sworn his Heir,
which was done, and Prince John was left to govern the Kingdom. 1476.
How he marched with Forces to the assistance of his Father, then at Toro in
Castile; and how he behaved himself in the Battle between that Place, and
Zamora, has been said in the Life of that King. 1477.
Upon his return into Portugal, he recovered Alegret^, taken by the Castilians.
Having been, as was said in the last Chapter, proclaimed King in his Father's
life time, and by his order; upon his return out of France, he restored to him
the Regal Authority, by the advice of the Duke of Braganca, and yet he thought
to have put that great Man to Death afterward upon that same Account.

2. King Alonso having revived the War with Castile, 1478.
Lope Vaz de Castel-Branco, seized the Town of Moura, and called himself Earl
thereof. The Prince resenting this Insolence, sent Six Men, who being admitted
into his company, slew him as he was Hunting; which done, the Prince secured
the Town, and gave it to the Princess Beatrix, his Mother-in-Law, to whom it
property appertained. The King lying on his Death Bed at Sintra, the Prince
hasted thither to see him, and his Father dying on the Three and twentieth of
August, 1481.
he was the second time proclaimed King the last Day of that Month. King John
proclaimed.
Nunho Pereyra immediately upon the New King's Acession to the Crown, presented
him with a Note he had given him under his Hand, in his Minority, promising to
make him an Earl whenever he ascended the Throne. The King considering he had
obtained that Note in his Infancy, when he had not judgment to know on whom he
ought to bestow Honors, tore it, telling him, it was a sufficient Favor he
did not punish him for having used sinister means to obtain it. He had resolved
to build a Town and Fort on the Coast of Africa, called Mina; to this purpose
he fitted out a Fleet, commanded by James de Azambuja, who had with him 500
fighting Men, and 100 Masons, with all materials for the Work, so fitted, that
at their landing there was nothing to do, but to put them together. Azambuja
landing, caused Mass to be said on the Shore under a Tree, Fort of St. George*
on the Coast of Afric^^, (...).
whither the King called Caramansa, came to him, with a great Retinue, and was
converted. The Fort was built, and called S. George; which done, Azambuja sent
home his Carave^s with a great quantity of Gold.

3. Before this Fleet sailed, the Cortes or Parliament had met at Ebora, where
the Form of Obligation, that Lords and Governors of Places were to enter into
with the King, was settled, because till then the Nobility and Commanders
exercised a despotick Power in their Juridi^cions independent of the Kings, and
by their tyrannied Proceedings were grown burdensome to the People, and
dangerous to the Sovereign, who had little more left him but the Name. King
John being now at Peace abroad, ordered that no Lord should exercise a judicial
Power in Cases Criminal. This pleased the People, but made him odious to the
Nobility. Soon after, he made a Law, That his Judges, and other Officers of
Justice, should execute their employments throughout all the Territories of
great Men that pretended exemption from them. All the Grandees opposed these
New Ordinances; but the King was not so jealous of any, as of Ferdinand Duke of
Braganca, a Servant of whom presented to the King certain Letters from the King
of Castile to the said Duke, which much increased the King's suspicion, 1482.
and caused him to decree his Death. In the mean while, The Plague at Lisbon.
the Plague beginning to diffuse it self at Lisbon, King John removed his Court
to Monte-Mayor, a more healthy Place. An Ambassador was sent into England, to
confirm the established Friendship with that King. Another was also dispatched
to Castile, about concluding the Match designed betwixt Prince Alonso of
Portugal, and the Princess Elizabeth of Castile, which was not effected till
afterward Ambassadors came thence to Portugal on that Account. By his
Ambassadors that had been in Castile, the King had farther information
concerning the Duke of Braganca his holding Correspondence with that King. The
Duke was warned by the King to forbear any farther proceeding in that
Correspondence; yet he desisted not, but on the contrary, proposed to
unnaturalize himself, in order to be at liberty to withstand his Sovereign. The
King understanding that the Duke accompanied his Son Prince Alonso in his
Journey from Moura to Evora, he resolved to apprehend him. After the Solemnity
of the Princes Reception was over, the Duke coming to take his leave of the
King, was, by his order, secured.

4. The Duke being now in Custody, the King called his Council, and laid before
them the Copies of his Letters of Correspondence with Castile. Judges were
appointed for his Trial, before whom he appeared twice, but refused to come the
third time. The Duke of Braganca beheaded for High Treason
They thereupon past Sentence of Death upon him, which was publicly executed
upon a Scaffold, by severing his Head from his Body. D. Alvaro de Portugal, one
of the Duke's Brothers, was banished, and found such Favor in Castile, that he
was made President of the Council. The Marquis of Monte-Mayor, his other
Brother, having made his escape, was executed in Effigy. This done, the King
and Queen took a Progress through the Provinces betwixt Duero and Minho, and
behind the Mountains. In February they returned to Santarem, 1484.
where they found the Death of the Duke of Braganca, instead of security to
them, The Duke of Viseo, Conspires against the King's Life.
was like to produce greater danger. The Duke of Viseo, Brother to the Queen,
had conspired to Murder the King, in hopes to Succeed him; as he would have
done, had he not endeavored to anticipate the time. His Associates were, the
Bishop of Evora, and several other Persons of Note. This Treason was discovered
to the King by Antony de Faria, who had it from James Tinoco, Brother to a
Servant-Maid of the Bishop, that gave him the first information. James Tinoco
gave the King a particular Account of the Design, but found not entire Credit,
till D. Vasco Coutino confirmed all he had said. Three times the King escaped
the Danger, being provided against it since the information given him; and yet
none of the Conspirators perceived he knew any thing of it. On the 22d. of
August being at Setuval, he sent for the Duke; and having taken him aside,
asked of him, what he would do to the Man that designed to kill him. The Duke
answered, The Duke stabbed by the King.
I would kill him first if I could. Then replied the King, You have given
judgment against your self. At the same Instant he stabbed him, so that he fell
down dead at his Feet.

5. Late at Night Proclamation was made for apprehending the rest of the
Conspirators, The other Conspirators punished.
and the next Morning the Duke's Carcass was exposed to public view upon the
Scaffold. Most of the Traitors were apprehended. The Bishop of Evora being put
into a Cestern, was there eaten alive by Worms. His Brother Ferdinand was
beheaded; the same end had Peter de Albuquerque. D. Gutiere Coutino died in
Prison, and D. Alvaro de Atayde fled to Castile, and was afterward pardoned by
King Emanuel. The Count de Pena-Macor died at Sevil, and Ferdinand de Sylveyra
was killed in France. D. Vasco Coutinho, one of the discoverers, for his
loyalty was created an Earl; and Tinoco the other, being of less Quality, had
5000 Crowns down given him, and a Church Revenue worth 1500 a Year* This done,
the King bestowed all that had belonged to the Duke of Viseo upon his Brother
Emanuel, and with it the hopes of Succeeding to the Crown, as also, of the
Empire of Asia; for at this time, Burtholomew Diaz, by the King's order,
discovered the Cape of Good Hope, which he then called Tormentoso, or Stormy,
because of the ill Weather he met with there.

6. Whilst these things passed in Portugal, the City S. George in Guinea
increased, and the Christian Religion diffused it self; whereupon the King,
this Year, first styled himself Lord of Guinea. 1485.
Several sorts of new Coin, King John styles himself Lord of Guinea.
as well of Gold and Silver, as of Copper, were now also spread abroad in
Portugal. The King had sent D. Peter de Noronha his Ambassador to Rome, to pay
his Obedience to the Pope, and obtain of him the Croisade, in order to
prosecute his Conquests in Africa, for which he made Preparations throughout
the Kingdom. 1486.
Four Venetian Galleys being taken by the French, and the Men put ashore almost
naked at Cascaes, the King not only relieved them with Clothes, and other
Necessaries, but gave them such a Sum of Money, as redeemed their Galleys,
wherewith they returned home. Whereupon that Republic sent a Solemn Embassy,
with Presents, to return him Thanks for that extraordinary Act of Hospitality.
Azamor in Africa submits to the King.
The Town of Azamor in Africa sent this Year to submit it self to our King, and
was taken into Protection. The way to India by Sea beginning to be laid open,
after the Discovery of the Cape of Good Hope, the King sent Alonso de Payva,
and John de Cubillan, to take a Journey into India by Land. Others followed
them; but the particulars of those Actions belong to the Portuguese Asia, where
they may be found. The Catholic King and Queen falling short of Ammunition at
the Siege of Granada, sent to desire a Supply of King John, which was speedily
and plentifully conveyed to them. John Alonso de Aveyro discovered the Coast of
Beni, and brought thence the first Pepper that was ever brought from those
Parts; as also an Ambassador from that King, who was honorably entertained,
and sent back loaded with Presents. James de Almeyda, a Knight of Malta,
Sailing for Africa with 30 Sail, in which were 1500 Horse, and 1000 Foot; and
being put by his Port, landed near the City Anafe, where encountering a
multitude of Moors, he killed 900, and carried away 400 Prisoners. The King
improved this Accident, by giving out he had chastised those Moors for their
Disobedience to their Prince M^ley Bel^abe, which that Prince believed, and
ever accounted himself much obliged to King John.

7. Barraxe, a Valiant Moor, with a Party of 400 Horse, and as many Foot, took
a great Booty about Tangier; but the Governor of that Place, D. John de
Meneses, instantly pursued him, took him Prisoner, and recovered all the Prey.
The Jews, who in great Numbers lived in Castile, seeing themselves condemned to
the Flames* by the erecting the Inquisition in that Country, The Jews fly out
of Castile into Portugal.
swarmed into Portugal. King John at first entertained them; but afterward
being sensible of their wicked Practices, for that pretending to be Christians,
they ceased not to Judaize, he sent out his Officers, who burnt some, chastised
others, and filled all the Prisons with them. This made many of them fly over
into Africa, where they professed themselves openly Jews; whereupon the King
forbid any more passing over thither, upon pain of Death; giving them Liberty,
at the same time, to remove to any Christian Country. But though it happened some
Years latter, let us here relate what was done in this case. In the Year 1492.
vast multitudes of Jews came out of Castile into Portugal, engaging to pay the
King a certain number of Ducats for each Head, and only desiring to be
permitted to pass through the Kingdom. Eight Months were allotted them to stay,
and certain Ports assigned them to Embark. The Term expiring, many went over to
the Coast of Fez, where they were plundered and abused by the Moors, having
been little better treated by the Portuguese. Many returned to Castile,
pretending they were converted, and many stayed in Portugal under the same
color. The King, the following Year, finding them obstinate in their wicked
Practices, made all that could be found Slaves; and taking their Children away,
sent them to the Island of S. Thomas, to be there brought up Christians. Thus
the Jews came first to mix their Race with that of the Ancient Portuguese.

8. The King, notwithstanding it was a time of Peace, ceased not to lay up
Magazines in all his Garrisons, 1488.
and fortified the Town of Olivenca, which alarmed the King and Queen of
Castile; but he satisfied them, and went on with what he had begun. In Africa,
D. Vasco Coutinho, Earl of Borba, with only 70 Horse, defeated 450 Moors, and
took their Commander, who lay in wait to have surprised him. Upon the receipt
of this News, the King sent over 150 Horse, and some Foot, to encourage his
Forces there. They passed the Bridge of Alcacerquibir, that had never before
been passed by the Portuguese, and returned with Slaves and Cattle. In the
Month of October arrived at Lisbon, Bemoy, an African King* (...) into Portugal.
Bemoy, King of Jalof in Africa, who being expelled his Kingdom, came to ask
Succors for recovering of it. He had Audience of the King at Setuval, and
having proposed the Motive of his coming, was answered, That nothing could
obstruct the assisting him, but his being an Infidel; for that it was not
allowed Christian Princes to give Aid to Pagans. He replied, he was ready to
receive the Faith, and only sorry that it might be thought he was moved to it
by any Temporal Interest. On the Third of November, he, and six of his
principal Followers, were baptized; the King, Prince, and Duke Emanuel being
Godfathers. On the seventh the King Knighted him, and gave him for his Arms,
Gules, a Cross, Or, within an Orle of Portugal. Next, he did Homage to the
King, and promised Obedience to the Pope. This done, the King sent him home
with 20 Caravels well manned and provided, under the Command of Peter Vaz da
Cunha, with Orders to erect a Fort at the Mouth of the River Zanaga. He is
(...) Peter (...).
This Expedition succeeded not, for Cunha fearing to venture himself in that
unhealthy Country, murdered the unfortunate Bemoy, and so returned home with
the Fleet, and the King unjustly connived at this Villainy.

9. At the beginning of the Year the King went into Algarve, (...)
and thence sent over some Forces, with Masons and Materials, to build a Fort
at the Mouth of the River Larache, ordering it to be called Graciosa. Muley,
King of Fez, in whose Territory it was, understanding how the Work advanced,
set down before it with 40000 Horse, and a vast multitude of Foot. King John
sent Succors to the besieged, but all too weak to withstand so great a Force.
He thought of going over in Person, but the Moors offering to suffer the
Christians to depart, the offer was accepted, and the Place abandoned, Barraxe
that Moor who had been taken Prisoner by D. Vasco Coutinho, being ransomed, now
held Correspondence with a Gentleman, called Lope Sanchez, about betraying the
City Ceuta to him. Sanchez held him in hand, and gave Advice to the King, who
sent to secure that Place 50 Sail from Algarve, well manned and stored, under
the Command of D. Ferdinand de Meneses. He and his Brother Antony, that was
before at Ceuta, marched out with 150 Horse, and 1000 Foot, and falling upon
the Town of Targa, easily took it, as being abandoned. The Town they utterly
destroyed, took some Ships, Cannon, and Ammunition, and released some Christian
Captives. This Action cost not one drop of Blood. D. Ferdinand marched away to
Alcacar, and joining with the Governors of that Place and Tangier, he again
set out with 400 Horse, and 1200 Foot, toward Camice, which the Moors call the
Enchanted, because it was thought inaccessible, standing upon a craggy Hill.
Now the Enchantment ceased, for the Place was taken by Assault, and razed down
to the Ground, 400 of the Defendants, who hid themselves in the Mountain, being
put to the Sword. But this Victory was not so cheaply purchased as the other,
for it cost the Lives of 70 Men.

10. Prince Alonso was now going into his Fifteenth Year, 1490.
an Age fit to Marry, and he was already contracted to the Princess Elizabeth,
Eldest Daughter to King Ferdinand and Queen Elizabeth of Castile. The News of
her being affianced to him by Proxy at Sevil, being brought to Evora, where the
King then was, that City was filled with all public Demonstrations of Joy.
From thence soon after it was diffused throughout the whole Kingdom. The Plague
in Portugal.
The Plague then raging a Lisbon, and spreading as far as Evora, as also the
News brought of the Death of the Princess Joanna, the King's Sister, in the
Monastery at Aveyro, might have been looked upon as ill Omens forboding the
evil Success of this Marriage. The public Joy was turned for some time into
Mourning, but soon after resumed again. Nor did the Preparations for the
Wedding cease all that time, and they were the greatest that had ever been seen
in Portugal. The Palace at Evora being thought too little to Entertain the
Bride, Prince Alonso marries Elizabeth, Daughter to the King and Quein of
Castile and Aragon.
was much enlarged. On the 22d. of November the Bride was brought to the
Borders of the two Kingdoms, and on the Bridge of the River Caya, the Cardinal
D. Gonzalo Perez de Mend^ca, Archbishop of Toledo, delivered her to Emanuel,
Duke of Beja, sent to receive her. Betwixt E^vas and Estremoz the King and
Prince met her. At the Church of our Lady of Espineiro, which is without the
Walls of E^ora, they were married by the Archbishop of Braga, and in that
Monastery the Prince bedded her. November the 27th. they made their Solemn
Public Entry into the City, with such Grandeur, as is not easily to be
expressed, no more than can the infinite Rarities that were served up that
Night at Supper. Besides the Balls, Music, and other extraordinary
Divertisements, the King appointed a Solemn Tilting, in which he deservedly
carried away the Honor from all that ran. In May the King, Queen, and Princes
removed to Santarem, the Divertisements never ceasing, 149^.
till upon Tuesday the 12th. of July, The Prince killed by (...) fall of his
Horse.
the Prince riding abroad after Dinner, and being upon a Full-speed, his Horse
fell upon and Mortally bruised him. He was past all Remedy, and died the next
day at the same hour he had fallen. Thus was that Scene of Joy converted into a
horrid Spectacle of Sadness. The Prince was magnificently Interred in the
Church of Batalla. The Princess was sent back to Castile all clad in the
deepest Mourning, and in a Horse-Litter covered with Sackcloath.

CHAP. VIII.
The remaining Part of the Life and Reign of King John, the Second of the Name,
and Thirteenth King of Portugal; from the Year 1492, till 1495.
1. ON the 25th. of May, 1492. 1492
King John laid the Foundation of the Magnificent Church and Hospital of
All Saints in the beautifullest Square, or Marketplace of Lisbon, scattering
some Money under the first Stones laid, having obtained leave of the Pope to
incorporate all other Hospitals into this. The French, then at Peace with
Portugal, had taken a Caravel bringing Gold from Guinea; whereupon the King
seized all the Vessels of that Kingdom within his Ports, which caused the
Caravel to be restored untouched. King John in the Year 1485 had sent James
Cano with a Fleet to Guinea. Further D^s^^veries in Guinea.
He came to an Anchor at the Mouth of the River Manicongo; lying in Seven
Degrees of South Latitude, and understanding that King was far off in the
Inland Parts, he sent some Portuguese to him with a Present, who not
returning, he seized some Blacks, and brought them away to Portugal, assuring
the People they should be restored; whereupon King John sent them back loaded
with Gifts, which so obliged the Black King, that he said, That must be the
true God, whom a Prince of so much Honor adored. He sent an Ambassador to him,
offering Submission to his Authority, and desiring Priests to Instruct the
People, and Workmen to build Churches, and a Fleet returned with all that had
been desired. The King and a great number of his Subjects were baptized, as
also the Queen and Prince. The King soon fell off again, because Christianity
obliged him to adhere to only one Wife, and therefore he resolved to declare
his Second Son, Panso Aquitimo, who continued an Idolater, his Heir. Alonso,
the eldest Brother, the Lawful Heir, and a Christian, was absent when his
Father died, but hasting to Court, was proclaimed King. His Brother Aquitimo
thought to surprise him, but failed; for his great Army was overthrown by a
handful of Portuguese and Blacks that followed Alonso. Many of the Prisoners
declared they were overthrown by a glittering Army, led by a Commander that
carried a white Cross. Alonso being secured in his Throne, became the Apostle
of that People, in which good Work most of his Successors have followed his
Example.

2. In the Month of March, 1493.
Christopher Columbus, after discovering the Islands of America, Columbus after
discovering of America, ^^rives at Lisbon.
entered the Port of Lisbon, to Revenge himself, by showing what he had found,
to King John, who had before rejected him when he came to offer his Service,
and whom he thought it would now grieve to see what he had lost. Some Gentlemen
offered the King to Murder him, which he not only refused, but calling Columbus
to him, honored and made him Presents. This Discovery alarmed all Spain, the
Castilians fearing to be disturbed in their Conquests there, and the Portuguese
pretending it appertained to them. Many Messengers and Ambassadors passed
between the two Kings, Spain and Portugal divide the World (...) them
at last, their Ministers meeting at Tordesillas, divided the World betwixt
them. To the Portuguese was allotted from 370 Leagues to the Westward of Cabo
Verd^, all to the Eastward; and all to the West from that Place, to the
Castilians, drawing a Line there from North to South, so that commencing from
that Point, one half of the Globe remained to each Crown. Many Persons of Note
came about this time from Foreign Parts to see, and some to serve King John.
Among them was a French Prince, whom the Portuguese call Monsieur de Lion, who
offered to serve in Africa with 300 Horse at his own cost. The King of Naples
also sent his Ambassador with Rich Presents.

3. This Year and part of the next the King spent in taking a Progress through
his Kingdom, 14^4.
and settling the Affairs of greatest Importance, for being grown sickly, he
could not apply himself to Business of less moment. He also fitted out the
Ships in the River of Lisbon, that were to Sail to discover the way to India by
the Ocean, and gave the Command of them to Vasco de Gama, with Instructions how
to proceed. His Distemper increased, and not only cost him his Life, but laid a
lasting stain upon the Good Name of his Subjects. Some of those who designed to
have murdered him by the Sword, King John poisoned.
now executed their Design with Poison. A Woman, held in Esteem for her
Sanctity, warned him to have a care of Poison, which nevertheless he drank out
of a Spring near Evora, which Water he liked best. That this was true, appeared
by that two Gentlemen, who drank with him at the same time, died as well as he.
His Distemper seemed to turn to a Dropsy, and the Physicians advised him to go
to the hot Baths at Alvor in Algarve. One of them opposed the rest, affirming,
this would shorten his Days, but he was a Jew, and therefore found no Credit.
The King fell into a Flux, which being stopped, he became wholly Lethargick.
Coming a little to himself, he asked, how the Tide was; and being told, said,
he should die within two hours. (...)
Just at Sun setting he gave up the Ghost on the 25th. of October. (...)
Being sensible he must die, he commanded the Plate furnished by the Churches
for the late Wars, to be restored. He ordered Duke Emanuel should Succeed him,
having first used all possible means to leave the Crown to his Bastard-Son
George, which was the greatest Act of Injustice he was (...) indeed that could
be. Having (...) the Queen, Princess Beatrix, and the Clergy in his Life time,
he now begged Pardon of them.

4. Though the King earnestly desired to see Duke Emanuel before his Death, he
could not compass it, some Persons persuading that Prince, his Design was to
kill him. There was a small Box, whereof he always kept the Key, which was
generally supposed to contain nothing but Poison: (...) Saint
But this Box being opened after his Death, there was found in it a Book of
Instructions for to make a good Confession, a Hair-cloath, and a Discipline
stained with Blood. Hence the People took occasion (...) call him a Saint, as
many before accounted him a Tyrant. In his Will the King ordered 3000 Masses
should be said for his Soul, that 41 Orphans should be married, that the like
number of Captives should be redeemed, that the great ^ospital of Lisbon should
be finished, that half the Plate taken from Churches by his Father for the War
against Castile, should be restored, that Duke Emanuel should Succeed him in
the Throne, that his Bastard-Son George should have the City Coimbra, with all
the Royalties wherewith Prince Peter had it before, that in case Duke Emanuel
died without Issue, the aforesaid George should Inherit the Crown, and that
none of the Persons banished the Kingdom by him, should be restored. After his
Death he had the Commendations of his very Enemies. His Body was conducted with
great State from the Cathedral of Silves to the Monastery of Batalla, where it
is said to have been found long after uncorrupted, which increased the Opinion
of his Sanctity. He married his Cousin-German, Ellenor, Daughter to Prince
Ferdinand, Duke of Viseo, and the Lady Beatrix, Daughter to Prince John. She
was a Princess endued with singular Beauty, Wit, and Virtue, and lies buried in
the Monastery of the Mother of God at Lisbon, founded by her self, in the
Cloister among the Nuns is her Grave, without any distinction.

5. Let us now give some Specimen of the many Virtues that adorned this King.
(...) Virtues
First, for his great Zeal in Matters of Religion, Pope Innocent VII. publicly
called him* The Eldest Son of the Church. Daily he performed several Devotions
upon his bare Knees, and in the Holy Week spent whole Nights in mourning before
the Sepulcher. He forbid the use of Mules, and because the Clergy said, they
would have recourse to the Pope on that account, he made it Death for any Body
to (...) them, and so that Dispute (...) Justice was such, that he rewarded
some Judges, before whom he was Cast in Law Suits; and hearing a Man was
condemned to Death, who had been Fourteen Years in Prison, he pardoned him,
saying, They better deserved to die, who had kept him so long, to Condemn him
at last. Few ever exceeded him in Liberality and Gratitude, for having borrowed
1500 Ducats of Peter Pantoja, and kept them but five days, he then sent him his
Money, and 250 Ducats for the Use of it. Pantoja complaining that the Interest
was too great, he ordered him as much more, and said, He would do so as often
as he complained. James Fernandez Correa, his Factor in Flanders, having lent
Maximilian the King of the Romans 30000 Ducats without his Order, he sent him
Thanks for so doing, and gave him 1000 Crowns. Edward del Casal, a Man of
Worth, having employed another to beg some Favor for him, the King seeing him,
said, Since you have Hands to serve me with, why have not you a Tongue to speak
to me?

6. There was nothing that daunted him, More of his good Qualities.
in so much that others fearing to go aboard the Fleet, because of the Plague,
he went himself, and is said to have spoke unconcerned with the Ghost of a
Gentleman that was dead, and came to warn him of the Conspiracy of the Duke of
Viseo. Favorites he never had any, and was such an Enemy to those sort of
Ministers, that the Cardinal George da Costa, who had entire influence over his
Father, fled to Rome before his Accession to the Crown. None that deserved
well, passed unrewarded, for he carried about him a Table Book, in which were
the Names and Services of all those that merited of him. All Men had access to
him, their Business was heard and answered. Truth was so much admired by him,
that he made D. John de Meneses his Lord Steward, only because he said, He
always spoke the Truth, (...) it were displeasing to him. As for Learning, he
understood Philosophy, was skilled in Mathematics, well versed in History, and
a great admirer of Poetry. Though his Countenance represented much of Gravity,
and his Carriage had much of Majesty, yet at times he was pleasant and
facetious. To conclude, his Government was inferior to none of the best Kings
that preceded him, and may be a Pattern to all those that come after him.
Scarce any excelled him in all sorts of Virtues, and for his Zeal to Religion,
he was the first that propagated it in the Torrid Zone. In short, he was a
Father of his People, Bountiful, Just, Merciful, Generous, Brave, a lover of
Truth, and sure rewarder of Merit.

7. King John had only one Lawfully Begotten Son, His Issue.
which was Prince Alonso, born at Lisbon in the Year 1475. and who died, as has
been said, unfortunately, by a Fall off his Horse in the Year 1491. being newly
married to the Princess Elizabeth, Daughter to King Ferdinand, and Queen
Elizabeth of Castile. This King had also One Bastard-Son, called George,
created Duke of Coimbra, Marquis of Torres Novas, Master of the Military Orders
of Santiago and Avis, and Lord of the Lands that had belonged to Prince Peter.
He had also the Town of Aveiro, and of him are descended the Dukes of that
Title, who keep the surname of Lancaster, taken by them in Memory of Queen
Philippa, Daughter to the Duke of Lancaster. King John at length fixed the Arms
of the Kingdom in the manner they are used at this Day, reducing the Castles in
the Orle to the certain Number of Seven, and set^ing the Five middle
Escutcheons upright.

8. Discoveries in the Reign of King John were as follow. (...).
James Cano sailed to the River and Kingdom of Manicongo. James Alonso de
Aveiro to that of Beni, and brought thence the first Pepper that came from
those Parts. Bart^^^^mew Diaz to the Cape of Good Hope, and passed beyond it,
to the River called Del Infant. Peter Covillam, and Alonso de Paiva, Men
versed in many Languages, went to Grand Cairo in Egypt; then embarking on the
Red Sea, saw the City Adem, where parting, Paiva went into Ethiopia, Covillan
to Cananor, Calicut, Goa, Sofala, Mozambique, Quiloa, Mombara, and Melinde*
then returned to Adem, and Grand Caire, where his Companion and he had
appointed to meet; but the other being dead, he returned again to Adem, thence
to Ormus, and then traversed Abissinia, being the first Man that ever performed
those Travels. Christopher Columbus offered his Service to King John, but not
being encouraged by him, he discovered the West Indies for King Ferdinand, and
Queen Elizabeth of Castile and Aragon.

CHAP. IX.
The first Part of the Life and Reign of Emanuel, the First of the Name, and
Fourteenth King of Portugal; from the Year of our Lord, 1469, till 1509.
1. THough the late King John labored all that in him was to have left the
Crown to his Bastard-Son George, yet neither the Queen, nor the Subjects would
consent, because Duke Emanuel had a most undoubted Title to it. King Emanuel
his Birth and Descent.
This Emanuel was Son to Prince Ferdinand, Grandson to King Edward, and Great
Grandson to King Alonso V. and Cosen German to his Predecessor King John,
whose undoubted Heir he was, that King leaving no lawful Issue. He was born in
the Town of Alconchete, 1469.
in the Province of Riba Tejo, upon Thursday the last Day of May, being the
Feast of Corpus Christi. His Mother being in Labor was delivered of him just
at the time that the Blessed Sacrament passed by her Door, and therefore she
called him Emanuel, the proper Name of Christ, which signifies, God is with us.
During his Infancy Emanuel was one of the Hostages between the King of Castile,
and King John the Second. The very Day King John killed James, Brother to this
Emanuel, 1^^4.
he gave him all the other's Estate, only changing the Title from Duke of
Viseo, to that of Beja. He also constituted him Master of the Order of Christ,
Constable of the Kingdom, and General of the Frontiers betwixt the Rivers Tagus
and Guadiana, so that his Revenue amounted to above 70000 Crowns per Annum,
which was very great in that Age, and that Kingdom. (...)
His Family was increased when he went the second time into Castile to conduct
the Princess Elizabeth, Wife to Prince Alonso, into Portugal. King John, as is
said, King Emanuel (...)
dying without any lawful Issue, and not able to prevail for his Bastard-Son
George, Emanuel was proclaimed King with the usual Solemnity, upon (...) the
27th. of October, 1495, and in the 26th Year of his Age.

2. The New King went away to (...) ^uevo, where James (...), Prior of Crato,
presented to him George, King John's Bastard-Son, whom he received favorably,
and treated as if he had been his own. Here the Cortes or Parliament met, but
did little Business, as well by reason of the Plague, as for that King John had
left all Things in good Order. After sending Ambassadors to Rome and Castile,
the King gave the Tenth of all his Revenues in Africa, to the Churches there,
and reinforced those Garrisons. At Setuval came to him the Sons of the late
Duke of Braganca, 1496.
executed by King John, their Uncle D. Alvaro, and D. Sancho, Son to Alonso,
another of that Duke's Brothers, who were all restored to their Estates. He now
sent another Ambassador to Rome, to obtain the Pope's Dispensation for Knights
of the Military Orders to marry, which was granted. At Torres Vedras, whither
he fled from the Plague, he received Ambassadors from the State of Venice. Jew^
banished the Kingdom
The Jews whom King John had made Slaves, in great Numbers had now Liberty to
depart the Kingdom; and though they offered the King a Present of a
considerable Sum of Money, he would not accept it. A time was set for them all
to depart, and it was ordered that they should leave behind them all their
Children that were under Fourteen Years of Age. Many of them rather than
deliver their Children to be bred up Christians, 14^7.
murdered them; and some there were that killed themselves as well as their
Children. The time of their Departure being put off, they offered, if their
Children were restored them, and Twenty Years allowed them in which they could
not be punished for Offenses against Religion, that they would become
Christians. This granted, the greatest part of them was Baptized, the rest were
sent over into Africa, together with the Moors then also expelled, but these
were allowed to carry their Children with them. Those that remained in Portugal
committed many Enormities, in contempt of the Christian Religion, and becoming
Rich, had the Opportunity of corrupting all the Nobility of the Kingdom, by
mixing their Families.

3. At (...) the King had it debated in Council, (...)
whether the Discovery of India ought to be prosecuted or not; and after much
contesting, it was resolved in the Affirmative. Vasco de Gama was thereupon
pi^ched upon to command Four Ships designed for that Voyage. The Particulars of
his Success may be seen in the first Vol. of the Portuguese Asia. The King, by
his Ambassadors, having concluded a Match for himself with Elizabeth, Emanuel
marries Elizabeth, Widow of the late Prince Alonso.
Princess of Castile, Widow of the Late Prince Alonso of Portugal, in the
Month of October she was brought to Valencia de Alcantara, where King Emanuel
waited for her. Presently after the King and Queen were married, came the News
of the Death of John, Prince of Castile, Brother to the new Queen, and Heir of
that Kingdom. New Charters were now given to all the Cities and Towns of
Portugal, which were all contained in Five Books, One of each Province. About
the end of the Year, the Queen being with Child, Ambassadors came from Castile
to induce the King and her to go into Castile, to be sworn Heirs to that Crown.
The King took the Advice of the Cortes, or Parliament therein; 1498.
and it was resolved he should go. On the 29th. of March they set forwards with
a small Retinue, not exceeding 300 Horse. All this Company was in Mourning for
the Prince of Castile. The Duke of Medina Sidonia met them at Badajoz, with a
Retinue somewhat less. Soon after the Duke of Alva, and Count de Feria, with a
like Number. King Ferdinand came out of Toledo to receive them, and they were
entertained with extraordinary Magnificence. On the 28th. of April King Emanuel
and his Queen were sworn Heirs of Castile, in the Cathedral Church. This
Ceremony being over, they traveled toward Zaragosa to be there sworn to the
Succession of Aragon. They entered that City on the first of June, where many
Disputes arose concerning the Privileges of that Kingdom. On the 24th. of
August the Queen of Portugal was delivered of a Son, and died before she could
be laid in her Bed. She was buried in the Church of St. Hierome, without any
Pomp, because she had so ordered it in her Will.

4. King Emanuel returned to Portugal, (...) Aragon^* and Portugal.
and was received at Lisbon with great Joy in (...). H^ now understanding that
his Son Michael, born of (...) Queen, had been sworn Heir of the Crowns of
(...) and Aragon, resolv^d to have him sworn in like manner in Portugal. To
this purpose he assembled the (...) or Parliament at Lisbon, on the 7th. of
March, where all the Representatives took an Oath to him, as lawful Successor,
(...)
the King confirming his former Grant, that no Castilians should at any time be
admitted to Places of Honor and Trust in Portugal. About the end of this Year,
which was the 4th. of his Reign, the King resolved to translate the Body of
King John his Predecessor, from Silves, where he was buried, to the stately
Church of Batalla, the burial Place of the Portuguese Princes. He went in
Person to Silves, and found the Body whole, as it was seen Fifteen Years after
by the Cardinal Henry, and others, which confirmed the Opinion of Sanctity that
was conceived of him. The Body was honorably conducted to the Church of
Batalla, and there laid in a Marble Tomb. This Year also the King dispersed
several sorts of new Coins of Silver and Gold, as he did again in the Years
1504, and 1517. He had before given large Revenues to George, the late King's
Bastard-Son, and this Year 1500 gave him the City Coimbra, with the Title of
Duke, made him Lord of Montemayor ^l Viejo, and bestowed on him the Mastership
of the Military Orders of Santiago and Avis. Next he married him to the Lady
Beatrix de Villena, Daughter to D. Alvaro, the Brother of Ferdinand Duke of
Braganca, Beheaded by King John.

5. Now came the News that Prince Michael, (...)
King Emanuel's Son, and sworn Heir of all the Kingdoms of Spain, had departed
this Life at Granada, being not yet Two Years of Age. It was requisite the King
should marry again, (...)
and a Match was accordingly concluded with Mary, Daughter to King Ferdinand,
and Sister to King Emanuel's late Queen. Her Portion was 200000 Crowns down,
and 10000 a Year settled upon the Revenue of Sevil. The Archbishop, D. James
Hurtado de M^ra^za, conducted her to the Borders, where the Duke of Braganca,
attended by several of the Nobility, (...) her. The Marriage was solemnized at
Alcacer (...), (...)
on the 30th. of October. No sooner was the King married but he resolved to
make an Expedition into (...) in Person, (...).
and to that effect had assembled an Army of 26000 Men. The Venetians at this
time, hard (...) by the Turks, made use of the Pope's Mediation, to obtain of
our King to desist from the Enterpize he had in Hand, and to employ his Forces
in their Assistance. The King consented, and sent them Thirty Sa^l, under the
Command of D. John de Meneses, Son to the Earl (...); and for his Encouragement
before his Departure, he was created Earl of ^^rouca. In this Squadron were
3500 fighting Men. Another Squadron followed, being designed for the Coast of
Oran, in order to attempt taking the Fort of Mazalquivir. They sailed from
Lisbon about the middle of June, and having assaulted that Place in July, with
the loss of 20 Men, and no prospect of Success, the Squadron, provided for that
Expedition, returned to Lisbon. D. John de Meneses, with his 30 Sail off of
Tunez, took 3 Genoese Ships full of Turks, Moors and Jews, the Genoese he set
at liberty. Near Corfu he was met by Twenty five Venetian Galleys, and five
Galleons, where both Fleets saluted each other with great Joy. The Turks
understanding the Fleets were joined, retired to their Ports, and the
Portuguese Squadron returned home.

6. The King had yet reaped no Advantage from India, (...)
but the bare Discovery of it by Vasco de Gama, and yet as if the Treasures of
that Empire had been brought him, he in Thanksgiving laid the Foundation of
that wonderful Structure of the Church and Monastery called B^^e^, or Bet^lem,
on the Banks of Tagus, about a League from Lisbon. This Fabric is Magnificent
for its Greatness and Workmanship, but above all for the largeness of the Arch
above the Chancel, where, after the manner of all Cathedrals, it opens into a
Cross, which Arch, tho vastly spacious, has no Pillar to support it. This
Monastery was given to the Friars of the Order of S. Hierome, and is
plentifully endowed. Opposite to the Monastery, in the very River, the King
erected a Fort, which, tho not large, is Beautiful, and Commands the River,
serving at the same time for a Rampart to the Church; it is called the Fort of
S. Vincent. D. Jayme, or James, Duke of Braganca, who was restored to that
Honor by King Emanuel, labored under such a deep melancholy, that he
sometimes forbore taking his natural Sustenance. Nevertheless, through the
King's Persuasions he married the Lady (...) Daughter to D. John de Guzman,
third Duke of M^di^^ Sidonia. But no sooner was he married, than he absented
himself with only one Servant; leaving a Letter for the King, in which he
begged of him to bestow all his Possessions upon his Brother Denis, because he
was resolved to spend his days at the Holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem. Messengers
were sent several ways with orders to bring him back. Some of them found him at
Calatayud; in the Kingdom of Aragon, and prevailed upon him to return. Being
brought back, he had by his Wife a Son called Theodosius, who succeeded him;
and a Daughter named Elizabeth, married to Prince Edward, Son to King Emanuel.
His first Wife dying, he fell in Love with the Lady Joanna de Mendoza, Daughter
to the Governor of Mouram, and having obtained leave of the King, married her;
and by her had Four Sons, and as many Daughters.

7. Queen Mary, 1502.
second Wife to King Emanuel, was delivered of her first Son on the 6th. of
June, 1502. The Queen delivered* of a Son.
At the time of his Birth happened a violent Storm of Rain; and when he was
Baptized a Fire broke out in the Palace; we shall see in his Life what these
Prodigies portended. A Fleet sailed from Lisbon, under the Command of George de
Melo, and Gaspar de Aguilar, designing to take the City Targa, on the Coast of
Africa, but returned, having sustained Loss, and effected nothing. The King for
the Success of his Fleet, undertook a Pilgrimage to Santiago in Galicia;
presented that Church with a rich Silver Lamp, made in the Form of a Castle,
and gave Bountiful Alms. In his return, at Coimbra, he resolved to erect a
stately Tomb for Alonso, the first King of Portugal, whose Body lay there in a
very mean Sepulcher. At Porto he finished the Silver Shrine of S. Pantaleo,
1503.
Patron of that City. The King had now a second time resolved to pass over into
Africa, A Famine in Portugal.
and had all things in readiness for the Expedition, when he was again
prevented; being obliged to attend to the Relief of his own Kingdom, laboring
under a Famine. He remedied this Evil, by bringing in Plenty of Corn from all
the Northern Countries. Discoveries in North America.
In the Year 1500, sailed from Lisbon, Gaspar Cortereal, to attempt some
Discovery in the Northern Seas. He discovered a Country, which by Reason of its
delightful Groves, he called Verde, that is Green. The People were but
Barbarous, of a middle Stature, very Swift, expert at shooting with the Bow,
and skilful at casting Darts, whose Points are hardened in the Fire, clothed in
Skins, living in Caves and Cottages, and having no Religion, but believing in
Auguries, and very jealous of their Women. The following Year, he returned
thither to make some farther Discovery, but he staying long, his Brother
Michael went out in Quest of him, with two Ships, in May 1502; and neither
returning, another Brother prepared to seek them, but was hindered by the King.
It being believed both these Brothers were lost in that Country, discovered by
the first, the Name of it was changed to that of Tierra de Cortereales. About
the middle of this Year, the Cortes being Assembled, the King caused his Son to
be sworn Heir to the Crown. The Country, tho Poor, gave the King 50000 Duccats,
to carry on the War in Africa. On the 4th. of October, was born at Lisbon, the
Princess Elizabeth, her Birth being attended with the same Prodigies of Storms,
as her Brother's was; she was afterward married to the Emperor Charles the
Fifth, her Dower above a Million of Ducats, 900000 in Money, and the rest in
Jewels.

8. Elizabeth, 1504.
Queen of Castile and Aragon, died this Year 1504, at Medina del Campo. Her
Death was concealed from Elizabeth, Queen of Portugal, her Daughter, because
she was near her time of Delivery, and accordingly on the last Day of December,
was brought to Bed of a Daughter, called Beatrix, after Duchess of Savoy.
There followed upon it such Terrible Earthquakes, that whole Towns being
swallowed up, 15^5
the People fled Distractedly to the Mountains. The (...) of Egypt threatens
Jerusalem.
The New Year began with Threats from the Sultan of Egypt, that he would
destroy the Holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem, unless the Portuguese desisted from
their Conquests in India, where Edward Pacheco was now doing Wonders, and King
Ferdinand of Castile from invading the Moors. An Account of the Portuguese
Conquest^ in India
But these Menaces were little regarded, both Kings proceeding in what they had
undertaken. Now returned the King's Ambassadors, sent to Pope Julius, and with
them came a Merchant Ship, which being infected with the Plague, spread it
throughout all Spain. Edward Pacheco returned at this time from India, leaving
that Part of the World, astonished at his Actions. King Emanuel himself went
out to receive him at landing, with a numerous Train; he walked under a Canopy
with the King, his Actions were set out in the Church, by the Bishop of Viseo.
An Account of them was also given to all Foreign Princes, and they were made
known to all the Kingdom. After all this Honor, the same Pacheco was cast into
Prison loaded with Irons, and tho he cleared himself of all that could be laid
to his Charge, he was only turned out of Goal, and left to live upon Charity,
as did his Son and Grandson after him; till in the time of King Sebastian, the
prime Minister Giles Yanez de Costa, obtained him the grant of a Commendary,
and because none was then Vacant, gave him that he had obtained for his own Son.

9. On the third of March, 1506. 1506.
at Abrantes was born the King's fourth Son, Birth of the King's fourth Son.
Lewis, an admirable Prince for his Judgment, Learning and Valor. So addicted
to Warlike Affairs, that a Fleet of 60 Sail was provided for him, to go into
India, but the Design was disappointed. He served under the Emperor Charles the
Fifth, at the taking of Tunis, and gained Honor. He was never married, but had
a Bastard-Son by the Lady Violante Gomez, this was Antony, who afterward, upon
the Death of Henry the King and Cardinal, aspired to the Crown. Upon the 6th.
of April, A great Mutiny on Account of a supposed Miracle.
it being Sunday, certain Persons in the Church of S. Dominick, fancied a
Crucifix in one of the Chapels, cast forth a miraculous Light; a New Convert
that had been a Jew, said it was the Reflection of the Sun from a Window.
Hereupon, without farther Examination, they dragged him out of the Church and
burnt him. The Rabble assembled about the Fire, one of the Friars with vehement
Speeches Encouraging them. Two other Friars ran about the Streets, crying out,
Heresy! Heresy! with Crucifixes in their Hands. Above 500 Men gathered in
Arms, who slew as many of the New Converts, burning their Bodies. The number
increasing, upon Monday Morning they murdered Men, Women, and Children,
dragging them from the very Altars, whither they fled for Sanctuary; so that
this Day above 1000 perished. This was continued the third Day, to the number
of 400 being destroyed, so that in all they amounted to 2000 murdered, among
them many that were not New Converts; for the desire of Plunder was more than
the Zeal of Religion, as it is in all Mutinies, whatever the Pretenses be. The
King then at Avis, was highly offended at this Insolency. He took away the City
Charter, and sent thither the Prior of Crato, and Baron of Alvito to punish the
offenders. Some were hanged, others had their Goods confiscated, and the two
Friars burnt, all that belonged to the Monastery were banished.

10. James de Azambuja was sent to erect a Fort on a Point of Land in Africa,
1507.
opposite to the Island Magador, Birth of the King's fifth Son
it was called Fort Royal. July the 5th. the King and Queen being at Abrantes,
was born their fifth Son, whom they called Ferdinand. 1508.
He was a great lover of History, and no less addicted to Warlike Affairs. The
following Year, the Limits of the Conquests, on the Coast of Africa were
settled betwixt the two Crowns of Spain and Portugal. All Eastward of Belez de
la Gomera was assigned to the Spaniards; thence Westward was allowed to the
Portuguese. This Year 1509, was born the Prince of Portuguese Poets, 1509
Luis de Camoens. On the twenty third of April, Birth of Camoens, the great
Portuguese Poet
the Queen was delivered at Evora, of her sixth Son, called Alonso. At Seven
Years of Age, Pope Leo the Tenth, sent him a Cardinal's Cap; afterward he had
both the Archbishopricks of Lisbon and Evora, and the Abbey of Alcobaca, all at
one time. This Year also the Work continued from the time of King John the
First, and Founder of the famous Church and Monastery of Batalla, which ought
to have been finished, was interrupted, and nothing done to it since, so that
ever after, that mighty Fabric remains Imperfect. Mondragon, a French Pirate,
having the foregoing Year, taken a Rich Ship coming from India, had now fitted
out Four great Galleons upon the same Design. The King sent out some Ships
against him, under the Command of the Renowned Edward Pacheco, who after a
sharp dispute near Cape Finisterre, sunk one of the Pirate's Galleons, and took
the other three. Mondragon was presented to the King, who freely forgave him.

CHAP. X.
The remaining Part of the Life and Reign of Emanuel, the First of the Name,
and Fourteenth King of Portugal; from the Year of our Lord 1510, till 1521.
1. NOthing remarkable happened the Year 1510, 1510.
but that many Moors, and Hords of Arabs, along the Coast of Africa, submitted
themselves to King Emanuel, 1511.
and became his Tributaries. The following Year threatened a Breach between
Castile and Portugal; because King Ferdinand fitted out a Fleet at Malaga, with
Design to invade the Portuguese Conquests. The Pope calling upon him for
Succor against the French, obliged him to desist from that Enterprise.
Nevertheless, that Faithless King as if his Designs had not been known,
solicited King Emanuel to join with him against France, and highly resented
that he Courteously entertained a French Squadron in his Ports. Henry the 8th.
King of England, who had married Katherine, Sister to the Queen of Portugal,
King Emanuel receives the Order of the Garter, from King Henry the Eighth of
England.
now sent King Emanuel the Garter, having received him into that most Noble
Order. On the last Day of January, was born at Lisbon, Prince Henry, the King's
Seventh Son; a mighty Snow falling just before his Birth, which is a thing
rarely seen in Lisbon. We shall have more occasion to speak of him hereafter,
when he ascends the Throne. Alonso King, and Apostle of Congo, this Year sent
his Son Henry, and his Brother Emanuel, 1512.
with many Young Noblemen into Portugal, to be instructed in the Christian
Faith. Henry, Son to the King of Congo, comes into Portugal,
With them came Peter, that King's Cousin, whom he sent as his Ambassador to
Rome, to submit him and his Kingdom to the Pope. King Emanuel sent the Black
Prince Henry with the Ambassador; they arrived at Rome the following Year,
where they were courteously received, and dismissed by Leo the Tenth, 1513.
then sitting in 8. Peter's Chair.

2. D. Alvaro de Castro, The King punishes his Lord Steward for his cruelty to
a Servant.
was Lord Steward of the Household, and in great Favor. He finding a Servant of
his own, whom he had turned away, talking with a Slave in his House, caused him
to be so cruelly lashed, that all his Body was but one continued Sore. The
Servant putting nothing on but his Cloak, came into the King's Presence, where
letting it fall, he said, Ecce Homo; Your Lord Steward has done this to me,
only for talking to one of his Slaves. The King astonished at this Barbarity,
immediately sent Andrew Perez Landin, his Clerk of the Closet, to acquaint D.
Alvaro, that he deprived him of his Charge, ordered he should remain a Prisoner
in his House till farther order, and pay 500 Crowns to that Man. D. Alvaro's
Kindred came to the King to intercede for him, but finding the King implacable,
they went away Discontented, and returned not to Court; whereupon the King
ordered the Two Sons of D. Alvaro, to be struck out of his Books. At last upon
the humble Application of D. Alvaro's Wife, he was sent for to Court, severely
reprimanded, and then pardoned. Last Year began the Preparations, and now was
fitted out a Fleet of above 400 Sail, 1514.
carrying 18000 Foot, and 2600 Horse, all under the Command of Jayme or James
Duke of Bracanca. He sailed from Lisbon about the middle of August, and landing
on the 28th. of the same Month in Africa, Azamor, on the Coast of Africa, taken.
took the City Azamor. Those of Tite and Almedina, being abandoned by the
Inhabitants, he also possessed himself of with ease. Then having ravaged the
Country, without any opposition, he returned to Lisbon The Particulars of this
Expedition, properly belong to the Portuguese Africa.

3. King Emanuel resolving to Dedicate to God, Presents of the First Fruits of
India, sent to the Pope.
the First Fruits of India, thought the shortest way was to present them to the
Pope, his Vicegerent. With this Present he sent Three Ambassadors, the chief
whereof was Tristan da Cunha, with a most magnificent Retinue. The Present
consisted of an Elephant covered with Cloth of Gold, and governed by an Indian;
a Persian Horse with rich Furniture; a Panther that would Hunt, and was at
Command like a Dog; and a whole Suit of Vestments, for all occasions, all of
Cloth of Gold, so thick Embroidered with Pearls, and precious Stones, that the
Ground of it could not be discerned. The whole was valued at 500000 Crowns.
Bernardin Freyre, and Francis Pereyra Pestana, arriving now from India, the
King caused them to be cast into Prison; being informed how unworthily they had
treated Matthew, Ambassador from Ellen, Grandmother of David, Emperor of
Ethiopia, and Regent of that Empire, during her Grand-Son's Minority. There
they remained till the said Ambassador interceded for them. He was an Armenian
Christian, Judicious, Learned and Bold. The King received him with Respect, and
by him a Letter, from the Empress, Five Medals of Gold, and a great Cross made
of the Wood of that our Savior suffered upon; and kept in a Gold Case. In her
Letter the Empress offered her assistance toward forwarding the King's
undertakings in Asia; and desired since they were both Christians, that their
Families might be allied by mutual Marriages, that so they might be the better
enabled to destroy the Turks, 1515.
and Moors, The King's Eighth Son born.
in those Parts. On the 7th. of September, 1515, was born at Lisbon, Edward,
the King's 8th. Son, of whom more at the end of this Chapter. Ambassadors were
sent to Castile, 1516
to condole with Queen Germana, upon the Death of her Husband King Ferdinand;
and to Flanders, to Charles, afterward the 5th. of that Name, Emperor, to
offer him Elizabeth, Daughter to King Emanuel, in Marriage; and ask his Sister
Ellenor, for Prince John. This Year ended with the Birth and Death of Mary,
Emanuel's Ninth Child.

4. Prince Antony, 1517.
the King's Tenth Child, was born at Lisbon, Birth of the King's tenth Child.
on the 9th. Day of September. He lived but a few Days, and left his Mother so
Weak, that she died the 7th. of March following, of an Impostume in her Bowels;
The Queen dies.
being but 35 Years of Age. She was generally lamented, being extremely beloved
for her Fruitfulness, her great Love to the King, her liberality to the Poor,
her Devotion, Affability, Modesty, Piety, Industriousness in the good spending
her Time, and special care of Instructing her Children. As to Features, she was
neither beautiful, nor deformed. She founded the Monastery of S. Hierome, in
the Berlings; and lies buried in the Church of Belem. Before the Queen's Death,
the King put an Elephant, and a Rhinoceros together, to see the manner of their
Fight, being naturally Enemies; but the Elephant being young was frighted, and
forcing his way through a Place that was barred, ran about the City,
overturning all he met. The Rhinoceros was afterward sent as a Present to the
Pope, but the Ship was cast away; however the dead Rhinoceros being cast a
Shore, was taken up, and the Skin stuffed and carried to Rome. John Diaz Golez,
a Portuguese Pilot, flying from Justice, escaped into Castile; where he
persuaded certain Merchants to fit out Two Ships, and Trade into Brasil. King
Emanuel complaining to the Young King Charles, these Encroachers were punished.
John Wallop, an English Gentleman of Worth, afterward Governor of Callis,
came into Portugal, offering to serve in Africa upon his own Expense. He served
Two Years at Tangier honorably, and then returned home; having received the
Order of Knighthood of Christ, and other considerable Favors, and continued
always a great Favourer of the Affairs of Portugal.

5. Soliman the great Emperor of the Turks, having taken Grand Cairo, and all
the Dominions of the Egyptian Soldans; King Emanuel pressed the Pope, to excite
all the Christian Princes to join their Forces against him, but without
success. The Body of S. Auta, one of the 11000 Virgins, was now brought to
Lisbon, and placed in the Monastery of the Mother of God, where it is held in
great Veneration. The King being extremely afflicted for the Loss of his Queen,
had thoughts of retiring to Algarve, contenting himself with that little
Portion of his Kingdom, and leaving the rest to the Prince his Son. But the
Prince led away by his Favorites, being too forward, and dropping some
disrespectful words of his Father, moved him to change that Resolution; and not
only to retain the Power in his own Hands, but to marry the Wife he had
designed for him. 1518.
To this purpose, The King marries again.
D. Alvaro da Costa was sent Ambassador into Castile, and the Treaty so
privately managed, that the Bride was contracted to the King by Proxy; before
the Design of the Ambassador was known in Portugal. Her Portion was 200000
Crowns down, and 5000 per Annum; during her Life. She was conducted to the
Borders of the two Kingdoms by several Noblemen of Spain, and there received by
Jayme or James Duke of Braganca, accompanied by a great Train of Persons of
Quality on the Twenty third of November. At Crato, the next Day, she was
married by the Archbishop of Lisbon. Thence they went to Almeyrin, because the
Plague was brief at Lisbon. Here the King, on St. Andrew's Day, received the
Order of the Golden Fleece, sent him by his Brother-in-law King Charles.

6. Ferdinand Magellanes a Gentleman of Worth, who had served well in India and
Africa, being refused some small Addition to the Pension he enjoyed for his
good Services, some envious Persons dissuading the King from showing him any
Favor, discontented at this hard Usage, solemnly Unnaturalized himself as the
Custom was then, and went over to Castile, at such time as the Molucco Islands
were thought to appertain to the Conquests of that Crown. He there offered to
find out a New way to those Islands, 1519.
and being furnished with Five Ships, sailed from Sevil about the beginning of
August, Magellan discovers the Streights of his Name
and discovered those Streights, which will Eternize his Name, being of him
called the Streights of Magellan. The Particulars of this Voyage, as more
properly appertaining to that History, are to be seen in the Portuguese Asia.
The King laid a Duty upon Corn, to which imposition some Places consented. John
Mendez Cec^oso, Mayor of Evora, opposed it. The King sent for, and promised to
reward him if he would comply; but he persisting obstinately was confined to
his House. Soon after he commended him for his Resolution, and remitted that
Tax. The Commonalty of Castile now rising in Rebellion against their King, 1520.
who was gone into Germany, being chosen Emperor upon the Death of Maximilian,
sent the Dean of Avila to offer the Crowns of Castile and Leon to King Emanuel.
He believing no Confidence could be reposed in those that were Rebels to their
Lawful Sovereign, not only advised them to return to their Obedience, but sent
Supplies of Ammunition and Money to the Cardinal Adrian, afterward Pope, the
Constable, and Admiral, then Governors during the King's Absence.

7. Ellenor the new Queen of Portugal was the last Year at Evora, on the 18th.
of February delivered of a Prince called Charles, who lived but Fifteen Months.
This Year on the 18th. of June, 1521.
at Lisbon, she brought forth the Princess Mary. Many Matches were proposed for
this Lady, but none took Effect, so that she died a Maid at the Age of 57
Years. After long Debates, and Three several Embassies sent by Charles Duke of
Savoy to obtain Beatrix, King Emanuel's second Daughter for his Wife, Beatrix,
Daughter to King Emanuel, married to the Duke of Savoy.
the Match was concluded. She had 150000 Crowns Portion, and was conducted to
Savoy with extraordinary Expense. Eighteen Sail were fitted out to transport
the Princess, and a most splendid Retinue accompanied her. In fine, she
embarked on the 5th. of August, lay Five Days a Board on the River, and then
set Sail on the Day of the Feast of S. Laurence. By this Princess the Duke of
Savoy had his Son Emanuel Filibertus, from whom the Dukes of that House are
descended. Bernardin Ribeyro, a Man well born, and an ingenious Poet, was in
love with the Princess, and she favored him for his Wit. Seeing her depart he
became a Hermit at Sintra; thence he went a Pilgrim into Italy, and returning
through Savoy he received Charity of the Duchess, who knowing him, ordered he
should not stay in the City. He returned Home, and ended his Life with his
Pilgrimage. The Venetians, who had for many Years enjoyed all the Trade of
Spice, being now deprived of it by the Portuguese having discovered India, sent
an Ambassador to pray they might be allowed all that was above what the Kingdom
consumed, at a certain Rate. This Ambassador was honorably entertained, but
received not a satisfactory Answer.

8. Such was now the flourishing Estate of Lisbon, that it was thronged with
Foreign Ambassadors and Merchants from all Parts. In the height of this
Prosperity and Grandeur King Emanuel fell sick of a Lethargy, then the
epidemical Distemper reigning. Perceiving his End draw nigh, he performed all
the Acts of a good Christian, King Emanuel dies.
and died the 13th. of December, 1521. the Ninth day of his Sickness, the 53d.
Year of his Age, and 27th. of his Reign. His Body was Interred in his Church of
Belem, where his Son built him a stately Tomb. Before his Death happened a most
cruel Famine, and after that, a terrible Plague. The Pestilence continued the
following Year, and such prodigious Earthquakes shook the Island of S. Michael,
that Mountains fell upon some Villages, and others were overturned into the
Sea, with great slaughter of the Inhabitants. King Emanuel, as to Stature, was
tall, somewhat lean, his Hair dark-brown, his Forehead high, his Eyes green and
pleasant, his Arms so long, that when hanging down, his Fingers reached below
his knees. He was much addicted to all Sports, as Riding, Dancing, Music, and
Feasting; very Devout, and therefore on Holydays went to several Churches;
extraordinary Charitable, a lover of Astrologers and Jesters. He reformed
several Religious Houses, that lived not regularly.

9. His Structures were so many, His Structures, and other Work.
and so great, it would swell to a Volume to particularize them; in short, they
were Thirteen Monasteries in Portugal, besides all those in Asia, Africa, and
America; and besides Repairs in other Places, Eight great Churches, the great
Hospital of Lisbon, Five Palaces, Custom-houses, Storehouses, many Magazines
plentifully stored, and above Twenty Forts of considerable Magnitude, besides
many of less note. Also several Bridges, Moles, Fountains, and other Works were
begun and finished by him. To encourage Gentlemen to serve in Africa, he
instituted new Commendaries to Reward those that deserved well, and allowed
Wages to an Hundred Knights for their Entertainment there. He first gave the
hundredth Penny of his Revenue to Pious Uses. By him the Laws of the Kingdom
were digested into Method, and Registers made of all Estates and Foundations,
as also a Book of the Arms of the Nobility. Kings at Arms, and Rules of Blazon,
were of his introducing into Portugal, Antony Rodriguez, the first Master of
that Science here, being sent to most Courts of Christendom, to inform himself
perfectly therein. The Chronicles down to his own days he caused to be
corrected, Rewarding Edward Galvam, and Ruy de Pina, who labored in that
Affair. He had three Wives; the first, Elizabeth, Widow of Prince Alonso, in
her Right he was at Toledo sworn Heir to the Crowns of Castile and Leon. The
second was Mary, Sister to the former, both Daughters to King Ferdinand and
Queen Elizabeth of Castile and Aragon. The third was Ellenor, Daughter to King
Philip the First of Spain, Sister to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and Niece
to both his former Wives.

10. By his First Wife he had Issue, His Wives and Issue.
Prince Michael who died at Zaragoca, not quite Two Years of Age, having been
Sworn Heir to all the Kingdoms of Spain. By the Second Wife, he had, First,
John, his Successor. Secondly, Elizabeth, Wife to Charles the Fifth, and Mother
to King Philip the Second. Thirdly, Beatrix, Wife to Charles the Third Duke of
Savoy. Fourthly, Lewis, Duke of Beja, and Constable of Portugal, Father to
Antony, Prior of Crato; who tho a Bastard aspired to the Crown. Fifthly,
Ferdinand, Duke of Guarda, who left no Issue. Sixthly, Alonso, the Cardinal and
Archbishop of Lisbon. Seventhly, Henry, the Cardinal and Archbishop of Braga,
Lisbon, and Evora; who afterward was King. Eighthly, Edward, Duke of
Guimaraens, who married Elizabeth, Daughter and Heiress of James Duke of
Braganca, by whom he had two Daughters; Mary the eldest married to Alexander
Farnesius, Duke of Parma; and Katherine, Duchess of Braganca, from whom, tho
the younger, are Descended the late Kings of Portugal. Ninthly, Mary. Tenthly,
Antony, who both died in their Infancy. By the Third Wife, First, Charles, who
died in Infant. Secondly, Mary, who died a Maid at the Age of 57 Years, having
been disappointed of several Matches that were proposed for her.

CHAP. XI.
The First Part of the Life and Reign of John, the Third of the Name, and
Fifteenth King of Portugal; from the Year of our Lord 1502. till 1543.
1. KIng John the Third, King John the Third his Birth.
was Second Son to King Emanuel, and the First, by his Second Wife, born at
Lisbon on the 6th. of June, 1502, about Two in the Morning. It was observable,
that this being the midst of Summer, when the Weather is usually settled fair,
just at that time, there arose such a terrible Storm of Wind, Rain, Thunder and
Lightning, that none living had ever seen the like. Whilst this Prince was
Baptizing, there broke out such a Fire in the Palace, as alarmed the whole
Court, and gave occasion to various Conjectures on what it might Prognosticate.
150^.
The Prince was just a Year old, when his Father Assembling the Cortes, or
Parliament at Lisbon, caused him to be sworn Heir to the Crown. At three Years
of Age he was weaned. Being come out of his Infancy, he was given in charge to
Gonzalo Figueyra, a Noble Citizen of Lisbon, the Queen his Mother still
overseeing his Education. The Bishop of Tangier taught him his Grammar, and
Lewis Teyxeyra instructed him in the Laws, yet he profited little in either,
never thoroughly understanding any Book that belonged to them. Nor was he more
successful in Astrology, taught him by Thomas de Torres, then Famous in that
Science and Physic. In short, at the end of his Studies, the Prince was found
very ignorant; for though he had an excellent Memory, he never applied himself to
Learning, and his Masters feared disobliging him. In the Year 1512. the Prince
fell down from a Gallery in the Palace, 1512.
so that for 24 hours the Doctors despaired of his Life. After that, he came to
himself, and recovered, a small scar of a hurt received in the fall remaining
on his forehead. Next, he had a violent Fit of Sickness, which once passed, he
continued healthy all the remaining part of his Life. At this Age the King
began to make himself acquainted with Business, to which he applied himself
better than to his Book.

2. The King, 1515.
later than had been expected, settled the Prince's Family, and appointed all
the Officers of his Household, among which, his principal Favorites were D.
Lewis de Silveyra, and D. Antony de Ataide. D. Lewis de Silveyra was suspected
to incense the King against his Father, after his marrying Queen Ellenor,
Sister to Charles the Fifth, once designed for the Prince, as was said in the
forgoing Chapter. 1519.
Hereupon D. Lewis was banished the Court, but as soon as ever King John came
to the Crown, he was recalled. It being the Custom to Proclaim the new King the
third day after the Death of his Predecessor, 1521.
this Solemnity was, for several urgent Reasons, King John proclaimed.
deferred till the sixth day, when it was performed with the usual Ceremonies.
The new King understanding that a Fleet was fitting in France, in order to make
new Discoveries in India and Brasil, and that several French Pirates infested
the Portuguese Seas, sent D. John de Silveyra to put that King in mind of the
Ancient Friendship betwixt those two Crowns, and require redress of those
Wrongs. This Ambassador had an Honorable Reception, but no Success in his
Business. Airs ^e Sousa went Ambassador to the new Pope Adrian, 1522.
then at Zaragoca, in his way to Rome, to Complement him upon his Promotion to
S. Peter's Chair. 1523.
D. Lewis de Silveyra, King John's Favorite, was sent to the Emperor Charles
the Fifth, to offer him Elizabeth, the King's Eldest Sister, in Marriage. Yet
of a sudden his Instructions were altered, and he ordered only to Complement
that Prince upon his happy Arrival in Spain. The cause of this sudden change
was this: The Ship, called the Victory, the first that sailed round the World,
and the only one that escaped of those that discovered the Streights of
Magellan, arriving at the Islands of Cabo Verd^, the Inhabitants understanding
she came from the Molucco Islands, designed to secure her; but they on board
having some Jealousy of it, immediately set Sail, leaving behind their long
Boat, with thirteen Men, who were sent away Prisoners to Lisbon, whilst the
Ship made her Voyage, and arrived safe at Sevil. The Emperor complained hereof
to the King, and he again that the Emperor's Ships invaded his Conquests,
demanding the Lading of the Ship Victory. D. Lewis de Silveyra spent Eight
Months in his Embassy at the Emperor's Court, without dispatching any Business,
and then returning to Portugal, found the King at Almeirin, where at his first
access, forgetting or neglecting to kiss his Hand, he found himself quite out
of favor; for D. Antony de Atayde, making his Advantage of the others absence,
had quite worked him out of his Master's Affections. Nevertheless, D. Lewis
continued at Court, without ever expressing the least Resentment for his Fall.

3. D. Antony de Atayde, The Character of D. Antony de Atayde the King's
Favorite.
now the only Favorite, was a Person well deserving that high Honor for his
singular Prudence and Moderation. There are sufficient Testimonies of the
former, and I will bring one that may fully evince the latter. The Lord of
Azambuja, Head of one of the ancientest Families in Portugal, designed to sell
that Town to supply his present wants. The King told D. Antony, it would be
proper for him to buy it, because it joined to his Estate. He answered, It was
more for his Highness's Reputation, to supply the wants of so Ancient and
Honorable a Family, than to suffer it to fall to nothing, by selling an Estate
of that Antiquity. The King took his Advice, and so generously relieved that
Gentleman, that he was enabled to preserve his Patrimony. This is a good Remark
for those, who, to advance their own Fortunes, are so far from regarding any
Private Person, that they stick not to ruin Kings, and overturn Kingdoms. It
was now thought time that the King should Marry, and James, Duke of Braganca,
proposed to him Queen Ellenor, his Mother-in-law, as Wife to the late King, who
was vastly Rich. This Proposal being noised abroad, was so well liked, that the
Council of Lisbon addressed him, in behalf of themselves and the whole Kingdom,
praying he would condescend to it. The King could not approve of Marrying his
Father's Wife, and was freed from their Importunities by the Emperor's desiring
he would suffer his Sister to return to Castile, which was accordingly
performed.

4. A March being proposed for the King with Katherine, 15^^*
Sister to the Emperor Charles the Fifth* King John Marries Katherine, Sister
to the Emperor Charles the Fifth.
Ambassadors were sent to Burgos, where that Prince then kept his Court, to
treat about it. The Articles agreed upon were, That the Bridegroom should pay
the Charge of the Dispensation; the Emperor should be at the Expense of her
Journey; That she should have 200000 Ducats down, and 5000 a Year for her
Portion, besides Jewels and other Necessaries. That the third part should be
given to her at her Marriage, and that her Jointure should be 10000 Ducats a
Year, with all the Lands and Towns the Queens used to possess. The former Peace
was confirmed, and Supplies promised reciprocally in case of need. About the
end of the Year she was conducted to the Borders by the Bishop of Siguenca, and
Duke of Vejar, and there delivered to the Princes Lewis and Ferdinand, sent to
attend her. The King received her at Crato, and she proved one of the best
Queens in the World. She was happy in bringing forth many Children, but
unfortunate in the shortness of their Lives, which gave occasion to the
Multitude to say, It was a Judgment of God on the King, for the Familiarity he
was suspected to have with the Queen his Mother-in-law. 1525.
At the beginning of the Year a motion was made of a Match betwixt the Emperor
and our King's Sister, The Emperor Charles the Fifth Marries Elizabeth, Sister
to King John.
the Princess Elizabeth. Ambassadors of the Emperor and the King's
Commissioners meeting upon this Subject, agreed, That the Emperor should be at
the Expense of the Dispensation, and the King defray the Charge of her Journey,
as had been done in the Marriage of the Emperor's Sister; but the Portion now
given with this Princess, far exceeded that, for it amounted almost to a
Million of Crowns. In November the Emperor's Ambassador was contracted for the
Emperor to the Princess, and the day after they set forward with the King and
Princes.

5. The Empress's Journey into Spain was delayed till the Dispensation came
from Rome, 1526.
and then being attended to the Frontiers by many of the Nobility, she was
there delivered to the Spanish Noblemen sent to receive her. She was conducted
to Sevil, and there received with Pomp suitable to so great a Princess. Soon
after came the Emperor, and in March the Marriage was solemnized.

We must now pass over seven Years, without mentioning any thing of the Affairs
of this Kingdom, because we find nothing Remarkable, except that in the Year
1531. there happened a most terrible Earthquake, 1531.
which overthrew many Buildings, A great Earthquake.
but chiefly at Lisbon, and round about it, where whole Towns were overwhelmed.
About this time also the Tribunal of the Inquisition was erected for
suppressing of the Jews. Muley Hazen, 1534.
expelled the Kingdom of Tunis by the Famous Pirate Hariaden Barbarossa, fled
to the Emperor Charles the Fifth for Succor. The Emperor undertook his
Protection, and in order to it, desired Assistance of King John, particularly
praying him to send an extraordinary Galeon, then Famous for its greatness,
called the S. John. 1535.
The King sent him that, and two others of great Bulk, King John sends Succors
to the Emperor.
besides 20 smaller ones loaded with store of Ammunition, and bravely manned.
The Command of this Squadron was given to Antony de Saldana, who had served
well in India. At Barcelona he joined the Emperor, and was by him Honorably
received. Prince Lewis stole away from Court, to serve under the Emperor
Charles the Fifth; but of this we spoke at the time of his Birth, in the Reign
of King Emanuel. The King sent him 100000 Crowns, and the Emperor received him
at Barcelona with all possible marks of Honor. They set out with 400 Sail, and
made themselves Masters of Guletta and Tunis.

6. From the Year 1535. we find nothing worthy of Memory till 1539. a Year
Remarkable for the Death, 1539.
first, Death of Prince Philip, and of the Empress
of Prince Philip, who was scarce Six Years of Age, who departed this Life at
Lisbon; and then of the Empress Elizabeth, who ended her days at Toledo. Nor
was the following Year less fatal, 1540.
since in it were snatched away, And of others.
first, Antony the King's Son, being but Eleven Months old, then the Cardinal
Alonso, and lastly, Prince Edward, both Brothers to the King. D. Michael de
Silva, 1541.
Bishop of Portalegre, and Clerk of the Closet, at this time fled privately to
Rome, where he had before negotiated for a Cardinal's Cap, which was given him
immediately upon his arrival at that Court. 1542.
The King was so highly offended at this Contempt, that he disclaimed him as a
Subject, and deprived him of all the Benefices and Honors he enjoyed in the
Kingdom. All Persons that should presume to hold Correspondence with him, were
subjected to the same Penalties; yet the Cardinal's Brother, D. George,
transgressed against this Decree, and was therefore committed Prisoner to the
Fort of Belem, to answer that Misdemeanor. The Princess Mary, the King's
Daughter, at the time of her departure to Castile to Marry Prince Philip,
begged and obtained of her Father that the said D. George might be pardoned,
only upon the Penalty of going to serve at Arzila, 1543.
where he behaved himself in such a manner, as gained him great Reputation.

7. The Match betwixt Prince Philip of Spain and the Princess Mary of Portugal
was concluded by the Spanish Ambassador, Prince Philip of Spain Marries Mary,
Princess of Portugal.
Lewis Sarmiento de Mendoza, who stood Proxy for the Prince at the Ceremony of
Contracting the Princess to him, which was performed by Prince Henry. About the
middle of October the Princess set forward toward Castile with a most Splendid
and Honorable Retinue, consisting of 5000 Horse, and 2700 Sumpture Mules.
Francis, King of France, hearing of this Match, whereof the King had given him
no Account, was highly offended, and expressed his Resentment to D. Francis de
Noronha, the Portuguese Ambassador at his Court. That Gentleman, though
unacquainted with the Affair, so mitigated that King, and soothed him with such
convincing Reasons, that he appeared wholly satisfied, and by his Prudence, a
Breach that might have happened between the two Crowns, so strictly allied for
many Years, was prevented. In August, Edward, the King's Bastard-Son came to
Lisbon, and was received with general Applause by the King, Queen, and all the
Court. He was Born in the Year 1525. and brought up in the Royal Monastery of
S. Hierome da Costa. He was a promising Youth, but cut off in his Prime, for he
lived not much above two Months after his coming to Court, and died in the 22d.
Year of his Age.

CHAP. XII.
The remaining Part of the Life and Reign of John, the Third of the Name, and
Fifteenth King of Portugal, from the Year 1544, till 1557.
1. THE Years 1544 and 1545 passed without any thing Remarkable, 1546.
or at least Historians do not give us Account of any Passages in them. King
John receives the Golden Fleece.
Nor is there any thing of more note in the Year 1546, besides that King John
received the Order of the Golden Fleece, sent him by the Emperor Charles the
Fifth. In March following, the King being at Almeyrin, King Henry of France
sent Monsieur de Biron to him, desiring he would stand Godfather to a Son he
had newly born; which the King granted, and D. Constantine of Braganca, Brother
to that Duke, went to represent his Person. It was found necessary, for the
security of the Conquests in Africa, to erect a Fort over the Bay of Alcacar.
The King ordered his Ambassadors residing at Brussels with the Emperor, and
with Prince Maximilian, then Governing Spain, to incline them both to send some
Auxiliary Galleys for carrying on that Work, the particulars of it may be seen
in the Portuguese Africa. 1548.
Prince John was now Twelve Years of Age, and still continued under the
Government of Women, when the King began to think of settling his Family, which
was accordingly done in February following. 1549.
Antony de Pesquera had some Years since set out a Ship at S. Lucar, and traded
in the Portuguese Conquests of Guinea and Brasil, and was now returning to
those Parts. King John sent out Vasco Lorenco, with Orders not to take him,
unless in the Conquests, but he over-hastily seized him in the Canary Islands;
whereof Prince Maximilian, who then governed Spain, complaining, he was
released, and Vasco Lorenco for a time confined to the Castle of Ovidos, but
soon discharged. George, Bastard-Son to King John the Second, who had absented
himself from Court all the time of his Youth, came now to it at 70 Years of
Age, and fell in Love with one of the Queen's Ladies, not above 16. They were
privately contracted, yet never married, the King obstructing it, and so the
Young Lady was left under some Scandal.

2. The King considering long Peace had disarmed the Kingdom, Ordinances (...)
by the King.
ordered all People should furnish themselves with Arms. Such as had 2500
Royals per Annum, were obliged to keep complete Armor, a Sword and Spear;
every Man that had double this Yearly Income, to keep a Musqueteer; and so
forward for every time that Revenue was doubled. Because Horses were scarce, he
forbid Mares engendring with Asses for Mules. The Wolves being numerous, and
destroying much Cattle, general Huntings were appointed upon certain days, and
Rewards assigned to such as brought in the Skin of a Wolf. The King, weary of
multiplicity of Business, remitted a great part of his Care to the Council, and
from this time the Kingdom began to decline. Pope Paul III. dying about the end
of this Year, Dr. Baltasar Faria, the Portuguese Ambassador at Rome, used all
his Interest for Prince Henry of Portugal, but on the 17th. of February, 1550.
Cardinal John Maria was declared Pope, by the Name of Julius the Third, and
King John sent D. Alonso de Lancastre to Complement him upon his Promotion to
S. Peter's Chair. Most of the Copper Coin of the Kingdom having been carried
out, because the Metal was worth more than it was coined for, the King new
coined other Pieces, New Coin.
which being much under the value, the Kingdom was soon filled with it
counterfeit from other Parts. Though Prince John had his Family settled before,
yet he kept not House apart from his Father till this Year 1551. 1551.
Certain French and Turkish Pirates infesting the Coasts of Spain and Portugal,
the King prevailed with the Emperor to fit out some Ships to scour those Seas;
1552.
he did the same himself, and they were appointed their several Stations, with
Orders, upon occasion, to join and assist one another.

3. A Match being concluded for Prince John with the Princess Joanna, 1553.
Daughter to Charles the Fifth, and Elizabeth, Prince John Marries Joanna,
Daughter to Charles the Fifth.
the Prince's Aunt, and her Portion settled at 360000 Ducats; the Duke of
Aveyro, and the Bishop of Coimbra went with a numerous and splendid Retinue to
receive her upon the Frontiers. She came to Elvas about the end of November. At
Barreyro the King met and conducted her thence to Lisbon, where a few days
after she was married to the Prince, to the general Joy of all the Kingdom,
hoping a numerous Issue from them. But all Humane hopes are vain, for the
Prince died the Second of January following. 1554.
His Distemper was an inward consuming Fever, Prince John dies.
which being supposed to proceed from too much use of his Wife, she was removed
from him to the Queen's Apartment. There the Prince's Death was kept from her
knowledge, the King visiting her without Mourning. The Princess was left with
Child, and on the 19th. of January brought forth a Son, The Princess delivered
of a Son
who was called Sebastian. The Princess being out of danger, was acquainted
with the Death of the Prince, and went into strict Mourning. She would have cut
off her Hair, in token of Sorrow, but the King would not permit it. Being one
Night in Bed with her Husband there appeared to her a Woman in Mourning, who
giving one blast vanished, as if she had foretold all her Delights would vanish
into Air. Other Nights she perceived the Lights in her Chamber put out without
seeing any Body to do it. Twice being at a Window with her Ladies, she saw many
Men clothed after the Moorish Fashion, with Torches in their Hands, cast
themselves into the River. All these were looked upon as unhappy Omens of the
Prince's Death, and other Calamities that ensued.

4. Prince Philip of Spain, Brother to the Widow Princess, being upon his
Departure for England, to marry Mary the Heiress of that Crown; by his
Ambassadors desired of King John, that he would suffer the Princess to return
to Spain, to Govern that Kingdom. In May, the Princess set forward from Lisbon,
The Princess Governs Spain.
attended by Prince Lewis, as far as Arroyolos; where he delivered her to the
Duke of Braganca, who conducted her to the Borders of the Kingdom, and there
gave her up to the Bishops of Osma. and Badajoz, and to D. Garcia de Toledo,
who was Lord Steward. She Governed Spain with Discretion, and Founded a
Monastery and Hospital in Madrid. This Summer sailed from Lisbon, D. Peter da
Cunha with Five Ships and Four Galleys, to Guard the ^^ast of Algarve. Being in
the Bay of Tavira, An Engagement
he discovered the famous Turkish Pirate, Xaramet Arraez, with Eight Galleys.
D. Peter gave orders to engage them, but the Ships not being able to come up
for want of Wind, he engaged with only his Four Galleys. The Admiral Galleys
attacked one another, and at first the Portuguese had the worst; whereupon the
Turks boarder her, but were beaten out; and Fortune changing, D. Peter took the
Turk. The other Three Christian Galleys boarded as many of the Infidels,
whereof they took two, and sunk the Third. The remaining Turkish Galleys,
seeing these lost, fled. Of the the Turks 150 were killed, and 100 taken, 230
Christian Slaves were released, and 40 Portuguese perished. Two Portuguese left
ashore when the Galleys went out to meet the Enemy, swam aboard with their
Swords in their Mouths. D. Peter returned Victorious to Lisbon, where he
maintained the Turk his Prisoner, till he was exchanged for a Turk, who turning
Christian, was called Peter Paul, and had behaved himself so well, that the
Command of the Galley was given him; but he being taken by the Infidels and
carried to Mazagam, had certainly been put to Death, but was spared only upon
Account of Xaramet, for whom he was exchanged.

5. On the the 27th. of November, 1555, 1555.
died Prince Lewis the Delight of Portugal, Prince Lewis dies.
and a Person of singular Learning, Judgment, Courage, Generosity, and Piety.
He went twice into Castile, once to agree with the Emperor about reducing the
King of France to forbear trading in the Portuguese Conquests, which he
effected. The Second time, to Conclude a Peace betwixt the Emperor and King of
France. He built a stately Palace at Salvaterra, but lived not to finish it.
The following Year, the King settled the Rules of Precedence, 1556.
about which there had been great Contests; ordering that all Titles should
take place according to Seniority. Now the Misfortunes of this Crown seem to be
Complete, 1557.
for the King died aged 55 Years, The King dies.
when he was ripest for Government, and left the Crown to Prince Sebastian then
unfit for Rule, as being but Three Years old. He was suddenly snatched away,
yet not so but he had time to end his Life like a Christian. He was of a mean
Stature, rather inclined to Fat than Leanness, his Complexion ruddy, his Eyes
dark Blew, but lively, In matters of Justice he always inclined most to Mercy,
was a great lover of Peace, made an excellent choice of Ministers, and loved
not to heap many Employments upon one Man. In the Year 1553, he founded the
University at Coimbra, and afterward with great charge brought Professors to
it from Paris. The Ancient Aqueduct, built by Sertorius at Evora, was by him
repaired; much was added by him to the Building of the Monastery of Belem; by
him also the Custom House, and Arsenals were erected; as also the Churches of
our Lady of Grace, S. Francis, and S. Rocque; besides many other public Works.
All the religious Orders were by him reduced to live up to the rigor of their
Rules; and Houses founded for all sorts of Women to retire to. He instituted
the Council of Conscience, and that of the Military Orders. No want ever
prevailed with him to lay heavy Taxes on his Subjects. Though he heard the Advice
of many, he always followed his own Opinion, which was the Cause he often erred.

6. To conclude, King John proved an excellent Prince, and singular Champion of
the Catholic Religion. His Children were as follows: First, Alonso, who died a
Child. Secondly, Mary, First Wife to Philip the Second of Spain. Thirdly,
Elizabeth. Fourthly, Beatrix. Fifthly, Emanuel. Sixthly, Philip. Seventhly,
Denis, all which died young. Eighthly, John, who married the Princess Joanna,
Daughter to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and died soon after. Ninthly,
Antony, who lived not out a Year. His Bastard Issue was: First, Emanuel, who
died a Child. Secondly, Edward, Archbishop of Braga, a Prelate of Piety and
Learning.

7. In India Nunho da Cunha overthrew the King of Monbaca, Actions abroad duing
his Reign.
and slew him of Cambaya. D. John de Castro with such wonderful Courage, as
rather seemed Rashness, Engaging a vast Multitude at the Second Siege of Diu,
obtained one of the most wonderful Victories that raised the Renown of the
Portuguese Valor. Hector de Silveyra, besides many other remarkable Actions,
subdued the King of Adem. George de Albuquerque with only 80 Men, held out a
Siege against the King of Bintam, who had 12000. D. Simon de Meneses burnt the
City Bracalor. Peter de Silva defended Malaca against the Power of Five
Confederate Kings. Thus many others in Asia and Africa, and even the Portuguese
Women at Zafin, showed their Valor, helping to defend that Place against the
Moors. The Particulars of these Actions belong to the Books of the Portuguese
Asia and Africa, to which we refer the Readers; our intent here being to Treat
only of the Portuguese Affairs in Europe.

The END of the FOURTH BOOK.
THE HISTORY OF PROTUGAL.
The Fifth BOOK.
CHAP. I.
The Life and Reign of Sebastian the First of the Name, and Sixteenth King of
Portugal; with the total Destruction of him and his whole Army in Africa, from
the Year 1554. till 1578.
1. PPrince John, ^he Birth of King Sebastian.
Son to King John the Third dying, left his Wife the Princess Joanna, Daughter
to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, with Child. On the 18th. Day of her
Widowhood, she was delivered of Prince Sebastian, at Lisbon, it being the 20th.
of January, 1554. This Prince's Birth cleared up the Clouds of Sorrow
contracted by the Death of his Father, and all the Kingdom resounded with
Expressions of Joy. On Account of his Name, Pope Paul the 4th. sent him one of
the Arrows taken out of the Body of S. Sebastian, which this Prince took for
his device, and instituted the Military Order of the Arrow, which lasted not
long. He was Three Years of Age, when, by the Death of his Grandfather, he
inherited the Crown, being left under the Government of his Grandmother Queen
Katherine, 1557.
a Princess extraordinarily qualifyed for that Charge. His Accession to the
Crown.
Yet the Queen, thinking it a dangerous Employ, quitted it when she had held it
little above Two Years. From her the Government was transferred to the Cardinal
Henry, Cardinal Henry, Regent.
the King's Uncle, who was judged to undertake it with a willing Mind. He being
much affected to the Jesuits, sent for F. Lewis Gonzalez de Camara from Rome to
be the King's Preceptor, and joined with him F. Amador Rabelo, and F. Maurice.
D. Alexius de Meneses was appointed his Governor. 1563.
He took upon him the Government on the Day of S. Sebastian, which was his
Birth Day, he being then just Fourteen Years of Age, and was warned by Peter
Nunez, the famous Mathematician that it was an Unhappy Day.

2. King Sebastian, Odd Actions of King Sebastian.
tho he showed great Zeal in matters of Religion, yet had some actions so
Extravagant as seemed to foreshew his Destruction. After going to Bed he would
rise at Midnight and go out with D. Alvaro de Meneses his Page, whom also he
would leave behind and spend an Hour or Two by himself, on the Shore, after
which he returned home. Other times he would cross the River Tagus in a Boat
with Sancho de Toar, at the same time of Night, where landing, a Boat was seen
to bring another Man from toward Bel^m; they two would walk together two
Hours, and no Body could tell who the Man was, or what they discoursed about.
Near Sintra there is a thick Wood where he used to spend two Hours, at Night,
alone. At Almeirin he lay in wait on a Tree, for a wild Boar, and hearing the
Boughs shake, he discovered a Bulk which he ran at, and laid hold of it; some
of his Company coming in, found him Wrestling with a wild Black, who having
fled from his Master, had lived long on the Mountain. Having ordered that none
should be suffered to pass by the Forts of (...) and S. Julian, without being
obliged to come in and give an Account of themselves; To see if his orders were
observed he went into a Boat, passing both these Forts through showers of
Bullets sent after him, and returned without discovering himself. He would put
out to Sea in a Galley, when the Weather was most Stormy, and laughed at the
Danger. D. Alvaro de Castro, his Favorite, dying, he went some Nights to his
Grave, where he was heard to talk, and returned with Tears in his Eyes. Most of
his time he spent among the wild Beasts in the Woods, seldom applying himself
to Business, for the dispatch whereof, by the Advice of Cardinal Henry, he made
choice of two Gentlemen, which were D. Martin Pereyra, and Martin Gonzalez de
Camara a Priest. These two discharged that Trust with much Honor; but Martin
Gonzales wholly Monopolized all the King's Favor to himself.

3. Tho the Kingdom was miserably exhausted, The King prepares for an
Expedition into Africa.
the King, who had fixed his Mind upon the Conquest of Africa, ceased not to
make vast Preparations for that Enterprise. All that Flattered him, upon this
score, were advanced to his Favor; but such as more prudently represented the
mighty difficulties and dangers of that Enterprise, were soon removed from his
Presence. Even his Grandmother, for giving Advice against this undertaking,
became so irksome to him, that she was upon departing to Castile; yet he was
again reconciled to her. Whilst the Kingdom was thus tossed with various
agitations at home, Exploits in India.
several Fleets arrived from India, and brought Advice of the Progress the
Portuguese made in those Parts. D. Constantine, Son to James Duke of Braganca,
had taken the City Damam. D. Lewis de Ataide made Bracalor Tributary, and with
600 Portuguese defended the City Goa, against Hidalcan, who Besieged it with
100000 Indians, 2000 Elephants, and 400 pieces of Cannon. D. Francis
Mascarenhas held out nine Months in Chaul, against Nizamaluco, who Besieged it
with 150000 Men. George de Moura, and Antony Chale, raised the Siege of Onor,
the same was done at the Town of Chale. D. Leonis Pereyra defended Malaca
against the King of Achem. D. James de Meneses destroyed many Places on the
Coast of Malabar, and all the Kingdom of Ma^galor: These, and many other such
notable Victories, which may be seen at large in the Portuguese Asia, excited
the young, unadvised, but ambitious King, to attempt the Conquest of Africa,
that he might not be outrun in glory by any of his Subjects.

4. Inflamed with these aspiring Thoughts, he went the first time into Africa
at twenty Years of Age. To this purpose he sent D. James de Sousa, 1574.
Governor into the Kingdom of Algarve, Sebastian passes over into Africa
with Orders to Ship off the Forces raised for that Expedition. Antony,
Bastard-Son to Prince Lewis, was sent before to Tangier; many Gentlemen
followed him, so that he made up a Body of 800 Horse. The King was resolved for
Africa, and yet had no Fleet, and all his Friends dissuaded that Voyage. He
feigning he went to divert himself at Sintra, ordered D. Alvaro de Noronha,
with Three Galleys, to meet him at Cascais, where on a sudden he Embarked,
ordering Simon de Vega, who guarded the Coast, with one Galley and five Ships
to follow him. All that followed him, seeing themselves shipped just in their
Hunting Apparel, stood amazed. From Cape S. Vincent the King sent Messengers
with Letters to all Cities, Towns, and the Gentry, informing them with his
Designs, that they might follow him. Many from all Parts resorted to him, both
by Sea and Land. The Cardinal, Prince Henry, was left Governor of the Kingdom.
The King was received in Africa with great Joy by his Subjects; but not with
much Terror of his Enemies, for they perceived his Preparations were not
suitable to the Undertaking. He hunted there as if he had been at home, and
made several Inroads into the Country, which provoked the Moors in great
numbers, under the Command of the Alcayde Cid Admubenania, Viceroy of Mequines,
to draw together to oppose him. The Multitude was great, and advanced
Confidently, seeing the small number of Christians. Our Cannon played upon
them, and the Infidels gave the first Onset, in which many of them that were
foremost fled. The King was always in the Front, and with his Example, so
encouraged his Men, He defeats the Moors, and returns to Lisbon.
that they cleared the Field of the Enemy. Next Day the King expected the Enemy
in the same Place, but they thought not good to attack him; nor did he
prosecute his Victory, saying* He came not to make War, but to visit his
Garrisons. He returned to Lisbon in November, at such time as it was feared he
was lost; for News was brought of his embarking at Tangier, and a violent Storm
had long ^osted him at Sea.

5. Before this time a Match had been proposed for King Sebastian, with
Margaret, second Daughter to Henry the second, King of France. And Ambassador
was sent to King Philip the second of Spain, by King Sebastian, at his return
out of Africa, to incline him to give him his Daughter Clara Eugenia to wife;
she was afterward married to the Archduke Albertus, and the result of the
Embassy was, 1576.
That the two Kings should meet at Guadalupe. He has an interview with the King
of Spain.
To save expense, King Sebastian traveled by the Post, with several Persons of
Quality, and as soon as he came into the Borders of Castile, was Magnificently
Entertained at the Cost of King Philip, who had also ordered all the Keys of
the Towns he passed through to be delivered to him. Nine Days after the King's
Departure, the great Warehouses of Merchant Goods, next to the King's Palace,
were accidentally Blown up, with such force, that the Noise was heard at
Santarem, which is fourteen Leagues distant, and great Stones, and pieces of
Timber were cast far from the Place, and many remote Buildings were shaken.
King Philip met our Sebastian the Day before Christmas-Eve, half a League from
Guadalupe. They embraced friendly, and then Philip saluted the Portuguese
Noblemen; Sebastian as the Stranger went first into the Coach. Fifteen Days
they stayed at Guadalupe. Philip endeavored to dissuade the Portuguese from
his designs upon Africa, but not prevailing, promised to assist him with 50
Galleys, and 5000 Men; and contracted at his return from that Expedition, to
deliver to him his Daughter. 1577.
After this they parted, with the same expressions of Love and Affections as
they had met, and King Sebastian in his return home, presented the Spanish
Gentry and Officers that attended him.

6. Being come to Lisbon, Preparations for a second Voyage into Africa.
he hasted his Preparations for a second Voyage into Africa; to which he was
the more encouraged by Muley Hamet, who was at War with his Uncle Muley Maluco
for the sovereignty of Morocco, and being worsted offered to remain Tributary
to Portugal, if enthroned by the King. Cid Adelcherim, Lord of Arzila having
sided with Hamet, delivered up Arzila to Edward de Meneses, Governor of
Tangier, who sending for Succors to the King, there was scarce enough found in
the Magazines to furnish him; whereby, King Sebastian perceived how impossible
it was for him to fit out a Royal Fleet that Year. Nevertheless, he ceased not
to use all possible means for forwarding his Design. To this effect he had a
free Gift of 15000 Duccats from the Clergy. The Croisade was set on foot to
(...) Money* a Tax laid upon Salt, Donatives required of the People, Money
borrowed of rich Men, the Revenues of the Crown anticipated, and a great Sum
raised of the Convert Jews, on Account of a general Pardon granted them.
Besides this, they listed none but the basest sort of People that had no Money
to buy themselves off, Several Prodigies.
and were carried away by force. King John the Third's Ghost is said to have
appeared to F. Lewis de Moura, foretelling the ill success of this Enterprise.
About the same time a vast number of Fishes called Espada's; or Sword-fish,
were cast a Shore, one whereof of an extraordinary Bigness, had upon it a
Cross, from the Arms of which hung two Scourges, and the number of that Year,
1578.
which was 1578. Armies were seen fighting in the Air, in the Province bewixt
Duero and Minho. Colonel Vasco de Silveira always heard a doleful Voice
following of him; and one Night, in the Field of Almeyria saw a great Fantome
it proceeded from, which being by him asked the cause of its Groans, answered,
I bewail my self and you, seeing you and those I always loved, engaged in so
great a Disaster. This same Hobgoblin was seen by him near the King's Tent, in
the Field of Alcacer, the Night before the Battle.

7. Notwithstanding all these Preparations, The King not to be moved from his
Resolution.
there wanted not some who urged the King ought not to expose his Person; but
he, to divert them, caused Edward de Meneses, Governor of Tangier, to signify
by Letters to him, that the Moors were wholly unprovided. These he showed in
Council, and because D. John Mascarenhas persisted to contradict him, he caused
a Consult of Physicians to declare, That tho a Man had been brave in his Youth,
he might become a Coward in his old Age. D. Lewis de Ataide known for his brave
Exploits in India, he sent thither again, after having chosen him General of
his Army, and this because he advised him to be very circumspect in this
Affair. The Citizens of (...) protested to the King, that if he persisted in
his Resolution they would detain him by force. The King of Morocco, tho he were
well provided against this Invasion, failed not to exhort King Sebastian to
Peace; but neither these Motives, nor King Philip of Spain his failing to send
the promised Supplies of 50 Galleys, and 5000 Men, could stop this unfortunate
Prince from running headlong to his Ruin. All things being in readiness for his
Departure, the King would have appointed Henry the Prince Cardinal to Govern
the Kingdom in his Absence; but he refusing, Five Governors were appointed,
viz. D. George de Almeyda Archbishop of Lisbon, Peter de Alcacova Surveyor of
the Revenue, Francis de S^a, D. John Mascarenhas, and the Secretary Michael de
Moura.

8. On the 14th. of June, The King and Nobility Embark.
King Sebastian, attended by all the Nobility and Gentry, rode to the
Cathedral, where his Standard was Blessed, on which was the Figure of our
Savior Crucified. He returned not to Court, but to expedite what was yet
wanting, A Fleet of 1000 Sail.
went directly aboard his Galley. The River was covered with 1000 Sail, all
filled with such gaudy, but ill disciplined Forces, that they seemed rather to
carry a rich Prey to the Enemy than Weapons to Fight. On the 24th. of June, the
Fleet sailed from Lisbon. Landmen.
The Land Forces made up the number of 18000. 18000
At Cadiz the King stayed Seven Days to gather all his Fleet, and sailing
thence, anchored before Tangier on the 6th. of July, about Midnight. The Moor*
Hamet sent his Son Muley Xeque that Night to visit the King, and came himself
in the Morning. Hence the King removed to Arzila, where the Moors that were of
his Party joined him. Larache is Five Leagues distant from this Place; Thither
he was first designed to go by Sea, and now the Resolution was taken to March
by Land. The Army lands at Arzila.
The Forces landed, and numerous Troops of the Enemy approaching to discover,
the King threw himself into all Dangers, envying others every opportunity of
gaining Honor. Here he stayed longer than he ought to have done, and
Provisions began to grow scarce. Having given all necessary Orders, and taking
five Days Provision, the King advanced on the 25th. of July toward Larache,
and continued his marches till the 4th. of August, when he encamped between the
Rivers Haiuad Macharim, and Lucus, and where he was informed that the King of
Morocco was himself at hand, which was not then expected. The Enemy immediately
passed the River Lucus, covering the Hills and Plain with 150000 Men, most of
them Horse.

9. The Christians had marched Seven Days with only Five Days Provision, The
Christian, and Moorish Armies engage.
and therefore it was thought necessary not to delay the Fight till next Day.
The Enemy perceiving it, advanced in the Form of a Half Moon to enclose the
Portuguese Army which was drawn up in the best manner time would permit. Both
Kings having with their Presence in all Parts encouraged their Men, the signal
of Battle was given on both sides. Having well nigh encompassed the Christians,
the Infidels began to play their Cannon, which disordered those that had charge
of it in the Portuguese Army. After a short pause, the King gave the Charge;
others following his Example, great slaughter was in a short time made among
the Moors. Yet the Multitude began to prevail, when the Castilians, Italians,
and Germans, falling on, routed a multitude of Barbarians; so that the
Christians, in the heat of the Action, began to cry Victory. On a sudden a
Voice was heard to cry, Halt, Halt; which most Men obeyed, till seeing the
Enemy return upon them, they renewed the Fight with almost as great Success as
before, the King in Person doing Wonders. He of Morocco thinking all lost,
advanced a Horseback to Encourage his Men, The King of Morrocco slain.
but soon fell down dead. Hamet Taba, a Renegado, put him into a Litter, and
feigned he gave out Orders from him. Halican, a Renegado Portuguese, Encouraged
the Infidels, and was by some taken for the King himself. The Germans did
Wonders, but the Portuguese Foot being undisciplined was disordered by the
Enemies Cannon. The Rout of the Christians.
Now all began to be in Confusion, which the King perceiving, he performed
Actions beyond belief, rushing into the midst of his Enemies, not as a General,
but as the bravest of Soldiers. George de Albuquerque meeting him gave him his
Horse to carry him off, but he mounting Charged again into the thick of the
Enemy. D. Antony, Bastard-Son to Prince Lewis, was much wounded, and the King
offered him his Horse, as did Christopher de Tavora. King Sebastian meeting
Lewis de Brito, with the Royal Standard stripped and wrapped about him, cried
out, Hold it fast, and let us die upon it. Christopher de Tavora advised the
King to suffer himself to be taken, but he being offended at the Advice, fell
in again among the Moors; where being seized, Brito rescued him, and was
himself made Prisoner, and with him the Standard was taken, which afterward
certain Portuguese bought at Fez, for a small matter. Brito taken saw the King
at distance, no Enemy pursuing him; and afterward D. Lewis de Lima met him
making toward the River. This is the last time he was seen by any of his
People, tho others say he was found dead after the Battle; and others more
^ondly expect his return to this Day; but where he died only God knows. Hamet
the Moor, that sided with him* was drowned in passing the River.

10. To reckon what Men of Note were slain, Of 18000 Men, only 50 escape.
were tedious and needless, since of 18000 Combatants, that composed that Army,
only 50 escaped being killed or taken. The Body of Hamet the Moor being carried
to the new King of Morocco, he caused it to be flayed, and hung on the Walls of
Fez; his Son Muley was brought to Portugal, and became a Christian. Some will
have it, that the Body of King Sebastian was also found, but others deny it. A
rumor of this Disaster was spread abroad at Lisbon before any body brought the
News, till at last D. James de Sousa the Admiral returned home, after having
waited two days at Larache to take up any that escaped, and chiefly in hopes of
the King, who was not known to be dead. Some would have it, that he came in the
Fleet, but Landing, had absconded for shame. However, there being no tidings of
him, till an Account was brought from Africa, that his Body was found, it was
resolved that the Cardinal, Prince Henry, should succeed him in the Crown. Come
Counterfeits Personate King Sebastian.
Nevertheless, upon the vain Rumor of King Sebastian's being still alive, four
or five base Fellows had afterward the Impudence, to Personate him* causing
thereby no small Troubles* Many other Prodigies are reported to have happened,
besides what we before related; but being very dubious, it will be needless to
repeat more of them.

11. King Sebastian, The Character of King Sebastian.
as to his Inclinations, was Religious, Merciful, a Lover of Justice, and no
less Bountiful than any of his Predecessors. As to Stature, he was of the
largest size, and well proportioned; fair of Complexion, his Eyes blue, his
Countenance Majestic, his Strength more than ordinary, and his Heart
undaunted. He died in the 25th. Year of his Age, and 21st of his Reign, but the
11th. after he took the Government into his own Hands, and lies buried in the
Monastery of Belem. In his Time the value of Copper Money was abated, to
prevent the Importation of it from Foreign Parts. On the contrary the Silver
was raised, which drew much out of Spain. King Sebastian coined some Pieces of
Gold, worth 1000, others of the value of 750 Royals, for himself to give away
with his own Hand.

CHAP. II.
The Life and Reign of Henry, the First of the Name, and Seventeenth King of
Portugal; from the Year 1512, till 1580.
1. CArdinal Henry, Birth of K. Henry.
Eighth Son to King Emanuel, and Seventh by his Second Wife, Queen Mary, was
Born at Almeyrin on the last day of January, 1512. Pope Paul the Third sent him
the Cardinal's Cap, and he was at once Archbishop of Braga, Lisbon, and
Coimbra, Abbot of the Famous Monastery of Alcobaca, and twice Governor of the
Kingdom; though unfit for the Crown, so fit for the Mitre, that upon the Death of
Pope Paul, he had many Votes in the Conclave to succeed him. Whilst Governor,
he never forbore to Act as a Prelate; and though a Prince of the Church, he
performed all the Duties of a private Priest. He was at Alcobaca when the News
was brought of the loss of the King his Nephew, 1578.
and his Army. The Governors sent him this Advice by D. John Serran,
Provincial of the Jesui^^. He immediately set out for Lisbon, where, upon his
arrival, the public sorrow was renewed, upon the Consideration that the
Inheritance of the Crown should fall to him, then 67 Years of Age, and the last
of the Male Line. Henry being come to Lisbon, called to him the Duke of
Braganca, and other Persons of Knowledge and Experience; and seeing there was
yet no certain Account of his Nephew's being dead or alive, the Council, and a
number of able Lawyers were ordered to Consult what was to be done in that
Case. They agreed, the Cardinal, though a Priest, was capable of Inheriting the
Crown; Cardinal Henry first declared Protector.
but it being yet doubtful what was become of the King, he should therefore
take upon him the Government, with the Title of Protector, which he accordingly
did in the Palace of the Duke of Braganca on the 22d. of August.

2. Soon after his entering upon the Government, He is crowned King*
the News of the King's Death was brought, and his Funeral Obsequies were
performed with general Lamentation. On the 28th. of August, after having said
Mass, the new King and Bishop, Henry, proceeded to the Church of All Saints
Hospital, where he had before received the Mitre, now to put on a Crown. He was
the second Melchisedeck, for since the first, till him, none ever was at once
both Priest and King. The Ceremony of his Inauguration was performed with no
less Lamentation than Pomp, and he returned from the Church to the Palace a
Temporal as well as Spiritual Prince. A few days after his Exaltation, came the
News, that Antony, Bastard-Son to Prince Lewis, having escaped out of Slavery,
was at Arzila, and though much offended at him before, he extremely rejoiced to
hear of his Safety. Antony by his Affability had gained the Affections of all
Men, and the People looked upon him to have as good a Title to the Crown as
King John the First had almost two Ages before; and in Truth, the Right was the
same, for they were both Bastards. Antony had fallen into the Hands of a poor
Moor, who ransomed him for a small matter, being told, he was a Priest* and if
not presently redeemed, would lose his Benefice, and thereby become incapable
of paying his Ransom. About 16000 Persons remained in Captivity, to Redeem
whom, 20 Trinitarians were sent to Fez and Morocco. F. Francis da Costa settled
the Ransom of 80 Gentlemen at 400000 Ducats, and paid down 300000, remaining
himself an Hostage for the rest; Ingratitude of certain Gentlemen.
yet those Gentlemen getting home, never thought of releasing him, till he was
bought off^by the Kingdom, the Moor refusing to take any thing for him but
Pearls. F. Amador Rebelo, a Jesuit, was sent to Argiers, to Ransom those that
had been sold thither. King Philip of Spain obtained of the Moors the Body of
King Sebastian, which he afterward brought into Portugal. He also redeemed the
Duke of Barcelos, Son to John, Duke of Braganca, and afterward entertained him
with all possible expressions of Affection in Castile.

3. No sooner was the new King enthroned, Several Pretenders to the Succession
of the Crown,
but all those who pretended a Right, began to put in their Claims to the
Inheritance of the Crown. Philip the Second of Spain, afterward the First of
Portugal, sent D. Christopher de Moura to condole with King Henry for the late
Loss, and to Congratulate his Accession to the Crown, without mentioning his
Title to the Succession, but with private Instructions to advance his Interest.
The Candidates were, First, King Philip of Spain, as Son to the Empress
Elizabeth, Daughter to King Emanuel, Secondly, the Lady Katherine of Braganca,
Daughter to Prince Edward, who was Brother to the Empress. The difference
betwixt these two Pretenders was, that the Lady, though a Female, claimed the
Crown, as descended of the Male; and the King, as being himself the Male, though
descended of a Female. Of these the former was the better Title without
dispute, but neither so good as that of Alexander, Prince of Parma, in the
Right of his Mother, who was elder Sister to the Lady Katherine. The Duke of
Savoy had a Title, but not so good, by his Wife, the Princess Beatrix, Daughter
to King Emanuel. Antony, Prior of Crato, pretended to be Lawful Son to Prince
Lewis, Brother to Prince Edward, the Empress, and Duchess of Savoy; but having
never been owned as such by his Father, or any other Person, that was mere
Pretense. The People pleaded, the Right of Election was in them, and showed
Prescription, as in the case of their first King, of King Alonso the Third, and
King John the First, all which in reality were but Fortunate Usurpers. The Pope
also would Inherit this Crown, as being now devolved to the Church, being in
the Hands of a Cardinal, and urged, that it had been Tributary to the Sea of
Rome; which was true, but a poor Title for Inheritance. Katherine of Medicis,
Queen of France, alleged, she was descended of King Alonso the Third, by his
first Wife Maud, Countess of Bologne, on whom he had a Son; but her Title was
rejected, as over antiquated, being above 330 Years standing. Savoy and Parma
were soon thrown out, because too weak to carry on their Pretenses, not because
they wanted a Title. The People attempted to carry it by Election, but
miscarried. The Dispute rested betwixt Philip of Spain, Katherine of Braganca,
and Antony, Prior of Crato, we shall soon see where the Controversy ended.

4. Several Methods were proposed to determine these Differences. Means
proposed to reconcile tha^ different Pretensions
Some would have one of King Philip's Sons Marry the Daughter of the Duke of
Braganca. Others, more inclined to Antony, would have that Daughter given to
him. Others there were, who advised the Cardinal, though old, and a Priest,
should Marry. Many Pamphlets were spread abroad, some of them against King
Philip, and others for him, which last were so well penned, that they seem to
have inclined King Henry to his Interest, as they did many others throughout
the Kingdom. But the City of Lisbon openly declared its aversion to him,
offering to raise 20000 Men, and threatening to burn the Houses of those that
favored him. Antony, Grand Prior of Crato, that is, of the Knights of Malta in
Portugal, labored in vain to prove himself Legitimate, and King Henry seeing
him persist obstinately in that Design, banished him the Court. The City of
Lisbon now again pressed King Henry to obtain a Dispensation of the Pope to
Marry; he excused himself on account of his Ecclesiastical Dignity, rather than
his Age or Infirmities. No Excuses availing, D. Duarte de Castello-Branco, and
Dr. Ruy de Castanheda were appointed to go Ambassadors to Rome; but they went
not, for the King still urging his Inability, and his Infirmities being
apparent, his Excuses were at last received.

5. Since there were no hopes of Issue in King Henry, Five Persons appointed to
Govern after the King's Death.
he was pressed to declare who ought to Succeed him, which he refused, leaving
it to Governors and Judges to determine after his Death. For appointing of
them, he presently summoned the Cortes or Parliament, who named Fifteen Persons
for Governors, of whom the King chose five, which were D. George de Almeyda,
Archbishop of Lisbon, D. John Mascarenhas, Francis de Sa, James Lopez de Sousa,
and D. John Tello de Meneses. Also 24 Lawyers were nominated, and of them 11
elected to be Judges; and the Names of them all to be kept close, till the
Death of the King. All swore to stand by these Decrees. The substance of the
Oath was, The same appointed to decide the Controversy concerning the
Succession.
That the King dying, they would obey the Governors appointed, and would
acknowledge him for their Lawful Sovereign, that should be declared such by
them. The Duke of Braganca, as one of the Candidates, swore to stand to their
Determination; the same did Antony, the Grand Prior, yet afterward he recanted
before the Pope's Nuncio, alleging, he had sworn for fear of his Uncle. King
Philip's Ambassadors refused to take the Oath for their Master, pleading, he
was Lawful Heir of the Crown, and therefore not obliged to allow of that
Decision. The Cortes being broke up, each of the Candidates, which were now but
three, viz. King Philip, the Duke of Braganca, and the Grand Prior, began to
speak their Thoughts more boldly. The two latter were soon banished the Court
by King Henry; who perceiving that Antony grew haughty, having obtained a
surreptitious Judgment of his Legitimacy, got leave of Pope Gregory XIII. to
inspect into and determine that Affair. After some time spent in enquiring into
it, he at length positively declared him Illegitimate. The Grand Prior,
dismayed at this Sentence, and the great Power of his Adversary, proposed to
King Philip's Ambassadors, that he would be content with the Kingdom of
Algarve, and Title of King, or else that he might have the Government of the
Kingdom for Life, with a Revenue of 300000 Ducats, half of them to remain to
his Heirs. King Philip answered, That Kingdom was too small for so many Kings.

6. King Henry ceased not to prosecute the Grand Prior, and sent Orders to
Apprehend him at Coimbra, where he then was, but he made his Escape, and lurked
about in the Province between the Rivers Duero and Minho. Next, he issued out
his Proclamation, Summoning him to Surrender himself, but he obeyed not. The
King was now at Almeyrin, The Plague at Lisbon
whither he fled from the Plague that raged at Lisbon, and spread it self
throughout the Kingdom. There he summoned before him the Principal Members of
the Cortes or Parliament, and the Ambassadors, before whom he declared himself
for King Philip, ordering them to Capitulate with him. The Lords Spiritual and
Temporal were easily brought to approve of the King's Proposition, but the
Commons opposed it. Soon after, the King Assembles the Cortes, intending to put
an end to this Controversy; but all he or the Nobility could do, availed not,
so that the Division ran as high as ever it had been. The King's Death now
drawing on apace, Katherine, Duchess of Braganca, came from Villa Viciosa,
1580*
to try if she could prevail with him to declare her his Heiress. K. Henry dies.
He heard her, and soon after, without returning any Answer, gave up the Ghost.

7. King Henry was of a middle Stature, His (...).
in shape like his Father, of a lively Spirit, patient of Labor, and in his
Youth trained in all the Exercises that belong to a Prince. Damianus de Goes
says, he understood Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, and was well read in
Mathematics, Philosophy, and Divinity. He says further of him, That he had an
absolute Command over his Passions, was temperate in Speech, a great lover of
Truth, a notable keeper of Secrets, an Enemy to Detraction, an admirer of
Justice, free in giving Advice, averse to Favorites, and inclinable to all
Virtue. Notwithstanding all these Qualities, he was a better Priest than King.
His first Spiritual Promotion was to the Priorship of Sancta Cruz, which
Monastery he reformed, and increased its Revenue. Next, he had the
Archbishopric of Braga* where he spent his Revenue, relieving the Poor in time
of Famine. The same he did at; Evora. He maintained many Foundlings, gave
Portions to Young Maids, redeemed Captives, and performed himself all the
Duties of a private Priest. At Braga he assembled a Synod, endowed Schools in
that City, repaired the Monastery of S. Fructuosus, punished severely all
Crimes in the Clergy, especially Incontinency. The Sea of Evora being added to
his other of Braga, he did the same good Offices there, and founded the
University under the Jurisdiction of the Jesuits. Many other notable Works he
performed, and being created Cardinal and Legate to the Pope, still increased
in Works of Piety.

8. In this Henry expired the Kingdom, Observations on the Rise and Fail of
Portugal.
erected by another of the same Name; the first died in the Year 1112. and the
latter was born in 1512. So that the Name of Henry, and Number 12, were the
beginning and end of this Monarchy. Thus the Seventeenth was the last Native
King of Portugal. The Moon labored under a great Eclipse when he died, 15^^.
in the 68th. Year of his Age, and second of his Reign. His Body was deposited
at Almeyrin, where he died, till King Philip translated it to the Monastery of
Belem.

CHAP. III.
The short Administration of the Five Governors. Antony, Grand Prior of Crato,
or the Order of Malta, proclaimed King by the Multitude, the short time of his
Usurpation.
1. NO sooner was King Henry dead at Almeyr^^ but the Five Governors began to
exercise (...) Power. (...).
The Commons held their Assembl^^ (...), and appeared inflexible; Martin (...)
Camara was sent to appease them, and promise they should have all the Records
relating to the Succession. It was proposed the Governors should remove to
Santarem, and disband the Forces they entertained. The Prior of Crato drew near
to Lisbon, thinking the City would receive him; they ordered him to remove
farther, yet he approached nearer, and at last was admitted. The Governors and
Commons were at variance, and could agree upon no one Point. King Philip wrote
to the Governors, Parliament, and chief Cities, admonishing them to Proclaim
him King, Philip of Spain Arms to secure the Crown (...) Portugal.
and at the same time suspecting them, gathered his Forces. He chose Ferdinand
Alvarez de Toledo, Duke of Alva, then a Prisoner at Vzeda for Miscarriages in
Flanders, to be General of this Expedition. Philip removed to Guadalupe on
Pretense of Devotion, thither came to him the Portuguese Ambassadors, desiring
him to forbear Force, and stand to the Determination of the Judges; But he told
them he could not lay down Arms till he was proclaimed King. The Governors,
weary of the Commons, sent them word, they were dissolved, and might depart.
They doubted at first, but soon after obeyed. This done, the Governors, to rid
themselves of such as opposed King Philip, sent them away to the Frontiers and
other Parts, on pretense of securing the Kingdom.

2. King Philip, now at Merida, spread his Forces along the Borders of the
Kingdom, ordering the Commanders to treat such Portuguese as resorted to them,
courteously. Preparations in Portugal to oppose Philip.
The Portuguese, though they knew of these Preparations,, yet because the King
courted them, they thought he was weak. Such of the Governors as favored him,
were afraid to discover it, and therefore Francis Barreto was sent into France
to obtain 6000 Foot of that King, which done, he was to go to Rome, to move the
Pope to Mediate that King Philip might stand to Judgment. D. Elisio de Portugal
was sent to the Emperor. The Fleet was also ordered to be fitted out D. Emanuel
de Portugal erected a Wooden Fort on a Bank of Sand at the Mouth of the River,
to secure the Harbor. There being great want of Men, the Friars from the
Pulpits encouraged them to take up Arms, and became more insolent when they
incensed the Rabble to Rescue Antony Suarez, who was hanged for murdering
Ferdinand de P^ca, an Ancient Grave Man, and Alderman of the City, for that he
opposed Antony the Grand Prior by whose order he was assassinated, and he now
pressed the Governors to declare him Legitimate. D. John Tello, one of the
Governors was sent to Belem with absolute Power, and there joined with D.
Emanuel de Portugal, both of them being Mortal Enemies to Castile. These Two
wanting Money designed to sell the Crown Jewels but Christopher de Moura
deterred any from buying, affirming, They would lose their Money, for that the
King would take them from them, and their Persons would be in Danger.

3. The Portuguese Ambassadors followed the King to Badajoz, where he dismissed
them, with the same Answer as before. The Governors still remained irresolute,
but resolved to secure themselves, and therefore removed to Setuval, that being
a stronger Place. The Duke of Braganca and Spanish Ambassador followed them,
and they began to talk of summoning the Cortes or Parliament, as if the Duke of
Alva were not now upon his March. Elvas, and other places, delivered to King
Philip.
In the mean while, the City Elvas was delivered up to King Philip, there
being. Two Parties in the Place, and Sixty Horse appearing before it and
cutting off its Water. The same happened at Olivenza. Serpa, M^ura,
Campo-Mayor, Aronches, and Portalegre did the same. Antony, the Grand Prior at
Santarem, was by the Rabble proclaimed Protector of the Kingdom, Antony, the
Bastard, declared Protector by the Rabble.
and he going to lay the Foundation of a Fort, a Base Fellow called Antony
Baracho flourishing a Clout on the point of his Sword, cried out Antony,
Antony, King of Portugal. All the Multitude took the word, and pursued it, so
that none durst contradict them. Only he made some seeming Opposition, which
was but to heighten their Desires. Mounting on Horseback he was conducted to
the Church, and thence to the Town Hall, where all present swore Allegiance to
him. This done, he resolved to set forward for Lisbon, believing himself secure
if received there. This News was soon carried to the Governors at Setuval. But
before we proceed, let us give some further Account of this Mob King.

4. Antony, Prior of Crato, that is of the Order of Malta, was born at Lisbon
in the Year 1531, being Bastard-Son to Prince Lewis, the Son of King Emanuel,
by V^^lante Gomez; yet he made efforts to prove himself Legitimate, but all
unsuccessfully. He was bred to Learning, but made but little progress, 1531.
only understood Latin, and had some rudiments of other Sciences. The Birth and
Education of Antony Prior of Crato.
His Particular Talent was a smooth Tongue, which was very Attractive.
Incontinency was so predominant in him, that in the depth of his Misfortunes he
could not refrain from it. Upon some Distaste given him at Court, he went into
Castile and was kindly Entertained by King Philip. 1560.
At Tangie^ he served against the Moors, and gained Reputation; 1568.
and Accompanied King Sebastian in both his Voyages to Africa, where, as we
have seen, he remained in Captivity. Being ransomed, he returned to Portugal,
and soon began to aspire to the Throne. Finding King Philip so powerful an
Enemy, he offered to Compound, but his Proposals were rejected. What followed
till his being proclaimed King at Santarem, we have seen above. The Governors
hearing thereof, and fearing he would soon be upon them, Fortifyed themselves.
At Lisbon all things were in the greatest Confusion imaginable. King Philip was
at Badaj^z* and the power of his Army much extolled; which spurred all Antony's
Followers to press the Kingdom to Declare for him, that so united, they might
the better oppose the Spaniards. The Council of Lisbon, refused to admit Antony
as King, but would receive him as Protector; which he refusing, they prepared
to oppose him.

5. Antony advanced to Lisbon, Antony, enters Lisbon, (...).
and tho but slenderly attended, entered the City; all that saw him saluting
him as King. He went to the Townhouse, and being there proclaimed; all that
were present swore Allegiance to him, which done, he immediately sent to
acquaint the Duke of Braganca, the Governors, and other Noblemen, of his
Exaltation. His next care was to raise Men, and dispatch Expresses to England,
and France, to crave Succors. Having gathered 1500 Men, he set forward for
Setuval, where the Governors were, sending before the young Count de (...),
his great Favorite, with a Letter, admonishing them to submit. They thought to
have defended themselves, but the Gount being possessed of the Gates, they fled
away privately, and met again at (...), where they gave their definitive
Sentence in Favor of King Philip. Antony hasted to Setuval, and having secured
the City, returned to Lisbon, where the Forts of S. Julian, and (...). The Duke
of (...) who had retired to his Town of Portel, sent thence to King Philip,
offering to come to Composition, but it was now too late, for that Prince was
too far advanced. The Duke a^ Alva had passed the River Caya in June, which
parts the two Kingdoms, with 20000 Men, 6000 Carts, and 25 pieces of Cannon. He
marched peaceably as if it had been through a Country subject to his Master,
all Places submitting themselves as far as Estremoz. This Town was soon
persuaded by D. Christopher de Moura to surrender, but D. John de Azevedo held
out in the Castle, till seeing the Cannon planted against him, he endeavored
to escape, and being taken, was sent Prisoner to Villa Viciosa; the Duke of
Alva declaring he spared his Life in regard to his want of Experience. Hence
the Army moved, and took in Evora, and Monte-Mayor, and so proceeded to
Setuval, without committing any was^ in all the Country.

6. The grand Prior provided for his Defense, but wanting Men, and no Succors
coming from France, he sent the French Consul residing at Lisbon to hasten
them, and he went to spend the Money he carried. The Spanish Forces, (...) Duke
(...) Alva, (...) near to Lisbon.
Now perceiving the Duke approached, having taken Alcacer do sal near Setuval,
and being wholly unprovided to oppose him, he suffered his Officers to commit
many Extortions to raise Money. Slaves had their Freedom given them to take
Arms, Money was coined of less Weight than usual, all the Jewels of the Crown
were sold, the Money designed for Redemption of Captives seized, Convents were
searched for Money deposited in them, and the Plate of the Churches was seized.
The Friars took Arms, and went about the Streets, exciting others to do the
like. Setuval was soon surrendered to the Duke of Alva, and only a Tower held
out that secures the Haven, under which lay Three Galleons. D. Alvaro Bazan,
Marquess of Santa Cruz, coming up now with 60 Galleys, and 25 Ships, and some
Cannon being planted on an Eminency, at the first shot the Galeons surrendered,
and soon after the Tower. The Grand Prior seeing the best Part of the Kingdom
in the Power of King Philip, and the Nobility daily resort to him, began now to
suspect his own Followers. Duke de Alva* pass^^ the River Tagus.
The Duke of Alva after long consulting where to pass the River Tagus, at
length took the Advice of the Portuguese that adhered to him, which was, to go
over in the Galleys to Cascais. D. James de M^^^es lying with some Men behind a
Mountain, did not hinder the landing, and was therefore accused of Cowardice.
The Grand Prior marched out to Belem, with some few ill armed Troops, but soon
retired. The Duke took and plundered Cascais, where D. James de Meneses, being
taken, had his Head cut off. This put Lisbon, and the Grand Prior, into a great
Consternation; and he gathered about 8000 undisciplined Men, with which he
marched toward Belem on the 5th. of August. On the 4th. Day after, he removed
and posted himself on an Advantageous rising Ground over against the Bridge of
Alcantara. In the mean while the Duke advanced to batter the Fort of S. Julian.

7. D. James de Cazamo, a Spaniard, who had served the Grand Prior, came now to
him, and prevailed with him to submit himself to King Philip, but the King
remitted the whole Affair to the Duke of Alva, who broke off that Negotiation.
The F^^ts upon the River taken by the Spaniards.
The Castle of S. Julian, after being Two Days battered, was delivered up to
him. The Wooden Fort at the Bar was abandoned by the Defendants, and the
Spaniards possessed themselves of it. King Philip now published his general
Pardon to all Persons whatsoever concerned in these Broiles, except the Grand
Prior, and some other of the Heads, conditionally that they submitted by a Day
appointed. Lisbon was willing enough to embrace this offer, but feared as much
to be plundered by its armed Rabble, as by the Enemy. Eight Days the Two Armies
lay close by each other, without doing any thing. At length the Duke sent
Sanch^ de Avila with 15 Horse, and some Foot, to discover which way the Tower
of Bel^m might be attacked. A greater number of Portuguese met them, and a
Skirmish (...), tho not considerable, the Spaniards retiring. That (...) they
planted their Cannon, and the next Day the Tower was delivered to them. The
Duke perceiving the Ground Prior kept his Ground, which prevented the City
(...) from surrendering, he went in Person to take a view (...) his Camp* and
found it well seated, but not fortifyed. He resolved to attack it at Midnight,
and have strict Ordere that the City should not be plundered; King Philip having
given it him particularly in Charge. At the t^m^ appointed* he marched, the
Spanish Sh^ps and (...) then riding in the River. The Grand Prior encourage^
his M^n, which were now but a small number, and (...) disciplined. The Spanish
Army consisted of 20000 Men, the Portuguese were not above 4000. The Cannon
having played on both sides, Antony's Army routted.
the Spaniards assaulted the Bridge, where was a sharp dispute, but that once
gained, the Portuguese soon fled to the City, where Antony opened the Prisons,
and then with some few that would follow him, shifted for himself.

8. Notwithstanding the contrary Orders, the Spaniards during Three Days
plundered Lisbon, Lisbon plundered by the Spaniards.
which so displeased King Philip, that he threatened to punish all the Officers,
and so severely reproved the Duke, that he is thought to have died of Grief
Antony having stayed at Sacavem near Lisbon, removed to Santarem, which Place,
tho the first that declared him King, refused now to admit him. Thence he fled
to Coimbra, where he fortifyed himself, and having gathered 5000 Men, sent
Orders to the Province betwixt Duero and Minho, to own him King, and entered
Aveyro by force. The Towns in Africa immediately submitted, Antony, forced to
fly (...) abscond.
but the Tercera Islands stood by Antony. Sancho de Avila set out from Lisbon,
with 400 Horse, and 6000 Foot, to pursue Antony. Coimbra opened her Gates to
him, and Antony removed to Porto, which Place refusing him admittance, he began
to batter, and thereupon it was surrendered to him Sancho de Avila followed the
Grand Prior close, and coming to Porto, battered it from the same Place the
other had done, and entering plundered it. Antony escaping thence, and being
forsaken of all Men, absoncded for a long time in the Mountains. Being close
pursued at the River Lima, he had certainly been taken, but that one Thomas
Cacheyro, who still followed him, Swam over the River with him on his Back. In
this manner he fled from Place to Place, narrowly escaping in several
Disguises. King Philip offered 80000 Crowns in Gold to any that could discover
him, and the many poor People were concerned in his Escape, none ever offered
to betray him. Antony came in disguise to Lisbon, and thence to Setuval, where
a Woman assisted to hire a small Vessel for him, which carried him into
England; whence he passed into France, and was there favorably entertained by
the Queen Mother Katherine of Medicis, and her Son the Duke of Alenson, who
aspired to a Crown, and hoped if he could get Forces into Portugal, to secure
that to himself.

9. The Tercera Islands still held for Antony, (...)
and at the same time expected King Sebastian, who was killed in Africa, The
Tercera Islands for Antony.
and many pretended to prophecy the Day he would come to them. King Philip
being about to make his Entry into Lisbon, received this News from the Islands,
and therefore sent thither Peter Valdez with 600 Men and some Cannon to reduce
them. He found a very ill Reception, and therefore kept at Sea, not knowing
what to do. Advice was brought him, That D. Lope de Figueroa was preparing at
Lisbon to follow him with a greater Force; and he, that the other might not
have any share in the Honor of subduing those Islands, rashly adventured to
land. With much difficulty he got ashore upon S. James his Day, and at First
took some pieces of Cannon from the Portuguese. But Cyprian de Figueyredo, the
Governor, coming out of the City with all the Force he could make, drove
before a Herd of Oxen, which being pricked forwards upon the Spaniards, put
them into disorder, and he then falling on, drove them into the Sea, where 450
of them perished. Many Barbarities were committed toward the Dead, some being
cut in Pieces, and others dragged about the Streets. Valdez was in this
miserable Condition, when D. Lope de Figueroa came to be a Witness of his
rashness; for he could do nothing after that Loss. Upon the News that Levies
were making in England, France, and Flanders, to bring Antony into Portugal,
the King sent the Prior of Malta, to secure the Province betwixt Duero and
Minho. Ambrose de Aguiar, and Peter Peixoto, were sent to the Terceras. The
Marquis de Santa Cruz returned from Sevil, with Twelve Galleys, and Twenty
Galleons, and found there Thirty Vessels gathered from Portugal, Biscay, and
other Places. With this Force he sailed toward the Islands in July. Antony
arrives at the Tercera^ with a Fleet from France.
Antony at the same time sailed from France with Fifty eight Sail, in which
were above Seven thousand Men, commanded by Philip Strozi, and Monsieur de
Bris^^. He arrived at the Island of S. Michael, before the Spaniards, and
plundered the Town of Laguna. The Inhabitants of Punta Delgada, the chief Town
of the Island, fled to the Mountains. Ambrose de Aguiar, who had been
Governor, was dead, and now Peter Peixoto, and Laur^^^e Nogueyra commanded.
They marched out with about Three thousand Spaniards and Portuguese, to meet
the French, by whom they were defeated, and Nogueyra flying to the Fort, died
there of his Wounds. Antony, after summoning the Fort, in vain prepared to
batter it when the Spanish Fleet appearing, diverted him from that Design.

10. After several Essays made, 1582.
the Two Fleets joined Battle on the 26th. of July. Antony's Fleet destroyed by
the Spanish.
The Engagement lasted Five Hours, in which the French Admiral, and
Vice Admiral, being taken, Two great Ships sunk, and about Two thousand of
their Men slain, the rest fled. Philip Strozi being taken died of his Wounds,
as did D. Francis de Portugal, Earl of Vimioso. John de Jaen, Chaplain to the
Major General, frighted by the Cannon, ran down into the Hold, where he died
with fear. Anthony thinking some of his Commanders had not done their Duty, as
being corrupted by the Spaniards, cut off D. Duarte de Castro's Head, on
suspicion that he was one of them. He was not himself in the Fight, being then
received ashore in the Island Tercera, where he was received as King. Some of
the French Ships returned to France; others plundered the Island of Fayal. The
Marquess after his Victory, having Twenty eight Lords, Fifty Gentlemen, and a
great number of Mariners and Soldiers, Prisoners, beheaded all the former, and
hanged the latter. This done, he returned to Lisbon, carrying with him Two
India Ships he met in the way. Antony coined Money, much under Weight, wracked
the People to raise more, incited the religious Men to take Arms, and forbore
not too, in the midst of his Misery, to endeavor to corrupt Nuns. He sailed
thence in November, with Thirty Sail for France, but some of them forsook him
by the way. (...).
About the middle of February, King Philip returned to Castile. As soon as the
Season was fit for sailing, Monsieur de Chartes, a Knight of Malta, came from
France with 1200 Men to secure the Islands to (...). In July arrived there the
Spanish Fleet, consisting of Sixty Sail, and among them Twelve Galleys, which
caused admiration; for that those Vessels had never before been used in the
Ocean, but for Coasters. In this Fleet were One thousand two hundred Men
commanded by the Marquess de Santa Cruz. On the 24th. of this Month, the
Admiral would have proclaimed a general Pardon, but could not be heard. He
landed at (...) Mole, The (...)
and after Three Days resistance became absolute Master of the (...) the
Defendants flying to the Mountains. Monsieur de Chartes articled to depart with
the French, leaving their Colors. D. Emanuel de Silva the Governor, after
absconding some time, was betrayed by a Slave, taken and beheaded. His Head was
put up where he had set up that of Belchior Alfonso, for finding with King
Philip, and it is remarkable, he had said it should be taken down when his were
fixed in the Place. Some were beheaded, others hanged, and all that had any
Honors or Employments conferred by Antony, were deprived of them. All the
other Islands were easily reduced.

11. Antony having left all he possessed in the Seas, Antony flies into England.
and having no hopes of Succor in France, went over into England, the
differences betwixt King Philip and Queen Elizabeth encouraging him to hope for
assistance there. The Queen was easily persuaded to embrace this Enterprise,
and offered her Ships, and Two thousand Men that had served in Holland, but
upon very hard Terms, which were granted, and are these; That the Queen should
furnish 120 Sail, 15000 Landmen, and 5000 Mariners, for which Antony within
Two Months after he was in possession of Lisbon, should pay down Five Millions,
and 300000 Duccats a Year for ever. That the English should Traffic freely in
Portugal and India. That the Queen might bring her Fleet into Lisbon River, and
Antony should be obliged to assist her against King Philip. That the Garrisons
in Portugal should alwalys be in the hands of English, maintained by the
Kingdom. That Bishoprics should be conferred on English Catholics, and so
others too tedious to relate. Sir Francis Drake had the Command of the Fleet,
and Sir John Norris of the Land Forces, which were 22000 Men. They sailed from
Plymouth, and arrived at Coruna the 4th. of May, where they landed, and having
spent Five Days before the Place without any success, returned to their Ships
with loss. In the mean while King Philip sent Advice to Lisbon, That the
Cardin^^ Alvertus who was Governor, and the Count de (...) who was General,
might be in readiness. The English landed some Horse, and 12000 Foot at
Peniche, which Place they took, and thence coasting along, entered the River of
Li^b^^. The Count de Fuentes, with some Troops of Horse, endeavored to secure
the Country, ^et Norris marched with a great Body of Troops (...) wards Lisbon,
and fortyfied himself close to the City. There he lay some time, but still
finding that not one Portuguese came over to him, nor that Drake did not come
up the River, he marched back and embarked his Forces. Many of his Men died by
the way, of the Plague, which was got among them in Portugal, and the rest
arriving at Plymouth, spread it through all England.

12. Antony seemed now only to have come to take his last Farewell of his
Country, for ever after he resided in France, He dies in France.
though never quitting his claim to this Crown, till he died at Paris in great
Poverty, and the 64th. Year of his Age. His Body was buried in the Church of
the Nuns of Ave Maria, and the Inscription on his Tomb, calls him King. He was
endued with several good Qualities, his Person was comely, and his Countenance
pleasing. He was not unlearned, especially in Divinity, and wrote a Paraphrase
upon the Penitential Psalms. He could not marry, as being of the Military Order
of Malta; but by several* Women had the following Bastard Children: First, D.
Emanuel de Portugal, who married Emilia, Daughter to William Prince of Orange.
Secondly Christopher, who died in France. Thirdly, Peter, who became a
Franciscan Friar, and was called of the Desert, remarkable for Piety and
Learning Fourthly, Denis, who took the Habit of S. Bernard, in the Monastery of
Valbuena. Fifthly, Alonso, who served in the Galleys of Naples, where he died.
Sixthly, John, who died very Young. Seventhly, Philippa, a Bernardin Nun.
Eighthly, Luisa, a Franciscan Nun. Ninthly, and Tenthly, Two Daughters, whose
Names are not extant, but they were both kept in the Monastery of Huelgas, near
Burgos, by King Philip the Second.

CHAP. VII.
The Reign of Philip, the Second of Spain, and First of Portugal; and
Eigthteenth King, from the Year 1580, till 1598.
1. PHilip the Second of Spain, Birth of King Philip.
and First of Portugal, Son to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and the Empress
Elizabeth, Daughter of King Emanuel of Portugal, was born at Valladolid on the
23th. of March 1527. After the loss of King Sebastian in Africa, he sent Don
Christopher de Moura to condole with the New King, and Cardinal Henry, offering
his assistance in reestablishing the Kingdom in its former Splendour, and Money
for the redemption of Captives. The First he ransomed, was the Duke of
Barcelos, Son to him of Braganca, and with him several Gentlemen. King Henry
dying, and the Kingdom being in a Confusion, for that the Governors feared to
declare who was the next Heir, and the Multitude began to declare for Antony
the Grand Prior; King Philip came to Badajoz, hoping his approach would induce
the Portuguese to declare for him; but being deceived of his Expectation, he
sent the Duke of Alva who reduced all the Country with much ease, as we have
seen in the foregoing Chapter. At the time the King intended to enter the
Kingdom in Person, he fell so dangerously Sick that he was given over. He
suddenly recovered, and Ann his Queen who was with him died. Being restored to
his Health, he was received at Elvas, He enters Portugal.
D. Christopher de Moura, and Nunho Alvarez Pereyra, attending upon him as
Ministers of State for this Kingdom. Lisbon was not yet quite clear of the
Plague, and therefore he ordered the Cortes or Parliament to meet at Tomar on
the 15th. of April. In his way thither he met the Duchess of Braganca, and
they were long together, though their Discourse was not over pleasant; for the
King treated her not with all the Complement she expected, and she never gave
him the style of Majesty. Being come to Tomar, before the opening of the
Parliament, he caused himself to be Sworn King, according to the Portuguese
manner, and his Son Prince James Heir of the Crown. An Amn^sty.
Next he granted a general Pardon to all that had sided with Antony the Grand
Prior, only excepting Fifty two Persons, and excluding all religious Men, that
espoused his Quarrel, from Spiritual Promotions.

2. The Parliament was opened the 19th. of April, He holds a Parliament.
the King sitting on his Throne. The King bountifully bestowed his Favors upon
all there, and yet there were more discontented than pleased. It was proposed
to suppress the University of Coimbra, because it had supported the Grand
Prior, but the King would not suffer it to be done. What the King granted of
his own will to the Kingdom in general, Privileges granted to Portugal.
was as follows. That he will keep all their Ancient Privileges, and
Immunities. That the Parliament shall always meet within the Kingdom. That none
shall be Governor of Portugal but a Native, unless it be a Prince of the
Blood. That all Places of Trust and Honor, shall be given to Natives. That all
the Officers of the Household shall be kept up, and none but Natives shall be
such. That the same be observed in India, and America, and none but Portuguese
Ships shall be allowed to Trade thither. That all the Money coined in the
Kingdom, shall be stamped with only the Portuguese Arms. That all Church
Preferments, and Commendaries of Military Orders, shall be given to Natives.
That no New Imposition shall be laid upon the Church. That there shall be
always a Portuguese Council with his Majesty, for the Affairs of the Kingdom.
These are the Principal Heads, the others being much of the same Purport, or
less Material, I omit for brevity sake. They were in all Twenty five Articles.
King Philip bound himself by Oath to perform them, left his Blessing to such of
his Heirs as preserved, and his Curse to those that violated them.

3. The Cortes being broke up, Philip's public Entry into Lisbon.
King Philip resolved to make his solemn Entry into Lisbon, but because the
City had not yet finished the Works designed for his Reception, he staid some
Days at Almada, a Town on the opposite side of the River. On the 29th. of June
he entered the City, attended by all the Nobility, with the greatest Splendour
and Majesty imaginable. Thus ended the Calamities of this Kingdom, which had
lasted Two Years, during which short time there may be reckoned Five several
Reigns; which were that of Sebastian, of Henry, of the Five Governors, of
Antony, and now of Philip. For the easier dispatch of Business, the King
ordered there should be but Two prime Minister, viz. Antony Pineyro, Bishop of
Leyria, and D. Christopher de Moura, the former because he had no Kindred, and
the latter because he made no Account of them, for Moura was never known to
prefer any of his, though he had many. Nunho Alvarez Pereyra was made Secretary,
and was equal in Power to them, though not in Title. The King had appointed to
return to Castile in November, but Prince James dying, (...)
he was forced to call a Parliament, to cause his Second So^ (...) sworn Heir
to the Crown. 1583.
The Parliament met the beginning of the New Year, Another Parliament held.
and swore the Prince; and among other things the King granted leave for
wearing of Silks. Mary the Empress, Sister to King Philip, and her Daughter
Margaret, came to meet the King at Lisbon. The Portuguese expected the former
would have been left to govern them; Philip returns to Castile.
but the King made choice of her Son the Cardinal Albertus, Archduke of
Austria. On the 11th. of February the King set forward for Castile, carrying
with him the Lady Juliana de Lancastro, Heiress of the Noble House of Aveiro.

4. All Men began to observe how the Cardinal Albertus was qualified, Cardinal
Albertus, Governor of Portugal.
and they found his Inclinations were good. Only two things remarkable happened
during the time of his Government. One was the English Invasion, under Antony
the Grand Prior, before spoken of. The other the counterfeit Sanctity of a Nun.
The Hypocrisy of a Nun.
She pretended to live without eating, and indeed had no other Sustenance, but
what she got out of artificial Candles she pretended to burn in her Oratory.
She also imprinted on her Body the Five Wounds of our Savior, so artificially,
that the cheat was scarce to be discerned, even after she was discovered.
During the short time this Hypocritical Scene was acted, she wrought some
Miracles. Being at last examined, she was punished, and from thenceforth led so
Godly a Life, as almost purchased her the Opinion of Sanctity, she before
endeavored to gain by Hypocrisy. The King though he left the Cardinal in
Portugal, governed the Kingdom himself with the assistance of his Portuguese
Council, composed of very worthy Persons, in the choice of which he never
erred. The conceit some People entertained that King Sebastian was yet living,
15^^
gave Occasion to some Persons to take upon them his Name and Character. (...)
Sebastian.
The Son of a Tiler, born at Alcobaza, who had been Apprentice to a small
Turner of Heads, in Lisbon, and expelled the Order of Carmelites in his
Noviceship, went away and lived like a Hermit, on the Borders of the Kingdom,
near A^^^querque. After some time the People censuring his course of Life, he
left it, and putting on good Apparel, he traveled about that Country well
mounted. Some presently gave out he was King Sebastian, which he at first
denied, but finding them positive, at last complied with their Humor, and
suffered two of his Followers to call themselves, the one Christopher (...) and
the other the Bishop of Guarda, both which had been slain with the King in
Africa. Some few days they lived well among their Adherents, and gathered
Money, but being apprehended by Order of the Archduke Albertus, the
Counterfeit Sebastian, after having been showed at Lisbon, was sent to the
Galleys, and his Companion, the pretended Bishop, hanged.

5. Scarce was the last Impostor punished, when another started up in his
place. This was one Gonzalo Alvarez, the Son of a Mason, who, like the other,
became an Eremite, and did much seeming Penance, lashing himself, and then
crying out, where he might be heard, O unhappy Sebastian, all thy Penance is
but little, in respect of thy Crimes. A Rich Farmer, called Peter Alfonso,
joined with him, and concealed him, giving out Orders in his Name. At length he
gathered 800 Men, calling himself Earl of Torresnovas, Lord of Cascais, and
Governor of Lisbon. None saw the pretended King but the Daughter of the false
Earl, she being designed Queen, and also the Wife of Antony Simoens, a Rich
Man. Whenever this Pageant King was forced to appear abroad, he wore a great
pair of Spectacles, which covered most part of his Face. He sent a Son of
Simoens to the Governor Albertus, to Order him to quit the Palace, for that he
was coming to undeceive the People. This Messenger being taken, and then let
go, increased the Opinion of the People, that it was King Sebastian, because
Antony Simoens having known him, would not otherwise have suffered his Son to
go on that Message. The Judge of Torresvedras was ordered to Apprehend them,
but he attempting it, was, together with his Clerk, cast headlong from a High
Place, and killed: Gasper Pereira, for reproving them, was also murdered, with
his Son and Nephew, and his House plundered. Antony Fonseca, an Alcalde de
Corte, went next with 400 Spaniards, The false Sebastian executed.
commanded by Captain Calderon, who, after killing a few of the Mutiniers, took
the Upstart King. At Lisbon he was hanged and quartered, as was the false Earl,
Peter Alfonso, with others. Some were sent to the Galleys, and the Towns of
Ericeyra, Carbonero, and Mafra were left almost desolate, the Inhabitants
flying for fear of Punishment. Yet after all this, many thought King Sebastian
must come out from the Desert, and there was scarce any that lived an
Eremitical Life in Portugal, who was not imagined to be that King.

6. Elizabeth, Queen Elizabeth's Provocations, and King Philip's Design against
her
Queen of England, not regarding that she owed her Life to King Philip, joined
with the Rebels of Holland against him. She sent over to then Assistance
Robert, Earl of Leicester, with 3000 Men. Sir Francis Drake also sailed from
Plymouth in August, and Landing at Bayona, was beaten off thence. Next, he fell
upon the Islands of Caboverde, where he took a considerable Booty, and all the
Cannon of the Fortifications along the Seacoast. Thence he sailed to Sancto
Domingo in the West Indies, 1586.
which City he ^^ok and plundered. The same he did at Cartagena, and then
passed over to Florida. About the beginning of this Year King Philip set out
the Proclamation for regulating the Style to be used in Letters, which till
then caused much Confusion, every one aspiring to greater Titles than belonged
to them. King Philip, provoked by the many Wrongs done him by Queen Elizabeth,
resolved upon the Conquest of England, and to that purpose gathered a Mighty
Fleet in the vast Port of Lisbon. It contained 130 Sail, most of them very
large, under the Command of D. Alonso Perez de Guzman, Duke of Medina Sidonia,
and Generalissimo. The Land Forces amounted to 20000, 1588.
the Mariners above 11000. They sailed from Lisbon the 27th. of May, and after
being dispersed by a Terrible Storm, met again at Cor^na. Sailing thence, the
greatest part of this Mighty Fleet was destroyed, either by the English, or by
violent Storms, which drove it round Scotland and Ireland, so that the Duke of
Medina Sidonia with a very few returned to Santander. In Revenge of this
Attempt, Queen Elizabeth sent the Fleet, we before spoke of in the Life of
Antony the Grand Prior, to Invade Portugal. The Disappointment she met there,
made her think of Intercepting our India Fleet. To this purpose she fitted out
50 Sail, 1591.
commanded by the Earl of Essex, who sailed directly to the Islands Azores.
King Phil^^ sent out his Fleet, under the Command of D. Alonso Bazan, against
him. Near the Island Flores the two Fleets engaged, with so much Advantage on
the part of the Spaniards, that they took the English Vice Admiral, yet
presently after, some of the Spanish Fleet perished in a Storm. However, the
English took the Flag-Ship of three that came from India in the Year 1593. 1593.
tho D. Alonso Bazan sailed from Lisbon to prevent them. He found seven English
Ships in the Island Flores waiting for the other two that came from India, and
he took them.

7. The Archduke, 1594.
Cardinal Albertus, being called away to Madrid, Portugal governed by
Commissioners.
to receive the Archbishopric of Toledo, the Government of Portugal was
committed to D. Michael de Castro, Archbishop of Lisbon, the Counts D. John de
Sylva of Portalegre, D. Francis Mascarenhas of Sancta Cruz, D. Duarte de
Castelobranco of Sabugal, and Michael de Moura, Secretary. The English Fleet
again appeared before the Tercera Islands, hoping to meet with the Ships from
India. The Earl of Essex was Admiral, he destroyed Fayal and Pico, then Landing
upon S. Michael, plundered Villafranca. Lastly, one of the India Ships falling
into his Fleet, he thought to have carried it off, but was disappointed by her
being fired. This done, he sailed from the Islands. Prince Charles, Son to King
Philip, was naturally of a turbulent Spirit, and is said to have held
Correspondence with his Father's Enemies, and to have practiced against him.
Hereupon he was cast into Prison, and Judges appointed to inspect into the
Cause, who passed Sentence of Death against him. His Father allowed him no
other Favor, than to choose what Death he would die; and he said, they might
kill him as they pleased. Being prepared for it, four Slaves strangled him with
a Silken Rope. D. John of Austria, though a Bastard, was no less haughty, and
aspired first, to the Kingdom of Tunis, then, to that of England; but the King
lowered all his haughty thoughts, and he is believed to have died a violent
Death. King Philip having been some time sick, at last was confined to his Bed,
as well by reason of Weakness, as that the Gout was broke out in Sores upon his
Hand, Foot, and Knee. Fifty three days he lay in such condition, that his Bed
could not be made, and on the last of them he died. His Patience in his
Sufferings was wonderful, for he pityed those that attended him more than he
did himself. Having performed all Offices of a good Christian, he gave up the
Ghost the 13th. day of September, being Sunday, 1599.
at Five in the Morning, in the Year 1599, in the Famous Monastery of the
Escurial, King Philip dies.
the 71st. Year of his Age, the 18th. of his Reign over Portugal, and 41st.
over the rest of Spain. He was the first King, since the Goths, that possessed
all this Monarchy entire.

8. King Philip was of a middle Stature, His Description.
an awful Presence, had a high Forehead, blue and beautiful Eyes, a handsome
Nose, thick Lips, the lower somewhat fallen, as is usual to the House of
Austria, fair Hair; and taken altogether, his Person was Majestic. He wanted
the Sense of Smelling, or at least had very little of it. He had four Wives;
First, Mary, Daughter to King John the Third of Portugal. His Wives and Issue.
Secondly, Mary, Queen of England, Daughter to Henry the Eighth, by whom he had
no Issue. Thirdly, Elizabeth, Daughter to Henry the Second, King of France.
Fourthly, Ann, Daughter to the Emperor Maximilian. By the first he had Charles,
whom he put to Death, as has been said. By the third, Elizabeth Clare Eugenia,
Countess of Flanders, Wife to the Archduke Albertus. Also Katherine, Wife to
Charles Emanuel, Duke of Savoy. By the fourth, first, Ferdinand; secondly,
Charles Lawrence; thirdly, James, all three died young; fourthly, Philip, who
succeeded his Father; fifthly, Mary, who died an Infant.

CHAP. V.
The Reign of Philip the Third of Spain, and Second of Portugal, and Nineteenth
King, from the Year 1578. till 1621.
1. SIngular was the Wisdom of the late King, and consequently the loss of him
was extraordinarily lamented by all his People. Their Sorrow was much mitigated
by the great hopes conceived that his Successor, Philip, would prove no less
capable to wield the Scepter than his Father had been. Birth of Philip the
Third.
This Prince (being the Seventh Child of his Father, and Fourth of his Mother
Queen Ann) was Born in the renowned Town of Madrid, 1578.
on the 14th. of April, 1578. and was the Second of the Name in Portugal, and
Third in Spain. He was sworn Heir of Portugal on the first of February, 1583.
158^.
and afterward of his other Kingdoms, 1598.
this being the first of them that took an Oath to him. The many Embassages he
received with singular Grandeur, the Fleets he set out, the great Supplies he
sent to Pope Paul the Fifth, and the Emperor Ferdinand, and many other
particulars of his Reign, as appertaining more properly to the History of
Spain, where he resided, are purposely omitted here, because we design only to
adhere to what particularly belongs to Portugal. His Resolution was wonderful
in banishing the Moriscoes, The Moriscoes banished Spain.
or those that were descended of the Race of the Moors, who pretending to
become Christians, committed many Villainies and Sacriledges, at the same time
underhand holding Correspondence in Africa and Turkey, in order to bring over
the Moors into Spain again. Charles the Fifth, Ferdinand and Philip the Second,
had all of them entertained thoughts of putting this same Design in execution,
but the many Inconveniences that attended it, still deterred them. 400000 of
these base People were dispersed throughout the Kingdom, who all upon the
King's Edict departed the Kingdom, having liberty to carry away with them all
they were worth. Upon the Birthday of this King, a Preacher Prophetically
foretold the Banishment of the Moriscoes, threatening them with the Newborn
Prince.

2. Often did this King promise to Visit his Realm of Portugal in Person, but
still failed, being put by his Resolution by his Favorites, who for their
private Ends dissuaded this Journey, not regarding how much a King loss the
Affections of his People, who never suffers himself to be seen by them. 1619.
At length, when least expected, he suddenly set out in April, 1619. bringing
with him Prince Philip, Philip the Third comes into Portugal.
and the Princesses Elizabeth and Mary, and (as his Father had done) he made
his Public Entry into Lisbon on S. Peter's Day. His Reception was the greatest
that ever till then had been heard of; for the Portuguese, ravished with
Affection and Joy to see their Prince among them, erected such Fabrics on the
Land, and made such mighty Works on the River, as seemed to fill, up both those
Elements of Land and Water, and scarce left room for the admiring Multitude to
behold him that all those Expenses were made for. His Reception.
It is impossible to describe the particulars of this most Glorious Entry. The
River Tagus was covered with an innumerable multitude of Vessels, built in the
shape of several Fishes and Sea Monsters. The King was brought in a Galley
(attended by many others) built with such admirable Workmanship, that the like
was never before seen, and it obliterated the Memory of the Famous one made by
Ptolomy, King of Egypt, which at that time was the Wonder of the World. Whilst
this multitude of Vessels rowed down the River, the thundering of the Cannon
from the Vessels themselves, and from the Castle, shook the Earth, and rent the
Air. Being come on shore, the King proceeded to the Cathedral, and thence to
the Palace, entertaining his Lies with such prodigious Sights of Gold and
Silver, that the time falling short to view all, he returned the next day to
behold the lofty Fabrics, which expressed the greatness of their Affection who
received him. Such was the Magnificence of the Piles erected, such the Cost
bestowed on them, and such the solid Strength of them, that they seemed as if
designed for many Ages, not for the use of one only day, which was too short a
space even to demolish them.

3. The Majesty of these Works was so amazing, that the King, though used to
Regal Entertainments, said. He never till that day thought himself a great
King. Hereby seeming to call Lisbon, Felicitas Philippica, as once Julius
Caesar gave it the Name of Felicitas Julia. In the Palace he performed the two
Solemn Acts of Swearing the Prince and holding the Cortes or Parliament, He
holds Parliament.
which met with extraordinary Joy and Satisfaction of all Men, but (...) the
end disappointed them of their hopes. First, for that the King was scarce seen
by his Subjects, and next, for the unsatisfactory Answer he gave to their
Demands. The Reason of it was, that his coming to the Kingdom, and calling the
Parliament, were Actions proceeding from his own Inclination; but the
disobliging of them, was wholly the product of the ill Advice of his Ministers.
His Favorites fearing he should take an Affection to the Portuguese, and
perhaps continue among them, were uneasy at the Splendour of his Entertainment,
and so much Influence had they over him, that he gave more Credit to their
Words, than to those marks of Respect and Loyalty he saw with his Eyes. This is
the greatest Misfortune can befall a Prince, to be so led away and infatuated by
the Flatteries of Favorites, who only attend their private Interest, as to
forfeit the Affections of their People. This is the height of Tyranny in
Ministers, to covet all for themselves, and allow nothing to others.

4. Seven Months the King spent in his Journey to Portugal, His stay and return
to Madrid.
staying there, and returning home. Being come to Madrid, he departed this Life
the last day of March, in the Year of Grace 1621. the 43d. 1621.
Year of his Age, and 23d. of his Reign. His Death.
His Body lies buried with his Predecessors in the Royal Monastery of St.
Lawrence, commonly called the Escurial. His Picture, drawn as he appeared at
the Cortes or Parliament held at Lisbon, in his Robes, with the Collar of the
Golden Fleece, and the Steptre in his Hand, represents him of a pleasing
Aspect, yet full of Majesty. Of Stature, he was rather little, but
proportionable; his Forehead high, his Eyes blue, his Lips thick, his
Complexion fair, with a fresh Color, his Hair yellow, his whole Countenance
beautiful, and representing much Grandeur. He was a most Holy Prince, and at
his Death seemed to have only one thing to lament, which was, that he fulfilled
what his Father had Prophetically foretold, viz. That he suffered his
Favorites to have so much the Ascendant over him. Had he given less Ear to his
Ministers (who always mind their own Advantage, though with the loss of their
Master's) and been more absolute in taking his own measure, he had proved one
of the greatest and most successful Princes in the World. For he was so
Fortunate, that notwithstanding all the Miscarriages of those that governed
him, he still came off with Honor and Reputation, adding new Conquests to his
Dominions, both in India and Africa.

5. His only Wife was Margaret of Austria, His Wife and Issue.
Daughter to the Archduke Charles and his Duchess Mary. She was one of the
most Renowned Queens this Kingdom ever had, and it enjoyed many that deserve
Immortal Fame. After her Death, the King in Continency imitated his Predecessor
Alonso the Fifth, for he never would Marry again; and it is generally believed
he never had to do with any Woman but his Queen. His Issue was, First, Ann Mary
Mauricia, Wife to King Lewis XIII. of France, her Dowry 500000 Crowns in Gold.
Secondly, Philip; who succeeded him. Thirdly, Mary, born at Valladolid the
18th. of August, 1606. afterward Queen of Hungary. Fourthly, Charles, born at
Madrid the 14th. of September, 1607. Fifthly, Ferdinand, born at the Escurial
May the 17th. 1609. he was a Cardinal, Archbishop of Toledo, Prior of Crato,
and Abbot of Alcobaca. Sixthly, Margaret, born at Lerma in May 1610. and died
the 11th. of March 1617. Seventhly, Alonso, born at the Escurial September the
22d. 1611. and died the following Year. His Mother also died in Childbed of
him, leaving her Subjects in unspeakable sorrow and want of her.

6. In this King's Time the Plague raging in the City of Lisbon, Prodigies.
was observed to cease immediately after the Image of the glorious Martyr S.
Sebastian had been seen to sweat plentifully. A Year before the King's Journey
to Lisbon, two Comets of a wonderful Magnitude appeared in the Signs of Virgo
and Libra, one of them so prodigiously great, it renewed the Memory of that
which appeared at the Birth of Mithridates, that extended over one quarter of
the Heaven. After them ensued the Death of Popes and Kings, the overturning of
States, and the fall of Great Ministers, whose Ruin is by nothing more
evidently foretold than by the unlawful means they use to rise, and yet none
takes warning by him that went before, to avoid the Precipice. At the City
Bacaim in India there happened such a violent Storm, as carried away Churches,
Houses, Trees, and Mountains. Several Apparitions were seen in the Air,
representing Men, Fires, and Battles. The Holy Man, F. Bartholomew, of the
Martyrs, Archbishop of Braga, was beatified; his Body is in the Town of Viana.
Margaret de Chaves now flourished in Sanctity, and made a miraculous end.

CHAP. VI.
The Reign of Philip the Fourth of Spain, and Third of Portugal, and the
Twentieth King, from the Year of our Lord 1605, till 1628.
1. KIng Philip the Third of Spain, Birth of Philip the Fourth of Spain, and
Third of Portugal.
and Second of Portugal, being at Valladolid with his Wife Queen Margaret,
their Son Philip the Fourth of Spain, and Third of Portugal, was born upon
Good Friday, which fell then upon the 8th. day of April, in the Year 1605. His
Birth was celebrated with the greatest Demonstrations of Joy, and most of
Expense, 1625.
that had ever till then been seen. His Father dying, he retired to the Royal
Monastery of S. Hierome, 1621.
whence a few days after he returned to take Possession of his Crowns left him
by his Ancestors, his Magnificent Entry dispelling the Clouds of Sorrow that
hung over the Heads of the Subjects, and filling their Hearts with Joy. He
entered upon the Government, giving ample Testimonies of a more pregnant
Judgment than could have been expected at those tender Years, His Accession to
the Crown.
for he reformed the Councils, established wholesome Laws, punished evil
Ministers, and ordered that all those who were in Office, should give in true
Estimates of what they were worth, that it might afterward appear how their
Estates were advanced in his Service. K. Charles the First of England, then
Prince of Wales, in Spain.
On the 16th. of May, Charles, Prince of Wales, afterward King of England,
came incognito by the Post to Madrid, and went to Lodge at the English
Embassador's House, and by him made known the design of his coming. The
Catholic King made a Public Entry with him from the Escurial with that
Solemnity that is only used at the Reception of the Spanish Kings, giving him
the Right Hand under the Canopy, and attended by all his Court, every Man th^^
day vying to out do the rest in Splendour, and in testifying his Joy.
Afterward, several Sports were made, to Entertain the Prince, the King
himself, at the Riding used with Canes instead of Spears, signalized his
Dexterity. The Match betwixt the Prince and Princess Mary being proposed,
learned Men were consulted, and agreed upon the Conclusion, but not the
Formalities. It was hoped it would have succeeded, but Providence had ordered
otherwise.

2. The Arms of Spain were at this time employed in several Parts, The Dutch in
Brasil.
in all which many Portuguese served with singular Reputation. The Rebel
Hollanders having Intelligence of the evil Posture of Affairs in Brasil,
resolved to attempt the Conquest of that Country, and to that effect, moved
several of the Northern Princes, grown envious of the Power of Spain, to assist
them in the Enterprise. They fitted out a Fleet in Holland and Zealand, it
consisting of 35 Sail, under the Command of Admiral John Vandort, and carried
3000 chosen Men, a good Train of Artillery, with all other Necessaries. The
Design was kept very private. In December the Fleet set Sail, and having passed
the Line in 6 Degrees of South Latitude, according to the Orders given, the
Admiral opened his Instructions, and found he was commanded to invade Baya de
Todos Santos, or the Bay of All Saints. This Bay is thought to be the greatest
in the World, and is the sort to the City S. Salvador, seated on a rising
Ground along that Mountainous Shore, extending out in length from North to
South. It has a Cathedral Church, and had once a Court of Chancery, which has
been taken away with good cause; for the greatest Injustice that can be in a
State is to be pestered with too many Officers of Justice. This City is the
Metropolis of all that vast Province of Brasil in America, and on the East side
of that Continent, stretching forth 1200 Leagues along the Coast, being a
Delightful, Rich, and Pleasant Soil.

3. The Fleet entered this Bay, and began to batter the Suburb next the Sea, The
Dutch Land, and take the Capital City of all Brasil, called Baia.
where was begun a Fort in the Water, in which Antony de Mendoza, Son to the
Governor James de Mendoza, commanded, but was forced to abandon it, because in
no condition then to withstand the fury of the Enemy's Cannon. In the mean
while 1000 Musketeers landed, and advanced toward the City without any
Opposition. They halted in the Suburb of S. Benedict. Night came on, and all
the Inhabitants fled out of the City, which the Enemy took Possession of in the
Morning. The Governor staid (...) his House, and was thence carried away
aboard the Admiral. All the People had forsaken their Houses, leaving an
inestimable Booty to the Rebels, who polluted the Churches, and committed all
manner of Sacrilegious Outrages. D. Mark Teyxeira the Bishop with his Clergy
had offered to withstand the Enemy, but none adhering to him, he retired to a
Village. Mathias de Albuquerque, who was next in Command to the Governor, then
a Prisoner, was 100 Leagues off at Pernambuco. He sent an Account of what had
happened into Portugal, where the Advice arrived in July. The King writ to the
Governors of Portugal a Letter with his own Hand, in which he expressed how
much he valued the Portuguese Loyalty, and what returns he expected from them
upon such an Exigency. A Fleet sent against the Dutch.
The Portuguese, to answer their King's Expectation, speedily resorted from all
Parts of the Kingdom to Lisbon, and in the space of three Months fitted out a
Fleet of 26 Sail, in which was most of the Gentry of the Kingdom, all at their
own Cost, without putting the King to any charge. D. Emanuel de Moura Corte
Real, Marquess of Castle Rodrigo, gave the Example to others, raising a sightly
Company of Musketeers, which he sent upon this Expedition at his own Expense.
This stirred up others to do the like, for among the Portuguese Emulation is
more prevalent than Virtue. D. Alonso de Noronha, though old, that had been
Governor of India, listed himself, and many Gentlemen of Quality followed his
Example. I shall not name them, because among the Portuguese every one had
rather his Name should be omitted, than that his Neighbors should be inserted
with him.

4. The Portuguese not being a sufficient Power to recover Brasil, a Spanish
Fleet was at the same time fitting out, but not so soon ready, for the former
stayed a Month for the other in the Port of Lisbon; and sailing thence in
November, expected it at the Island of Santiago the chief of those of Cabo
Verde till February, which delay proved not a little advantageous to the Enemy.
The Portuguese Squadron consisted of 26 Ships, 1625.
and in them 4000 Men; in the Spanish were more Ships, and 8000 Men; the former
commanded by D. Emanuel de Meneses, the latter by D. Frederick de Toledo
Ossorio, Marquess of Valdueza. Whilst these Squadrons, now united, make their
Voyage, let us see what was doing at Baia. The Hollanders, possessed of the
City, Other Actions of the Dutch after taking Baia.
took several Vessels, which knowing nothing of what had happened, fell
ignorantly into that Port. They sent five Ships laden with Booty to their
Country, with the News of their Success, and with the Governor, and Provincial
of the Jesuits, that had been taken Prisoners. After the taking of the City, D.
Mark Teixeira the Bishop took upon him the Command of General, for the Defense
of the Country, and drew near to the Place with 1500 Men, the third part of
them Blacks. Several Encounters happened betwixt his Men and the Enemies, in
which he lost 7 or 8 Men, and the Rebels above 300. In one of these Skirmishes
Capt. Francis de Padill^ killed Col. John Dort, and cut off his Finger, on
which he wore a Ring, the Soldiers stripping his Body, cut off his Privities to
show them to his Men. These Barbarities were a greater shame to them that
acted, than to him that suffered them. Two runagate Portuguese repenting, and
deserting back from the Enemy, were received by our Men upon the points of
their Swords; and cut in pieces. The Port of Tapagipe was recovered from the
Rebels, and the Commander of it sent Prisoner to Lisbon. The Bishop fell sick,
and died, and Francis Nunez Marinho succeeded him in the Command, who behaved
himself will till D. Francis de Moura was sent thither by the King with some
Supplies, till the Fleet could come. He pent up the Enemy within the Town,
recovering from them the Suburbs of the Carmelites and S. Benedict, but the
City was strong, and in the Port were 26 Ships well manned. Their whole Force
consisted of 3000 Men of several Nations, and 500 Blacks.

5. The Spanish and Portuguese Fleet arrived at Baia upon Good Friday, 1626.
to the great Terror of the Rebels. 4000 Men landed immediately. The Spanish
and Portuguese Fleets arrive at Brasil.
The General, D. Emanuel de Meneses, and the Admiral, D. John Faxardo, remained
aboard, drawing up their Fleet like a Half Moon, to hinder the flight of the
Enemy, Peter Roiz de San Estevan, Marquess of Cropani, marched with the 4000
Men to the City, D. Frederick de Toledo, the Spanish General, following him.
They took their Posts, and began to carry on their Works, when about 300 of the
besieged sallying, killed 50 of our Men, most of them Persons of Note, yet they
were forced to retire. The Cannon being planted, the Bullets flew so thick,
that in a few days all was full of Ruins, and the besieged began to be
dismayed. The same Fate attended their Fleet, for D. Emanuel de Meneses
landing, from a Battery he raised on the Shore, sunk several of their ^hips,
destroying many Men. The Enemy's only hope was in the Succors they expected,
but they came only to be Spectators of their shameful quitting the Town. Their
Soldiers began to complain they had been decoyed thither, and were weary of the
Service, their Commander in Chief proclaimed, that all such as would go over to
the Portuguese Camp, should have leave, but two that declared for it, were
hanged. This silenced them for a while, but soon after they proposed the
surrendering the City, and the Governor opposing them, was not only affronted,
but wounded. To prevent their deserting him, he designed to burn the Fleet, but
before he could put it in execution, they surrendered, Articling only for their
Lives. Baia recavered.
In the Town was found an extraordinary Rich Booty, which the Spanish Soldiers
made the most of. The Merchandise found there was valued at above Three
Millions, in Money 300000 Ducats, 2000 Quintals of Powder, each Quintal is an
Hundred Weight, an infinite quantity of Ball, 230 Pieces of Cannon, 3000
Muskets, 800 Corslets, the same number of Saddles, 600 Blacks, 6000 Bushels of
Meal, 50000 Hides, and 2000 Pipes of Wine. The two Squadrons returning home,
suffered by Storms, some perished, the rest arrived in their Ports.

6. King Philip most generously rewarded the Portuguese, King Philip Rewards
the Portuguese.
who so signalized their Zeal upon this occasion, for his Council Advising,
that he should grant to the Sons of those that were killed in his Service, all
that they possessed belonging to the Crown, he not only consented to it, but
afterward, without being asked, he added more with his own Hand; That
forasmuch as he was desirous such Subjects might live, he not only allowed that
Favor to those that were killed, but to all that went in the Fleet. This same
Year a Fleet of above 100 Sail of English assaulted the Island of Cadiz, Cadiz
assaulted by the English.
whither many Portuguese Gentlemen, after providing for the Security of their
own Coasts, resorted, to express their Zeal for the King's Service. After some
time, the Enemy was repulsed with loss, and retired, leaving many of their Men
dead behind them. Before this Invasion of the English, the Famous Bell of
Villilla in the Kingdom of Aragon, is said to have rung out of it self. Two
great Losses to Portugal.
Portugal sustained two inestimable Losses, the one before the Passages we have
spoke of happened, the other after. The first was the taking the City Ormuz by
the Persians, with the assistance of the English. The other, the Destruction of
its Fleet, which being set out to Convoy the Ships from India, was wrecked on
the Coast of France, where all the Ships, and most of the Men, among whom were
many of Note, perished. Since the loss of King Sebastian in Africa, this
Kingdom had not so great a Misfortune.

7. Here our Author, The Conclusion.
Emanuel de Faria, puts an end to his History. He composed the whole at Madrid,
and being there at the time of the Revolution, durst not proceed any further,
because as a Portuguese, he would not write any thing that should derogate from
the Honor of his Country; and as being in the hands of the Spaniards, it was
dangerous to say any thing that might be offensive to them. He only adds an
Account of the Children King Philip had till that time, and some short Remarks
upon the Public Affairs of the World, which make nothing to this History. Let
us therefore put an end to this Part of the History, and proceed to the
Supplement, wherein will be found all that was worth our Knowledge, from the
Time where he leaves off, to our Days.

The End of Emanuel de Faria y Sousa his History of PORTUGAL.
The Supplement to Emanuel de Faria e Sousa his History of Portugal, from the
Year 1640, where he left off, till this present time, collected from the best
Authors that have written thereof, and from Authentic Information of
Eyewitnesses.
Anno 1640.
1. THE Spaniards had now been near 60 Years possessed of the Kingdom of
Portugal. 1640.
Philip the Second of Spain, The Condition of Portugal.
after the Death of Henry the Cardinal-King, had carried it against the House
of Braganca by force of Arms, though with no good Title, and that Kingdom was
insensibly become a Province of Spain, without any appearance that the
Portuguese could ever be able to withdraw themselves from that Foreign
Subjection. The Nobility of the Kingdom durst not appear in that Splendour which
became their Quality, or claim all the Privileges due to their Birth, for fear
of raising a Jealousy in the Spanish Ministers, at a time when Riches, Birth,
or Merit^were thought sufficient to render a Man suspicious, and cause him to
be persecuted. The Gentry were in a manner banished to their Country Houses,
and the Commonalty groaned under the heavy Burden of the Taxes. The Count Duke
de Olivares, Prime Minister of State to Philip the Fourth of Spain, thought a
new Conquest could never be too much weakened. He knew that the Natural
Antipathy which was betwixt the two Nations could not but render the
Sovereignty of the Spaniards odious to the Portuguese. That it must be ever
offensive to them to see all Places of Trust filled by Strangers, or else by
Men of no Extraction, who were wholly devoted to the Interest of Spain.
Therefore he thought to secure his Masters Authority by keeping the Nobility
out of Employ, the Gentry remote from Business, and the Commonalty so poor,
that they could not have the heart to aspire to any change. Besides, he drew
out of the Kingdom all the Young Men that were fit to bear Arms, employing them
in Foreign Wars, lest those turbulent Spirits should disturb the Peace of the
Government. Yet this proceeding, which might have succeeded, if not pushed on
too far, had a far different consequence than was expected, both by reason of
the ill Circumstances the Court of Spain then lay under, as also because of the
Prime Minister's Character, who was naturally morose and inflexible. No
pleasing Methods were now used in raising of Taxes, but they were rather
collected as if they had been Contributions gathered in an Enemy's Country. The
Portuguese having now nothing more to lose, and as little to hope for, thought
of casting off that Subjection, which they always believed unjust, and was now
become insupport able.

2. Margaret of Savoy, Margaret of Savoy Duchess of Mantua, Governs Portugal.
Duchess of Mantua, governed Portugal with the Title of Vice-Queen, yet she
bore only the Title circumscribed within a limited Power. The whole Intrigue of
the Government, and all the Authority was in the Hands of Michael de
Vasconcellos, a Portuguese, who, under the Character of Secretary of State, was
the absolute Minister in the Kingdom. He received his Orders immediately from
the Count Duke, whose Creature he was, and became most acceptable to him by
finding Methods to draw great Sums of Money out of Portugal, and by sowing the
Seeds of Sedition among the Nobility, favoring some, and depressing others,
which raised implacable Enmity betwixt them. This Discord was the Minister's
Security, he believing they could never Plot against the Government, who
meditated how to exercise their Revenge upon one another.

3. In all Portugal there was none but the Duke of Braganca who could give the
Spaniards any Disturbance. Only the Duke of Braganza could give the Spaniards
Jealousy.
That Prince was of a soft and agreeable Temper, much given to his Ease, his
Judgment rather sound than piercing; in Business he aimed at the main Point,
and could easily dive into such Matters as he applied himself to, but loved not
application. His Father, Duke Theodosius, who was of a fiery Temper, had
labored to ingraft in him his Natural Hatred to the Spaniards, that he might
regard them as Usurpers of his Right, and had done all that in him was, to
inspire into him Ambition and Resolution enough to attempt the Recovery of a
Crown which was due to him. D. John had imbibed his Father's Sentiments, but
that in such measure as was most suitable to his Peaceable Temper. He hated the
Spaniards, but not so as to seek Revenge with the Expense of his Quiet. He was
ambitious, and did not despair of ascending the Throne of his Ancestors, but
was not so impatient as his Father had been. He thought it enough to keep
within Prospect of his Hopes, without hazarding an easy Life, and more than
Private Fortune in Possession, for a Crown that was very uncertain. Doubtless,
had he been the Man Duke Theodosius would have had him, he could never have
compassed what he aimed at. His Actions were so narrowly looked into by the
Count Duke's Order, that if he had not been so entirely given up to his Ease
and Pleasure, he must of necessity have been discovered; and if once
discovered, his Repose and Fortune had both been sacrificed. The Court of Spain
would never have put such Power into his hands, and suffered him to live in the
midst of his Country. Nature made him more Politic than Art could have done.
His Birth, Estate, and Right to the Crown, were no Crimes, but his being
Formidable, was Crime enough, according to the Laws of true Policy. He was not
ignorant of it, and found there was no way to wipe off that Guilt, but by
rendering himself less to be feared, and appearing wholly devoted to his
Pleasure. Nothing was to be seen at Villaviciosa, the ordinary Residence of the
Dukes of Braganca, but Hunting, Feasting, and suchlike Country Divertisements,
as if Nature and Fortune had conspired to qualify him for those Times. In
short, such was his course of Life, as gave not the Spaniards the least Umbrage
of his aspiring to the Crown, and yet it furnished the Portuguese with assured
hopes of a wise and mild Government, if they themselves would attempt to
Enthrone him.

4. His Conduct could breed no Suspicion, The People of Evora Mutiny.
but an Accident that happened some time before, in which he had no hand, had
begun to raise a Jealousy in the Prime Minister. The People of Evora, provoked
by certain new Taxes, had mutinied, and in the heat of that Fury, amidst their
Complaints against the Tyranny of the Spaniard, some Acclamations had been
heard for the House of Braganca. Here it first appeared how much Philip the
Second erred in leaving within the Kingdom a Family so Powerful, and that had
so good a Title to the Crown. Hereupon, the Council of Spain resolved to secure
the Duke of Braganca, or at least, to remove him out of Portugal. Immediately
the Government of Milan was offered him, which he refused, pleading want of
Health, and Knowledge in the Affairs of Italy. The Prime Minister seemingly
approved of his Reasons, but found out another Method to draw him to Court. The
King being about to March to the Frontiers of Aragon, to punish the Rebellion
of the Catalonians, he wrote to the Duke, exhorting him to be present in that
Expedition at the Head of the Nobility of his Country. The Duke, The Duke of
Braganza refuses to go into Castile.
who was upon his Guard against all Artifices of the Court, answered, He was
not in a Condition to defray the Expense he must be at in that Expedition, to
support the Grandeur of his Family. These repeated Denyals gave the Prime
Minister ground to fear the Duke, notwithstanding his Natural Propension to
Ease, had still some thoughts of a Crown. Considering therefore of what
Importance it was to the King his Master, to secure his Person, he omitted
nothing that might conduce to the compassing his Design. But it being dangerous
to use Force, because of the great Affection the Portuguese always bore to the
House of Braganca, he resolved to bring him to his beck by all imaginable
exterior marks of Affection, and of an entire Confidence in him.

5. There was War at that time betwixt France and Spain, The Duke made General.
and the French Fleet having appeared on the Coast of Portugal, furnished the
Prime Minister with a fair Pretense for carrying on his Designs. It was
requisite there should be a General to Command the Forces that were to Guard
the Coast. This Commission was sent to the Duke with such an Absolute Power, as
seemed to put the whole Kingdom into his hands: Yet this served only the better
to hide the Bait. For at the same time, D. Lope de Ossorio, Admiral of the
Spanish Fleet, had Orders to put into the nearest Port to the Duke, as if he
were drove in by stress of Weather, or on some other Pretense, and having drawn
him aboard, as to an Entertainment, to carry him away to Spain. But Fortune
ordered it otherwise, for the Spanish Admiral lost several Ships in a Storm,
and the rest being dispersed, he could not gain the Coast of Portugal. This no
way discouraged the Count Duke, who looked upon the Disappointment as merely
accidental, and therefore he laid his Project another away, writing to D. John
in such terms, as expressed the greatest Confidence, lamenting the loss of the
Fleet, which left the Coast open to be insulted by the Enemy, and advising him
to visit and strengthen those Places that were most exposed. At the same time
he sent him 40000 Ducats to raise new Forces, if requisite, and to defray the
Charge of his Progress. In the mean while, the Governors of all Strong Holds
being for the most part Spaniards, had private Instructions to secure him, if a
favorable Opportunity were offered, and send him into Spain. D. John
suspecting these extraordinary marks of Kindness, made the Minister fall into
the Snare he had laid for him. Though he returned Thanks for the Trust reposed in
him, and gave special Assurances of Fidelity; yet he made use of this
Opportunity to prefer his Friends to such Posts as might be most for his own
Interest. He made use of the Money to Purchase new Creatures, and always
visited the Forts so well attended, that there was no hopes of seizing his
Person.

6. All the Court of Spain, The Duke in his Progress lays the Foundation of his
future Greatness.
being ignorant of the Design it was grounded upon, loudly exclaimed against
the Prime Minister for putting such Power into the hands of a Person so
suspicious; (...) the King liked the Project the better, because no Body could
dive to the bottom of it. Thus the Duke of Braganca, under color of executing
his Employment, freely traversed all Portugal, laying at the same time the
Foundation of his future Greatness. He had a Magnificent Retinue, which drew
the Eyes of the People after him; he heard all Men with extraordinary
Courtesy; he curbed the Insolency of the Soldiers, and at the same time
commended the Officers, and used all possible mean^ to oblige them. His
Behavior charmed the Nobility, for he received them with obliging marks of
Distinction, according to every Man's Merit and Quality. To be short, he
bestowed Favors wherever he came, and yet gained more Friends upon the hopes
of what they might promise themselves from him, than what at present they
received. So that those who saw him, thought they prayed for their own
Interest, when they offered up their Vows for his exaltation to the Throne. His
Partisans did not neglect at the same time to do all things that might be for
the establishing of his Reputation. John Pi^^to Ribeiro, the Comptroller of his
Household, was the Man that labored most to reduce to an exact Method the hopes
of his Master's Exaltation, which were yet but in Prospect. This was a vigilant
active Man, expert in Business, and passionately zealous for his Master's
Promotion, as hoping to have no small hand in the Government, if the Duke
ascended the Throne. His Master had owned to him, that he would willingly
embrace a fair Opportunity of seizing the Crown, but would not do it like one
who had nothing to lose; that therefore he gave him leave to manage that
Affair, yet so, as it should never appear that he was any ways concerned.

7. Pinto had long applied himself to discover what discontented Persons there
were at Lisbon, Pinto, the Duke's Agent, Conspires with some of the Nobility.
and to increase their number. He spread Complaints against the present
Government. He put the Nobility in mind of the Honorable Employments their
Families enjoyed under their Natural Princes, and represented their being
summoned to the War in Catalonia, as an Honorable Banishment. Among the
Merchants and Shopkeepers he complained of the loss of their Trade, discoursed
of the Tyranny they lay under, and extolled the Dutch and Catalonians, who had
asserted their Liberties. The Clergy he stirred up, by showing how the
Privileges of the Church were infringed, and benefices given to Strangers,
which ought to be the Reward of Merit and Learning among the Natives. Such as
he knew to be Malcontents, he discoursed about his Master's Qualities, to
sound their Inclinations. So cunningly did he manage their several Humors,
that after having secured many in private, he at last gathered a Number of the
Nobility, and among them was the Archbishop of Lisbon. This Prelate was of the
Family of the Cunhas, which is one of the best in the Kingdom; a Man of ^arts,
beloved by the People, but hateful to the Spaniards, for whom he had no less
aversion, because they had, through the Interest of the Vice-Queen, given the
Archbishopric of Braga to D. Sebastian de Matos de Noronha, and made him
President of the Council, called d'O Paco. The rest that made up this Assembly,
were D. Michael de Almeida, so great an Enemy to the Spaniards that he could
never be persuaded to appear at Court, D. Antony de Almada, and his Son D.
Lewis, D. Lewis da Cunha, Nephew to the Archbishop, Melo, the great Master of
the Game, D. George his Brother, Peter de Mendoza, D. Roderick de S^a the Great
Chamberlain, and many Officers of the Household, whose Employments were become
only Titular, since Portugal had lost its Native Kings. To these, the
Archbishop, who was naturally a well-spoken Man, made a Speech, representing
the state of the Kingdom, since it fell into the hands of the Spaniards, in its
most hideous form. He showed them, how Philip the Second, to secure his
Conquest, had put to Death many of the Nobility, not sparing even the Clergy,
having to that effect obtained a Bull from the Pope. How the Spaniards had ever
since followed the same Maxims of Government. That no Man's Life or Estate was
safe. That the Nobility was slighted, Benefices given to unworthy Persons, the
People consumed with Taxes, the Country lay waste, and Towns desert, the Men
being carried away by force to the War in Catalonia. That the last Orders from
Court for Summoning the Arrier-Ban, served only to draw away all the Nobility,
that they might end their days in Exile, whilst their Estates were given away
to Strangers. In fine, that he would rather wish to die, than survive the utter
Ruin of his Country, and hoped so many Worthy Persons were not met there to no
purpose.

8. This Discourse renewed the Memory of every man's private Grievances, The
Conspirators incensed, resolve to put their Designs in execution.
but above all, they resented the Summons for Catalonia, as designed for their
utter Ruin. These Considerations, and the desire of Revenge, made them resolve
to take the necessary Measures for shaking off so heavy a Yoke. They blamed
themselves for having suffered patiently so long, and concluded it was
absolutely necessary to expel the Spaniards, but were divided upon what Form of
Government to choose. Some were for a Commonwealth, like that of Holland. The
others were for a King, but differed about the Person; some proposing the Duke
of (...), others the Marquess of Villarcal, and others the Duke of (...), all
three Princes of the Blood Royal of Portugal; every Man speaking according to
his private Affection, or prospect of Advantage. The Archbishop, who was
entirely devoted to the House or Braganca, making use of the Authority of his
Character, declared to them, that the choice of a Governor was not Arbitrary,
since they could not in Conscience break the Oath of Fidelity they had taken to
Spain, unless it were to enthrone the Rightful Heir to the Crown, which was the
Duke of Braganca. Besides that, his Power and Interest was such, that without
him, they could hope for no Success, though he were not, as indeed he was, the
first Prince of the Blood. Then he descanted upon the Duke's good Qualities,
and so managed the Assembly, that they all resolved to make him their King, and
that every Man should use the utmost of his Endeavors for carrying on that
Design. Thus the Assembly broke up, having first fixed the Time and Place for
another Meeting, wherein they should take the necessary Measures to secure a
speedy and happy Success to their Enterprise. Pinto seeing all well disposed in
favor of his Master, writ privately to him, to draw near to Lisbon, as well to
encourage the Conspirators by his Presence, as to take Order with them about
putting the Design in execution. Upon this Advice, the Duke some days after set
forward from Villaviciosa, and came to Almada, a Village opposite to Lisbon, on
the other side the River, as if he had fallen in there accidentally in his
Progress through the Kingdom. He had so splendid an Equipage, and was followed
by such a Numerous Train of Persons of Quality and Officers, that he looked
more like a King going to take Possession of his Crown, than a General that was
visiting the Posts under his Charge. The Duke visits the Vice-Queen
Being so near Lisbon, he could not omit paying his Respects to the Vice-Queen.
When he entered the Great Court before the Palace, all the Avenues were thronged
with People flocking to see him, and all the Nobility came to Conduct him
before the Vice-Queen. Such was the Joy throughout the City at the first sight
of him, that he seemed either to want only a Herald to Proclaim his King then,
or else courage to seize the Crown. But he was too wise, to commit his Fortune
to the wild Sallies of the giddy Multitude; and therefore having visited the
Vice-Queen, he instantly retired to Almada, without so much as entering the
House of Braganca, for fear of heightning the Jealousy of the Spaniards, who
were already too much alarmed.

9. Pinto having made the Conspirators observe his Master's fearful
Cautiousness, The Conspirators Deputies confer with the Duke at Almada
said, they must make their Advantage of his stay at Almada, and use a sort of
Violence to oblige him to accept of the Crown. His Advice being approved of,
they gave him in charge to know of his Master, when they might wait upon him
with their Proposals; which he did, upon Condition only three of the
Conspirators should come to him. Michael de Almeida, Antony de Almada, and
Mendoza, were accordingly privately conducted into the Duke's Closet at Almada.
Antony de Almada represented to him the miserable state of the Kingdom, the
little Security any Man had of his Life or Estate, and that even he himself had
no other Refuge to fly to but the Crown. He showed him the low Condition the
Spaniards were reduced to, the Assistance he might expect from Foreign Princes
who were Enemies to the House of Austria, and particularly from France, the
Convenience of the Sea for bringing of Succors; and lastly, the small Number
of Spaniards that were left in Portugal, the Garrisons being drained to supply
the Army in Catalonia. This Discourse was pleasing enough to the Duke, yet
nevertheless keeping himself within the Bounds of his Natural Timidity, he
answered so as they might not have cause to despair of him, nor to hope much
more than they did before; telling them, He was sensible of the deplorable
Condition of the Kingdom, and of his own Danger; that he commended their Zeal
for their Country, and was beholding to them for their good Wishes toward him;
but that it was not as yet time to think of applying such violent Remedies,
which might prove of Fatal Consequence. To this dubious Answer, he added such
Caresses and particular Thanks, that they could no longer doubt but that their
Proposals were acceptable, and yet they found he would make no advances till
the Success of their Enterprise was past all danger. After some private
Conference with Pinto, he returned to Villaviciosa, but not with that inward
quiet which he used to enjoy as a private Man, and therefore immediately
communicated the whole Affair to the Duchess. This Lady was by Birth a
Spaniard, and Sister to the Duke of Medina Sidonia, a Grandee of Spain, and
Governor of Andaluzia. She was naturally ambitious, and her Father had
endeavored to improve that Inclination in her. Besides her Knowledge in other
Languages, she was so perfect in her own, and had such an insinuating way, that
she drew all men's hearts. All the Customs of Portugal she had made Natural to
her self, and had by her extraordinary Application and Carriage gained an
absolute Ascendant over her Husband, who never undertook any thing of moment
without her Advice, and therefore could not proceed farther in this Affair
without consulting her. To her he revealed the whole Conspiracy, the Parties
concerned, their Zeal in carrying it on, and all that had happened to him at
Lisbon, and at Almada in the Conference. He told her how much the Nobility were
offended at the Expedition against Catalonia. That nevertheless, the greatness
of the Danger discouraged him, as did the fear that the Great Ones, out of
Envy, would oppose him; that the Power of the King of Spain was formidable, and
little Confidence to be reposed in Foreign Princes. These Considerations
weighed more with the Duke, than the desire he had of a Crown. But the Duchess,
whose A^^^ion was more rooted, presently embraced the hor^^ of a Crown, and
used all the Arguments her Rhetoric could furnish her with to persuade him,
yet so, as that he should see a greater Number of Conspirators engag^^, and
never openly espouse the Cause, till the moment it should be put in execution.

10. The Court at this time was not free from Care. The Prime Minister of Spain
resolves to draw the Duke out of Portugal.
The extraordinary Joy the People expressed at Lisbon, at the sight of the
Duke, alarmed the Prime Minister. He suspected there were Private Cabals held
at Lisbon, and certain groundless Reports, which are commonly the forerunners
of great Revolutions, increased his Jealousy. Several Councils were held
hereupon, and it was finally resolved to call the Duke of Braganca to Madrid,
that so the Portuguese, wanting a Head, might have no hopes left of succeeding
in their intended Revolt. On the 20th. of October, 1640. the Count Duke de
Olivares sent an Express to the Duke of Braganca, 1640.
to acquaint him, the King expected him at Court, to be informed by him of the
Posture of Affairs in Portugal, assuring him he should receive all marks of
Honor that were due to his Birth and Quality. This Positive Command strangly
surprised him, as knowing, should he refuse to Obey, the next Orders would be,
for carrying him away by force; and thinking he was betrayed, concluded himself
fallen into the depth of all Misfortunes. The Duke's Arts in refusing.
Nevertheless, that he might gain time, and advertise the Conspirators of his
Danger, by the Advice of his Duchess, he sent a Gentleman to Madrid, to assure
the Prime Minister of his Resolution to appear suddenly before the King. This
Gentleman had private Instructions to find some counterfeit Excuses for his
delay from time to time. Being come to Madrid, he assured the King that his
Master followed him. He hired a great House, bought Rich Furniture, hired
Servants, and laid out much Money, as if he daily expected his Master. Soon
after, he pretended he had received Advice, that his Master was sick; and
finding this Fraud would not last long, presented a Memorial to the Prime
Minister, desiring that the King would ascertain in what manner his Master
should be received at Court. This was done, in hopes that the Grandees opposing
him, the Dispute might be held on foot some considerable time. But the Count
Duke, to avoid all delays, persuaded the King to decide the Controversy in
favor of the Duke of Braganca; so that he could (...) longer doubt of as
Honorable a Reception as he cou(...) himself desire.

11. As soon as the Conspirators understood what Orders the Duke had received
from Court, they sent Mendoza to assure him of their stedfastness, and to
persuade him openly to join with them. They met a Hunting, and being withdrawn
into a Wood, Mendoza made use of the most pre^ing Arguments to engage him to
espouse his own Quarrel. The Duke answered, He approved of their Proceedings,
and was fully resolved to Head them. Mendoza returning to Lisbon, informed the
Conspirators how he had sped, and that the Duke would have Pinto repair to him.
He was sent, and with him the whole Scheme of their intended Proceedings. Pinto
acquainted his Master, how great a Misunderstanding there was betwixt the
Vice-Queen and the Secretary Vasconcellos, and withal told him, nothing could
have fallen out more advantageously for advancing his Affairs. The Duke, who
was fully convinced of the force of his Reasons, found himself more pressed
forward by the Gentleman he had sent to Madrid, for he writ, that the Prime
Minister would admit of no longer delays. This made him resolve to lose no
time. However, he writ to that Gentleman, that he should acquaint the Count
Duke de Olivares, that he would have been at Madrid long since, but for want of
Money to support his Dignity^, which as soon as it could be raised, he would
set out toward the Court. The Duke carried Pinto to the Dutchess's Apartment,
where several Methods were proposed about the Execution of their Design. At
length the Duke concluded that Lisbon should be secured, for that being the
Capital City, would shake the whole Kingdom, and that the same day it was done,
he would cause himself to be proclaimed King in all the Towns that depended on
him. That such of his Friends as were Governors of Towns should do the like
where they commanded; and that the People should be made to rise, even in the
Villages that were subject to any of the Conspirators; to the end that the
Conflagration being general throughout the Kingdom, those few Spaniards that
were in it might not know which part to have recourse to first. That he would
march his own Regiment into Elvas, the Governor of which Place was wholly at
his Devotion. That as to the securing of Lisbon, he must leave it to them to
Act as Opportunity should offer. Nevertheless, his Advice was, that their first
^^^rts should be made against the Palace, that having seized the Vice-Queen,
and all the Spaniards, they might serve as Hostages to oblige the Citadel to
Surrender, which might otherwise incommode the City. He gave Pinto two Letters
of Credence, directed to Almeida and Mendoza, only requiring them to give
entire Credit to the Bearer, and to be faithful and courageous in putting what
they had promised in execution.

12. Being come to Lisbon, Pinto delivered his Credentials to Almeida and
Mendoza. Then they sent for Lemos and Correa, The Conspirators contrive how to
incense the Citizens of Lisbon against the Spaniards.
two Citizens of the Duke's Faction, who employing many Workmen, and having
gone through all the Offices of the City, were in great Reputation among the
People. They had before made it their business to incense the Citizens against
the Spaniards, by spreading Reports of new Taxes to be raised, and had
designedly discharged many of their Workmen, pretending that the Trade being
lost, they had no Business for them; but in truth, that Want might make them
the readier to rise; and yet from time to time they relieved them, that they
might be entirely at their Devotion. Besides, they held Intelligence with the
chief Men of every Quarter, so that they assured the Conspirators, that having
but one day's Warning, they could raise the greatest part of the People at an
hour appointed. Having made sure of the Tradesmen, Pinto admonished the other
Conspirators to be ready upon the first Notice given them, and to secure as
many Friends as they could, as it were upon some Private Design, without
entrusting them with the Secret. All things being disposed as they could
desire, Almeida, Mendoza, Almada, Melo, and Pinto met, and fixed Saturday, the
first of December, for putting their Enterprise in execution. Advice was
immediately sent to the Duke, that he might the same day cause himself to be
proclaimed King throughout the Province of Alentejo, which for the most part
held of him; and it was agreed, they should have one Meeting more, to fix their
ultimate Resolutions. On the 25th. of November they met at Night, as had been
agreed, in the Palace of Braganca. They found they could make up near 150
Gentlemen, most of them Chiefs of Families, with all their Servants, and about
200 Citizens and Tradesmen, who by their Reputation could easily draw the
greatest part of the People after them. It was resolved Vasconcellos should
fall a Victim to the Resentments of Portugal. Some there were who proposed that
the Archbishop of Braga should undergo the same Fate, as being a great Friend
to the Spaniards, and Formidable for his great Parts. But D. Michael de Almeida
opposed it, representing how odious the Murder of a Person of such Dignity
would render them to the whole World, and that it would draw the Indignation of
all the Clergy upon the Duke of Braganca. Nothing remained now but to order the
manner of their Rendevouz, and giving the Attack. It was agreed, that they
should divide themselves into four Bodies, which at one and the same time
should rush into the Palace, that having possessed all the Avenues, the
Spaniards might be kept asunder, and so disabled from relieving one another.
That D. Michael de Almeida should Attack the German Guard at the Palace Gate.
Melo, the Great Master of the Game, his Brother, and D. Stephen da Cunha, at
the Head of the Citizens, were to Attack a Company of Spaniards that mounted
daily at a Place, called The Fort. Tello de Meneses, Emanuel de Saa, the Great
Chamberlain, and Pinto, were to secure the Apartment of Vasconcellos, and to
make him away immediately. D. Antony de Almada, Mendoza, D. Charles de Noronha,
and Antony de Saldanha had it in Charge to seize the Vice-Queen, and all the
Spaniards that were in the Palace, to be kept as Hostages, in case of need.
That whilst they were busy in making themselves Masters of their several
Posts, some Horsemen should be detached to Proclaim John, Duke of Braganca,
King of Portugal, about the City. That having gathered the Multitude into the
Streets, they might make use of them as there should be occasion. The Assembly
broke up, having agreed to meet on Saturday the first of December, some at
Almeida's House, and others at those of Almada and Mendoza, where the
Conspirators were to Arm themselves.

13. Whilst the Duke of Braganca and his Friends thus pursued their Ends, the
Prime Minister, alarmed at his Delays, sent away an Express to him, with
positive Orders for him to come away instantly; and that he might have no
Excuse, sent him a Bill upon the Treasury for 10000 Ducats. This Command
admitted of no Demurs, and therefore in the presence of the Gentleman that
brought the Express, he gave Orders for his Family to set forwards toward
Madrid, and dispatched a Gentleman to the Vice-Queen, to acquaint her with his
Departure. He writ to the Prime Minister, assuring him, he would be at Court
within Eight Days, The Duke presses the Execution of the Conspiracy.
and at the same time acquainted the Conspirators with what had happened,
showing them the absolute necessity there was of executing their Designs on the
day appointed. Nor were the Conspirators backward; but some odd Accidents had
like to have put off the Execution, if not broke all their Measures. Almada
revealed the whole Design to a Man of Quality, that used always to rail
violently against the Spaniards, but finding him timorous, with his drawn Sword
made him swear Fidelity. Nevertheless, suspecting the Man, he kept his Eye upon
him, and acquainting his Associates with his Jealousy, they resolved to delay
their Enterprise; yet the next day perceiving all was quiet, they were ashamed
to have been so easily terrified, and persisted in their first Resolution.
Another thing fell out, which cast a great Damp on them; for on the Eve of the
Day appointed to rise, Vasconcellos the Secretary was seen to cross the River,
which they imagined he did upon some Intimation of the Design, and that he went
to bring over some Forces from the other side; but he returning at Night,
having only been at an Entertainment, all was calm again. It was late before
the Conspirators parted. George de Melo, who lodged at a Kinsman's House out of
the Town, thought he would take it ill, that he had not been acquainted with
the Design, and therefore at his return home, gave him a full Account of the
whole Matter. The other, though surprised, seemed to rejoice at it, and thanked
Melo for reposing such Confidence in him. They parted, and Melo being in his
Chamber, began to blame himself for his rashness, in trusting a Man he was not
well assured of. Walking in his Room full of these troubled Thoughts, he heard
some noise, and looking cut of his Window, could perceive his Kinsman ready to
take Horse. He ran down in a rage with his Sword in his hand, and by force made
him return to his Chamber, then taking the Keys of the House, secured him till
the next day, at which time the other complied, and resolved to join with the
rest of the Conspirators.

14. At length the Day came which was to decide whether the Duke of Braganca
should deserve the Title of King, The Conspirators meet and execute their
Design.
and Deliverer of his Country, or be called Rebel, and Enemy to the State. The
Conspirators met early at the Houses of Almeida and the other great Men, where
they were to Arm themselves. In all their Countenances appeared such
Confidence, as gave assured hope of Victory; but what is most Remarkable, is,
that among so many Persons as were concerned, and some of them Women, none
should fail of their Word, or betray their Trust. All being armed, they
repaired to the Palace by several ways, and most of them in Litters, the better
to conceal their Number and Arms. They were divided into four Bodies, as had
been agreed, and expected the Clock should strike Eight, which was the moment
appointed to fall on. As soon as the Clock struck, Pinto gave the Signal agreed
upon, by firing a Pistol, and then all Parties fell to their Work. D. Michael
de Almeida fell upon the German Guard, which being surprised, for the most part
unarmed, was overcome without much struggling. The Great Master of the Game, his
Brother, and D. Stephen da Cunha charged the Spanish Company before the Palace,
at the Place, called The Fort. Most of the Townsmen, who knew of the Design,
were in this Action, and boldly fell in with Sword in Hand upon the Court of
Guard. None signalized himself more than a Priest, who carrying a Crucifix in
one hand, and a Sword in the other, amidst his loud Exhortations ceased not to
Act beyond the most desperate of the Conspirators. None could stand before him;
so that after some small Resistance, the Spanish Officer and his Soldiers were
forced to Surrender themselves, and for safety of their Lives, to cry out with
the rest, God save the Duke of Braganca, King of Portugal. Pinto having made
his way into the Palace, headed those that were to Attack Vasconcellos his
Apartment. At the foot of the Stairs they met Francis Soarez de Albergaria,
Judge of the Civil Causes, who seeing this Tumult, would have interposed his
Authority to appease them; but hearing all cry* God save the Duke of Braganca
he thinking in the Duty of his Office, cried* God save the King of Spain and
Portugal. This cost him his Life, for one of the Conspirators shot him with a
Pistol thinking it meritorious to punish that Fidelity which now became
Criminal. Antony Correa, first Clerk to the Secretary, ran out upon the noise,
and was stabbed by D. Antony de Meneses, yet ye turned up his Eyes full of
Revenge, and said, What I dare you strike me? All the Answer Meneses returned,
was to stab him three or four times again, till he fell, yet he survived all
these Wounds, to die some time after by the hand of the Hangman^* Being quit of
this Obstacle, the Conspirators pressed forward toward the Secretary's
Chamber. James (...) a Captain of Foot, was then with him, who seeing so many
armed Men, and supposing they sought the Life of Vasconcellos, though he owed no
Obligation to that Minister, yet out of mere Generosity he endeavored to keep
the Door with his Sword, till the Secretary could make his escape; but being
wounded in his Right Arm, so that he could not hold his Sword, and overpowered
by the Multitude, he leaped out at a Window, and had the good Fortune to
escape. Immediately the Conspirators broke into the Chamber, and not finding
the Secretary, though they searched all corners, they threatened an Old
Woman-Servant with present Death, if she did not discover him; and she, to save
her Life, pointed to the Place where he was, being a close Cupboard or Closet,
taken out of the thickness of the Wall, where they found him covered with
Papers. Fear prevented his uttering one word, and D. Roderick de Saa gave him
the first Wound, firing a Pistol at him; after which, several of the
Conspirators having struck him, they cast the Body out at the Window, crying,
The Tyrant is dead, let Liberty live, and D. John, King of Portugal.

15. The Multitude, who had flocked to the Palace, gave great shouts of Joy,
seeing the Body cast down, and falling upon it, every one endeavored to have a
stroke at it. Such was the end of Vasconcellos, a Man of great Parts, and
indefatigable, who had gathered vast Riches, part whereof was plundered in this
hurly-burly. The Vice-Queen and others seized.
Pinto losing no time, hasted to join the Party that was to seize the
Vice-Queen, and found they and all the rest were already successful. Those who
were to enter that Princess's Apartment being come to the Door, and the enraged
Multitude crying out, they would set fire to it, if not opened quickly, the
Vice-Queen with her Ladies, and the Archbishop of Braga, appeared in her
Chamber, believing her Presence would appease the Nobility, and cause the
Commonalty to retire. Whereupon advancing some steps toward the chief of the
Conspirators, she said, I confess, Gentlemen, that the Secretary has justly
incurred the hatred of the People, and your Indignation, by his Austerity and
insolent manner of proceeding. His Death is a sufficient Revenge. Believe that
what has hitherto passed, may be attributed to the hatred conceived against the
Secretary, but if you proceed in this Uproar, you cannot avoid being reputed
Rebels, and you will deprive me of means of excusing you to the King. D. Antony
de Meneses answered, That so many Persons of Worth were not met only to punish
a Wretch, who ought to have died by the Hands of the Hangman; that they came to
do Right to the Duke of Braganza, to whom the Crown of Right appertained. She
would have replied, but Almeida fearing the Conspirators might cool, said,
Portugal had no King but the Duke of Braganza; and then all the Conspirators
cried out, God save D. John, King of Port^^^ The Vice-Queen seeing them past
reclaiming, thought to find more Respect in the City, but as she offered to go
down, D. Charles de Noronha prayed her to retire to her Chamber, and not expose
her self to the fury of the incensed People. In a Rage, finding her self
forcibly detained, she cried out, Why, what can the People do to me? To which
Noronha rudely answered. Nothing, Madam, but throw your Highness out at the
Window. The Archbishop of Braga, enraged at what Noronha said, snatched a Sword
from a Soldier, and offered to run upon the Conspirators in Vindication of the
Vice-Queen; but D. Michael de Almeida laid hold of and told him the danger of
provoking those, who, but for him, had decreed his Death. This made him curb
his Passion, in hopes of a more favorable Opportunity of Revenging himself
upon Noronha. The rest of the Conspirators seized the Spaniards that were in
the Palace, or City. The Marquess de la Puebla Steward to the Vice Queen, D.
James Cardenas, Major General; D. Ferdinand de Castro, Intendant of the Sea,
the Marquess de Bainetto, an Italian, Master of the Horse to the Vice-Queen,
and several Sea-Officers, were made Prisoners; which was done with as great
ease, as if they had been apprehended by Order of the King of Spain. No Man
stirred to defend them, and they were in no condition to do it, being most of
them taken in Bed.

16. This done, Antony de Saldanha led the People to the Courts of Judicature,
where he made an Harangue to them upon the present Happiness of Portugal, in
being delivered from Tyranny, All Proceedings ordered to run in the Name of D.
John, King of Portugal.
and restored to their Natural Prince. His words were received with general
Applause, and all Proceedings for the future ordered to run in the Name of D.
John, King of Portugal. In the mean while, D. Gaston Coutinho released all
those out of Prison, who had been committed through the Severity of the Spanish
Ministers; and they thus unexpectedly delivered, formed themselves into a Body,
no less Formidable than, that of the first Conspirators. Amidst this general
Joy, Pinto and the other Principal Men were not free from Care. The Spaniards
were still possessed of the Citadel, whence they might Canonade the City, and
whilst it held out, the King of Spain had always an inlet at Command. Therefore
thinking they had done nothing, till they were Masters of that Place, they went
to the Vice-Queen, The Citadel taken from the Spaniards.
demanding of her an Order for the Governor to deliver it up to them. She
rejected them with scorn; but Almada swearing, if she persisted, he would
instantly Murder all the Spaniards that were taken; For fear of Sacrificing so
many Persons of Quality, she signed the Order, believing the Governor knew his
Duty too well, to obey an Order, he could not but be convinced, was extorted
from her. It fell not out as (...) expected, for the Spanish Governor, D.
Lewis del Campo, a Man of no Resolution, seeing all the Conspirators in Arms
before the Citadel, vowing they would put the Garrison to the Sword, unless
they instantly surrendered, was glad to depart with so good a Pretense to hide
his Cowardice. The Citadel being surrendered, and the Conspirators now secure on
all sides, they immediately dispatched Mendoza, and the Great Master of the
Game to carry the Happy News to the Duke of Braganza, and assure him there
wanted nothing to complete the People's Happiness but the Presence of their
King. Yet was not his Presence equally desired by all Men. The Nobility looked
upon his Exaltation with an envious Eye; The Gentry, who had no hand in the
Conspiracy, stood dubious. Some said, they knew not whether he would justify
those proceedings. The Creatures of Spain were in a Consternation, and only
took care to save themselves from the Fury of the Multitude. The Duke's
Friends, knowing his Intention, prosecuted their Business. They met at the
Palace to settle Affairs till the Arrival of the King, and unanimously chose
the Archbishop of Lisbon President of the Council, and Lieutenant of the
Kingdom. He refused at first, saying, there was more need of a General, than a
Person of his Character, but soon complied, upon Condition, the Archbishop of
Braga should be joined in Commission with him. This subtle Prelate's Design
was, to make the other as guilty, in respect of the Spaniards, as himself, if
he accepted; or if he refused, to render him odious to the new King and People.
He of Braga perceived the Snare, but being wholly devoted to the Spaniards,
positively refused to have any share in the Government. Thus the whole Power
fell into the Hands of the Archbishop of Lisbon. D. Michael de Almeida, Peter
de Mendoza, and D. Antony de Almada, were appointed his Counselors.

17. The Governor's first care was to make himself Master of three great
Spanish Galeons that were in the Port. Three Spanish Galeons seized in the
River of Lisbon.
Several Barks were fitted out, and manned with the choice Youth of the City,
each endeavoring to signalize himself, but they met with no Opposition, the
Officers, and most of the Soldiers having been secured ashore, at such time as
the Conspiracy took effect. Expresses were sent the same Evening to all the
Provinces to excite the People to give Thanks to Heaven for the Recovery of
their Liberty, and Commanding all Magistrates to cause the Duke of Braganza to
be proclaimed King, and to secure all the Spaniards. The next care was to
dispose all things for the Reception of the new King. The Archbishop acquainted
the Vice-Queen she must withdraw, to make room for the King and his Family. He
caused an Apartment to be furnished for her in the Royal Mansion House of
Xabregas, which is in the Suburbs. The Vice-Queen, upon the first Order, left
the Palace, but with a Countenance full of Indignation, and without speaking
one Word. Only a few of her own Servants, and the Archbishop of Braga, though
with the hazard of his Life, attended her. Still the Duke of Braganza was in
suspense, not knowing how Affairs had succeeded at Lisbon, till Melo and
Mendoza arrived at Villaviciosa. By the joy of their Countenances, and their
casting themselves at his Feet, more then by their Words, he understood he was
King of Portugal. He conducted them to the Duchess, to relate what had
happened, and they gave her the Title of Majesty; whereas the former Kings and
Queens of Portugal had only the Style of Highness given them. The Duke
proclaimed King in the Towns of his Dependence.
That same Day D. John was proclaimed King in all the Towns that depended of
him. Alfonso de Melo did the same at Elvas. The new King set forward for Lisbon
with the same Equipage he had provided to go to the Court of Spain He was
attended by the Marquess de Ferreira his Kinsman, the Count de Vimioso, and
many other Persons of Quality. The Queen was left at Villaviciosa to confirm
that Province in its Obedience, by her Presence. All the ways as he went were
thronged with People, that ran to see him, pouring Blessings on him, and Curses
on the Spaniards. All the Nobility, Officers of the Crown, and principal
Magistrates went out to receive him far from Lisbon, where he made his Entry
amidst the joyful Acclamations of the Multitude, on the 6th. of December. All
that Night the City was enlightened with Bonfires and Illuminations, which gave
occasion to a Spaniard to say, That he was a happy Prince, since all that
Kingdom had cost him but one Bonfire.

18. The whole Kingdom followed the Example of Lisbon, The whole Kingdom
follows the Example of Lisbon.
as if there had been a particular Conspiracy in every Town. Expresses arrived
at Court daily, bringing the King Advice, of Towns, and whole Provinces that
had expelled the Spaniards, and submitted themselves to him. The Governors of
other strong Places had no more Courage than he of Lisbon. most of them
shamefully marching away without so much as firing a Musket. Thus within
Fifteen Days the Spaniards were drove out of all the Kingdom of Portugal. Only
D. Ferdinand de la Cu^va, (...) St. Julian, at the Mouth of the River, taken.
Governor of the Castle of St. Julian, at the Mouth of the River (...),
appeared resolutely set down to keep that Fortress for the King his Master. The
Garrison consisted only of Spaniards commanded by brave Officers, who made a
vigorous Resistance at the first Approaches of the Portuguese* There was no
remedy but to besiege the Place in form. Heavy Cannon was brought from Lisbon,
the Trenches opened, and carried on to the Counterscarp, notwithstanding the
continual Fire, and frequent Sallies of the besieged. But Treaty being the
surest, and often the shortest way, the King made such Advantageous Proposals
to the Governor as he had not the Power to withstand. The great Sums the King
offered him, together with a Commendary of the Order of Christ, prevailed with
him. The Treaty was concluded, and the Fortress surrendered, upon pretense he
had not a sufficient Garrison to defend it, notwithstanding the principal
Officers refused to sign the Capitulation, and principally D. Roderick Chalon,
a young Gentleman of Andaluzia, of great Courage, and Colonel of a Regiment,
who offered to hold out three Weeks longer to expect the Succors from Spain,
which they heard to be at Sea, under the Conduct of the Duke of Maqueda. The
King thought it not fit longer to delay his Coronation, that his Royal
Authority might become the more Sacred, and his Person more respected among the
People. This Ceremony was performed on the 15th. of December, with all possible
Magnificence. The Duke of Aveiro, the Marquess of Villareal, the Duke de
Caminha his Son, the Count de Monsanto, and all the Nobility of the Kingdom
assisted at the Ceremony. The Archbishop of Lisbon, at the head of his Clergy,
and attended by several other Bishops, received the King at the Gate of the
Cathedral, and there all the Three Estates took the Oath of Fidelity to him. A
few Days after the Queen came to Lisbon, having been received at a distance by
the whole Court, and the King himself.

19. The News of this Revolution being soon carried to the Court of Spain, How
the News of his revolt^ was received in Spain.
struck to the Heart of the Prime-Minister; yet making the best of that
Disaster, he accosted the King with a Countenance cheerful, and full of
Assurance, saying, Sir, I bring you happy News, your Majesty has just now
gained a great Duchy, and a considerable par^el of Lands. The King, in a
surprise, asked in what manner. Sir, replied the Minister, the Duke of Braganza
is run mad, he has suffered himself to be deluded by the Multitude, who have
proclaimed him King of Portugal, now all his Lands are forfeited to the Crown,
and that Family being extirpated, your Majesty will, for the future, possess
that Kingdom in Peace. The King was not much taken with these plausible Words,
and only told him, That Care must be taken to suppress a Rebellion that might
prove of dangerous Consequence.

Anno, 1641.
1. THE new King of Portugal omitted nothing that might conduce to his
Establishment on the Throne. After his Arrival at Lisbon, New Governors placed
in the Frontiers.
he presently appointed Governors for all the Frontier Towns, choosing for
that purpose Men of Fidelity, Valor and Experience, who immediately went away
to their Posts with what Forces they could gather, and used all possible
diligence to put the places committed to them into a posture of defense.
Commissions were given out to raise Forces, and immediately after the
Coronation, the Cortes or Parliament was Summoned: They met the 28th of
January, and by a solemn Act acknowledged King John to be their lawful and
rightful Sovereign, as descended by the Princess his Mother from Prince Edward,
Son to King Emanuel. In this Assembly of the three Estates, the King declared,
that for the support of his Household, he would content himself with his own
private Revenue, and would lay apart all those of the Crown to supply the
necessities of the Kingdom, and that the people might relish the sweetness of
his Government, he abolished all new Taxes imposed by the Spaniards. The most
considerable employments he gave to such of the Conspirators as had best
deserved, yet, Pinto had no share in this promotion, but nevertheless, had so
great an influence over the King, that though he had not the Title of a
Minister of State, nothing of moment was done without him. Having settled all
things at home, the King next bent his thoughts toward Foreign Princes.
Ambassadors sent to all the Courts of Europe.
He dispatched Ambassadors to all the Courts of Europe, to move them to own
him, and at the same time to gain Allies and raise new Enemies to the House of
Austria. A League offensive and defensive was concluded with the Hollanders and
Catalonians, both at that time in Rebellion against the King of Spain. That
Monarch nor being in a condition to use immediate force for the reducing of
Portugal, still hoped he might by fair means or threats work upon the new King,
and to that end writ a Letter to him in the Style of a Sovereign, but in most
affectionate terms. The Answer was such as no less touched the King of Spain,
than the News of the Revolt had done before. He had his hands full in Flanders,
Italy, Roussillon and Catalonia, and yet rather than seem to abate any thing of
his Royal Grandeur, resolved to hazard all, rather than suffer this Affront to
pass unrevenged. The Duke of Medina Sidonia was ordered to raise Forces in
Andaluzia, the Count de Monterey in the two Castiles, and the Marquess de
Valparaiso in Leon and Galicia. And because a Fleet was the most absolutely
necessary, the Duke de Maqueda Admiral of the Ocean, had Orders to gather all
the Vessels that were fit for Service, and to infest the Coast, whilst the
others acted by Land.

2. Of all the Ambassadors sent by the King of Portugal to the Christian
Princes, The Bish^p of Lamego, going Ambassador^ to Rome, (...) by the
Spaniards.
only the Bishop of Lamego designed for Rome, miscarried: The Master of the
Vessel that carried him, put into Cartagena, a Port of the Kingdom of Murcia,
and delivered him up to the Spaniards, for which Treachery, he received a
Reward of 2000 Crowns. That Prelate's Life was in great danger, for he had
certainly been Executed but that the King was put in mind that the Marquess de
la Puebl^, and five or six other persons of Quality were Prisoners at Lisbon.
This Consideration moved him to order the Bishop should be civilly Treated,
least, the Prisoners at Lisbon might suffer for his sake. Fortune, which the
Year before had so highly favored the new King, still seemed wholly devoted to
his Party. All the Forts on the Coast of Africa, (except Ceuta, and Tangier,
which at last afterward submitted) upon the first News of what had happened in
Portugal, withdrew themselves from their Obedience to the Spaniards, and sent
to acknowledge King John, and assure him of their utmost Fidelity. Nor was this
all, for the Viceroy of Brasil, having. Intelligence of the Revolution, sent
his Son to Lisbon to take the Oath of Allegiance to the new King, in his Name,
and in the Name of all the Inhabitants o^ that Coast, who testified an
extraordinary satisfaction for that Change. The Islands Azores, resolved not to
be the last that declared for the King, and to give him some proof of their
Fidelity, at the very beginning of his Reign, they seized 10 Ships coming from
India, that knew nothing of the Revolution, and sent them to Lisbon, after
having taken off all the Soldiers that were aboard them. In May also this Year,
a (...) dispatched Express from India, by John de Sylva Tello, the Viceroy,
brought the News that the King had been Proclaimed in all his Dominions in
Asia, King John Proclaimed in India.
and as far as the Coast of China. The Hollanders at this time were very
powerful in those Seas, and being at War with Spain, did all the harm they
could in the Portuguese Colonies and Factories, endeavoring with the
assistance of the Indians, utterly to extirpate all others, that they might
themselves ingross that Trade. To this purpose, they omitted not any manner of
Villainies that might conduce to their advantage, and particularly though they
had afterward certain Intelligence of King John's being Proclaimed, and being
in amity with their State, yet they ceased not to prosecute their ends in those
remote parts, as shall appear in the Sequel of this History. However, before
the Revolution reached India, they had got footing in Ceylon, laid Siege to
Malaca, which they took, and had their designs against Go^, and all other the
Portuguese Conquests in India. In America also they were possessed of
Pernambuco, Paraiba, Rio Grande, Ciara, the Islands of Tamaraca and Ferdinand
de Noronha, and toward the South of Porto Calvo and Segeripe, all places
appertaining to the Crown of Portugal. But after they had information of the
Truce concluded betwixt Portugal and Holland, they perfidiously made themselves
Masters of Angola, and the Island of St. Thomas in Africa, of Maranhao in
America, and of Malaca in India. To complete this Prince's Happiness, though
before there was a mortal Enmity betwixt the Portuguese and the Hollanders, yet
now on the 12th of June a Cessation of Arms betwixt the two Nations was agreed
upon and concluded, A Cessation of Arms with the Dutch.
at the Hague, for 10 Years, and soon after the States sent an Ambassador to
Congratulate the King, upon his Accession to the Crown. The Portugal Ambassador
returning, brought with him Two Regiments of Horse, and considerable supplies
of Arms and Ammunition. The Catalonians also sent the Lord Sala on the same
Account, and to Ratify the League before concluded by the Portuguese
Ambassador.

3. All new erected Monarchies are subject to a thousand accidents, A
Conspiracy against the New King, discovered.
and unless protected by some Heavenly power, can scarce continue long in their
full splendour. The King of Portugal was raised to the Throne of his Ancestors,
in a manner almost miraculous, he mounted without any opposition, 600 Towns,
and 15000 Villages, submitted to him in less than eight days, and all the
people of the Kingdom declared they were never happy till his Accession to the
Crown. Nevertheless, no sooner was he seated on the Throne, but he found many
Enemies, and among them some of those who had helped to raise him to that
Grandeur. About 100 of the Greatest Men in his Kingdom, Conspired to destroy
him, and if Heaven had not protected him, there had been but a short space
betwixt the Birth and Grave of his Sovereignty. The Archbishop of Braga, the
chief Inquisitor, two other Bishops, the Marquess of Villareal, and his Son,
the Duke de Caminha, were the principal Conspirators: D. Lorenzo, Pidez de
Carvallo, the Count de Armamar, and D. Augustine Manuel, were brought in as
Associates, the Jews of Lisbon were concerned in the Design, and there was a
party in the Fleet then lying at Belem, one Man being aboard every Ship, in
order to Fire it upon a signal given. Laurence Pidez de Carvallo, was to break
into the Queens Apartment with 100 Men, to secure all there. It was given in
Charge to the Jews, to fire the City in 8 or 10 places, that the people being
busied there, they might have time to force the Palace. The Inquisitor General
sent Letters into Spain to acquaint the King with the Design, that the Forces
on the Frontiers might be ready to March to Lisbon, upon the first Advice, and
the Duke de Maqueda to enter the Port with the Fleet of Spain. Concerning the
manner of discovering this Conspiracy, there are three several Accounts. One
is, that the Letters being directed to the Marquess de Ayamonte, who was
Governor of the Spanish Frontiers, he broke them open, and sent them back to
the King of Portugal, when he had seen the Contents, which is most probable; he
being afterward Convicted of High Treason, and put to Death, at Segovia, for
Conspiring against his King, with the Duke of Medina Sidonia, and the new King
of Portugal. Another says, that a Spy employed by the King to go often into
Spain, meeting a Bohemian who was employed to carry the said Letters, and
suspecting something by his Discourse, made him Drunk, then Stabbing him, and
having taken the Packet, brought it to the King; but this seems not to have any
thing of probability, or consequently of Truth. The third is, that D. Alfonso
de Portugal, Count de Vimioso, being deprived of his Command on the Frontiers,
and grievously resenting that Affront; the Archbishop of Braga, conceived the
desire of revenge would easily engage him to enter into the Conspiracy. He
therefore discovered the whole design to him, and the Count seeming to embrace
the proposition acquainted the King with the whole matter. The Conspiracy being
discovered, the King so ordered the Affair, that most of those persons therein
concerned were apprehended, without the least noise or confusion. The 5th of
August, at 11 at Night, was the time appointed, for putting the Conspiracy in
execution. That very morning the King caused all the Troops that Quartered in
the neighboring Villages, to march into Lisbon, upon pretense of a review to
be taken in the large place before the Palace. He with his own hand, gave
several Billets Sealed up, to persons he could confide in, with positive Orders
to every one, not to open his Billet till 12 at Noon, and then punctually to
obey what it directed. Then having sent for the Archbishop of Braga, and
Marquess of Villareal under color of communicating some important Affairs, The
principal Conspirators seized and punished.
they were both seized in the King's Lodgings about Noon, without any noise: At
the same time a Captain of the Guards publicly apprehended the Duke of
Caminha, in the place before the Palace. Those who had received the Billets
having opened them, found each an Order to take up one of the Conspirators, and
secure him in such a Prison, till further order, which was so punctually
executed, that 47 were taken without any difficulty, none endeavoring to
escape. When the News of the Conspiracy was noised abroad, it is not possible
to express the rage conceived by the multitude against those that were the
fomenters of it, every Man desiring to be the Executioner of them, as is the
nature of the Rabble, wherever they conceive a hatred. The Wrack, forced a
Confession from many of the Criminals, and the Archbishop, the Inquisitor, the
Marquess of Villareal, and Duke de Caminha, to save themselves that misery,
owned the whole Design. The Marquess, the Duke, the Count de Armamar, and D.
Augustine Manuel, were sentenced to be Beheaded. The Archbishop and Inquisitor,
because of their Character, the King Condemned to perpetual Imprisonment: All
the others were adjudged to be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered, and they all
suffered according to the Sentence pronounced against them, upon the 29th day
of August. It is remarkable, that when the Marquess on the Scaffold had spoke
to the people, they cried out furiously, let him die, let him die: To which the
Marquess answered; So the Jews cried out against Christ.

4. These Executions having secured the Prince, Several Military expeditions.
he bent all his Thoughts upon War, and having to that purpose obtained of the
King of France five Colonels of Horse, three of Foot, and two of Dragoons, he
ordered them to be ready to march to the Frontiers, and raised new Troops to
reinforce his Army that lay then before Badajoz: However, they were otherwise
employed, for the Council not thinking it exp^^^ent to wast an Army before a
Town that did them no (...), those Troops that besieged it were recalled to
serve elsewhere. The first Act of Hostility I meet with betwixt the Spaniards
and Portuguese, was in the Province of Alentejo, near Elvas. A Party of
Spaniards having broke into that Province, exercised all manner of Cruelties to
terrify the People, sparing neither Age nor Sex, nor even the Churches. D.
John de Acosta, who Commanded at Elvas, having notice hereof, sent out five
Companies of Foot under the Command of Gaspar de Sequeira Manuel; These were
followed by 400 Men under the Conduct of Luis Mendez de Vasconcellos: These
being joined by certain Troops three Leagues from Campo Major, marched toward
the Spaniards, who still continued their Ravages, and Charging them, killed 200
upon the spot, pursuing the rest to the Gates of Badajoz, where they took
shelter. This fortunate beginning was followed by like consequences; 600
Spaniards advancing into the Province of Alentejo to surprise the Town of
Montalvao; Mascarenhas, Colonel of a Portuguese Regiment, with only four
Companies Attacked them before they came to the Town, and with such good
success, that having killed 18 or 20, the rest retired to the Pass on a small
River, and he fearing some ambush, because Night drew on, pursued no further.
In the morning perceiving they were quite gone, he followed them as far as the
Town of Ferreira in Castile, which he Plundered and Burnt without any
opposition, though it might easily have been defended against a greater power.
Beyond the Mountains, the Spaniards had sacked and Burnt four open Towns, to
revenge which, Lewis Gomez de Figueiredo passed over into Galicia, took the
Town of Monterey, and having pillaged reduced it to Ashes. To requite this,
another party of Spaniards fell into the Country about Braganza, but the
Inhabitants and Soldiers who Quartered thereabouts assembling, cut most of them
in pieces, and then piercing into Castile, burnt seven Villages, and the Town
of Geronda, of which, they left nothing standing but the Walls: At the same
time, Luis Gomez de Figueiredo with 1500 Foot and 300 Horse fell upon the
Marquess of Tarrasona, who marched toward Valverde with 2000 of the former,
and 200 of the latter, and after a Fight, which lasted about four hours,
obtained the Victory, which had been greater but that Night coming on hindered
the pursuit.

5. Daily Action more and more incensed the two Nations, Other War like
exploits.
and an implacable hatred had taken possession of their hearts, so that the
Frontiers were never free from slaughter and Rapine. D. Gaston Coutinho the
Portuguese General, being informed that 6000 Spanish Foot, and 800 Horse had
fortified themselves in two Villages, one whereof was in Galicia, the other in
Portugal, he marched with 30 Horse to view them, and finding their Works weak
enough to be overthrown, if Attacked with vigor, ordered his Foot to advance:
A Party of the Enemies Horse that advanced, was easily Repulsed, which causing
some Consternation in the main Body, gave time to plant two pieces of Canon
against them. These two pieces having played some time, D. Gaston who had made
four Batallions of his Foot courageously assaulted the Works in as many places:
The Soldiers being as forward in the pursuit of Honor as their Officers,
nothing could withstand them: They forced the Entrenchments, took four
redoubts, entered the place and took all the Baggage, but not contenting
themselves with this Victory and the gaining of 11 Colors, they burnt all the
Villages for two Leagues about. Above 400 Spaniards were killed upon the place,
14 Officers, and 70 Soldiers were taken. Nor was this all, the Portuguese
General making his advantage of the Enemies Consternation, the next day marched
into Galicia, and pursuing those that having escaped, had fortified themselves
in another Village, forced them again to retire, burnt nine Houses, and then
returned home with Honor, and his Soldiers enriched with Plunder. In the mean
while, Vasco de Azevedo Coutinho, and Emanuel de Sousa de Abreu, being
continually infested by the Excursions of the Spaniards, gathered all the
Forces they could and marched to Lobos, in the Castle of which place, the
Spaniards always had a safe retreat, after committing their ordinary Ravages.
This Castle they assaulted and carried with the loss only of 22 Men, which
done, they burnt 700 Houses, as well in the Town of Lobos, as in the
neighboring Villages. This was not yet the last stroke of ill fortune the
Spaniards felt. Martin Alfonso de Mello, understanding a great body of them was
marched from Badajoz to Attack Olivenza, a Town seated on the River Guadiana,
which parts Spain and Portugal, assembled all the Forces he could to relieve
that place. Being on his March, an Express came to him from the Governor,
giving an account that they had assaulted the Town in two places, but met with
such a vigorous opposition that they were forced to retire with the loss of 200
Men; nevertheless, he desired some succor, least they should return. They
accordingly returned, hoping to surprise the place, feigning themselves a
Portuguese Convoy with Provisions, yet met they with no better success, being
again repulsed with the loss of 140 Men. Martin Alphonso, still hoped to be
able to overtake them in their return, but they taking another way than was
given out, he missed of them, and therefore dismissed his Troops to their
several Garrisons.

It was a generally received Opinion throughout all Spain, though the Author of
it was not known, that the Duke of Medina Sidonia, The Duke of Medina Sidonia,
being suspected in Spain, Challenges King John.
held secret Correspondence with the King of Portugal, and favored his Cause.
The ground of this Suspicion was, that King John had to his Queen the Sister of
that Duke, and upon this Jealousy, it is thought the King of Spain talking one
Day with the Count Duke de Olivarez, complained to him, That he had three or
four times observed the Family of Guzman was fatal to his Grandeur: The Count
Duke who was himself of that Family, immediately dispatched an Express to the
Duke of Medina Sidonia, summoning him to appear at Court with all possible
Speed. He obeyed, and being come to Madrid, he was persuaded, that to clear
himself of the imputation of Disloyalty cast upon him, he should publish a
Manifesto, containing a Challenge to the new King of Portugal. Others are of
Opinion, that the Duke knowing himself to be in some measure guilty, published
the said Declaration and Challenge of his own accord, to blot out the ill
Opinion conceived of him: Whatsoever the grounds were that moved him to it,
Certain it is, he published and dispersed throughout Spain and Portugal, a
Cartell in Vindication of his Honor, charging the new King with the Crime of
Rebellion; and challenging him to single Combat with all the Formalities used
in those Cases. This Cartel was dated at Toledo, the 29th. day of September,
1641. and is too long to trouble the Reader with in this place; nor is it
significant, since as it happens to most things of that Nature, no Notice was
taken of it.

7. The Bishop of Lamego betrayed to the Spaniards, The Portuguese Ambassador
at Rome.
as has been said above, being now exchanged for certain Spaniards of Quality;
continued his Journey to Rome on his Embassy to his Holiness. Upon his Arrival,
the Spanish Ambassador protested, that he would immediately return to Spain, in
case the Pope received him as Ambassador from Portugal. Hereupon the Pope to
prevent Disorders that might happen, ordered he should come to Town by Night,
but suffered him to be visited as an Ambassador. He of France sent his Coach to
fetch him from Civita Vecchia, with a Guard of all the Portugese and
Catalonians that were then at Rome. Being come thither, he took up his Lodging
at the French Ambassadors, who received him at his Door with all possible marks
of Respect: We shall see what became of this Embassy in its proper place. On
the 27th. of September, arrived at Lisbon a Fleet of 18 Sail from Angola,
richly laden; two days after came in another from Rio de Janeiro of no less
value in sundry sorts of Commodities.

Anno, 1642.
THE Island Terzera was the only Place which had refused to submit to the new
King of Portugal, The Island Terzera reduced.
the Governor thereof proving more faithful then the rest to the King of
Spain. He began to want Provisions and Ammunition, which being known in Spain,
two Ships were sent to him laden with all Necessaries for his Relief. These
Vessels were taken by the Ships of Portugal, which lay about this Island, on
purpose to intercept all Succors. D. Alvaro de Viveiro who commanded in the
Fort, being now reduced to great streights, and seeing no likelihood of being
relieved; capitulated, and marched out with 263 Men, two pieces of Canon, and
all other marks of Honor, leaving behind 800 sick Men, who according to
Articles were to be taken care of, and sent away as soon as well. D. Emanuel de
Souza Pacheco was sent to govern that Island. The Portuguese Fleet consisting
of 13 Sail, sailed together with the Dutch, designing to intercept the Spanish
Galeons; but the Dutch treacherously forsook the Portuguese, who in a Storm
lost their Admiral and Vice Admiral, the other Ships being much shattered.

2. Soon after the Surrender of the Island, Foreign Alliances concluded.
News was brought that the Portuguese. Ambassador in Sweden, had concluded an
Alliance betwixt the two Crowns, which the King for the satisfaction of his
People, caused to be proclaimed by his Heralds. To confirm which, in a few
Days there arrived at Lisbon four Swedish Ships laden with Naval and Warlike
Stores, sent by the Ambassador; and Letters were brought from the Queen of
Sweden, in which she gave their Portuguese Majesty's assurances of her firm
Adherence to them in all that should be for their Service. Tristan de Medoza
had in like manner established a firm Friendship and Alliance with the
Hollanders. However, the Dutch Fleet that was upon the Coast of Goa in India,
took some Portuguese Ships commanded by Sancho Faria de Silva, who was killed
in the Action with 50 of his Men. At the same time they took several places in
Brasil, driving out the Portuguese. D. George Mascarenhas, who was Viceroy
there, sent Advice to the King, and he immediately writ to Francis de Andrade
Leitan his Ambassador in England, ordering him instantly to go over to complain
to the States of the taking of those Places. The States considering how
incapable the King was at that time to do himself right, made small account of
his Ambassador demanding restitution. Goa was at the same time Besieged by the
same Fleet, which not being strong enough for such an Enterprise, begged the
assistance of a Neighboring King: That Prince blocked it up by Land, but as
soon as he understood of the Revolution of Portugal, he raised the Siege,
joined in League with the Portuguese Viceroy, and by this Means, the Dutch
Fleet was forced to retire.

3. All this while the Frontiers of Castile and Portugal were full of Soldiers:
The Progress of the War in the Province of Alentejo.
The Garrison of Campo Mayor often broke into Estremadura. Parties of Horse
from Badajoz appeared frequently at the Gates of Elvas, and the Governor of
this last Place, as often drove Cattle from about Badajoz. Though these inroads
were not very considerable, yet they were not performed without Bloodshed; Time
heightning the hatred betwixt the two Nations, both Parties increased their
Troops. The King of Portugal erected six places of Arms on his Frontiers, and
put 5000 Men into each of them. The Spaniards assembled on all sides, and four
or five Armies appeared in as many places to oppose and infest the Portuguese.
Hereupon daily Action ensued, sometimes the one, and sometimes the other being
superior: Ferdinand Tellez de Meneses Governor of the Province of Beira, was
one of the first that gained upon the Spaniards. He made an inroad into Old
Castile, where he took and burnt the Towns of S. Martin and Elgas, with the
Castle of the latter, which commands all the Territory of Gata. Having made
himself Master of Valverde, and finding it conveniently seated to annoy the
Enemy, he left in it a Garrison well provided. A small Body of 2500 Spaniards
endeavoring to give a check to his Proceedings, was put into Disorder at the
first Charge; and the Portuguese using their Advantage, cut in pieces most of
their Enemies. Martin Alphonso de Melo Governor of Elvas, was no less
successful about the same time. For having received intelligence that a party
of 300 Spanish Horse ravaged the Country betwixt Badajoz and Valverde; he sent
out a good Body of Horse, with 150 Musketeers, ordering them to attack the
Enemy wherever they met them. This was so courageously performed, that most of
the Spanish Horse being slain upon the place, the rest quitted their Horses to
save themselves in a small Wood hard by; so that 274 Horses became a prey to
the Victors. These were yet but small Advantages; D. Francis de Melo General of
the Portuguese Horse in the Province of Alentejo, entered Estremadura, where
finding no Forces to oppose him, he took Aroches, Villar del Rey, Codissera and
Ancinasola; defeated some Troops that adventured to oppose him, took a vast
Booty, and so many Prisoners, that the King of Portugal ordered many of the
least considerable to be set at Liberty. D. John de Garay Governor of Badajoz,
sent out 800 Horse, and 2000 Foot, with design to surprise Olivenza, but D.
Francis de Melo charging them by the way, put them to flight with the slaughter
of 300 Men.

4. These continual Incursions kept the Spaniards always upon their Guard,
Other Military Actions.
and made them think of securing themselves. To this purpose they began to
fortify Aldea del Obispo; but Ferdinand Tellez de Meneses being unwilling to
suffer that Work to go forward, marched with 500 Foot, and four Squadrons of
Horse, attacked the Place, and carried it, though obstinately defended: 140
Spaniards were killed in the Assault, and 116 taken, and all the Works, as well
Old as New, were levelled with the Ground. Then passing on, he did the same to
the Town of Castillejo, which was no less offensive to the Portuguese
Frontiers, then the other would have been. The King to show he was no less
formidable by Sea then by Land, even in the first rise of his Greatness; fitted
out 13 great Men of War, under the command of Antony Tellez, ordering him to
seek out the Spanish Fleet, or in case he found it not, to attempt some
Seaport Town; the Spaniards, though weak, omitted not to make their utmost
efforts, and infest their Enemies Country, as much as in them was. Chelas, a
considerable Town of Estremadura, and seated near the Frontiers of Alentejo,
did often send out Parties, which did incredible damage in that part of the
plain Country subject to Portugal. Francis de Melo who had the charge of those
Frontiers incensed hereat, marched with all the Force he could gather, with a
resolution to carry that Place; nor did he fail of his Design altogether, for
meeting a Squadron of Spanish Horse he cut them off, and then applying his
Scaling Ladders, after a Dispute of five Hours, entered the Town. His Men
immediately fell to the Plunder, which lost them the opportunity they might
have had of entering the Castle with the flying Enemy. Francis de Melo seeing
nothing more could be done then plundering the Town, returned leaving the
Streets full of dead Bodies, and having lost but 16 of his own Men.

5. Whilst the War continued in this manner betwixt these two Neighboring
Nations, Alliances in Africa and Asia.
those of a greater distance sought the Fri^ndship of the new King of Portugal.
That King near Goa whom we mentioned before, was the first that moved for this
Friendship, when he raised his Siege from before the City: The King of Morocco
was not long behind him, for he understanding how fast the Crown was settled by
the unanimous approbation of the whole Kingdom, and so many Alliances with most
Princes of Europe, except those that were devoted to Spain, sent now into
Portugal, to desire leave of the King that an Ambassador might come to put an
end to the Animosities which had been produced by the violent procedure of the
Spaniards.

6. The ill Fortune of the Spaniards raised in them an implacable desire of
Revenge. Military Action in the Province of Tralos Montes.
They assembled 1500 Foot, and 300 Horse, to take a Fort that Ferdinand Tellez
de Meneses had built in Val de Mula, on the Frontiers of the Province Tralos
Montes, and marc^^^ till they came in sight of the Fort; there discovering
(...) Portuguese Horse, and 400 Foot, they halted to consult what was to be
done. D. Sancho Manuel, the Portuguese Camp-Master having obtained Leave of
Ferdinand Tellez, though so unequal in Number, charged the Enemy so vigorously,
that at the first shock the Foot fled, and the Horse seeing the Rout, durst not
come up to support them. Having with such ease overthrown those Troops, the
Portuguese General resolved to make use of the Advantage, being informed they
were retired to Fuentes in Castile, where some Fortifications were begun to be
thrown up. Being too weak to attack them there, he stayed till 500 Foot more
had joined him, and then advanced; he planted some Canon against the Place, and
began to batter it, but seeing no effect, thought of sending for more Troops to
carry it by Escalade, when he was told the Spaniards assembled in great Numbers
from all parts to cut off his Retreat. His danger drew D. Alonso Furtado de
Mendoza to his Assistance, but being still much inferior to the Enemies, they
retired with Speed, and unmolested by the Spaniards. Nor was there any more
quiet on the Frontiers of Galicia; for D. Martin Daradin the Governor of that
Kingdom, not being in a condition to oppose two Portuguese Armies that broke in
upon him at once, they burnt 150 Villages in that Country, and returned home
with a considerable Booty.

7. It was now but reasonable the Forces should have been put into their Winter
Quarters; nevertheless the Duke d'Alva having gathered all the Power he could
sent them under the Conduct of his Son to wast the Province of Beira. In the
Province of Beira.
Ferdinand Tellez de Meneses having Notice hereof* formed a Body of 7000 Foot
and 2700 Horse, resolving to prevent the Spaniards, whose Forces were no less
Considerable; he marched to Val de Mula, and encamped before the Town of
Guardan, which he Summoned, and finding no Disposition in the Governor to
surrender, battered it with two pieces of Canon. The Battery was of little
effect, and therefore Ferdinand Tellez commanded Peter Sousa de Castro to
attack the Outworks with all the Musketeers, and Gaspar de Seixas with some
other Battalions to sustain him; The Attack was begun with great Resolution,
and continued for three Hours, at the end whereof the Besieged put (...) a
white Flag, and sent a Drum to offer to Capitulate^ The Garrison marched out
upon sorry Terms, the Governor and Officers being only allowed to carry their
Swords, and all the Soldiers to the number of 340, being sent Prisoners to
Lisbon. The Booty was great, besides much store of Provision and Ammunition
found in the Place; but the main Consequence of taking this place was, that it
secured the Portuguese Frontiers, and laid those of Castile open to Incursions.
Whilst this was doing, about the Province of Beira, without the Spanish
General, who had taken the Field, his attempting to succor the Town; D. Antony
Mascarenhes commander of Valladores, took Quintas and Corgra. D. Sancho Manuel
plundered and burnt the Towns of Sorvo, Avilar and Chalenga; the Captains,
Edward Miranda, and Emanuel de Andras, did the same to those of Basquilha,
Villar del Puerto, and Saranitho, and so did others all along the Frontiers. D.
Francis de Melo, General of the Cavalry in Allentejo, being abroad with 300
Men, the Governor of Badajoz upon Notice of it, marched out with 700, and
leaving half of them in Ambush, with the other half advanced to draw on the
Portuguese: Melo thinking he had no more Enemies to deal with but what were in
sight, charged them, and they as soon retired, till they drew him into the
ambush. He was at first surprised, seeing himself Attacked by that fresh body,
but recovering himself, divided his men, and sent one part to charge those that
had drawn him on whilst the other engaged those that lay in ambush. In this
manner the Fight continued a considerable time, after which, fresh Troops
appeared, coming from Badajoz, to the assistance of the Spaniards, and others
from Elvas, to sustain the Portuguese. These last were 1600 Foot, and four
Squadrons of Horse, under the Conduct of the Count de Obidos. Now the face of
Affairs was changed, for the Portuguese obtained a Complete Victory. The first
of the Spanish Troops were cut in pieces, and the last retired with the loss of
176 Horse. Of the Portuguese, 37 were killed in the ambush, and 16 in the
Engagement after it.

8. The Assembly of the States, The Cortes or Parliament held.
or Parliament of Portugal, being the only Authority that could establish the
Crown, and raise such supplies as were necessary for the support of it; the
King fixed their Meeting for the 18th. of September, and that day the Session
was commenced with all the Ceremonies usual upon such occasions. The Bishop of
Elvas performed the Office of Chancellor; acquainting that Assembly in the
King's Name, with the causes of their being convened: He represented the great
Blessing of Liberty, the King's extraordinary Care to repair the Harms done by
the Spaniards, the mighty Power he had, as well by Sea as Land; the Alliances
he had made Abroad, and put them in mind how he had never laid any Impositions
upon his People, but maintained the expense of his House upon the private
Patrimony of his Family; and that being now much exhausted, he recommended it
to them to find out means to support so great a Charge, assuring them of his
Royal Protection, and that their Liberties and Privileges should be religiously
preserved. Great was the expectation the King had conceived of this Assembly,
nor was he disappointed, for they gave such Testimonies of their Duty, as
exceeded even his Hopes. They returned Thanks for his Care in asserting their
Liberties, for delivering them from the Yoke of Spain; for the Alliances he had
made Abroad, and for all his good Intentions, offering him their Lives and
Fortunes, and sending him a Blank Paper, that he might dispose of their Estates
as he thought fit for the support of the State, and purchasing his Brother's
Liberty, who was kept Prisoner by the Spaniards ever since the beginning of the
War, having been put into their hands by the King of Hungary, in whose service
he had been nine Years. The King returned the blank as it was sent to him, and
had more plentiful supplies granted him than he himself would have demanded.
The Parliament settled two Funds, the one for Land, the other for Sea-Service:
All other expenses were to be supplied out of the Patrimony of the House of
Braganza.

9. D. John Rodriguez de Souza, y Vasconcellos Count of Castelmelhor, A
Conspiracy to seize Carthagena, discovered; and the Portugueses secured.
went over to Brazil in the Spanish Fleet, in the Year, 1639. In 1641. he was
sent by his General to the Spanish Plantations, in the West Indies. The News of
the Revolution of Portugal, being then brought to the Fleet, the Spaniards
cried down the New King's Title, and exclaimed against the Portugueses as
Rebels. This sensibly touched the Count de Castelmelhor, yet he was forced to
bear with it, being in no condition to make his resentment appear without his
certain destruction. There were seven Portuguese Gallions in the Fleet, and in
them 3000 Men. With the Officers of these Ships, he conspired to seize the
Fleet; as also the Town and Citadel of Cartagena, in new Spain, before which,
they were then at Anchor. Most of the Officers were already engaged in this
Design, and all disposed for putting of it in execution, but the Count having
communicated it to Antony Tenezedo a Portuguese, in whom he confided, as having
done him many signal favors; he discovered the whole matter to the Governor
of the Citadel, who immediately apprehended the Count, and had him Condemned
to Death. This Sentence had been executed within two days, had not the Count
appealed to the Court of Madrid, and the Admiral of the Fleet having had the
Sentence confirmed by the Council there, no hopes remained for his deliverance
but in God. Whilst the Admiral sent into Spain to have the Sentence confirmed,
the King of Portugal got intelligence of what had happened. He immediately sent
away a Caravel, Commanded by a Captain, in whose Conduct he had great
confidence, ordering him to sail for Cartagena, and use all possible means to
deliver the Prisoner. The Weather proved favorable to the Design, the Captain
Arrived safe, and found means to let the Count know he was come to rescue him.
To this purpose, he agreed with a Dutch Captain who Commanded a Frigate in that
Port, for the Caravel being so leaky, that it could not be put to Sea again, he
burnt it. In the mean while, the Count with ready Money and large promises,
corrupted a Corporal, and two Spanish Soldiers, that had the keeping of him,
and they altogether got aboard the Dutch Frigate, which carried them safe to the
Island of Tortuga, where they were favorably received by the French Governor.
Thence they went over to the Island Tercera, and lastly arrived at Lisbon,
where they were bountifully rewarded by the King.

Anno, 1643.
1. THE hatred the Spaniards and Portugueses bore to one another, was too great
to suffer them to lie still: Though the Season was not yet fit for Action, the
Frontiers were never free from incursions. D. Sancho Manuel a Portuguese
Major General, thinking no difficulties too great to be surmounted, marched out
with 150 Horse, judging that a sufficient number to plunder the Town of Fituro
in Castile, four Leagues from the Frontiers of Portugal. His Design being
divulged, and the Spaniards believing his Forces greater than they were, they
abandoned the Town, leaving it to be ransacked by the Soldiers without the
least opposition. But the retreat proved not without danger, for the Spaniards
of the neighboring places assembling to the number of 200 Horse, Charged them
before they could recover their own Frontiers, and that with such resolution,
that the Portugueses were at first forced to give ground. But having quitted
all the Booty which encombred them, they rallied, and giving a fresh Charge,
worsted those by whom before they had been drove. Night coming on, put an end
to the Battle. The number of the Dead was equal, and the Victory had been
dubious, but that the Spaniards got away in the dark, leaving the Booty and the
Field to the Portugueses. This small Action was the cause of a greater, for the
Marquess de Elecha, General of the Spanish Horse, resolving to revenge that
loss, entered Portugal with 500 Horse, and 300 Musketeers, surprised the Town of
Sabugal, fired 13 Houses, killed seven of the Inhabitants he found in Arms, and
drove away all the Cattle he found. Not content with this, he returned by the
way of Alfayates to brave the Garrison, but this boldness cost him dear.
Ferdinand Tellez de Menezes the General who was within two Leagues of that
place, gathering 200 Horse and three Companies of Foot, sent to the Governor
of Alfayates to join him with the best men he had, which was accordingly
performed; that Governor bringing with him 200 Men. With this force they
pursued the Spaniards, and having overtaken, fell upon them: The Fight was
bravely maintained, for the Spaniards and Portugueses gave three several
Charges in such a manner, that it was not discernable who had the better: being
now fallen in after the Fire, with Sword in hand, and the Marquess de Elecha,
the Spanish General, and D. Francis de Erasso, who was next in Command to him,
being both Slain, Victory began to incline to the Portugueses, for the
Spaniards dismayed at the loss of their Commanders fled, leaving the Field
strewed with Dead Bodies, Arms and Plunder which they quitted to save their
Lives. The Portugueses were forward enough to have pursued them, but Ferdinand
Tellez held them in, fearing to fall into some ambush, being to pass before the
Enemy. The Duke of Alva's Enterprise redounded more to the honor of the
Spaniards. He being desirous of doing something considerable in Portugal, drew
together 8000 Foot and 900 Horse, with which he entered Portugal, burnt four
open Towns, put many of the Inhabitants to the Sword, and finding a vigorous
resistance at Eschallam, which place, he had caused to be Attacked at the same
time, he retired again, to avoid meeting all the Troops of the Frontiers drawn
together to oppose him.

2. It was not only the success on the Frontiers that rendered the King of
Portugal fortunate. Two Jesuits being procurators for the Provinces of Cochin
and Goa in India, arriving at this time, brought him an Account how well
affected the people in those distant Provinces were to his interest. This happy
News was a great addition to the joy of his success in War, for they assured
him that most of those Eastern Princes had joined in League with his Viceroy,
as soon as they understood he was restored to the Crown of his Ancestors. The
King who omitted nothing that might encourage his faithful Servants, and gain
him new Friends, sent away two Gallions, and six other Vessels, with all
necessaries to the former, and with assurances to the latter, that they should
always find in him a brotherly return of affection, as long as they continued
their friendship toward him.

3. Francis de Lucena, The Secretary Francis Lucena, put to Death upon account
of a supposed Conspiracy.
Secretary of State ever since the Revolution, had upon complaints preferred
against him by his Enemies been committed Prisoner to the Castle of St. Julian,
but nothing being proved against him, after a long Imprisonment, the King had
resolved to restore him to his Honor, when an unfortunate accident on a sudden
brought him to an untimely end. The Count de Obidos General of the Province of
Aleitejo happened to take a fellow coming from Badajoz, who proved to be Servant
to Peter Bonete Adjutant to the Major General. Upon examination, this Man
declared that his Master held Correspondence with the Spaniards, and he being
thereupon Apprehended and put upon the Rack, made a Confession, which at his
Death, he declared to be false; but wherein he accused D. Joseph de Meneses,
Governor of Fort St. Julian of a Design of betraying it to the Spaniards,
Francis de Lucena, the Secretary of holding Correspondence with them, and
several others of joining with them in these Treasonable practices. All the
persons accused being put to Torture, some of them to the last, denied their
knowledge of any such Treason, but others, to be eased of their misery, owned
all that was laid to their Charge. Upon this weak evidence, several were put to
Death. D. Joseph de Meneses, endured the Rack constantly, denying it, and being
cured, the King offered him again a Command, but he refused it; saying, He was
now resolved to serve him, who knew how to Reward services, and punish
Offenses. The unfortunate Secretary, Francis de Lucena, being put upon the
Rack, and being weak with Age fainted away without Confessing. Nevertheless,
though all had recanted that accused him, he was Condemned to Death as a
Traitor, and suffered accordingly, positively denying any guilt in the matter
he was accused of, to the last minute of his Life. The Rabble would have torn
him in pieces when he was brought Prisoner from the Castle of St. Julian, for
in all Countries they are ready to devour the innocent, bu^ he was then
preserved by the Guards, to be made a Sacrifice to that many headed Monster in
a more solemn manner, being publicly beheaded upon a Scaffold.

4. Whilst due Examination was making into this piece of Treachery, King John
rewards those that suffered for the Conspiracy at Carthage^^.
the King of Portugal made generous acknowledgments to the Count de
Castelmelhor, on account of his good Endeavors and Sufferings
beforementioned. The post of General of the Frontiers, betwixt the Rivers
Duero and Minho, given him as the first Reward of his Fidelity in the
West Indies, seeming too small a Recompense for a Service of such Consequence;
he added to it a present of a considerable* Sum of Money, a Commendary of the
Military Order of Christ, worth 2000 Crowns a Year, gave the reversion of it to
his Children, and confirmed that Earldom to his third Generation. To Father
Ambrose a Benedictin, concerned in the Counts Escape, he gave a Benefice. To
Antony de Abien, Captain of the Caravel, that went for him a considerable
Commendary. And because Dominick de Sylva, Antony Rodiguez the Spanish
Corporal, two Soldiers that were upon the Guard, and the Dutch Captain that
lent his Vessel to forward the undertaking, had all contributed to the Earl's
Deliverance; they also were made par^^kers of the King's Bounty. The Dutch
Captain had 2000 Crowns, Dominick de Sylva was Knighted, and had a Company in a
Marine Regiment with a Pension. The Spanish Corporal had also a Company in the
Land-Service, with a Pension as the other. The two Soldiers were likewise made
Captains, but without any other addition of Honor or Pension. These Acts of
Generosity in the King, redounded much to his Honor, as did no less his
Prudence in placing good Commanders upon the Frontiers. George de Melo General
of the Galleys, was put into the Fort of St. Julian, to secure that Place,
whilst D. Joseph de M^nezes the former Goververnour was proceeded against. D.
Francis de Sousa Coutinho, returning from his Embassy of Sweden, had the
Government of the Island Tercera conferred on him. D. Alvaro de Abranchez was
appointed General of the Frontiers of Beira, and D. John de Sousa, of those of
the Province Tralos Montes.

5. About this time News was brought to Lisbon of two several Accidents which
moved different Passions in the People. The King of Spain's Favorite disgraced.
One was, that the Count Duke de Olivarez had lost the favor of the Catholic
King, whose prime Minister he had been for the space of 22 Years; and because
his Government had appeared. Tyrannical to the Portugueses, there were few of
them, who did not express extraordinary satisfaction at his fall. The other
piece of News produced great Compassion in such as were least Zealous for
Religion. Several Persons suffered Martyrdom in Japan.
F. Antony Francis Cardin a Jesuit, and general Procurator for the Society in
the Province of Japan, gave an account, that four Portuguese Amabassadors from
Macao, being at the Town of of Nangassaqui, with 66 Persons in their retinue,
for the settling of Trade, and to endeavor the planting of the Faith there;
the Emperor of that Island, whose Name was Toyogun, had cast them all into
Dungeons, then put to Death the four Ambassadors, with 53 of the chief of their
Retinue, and sent home the other 13 in derision of the Apostles, to carry the
News of that Bloody Execution to Macao. The Dutch notwithstanding the Cessation
of Arms, betwixt the Crown of Portugal and the States of Holland, entered the
City Negapatan in India; the Portugueses not being able to withstand them, and
obliged them to ransom it for 110000 pieces of Eight. A Treaty was afterward
set on foot for settling a Truce betwixt the two Nations in those parts, but
the Hollanders thinking it more for their Advantage to continue the War, soon
broke it off. The next Act of Hostility they committed, was in the Island
Ceylon, where thinking to surprise the Portugueses quartered in the Village
Curaza, as relying on the Truce betwixt the two Nations, they marched against
them; but they having intelligence of their coming, charged them with such
Bravery, that of 400 Hollanders, scarce any escaped being killed or taken. This
Victory gave the Portugueses in that Island quiet for some time. But still the
War was continued in other parts. After the Dutch had left Negapatan, it was
besieged by a Neighboring Nayque or Prince of the Indians, but he meeting with
a vigorous opposition, soon desisted.

6. In America, the Portugueses under the command of Antony Teyxeyra, after a
long Siege, recovered from the Dutch the City St. Luis of Maranhao, they being
forced to abandon it for want of Provisions, and most of them afterward
perished by the hands of the Indians, whom they had barbarously used. Our
Affairs were not so successful in Angola where our Men under the Command of
Peter Caesar were worsted by the Dutch, who afterward concluding a Truce with
them, treacherously fell upon them, killing 40, taking 187 Prisoners, and
forcing the rest to fly for safety to the Mountains. Our Fort at Mozambique
enjoyed most Peace, for the Emperor of Monomotapa having been lately converted
to the Faith, by the religious of the Order of St. Dominick, professed an
inviolable Friendship toward the Portugueses, and had obtained a number of
them of Julius Moniz, the Governor of that Fort for his Guard.

7. The Pope always continuing fixed in his Resolution, The Portuguese
Ambassador at Rome not being admitted, returns home.
not to give Audience to the Bishop of Lamego, sent by the King of Portugal,
with the quality of his Ambassador to Rome, that Bishop was at length obliged
to return home. He was conducted by some of the Duke of Florence's Horse to
Leghorn, where four Portuguese Ships lay ready to carry him to Lisbon. D. Luis
Pereira de Castro Counselor in his Majesty's Council of Conscience, was
nevertheless chosen to undertake another Voyage to Rome. But because the
rejecting of a second Ambassador might be of ill Consequence to the Crown of
Portugal, this Counselor took only the style of Deputy of all the Clergy of
the Kingdom, to represent their wants, and how prejudicial it was to refuse to
admit an Ambassador from his Portuguese Majesty, who had omitted nothing that
might tend to convince the Christian World of his Zeal for Religion, and his
Respect to the Holy See.

Anno, 1644.
1. IN pursuance to the League concluded betwixt the Kings of France and
Portugal; Great Preparations both in Spain and Portugal.
the former excited the latter, to invade the Territories of Spain with all his
Power by Sea and Land, that so he might be put into a Condition to make the
greater progress in Catalonia. Hereupon King John gave Orders for gathering an
Army of 12000 Foot and 2000 Horse, which was to enter Castile by the way of
Alentejo. The Catholic King having Advice hereof, the better to secure his
Dominions on that side, whilst he attended the Affairs of Catalonia, gave the
command of his Army in Estremadura, to the Marquess de Torrecusa. Mathias de
Albuquerque having served the King of Portugal well, was by him continued
General of the Frontiers. The first attempt made by the Marquess proved
unfortunate, for he could not make himself Master of Ougela, a little Town in
Portugal, which after the Gate had been forced with a Petard, was bravely
defended by the Inhabitants, for the space of six Hours. The Portuguese army in
Estremadura.
Among the other Defendants, a Woman did Wonders with a Baker's Peel; and
though wounded, could never be persuaded to retire till the Assault was given
over. The Portugueses after this were not slack to return the Spaniards their
Visit at Mentejo; which place, though well fortifyed and defended by four
Companies, they assaulted and took by Scalade, where falling disorderly to
Plunder, the Spaniards took the opportunity to rally, and fell upon them so
resolutely, that they had all Perished, but that the Monteiero Mor came in
opportunely with his Horse, and forced the Spaniards to retire to the River
Guadiana, where many of them were drowned. Hence the Portugueses advanced, and
rased Membrillo an open Town, save a Trench that had been thrown up about it.
The same they did to Villa Nueva de Barcarota, but attempted not the Castle, in
which was D. Francis de Velasco, Lieutenant General of the Horse of Castile,
who having but 500 Horse with him, was not able to appear in the Field against
the Portugueses. They being now 6000 Foot and 1100 Horse* with 6 pieces of
Canon, took and destroyed Villar del Re^, Roca de Almanacite and Puebla, all
Towns of Estremadura. These Actions of the Portugueses struck to the Heart of
the Marquess de Torrecusa, as perceiving a sort of Faintness in his Soldiers,
which looked like infatuation, being wholly opposite to the natural Bravery of
the Spaniards. He called a Council of War, in which he proposed to take the
Field, and give the Enemy Battle. Many applauded his Propositions, yet others
advised to besiege Olivenza, as the strongest of the Enemies Garrisons, which
would draw their Forces out of Spain, and perhaps necessitate them to give
Battle upon Terms of Disadvantage. This opinion wanted not some to support it,
but the Marquess and others persisting in the Resolution of hazarding a Battle,
their Authority prevailed. The Spanish Army consisted of 7000 Foot, and 2600
Horse in 34 Troops, under the command of the Baron de Molinguen, who was now to
command the whole Army, because the Marquess was to stay at Badajoz. These
Forces met the Enemy sooner than they expected.

2. On the 26 of May, 1644, The Spanish Forces defeated.
Albuquerque the Portuguese General, finding himself reduced to that necessity,
that he must either fight or fly, chose rather to hazard a Battle, than forfeit
his Reputation. He performed the Office of a Major General, ordering his Battle
himself. The command of the Right Wing he gave to the Monteiro Mor, and the
Left to the Commissary General, who had under him the Dutch Horse, commanded by
Captain Piper. The two Armies engaged, and the Spaniards gave such a furious
Charge on the Portuguese Left Wing, where the Commissiary commanded, that the
Dutch Horse fled, and running upon their own Foot, so disordered that part of
the Army, that the Spaniards drove them from their Ground; their General being
in danger to be bruised to Death, his Horse falling upon him, but a French
Captain saved him, giving him another Horse that ran lose, and sustaining the
shot of the Enemy till he mounted. Being delivered from that Danger, he had
recourse to the Body of reserve, which advancing to the Place, which the
Spanish Horse had left to pursue the Dutch, and others that fled, made such
Havoc among the Foot, before Victorious, that they were forced to fly. The
Horse returning from the pursuit, and seeing the Foot broke, could never be
brought to a Charge, but betook themselves to their Heels, quitting their
Cannon and Baggage. Of the Spaniards, about 2000 Foot and 700 Horse were killed
and taken, with about 40 Colors and Standards. Of the Portuguese, 750 were
slain, and among them two Colonels. The Portugueses continued a Day in the
field of Battle, least the Spaniards should return and vaunt they had kept it.
King John rejoicing at this Victory which secured his Crown, created the
General Earl of Alegrette, giving him a Pension of 4000 Crowns, and rewarded
many other of the Principal Men in the Army. The Marquess of Torrecusa labored
to gather all the Forces of Estremadura; being grieved he was not present at
the Battle, as believing it lost for want of Conduct, and it troubled him the
more, because he was the adviser of it.

3. Whilst these things happened in Estremadura, several Incursions were made on
all the Frontiers of the Kingdom, but in them was nothing Memorable, for the
Portugueses were most upon the Defensive, and the Spaniards only kept the War
afoot, till the affairs of Catalonia might be settled, that then they might
turn their whole Force to this side. A sham Conspiracy.
About this same time, D. George de Mascarenhas, Count de Monte Albano who was
of the Council of State, and had other great Employments, was impeached of
Conspiring with others against the King, for which he was committed to the
Castle of Belem, and the rest to other Prisons. Upon Examination, the
Accusation was found malicious and groundless, whereupon he and all the others
on the second of November were honorably discharged, and restored to their
Estates and Honors. At this time also dyed the Archbishop of Braga, one of
the managers of the first Conspiracy against the King. Dying, he made it his
request to the King, that he would pardon his Treachery, and grant that his
Body might be Buried without some Parish Church, without any inscription upon
it, to the end, no Memory might survive of one that has been Traitor to his
King.

4. The Portuguese Governors on the Coasts of America at length concluded a
Truce with the Count de Nassan, The Affairs of America.
who governed at Pernambuco for the Hollanders. Yet so far were they from
observing the Articles of it, that they raised a new Fort at Segeripe, took
several of our Ships, and committed many Barbarities against the Portugueses;
that according to composition, remained under them at Pernambuco. These things
moved John Fernandez Veigra, and Francis Berenguer, to lay the design this Year
of expelling them that Province; the success of their Enterprise belongs to
another place. In Africa, Tangier had till this time held for the Spaniards,
but now the Garrison secured their Governor, sent him Prisoner to Lisbon, The
Dutch contrary to Faith given, take several places in India.
and declared for King John. The Moors thought to have surprised that City, and
gave a desperate Assault, but were repulsed with great Loss. The Dutch in
India, notwithstanding their repeated Orders from the States to cease from all
Hostilities, still found pretenses to carry on the War; and landing a great
number of Men in Ceylon, took the Fort of Negumbo, having first overthrown the
Portugueses that were to defend it; they presuming, though much inferior in
Number, and contrary to their Orders to meet the Enemy in open Field, who
pursuing them after the defeat, entered the Fort in that Heat, putting above 300
of our men to the Sword. The City Macao in China was near falling again into
the Hands of the Spaniards; many of the Inhabitants favoring their interest,
and raising a dangerous Tumult to promote the same, but by the Courage of
Sebastian Lobo the Governor, who fired from the Castle upon the City, together
with the Interposition of the Jesuits, it was again reduced to Obedience.
Gonzalo Sequeyra was sent Ambassador by the King to the Emperor of Japan, but
through the Instigation of the Hollanders was not received.

Anno, 1645.
1. THis Year the King having regard to the good Service done by the Earl of
Castello-Melhor, Actions in the Province of Alentejo.
in the Province betwixt Duero and Minho, appointed him General of Alentejo. In
April he took possession of that Command, and at the same time received
intelligence that the Marquess de Leganez was come to Badajoz, to command the
Spanish Army. Soon after the Counts Arrival at Badajoz, 500 Spanish Horse made
an Incursion into the Territory of Campo Mayor, whence they retired with great
Booty. In their retreat, the two Captains Emanuel de Gama Lobo and D. Charles
Jordano, charged them with 300 Portuguese Horse, recovered the Prey, and took
from them 80 Horses. The Count de Castello Melhor, presently after attempted to
drive the Country about Badajoz, and to that purpose marched with 800 Horse and
1500 Foot, but returned without doing any thing more, than driving the Enemies
advanced Parties to the Walls of Badajoz. In return, the Spaniards with a Body
of 700 Horse, fell into the Country of Barbacena and Sancta Olaya, which is two
Leagues from Elvas and Campo Mayor; the Horse of both which Places, to the
Number of 500, joining, charged them in their Retreat, recovered all the Booty,
and took 60 of their Horses. The Count de Castelmelhor having thoroughly
examined the strength of Badajoz, thought to have surprised that place, and in
order to it marched with 5500 Foot, and 1200 Horse, two Petards, and eight
pieces of Canon, which last being useless for a surprise, were the cause he
failed of his design, for the Carriages breaking by the way, (as was thought
rather through the malice of those who had them in charge than neglect) so much
time was spent in fixing them again, that it was day before he could reach the
Fort of Telena, which being a League from the City, he was forced to return
without attempting any thing to Elvas.

2. The King having certain intelligence that the Spanish Army daily increased
at Badajoz, gave out all the necessary Orders for his Troops to Rendesvouz at
Elvas, and to be himself the more at hand, went over to Aldea Gallega, which
was the cause that many of the Nobility and Gentry repaired to the Army. The
Spanish Army on the Portuguese Frontiers.
On the 25th day of October, the Marquess de Leganez, marched from Badajoz,
with 12000 Foot, 3000 Horse, 10 pieces of Cannon, and a Train proportionable,
and halted in sight of the Bridge of Olivenza, and Fort St. Antony. In two days
he took the said Fort, and another at the foot of the Bridge, both which, he
demolished, and broke several Arches of the Bridge, to cut off the
Communication of Olivenza. Whilst the Spaniards were busy at this work, a
Party of 600 of their Horse, meeting 400 of our Foot, under the Command of
Major John da Fonseca Barreta, within two Leagues of Estremoz, cut most of them
off, the Major being the first that Fled; whereas, he might have easily drawn
his Men within an Enclosure which was by, and have thereby secured them against
any Horse. The King of the Maldivy Islands, in India, being now come to
Portugal, to crave Aid of the King against a Brother who had Usurped the Crown;
served in the Army this Campaign, and was treated with all imaginable respect.
Count Castelmelhor, having drawn together all the Force he could, and being yet
Inferior to the Enemy, kept himself still within the Olive-Gardens at Elvas,
but continually sent out Parties to Alarm the Enemy. D. Roderick de Castro,
with 1000 Horse, and 500 Musketeers, sustaining one of those Parties, the Enemy
Charged it, and pursuing too far, he cut off 90 of their Horse. Another of our
Parties being beyond Badajoz, took the Count de Izinguen, who came to be
Lieutenant General of Horse, in the Spanish Army, and being sent to Lisbon,
continued a long time Prisoner in the Castle of Belem. The Marquess de Leganez,
having done nothing more than break the Bridge, and demolish the two Forts,
returned toward Badajoz, and in 12 days erected a new Fort at Telena, near
that City, destroying at the same time a Tower, in which, was an Ensign and 15
of our Men, a League from Elvas. This is all that was done of moment, in the
Province of Alentejo, and both Armies went into Winter Quarters.

3. In the Province betwixt Duero and Minho, The War in the Provinces betwixt
Duero and Minho, and Tralos Montes.
there was no memorable Action; only small inroads made on both sides: But the
Province Tralos Montes, enjoyed perfect Peace, both Parties lying still, each
fearing to provoke the other. D. Ferdinand Mascarenhas, Count de Serem,
Governed Beira. At his first coming thither, the Spaniards drove a Prey from
about Villa Tropim, and Malpartida, but Captain Ruy Tavarez de Brito,
overtaking them with 100 Horse, recovered all, though at the cost of his own
Life. Soon after, the Enemy laid Siege to Salvaterra, but without success; for
the Count having drawn together all the Force he could make to relieve it, and
being reinforced from Alentejo, they broke up the Siege and departed. They
being gone, the Count fortified the Frontier places, and obliged the Country
People to retire farther from the borders, because he was inferior to the
Enemy in Forces.

4. We left John Fernandez Vieyra, Actions of John Fernandez Vieyra in Brazil
against the Dutch.
the last Year in the Mountains of Pernambuco, expecting succors from Bahia,
to make War upon the Hollanders. They laid several designs to take him, but he
having timely notice; still escaped their hands. They promised 1000 Florins
Reward for his Head, and he on the other side offered 8000 Crusados for any of
the Heads of those of their supreme Council. Henry Hus was sent with 1500
Dutch, and 800 Indians, into the Mountains, to cut him off with all his Party;
but he having gathered 1200 men, whereof only 200 had Firearms, posted himself
so advantageously, and received them with such resolution, that after a dispute
of several hours, they were totally routed with much slaughter, and had not the
Night sheltered them, none had returned to carry the News. The Arms taken in
this Action were the principal part of the Booty, because of the great want of
them there was among the Portugueses. John Hus, revenged himself upon the
innocent Inhabitants of the Towns of St. Laurence and Apopucos, who lived under
the protection of the Dutch, robbing and putting them to the rack. Soon after
Antony Philip Camarao, and Henry Dias, with the Blacks and Indians under their
Command, joined John Fernandez Vieyra. Andrew Vidall, also sent with some Foot,
by Antony Tellez, Governor of Bahia, to apprehend John Fernandez, for breaking
the Truce with the Dutch, took part with him against them. Advice being brought
them that the Hollanders plundered Varzea, and carried away the Women that were
there, they marched with all speed and defeating them in the Field, obliged
those that retired into a House to surrender themselves. Though the Hollanders
complained that Andrew Vidal being sent to their assistance, had joined their
Enemies, yet they as soon as he was landed, had burnt the Ships that brought
him from Bahia.

5. The Dutch going about to disarm the Portuguese Inhabitants of the Town of
Sirinhaem, Faithless proceedings of the Dutch in Brazil.
they were so incensed, that gathering together under Hypolito de Vercoza, they
drove them not only out of the Town but out of the Fort, whither they had fled
for safety. At Pontal de Nazareth, our Men had also Besieged the Dutch in the
Fort, and Martin Sourez Moreno, with his Regiment coming to the assistance of
the Besiegers; Theodosius Straet, the Governor, underhand contrived how to
deliver it up to them, and he with most of his Men entered into their Service.
Andrew Vidal, who had been in this last Action, having again joined John
Fernandez Vieyra, they resolved to block up the place called Arrecife, and the
City Mauricea, which was immediately put in execution, all the Forces being
posted in the most convenient places, to cut off the Enemy from all relief by
Land. They Attacked and took the Fort St. Cruz, seated betwixt the Arrecife and
the Town of Olinda, the Commander with 60 Men taking Service among the
Portugueses. The Fort of Porto Calvo, was also taken by Christopher Lins, the
Garrison being straightened for Provisions, and he having intercepted a Vessel
coming to their relief.

6. Whilst these things were doing, the Portugueses of the River of St.
Francis, following the example of the rest of their Contrymen, falling upon
the Dutch, who would have secured the principal Men among them, flew some, and
drove the rest out of Town. Then besieging them in the Fort, and being
reinforced by some Companies sent by the Governor of Bahia, they obliged them
to surrender, and rased the Fort, that the Enemy might never think of
recovering it. Andrew de Rocha de Antas, and Valentin de Rocha were the
principal promoters and managers of this enterprise, who having delivered their
own Province* marched with the Soldiers and such others as would follow them,
to join John Fernandez, and his Forces before Arrecife. Here it was resolved to
Attack the Island Itamaraca, whence the Besieged had all their sustenance. The
Design was put in execution with 800 Men, who falling to plunder before they
had secured the Victory, were repulsed, 80 of them being slain, and many
wounded. The Besieged made a great sally upon the quarter where Henry Dias
Commanded, but his Blacks received them with such bravery that very few
returned to the Town. Nevertheless, having agreed with a Regiment of Dutch,
that served the Portugueses, that in the heat of the Action they should fall
upon them; they ventured to make another Sally, but with no better success, the
Treachery of the Hollanders being timely prevented by their Colonel, who
suspected their fidelity. A few days after, 130 of them Deserted, whereupon the
rest were disarmed, and sent away to Bahia, except only the Colonel, Theodosius
Straet, who was found innocent, and served to the last. But it is time we leave
them to the next Year.

7. At Tangier, the new Governor D. Gaston Coutinho, made an inroad into the
Country, with 150 Horse, overthrew a Party of Moors, and returned with a great
booty, which proved fatal to Tangier^; for the Plague then raging among the
Moors, was brought into the Town, and in half a years time carried off 1700
persons; a great number for that small place. The Affairs of India we related
in the last Year, and have nothing more, but that D. Philip de Mascarenhas, the
new Viceroy Arrived at Goa, from Ceylon, and entered upon the Government. The
Truce with the Hollanders is the cause there will be little to say relating to
those parts. Six Ships sailed this Year from Lisbon for India, and arrived in
safety.

Anno, 1646.
1. D. John Mendez de Vasconcellos, the Portuguese General for the Province of
Alentejo, The Portugueses ravage the Frontiers of Estremadura.
had an Army of 10000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, about Elvas, rather to serve the
interest of the Catalonians, than for any desire King John had to make any
incursion into Estremadura. D. Roderick de Castro, General of the Horse, and
his Lieutenant, D. John Mascarenhas, were ordered to march with 600 Horse,
carrying 300 Foot behind them to Olivenza, where they should receive farther
Orders, of what was to be done on the 17th of July, at Night. They marched with
great secrecy, and having there received instructions, continued their march
thence all Night, and at break of day without meeting the least opposition,
entered, plundered and burnt the Town of Sta. Marta, bringing away a great
booty, though the place was eight Leagues up the Country, betwixt Badajoz and
Cafra. The same from the Province of Beira.
The Portugeses of the Province of Beira, were not idle, but made a road as far
as Valverde, driving away all the Cattle, and taking many Prisoners. Not
content with what was done, they advanced to Silleros, a place six Leagues
higher in the Country; but here they met not with their usual success, for
after some skirmishing, they were forced to retire. The Spaniards to divert the
Enemy from ravaging Castile, on the 5th of August, Attacked Fiaces, but to no
purpose, for though the Wall was low and weak, it was so resolutely defended that
they were forced to quit the enterprise.

2. Wherever the Portugueses came, The Portugueses take Codisseira.
they utterly destroyed all before them, that the Enemies Frontiers being bare
and desolate, they might find the greater difficulties, if they attempted to
invade Portugal. Now to remove the Spaniards still farther off, and in case the
War continued to employ them about recovering of their own, or if a Treaty of
Peace were set on Foot, to have something to restore, they were resolved to
attempt the taking of Codisseira. This place was considerable as well for its
Riches, as the Strength of the Castle and Number of its Garrison. The Count de
Alegrette, who as has been said, was rewarded with that Title by the King, to
show himself worthy of it, resolved to use his utmost Endeavors to gain this
place. It was difficult to carry it by open Force and a Seige, and therefore he
concluded upon a Surprise. Having chosen 600 Foot, and some Troops of Horse,
backed by a good Number of Volunteers, and provided Scaling Ladders, Petards,
and all other Necessaries, he Marched by the way of Portalegre and Elvas to
Aronches, where he was reinforced by other Troops and Volunteers, with which
Forces he posted himself within a League of Codisseira. There he halted till
Night, having secured all the Men he met by the way; That none might carry
Intelligence to the Enemy. His eagerness made him think it dark enough sooner
than really it was; And therefore approaching the Place, whilst yet some
glimmering of Light was abroad, he was discovered at a distance, by a Sharp
sighted Sentinel, who giving the Alarm in the Town, was soon answered by the
Castle, in both which Places, As well the Inhabitants as Soldiers, Ran to the
Walls, and put themselves in a posture of Defense. Notwithstanding, all the
opposition made from the Walls, the Portugueses boldly made up to the Gate, and
Fired the Petards at the Town and Castle Gates, which were torn in pieces, and
they Entering put to the Sword, all they found in Arms. D. John de Guevara, was
retired into the great Marketplace with many of his Officers, hoping there to
Maintain his honor; but the harm they did among the Portugueses, enraged them
the more, so that they were scarce satisfied to disarm and make them prisoners
of War. The Danger being over, they fell to plundering the Town, and not so
content set fire to it, reducing to ashes the place they designed to have
maintained. This success made the Victors think of attempting Badajoz. They
marched to Telena, a Fort Built the foregoing Year, They Attempt Badajoz.
by the Marquess de Leganez, (...)-work to Badajoz. There were in it, 150
Spaniards, who at the first Summons, basely Surrendered upon discretion; and the
Fort was demolished. Whilst the (...) were at work, the Forces advanced to
Badajoz, where the Marquess de Mo^inguen was Governor, who presently marched
out with 7000 Foot, and 150 (...). The Portugueses though much inferior in number
stood their Ground, and obstinately defended themselves for the space of seven
Hours, but were at last forced to retire, having lost many Men, besides many
more wounded. The Spaniards say, the Fort of Telena was not Demolished, but
left in the same Condition the Portugueses found it, they wanting time to ruin
the Works, or remove any thing out of it, being forced to retreat with
Precipitation.

3. Nothing better was the success of the Marquess de Aytona, Actions in the
Province of Beira.
the Catholic King's General, betwixt the Rivers Duero and Minho, in his
design of surprising Salvaterra. He marched with 600 Foot, and 500 Horse, but
the Count de Castelmelhor, who commanded the Portugueses in that Province,
understanding his Design, posted himself under the Walls of that Place; and the
Marquess perceiving his Intentions had taken Air, posted himself not far off,
and being master of the Field, erected a Fort upon an Eminence, that might
serve as a Bridle upon the Garrison of Salvaterra, and where he might be at
Hand upon any Opportunity, to throw himself into that place which was very
considerable, as being upon the Frontiers of Beira. Some considerable Action
might reasonably be expected here, the Spaniards keeping to their Strength, and
the Portuguese to theirs, and the Forces on both sides daily increasing. The
Spanish Army grew up to the Number of 10000 Foot, and 3000 Horse, which on the
20 of November, undertook the Siege of Salvaterra, and pressed it so
vigorously, that they soon lodged themselves upon the Ditch, and had begun to
mine, hoping in few days to carry the place. This was the posture of their
Affairs, when understanding that all the Forces of the Province of Beira,
commanded by Count Seren, reinforced by others of Alentejo, under the Conduct
of D. Sancho Manuel, were marching with all possible speed to the Relief of the
Town, they raised the Siege with such Precipitation, that they left behind them
much Provision, Ammunition, their Baracks, and about 300 sick and lame
Soldiers. The Portugueses coming later then they had hoped, as those who were
stayed by the violent Rains, were much troubled to be disappointed of meeting
the Spanish Army, the routing of which they had promised to themselves, and
greater Security to their Frontiers for the future. Having burnt the Baracks,
and the Country round about, they returned to their Winter Quarters, as the
Spaniards had done on their side.

4. Thus stood all the Affairs on both sides, Both sides cease from Hostilities.
when as well the one as the other perceived that this sort of Action served
only to harrass themselves. The Catholic King seemed to maintain an Army to no
purpose, since in 5 or 6 Years time, he had done nothing but waste Money, and
loose Men and Ground. All the Portugueses did, was to destroy Towns, frighten
the Country People, and kill some few Soldiers. These Considerations moved both
Parties to put their standing Forces into Garrisons, and forbear farther
Hostilites. Whilst the Catholic King attended the Affairs of Catalonia, and
made his Interest at Rome, to obstruct the new King's being treated as such by
the Pope, and the vacant Benefices in Portugal, to be filled by Men of that
Princes presenting; he labored to heap up Treasure of the Riches brought him
from India, that whenever the Catholic King should renew the War, he might not
want Money, which is the Life and Sinews of all Armies. He also took care to
strengthen himself with Friends and Confederates, and having secured the King
of France, his Ministers endeavored to join in Amity with the new
Commonwealth of England. Portugues Affairs at Rome.
It remained to solicit the Friendship of the Sea of Rome, not only by
performing the public Act of Obedience, and filling the vacant Churches, but
by satisfying that Court, as to two Points, which it seemed to resent. One was,
that King John persisted in retaining some Revenues taken from the Church. The
other, that he kept the Archbishop of Braga Prisoner, for which he was
excommunicated, and therefore the Pope demanded, that the Revenues should be
restored, and the Archbishop put into his Hands, as being his proper Judge. To
those things the Portuguese Ministers answered, that had the Pope sent his
Nuncio, the Dispute about those Revenues, might have been easily accommodated;
it being made appear, that the Crown was in possession of them for about 600
Years. And as to the Archbishop, that he being guilty of High Treason, what
the King had done, was justifiable according to the Canons, and therefore he
could incur no Censure of the Church. Nevertheless, the King was ready to
commit the Trial of that Cause to such Judges, as his Holiness should appoint;
but not to deliver his Person, because of the danger there was, that he should
be set at Liberty by the way, if he touched at any port of Spain; as also,
because King John not being yet owned as such at Rome, they would not adjudge
the Archbishop guilty of High Treason. The Court of Rome seemed satisfied as
to this Point, but not as to the other.

5. In this place it will not be amiss to relate the end of the Misfortunes
befallen to Edward, Of Edward Brother to King John
Brother to King John. It was said above, how he was taken in Germany, where he
served the Emperor, and delivered up to the Ministers of Spain, as guilty of
being privy to the revolt of Portugal. It was laid to his Charge, that being a
Subject of the King of Spain, he had not discovered to him the designed revolt
of that Kingdom. On this account, he was put into the Castle of Milan, where
fresh Evidence was found against him. He was kept with Guards upon him in the
very Room, all his own Servants being removed from him, upon Suspicion that
they contrived his Escape. The Governor of the Castle imagining that his
Confessor who was a Jesuit, might have a hand in that Contrivance; sent him
word to chose another, so it were a Subject of the King of Spain, and no
Jesuit, letting him also know, that every now and then he must change his
Confessor. This Message being delivered by the Lieutenant of the Castle, D.
Edward broke out into a Passion, which he had never done before, and among many
other rash Expressions, said, His Comfort was, that he suffered for the King
his Brother, for his Family and Country, for which he was willing to lay down
his Life. This the Lieutenant deposed against him; and several Soldiers also
restifyed, that being upon his Guard, they had heard him drink a Health to the
King his Brother. The Governor having taken those depositions, there came a
Commission from Spain, appointing three Judges to try him, and they again
examined all the Witnesses; then they proceeded to examine the Prisoner
himself, who being asked what he knew of the design of revolting in Portugal;
utterly denied he had any knowledge of it, but unadvisedly in his Discourse,
added, that being at Lisbon, F. Bartholomew Gerreiro a Jesuit had told him,
that many Sebastianists (so they called those affected to the line of
Braganzza) desired him not to depart Portugal, because they thought his
Presence necessary for carrying on their Designs; that nevertheless he would
not see any of them, but went away for Germany. Next, they asked him whether he
had given the King (meaning the Catholic King) an account of those Words; he
said he had not, as making no account of them, but had immediately departed the
Kingdom. They also put Questions to him about the Healths he had drunk, and the
words he spoke upon the changing his Confessor, but they laid the chief stress
on the words spoke by F. Guerreiro, and his not discovering them to the King,
for which they pretended he was guilty of High Treason, and consequently
deserved Death. D. Edward pleaded, that he being a Knight of the Military Order
of Christ, the judgment of secular Judges against him was void. To this they
answered, that in cases of High Treason, those Privileges cease; besides that,
two of the Judges were also Knights of Military Orders. Death put an end to
this Controversy, for the Prisoner falling Sick, either through his long
Suffering, or some other Cause, put the same period to his Life and
Imprisonment.

6. For the better settlement of the Affairs of the Nation, The Cortes or
Parliament meet.
then in some disorder, through the long continuance of the War; the King had
summoned the Cortes or Parliament to meet in December, of the foregoing Year.
They being accordingly assembled, redressed many Grievances, occasioned by the
Army; ordered, that for defense of the Frontiers, there should be kept in Pay,
16000 Foot, and 4000 Horse, and as well for the payment of them, as other
Expenses of the War, assigned 2150000 Cruzados, which in English Money, is
286666 l. 13 s -- 4 d. allowing 3000 Reis to the pound, according to the common
Computation.

7. We left the Portugueses at Pernambuco last Year, successful on both sides,
The War in Brazil.
and besieging the Hollanders in their Towns, all along the Coast. These last,
erected a new Fort, to secure the Communication between Sinco Pontas, and
Af^^gados, but their Garrisons attempting to cast down the Woods that were in
the way, were obliged to quit that Work, with the loss of many Men. At the same
time, D. Antony Philip Camarhao, who was gone to reduce the Indians of Rio
Grande, gave a great overthrow to the Dutch, who came to attack him with 500
Men of their own, and 1000 Indians. The News of this success, being brought to
John Ferdinandez Viegra, he sent for Andrew Vidal, with six Companies to
reinforce the Victors. To the end, the Enemy might not perceive his Forces were
lessened, he kept them in continual Alarm; and Henry Diaz, who commanded the
Blacks, with only his own Men, took the new Fort the Dutch had erected, putting
all within it to the Sword. Andrew Vidal, at Paraiba, having laid himself in
Ambush, sent out 40 Portugueses, who drew 220 Dutch and Indian^ into the Snare,
where they all perished. Both the Besieged and the Besiegers at Pernambuco
suffered great Want, but several methods were found to relieve the latter. The
former had no hopes, but in a Fleet they expected from Holland* They had three
Ships, which lay to secure their passage to the Island Itamaraca, and other
parts of the Continent, which John Fernandez Vieyra perceiving, he attacked
them with 500 Men in Boats, who took one, and burnt the other two, then passing
over to the Shore, he drove the Defendants from several small redoubts, and
erected a Fort at the Port St. Mark, in which he left 200 Men with 18 pieces of
Cannon, which he had taken from the Enemy.

8. The Dutch were now reduced to the last Extremity, The Dutch in Brasil
receive Succors.
when 3 Ships arrived from Holland, bringing Provisions, Ammunition and Men; as
also an Account, that two Fleets were fitting out, the one to secure
Pernambuco, the other to conquer Bahia. Near the same time, a small Ship and
two Caravels, brought some relief to the Besiegers from Portugal. John
Farnandez Vieyra, was several times warned, that a Conspiracy was carried on
against his Life; yet he still slighted the Advice, till being one day advanced
from his Company, he saw three Firelocks levelled at him, whereof only one
gave Fire, and shot him through the Shoulder. Nevertheless he pardoned the
Conspirators, contenting himself with only a verbal Check, given them Face to
Face. Now at length, arrived a great Fleet from Holland, under the Command of
Sigismund Van Scop, with 4000 Men, and all other Necessaries. To oppose this
great Power, the Portuguese Commanders gathered all the Soldiers and
Inhabitants, that were before dispersed in places of less Consequence, and so
considerably increased their Force, that they stood no longer in fear of their
Enemies. On the 5th. of August, Sigismund Van Scop marched with 1200 Men, to
attack the Town of Olinda; but a pass that led to it, being well fortifyed, he
twice assaulted it, and was as often repulsed with great loss, and himself
wounded. The following Night, 1000 Men sallyed upon one of the Portuguese
Quarters, but with with no better Success. After this, Sigismund raised some
small Forts in convenient places, as well to secure that Coast, as to amuze his
Enemies; his design being as soon as his Fleet could be made ready, to sail for
Bahia, and make himself Master of that Place, but that belongs to another Year.

9. Africa this Year affords us nothing remarkarble, Affairs in Africa and
India.
only some Incursions of D. Gaston Coutinho, Governor of Tangier, and the
Martyrdom of Sebastian Gomez, who suffered Death with exquisite Torments, for
his constancy in the Faith. D. Phillip Mascarenhas, continued in the Government
of India, where likewise there happened little of moment, by reason of the
Truce with the Dutch; only about the latter end of April, 46 Sail lying at
Anchor, without the Bar of Goa, ready to sail the next day; such a sudden
violent Storm arose, that not a Vessel, or so much as one Man was saved, but
all together perished in the Sea.

Anno, 1647.
1. JOhn Mendez de Vasconcell^s, Several Enterprises on the Frontiers of
Alentejo.
who still commanded in Alentejo, finding his Forces too weak to withstand the
many Incursions of the Enemy, applied himself with great diligence to fortify
the Frontiers, and particularly Ouguela, and Campo Mayor; but upon Advice, that
the King had appointed Martin Alfonso de Melo, Governor of that Province, he
retired to Lisbon, being unwilling to serve under him. Andrew de Albuquerque,
General of the Artillery, commanded during the Absence of the Governor. No
sooner was he vested with this Power, but the Spaniards made an Incursion with
all their Horse, into the Country, betwixt Geromenha, and Elvas, and carried
away a great Prey; Albuquerque, though he drew out of Elvas, being too weak to
oppose them. To revenge this, he sent Henry de Lamorle with some Troops, to
draw out the Spaniards of Albuquerque, which he managed so dexterously, that
bringing them into an ambush they were totally routed, and 120 Horses taken.
The Enemy made another Incursion toward Olivenza, but as they retired, 200
Portuguese Horse Charging them in the Rear, recovered all the Booty. At this
time came to Elvas, Martin Alfonso de Melo, the new Governor. The Baron de
Molinguen General of Horse, Commanded the Spanish Forces. He gathered 1200
Horse, and advanced toward Elvas, 800 Horse, and three Regiments of Foot
marched out upon the alarm. Martin Alfonso sent the Horse before, ordering
Andrew de Albuquerque to Attack the Enemy, if he found them on this side the
Rivers Guadiana or Caya. Albuquerque Detached the Commissary-General, D. John
de Ataide, with four Troops, and the same Orders. D. John finding only a part
of the Enemy on this side, would not Charge them, which Antony Jaques de Payva
perceiving, he fell on with his Troop, but being overpowered, his Men fled;
those with D. John, instead of seconding, followed their example, as did also
those that were with Albuquerque. The Spaniards pursued, till they discovered
our Foot, and Andrew de Albuquerque rallying his Horse under their shelter,
when having no Foot, they drew off carrying away 40 Prisoners. John Paschasius
Cosmander, our principal Ingenier, passing betwixt Estremoz and Elvas, was
unhappily taken by a Spanish Party. The King offered the Count de Singuen in
exchange for him, but the Spaniards left no methods untried to bring him to
their Service, till at last they prevailed.

2. The Count de Castello Mel^or, Actions betwixt the Rivers Duero and Minho.
who Governed the Province betwixt the Rivers Duero and Minho, Understanding
that the Count de S. Estevan, General of Galicia, was to March with 1500 Foot,
and 400 Horse, to visit the Frontiers, sent out of Salvaterra, Colonel Francis
de Franca Barboza, with 450 Foot, to possess himself of an Advantageous Post
called Maleytas, near the River Minho, and a Musket Shot from Salvaterra. The
Adjutant Labarta, was Ordered with 20 Horse, to attack the Enemies Scouts, and
as if he were Overpowered, to retire and draw the Enemy within the reach of the
Foot. Labarta Executed his Orders, and was pursued by 5 Battalions of the
Enemy. With Francis de Franca, were 100 Dutch, who fled at the sight of the
Enemy, and many Potugueses followed their example, however Francis de Franca
with such as stood by him made good his ground till the Spaniards retired. The
Province Tralos Montes still pteserved its quiet, both Parties being inclinable
to admit of it. Count Seren who Governed Beyra, having Obtained Leave to quit
that Post, the King divided it into two Parts, Appointing two Generals because
the Province was Large. D. Roderick de Castro had the Territory about Guarda,
Pinhel and Lamego. D. Sancho Manuel that about Castelbranco, Viseu and Coimbra.
D. Roderick being come into his Province, immediately disposed all things for
the Defense of it, and repulsed a Party of the Enemy that broke in by the way
of Alfayates. His next design was to take the Fort of Galegos, 4 Leagues from
Almeyda, and 2 from Cuidad Rodrigo. To this purpose he gathered 60 Foot of the
Standing-Forces, and 2500 of the Militia, with 160 Horse, and 3 pieces of heavy
Canon. On the 23d of August, he marched from Almeyda, and the next day came
before Gallegos, Planted a battery, and began to play upon the Place, but
perceiving it required more time to make a breach than he could well spare, and
Understanding the Garrisons of all the Neighboring places were marched to
Cuidad Rodrigo, to Relieve Gallegos, he thought a Fair Opportunity was offered
him of taking St. Felices, a Place of more consequence. Wherefore they
Instantly broke up, and marched toward it with 120 Foot, and 120 Horse, and by
the way Understood, that all the Garrison of the place was marched, except 300
Foot, and 800 of the Country People. Upon this advice he hasted forwards, and
giving the Assault at several places together, Entered the Town, Plundered and
Burnt it. D. Antony de Isasse, the Governor having Lost 150 of his Men retired
with the rest into the Castle, and D. Roderick, Returned with great Honor to
Almeida. Several other small Skirmishes happened, in which the Portugueses still
had the better, which so Encouraged D. Roderick, that gathering 800 Foot, and
150 Horse, he made an inroad into the Territory of Cuidad Rodrigo, Burning all
the Open Towns, and utterly destroying the Country, without meeting the least
opposition. D. Sancho Manuel, Governor of the other part of the Province, was
not idle, but cut off 100 Spaniards, that had taken a prey in his district, and
Fortifyed Salvaterra, upon advice that the Enemy were assembling a considerable
body, which he was not able to Oppose in the Field.

3. This Year the King created his Eldest Son Theodosius, A Design to Murder
King John.
Prince of Brasil, and began to Assign the Revenues of the House of Braganza,
for the maintaining of his House. As the King studied all means to secure his
Crown, so the Ministers of Spain omitted not by all ways, though never so unjust,
to contrive his destruction, and had now infallibly compassed it, had not a
special Providence preserved him. One Dominick Leyte, a Native of Lisbon, who
had been Clark in one of the Courts, and was well descended, fled to Madrid,
where, having offered his Service to that King's Ministers, he undertook upon
several great promises, and some rewards in possession, to Assassinate King
John. In order to it, he returned to Lisbon in May, with one Emanuel Roque,
where, by degrees, he hired several Houses in the Turners-Street, next the
Church of St. Nicholas. He opened Doors all along from one House to another,
made loopholes through the walls to the Street, and provided several Firelocks
loaded with Poisoned Bullets, to Shoot the King as he passed that way in
procession upon Corpus-Christi-day; that if one piece should happen to fail,
another might certainly hit. The day being come, and he lying in wait, though he
twice attempted to fire, his Heart failed him, and the King being passed, he
shut the Doors, and went away to the Monastery of Our Lady of Grace, where
Emanuel Roque expected him with two Horses, and they both returned to Madrid.
There he framed excuses for missing of his Design; and receiving fresh
encouragement, returned again to Lisbon. By the way, he discovered his Design
to Emanuel Roque, who getting to Town before him, on pretense of taking a
Lodging, discovered the Treason. Dominick Leyte, being Apprehended, Confessed
the Crime, had both his Hands cut off, and was afterward Hanged and Quartered.

4. The Marquess de Niza, Negotiations at several Courts.
who had been before Ambassador in France, was sent back this Year to solicit
the Concluding a League betwixt the two Crowns. He proposed to Cardinal
Mazarine a Match betwixt Prince Theodosius, and the Eldest Daughter of the Duke
of Orleans, which the Cardinal seemed to approve of, yet it took no effect, no
more than the League at that time. However, King John sent three Men of War to
join the French Fleet. At Rome, F. Nunho da Cunha, presented a long memorial to
the Pope, pressing him to Confirm the Bishops Elected by the King, because of
the great want of Prelates there was in all the Portuguese Dominions, but
without any success; for three Popes successively, absolutely persisted in the
denial. Francis de Souja Coutinho, who was Ambassador in Holland, after having
interposed all the delays that could be admitted to hinder the States sending a
Fleet to Pernambuco, finding they had now 30 Sail ready to put to Sea, boldly
made use of certain blanks he had of the King's, to assure them that Parnambuco
should be restored; which done, he immediately gave the King an Account
thereof, desiring he would order him to be secured, and if it were necessary to
take off his Head, to satisfy the States, rather than the fraud should be
imputed to His Majesty. By this wile the Fleet was kept back from June till
December, when it was put out three times, and was still beat back by
unseasonable weather, to the great advantage of the Portugueses in Pernambuco.
The King on the other hand, always pretended he had ordered his Subjects in
that Province to lay down their Arms, that they maintained the War in Contempt
of his Commands, and that the succors they had from Bahia, were all by
stealth. Several proposals were made for buying those places the Dutch
possessed there, but they all came to nothing.

5. We left Sigismund Vanscop, Prosecution of the War in Brazil.
the Dutch Commander at Pernambuco, preparing his Fleet to attempt the Conquest
of Bahia: All things being in readiness, he set sail from the Coast of
Pernambuco called Arrecif^, about the end of January steering his course for
the River of St. Francis, the better to conceal his Design upon Bahia. There he
took in what necessaries he wanted, and being joined by Anderson's Squadron,
sent thither before, put to Sea again, and soon appeared before Bahia. Fearing
to attempt the City, ^e Anchored at the Island Taparica, opposite to it, and
three Leagues distant, where he speedily erected a For^, and four redoubts on
as many Hills that Command it, then stretched out his Fleet, so that all the
Shore lay exposed to his Cannon. Antony Tellez the Governor of Bahia,
fortified the passage, from the Island to the City, but adventuring contrary to
the advice of the Council of War to Attack the Hollanders in their strength,
was repulsed with great loss. This done, he immediately sent advice to the
King, of the Condition he was in, who ordered him speedy relief. Twelve Ships
were fitted out, under the Command of Antony Tellez de Menezes, Count de
Villa-Pouca, with Orders, that after relieving Bahia, five of them should be
delivered to Salvador Correa de Sa, and Benavides appointed Governor of the
Province of Rio de Janeyro, and Captain General for the Kingdom of Angola. His
instructions were to endeavor the recovery of that Kingdom, basely usurped by
the Dutch, after they had overthrown Peter Caesar de Meneses, under color of
friendship, as was said before. The Fleet set sail, and the Dutch at Pernambuco
having intelligence of it, and fearing it was designed against them, earnestly
pressed Sigismund Vanscope to quit Bahia, and come to their assistance, for
they were much pressed by the Besiegers. The Portuguese Governors at
Pernambuco, perceiving that the Dutch about Rio Grande improved that Country,
which was a great relief to the Besieged, sent Major Antony Dias Cardoso with
300 Men, who destroyed all he found there, driving away 200 Prisoners, and a
vast number of Cattle. After this, Andrew Vidal marched with 800 Men to Ceara
Merim, on the North of Rio Grande, and wasted all that Territory, killing 70
Hollanders, and bringing away many Prisoners, and as much Cattle as supplied
the want of Provisions there was before in the Camp. Whilst these 800 Men were
abroad, the Besieged made several Sallies, but without any success, and John
F^rnandez Vieyra to curb them, ordered that several Parties should continually
keep the Enemy in alarm. Then the more to streighten them, he raised a Fort
opposite to one the Dutch had built to cover the City Mauricia, which he
managed with such dexterity, keeping them always upon their guard, that though
it was begun about the beginning of October, they never perceived the work till
the 6th of November, when our Artillery began to play upon the City, the Shore
and the bar, for all those places were within reach. We also Attacked and
carried the Palace of Count Nasau, guarded by two Companies, which having
Plundered, our Men returned without any loss. At this time Sigismund Vanscop
returned with his Fleet, having abandoned his Fort at the Island Taparica,
before the Arrival of our Fleet. The Count de Villapouca Arrived at Bahia,
eight days after the Enemy had abandoned the Fort; but eight of their Ships
again appeared upon the Coast. Some Ships went out to receive them, and after a
long dispute, two Portugueses and as many Dutch were burnt and sunk. The Count
took possession of the Government of Bahia, and Antony Tellez de Silva the
former Governor remained there about his private Affairs, but with ill
success, as will hereafter appear. The five Ships designed for Angola, went
away in December, to join Salvador Correa, at Rio de Janeyro; what they did we
shall see in its place.

6. D. Gaston Continho, How things stood in Africa and India.
Governor of Tangier, never ceased to infest the Moors, and overthrew some
parties of theirs that came to ravage the Territories of Tangier. This Year the
Fleet of Spain consisting of 47 Ships and several small Vessels, and Commanded
by D. John of Austria, appeared before that City, as if it were designed to
Land Men, but after some Hours Canonading on both sides, put to Sea again. D.
John Luis de Vasconcellos, who Commanded at Marzagam, sent Presents to the
Alcayde of Azamor, and the King of Morocco, to purchase their friendship; yet
the Alcayde with 300 Horse, made an Incursion to the Walls of Marzagam, and
though D. John fought with him from nine in the Morning till three in the
Afternoon, he was forced to retire, being overpowered by the number of the
Infidels. In India, the King of Marava, commonly called Yevere, trusting to the
strength of the Island Ramanancor, revolted from the Nayque of Madure, to whom
he was tributary. The Nayque asked the assistance of the Portugueses, for
conveying his Forces into the Island. They sent a Fleet to his aid, and by
their means the Rebel was reduced, and they received the Reward promised for
their assistance. Four Ships sailed this Year from Lisbon to India, two whereof
perished in the Latitude of Mozambique.

Anno, 1648.
1. THE Count de St. Lorenzo, The Spaniards Besiege Olivenza without success.
governed Alentejo, and with great industry disposed all things for the defense
of that Province. D. James Mexia Marquess of Leganes came the second time to
Badajoz, to Command the Spanish Forces. His coming was the cause that all the
Portuguese preparations were redoubled, new Forces raised, and the Frontiers
fortified. Whilst the main Bodies were gathering on both sides, the Marquess de
Leganes sent 600 Horse by the way of Albuquerque to plunder the Country as far
as Marvao. The Count St. Lorenzo, having timely notice of it, sent Achim de
Tamericourt, the Commissary-General, with 400 Horse and Orders to fight
wheresoever he should meet him. Tamericourt, executed his Orders with so much
bravery, that meeting the Enemy near Portalegre, he soon routed them, took 200
Prisoners, and recovered all the prey. This disaster provoked the Marquess de
Leganez to hasten putting in execution his Design upon Olivenza, which place,
the Ingenier Cosmander (who before we said was won by the Spaniards) had
engaged to put into the Catholic King's hands without much difficulty. On the
20th of June, he appeared at break of day before Olivenza, with 8000 Foot and
3000 Horse. Cosmander, who had the directing of the Attack, divided these
Troops into four parts, ordering them to give the Assault in as many places;
reserving to himself a barrier of the covered way, where the Soldiers used to
come out to work. The Spaniards advanced with resolution, and mounted two
Bulwarks before the Sentinels gave the Alarm. The Soldiers of the next Guards,
and some of the Inhabitants hasting to the places where the danger was,
maintained the Fight till the rest of the Garrison came to their relief. D.
John de Menezes the Governor, at the first Alarm, ran half Naked with his
Sword in his hand into the Street, and with his example so encouraged the
Soldiers, that they drove the Enemy, forcing many to cast themselves down
headlong from the Bullwarks. Yet the danger was not over, for in other places
the Spaniards had turned some Cannon of the other Bullwarks upon the City, and
many fell on both sides. D. John, though he had received three wounds, ceased
not to act, as well as give out Orders. The danger lasted till it was clear
day; when Cosmander thinking to force the barrier of the covered way, was shot
dead from the Wall. His death put an end to the dispute, for though the
Marquess de Leganez dismounted his Horse to carry on the Assault; those that
were drove out so discouraged the others that were to come on, that the
Marquess was forced to sound a retreat, and immediately returned to Badajoz.
After this in several small rencounters the Portugueses were successful against
the Spaniards; took a considerable Convoy from them near Albuquerque; and the
Count de St. Lozenco made an Incursion as far as Talavera, whence he returned
with a great Booty, passing in sight of Badajoz, in hopes the Marquess de
Leganez might be drawn out, but he stirred not. Some difference arising betwixt
the Count and John Mendes de Vasconcellos, who had governed that Province
before, the King sent the latter Prisoner to the Old-Tower, where he remained
till the time we shall speak of him hereafter. In all the other parts of the
Kingdom, there was no Action of any consideration this Year.

2. On the 26th of April, was Born the King's third Son, Prince Peter, (now
King) and was Baptized by the Bishop of Elvas, Birth of King John's Son Peter*
now Reigning. Negociations in France and Rome.
with all Solemnity and public Demonstration of Joy. The Marquess de Niza, who
was Ambassador in France, ceased not to solicit the conclusion of a League
betwixt the two Crowns, but all his endeavors proved successless; whereupon,
in February of the following Year, he left Paris, and returned home. F. Nunho
da Cunha, was still at Rome, soliciting the Affairs of Portugal. Two Capucins
came to Rome with the Title of Ambassadors from the King of Congo, to give his
Obedience to the Pope, and obtain of him Bishops and Missioners, for
propagating of the Faith. The Pope gave them public Audience, and appointed an
Archbishop, two Bishops, and 3^ Missioners, Spaniards and Italians, giving
them a Sum of Money, and ordering them to imbark in (...) port of Spain. F.
Nunho da Cunha, opposed the sending of these Bishops and Missioners, because
that the Kingdom of Congo appertained to the Conquest of Portugal, and Dr.
Emanuel Alvarez Corrillo, was sent from Lisbon by the King, to second him as
well in that, as soliciting the Expediting of Bulls for the Bishops of
Portugal, but all they could effect, was only to stop the Voyage of the Bishops
and Missioners of Congo.

3. Whilst these things happened in Europe, Success of the Portugueses against
the Dutch in Brazil.
the Dutch continued blocked up on the Coast of Pernambuco. In January, the
Portuguese Governors of that Province, received Intelligence, that the Fleet
under the Count de Villa Pouca, was arrived at Bahia, but that no Succor was
to be expected from thence. They were no ways dismayed at this News, but
resolved to proceed more vigorously than before. Accordingly they sent Henry
Dias with his own Regiment, and some Companies of D. Antony Philip Camarao, to
Rio Grande. He marched with such Secrecy and Expedition, that the Enemy knew
nothing of it, till they felt the effects of his Arrival, for he Burnt and
destroyed all before him. Such as could escape, retired to Gurairas, a
fortifyed place in a Lake, but he attacked, and carried that also by Night,
putting all within to the Sword, without sparing Sex or Age. Thence he marched
to Cunhau, which was also fortified, yet was delivered up, those within only
compounding for their Lives. The King at last considering of how great
Consequence it was to expel the Dutch out of America, sent Francis Barreto de
Menezes, with two small Vessels, and 300 Men to command there, as Camp-Master
General. By the way, he met a Dutch Squadron, by whom he was taken, and carried
Prisoner to Arrecife, where he was kept in Custody 9 Months, and at last made
his Escape, with one Francis Bra, Son to the Officer that had him in keeping.
Being come into the Portuguese Quarters, he joined with John Fernandez Vieyra,
and Andrew Vidal being positively set down to endure the utmost Extremities,
rather then forsake the Enterprise they had in hand. They sent Captain Paul de
Cunha, to solicit some Succors from the Count de Villa Pouca, at Bahia, but
he returned without any, at such time as a Fleet was arrived from Holland,
which consisted of 44 Sail, with 9000 Land-Men aboard it, besides Seamen, when
it came out, but some had perished in a Storm. Upon the Arrival of this great
Power, the Portugueses gathered all their Forces, quitting the most distant,
and least advantageous Posts; and yet after all, they could make up but 2200
Men fit for Service. Sigismund Vanscop, who commanded the Dutch, proclaimed a
Pardon to all Slaves, or Portugueses, that should come over to him, but it took
no effect. On the 18th. of April, he took the Field with 7500 Foot, 500 Seamen,
300 Indians, 5 pieces of Cannon, and a great quantity of Ammunition; and
marching to the Fort Barreta, the Captain who commanded there, unadvisedly went
out with 80 Men, most of whom were killed, the Captain taken, and his Ensign
surrendered the Fort. Francis Barreto, who commanded the Portugueses, having
called a Council of War, it was resolved to give the Enemy Battle, though at
such great odds, rather than stay to be beaten out of all their Posts by
degrees. According to this Resolution they marched, and posted themselves in a
small Plain, at the Foot of the Mountains Gararapes, on the 16th. of April.
They sent out Major Antony Diaz Cardoso, with 20 Men to observe the Enemy, who
stirred not that Night, but appeared next Morning, being Low Sunday, upon the
Mountains; Antony Dias with his 20 Men, and 40 Indians that had joined him,
skirmishing in their Van. The Enemy drawing near, our Men attacked them with
Sword in Hand, and at the first Charge disordered their Van, which retiring to
the other Troops, endeavored to rally. Henry Dias, with his Regiment, pressing
hard upon them, was overpowred by the fresh Troops, and forced to give way, so
that many of the Portugueses who were disordered in Confidence of the Victory,
began to fly* Francis Barreto, in good time rallyed them, and charging the
Enemy again, recovered the Day. Yet the Dutch were not soon broke, for the
Fight continued four Hours very obstinate. At last the Dutch gave way, and
retired to a Hill, whether Francis Barreto thought not good to pursue them,
because his Men were spent with Travel, and fasting 24 Hours. There were taken
33 Colors, many Arms, and a great Booty. At Night the Enemy returned to the
Shore, leaving behind 1000 Dead, and carrying 523 wounded; of the Portugueses,
80 were killed, and 400 wounded. This done, Francis Barreto marched back to
possess his former Quarters, hoping the Enemy was not in a Condition to destroy
them, and so it proved; for they had only possessed themselves of the Fort
Barreta, and Town of Olinda, which last he resolved to recover. At Night he
sent Henry Diaz with his Regiment, and some other Companies, who drove out the
Enemy, killing 160 of them, and recovered 5 pieces of Canon. Francis Barreto
ordered the Works to be rased, and his Men to retire to their Post. Sigismund
Vanscop sent a Drum, demanding exchange of Prisoners, which was refused, and
they all sent away to Bahia. Some Ships of the Dutch Fleet that had been
separated by Storm, arriving now, Sigismund several times attacked the Quarters
of Henry Dias, but was as often valiantly repulsed by the Blacks. There was
great want of Men and Provisions in our Quarters, which was in some measure
remedyed by the arrival of Colonel Francis de Figueyroa from Bahia, with 300
Men, and a quantity of Cattle. The joy of this Succor was abated by the Death
of D. Antony Philip Camarao, Governor of the Indians, a good Christian, and
resolute Soldier. Sigismund Vanscop perceiving Fortune favored him not at
Pernambuco, put to Sea with some Ships, and landing in several parts of Ba^ia,
returned with a great Booty he had gathered. Francis Barreto growing better
versed in the Affairs of that Country, continued the War with good Conduct, as
we shall see in the following Years.

4. It has been said above, that Salvador Correa was sent from Lisbon with the
Title of Governor of Rio de Janeyro, The Dutch beaten out of Angola in Africa.
and General of the Kingdom of Angola. In January, he arrived at Rio de
Janeyro, and found there Emanuel Pacheco de Mello, with the 5 Ships sent by the
Count de Villa Pouca, in pursuance of the King's Orders. Salvador Correa was no
sooner landed, but he called a Council to deliberate about recovering the
Kingdom of Angola. It was unanimously resolved to go upon the Enterprise, and
for the carrying of it on, the Inhabitants contributed 55000 Cruzadoes (which
is 7333l. 06 s. -- 04 d.) This encouraged him to hire 6 Ships, and buy 4 small
Vessels. He listed 900 Land Men, and 600 Seamen, and having made all necessary
Provision for them, sailed for Angola on the 12th. of May, with 15 Sail. The
weather proved so bad, his small Vessels could not keep up with him. However he
arrived at Quicombo, where he was ordered to raise a Fort, and landed to view
the place. Five days after, arrived his Vice Admiral, and two of the small
Vessels, but the Night following, the Vice Admiral sunk in the Bay, without the
least Wind, no Man knowing what should be the cause of it. In her perished 360
Men, for only two were saved. Salvador Correa called a Council, where he
proposed, that though the King's Orders were not to make War upon the Dutch, as
supposing they lived peaceably with the Portugueses, yet finding on the
Contrary, that they ceased not to make War upon those who were retired up the
Country; he thought it was but reasonable to assist their Country Men, and
expel those Usurpers. All that were present answered, they would either
recover Angola, or dye. With this unanimous Consent he set sail again, and
arrived at Loanda. Having taken a Black, he reported that 300 Dutch, with 3000
Blacks so straightened the Portugueses, who were fled to the City Masangano,
that it was impossible to have any Correspondence with them. Having received
this Confirmation of the unjust proceedings of the Dutch, he sent to summon the
Governor of Loanda to surrender. This Message so surprised him, that he sent to
desire only 8 days, to resolve what was to be done. Salvador Correa perceiving
this was only to gain Time to call in their Men that were Abroad, replied he
would grant two Days, after which they must expect to be treated with the
utmost Rigor. They accepted of the offer, and in that time gathered all the
Force they could into the Fort of St. Michael, which commands the City, and
that of our Lady on the Shore, both which can contain 5000 Men. At the
expiration of the two days, Salvador Correa sent to know whether they were
ready to surrender; but they answered, they were resolved to hold out to the
last. Hereupon he instantly landed 900 Men, and marched to the Town, which he
entered without Opposition, possessing himself of the Fort S. Antony abandoned
by the Enemy, who had left in it 8 pieces of Canon, whereof only two were
nailed. With the other 6 and 4 Demi-Canon brought from the Ships, he formed two
Batteries that Night, which at break of Day began to play on the Fort of St.
Michael, but not with any considerable effect. Salvador Correa displeased at
this disappointment, and more at the News, that the Dutch had defeated the
Portugueses at Masangano, resolved to venture upon a desperate Action, which
was to assault both the Forts, joined by a Line of Communication, and defended
by 1200 Dutch, French and Germans, and as many Blacks. Accordingly at break of
Day, the assault was given, and though bravely carried on, he was forced to
retire, leaving 163 Men killed, and carrying off 160 wounded. However he
resolved upon a second attack, but the Enemy prevented him, by hanging out a
white Flag, and surrendering the Forts. Five days after the Surrender, the Dutch
that were abroad in the Country, being 250, with 2000 Blacks, upon Advice that
the Forts were besieged, came to relieve them, but finding them lost, agreed to
be sent away with the rest, notwithstanding the Queen Ginga, and the King of
Congos Officers encouraged them to continue the War. The Fort of Benguela
hearing what had happened at Loanda, was immediately surrendered by the Dutch
that held it. Salvador Correa, having gathered all the Portugueses that were
dispersed about the Mountains, repeopl'd the City Loanda, and sent some Vessels
to recover the Island St. Thomas. But those Dutch that he sent away, passing by
that Island, and giving an account of their ill success, their Country Men
there, went away with them, leaving behind their Artillery, and most of their
Ammunition, which the Portuguese Inhabitants soon made themselves Masters of.
Not content with this, Salvador Correa sent all along that Coast, to all places
where the Dutch had factories, and in two Months, wholly cleared the Country of
them. Being now rid of the Dutch, Salvador Correa, resolved to take Revenge of
Queen Ginga, the King of Congo, and their Confederates, who had assisted them.
He gave the Charge of this Expedition to Bartholomew de Vasconcellos, with whom
joined the King of Dongo, and the Jaga of Ambaca, who had always been faithful
to the Portugueses. Vasconcellos, soon reduced the King of Congo, and other
lesser Princes; the Island of Loando, being taken from the former, and new
Tributes imposed on him, as a Punishment of his Infidelity. Queen Ginga fled
300 Leagues up the Country. This Queen was Daughter to a King of Angola, who
was beheaded by the Portugueses, in revenge whereof, she gathered all the Youth
she could, killing the old People and Children wherever she came, and continued
a savage Life in the Mountains with these Robbers, always watching, all
Opportunities of doing harm to the Portugueses. Now at length being driven up
the Country, she sent an Ambassador, and concluded Peace with Salvador Correa,
who so well settled that Kingdom, that it continues ever since under the
Dominion of Portugal.

5. D. Gaston Coutinho, continued in the Government of Tangier, Africa and
India.
making many inroads into the Country in which he gained much Honor; but the
Forces in that City being but small, he could not make so great advantages as
might otherwise be expected, of his Valor and Conduct. De Philip Mascarenhas,
the Viceroy of India, sent D. Alvaro de Ataide, with a Squadron, to the Coast
of Coromandel, to fortify the Town of Negapatam, which the Portugueses had
lately built. The Nayque of Tanjaor, in whose Territory it stood, sent an Army
to hinder the Work. D. Alvaro landed 500 Men, and after a sharp Dispute, put
the Indians to flight, with much slaughter. This done, he saw the
Fortifications finished, and returned to Goa; nothing more of Note happened in
India, during the Government of D. Philip Mascarenhas, which lasted till the
Year 1651. The War in Portugal being prosecuted with small Force on both sides,
and the Campaign being often spent in small Incursions, do not afford much
matter worthy an History, which is the Reason, the Relations of Affairs at home
are so short; and the Actions abroad being very considerable, though I
endeavor to reduce them to as small Compass as may be; yet because I would
omit nothing that is remarkable, they often swell to a greater Bulk than the
Domestic, and force me to insist longer upon them then I had designed.

Anno, 1649.
1. WE left the Count de S. Lorenzo, Count St. Lorenzo his Actions in Alentejo.
governing the Province of Alentejo with good success. This Year, knowing that
some Troops of Foreign Horse were come to Badajoz, he promised Rewards to all
Soldiers or Officers that should come over to him, performing his Promise to
the full, with the first that deserted; so that in a short time, the greatest
part of them quitted the Spanish Service. At this time, all Prisoners on both
sides, as well Soldiers as Officers, not above the Degree of a Captain, were
set at liberty on both sides. In April, 600 Spanish Horse driving the Cattle
betwixt Fronteyra and Cabeza de Vide, were resolutely Charged by the Commissary
General Tamericourt with 16 Troops, and utterly defeated, 120 of them killed
and double the Number taken. The Baron de Molinguen the Spanish Camp-Master
General after this defeat quitted his Post, and D. Francis de Tutavilla Duke
of S. German succeeded him. At the Request of the Count de S. Lorenzo the
Commissary General Tamericourt, was made Lieutenant General of Horse, and a
Commendary given to the other Commissary Du Quesne. There being also great want
of Horse, King John sold Crown Lands to the value of 4000 Cruzodoes per Ann: to
buy Horses to Mount the Cavalry, rather than impose new Taxes upon the People.
The Horse being recruited, their General Andrew de Albuquerque Marched with
the whole Body and the Foot of Elvas, Olivenza, and Campo Mayor thinking to
reduce Albuquerque. He plundered and burnt the suburbs, but was repulsed by the
Town and Castle and returned with loss. Neither had John Homem Cardoso sent out
by him with 100 Horse, to surprise a Spanish Troop, better success, for Meeting
15 Spanish Horse he charged them and they kept him in play, till 7 Troops came
up and took John Homem and 60 of of his party. Tamericourt now Lieutenant
General Marched with 900 Horse to Revenge this loss, and having drawn out the
Enemy from Badajoz and Talavera, though they were more Numerous than he, put them
to flight killing 250, with the loss of 40 of his own. These are the most
Remarkable actions of this Year in the Province of Altentejo.

2. Count Castello Melhor, who till now Governed the Province betwixt Duero and
Minho, was called away to go Governor of Brasil, and the Viscount D. James de
Lima succeeded him in his former Post. D. James de Lima, Governor of the
Province betwixt Duero and Minho.
That Province scarce felt any effects of War except Two or 3 inconsiderable
incursions, after which both Parties again rested, as if it were in Time of
Peace. D. Hierome de Ataide Count de Atougu^a was now sent to Command in the
Province Tralos Montes, where finding the Standing-Forces very weak, he
Endeavored to secure the Country the best he could with the Militia. Whilst he
went to provide for the Safety of Braganza, the Commissary General of Horse La
Morle Commanded at Chaves, but had positive Orders only to stand upon the
Defensive. Nevertheless he marched with 220 Foot and 90 Horse, to plunder the
Town of Vmbra, which having performed and returned with the booty, he was set
upon by 1500 Foot and 350 Spanish Horse, who cut in pieces 140 of his Men and
made the rest prisoners, except some few Horse with whom he fled to Chaves,
where he Dyed of the Wounds he had received.

3. D. Roderick de Castro, D. Roderick de Castro in the Province of Beira.
who by reason of sickness had been absent; Returning to his Government of part
of the Province of Beira, sent Captain Francis Naper with 100 Horse, and Orders
to lay himself close in ambush Two Leagues from Cuidad Rodrigo, whence he was
to detatch a small party to drive the cattle about that City, that so 4 Troops
which were in Garrison there might be drawn into the Snare. He Executed his
Orders so successfully, that the Spaniards disorderly pursuing the detached
Party, he fell in and cut off 30 of them, putting the rest to flight. The Enemy
revenged this misfortune upon the poor Country People, killing many unarmed, in
return for which cruelty, D. Roderick with 600 Foot and 200 Horse, marched to
Sabugo a Town Two Leagues from Cuidad Rodrigo, of about 300 Houses which he
plundered and burnt down to the ground. The Spaniards assembling a good Body
pursued him retreating, but he drawing up at their approach, they marched off.
After this D. Roderick joining his Forces with D. Sancho Manue^ who Governed
the other part of the Province, they both together burnt many open Towns in the
Territory of Cuidad Rodrigo, and returned with a considerable booty. That part
of the Province which was subject to D. Sancho Manuel was this Year free from
any acts of hostility.

4. The affairs of Portugal both at Rome and in France, continued in the same
posture we left them the last Year. Francis de Sous^ Coutinho still continued
in Holland much hated by that People, The Dutch prepare to make War upon
Portugal.
who looked upon him as a Faithless man, for the many assurances he had given
them of the Kings quitting Pernambuco, which they saw took no Effect. Nor was
the King and Council better satisfied with him, because of the great Expense
he made and small Success of his Negotiation. At length the States Ordered
Francis de Sousa to depart, being resolved to declare War against Portugal, to
which purpose they fitted up 25 Sail in Zealand, sent supplies to Pernambuco,
and ordered 12 Ships carrying 2800 Soldiers for that Coast. Not long after
they directed Francis Coutinho to obtain a new Commission from the King, for
that they had important matters to Treat with him about. He Acquainted the King
with it, and, D. John de Menezes who was appointed to succeed him dying, he
continued there till the following Year. Antony de Sousa de Macedo at this time
Ambassador in England, was Ordered to withdraw from that Court, that he might
not be a witness to the most infamous act that ever subjects committed against
their lawful Sovereign, in the unparalelled Murder of King Charles the I.

5. Whilst these things happened in Europe, Progress of the Portuguese A(...)s in
Brazil.
the Forces at Pernambuco were not idle. Sigismund Vanscop, as has been said,
was Arrived at Arrecife; and now the Besieged began to think of some
Enterprise. On the other side, Francis Barreto, though weak, still lived in
hopes, for he had promise of succors from Bahia, and was informed from Lisbon,
that the King had settled a West India Company, like that of Holland. Francis
Barreto, omitted nothing on his part that could tend to the compassing of his
Design. Colonel Brink, Commanded the Dutch, under Vanscop; and some Italians
that deserted from the Portugueses, informing him how weak they were, he
obtained leave to march into the Field, to undertake some considerable
Enterprise, and d^sposed all things in order to it. Barreto having notice
thereof, gathered all his Men that were dispersed, repaired his Works, ordered
the Bridge of St. Bartholomew to be fortified, and all the people that attended
their Plantations to be ready upon the first Alarm. On the 18th of February,
Colonel Brink, marched out with 5000 Foot, 700 Pioniers, and six pieces of
Cannon, guarded by 300 Seamen, and advanced toward the Fort Barreta, whence
without halting, they departed toward the Mountains Gararapes; upon advice
hereof, Barreto called a Council of War, in which, it was resolved to follow
and give them Battle; and accordingly he set out with 2600 Portugueses, Blacks
and Indians. About four in the Afternoon, they reached the Mountains Gararapes,
and found the Enemy posted on some of them with Guards in the Valleys. Some
were for Charging them immediately, but because the Men were weary, it was put
off till the next day. That Night many of the Inhabitants that were dispersed
about the Country reinforced the Camp. Morning discovered the Enemy in the
same posts as the day before, and Francis Barreto was resolved to expect they
should Attack him. Thus they continued till about One in the Afternoon, when
the Dutch beginning to move, Barreto sent Colonel Andrew Vidal along the side
of a Hill, to possess himself of the Top. John Fernandez Vieyra, with 800 Men
advanced along the plain betwixt the Hills. Both of them met with vigorous
opposition, but their example animating the Men, they put the Enemy to flight
in both places. Thence they marched at the same time to beat the Enemy from the
Top of a Hill which Colonel Brink himself maintained, in which place, they
advanced not much till Brink being shot dead, his Men were dismayed, and then
all fled outright. The Portugueses pursued as far as the Fort Barreta, the
dispute having lasted from two of Clock till eight at Night. Of the victors 47
were killed, and above 200 were wounded, of the Dutch, above 2000 were left
dead in the Field, and among them Colonel Brink, the Prisoners and wounded Men
were yet more numerous. The Dutch Standard, 10 Colors, six pieces of Cannon,
and a great quantity of Arms, Ammunition, and Provisions were taken. Francis
Barreto having no more Men than just sufficed to carry on the Siege, undertook
no other Action this Year. On the 4th of November, sailed from Lisbon to Bahia,
the first Fleet set out by the new Company. The Count de Castello Melhor,
appointed Governor of Brazil, Commanded it, and Peter Jaques de Magallaens was
to bring it back.

6. D. Gaston Coutinho, Tangier and India.
still continued Governor of Tangier, and had some small rencounters with the
Moors, but no Action happened of moment. He repaired the Walls of the City,
cleared the ditch, and settled there the Redemption of Captives, which till
then was managed at Ceuta. In November he resigned the Government to D. Luis
L^bo da Sylveyra, Baron of Alvito, and returned to Lisbon. At Marzagao, there
was nothing remarkable this Year, except the death of the Governor. The King
appointed Nunho da Cunha da Costa to succeed him. Neither does India afford us
any thing, because the Truce continued with the Dutch, and D. Philip
Mascarenhas, the Viceroy, was in amity with the Indian Kings.

Anno, 1650.
1. THE Province of Alentejo, still continued under the Government of the Count
de St. Lorenzo. Whilst he made the necessary preparations to oppose the Enemy.
The Princes Rupert and Maurice, fly to Lisbon, from the English, and are
protected.
It happened that the Princes Rupert and Maurice, Sons to the Count Palatin, put
into Lisbon, flying before the Fleet of the English, which Anchored before the
Bar. King John generously resolving to protect the two Princes, ordered the
Count de St. Lorenzo, to send to Lisbon three Regiments of Foot, and 200 Horse.
The want of these Troops in the Province was supplied by the Militia. The
Spaniards understanding that the Frontier Garrisons were weakened, sent all
their Horse to lie in wait for the Garrison of Olivenza, who by Night without
being discovered, posted themselves in the Olive-Gardens about the place. John
Homem Card^so, going out in the Morning with his Troop to discover, on a sudden
perceived his retreat was cut off. However, he was no way dismayed, but closing
his Ranks, and joining Captain William Lanier, a Frenchman, who supported him,
he resolutely forced his way through the Enemies Squadrons, and recovered the
Town without any considerable loss. The Spaniards returned to Badajoz. Some
days after, the Count de St. Lorenzo sent Tamericourt with 800 Horse, to
attempt somewhat against the Garrison of that City. Giles Vaz Lobo, who led the
Van with 50 Horse, Attacked the discoverers that came from the Town, and
pursued them to the Gates, taking 20 of them; which done, they drew off, and
the next day Tamericourt routed two Troops between Badajoz and Albuquerque.
Winter drawing on, the Count de St. Lorenzo, procured leave to return to Court,
and the Camp-Master-General D. John de Costa, governed the Province in his
absence. He received intelligence that the Spaniards assembled their Troops,
and threatened the Territory of Castello de Vide and Portalegre. Andrew de
Albuquerque, General of Horse was sent to oppose them, who laying himself close
in ambush at Melrisso, sent out 40 Horse to Charge the advanced Parties of the
Spaniards, which they did, and retired to their Body. But the Spaniards
suspecting the Design, would not pursue them, and the Portugues Troops rising
out of their ambush, the Enemy thought not fit to encounter them, but retired
leaving their prey, which was restored to the Country people. Of the Spaniards
in the pursuit, 124 were taken, and among them a Captain of Horse and some
sutlers. Not content with this, D. John de Costa marched with 2000 Foot, and
1800 Horse, sending Tamericourt before with 600 Horse, to plunder the Towns of
Arroyo and Malpartida, ordering him to make his Retreat so leasurely that the
Enemy might assemble their Forces. He executed it according to his Orders, and
was pursued by a great Body of Horse and Foot, and under the Command of D.
Alvaro de Viveros General of the Spanish Horse, who perceiving Tamericourt, was
supported by D. John de Costa, with so strong a Party, retired without doing
any thing. D. John de Costa pursued him for some space, but to no effect; and
Winter being now advanced, he had not the opportunity of undertaking any
considerable Enterprise.

2. The Province between the Rivers Duero and Minho, Small incursions made by
the Spaniards.
afforded not any matter for History. That of Tras os Montes governed by the
Count de Atouguia; had not any considerable Action; Only the Count de St.
Estevan who Commanded the Spaniards on those Frontiers gathered his Forces, as
if he designed some considerable Enterprise; but understanding the Count de
Atouguia, was in a good posture to receive him, he contented himself with
burning two small Towns, and dismissed his Troops to their several Garrisons.
After this, a Party of the Enemy, consisting of 1000 Men made an incursion from
Monterey, and ravaged a part of the neighboring Country, driving away a
considerable booty. The Count de Atouguia, upon the first notice hereof,
marched out with a small number, and meeting a Party of the Spaniards, easily
put them to the root, the rest retired with precipitation to Monterey. D.
Roderick de Castro, and D. Sancho Manuel, betwixt whom the Government of the
Province of Beira was divided, as we have seen before, were both this Year
employed in raising Forces; the former for Alentejo, to make up for those that
had been sent thence to Lisbon, to oppose the English, and the latter to secure
the Conquests in India. Both of them had some reincounters with the Spaniards,
who broke into their Territories; and they also made some incursions upon the
Enemy, for the most part with success. But all these Actions being performed by
small Parties, and much alike to what have been already related; to
particularize them all would swell to a Volume, and will only serve to tire the
Reader, wherefore I have thought fit to pass by most of them. The last
expedition of D. Sancho this Year, was, the taking and burning the Town of
Huelga, abandoned by the Inhabitants, who secured themselves in a Tower. Hence
he returned home, with a considerable booty, which he had gathered in the
neighboring Country, without meeting the least opposition.

3. This Year proved unfortunate at Sea. Antony Tellez de Menezes, Count de
Villapouca, having resigned the Government of Brazil to the Count de Castello
Melhor, set sail for Lisbon, with the Men of War that had carried the latter.
Peter Jaques de Magalhaens, Admiral of the West India Company Fleet, set out at
the same time with 18 Men of War, and 80 Merchantmen. Having made the length of
the Tercera Islands, such a Storm arose, that four of the King's Ships were
cast away, and in them Antony Tellez de Sylva, with most of the Men. The Count
de Villapouca, and Peter Jaques, with the Ships under his Command, arrived safe
in Lisbon, and brought a considerable return for the great expenses the Company
had been at. The Princes Rupert, and Maurice, (as was said at the beginning of
this Year) having put into the River of Lisbon, and Blake Admiral of the
English, in pursuit of them, coming to an Anchor at Cascaes, it was debated in
Council, The Princes Rupert and Maurice, with a Portuguese Squadron put to Sea,
and return without fighting.
whether the Princes should be protected, and after hearing all that could be
said on bothsides, the King generously resolved on the Affirmative. Blake,
resolving to Attack them in the Port, the King fitted out 13 Men of War, under
the Command of Antony de Siqueira Varajao, an old Soldier. The two Princes
joining this Squadron, they put to Sea to meet the Enemy, having Orders to
Fight betwixt the two Capes, but the Enemy upon their approach, standing to
Sea, they returned into the Port without engaging. Antony de Siqueira, wanted
not Enemies to blame him for not Fighting, and the King harkening to them, gave
his Command to George de Melo, who had the Title of General of the Galleys. A
few days after, he sailed out, and the Enemy again standing to Sea, they were
surprised by so terrible a Storm, that all the Fleet was dispersed, some Ships
drove to Algarve, and one falling into the English Fleet was taken. The Tempest
ceasing, the English discovered, the Brazil Fleet, of which, they took 15 sail,
and Winter coming on, returned home. This gave the two Princes an opportunity
of putting to Sea again, after acknowledging the many favors they had received
of the King, and particularly, that of protecting them, though contrary to his
own interest and the Maxims of State Policy.

4. Since the departure of the Marquess de Niza, Christipher Soars de Abreu
continued at the Court of France, Proceedings of several Ambassadors.
where by reason of the troubles of that Kingdom no further progress was made
as to the Affairs of Portugal, but the Friendship before Established continued
firm. All his solicitations at Rome having proved ineffectual, the King now
resolved not to trouble the Pope further, so that nothing new happened at that
Court. Francis de Sousa Coutinho was still Ambassador in Holland, and
dexterously diverted those People from sending supplies to Brasil. The States
having Endeavored to corrupt his Secretary, that they might see the Kings
Letters, he improved their artifice to his own Advantage. For his Secretary
having acquainted him with the overtures made to him, he ordered him to consent
to them, and having filled up several blanks he had under the Kings hand, as he
thought convenient, delivered them to the Secretary, who conveyed them to the
States, and they supposing them to have been the Kings Letters, were thereby
induced to deferr sending a Fleet they had designed for Brazil. It was not long
after this, when a Servant of his having accidentally Shot a Coachman, the
Rabble rose and made 3 Assaults upon his House, and had certainly Murdered him
and his whole Family had he not been relieved by the Prince of Orange his
Guards. In September, Antony de Sousa de Macedo who had been Ambassador in
England came to the Hague, and Francis de Sousa went away to Res^^e as
Ambassador at the French Court. Since the departure of Antony de Sousa from
London, there was no Portugues Minister there, that whole Kingdom being then in
confusion.

5. We left Francis Barreto the Portugues General in Brazil Twice Victorious
over the Dutch, The War in Brazil prosecuted.
in the Mountains Gararapes. Sigismund Vanscop the Dutch Commander thinking
this success had rendered the Portugueses less vigilant, made a sally at break
of Day upon the quarter of Captain Antony Borges Vchoa, who having Notice of
his approach, received him so warmly without his works, that he was soon Forced
to retire leaving many of his Men dead behind him. The Dutch General made many
other Sallies both before and after this, but none considerable till the 7th of
October, when he attempted the quarter of Captain Emanuel de Aguiar with all
the Foot in the Garrison, but neither here was his Success any better than in
the former Attempt. On the 15th of December, they again Marched out and lay
close in ambush near the Salt Pits, but the Portugueses having intimation of
the Place they lay in, attacked them there, and after a Vigorous resistance put
them to flight with considerable Slaughter. In these and the like attempts the
Year was Spent, the Enemy still decreasing in power, as receiving no supplies
from Holland, our Ambassador Francis de Sousa artificially diverting all that
were designed for them.

6. The Baron de Alvito, who governed Tangier, knowing the chief support of
that place consisted in the booties brought in from the Country, Tangier and
India.
ceased not to surprise the Moors in several parts, and brought home
considerable preys, which was a great relief to the Garrison. Nunho da Cunha
did the same at Marzagao, and in one incursion killed 300 Infidels, and brought
away 47 Captives. D. Francis de Noronha succeeded him in that post, and entered
upon his Command with no less success than his Predecessor went off. In India,
D. Philip Mascarenhas was still Viceroy, and this being the last Year of the
Truce with the Hollanders, they seemed inclined to attempt the Kingdom of
Jafanapatan before it was expired. This obliged the Viceroy to send a Fleet
under the Command of D. Roderick de Monsanto, to the relief of that place, but
the Dutch attempting nothing, the Fleet returned to Goa. The Count de Aveyras,
sailed from Lisbon this Year, to be the second time Viceroy of India, but he
died by the way. Four Ships and two Caravels, were sent this Year for India.

Anno, 1651.
1. D. John da Costa, governed the Province of Alentejo, Enterprises on the
Frontiers of Alentejo.
as was said the last Year, during the absence of the Count de St. Lorenzo,
which continued till the Year, 1657. Through the negligence of the Commissaries
of the stores, Forage grew so scarce on the Frontiers, that several Troops of
Horse were forced to retire from Elvas, and Campo Mayor, farther into the
Country. The Spaniards made their advantage of this opportunity, for a Party
of 1200 Horse, and 600 Foot, from Badajoz, carried away a great booty from the
Territory of Villaboim, there being no Troops in readiness to oppose them. To
revenge this loss, D. John da Costa, ordered Andrew de Albuquerque, General of
the Horse, with 1000 of them, and 800 Foot, to make himself Master of
Salvatierra, which is six Leagues from Olivenza, and where the Spanish
Commissary-General John de Rozales then was with some Troops. Andrew de
Albuquerque assembled his Troops at Olivenza, and marched with such secrecy to
Salvatiera that he had secured all the avenues before the Enemy heard of his
approach. The Foot broke into the Town with little opposition, and with as
little took the Castle, where they made 100 Horse Prisoners. The booty was very
considerable, the Town consisting of 400 Houses. Andrew de Albuquerque returned
to Olivenza, having lost but three Men in this Action, for certain Troops of
the Enemy that appeared served only to be Witnesses of the burning of the Town.
Some few days after, D. John da Costa lay in ambush to cut off the Troops of
Badajoz, that used to come out to Forage between the Rivers Guadiana and Caya,
but they not going out that day, his Design was disappointed. His Horse being
now much out of Case for want of Forage, the scarcity till continuing, he
studied all means how to disable the Enemies Troops. Being informed that they
had turned 400 Horses to grass near Medellen, which is 16 Leagues from Campo
Mayor; he gave charge to Captain Emanuel de Saldanha to endeavor to destroy
them. Saldanha committed this Enterprise to his Lieutenant, Francis Lobo, who
set forward twice, with only 10 Men to put this in Execution, but discovering
parties of the Enemy both times, he was forced to return. The third time he
went through, and having defeated 15 Men that guarded the Horses, killed most
of them, and returned in safety. The Enemy now making great Preparations to
enter upon Action, D. John da Costa, who had neither a Force to oppose them in
the Field, nor Provisions in the Frontier Towns to hold out a Siege, acquainted
the King with his wants, who sent large supplies of Money, whereby the Province
was put into such a Posture of Defense, that the Spaniards thought not fit to
attempt any thing on that side. But D. John da Costa being thus supplied,
ceased not to molest them, with continual Incursions. Not to speak of other
small Parties, one of 30 Men, commanded by the Cornet Stephen de Rocha, came
off with more Honor then Success. Being advanced in the Enemies Country, he
found his retreat was cut off by 7 Squadrons; whereupon he retired to an old
ruined House, he found in the Field. The Spaniards surrounded it, and offered
him quarter, which he refusing, they attacked it, and were repulsed. After
endeavoring in Vain to burn it, they went away, carrying with them the Horses
of those in the House, and the Cornet returned to Moura, a Foot, having lost
two of his Men. About the beginning of November, Prince Theodosius, the King's
eldest Son, having privately stole away from Court, without his Fathers
Knowledge, appeared at Elvas, and was there received with all the Respect due
to his Person. The King was not a little disturbed at this Accident, being
jealous of the Prince's Designs, and therefore used all gentle Means to draw
him back to Lisbon; but that which at last prevailed with him, was want of
Money, which forced him back to Court about the end of December. He positively
resolved to return to the Frontiers, but was detained for some time by the
King, till Death put an end to his Designs, as we shall see in its Place.

2. The Province between Duero and Minho, The Viscount de Villa Pouca, burns
two Towns in Galicia.
seemed to spare it self all this while, that it might be the better able to
sustain the heavy burden of the War, which fell upon it the ensuing Years. The
Viscount de Villa Pouca, was still Governor there, who perceiving that the
Towns of Portela and Vieyra, were the Rendesvouz for the Troops of Galicia,
when they joined those of Monterey, he caused both those places to be burnt
down to the Ground. The Garrisons of certain Forts, the Spaniards had raised on
the Frontiers of Galicia, persuading the Country People to rebuild several
Places that had been destroyed on the Borders during the War, they began to
assemble, in order to restore those Towns. Twice they attempted to rebuild
them, but they were as often totally demolished by order of the Viscount,
whereupon the Country desisted. The Count de Atouguia who governed the
Province, Tras os Montes, lived this Year free from Action; both sides, as if
it had been by Agreement, forbearing to infest one another. Nor was there any
considerable Action in that part of the Province of Beyra, which was under the
direction of D. Roderick de Castro; most of the Year being spent in Incursions
of no great Moment. In November, when the Prince, as has been said, appeared at
Elvas, D. Roderick, that it might be said he had infused new Courage into the
Army, marched with 1500 Men, and entering the Town of Bodon, plundered and burnt
it. D. Sancho Manuel who governed the other part of the Province, ceased not
all the Summer to infest the Frontiers of the Enemy, and to repulse such of
them, as made inroads into the Country, subject to his Command. By agreement
this Summer, the Prisoners on both sides were set at Liberty without Ransom.

3. Francis de Sousa Coutinho, Negotiations in Foreign Courts.
having left the Ambassy of Holland, as has been said, according to the Orders
he had received from the King, removed to Paris, where he had Audience of
Cardinal Mazarine, but nothing was concluded betwixt them, by reason of the
civil Broils then prevailing in France. At Rome, the Portuguese Affairs
continued in the same Posture, notwithstanding the Solicitation of the
Cardinal d'Este. Antony de Sousa de Macedo, who had succeeded Francis de Sousa
Coutinho, in the Ambassy of Holland, followed the Footsteps of his Predecessor,
entertaining the States with hopes of an Accommodation, to gain time, whilst
the Dutch might be expelled Brazil. Having in some measure settled those
Affairs, he labored to enter upon a Treaty with the Parliament of England,
which was forwarded by D. Emanuel Per^yra, sent over to that effect, and
afterward, commenced by the Envoy John de Guimaraens.

4. Francis Barreto, Francis Barreto prosecutes the War in Brazil.
with unparalleled Resolution and Constancy, continued the War in Pernambuco.
About the beginning of March, he laid 300 Men in Ambush, betwixt the Forts of
Sinco Pontas, Affogados and Barreta, hoping to cut off the Communication
between those Places and Arrecife. Twelve of these Men discovering a Boat of
the Enemies, swam to it, and took it, and the Dutch that came to succor their
Boat, discovering the Ambush, retired in time, so that the Portugueses had not
the Opportunity of making any further Advantage on them. The Hollanders of the
Fort Affogados, made a sally upon the quarter of Mendoza, but were soon
repulsed with the loss of 6 Men, besides those that were wounded. Francis
Barreto, understanding that the Dutch had great quantities of Sugar Canes at
Rio Grande, whereof they expected very soon to make their Advantage; he sent
thither, Captain John Barboza Pinto, with 300 Men, who after destroying all the
Country, and taking 18 of the Enemy, returned with a great number of Cattle.
Sigismund Van Scop, the Dutch Commander, desiring to perform some Action, which
might encourage the Besieged, resolved to destroy the Thicket, which covered
the quarter of Aguiar, from the Fort Affogados. To put this in Execution, he
marched out with the greatest part of his Strength, but Emanuel de Aguiar, who
commanded there, being in a readiness, received him so roughly, that for six
Months after, he never offered to sally again. Continual Success, put Francis
Barreto out of doubt of Success, and therefore he ceased not perpetually to
solicit the King, and Count Castello Melhor, then Governor of Brazil for
Succor, that he might with speed put an end to that War, before the Dutch now
at Peace with all the World, had the leisure to send supplies thither, which
might much retard, if not wholly destroy, the success of his Labors.

5. The Baron de Alvito still governing Tangier, Tangier and India.
it happened that certain Vessels laden with Corn from Lisbon, and the Islands,
sailing for that City, were cast away, which caused so great a Famine in that
place, that the Inhabitants were forced to feed on Herbs and Roots they could
gather in the Fields. The Baron generously at his own Expense, maintained the
Sick, and a multitude of Children, which would otherwise inevitably have
perished. This Calamity reached the Horses, who could not be maintained upon
Grass alone, so that it was difficult to make Excursions, which added much to
the great scarcity of Provisions. D. Francis de Noronha, Governor of Mazagam,
sent an Ambassy, and Presents to the King of Morocco, which was by him
honorably received, and generously returned. D. Francis continued in this
Command, till the Year 1654, during which time, nothing remarkable happened
there, so that we shall not have occasion to make any mention of him. This was
the last Year of D. Philip Mascarenhas, his Vice-Royship in India, and in it
there was little remarkable, only the Chendarraos, a vagabond sort of People in
the Country of Hidalcan, possessed themselves of the Mount or Promontory of
Chaul, whence they were drove by the Viceroy's Order, by D. Alvaro de Atayde.
This Year two Galeons and a Pink sailed from Portugal to India, and the Galeon,
S. Philip built there, arrived at Lisbon.

Anno, 1652.
1. THE Prince who (as was said) returned to Lisbon the latter end of the last
Year, The Prince made Captain General of all the Forces in Portugal.
used all possible means to persuade his Father to send him again to the
Frontiers, but the King jealous of him, could not be worked upon. At length to
conceal his own Jealousy, and disappoint that Design of his Son, he appointed
him Captain General of all the Forces in the Kingdom, tha^ having the Charge of
all, he might not apply himself to command in any one Province. D. John de
Costa, never ceased to harrass the Enemies Frontiers, bringing i^ thence
considerable Booty. In revenge, the Spaniard^ drove a great Prey from the
Territory of Telena, and though Lieutenant General Tamericourt marched after
them with the Troops of Olivenza, they being far before him got safe into
Barcarota. Before, that place was (...) large Field, encompassed with a Ditch,
and lying under the Cannon and small shot of the Town, which the Spa^niards
believed would secure their Prey. However Tamaricourt coming to Barcarota,
dismounted part of h^^ Horse, and breaking into the Field before day, dro^ away
all the Cattle, without receiving any considerabl^ Loss. The Spaniards sallyed
out upon him, but sudde^^ly retired; and he marching off with the Booty,
rest^^red it to the Country People. Neither was he less su^^cessful, a few days
after, when engaging the Troops of Badajoz, he took the Spanish Lieutenant
General of Horse, D. Francis Hibarra, with other Officers, and 120 Horses. The
Prince being now Generalissimo, sent his Orders to all the Provinces of the
Kingdom, absolutely forbidding any Incursions to be made for the future, into
the Spanish Frontiers. D. John de Costa, upon receipt of this Order, replied to
it, showing how disadvantagious it was to the Kingdom, by reason of the great
Benefit reaped by those inroads, for he in the space of two Years, had
destroyed above 1400 of the Spanish Horse, having scarce lost 100 of his own.
Besides he looked upon this as so great a check to his Authority, that he
desired leave to lay down his Command. The Prince being well satisfied of D.
John's Zeal and Fidelity, recalled his Order, and the King gave him the Title
of Earl of Sour. He to appear worthy of this Honor, endeavored to make
amends by his Conduct, for what he wanted in Strength. To this purpose, he
secretly gathered 1500 Horse from the Neighboring Garrisons, which Lieutenant
General Tamericour, and Commissary General Duquesne divided betwixt them. With
these Troops they passed the River Guadiana, and lay close in the Wood near
Badajoz. In the Morning, a Squadron of Horse issuing out of the Town according
to Custom, they were drove back by some of our Troops. Fresh Troops seconded
the Enemy from the City, and they kept in play, till D. Alvaro de Viveros took
the Field, with all the Horse of that place, and having drawn them up, advanced
further then was thought convenient for the safety of the Town. Duquesne who
was nearest, thinking it now time, moved toward him with more Courage than
Order. The Spanish General halted and bravely stood the Charge, in which
Duquesne received three Wounds, and Captain Sancho Dias was killed, with
several Soldiers; the rest of the Troops missing their Commander, retired with
Precipitation. Tamericour perceiving this Disorder, charged furiously with his
foremost Troops, which being too open in their Ranks made but little Impression;
but those in the Rear coming up, behaved themselves with such Bravery, that
after a long Dispute, they broke the Enemy. The Troops of Duquesne, and part of
those with Tamericour, being wholly blinded by the Dust, fled to Olivenza,
believing the rest were cut off. Tamericour rallyed the rest, marched off with
above 200 Horses he had taken from the Prisoners; among whom, was a Captain of
Horse, and other Officers. The Count de Sour, being a strict observer of
Discipline, commended those that had behaved themselves well, and severely
checked those that had fled, giving the King also a particular Account of the
Merits of the former, and Demerits of the latter.

2. The Viscount de Villa Nova, Governor of the Province betwixt Duero and
Minho, still continued in perfect Tranquillity, nothing happening in his
Command, but that Captain Labar, a valiant Frenchman, disorderly with a party
of Horse, charging another of the Enemy, was himself killed, and most of his
Men wounded. The Province Tras os Montes, governed by the Count de Antouguia,
by consent of both Parties, was for several Months free from Action. Some small
Incursions were afterward made on both sides, but none of Note. The King
having now chose the Count de Penaguiao his Lord Chamberlain, to go Ambassador
into England; appointed the Count de Atouguia to execute his Office, and John
Mendez de Vasconcellos, was sent in his place to govern the Province. The most
remarkable Action performed this Year by D. Roderick de Castro, in his Division
of the Province of Beyra, was the burning of the Town of Martiago, Some Actions
in Beira.
which contained 300 Houses; the other Enterprises were too small to merit any
place here. D. Sancho Manuel, who commanded in the other part of Beyra,
understanding that a Troop of the Enemies was quartered at Lobeyros, and had
twice repulsed parties of the Portuguese Militia that ravaged the Country
thereabouts, ordered the Cornet Dominick Homen, with 40 chosen Men to lie in
wait for them. He sent before some of the Militia to drive the Cattle; the
Spanish Troop backed by a company of Foot, immediately rushed out upon them,
but the Ensign who was at hand, furiously falling in upon the Foot, broke them,
and with the same Success routed the Horse, killing many, and taking several
Prisoners. This Success was soon balanced by a greater disaster, for D. Sancho
being informed that the Spaniards gathered a great Power, in order to break
into his Province; and not being in a condition to oppose them, he thought to
divert them, by making at the same time an inroad into their Frontiers, hoping
he might retire to places of safety, before they could intercept him. With this
Design, he gathered 350 Foot, and 200 Horse, and marching to Segura, sent
before Captain Gaspar de Tavora with 140 Horse, to drive the Cattle about
Sacravim, which done, he had orders to retire to Colonel John Fialho, who
should expect him with 60 Horse, and the rest of the Foot, at a place called
Salto, near the River Lagao. Gaspar de Tavora, executed his Orders with such
expedition, that by Noon he had joined John Fiallo. But the Spaniards having
notice of D. Sancho's March, no sooner entered Portugal, then they turned back,
and marching toward their Town of Carza, by which the Portugueses must of
necessity pass, appeared before John Fialho, when least he expected it, with
600 Horse, and as many Foot. He covering his Horse with the Foot, retired in
good order for above a League, till coming to a Pass, the Enemy drew up before
him. Necessity now obliging him to charge them, he fell with such Bravery upon
the 600 Foot, that he absolutely broke them; but in the mean while, the 600
Spanish Horse charging his 200 now divided from their Foot, after some short
dispute overpowered, and totally routed them. The Enemy pursued their
Advantage, and John Fialho rallying his Foot, recovered an advantageous Post to
defend himself. The Enemy ceased their pursuit in care for their Foot, which
had been overthrown, and returned to complete their Victory, by destroying John
Fialho and his party. He had, as was said, gained an advantageous post; but
having spent all his Ammunition, was made Prisoner with all the Officers of
Horse and Foot, 140 Horse escaped, the rest with all the Foot, were either
killed or taken. After this Disaster, D. Sancho Manuel retired to Idanha Nova,
and garrisoned the Frontiers with the Militia, writing to the Prince for
supplies, which were soon sent him. Being recruited, and joining his Forces
with those of D. Roderick de Castro, he resolved to revenge the late Affront,
by surpising the City Coria. They marched with 1500 Foot, and 700 Horse, some
Petards, and other necessaries for such an Enterprise; but the distance being
great, they could not come before the City till after day. However, having
divided their Foot, they attacked the Suburbs in two places, which they
entered, plundered and burnt; which done, seeing no possibility of forcing the
City, they retired, and each returned to his Province.

3. The troubles of France increasing, rendered all Foreign Negotiations so
uncertain at that Court, that Francis de Sousa Coutinho, having obtained leave
of the King, came to Portugal, leaving D. Felicianus Dourado Secretary of the
Embassy, to Reside there during his absence. At this time there was held at
Paris a Synod of Bishops, Endeavors used for obtaining Bishops, but in vain.
to whose Consideration King John recommended the finding of some expedient for
prevailing with the Pope to precognize the Bishops of Portugal. They used their
utmost endeavors, but the Spanish Interest still prevailing, nothing could be
done at this time. Antony de Sousa de Macedo, having obtained leave of the King
to quit the Embassy of Holland, D. Antony Rapozo Succeeded him in that employ.
He made it his business to heighten the misunderstanding betwixt the English
and Dutch, because the latter having sustained great losses by the War they
were engaged in with the former, were thereby disabled from sending succors to
Pernambuco. The King at the same time considering how advantageous the
Friendship of England might prove to his Affairs, resolved to send an
Ambassador thither, and pitched upon the Count de Penaguiao for that employ, as
we have said before.

4. Francis Barreto, Francis Barreto, his further Actions in Brazil.
the General of Pernambuco, continued the Siege of Arrecife, with considerable
resolution, hoping at length to reduce the Besieged, whose only hope consisted
in the succors they expected from Holland. The first part of the Year passed
without any memorable Action. In May, Francis Barreto, ordered Major Antony
Diaz Cardozo, with 400 Men, to lie close in ambush, and send out parties to
endeavor to draw the Garrisons of the Forts Barreta and Affogados, into the
snare. The Major posset himself of the post assigned him without being
discovered, and sending out certain small Parties drew out the Enemy, as he had
designed, but the number of the Hollanders being greater than had been
expected, the Fight continued doubtful for above an hour; at length the Dutch
were routed and fled to their Forts, leaving the Field covered with dead
Bodies. After this, Barreto being informed that the Enemy had laid up great
store of Brazil-Wood and other Commodities at Rio Grande, in order to be
transported into Holland, he sent thither the Colonel Andrew Vidal with 300
Men, who burnt their wood, wasted all the Country, and returned with a great
booty and many Prisoners. The Dutch had in those Seas 50 sail of Ships, from 20
to 30 Guns, but so ill Manned and Equipped for want of supplies from Holland,
that though they met the Portuguese Brazil-Fleet and fought it, yet after a short
dispute they were forced to retire without any Prize, and the Fleet arrived
safe at Lisbon, on the 26th of October.

5. We left the Baron de Alvito, The Spaniards try the Governor of Tangier,
without success.
Governor of Tangier, laboring under great scarcity of Provisions the last
Year. He had not as yet received any relief from Lisbon, which being known at
Ceuta, D. John Soars, who Commanded there for the Spaniards, hoping their
wants might reduce that Garrison to revolt from their King, sent two
Brigantines and a Bark thither, ordering the Commander of the Bark to enter the
Port, and convey the Letters he had writ for that purpose, to the Baron, and
other Men of note. This being put in execution, the Baron read the Letters,
which were to persuade him to submit himself to the King of Spain, with promise
of great Rewards, or else to offer him safe passage to Lisbon. The Baron, whose
Loyalty was not shaken, having in vain endeavored to draw those in the Bark
a-shoar, caused another to be fitted out, in which, went several resolute
Gentlemen with Firearms, and Orders to Attack the Enemies Bark, when they
should approach to receive the Letter they expected. The Barks coming together
they fired, killed three of the Spaniards, and carried the rest Prisoners to
the City. This Action so exasperated the Spaniards, that they sent three Ships
to interrupt any relief that might be designed for Tangier, but the Baron
ordering the Vessels that came from Lisbon to be detained in Algarve, till
further advice from him, the Enemy quitted their station, and gave way to five
Caravels with Provisions to relieve that City. The Baron being informed that
certain Captive Moors in the Town, had by intelligence with those abroad,
agreed to let themselves down the Wall of the old Town, near which, the others
were to lie hid in order to receive them; he ordered three Soldiers habited
like Moors to be let down, and when the Infidels came on to succor them, they
were received with such a volley of great and small shot, as laid many dead
before the Town, the rest flying with more speed than they came on.

6. D. Philip Mascarenhas, having ended his Vice-Royship in India, and obtained
leave of the King to return home, The Affairs of India.
embarked for Lisbon, and died by the way. The Count de Aveyras, sent by the
King to succeed him, dying also in the Voyage, as was said before; the Sealed
Patents, which are always laid up to provide for such exigencies, being opened,
it was found that the care of the Government was committed to D. F. Francis dos
Reys, Primate of India, Francis de Melo de Castro, and Antony de Sousa
Coutinho. Having entered upon the Government, they fitted out a Fleet of 22
Sail, Commanded by Antony de Sousa Coutinho, one of the Governors. This Fleet
set sail in order to recover Mascate; some of them entered that Bay, but
receiving much harm from the Cannon of the Town, they stood out again, and came
to Anchor in the River Lafette, 100 Leagues from Mascate. They had lain there
but a few days before they discovered a mighty Fleet of Arabs, Commanded by one
Hali a Moor. Antony de Sousa, received them with such gallantry, that after the
Battle had lasted many Hours, he obtained a Complete Victory, killing above
5000 of the Infidels. Captain Antony Lobo, in this Action, being boarded by two
of the Enemies Vessels, set fire to his own Powder, and blew himself up and
both them. Antony de Sousa returned to Goa, where he found D. Vasco
Mascarenhas, Count de Obidos, whom the King had appointed Viceroy, upon the
News of the Death of the Count de Aveyras. Within a very few days, the whole
City running into Mutiny, offered the Government to Antony de Sousa, who
rejected their offer; then they pitched upon D. Bras de Castro, a Turbulent
Man, who presently accepted of it, which done, they seized upon the person of
the Count, and kept him Prisoner. But God showed how displeasing to him this
Rebellious Government was, by the Judgments that immediately attended the
beginning of it, for the Dutch before the expiration of the Truce began a War,
which proved the most fatal to the Portugueses, of any they ever had since the
Conquest of that Country. The Hollandrs resolving to break the Truce, fitted
out 10 Ships, under the Command of John Mansucar, who coming to Tutocorim,
seized all the Money laid up there to buy Pearl, and at the same time took a
Ship bound from Cochim to China. D. Bras de Castro, immediately prepared to
oppose them. Ceylon was the place next to danger, as being that they had always
aimed at. Emanuel Mascarenhas Homem, was Governor there, who hearing of the
preparations of the Dutch, sent four Companies to secure Calature, the safety
of Columbo depending on that Port. This reinforcement not coming in time, the
place fell into the hands of the Enemy, and for Columbo, all the people of the
Country flocking thither could not hold out long for want of Provisions. The
News of this loss being carried to Manicravare, where Lope Barriga Commanded,
the whole Garrison mutinied, because, according to the Orders received from
Mascarenhas, he designed to march them to Columbo, and killing some that
opposed them, sent him away and took the Field. The King of Candia thinking to
make his advantage of this disorder, marched a good body of Forces toward
them, and offered them large terms if they would come over to his Service. They
answered him with their Weapons, and after a fight which lasted many hours,
retitired to Columbo. Emanuel Mascarenhas the Governor, having gathered what
Forces he could into the City, designed to oppose the mutiniers, and fired
three pieces of Cannon. They resolved to be revenged, being reinforced by two
Companies of Foot, which deserted to them from the City, but the Religious and
Inhabitants to prevent the mischief they saw impending, opened one of the Gates
and let them in. Emanuel Mascarenhas, took Sanctuary in a Monastery, and the
City chose for their Governors Gaspar de Araujo Pereyra, D. Francis Rolim, and
Francis de Barros da Silva, and to Command in the Field Gaspar Figueyra da
Serpa, an experienced Soldier. He hearing the Dutch with some Natives were
abroad gathering Cinnamon, marched to cut them off, but they having
intelligence of his march, were gone before; so having reduced some Towns that
had revolted, he returned to Columbo. The Governors receiving advice that the
Dutch were raising a Fort at Angratota, which would Command all the Country
about Columbo, sent Gaspar Figueyra with 500 Foot, to drive them thence. Gaspar
Figueyra, marched with expedition, and having secured all the Avenues by which
the Enemies might receive any relief, carried on a Trench so close to their
work, that having raised a Platform and planted thereon one piece of Cannon, he
so incommoded them, that after 10 days the Dutch surrendered upon discretion;
110 of them were taken, 40 Jaos, and 300 Chingalas, who were severely punished,
as being for the most part Subjects to the King of Portugal. At the same time
John Botado, who was in the Inland with a Company of Portugueses and some
Blacks, was set upon by an Officer of the King of Candia, with 3000 Men, and
though the Blacks forsook him, the Portugueses fought so desperately that they
put the Indians to flight, leaving so many dead, that those who saw them could
not be persuaded they had been killed by so few. John Botado, with his Men
retired to Columbo. Four Ships and one Caravel sailed this Year from Lisbon for
India, and two Ships from thence arrived in Portugal.

Anno, 1653.
1. KIng John had resolved not to make any great Efforts to carry the War far
into the Spanish Territories, The War proceeds coldly on both sides.
concluding it his securest course to fill his exchequer, fortify his Towns and
build Ships, whilst the Spaniards wasted themselves with their Wars in Italy
and Flanders, were diverted from putting Portugal into any danger. This was the
reason that he kept no more Forces afoot in Alentejo, then served to secure the
Frontiers, and consequently the actions there were of small moment and few of
them worth relating. The most considerable was a party of 950 Horse, and 100
Musketeers, Commanded by Andrew de Albuquerque General of the Horse, which
defeated 1300 Spaniards, killing 200 of them among whom was their Lieutenant
General of Horse, the Count de Amarante, and taking above 400 Prisoners.
Neither did this Year produce any Exploits of note in the other Provinces,
which continued in full Peace, bating some small Alarms given on bothsides,
which only served to keep the Garrisons upon their Guard without any damage
done on either side.

2. In the midst of all his fortunate Successes, the King received one Fatal
blow, which outbalanced many of his former prosperities. This was the death of
his Eldest Son Prince Theodosius, Prince Theodosi-the Kings Eldest Son dies.
whom for his excellent qualities he entirely loved, The Prince, as has been
before hinted, had Labored under a tedious sickness, and though the Force of it
was abated, he never after enjoyed perfect health, for there continued a
defluxion upon his stomach, which no medicines could ever remove, but on the
contrary some that were used seemed to hasten his End. On the 3d of May he took
to his bed, and for 6 Days the Physicians Employed all their Art for recovering
of him, the whole Clergy and layety offering up their Prayers to God for him.
All proved in vain, for the Number of his days was complete, therefore on the
Night he received the Viaticum and on the 15th gave up his Ghost. The Encomiums
bestowed on this Prince are so great, they will appear incredible, and
therefore I think fitter to omit than trouble the Reader with them. He dyed
Aged 19 Years, 3 months and 7 days. His body was buried in the Royal Monastery
of Belem, being Attended thither by an incredible multitude of the People
Lamenting the Loss of so hopeful a Prince. Immediately after his death the
King assembled the Parliament, in which his Second Son Prince Alfonso was Sworn
Heir to the Crown. The 3 Estates agreed to Support the charge of the War with
the Tenth of all Temporal and Spiritual Estates, and in case the Spaniards
should besiege any considerable place, then to add one Fourth part more of the
said Tax; but if it should happen the Enemy Invaded the Kingdom with such
powerful Forces as might bring it into danger, then they offered all they had
for the Support of the Crown: Before the Parliament broke up, the King
sustained another Loss, in the Death of his Eldest Daughter Joanna, who
departed this Life on the 17th of September, She Lies buried in the Monastery
of Belem.

3. The Affairs of Portugal continued much in the same posture we left them at
the Courts of Rome, The Portuguese Ambassadors brother, beheaded for murder in
England.
France and Holland, In England the Count de Penaguiao solicited the settling
of a Peace with the Usurper Oliver, who was much offended at the protection
given in Lisbon, to the Princes Rupert and Maurice. But this Ambassador before
the End of his Negotiation met there with a Disaster, which cost the Life of
his Brother. The manner of it in short was thus. D. Pantaleon de Sa, the
Ambassadors Brother walking one Evening in the New Exchange, and resenting an
affront which he thought he had received from one Gerard, the Night following
repairs to the same place attended by the Ambassadors retinue, and with Sword
and Pistol, falls upon all he meets. A great Hubub rising, the Portugueses
were beat off, chiefly by one Colonel May an Irish man. One Greenway was
killed in the scuffle. For this Murder D. Pantaleon de Sa, as the Author of the
Tumult was Tried and condemned. Having in vain pleaded his privilege and made
his escape out of Prison by the help of the Lady Mohun, being again taken, he
was beheaded upon a Scaffold on Tower Hill.

4. Francis Barreto who Commanded in Pernambuco, Francis Barreto holds the
Dutch closely besieged in Brazil.
though his Forces were much lessened and no supplies came, was not at all
discouraged, but carried on the Seige of Arrecife with a full Resolution either
to Conquer or die. The besieged were now reduced to despair, and therefore
determined to attempt gaining the Fort Arrayal, which Sigismund their General
knowing to be a difficult Enterprise, endeavored to divert them from, but
perceiving he Labored in vain, told them, the only means to attack that Fort
was by Gaining first the quarter of Aguiar. On the 11th of March, he marched
out of the Fort Affogados with the greatest part of that and the Neighboring
Garrisons. Captain Alfonso de Albuquerque Commanded at the quarter of Aguiar.
He not thinking it for his honor to receive them in his works, marched out and
soon drove them back to their Forts. Twice after this they attempted the same
Post, and were both time repulsed with considerable Loss, which caused them to
forbear any farther attempts on the besiegers and employ their Men in bringing
provisions from the River of S. Francis. These Men were met there by 100
Portugueses and some Blacks Commanded by Captain Francis Barregos, who the
first firing was shot through the body, Yet his Men continued the Charge with
such bravery, that they drove the Dutch to their Fort, and thence to their
Ships, without the provisions they came for. Here upon the Council sent one of
their body into Holland to press for speedy releif, but the Dutch having been
defeated at Sea by the English, were not then in a condition to send any.
Francis Barreto having notice hereof, resolved when the Portuguese Fleet
arrived to make his utmost Efforts for expelling the Enemy that Country.
Accordingly he met the Admiral and Vice Admiral to concert the measures they
were to take, but the result of this Consultation and the Effect that followed
belong to the next Year.

5. D. Roderick de Alencastre at the Beginning of this Year, D. Roderick de
Alencastre defeats a party of Moors at Tanier.
succeeded the Baron de Alvito in the Government of Tangier, which he managed
with greater dexterity than many had expected by reason of his Youth. Being
informed that about a place called Gibalcaro, there were certain Hords of Arabs
come thither for convenience of pasture, he sent the Commander in chief of the
Horse, with 92 Troopers to attack them by Night. Being come near them some
advised him not to fall on them till morning when he could do better Execution,
however he obeyed his orders slew a great Number of Infidels, took 17 prisoners
and returned with a great booty, in which were six Camels which D. Roderick
sent to the King. D. Roderick performed several other actions of less note,
for a Famine raging among the Moors at that time, they brought him intelligence
for bread, and others brought Horses and Cattle to sell in the City.

6. The danger increased in India, War in India with the Dutch.
where D. Bras de Castro had usurped the Government; for the Dutch threatened
Ceylon, and other places were not free from Apprehensions. The three Governors,
who we said last Year commanded in Ceylon, sent Gaspar de Figueyra de Serpa,
with 900 Foot to reduce the Towns that had revolted, and bring in Provisions.
The King of Candia's Forces forsook the lower Country, and entrenching
themselves strongly, endeavored to exclude him the Upper. He attacked them
vigorously, and their number being great, was repulsed, but they adventuring to
pursue him, he rallyed, drove them back, and entered their Works with them,
making a mighty Slaughter. This Success made many Towns submit, which paid
their Arrears of Contributions, and a great quantity of Cinnamon, Provisions,
Arms, and other Plunder was conveyed to Columbo. Soon after, 10 Companies were
sent to attack a Town on the Frontiers of Candia, where there was great store
of Provisions; and though 10000 Chingalas defended a Wood that lay in the way,
they were defeated, and the Town taken. On the 11th of May, arrived at Columbo,
Francis de Mello de Castro, sent to command in that Island, by D. Bras de
Castro, with 8 Ships, and 150 Foot. With him went D. Alvaro de Atayde, as
General of the Forces, but his Age and Diseases rendered him incapable of that
Post; whereupon Francis de Mello gave it to his Nephew, Antony de Mello de
Castro, who being drove out of the Field by the King of Candia; Francis de
Mello, at the earnest request of all the People, restored Gaspar de Figueyra de
Serpa to that Command. No sooner had he received it, but he marched out against
the King of Candia, and having worsted him in several Encounters, forced him to
retire to the City Candia, near to which he encamped, and continued a
considerable time; underhand raising such jealousies in the King's Mind, that
he caused him to behead many of his Favorites. The Dutch at the same time had
agreed with Hidalcan, to besiege Goa by Land, whilst they blocked it up by Sea,
promising him the plunder of the Place. They came before it according to
agreement with a Squadron, but Hidalcan failing with his Forces, they drew off
again without attempting any thing. This Year two Galeons sailed from Lisbon
for India, under the Command of Luis de Mendoza Furtado. The Ship Nossa Senhora
da Penha de Franca, returning home from India, was taken by the Hollanders in
the latitude of Pernambuco.

Anno, 1654.
1. TO begin this Year, Tamericour, Lieutenant General of Horse, by order of
the Count de Sour, marched with all the Horse he could gather, and some Foot,
to the Valleys of Mata Moros, and St. Ann, near the City Xeres. All the Country
people was retired to those Places, and defended them the space of some Hours;
but being at length defeated, the Villages were plundered and burnt; which
done, the Portuguese Troops laden with Booty, returned to their Quarters. Very
few days passed before another Enterprise of more Consequence had the desired
Success. Oliva taken by the Portugueses.
Oliva was a large Town, not far from the City Xerez, defended by an old
Castle, and was the Receptacle of the Spaniards, when they made incursions on
that side. Thither Andrew de Albuquerque, though not well recovered of his
Wounds, marched with 2000 Foot, and 1500 Horse. By break of day he attacked the
Town, and made himself master of it without any difficulty. At the Castle he
found more opposition, because two Petards he applied to the Gates, failed of
the intended effect, and all the Spaniards able to bear Arms, had retired
thither. However, Albuquerque lodged himself under the Wall, and began to carry
on two Mines. The Besieged perceiving it, began to parley, and after three
days, surrendered upon Condition, every one might take with him what he could
carry. The Booty was great, because not only the Inhabitants of Oliva, but of
many other Towns, had conveyed their Goods thither, as to a place of Security.
This Conquest cost the Lives of 42 Men. Albuquerque added some Works to the
place, and leaving a Garrison in it, returned to Elvas. The Count de Sour
having obtained leave to repair to Lisbon; Andrew de Albuquerque, was left
supreme Commander in the Province of Alentejo. The King expressly commanded him
to forbear making any Incursions into the Spanish Territories, or driving
thence any Cattle, except such Horses as were fit for Service. The Duke de S.
German, the Spanish General, upon notice hereof, offered to agree, that no harm
should be done on either side to the Country people; but Albuquerque
representing to the King, the great Advantages that accrewed to his Army by
these Incursions, the King recalled his former Order, and the War was carried
on as before. The Spaniards, The Spaniards carry off a great Booty.
to show they had not made those Overtures, for want of Strength, drove a great
Prey from the Territory of Monsaras; and the Captains, Denis de Mello, and John
Ferreyra da Cunha with their Troops, attempting to recover it, were defeated,
and they with 34 of their Men taken, but soon set at liberty, it being agreed
that Prisoners should be discharged.

2. Scarce any thing of Note happened this Year in any of the other Provinces;
both sides for the most part contenting themselves to preserve their own, and
save the Country People from Destruction. Antony de Andrade de Oliva, who had
been a Franciscan Friar, and left that Order upon several Pretexts, had now
obtained leave of the King to go into Spain upon some odd Project, as he was a
Man of a restless Spirit; returning thence, Some Persons apprehended upon a
false Information of their corresponding with Castile.
he accussed Sebastian Caesar de Meneses, and his Brother F. James Caesar, of
holding Correspondence with the Spaniards, whereupon they were both secured and
committed to Prison, where they continued a long time. Francis de Sousa
Coutinho, returned this Year to the Ambassy at the French Court, where nothing
occurred worth relating; no more that at Rome, or in Holland, things continuing
still there in the same Posture. The Count de Penaguiao, not able to bear the
loss of his Brother, having concluded a Peace with the Usurper Oliver, returned
home, carrying with him the Ratification of the Peace.

3. Francis Barreto, the General of Pernambuco, meeting with the Amiral Peter
Jaques, Francis Barreto turns his Blocade at Arrecise into a formal Siege.
and his Vice Admiral at the Town of Olinda, to confer together about putting
at end to the long Blocade they had made of the Dutch, and having called a
Council of War, it was resolved to turn it into a formal Siege. In order to it,
they agreed their first attempt must be to gain the Fort called Rego, which was
upon the Salt pits. Peter Jaquez went away to the Fleet, with a Resolution so
to secure the Bar of Arrecife, that no Succor might possibly be conveyed in.
On the 5th. of January, the Works by Land were advanced nearer, and the Enemy
shut up within a narrower Compass, and a Battery of 9 Pieces of Cannon raised
against the Fort Rego, Colonel Andrew Vidal taking up his Post there. On the
11th of January, Francis Barreto with 2500 Foot, marched to the Fort, raised
two batteries the one of 7 and the other of 5 Pieces of Cannon, and began to
carry on his approaches with great Art. That Night they came within Musket Shot
of the Fort. On the 15th both the Cannon and small shot played incessantly on
bothsides, the Dutch at the same time attempting to put some succor into the
Fort, but were disappointed. That Night Hugh Naquer who Commanded in the Fort
Surrendered, Capitulating for the Garrison to march out with their Arms, and to
be sent to Portugal. Before day, he marched out with 70 Men. Two Companies of
Portugueses were put into it. Hence Francis Barreto marched to the Fort
Altanar, which after some short resistance was delivered upon the same
conditions as the other. Before the taking of this Fort the Dutch had abandoned
3 others, and now quitted 3 more, with the same precipitation. Barreto
designing next to attack the Fort of Sinco Pontas, was informed that the Enemy
had secured a Post, he thought to have lodged his Men upon; whereupon he sent
Colonel Andrew Vidal, with 1000 Men to dislodge them, which he did; and
Fortifyed himself in the same Place. Next Morning the Canon was conveyed
thither and the Trenches were opened against the Fort Sinco Pontas. The Dutch
perceiving the danger to approach, made overtures for a Surrender, which were
easily admitted; and after some days Spent in adjusting all differences, they
finally agreed upon the following Articles. That the Dutch should remain
possessed of all their movables. That they should have some of their own Ships
with Iron Guns, to Transport them to Holland. That such as would might stay
there and be Treated in point of Religion as they were in Portugal. That all
the Out-Forts be put into the hands of the Portugueses with their Artillery and
Ammunition. That a Garrison be immediately received into Arrecife and the City
Mauricea, where the Dutch might continue 3 Months but without any Sort of
Arms. That all Ships coming from Holland for Four months to come have the
Liberty of all those Ports. That the Dutch give hostages to secure the
Surrender of all other places they possessed, belonging to Portugal on that
Coast. That the Indians, Mulattos and Blacks who served, be pardoned. These
were the principal Articles signed on both sides the 26th of January. Next day
the Portugueses took possession of all the Posts where they found 121 brass
Guns, 170 of Iron; Ammunition and provision for a Year and great quantity of
Stores. The same Night that Arrecife was delivered, a Dutch Lieutenant Colonel
fled over to the Island Itamaraca, and persuading the People there that the
Portugueses spared neither Sex nor Age, they Shipped themselves and goods on
board two Frigates, and Sailing to Paraiba spread the same Terror there,
obliging Colonel Autin, who Commanded, against his will to Embark on a Ship
that arrived there from India, and leaving the Fort in possession of 50
Portugueses who were prisoners there. All other places in Brazil were recovered
with the same ease to the great honor of Francis Barreto, after the Dutch had
Tyrannically possessed themselves of them for the Space of 30 years, reckoning
from their first coming thither which was in the Year 1624. The recovery of
Pernambuco happened 8 days after D. Hirome de Ataide, Count de Altouguia had
taken possession of the Government of Brazil at Bahia, being successor to the
Count de Castello Melhor. Colonel Andrew Vidal, was sent to carry this good
News to the King who rewarded him and all the chief Officers according to their
Merit.

4. Our Affairs in India were not so successful as in America. The War in India
unsuccessfull to Portugal.
D. Bras de Castro continued in the Government, no Viceroy being yet come to
call him to account for his Usurpation. Francis de Mello, who commanded in
Ceilon, sent out Antony Mendez Aranha, with 400 Portugueses, and some Chingalas
to endeavor to fight the Dutch, but they avoided coming to blows as much as
could be, knowing that want of Provisions would in time ruin us. He marched
and in the way to Calature, found an Entrenchment guarded by some Blacks whom
he defeated. Then advancing to Diagao a place where he must pass the River, he
found it Guarded by two Companies of Dutch, and a Number of Chingalas, upon
whom he kept Firing for the Space of 10 days, and having provided boats to waft
his Men over, the Dutch quitted the Post and he possessed himself of it. He
continued 30 days about Calature hoping to draw out the Dutch, and then finding
his Design succeeded not, marched through the Country of Alicaao then subject
to the Enemy, destroying all that stood in his way. Here he received orders to
march up the Country, in order to furnish Columbo with provisions whereof there
was great scarcity, and when he had Spent 20 days without finding any, so that
his Men were consumed with Labor and want, 700 Dutch with a great Number of
Chingalas lay in the way he was to pass at Tebuna to intercept him. Antony
Mendez drew up his Men under cover and keeping a continual fire upon the Enemy,
who were on a rising ground, drove them thence. After this Action he received
advice from Columbo that Five Galeons were arrived there with relief from Goa,
yet they left the City in no better condition then they found it, for having in
an Engagement near Gale lost their two Commadores, the other Captains fell at
odds about the chief command and putting to Sea met 11 Dutch men of War by whom
they were all destroyed. The Dutch now wanting men in other places abandoned
Calature, which Antony Mendez possessed himself of as also of the Port Alicao,
three Leagues from Gale. His good Services being misrepresented by his
Enemies, he was called away, and his Command given to Gaspar de Araujo Pereyra,
who being soon found incapable of it, Antony Mendes was again restored. The
Dutch repenting they had quitted Araujo and Calature, had battered the former,
the space of 15 days, and passed the River to attack it, the same day that
Antony Mendez arrived there. He seeing no possibility of maintaining it,
resolved to march off his Men to Columbo; but the Enemy having wholly cut off
his Retreat, he was forced to engage them, having chose an advantageous Post,
which his Men maintained with incredible Bravery, till a chance Bullet flying
into the Enemies Powder, blew up all their Ammunition, killing above 50 of
them; whereupon the rest fled, leaving 200 of their Companions dead upon the
spot, this was the end of this Years Actions there. Three Ships sailed from
Lisbon for India, one whereof was cast away upon the Bar of Goa.

Anno, 1655.
1. THE War in all parts of Portugal, Very small matter this Year of martial
Exploits.
was this Year carried on with so little Vigor, that it is scarce worth the
mentioning; but that something must be said to carry on the Series of the
History. The Provinces of Alentejo and Enter Duero and Minho, afford us no
matter at all. John Mendez de Vasconcellos, who governed that of Tros os
Montes, and the foregoing Years had continued in perfect Peace, had now
received Orders from the King, as had all the other Governors to infest the
Enemies Frontiers with Incursions, which he put in Execution. The Spaniards in
revenge, drove all the Cattle about Miranda, but Antony Jaques de Payva, who
commanded in that Town, sent out a party, which defeating the Enemy, recovered
all the Prey, and brought away all the Cattle of the Spaniards that grazed
about Samil. This done, Antony Jaques, with 250 Horse, and 200 Foot, marched to
Caravajales, and passing by that place without Opposition, burnt the Town of
Tavora, and 19 Villages, returning with a great Booty. Soon after 500 Spanish
Foot, and 150 Horse, having gathered all the Cattle about Ifanes; Antony Jaques
set upon them with a lesser number, yet with such Valor, that few of the 500
Foot escaped being killed or taken. The People of Gallicia offered John Mendez
a Cessation of Arms, which he accepted of, but the King not approving of it, it
was of no Continuance.

2. John de Mello Feyo, Small incursions in Be^^^a.
governing that part of Beira, which was before subject to D. Roderick de
Castro, resolved not to be idle. Having borrowed 150 Horse of Nuno da Cunha,
who Commanded in the other part of the Province, and joined them to Six Troops
of his own, and a Regiment of Foot, he marched to Villa Vieja Nine Leagues from
the Frontiers, toward Cuidad Rodrigo. After plundering Villa Vieja, he charged
a body of 300 Spanish Horse and as many Foot that was gathered to oppose him,
and after a Vigorous resistance made by them, in so much that at the first his
party seemed to decline, he put them to flight pursuing them as far as S.
Felices. Antony Soars da Costa Governor of the Castle of Salvaterra, held a
friendly correspondence which is allowed of in time of War between Gentlemen, A
do^ble pi^ce of Treachery.
though serving in opposite parties, with D. Alfonso de Sand a Spanish Officer.
This familiarity increasing, D. Alfonso took occasion to make proposals to
Antony Soars, for delivering up that Castle to the King of Spain, promising
him large rewards for that Service. Antony Soars pretending an Inclination to
comply, carried on the Negotiation, till he obtained a Letter from D. Lewis de
Haro prime Minister of Spain, with a scedule under that Kings hand containing
Large promises if he delivered the place. Having received these assurances he
resolved to Revenge the wrong done to his Reputation, in attempting his
Fidelity. He agreed with D. Alfonso to receive him with 30 more into the Castle
of Salvaterra, in disguize as if they came thither to Trade, leaving the rest
of the Troops belonging to Alcantara ready in a Wood hard by. The day being
appointed D. Alfonso came according to agreement, and a small wicket of the
Castle was opened at which the 30 entered one at a time, the entrance not being
capable of admitting more at once. As every one was let in, Antony Soarez
caused his brains to be dashed out with a Club, and in this manner cruelly
butchered all the 30 reserving only D. Alfonso de Sand, whom after sending an
account to the King of his barbarity, he inhumanly tied to the mouth of a Canon
and giving fire to it shattered his body into atoms. Antony Soarez might have
been faithful to his King, without committing an act so full of horror, which
he himself could not but have abominated if committed by the most barbarous
Infidels, and which cannot but appear execrable in the sight of all that
profess the name of Christians.

3. The Portuguese Affairs in other parts of Europe continued much in the same
posture we left them. For the several proposalls made in France for concluding
a League offensive and defensive, all came to nothing. Nothing of moment done
in foreign courts, or at Tangier.
Nor could there any thing be done at Rome, the Pope being fully bent against
passing the Bulls for the Portuguese Bishops. The Dutch had resolved to revenge
the Loss of Pernambuco upon the Trade of Portugal, but the plague which raged
amongst them disappointed their designs. In England the Peace was concluded and
ratifyed with the Usurper. America yield us no subject for History since the
Expulsion of the Hollanders out of Brazil, where the Count de Atouguia was
supreme governor. Neither is there much to be said of Africa where D. Roderick
de Alencastre still Governed Tangier, which was this year Three days beset by
10000 Moors under the Command of Gaylan. who did no other harm save the
spoiling of some gardens. D. Francis de Noronha Governor of Mazagao, having
obtained leave to return home, left that Command to Nuno da Cunha who had held
it before, and he dying, the King sent Alexander de Sousa Freyre to succeed him.

4. The Count de Sarzedas was sent this Year Viceroy into India, Considerable
losses of the Portugueses in India.
who arriving at Goa, secured D. Bras de Castro and all those that had any hand
in the imprisonment of the Count de Obides, sending them to Portugal, there to
receive the punishment due to their crimes. He next applied himself with great
care to regulating all disorders in that government, and to relieve Ceilon then
in distress, but death cut him off in the midst of his progress, which we may
conclude to be the principal cause of the loss of that Island, the manner
whereof we are now to declare, though the surrender was not til^ the following
year 1656. At the beginning of this Year, Gaspar Figuegra de Serpa had waged
War so successfully upon the King of Candia, that he had reduced him to Peace.
The Dutch laid siege to Calature and continued before it 10 days, at the End
whereof finding themselves too weak to carry it, they departed. Before D. Bras
de Castro was deposed from the government of India, he sent Antony de Sousa to
succeed Francis de Mello in the Government of Ceilon, with Six Galliots and Two
pinks laden with provisions and other necessaries. Meeting Two Dutch Men of
War, these small Vessels were dispersed, Two of them ran ashore, two made their
way to Columbo, and Antony de Sousa with Two more got into Jafanapatan. Thence
he went by Sea to the Port Putelao 15 Leagues from Columbo, where Antony Mendez
Aranha met and conducted him safe by Land to that City, into which he was
received with great joy, and Francis de Mello put him in possession of the
government. Twelve Dutch Men of War arrived at Ceilon from Batavia, Six of them
lay before the Bar of Columbo, the other Six made their way to Calature, where
Landing their men they laid Seige to it, and the place being very ill
provided, after the Garrison had endured the utmost Extremities it was at last,
surrendered upon honorable Terms. Gaspar Figueyra de Serpa not knowing that
Calature was lost, advanced with 500 Portugueses to endeavor to put some
succor into it, but being attacked by 1600 Dutch, was totally routed and many
of his men killed. The Hollanders pursuing their Victory came and sat down
before Columbo, raised Four batteries, and playing continually with 12 pieces
of heavy Canon, ruined not only the houses but the works of the Town, and gave
a furious assault to the Fort Sancta Cruz, yet without success for they were
repulsed with considerable Loss. At the same time several other attacks were
carried on with great obstinacy, insomuch that at last the Dutch broke into the
City, where they found no less opposition, than without, most of them that
entered being either killed or wounded. At length they were repulsed in all
parts with the loss of near 1000 men. This discouraged not the Dutch who still
carried on their works with great diligence, raising new batteries and lodging
themselves upon the edge of the ditch. Then they fell to mining which the
besieged understanding, they countermined and drove them out of all their
subterraneous works. These losses made the Enemy alter their resolutions and
change the Siege into a blockade, whereupon the Governor turned out 300
persons that were not fit for Service, whereof about 200 escaped into the
Mountains. The Dutch having received considerable supplies, carry on their
works anew, and again fall to battering of the place incessantly. Ambassadors
from the King of Candia were conducted through the Enemies Camp into the City,
where they demanded it should be put into the hands of their Master. All the
answer they received was by thrusting them out of the gates. Though they showed
this resolution, the City began to be infected with the stench of the dead who
were not well buried, and Famine raged so violently that it was proved that
Mothers had eaten their own Children. Gerard Huld the Dutch General being
killed by a shot in the Head, the Governor of Gale, who succeeded him in that
Command, fearing least another General might come and rob him of the Honor of
taking the Place, carried on his Works, and plied his Batteries so briskly,
that several large Breaches were made. On the 7th. of May, 1656. he assaults
St. John's Bulwark, and carrying it, with the same heat enters a new Fort that
was raising; thence the Dutch venture to break into the Town* whence after a
long dispute they were beat out, and the Besieged following their Advantage,
recovered the Fort and Bulwark; yet fresh Enemies coming on, the Dutch again
made themselves masters of the latter, and lodged themselves therein. That
Night the Governor of the Town being informed that two Women had eaten their
own Children, caused them to be shot to pieces at the mouth of great Guns. Next
Day, seeing it impossible to maintain the Place, he called a Council, where it
was resolved to surrender. After some Debates, the Articles were agreed upon,
which were honorable to the Besieged, and in pursuance to them, the Governor
marched out with only 94 Officers and Soldiers, and 100 Townsmen. The
Hollanders committed all manner of Sacrilege in the Town, and without regard
to their Articles, plundered those few Townsmen and Soldiers that were left
alive. But from so infamous a Nation, nothing but Villainy can be expected. The
Count de Sarzedas, Viceroy of India dying, as was said before, upon opening
the Patents of Succession, it appeared that Emanuel Mascarenhas Homem, was to
fill his Place. Four Ships and one Caravel sailed this Year from Lisbon to
India.

Anno, 1656.
1. THE King's Distempers which had long molested him, No military Exploits of
moment this Year.
daily increased, yet he omitted not to apply himself to the Cares of the
Government. The War was still carried on with so little Vigor on both sides,
that nothing occurs this Year, but some few Incursions, more like Robberies
than military Exploits, and the consequence of them inconsiderable Skirmishes,
whereof so many have been already related in the foregoing Years, that to say
more of them, will only serve to nauseate and tire the Reader. This quiet was
general throughout all the Provinces of the Kingdom, and enabled them the
better to bear the Storm that ensued after the King's Death; for the Spaniards
then altering their measures, the following Years were full of Action;
considerable Armies appeared in the Field; Bloody Battles were fought* and the
Portugueses in the end, obtained glorious Victories.

2. Francis de Sousa Coutinho, Negotiations abroad.
continued still Ambassador at the French Court, and maintained the good
Correspondence that has always been betwixt that Crown and Portugal. The King
being desirous before his Death, to have his Ambassador admitted by the Pope,
ordered Francis de Sousa to go in that quality to Rome. He obeyed, and though
assisted by all the interest of France, and appearing with as great a Train as
any other Ambassador, could never obtain to be admitted as such by his
Holiness. Antony Raposo* who resided with the same Character in Holland, having
received a Letter from the Archduke Leopold, i^^^ting him to discover the
Secrets of his Master, upon pro^^^e of great Reward, sent the Letter to the
King. The Dutch, with the goods News of their Success in Ceylon, began to
forget their loss at Pernambuco, and consequently appeared more favorable to
Antony Raposo. Francis Ferreyra Rebello, who resided in England, after the
Ratification of the Peace, had no Business of moment. The Count de Atouguia
governed Brazil, much beloved and esteemed by the Inhabitants, for his
Generosity and good Conduct.

3. At the beginning of this Year D. Ferdinand de Menezes, The Count de
Ericeyra succeeds D. Roderick de Castro, in the Government of Tangier.
Count de Ericeyra, was sent Governor of Tangier. With him went 11 Caravels,
with recruits of Men and Horses, Clothes and Provisions for the Garrison. D.
Roderick de Castro, having put him into possession of the Government, departed,
and arrived again at Lisbon, with the 11 Caravels that carried the new
Governor. As soon as the Count had viewed the Garrison, he marched out against
the Moors, and having drawn them within the reach of his Entrenchments, where
he had placed his Foot, with some pieces of Canon, made a considerable
slaughter among them. In May, the English Fleet, under the command of Montague
and Blake, appeared before Tangier, and asked leave to water, which was granred
them; but they going ashore disorderly, some of them were killed by the Moors.
The Fleet being gone, the Count set out his Horse to burn the Corn the Moors
had sowed about Tangier, which was effectually performed; but the Moors
pressing hard upon those who had fired it, recovered the Cattle they were
driving to Tangier. Alexander de Sousa governed Mazagao, but that place affords
nothing but the usual skirmishes with the Moors. What happened in India was
related the last Year, and this furnishes nothing new, only two Ships sailed
thither this Year.

4. The King growing daily more and more infirm, The King's last Sickness and
Death.
and still continuing his Custom of Hunting once a Week, went out accordingly
on the 25th. of October, but feeling a great pain in his Side, returned home
before Noon. Some days were spent by the Physicians, in applying all sorts of
Medicines they thought proper, but his Distemper still increasing, he at length
made his Will, and received the Viaticum with great Resignation. Those few days
he lived after this Preparation, were spent in Devotions for the most part, and
the rest in giving advice to the Queen, the Princes, his Counselors, Generals
and others, who had any share in the Administration of the Government. At
length, on the 6th. of November, being Monday, having given all imaginable
Tokens of true Repentance and Christian Piety, he gave up the Ghost into the
Hands of his Redeemer. The King being dead, the Lord Chamberlain dressed him in
the Royal Robes, and laid him upon a Bed; the Bells throughout the City, and
the Tears of his Subjects, equally signifying the loss sustained by the
Kingdom. After noon the Council met, and opening his Will, found he appointed
the Queen Regent of the Kingdom, and Protectress of his Children, that the
Royal Chapel should be finished according to the Model by him begun; that the
Monastery of S. Clare, at Coimbra, should be finished. That several Pensions
should be given to Persons there named. That 2000 Cruzados should be
immediately distributed to poor Monasteries, and that his Body should be
interred in the Church of S. Vincent. All the while the Body lay in State in
the Guard Chamber of the Palace, the People thronged to see it. Thence it was
removed, attended by all the Officers of the Household, and Clergy of the whole
City, to the Church of S. Vincent, and there put* into the Tomb appointed for
it. King John was of a middle Stature, very handsome before he had the Small
Pox; his Hair fair, his Body gross, but strong. He hated gayety in Clothes, and
therefore was careless in his Dress, always an Enemy to new Fashions. His
Discourse was Witty and Pleasant, his Judgment sound, but affecting to have all
his Orders unblameable; he was often too slow in his Resolutions. He had but
one Wife, which was the Lady Luisa de Guzman, Daughter to the Duke of Medina
Sidonia. By her he had Issue, Theodosius, who dyed at Lisbon, His Wife and
Issue.
in the 19th. Year of his Age; Emanuel and Anne, who both dyed in their
Infancy, at Villa Viciosa, before their Father ascended the Throne. Alfonso,
who succeeded his Father, and was afterward deposed. Peter now reigning.
Joanna, who dyed at Lisbon, in the 16th. Year of her Age. And Catherine Queen
of England. One Bastard Daughter called Mary, who lived and dyed in the
Monastery of Carnide, near Lisbon. In this City, the King dyed upon Monday, the
26th. of November, in the Year 1656, at the age of 5^ Years and 7 Months,
whereof he was 26 Duke o^ Barcelos, 10 Duke of Braganza, and 16, King of
Portugal.

Anno, 1657.
AFter the death of the King, the Queen Dowager wh^ was also regent during the
minority of her Son, being a Woman of a haughty and active Spirit, presently
bent her thoughts upon making some considerable attempt on the Enemies
Frontiers, least they should imagine that the loss of their King had
discouraged the Portugueses, or dissipatated their Councils. To this effect,
and to gain her self a greater Reputation among her own People, she ordered the
Count de San Lorenzo, who then Commanded upon the Frontiers, with all secrecy
and expedition to attempt the surprising of the Fort of Barcarota, in which she
was informed there was but a small Garrison. At this time Francis Tutta-villa
Duke of St. German was General of the Spanish Frontiers, by birth he was an
Italian, and as to his person and experience a Soldier of known courage and
Conduct. He having private intelligence of the design covertly put 500 chosen
men into Barcarota, with orders to Stand upon their guard, that they might
surprise those who came to surprise them. The Portugueses a^temptin^ Barcarota
are repulsed with loss.
The Portuguese Forces, who knew nothing of this reinforcement, boldly making
up to the Fort before break of day, were on a sudden assaulted by the Spaniards
sallying furiously upon them, and they expecting no such reception were soon
put to flight, and a great number slain and taken prisoners. This rash and
fruitless attempt by which the Queen thought to have made herself terrible to
her Enemies, produced a quite contrary effect, for it only provoked his
Catholic Majesty to carry on the War against Portugal, with greater vigor
than had been done of late years. In order thereto the Spanish General the
Duke of St. German having been sent for to Madrid, and there fully empowered to
act, as he should find most expedient, returned to the Frontiers well furnished
with money, Arms, provisions, 20 pieces of Canon, and an Army of 13000 Foot,
and 4000 Horse. He was at first doubtful whether he should bend his Force
against Elvas, or Olivenza, but considering the damage received from the
frequent excursions of the garrison of the latter of these two places, he
resolved to attack it. Olivenza is seated in a plain almost a League from the
River Guadiana, and beset on all sides with hills that command it being within
Canon shot. The Fortifications of the place were after the modern manner
consisting of Nine bastions, two half Moons and two Forts, and was next to
Elvas the strongest place in Portugal. The Duke being come before the Town and
perceiving the Seige would be a work of time, The Duke of St. German the
Spanish General besieges Olivenza.
enclosed the whole place within his lines, possessing himself of the hills and
strengthening his lines with 21 redoubts, and four large places of Arms. Four
batteries were presently raised, which played with good success upon the Town,
but whatever they cast down in the day the besieged repaired by Night. After
which another was planted on the Monastery of St. Francis, which overtopping
the Walls slew many in the streets, till such time as a strong work was cast up
by the garrison, which covered that part of the Town. The trenches were
diligently carried on and many sallies made by the besieged. The Duke
perceiving the conquest of this place to be a work of great difficulty, thought
fit to reduce it by Art as well as Main-force. Having therefore suffered his
men to lie still several days, as if he intended to starve the Town, on a
sudden in the dead of Night, he assaulted the greater of the two Forts with his
whole power. The besieged being at first surprised and not knowing whither to
run, gave way (...) the Enemy, who thought themselves possessed of the Fort till
Emanuel de Saldanha the Governor of the Town, coming with fresh supplies
drove them out, and the Duke fearful of exposing his men sounded a retreat.
Twenty days after the Town was invested, the Count de St. Lorenzo came to the
relief of it, with an Army of 12000 Foot, and 3500 Horse. After being four days
on the Banks of the River, he moved nearer to the Enemy and planted a battery
against their works, but the Duke having raised also another, did such
Execution that he was glad to withdraw and return to his Camp near Jurumenha.
Three days he lay there, and then again drew near to Olivenza, to discover how
the Town might best be relieved, or at least to encourage the besieged by his
presence, to which purpose he sent several Messages to the Governor, The
Porguese general endeavors to draw away the Spanish Army from Olivenza by
giving a diversion.
with false promises of speedy relief. At length the Count seeing no possibility
of Forcing the Enemy without hazarding his whole Army, thought it better to
endeavor to draw them from the Seige by a diversion. In order to it he marched
to Badajoz, hoping to surprise that important place in the Night, by sending
3000 men who by the likeness of their habit and Language, might be admitted as
if sent from the Spanish Army. These being near the gate were discovered, and
the Garrison and Townsmen running to Arms were put to flight, after leaving
about 300 dead behind, besides several Officers of Note. This Enterprise
proving so unsuccessful, the Count de St. Lorenzo marched toward Albuquerque,
burning and destroying all the Country in hopes by that means to draw the
Spanish Army from Olivenza, and at last sits down before Valencia pressing that
place day and Night, but with great loss on his side, for it was no less
bravely defended by Sebastian Granero, the Governor an old Soldier of known
Valor. In the mean while the Duke of St. German had plied Olivenca so hotly
that the works of the place were all ruined, and the greater Fort almost
demolished by the mines he had sprung. Emanuel de Saldanha the Governor seeing
the ruin of his works; and that the Army which ought to have relieved him was
marched away, obtained a truce of the Duke conditioning to deliver up the place
if not relieved by a day appointed. The Count de St. Lorenzo having received
this advice before Valencia, immediately raised his Siege and marching first to
Portalegre came thence and encamped at Jurumenha, from which place he writ to
the Governor of Olivenza in hard Terms, commanding him at the peril of his
Life, to defend the place to the last extremity, and promising to come to his
relief as soon as he had received some recruits he expected. Saldanha the
Governor being sensible of his own weakness, and the vainness of the Counts
promises* resolved to perform the Articles he had agreed upon with the Spanish
General, and accordingly on the day appointed delivered up the Town to him,
marching out himself with about 2500 Foot and near 600 Horse. Not one Townsman
remained behind him, such was their hatred to the Spaniards. It was generally
agreed the Town could have held out some days longer, and the Governor being
accused of not having performed his duty, but to have made a hasty and
dishonorable surrender, was first kept prisoner at Lisbon; and afterward
banished the Kingdom for ever. The breaches of the Town being repaired and a
good Garrison put into the place, the Duke marched toward his Enemy, burning
and wasting all the Country before him, by this means intending to draw the
Count to a battle; but perceiving this nothing moved him, he sits down with his
Army before Moron. This Town is sea^ed upon the River Guadiana, secures the
passage of that River, and covers Olivenza. About the Town there was only an
old wall, but the Castle was of greater strength. The inhabitants terrifyed by
the fate of Olivenza, no sooner saw the Cannon begin to play upon their Walls
but they abandoned the Town, and retired into the Castle which was well
fortifyed. This success caused the Duke to alter his resolution of fighting,
and now he resolved to make himself Master of the Castle before he would come
to a battle. On the other side the Count de St. Lorenzo who before carefully
shunned hazarding his Army, seeing now the ill consequence of suffering the
Enemy to encroach so far upon him, was wholly bent upon engaging, but the River
being betwixt him and the Enemy who carefully guarded all the Fords, and some
Skirmishes being unsuccessfull to the Portugueses, still the general dreaded
to expose his whole Army to the fury of the Enemy, and of the River at once.
John Ferreira the Governor of the Castle being now sore pressed by the
besiegers, and no less by want of provisions, and seeing no likelihood of
releif, on the Eleventh day after the Castle was invested, Moron surrendered.
delivered it up: all the inhabitants marching out with the garrison. After
this success the Victorious Duke marched back to Badajoz, intending to return
and besiege Jurumenha, but the excessive heats made him defer that enterprise
for a more favorable Season. Nothing more of moment passed this year, but that
the Portugueses rased the Fort of Oliva, which before they had taken from the
Spaniards, as not tenable after the loss of Olivenza.

Anno, 1658.
QUeen Luisa a Woman naturally ambitious and haughty, The Queen prepares to
invade Castile.
was extremely perplexed to see her great designs against Spain miscarry, and
her Enemies triumphant in the taking of Olivenza, and daring of her Army the
last Summer. She feared the unconstant multitude, who always judge of things
according to the success, and when that fails immediately fly at the
government. To strike a Terror therefore into her Enemies and to still the
murmuring of the People, she resolved once more to carry the War into the
Borders of Castile. To this purpose she renewed the Alliance, concluded by the
late King, with France and England, and having sent to both for Supplies of
Men, caused 13000 Foot, and near 4000 Horse, to be speedily drawn together. The
command of these Forces she gave to John Mendez de Vasconcellos, an old
Soldier, who had served under the Catholic King in the low Countries. This
done, it was decreed in Council, in compliance to her Will, that Badajoz should
be Besieged, because that Place if taken, would add much Reputation to her
Government, and would be as a Bridle upon the Spanish Garrison in Olivenza. The
Duke of St. German, who was then at Badajoz, having by his Spies, received
Intelligence of these great Preparations and the design of them, immediately
dispatched an Express to acquaint D. Luis de Haro, the prime Minister of Spain
therewith; as also to inform him of the weakness of the Garrison of Badajoz,
and the ill posture of defense of the Place. Whilst Relief was expected, he
lost no time, but drew together all the Forces he could, and gathered such
stores of Ammunition and Provisions, as the time and his Exigencies would
permit. Few days were passed, before the Portuguese Army appeared on the
further side of the River Guadiana, near which Badajoz is seated. The River in
Summer, is fordable in many Places, and is joined to the Town by a good
Stone Bridge, at the Foot whereof, is the strong Fort of St. Christophers. On
the top of the Hill, on whose side the Town lies, stands the Castle; but the
Walls of the Town were at this time decayed and unfit for Defense. The Duke not
being as yet provided for a Siege, sent out his Horse to give some stop to the
Enemies sudden approach. The Portuguese Army lays Siege to Fort St. Christopher
near Badajoz.
But the Portuguese General, who ought to have immediately past the River, and
invested the Town then unprovided, missed his Opportunity, by setting down
before the Fort of St. Christopher. This Fort is seated on a Hill, on the
further Bank of the River from the Town, and about a Musket shot from the
City; being a regular Fortification after the modern manner. D. Ventura de
Tarragona General of the Artillery, commanded in the Fort. The Portugueses
immediately possessed themselves of two Hills, on each of which there was a
small redoubt, on which they planted their Cannon, and thence battered the
Fort. Next day they opened their Trenches, and carried them on with great
Application; the Besieged on their side, doing all that could be expected for
their Defense, in which they made many vigorous Sallies; in one whereof, after
a hot Dispute, they drove the Besiegers before them with much Slaughter, and
destroyed their Works. However, the Besieged soon repaired the Works, and began
to press the place, which obliged the Duke of St. German to send in all haste
for two Regiments that were in Andaluzia, one of Spaniards, commanded by the
Marquess of Lancarote; the other of Irish, under the commnnd of Colonel Walter
Dungan, who was afterward Earl of Limerick. These two Regiments, the Spanish
General had decreed should relieve the Fort, which began to be distressed; but
the Portuguese had appointed 6000 chosen Men to be always in readiness to
oppose such Attempts, and had broke the Line of Communication betwixt the Foot
of the Bridge and the Fort, by which supplies used to come from the Town, so
that this same was now an Obstacle against those that were to succor the
Besieged. Thus the Fort was reduced to the last Extremity. This moved the
Spanish General, to order a Spanish Major, with two Captains and 160 Men to
attempt breaking through the Enemies Line, which they most resolutely
performed, and got into the Fort. No sooner were they entered, but D. Ventura
the Governor, commanded them to attack the Besiegers in the redoubt they had
possessed themselves of; but this answered not their former Success, for being
overpowered by the multitude of Enemies, the Major was killed, one of the
Captains shot through the Arm, and such of the Men as could escape, fled in
disorder to the Fort. Hereupon the Governor sent to acquaint the Duke that he
could not hold out 24 Hours, unless he was considerably reinforced, so as to be
able to remove the Besiegers from the Posts they had possessed themselves of.
Immediately the Duke ordered the Marquess of Lanzarote, with 800 of the best
Men, and some Volunteers to march to the Relief of the Fort, and to recover the
two redoubts. It was a desperate piece of Service, for such a handful of Men to
attempt against such a multitude yet they charged with such Fury, that having
brok^ through the Enemies Line, and being supported by (...) sally, from the
Fort, they gained the redoubts, and drove the Enemy from their Camp. This
Success cost the Marquess his Life; however, though the Portugueses twice
attempted to recover their loss, they were both times repulsed, and at last
forced to desist. John Mendoz de Vasconcellos the Portuguese General, The Siege
raised from before the Castle, and laid to Badajoz.
having spent a whole Month before this place without any Success, but with
great loss, and despairing of carrying it, resolved now at last to removed and
lay Siege to the Town. He had before sent over some Troops to invest (...)
place, and work upon the Lines, but now he marched over, and bent his whole
Force against it. The first considerable Action in this Siege, was the taking
of two Hills which the Spaniards had fortifyed and strongly garrisoned. John
Mendez attacked them with all his Forces, and after a sharp dispute, in which
he lost many Men, made himself master of them, the Defendants being all killed
or taken. Next ^e assaulted the Fort of St. Gabriel, which being but weakly
Manned, was easily carried. But he found not the reducing of the Fort of St.
Michael, a work of so much ease; for Colonel Dungan who commanded there,
defended it with extraordinary Bravery, till it was no longer tenable, and then
surrendered it upon Articles; when the Besiegers had lost 1800 Men before it,
and among them many Persons of note. Having made himself master of this Fort,
John Mendez finished his Lines, encompassing the whole Town with them, which
before the reduction of these Forts he could not do. Then he began to batter
the Place, to cast in Bombs, and to press the Besieged on all sides. Within the
Town much harm was done by the Enemies shot; but scarcity of Provisions, and
Diseases proceeding from ill Food, were more terrible then all other Dangers,
and now no hope remained, but in the relief they expected from without. The
News of this Siege being brought to Madrid, highly incensed the multitude, and
perplexed the Council, in which at length it was decreed, that D. Luis de Haro,
the King's Favorite and prime Minister of State, should march in Person with
all the Forces he could gather to the relief of the Town. The Spanish Army
advances to relieve Badajoz.
Accordingly he immediately set forward with a gallant train of Volunteers, and
came to Merida, where the Rendesvouz of the Army was appointed. His Army
consisted of 12000 Foot, and 3500 Horse. The Duke of St. German being informed
of D. Luis's Arrival at Merida, resolved to meet him at that place, and having
in order to it forced the Lines of the Besiegers he broke through with 1000
Horse, and arrived safe (...) Merida. Thence the Spanish Army marched with a^
possible Speed to the relief of the Besieged, but the Portuguese General, not
thinking it prudent to expos^ his Army, now much diminished and harrassed to
the Enemy, who came fresh into the Field, drew off in the Night, and retired
hastily into Portugal. D. Luis de H^ro the next day, entered the Town in
triumphant manner.

Having given the necessary Orders for repairing the Damage done by the Enemy,
D. Luis marched with his Army, now increased to 13000 Foot, and near 6000
Horse, into the Frontiers of Portugal, burning and destroying all where he
came, as he did the Town and Castle of Villa Buim. Thence, though contrary to
the advice of the Duke of St. German, because Winter drew on, he marched to
Elvas, and laid Siege to that place. The Town is seated on a Hill of difficult
Ascent, and was then under the Government of Sancho Manuel, (...) resolute and
fortunate Commander. The first attem^^ of the Spaniards, was upon the Monastery
of St. Francis standing within Musket shot of the Town, which though well
defended, they made themselves masters of as also of the Church of
Santangracia, seated on a Hil^ without the Town. This done, they fell to work
upon their Lines, and took their Posts about the Town. Nothing was omitted by
the Governor that might conduce to a vigorous Defense; but the Besiegers by
degrees, having cut off all their Communication abroad* and possessed
themselves of all advantageous Posts, the place was no longer in a posture to
hold out long, had it not been speedily relieved. In order to it, all the
Garrisons were drained, and the Portuguese Army rendesvouzed at Estremoz, under
the command of the Count de Castagneda. Here the Count received Advice from the
Governor of Elvas, that his Garrison was extremely weakened through Want,
Sickness, and continual Labor, for which Reason he should be obliged to
surrender, unless speedily succored. Upon this Advice the Count de Castagneda
set forward with 12000 disciplined Foot, and 3500 Horse, besides a confused
multitude of all sorts of Rabble that followed the Army as Volunteers. With
this Force he came and drew up before the Hill of Santangracia, whither also
the Duke of St. German drew up the best part of the Troops to receive him. In
this posture both parties continued all that Night. By break of day the
Portugueses began to advance toward the Lines, and made their first effort
upon the quarter where Nicholas of Cordova commanded, the fight was obstinate
for a considerable space, and the Portugueses were twice forced to give back.
Mean while the Besieged making a furious Sally, The Battle of Elvas.
endeavored to ruin their Enemies Works, that they might open themselves a
passage to their Army. Thus the Spaniards* who were the lesser Number, being
charged in Front and Rear, made a desperate and bloody Fight, till their right
Wing of Horse being overpowered, was put to flight. The Duke of St. German
seeing the Foot left naked on that side, came himself to their Succor, with a
party of chosen Horse. Hence rushing furiously upon his Enemy, he received a
shot in the Head, which made him fast from his Horse. This accident of the
Generals who was esteemed dead, so discouraged the Spaniards, The Spaniards
defeated.
that they presently gave way on all sides, yet so that they carried off their
General. In the mean while the Portugueses meeting no opposition, cleared their
passage to the Town. Roderick Moxica who was Major General, and next in command
to the Duke of St. German, lying at this time at his post near the River
Cailla, fortifyed himself, and received all that fled from the Battle, still
skirmishing with the Enemy till Night, when he drew off, and saved the
remainder of the Spanish Army. For the Count de Castaneda satisfied with having
relieved the place, thought not fit to hazard any more by pursuing the Enemy.
Of the Spaniards, above 2000 were killed, as many wounded, but very few ^^ken.
On the Portuguese side, about 1000 fell. De Luis de Haro, who had been a
spectator of the fight, at a distance, seeing all lost, made his way to
Badajoz. Thus ended this present Year.

Anno, 1659, and 1660.
AFter the mighty efforts of the last Year, both parties being exhausted and
wearied, No Warlike exploits for two Years.
as if it had been by mutual consent, kept themselves so quiet, that these two
Years do not furnish us any Military Action worth the writing. The Spaniards
had bent all their Thoughts upon concluding a Peace with France, that so they
might wholly apply themselves to the War with Portugal. To this effect a Treaty
was set on Foot, and the whole affair managed by the two prime Ministers,
Cardinal Mazarine for France, Peace betwixt France and Spain.
and D. Luis de Haro for Spain. After long debates, which belong not to this
History, a Peace was Concluded betwixt the two Crowns; the French renouncing
their League with Portugal, upon Condition that King should quit all claim to
the Crown, and be restored by the Spaniard to all his ancient Patrimony, as
Duke of Braganza. The Portuguese Ambassador, who attended the Cardinal, during
the whole time of the Treaty, had not failed to use his utmost endeavors, to
obstruct the whole Negotiation taking effect, or at least, to prevent his
Master's interest being abandoned. But the particular interest of France,
outweighed all that could be urged in behalf of an Ally; and the Cardinal
assured the Ambassador, that notwithstanding the Peace, his master's Interest
should not be forsaken for that the French would be in a better Condition to
support him, and could not want a pretense for so doing. This Promise of the
Cardinals proved not Vain, as will appear by the Sequel. Count Schomberg, an
experienced French Commander, was already in the Portuguese Service, and had
under him some French Troops, which were afterward increased to a greater
Number. The Spaniard immediately, after the Conclusion of the Peace with
France, began to apply himself to carry on the War against Portugal with all
his Force; and to that end, several old Regiments were brought over out of
Italy and Flanders. D. John of Austria, the King's Bastard Son, who had
commanded in the Low Countries* and in Catalonia, was appointed General, the
Duke o^ St. German his Lieutenant General, Alonso Poderico Major General, James
Cavallero, General of the Horse and Gaspar de Cueva General of the Artillery.
On the Portuguese side, whether through want of Intelligence of the Storm that
threatened, or through want of Means is uncertain, but the Warlike Preparations
were not Proportionable. Since these Years afford nothing material, let us pass
on to the next, wherein we shall meet with more Action.

Anno, 1661.
D. John of Austria, D. John of Austria with the Spanish Army, invades Portugal.
having received the Command of the Army, and finding all things provided
suitable to his Expectation, in the Spring entered the Frontiers of Portugal,
with 13000 Foot, and above 6000 Horse, a Force not so considerable for its
number, as for that they were all old tried Troops. The Count de Castaneda
General of the Portuguese Army, could scarce gather 10000 Foot, and 3000 Horse,
so that he was in no Condition to make head against the Enemy. Hereupon D. John
being master of the Field, marched his Army in sight of Campomayor, as if he
intended to have set down before it, but having put the place into a
Consternation, he suddenly wheeled off; in his way, took and destroyed the
small Town and Castle of Origuela, and then unexpectedly invested Aronches. He
takes Aronches.
This Town is seated upon the River Alegrete, contains about 500 Houses, its
chief Trade is Cloth, but at this time the Walls of it were ruinous, though it
had a Castle, which was of no Strength. No sooner was the Cannon planted, and
began to play, but the place surrendered upon Articles; all the Inhabitants out
of hatred to the Spaniards, retiring with what they could carry away. Here D.
John continued, till he had strongly repaired the old Works, and cast up new
ones, then having plundered all the Country about, without any Opposition, he
marched back the Army to Badajoz.

This loss stirred up the Portugueses to a rash Action, The Portuguese Horse
under Count Schomberg, routed near Badajoz.
for Count Schomberg, with 16 Squadrons of Horse, had the boldness to appear
about the Bridge of Badajoz, as it were provoking the whole Force of the
Spanish Army, which then lay in and about that place, to revenge this excess.
D. John immediately sent out D. John Pacheco, Lieutenant General of the Horse,
who attacked the Portugueses with a small handful of men at first, yet with
such resolution that they gained no advantage, till he was shot dead upon the
place, but then fresh Supplies still coming from the Town, at last the
Portugueses were overpowered, many of them slain, many taken, and the rest
Forced to save themselves by Flight. This success was the less pleasing to the
Spaniards, because of the Loss of D. John Pacheco, who was a person of tried
Valor and Conduct.

D. John being informed that much damage was done on the Frontiers of Castile,
D. John of Austria takes Alconchel.
by the excursions of the garrison of Alconchel, sent D. James Cavallero with
the best part of the Army to invest it, and himself followed soon after him.
Alconchel is near the River Guadiana, has a Castle and had been lately
fortifyed by the Portugueses. The Seige was carried on but coldly, either to
draw the Portugues Army to attempt the relief of the place, or else because the
inhabitants being divided in factions, it was not doubted but they must
speedily surrender. Nor was D. John deceived in his expectation, for the
Governor perceiving the heats within to increase, and the Enemy without to
threaten the utmost extremity if he proved obstinate; was forced to submit, and
accept of honorable conditions. The Fortifications were speedily repaired and
a Spanish Garrison put into the place. This done D. John returned to Badajoz
and put his Army into Winter Quarters.

Anno, 1662.
1. THe Last years losses, and the present preparations of the Spaniards, had
sufficiently alarmed Portugal, to oblige the Queen to use her utmost industry
to be in a condition to oppose her Enemy. In order to it the Treasury being
exhausted, heavy Taxes were imposed upon the People, which they did not pay
without much murmuring, Catherine Infanta of Portugal married to King Chapter the
II* of England.
and reluctance. To strengthen her self by foreign allyances, she had concluded
a match for her daughter the Princess Catherine with his Majesty Charles the
Second, King of Great Britain. The Queen had Entertained hopes of Marrying this
Princess to the King of France, but he having chosen the Infanta of Spain, her
next recourse was by that affinity, to secure the Friendship of the King of
England. The new Queens portion was a considerable Sum of Money, the City of
Tangier upon the mouth of the Streights in Barbary, and the Island of Bombain
in the East Indies. On the other side the King of England was to assist the
Portugueses with a body of Foot, to serve as auxiliaries under the Command of
Count Schomberg. The Earl of Sandwich with the Royal-Navy, conveyed the Queen
into England. Upon the News of this match and that Tangier was to be delivered
up to the English, the King of Spain once more attempted the fidelity of the
governor of that City D. Lewis de Almeida, endeavoring to persuade him rather
to betray the place to him upon hopes of a considerable Reward, than to put it
into the hands of the English; but the governor was not to be moved, who
rather fearing that the inhabitants and Garrison would never be brought to
consent, to their Kings orders of delivering up the place, as soon as the
English Fleet appeared in sight to take possession of it, he sent out the
greatest part of the garrison, and many of the inhabitants upon pretense to
repel the Moors, who appeared then in bodies about the Town, and whilst they
were abroad engaging and pursuing the Infidels, gave possession of the City to
the English.

2. Notwithstanding all the Queens care and diligence, the Spaniards were first
in the field, and much superior the Portugueses in Strength. D. John of
Austria burns and plunders the Country.
D. John of Austria took the field at the beginning of May with 13000 Foot, and
5000 Horse all old Troops. His first design was to lay Siege to Estremoz, but
the Count de Castaneda the Portugues General prevented him, by planting himself
before the place with his whole Army, which then consisted of 8000 Foot and
3000 Horse. Hereupon D. John turned away as if he intended to march directly to
Lisbon, which put that City into a consternation, and no less surprised the
Count de Castaneda fearing least the Capital of the kingdom should fall into
the hands of the Enemy; and had the Spanish Army held on their march, as they
began, in all likelihood they must have made themselves masters of it without
any opposition. But D. John spent his time in plundering and burning the
Country, and having made a halt near a brook called Zapateros, he sent then D.
James Cavallero with Two Regiments of Foot, and most of the Horse, to attack
the Town of Villabuim, a place considerable both for it is Riches and Strength,
nevertheless the Governor who was a French man, upon the first approach of the
Spaniards resolved to Surrender, having privately Articled with the Spanish
General, that for the saving of his Reputation, he might be permitted to fire
his Cannon for an hour without ball, that so he might be thought to have made
some defense. Yet the Surrender was not without blood, for some of the
inhabitants encouraged by a Parish Priest, He takes and raises Villabuim.
endeavored to make some opposition, but were soon quelled by the Spaniards.
The Town and Castle were raised down to the Ground, for a Terror to other
places. Hence the Army moved toward Villaviciosa, and having taken an express
that was going to Elvas and Jurumenha, to encourage those governors to defend
themselves courageously, upon promise of speedy relief D. John sent him back to
the Count de Castaneda to let him know he would be with him the next day. He
performed his word, but the Count who was much inferior to him in numbers,
kept himself close in his Camp under the Walls of Estremoz. D. John intending
to attack him in his Camp, was diswaded by the Duke of St. German, and marched
away to Borba, a place of small Strength, but that had a Castle, and the
governor Roderick, da Cunha being a desperate man, had persuaded the Townsmen
to join with the Garrison, to defend it. Such was his Folly or rashness, that
he reproached and fired upon the Trumpet that came to bring him the Summons to
Surrender, whereupon the Town was assaulted on all sides and taken. The
governor with a few men retired into the Castle, which having for a while
stood the shock of the Canon, and beginning now to give way to it is fury,
Acunha's heat being somewhat allayed, he sent out to beg he might be admitted
to conditions. No entreating could prevail with D. John, who being incensed,
would admit of nothing but that they should Surrender upon discretion, Borba
delivered to him.
which was accordingly done. The Soldiers were all made prisoners of War, the
Town plundered, and Burnt, the Castle Demolished, and da Cu^ha the Governor,
with Two Captains were strangle^ in the Marketplace.

3. Hence the Spanish Army directed its course to Jurumenha, Jurumenha beseiged
by D. John.
an ancient and noted Town seated upon a hil^ along the East side of it runs
the River Guadiana, on the West is a pleasant hilly Country for the most part
covered with Trees, Gardens and Vineyards. On the top of the hill over the Town
stands the Castle which is strong, and has 17 Towers. The Fortifications of the
Town were all New, and consisted of Five very large bastions, several half
Moons, a good ditch, and Trench, with other modern works. Emanuel Lobato Pinto
was at this time Governor of Jurumenha, the garrison consisted of 3000 men and
was plentifully stored with provisions, and all Sort of warlike-ammunition,
when the Enemy sat down before it. D. John posted his Army about the Town,
drew his lines, whereof the extremes ended at the River, which as has been
said, waters one side of the Town, and then opened his Trenches and began to
raise batteries. The line of circumvallation was carried on with the utmost
diligence, and fortifyed to perfection, least the Portugues Army, as was
expected, should find an opportunity of relieving the place. On the other side
the Governor omitted nothing, that might conduce to the security of his
garrison, yet so as that he always spared to expose his men, reserving them for
the last extremity. The Portugues General understanding how Jurumenha was
beset, sent thither Emanuel de Sequeira an able Commander, to assist the
Governor in defense of the place. He got in by a boat in the Night unperceived
by the Enemies Guards. D. John raised two strong Forts, one on each side of the
River, and betwixt them laid over a bridge of boats, by which he received
plentifully supplies from Olivenza, and with his Cannon cut off from the
besieged the use of the River. All things being disposed for an attack, he
ordered the Spaniards and Italians upon a signal given in two several places,
to attack the covered way. The Spaniards going on too precipitary after a long
fight, were repulsed and drove back to their Trenches with the Loss of many
men, among which were several Officers; but the Italians, whose Conduct was
better, with small loss lodged themselves on the counterscarp, and yet the next
day it being thought a work of too much difficulty to force the Town on that
side, they were ordered to quit the Post they had taken. Being moved thence,
they were ordered to join the Germans, who lay before the great bastion, which,
it was hoped, might with more ease be ruined, and four more pieces of Cannon
were there planted to batter it, which played with good success and began to
fill the ditch. In the mean while a French Ingenier sent from the Portugues
Camp to view the Spanish Lines being taken, discovered to D. John that the
Count de Castaneda had resolved to attack him in his works, having with him at
that time 13000 Foot and 3000 Horse, and only expecting the auxiliary English,
which according to the contract of marriage with his Majesty of Great Britain
would soon be with him. This intelligence caused D. John to fortify his Lines,
having by the advice of the Duke of St. German, resolved, to receive the Enemy
within them, though others advised to march out and meet them. Having disposed
all things for the reception of the Portugues General, to forward the Seige, he
orders a general assault to be given to all the works of the besieged, the
Italians and Germans without much difficulty lodged themselves in the
counterscarp, and the Spaniards upon whom lay the hottest Service, after four
hours fight with great slaughter on both sides, made themselves masters of two
great bastions, and all the space betwixt them; so that now the Town had no
other defense left it but it is bare wall. This was the condition of the place,
when the Count de Castaneda with the Portugues Army, came and encamped within a
League of the Town, but after several movements to discover the weakest part
of the Enemies works, finding it a matter of too great difficulty to Force
their Lines, he marched away, having before his departure sent a Letter to the
Governor, directing him to make the best conditions he could for his garrison,
for that it was impracticable to relieve him. All hopes of releif being Lost,
and the Town now reduced to extremity, the Governor upon a fresh Summons from
D. John, capitulated and delivered up the Town upon such Terms as he could
obtain. Thus after a months Seige D. John took possession of Jurumenha,
Jurumenha surrendered.
but void of inhabitants, who all marched away out of their hatred to the
Spaniards, yet well stored with provisions and Ammunition, though the Portugueses
had spoiled most of their Corn before they quitted the place. D. Ferdinand de
Escovedo, was left Governor there after the works had been sufficiently
repaired.

4. Having secured Jurumenha, D. John lost no time, but immediately marched
away toward V^^^^viciosa, where the Portugues Army then lay strongly
entrenched. (...) used all his endeavors to draw the^ to a battle, burning and
wasting all the Country about, but perceiving the Count de Casta^^da was
unmoved, he removed and planted himself betwixt Aveiro and Monforte, both which
places, though well Fortifyed, being terrifyed with the success of the Spanish
Arms, surrendered upon the First Summons. Both place being secured with good
garrisons he (...) thence without delay to Crato, a Town belonging to the
Knights of Malta, encompassed only with an old ruined wall, and a small Trench,
but very Rich and at this time filled with great Stores of Provisions. Though the
place was not Tenable, the Count de Castaneda* fearing to lose all those
stores, put out the former governor and sent to succeed him an old rash Major.
This man never regarding the weakness of the place, answered the summons sent
him by D. John with scorn and contempt, whereupon the Cannon began on all sides
to ruin the old walls, and from the higher grounds to beat down the houses and
kill the People in the Streets. The inhabitants and even the garrison Soldiers
perceiving themselves exposed to inevitable ruin through the fooll hardiness of
their new governor, being also headed by the old one, in a mutinous manner
beset his house and obliged him to send to beg conditions which when offered he
had slighted, He (...) Crato.
but it was now too late, D. John sought Revenge for the insolence of the
Foolish Governor and would not hearken to any Terms. In this deplorable
condition, the inhabitants sent out again two Antient-Priests, to move the
Spanish General to Compassion, but whilst they were pleading for the Town, the
Enemy without expecting any Command from their Officers, broke in and made
themselves Master of the place. D. John by his Authority took care that none
but such as were in Arms should be put to the Sword, no woman Ravished, nor no
Churches sacked. Through a mistake both the Governors were led to Execution,
till D. John being informed of the innocence of the former that had been laid
aside, caused him to be honorably dismissed, and the latter for his rashness
was Shot to Death in the Marketplace. The Town of Crato was plundered. and
burnt down to the Ground, and the Castle blown up. From Crato, the victorious
Army marched to Oguela, which at first stood out against the Summons sent in,
but soon after, whilst the Governor had sent out to treat of a Surrender, the
Spanish Soldiers as they had done at Crato attacked and entered the Place. Of
which dishonorable Action, when the Governor complained to D. John, he caused
all their Goods to be restored to the Inhabitants, and granted honorable
Conditions to them and to the Garrison. The Count de Sartinara was appointed
Governor of this place, and with him were left two Italian Regiments. After
which Actions, D. John put his Army into Quarters, and so ended the Affairs of
this Year.

Anno, 1663.
1. BOth Crowns were earnestly intent upon renewing the War this Year, King
Alfonso takes upon him the Government.
and nothing was omitted on either side, that seemed conducing to a vigorous
Campaign. King Alfonso being now at Age, to take upon him the Government of his
Kingdom, according to the custom of Portugal, had removed his Mother from the
public Administration of Affairs, and was therefore ambitious to begin his
Rule with some important Action, which might gain him Reputation both at Home
and Abroad. His first step hereto was to remove the prime Ministers and
Officers of the Kingdom, and to supply their places with others more suitable
to his own Inclination, or less offensive in the Eyes of the People, then the
former had been. He called to him the Count de Castaneda, who had of late
commanded the Portuguese Army, pretending he had need of his Counsel at Court,
but in reality to ease himself of a Man, who being preferred by the Queen, was
likely to adhere to her party, and she who was of a haughty proud Spirit, and
had been removed from the Government against her Will, now was forming a
Faction to support her Authority. D. Sancho Manuel, Count de Villaflor, who had
commanded in the Province of Beira, was made General of the Army, in the place
of the Couut de Castaneda. It was this D. Sancho Manuel who bravely defended
Elvas, when besieged by D. Luis de Haro. Denis de Melo, was appointed General
of the Horse, Luis de Meneses of the Artillery, Count Schomberg was continued
in the post of Camp-Master General, and now was the Custom first introduced
into Portugal, of using Major Generals, which they had not in their Armies
before. The Army also was considerably reinforced by the accession of the
English and French Auxiliaries. The Count de Villaflor ha^ing spent a few days
at Lisbon to receive Orders, took a Progress, and visited all the Garrisons of
his Province of Alentejo, giving the necessary Orders in all places.

2. D. John of Austria had thought to take the Field very early in the Spring,
but was disappointed by the la^ coming of the Spanish Regiments from Milan. As
soon as they arrived, he took a review of his Army, which he found to consist
of 15000 Foot, D. John of Austria in Portugal, with an Army of 21000 Men.
and about 6000 Horse. With these Forces he marched into the Frontiers of
Portugal the same way he had taken the year before, when he besieged Jurumenha.
His design was not known to any Man, except the Duke of St. German, but it was
given out he intended directly for Lisbon. At first, the Count de Villaflor was
in Confusion, not knowing what place this Storm would fall upon; but upon
second thoughts, seeing D. John still advance into the Country, he concluded
that Ebora was the place he aimed at, because he well knew it was that Generals
custom to attempt the conquest of Towns, that were of great Name and small
Strength, such as Ebora was. Being fixed in this his Opinion, he threw into
that City 3000 Foot, and about 1000 Horse, which with 5000 Men of the
Inhabitants able to bear Arms, he thought would so long defend the Town, till
he could be in a posture to relieve it. In the mean while the Spanish Army
advanced through the Country, burning and wasting all in their way, without
the least Opposition, till at last the Count de Villafor with a small Army on a
sudden fell in upon their Rear, and for the present, put all into some
Disorder; but D. John having given Orders for all to halt, and then brought his
Light Horse about to relieve those that were engaged in the Rear, he was forced
to draw off and retire to Estremoz with some loss. Three days after, the
Spanish Army encamped near Ebora. D. James Cavallero, the General of the Horse,
was sent before to secure all Posts about it; which done, the whole Army
followed, and took its Posts about the Town, at such time as they seized all
the Cattle, which was then too late to be drove from the Country about into the
place.

3. Ebora is one of the largest, and most ancient Citie^ Portugal, seated in a
large Plain. On the South, in prospect is terminated by beautiful and fruitful
Hills, Ebora, besieged by D. John.
a^ the foot whereof is the stately Monastery of the Carth^sians. On the North
of it runs a small River, which being drawn out into little Trenches,
fertilizes the Plain. About the Town is a Mud Wall, and at this time some other
small Works had been cast up, such as the present Exigency would permit. The
Water for the use of the City, is brought from the Neighboring Hills, upon a
continued row of Arches. This Aqueduct they thought to secure by a Fort, but
the Enemies sudden approach prevented them. Luis de Mesquita was now Governor
of the Town, a Man of noble Extraction, but no Soldier, whom the Garrison
disdaining to submit to, Emanuel de Miranda an old Commander, was substituted
in his Place. The Spanish Army having invested this place, the general Officers
were intent upon securing all the advantageous Posts. In the mean while the
Portuguese Horse made some Skirmishes to keep them off at a distance, but being
beaten back to the Town, the Besiegers in the pursuit, possessed themselves of
the Monastery of St. Antony, which they found but slenderly guarded, and lay
commodiously to offend the Town. But the Spaniards sped not so well at the
Carmelite Monastery, which lay betwixt that of St. Antony, and the City; for
after six Hours sharp dispute, they were forced to leave the besieged possessed
of it. This done, D. John distributed the Posts to his Army, but thought it
needless to entrench himself, not doubting to be master of so weak a place,
before the Portuguese General could gather a sufficient Force to attempt the
relief of it. However the Trenches were opened against the Town, and Batteries
raised, but the first that gained a post were the Italians, who with much
bravery stormed, and took the Monastery of the Carmelites, whence planting
their Cannon, they made a great havoc in the Town. The Spaniards ashamed to be
outdone by the Italians, carried on their Works with great diligence, and
having with much slaughter repulsed the Besieged, who sallyed upon them, made
themselves master of the Church of St. Dominick, which overlooking the Town,
they planted their Cannon upon it, to the great Damage of the Besieged. D.
John, seeing the miserable condition of the Place, sent another Summons,
offering honorable Conditions if they surrendered in time, which all the
Officers of the Garrisons, seeing no possibility of holding the Place, or
likelihood of Relief, thought it time to accept of, but Lewis de Sousa, Elect
Bishop of Porto, and Administrator of the Church of Ebora, a Man fitter for the
Army than the Church, crossed their design, raising Factions among the People
and Garrison, and by this means obstructed the surrender that and the following
day. The Clergy and Laiety, Women and Children flocked to the Works, and
endeavored to make up the Breaches, but all in Vain, for more was already
ruined than could be retrieved, and the continual Fire of the Enemies Cannon,
rendered all their efforts unsuccessful. This Fury being spent, and the People
coming to themselves, at length they capitulated, and delivered up the City
upon such Conditions as could be obtained, which were not very Honorable. On
the 9th. day, after it wa^ invested, Ebora delivered to D. John.
the City was surrendered. There marched out 2000 Foot, and 300 Horse of the
Garrison, who according to Articles were to be conducted into Castile, and
there to remain Prisoners of War during the Summer.

4. The News of the Siege of Ebora being brought to Lisbon, The Portuguese
General Count de Villaflor, ordered to relieve Ebora.
caused mighty commotions and tumults in that City, whereupon the Young King by
the advice of his Counsel, sent orders to the Count de Villaflor, to relieve
Evora at any rate, and at the same time commanded the Count de Castaneda, with
what Troops he had and could raise to suppress all Seditions in Lisbon. The
Count de Villaflor received his orders the very day that Evora was Surrendered
of which as yet he had no notice, and therefore having called a Council of War,
the advice of the Count Sabugal was followed, which was not to hazard a battle
at any disadvantage, but to cut off the Enemies Provisions. In order hereto,
the Army being now 12000 Foot, and 4000 Horse, and having received intelligence
of the Surrender of Evora, marched and encamped at Laondil where they had
plenty of Provisions and straightened the Enemy. In the mean while the News of
the Surrender of Evora, being brought to bon, A mutiny at Lisbon for the loss
of Ebora.
the multitude ran headlong into all Sorts of Licentiousness, and not only the
vulgar rabble appeared in the sedition, but great Numbers of the more
substantial sort joined with them. The First effort of their fury fell upon the
Archbishops Palace, which they plundered, burning and carrying away all that
was in it, the Archbishop himself having before made his escape to Court.
Thence they turned their rage against the Count of Castaneda, whose house they
ransacked as they had done the Archbishops, he himself being also fled; and
after him they exercised the same barbarity, toward the principal Magistrates
and other great Men of the City. Whilst this passed in the City, the King
consulted with the Archbishop, the Count de Castaneda and other great Men,
about the means of quelling this Sedition. The Count advised to fall upon the
raging Multitude, with such Forces, as were in the Town, whereof the greatest
part were Foreigners, and therefore would be faithful, in the performance of
their duty. But the Archbishop's opinion prevailed; which was to let the fury
of the multitude pass over, and then of themselves they would Return to their
Duty. The Rabble having raged all about the Tow^ came at last to the Kings
Palace, where many being weary, and coming to themselves began to slink away,
and at last the King Looking out of the Window, and telling them that his Army
now besieged those, who had before laid Siege to Evora, they all retired with
confusion to their houses, blaming one another, for what they had all done. No
Notice was for the present taken, of what had happened, but some time after,
several of the Ringleaders were punished under other pretenses.

5. During these Transactions, D. John. marches out of Ebora to give the
Portugueses battle.
D. John of Austria, repaired the Fortifications of Evora, and finding
Provisions began to grow short, having left a small garrison in the City,
marched out to give the Portugueses battle, though contrary to the advice of the
Duke of St. German, who was utterly against hazarding a battle, till the Forces
they daily expected from Castile were arrived, and for the subsistence of the
Army, advised the turning out of the inhabitants, upon whose stores the
Soldiers might live many days. The Portugues Army lay within half a League of
Evora, having a small River before it. Thither D. John marched thinking either
the Portuguese^ would give him battle upon equal Terms, or else that he should
remove them from their advantageous Posts, by 17 pieces of Canon which he
planted upon an Eminence. But the Count de Villaflor resolving not to quit his
Advantage, and the Canon which was ill planted, doing as much Execution among
his own, as among the Enemies men, D. John drew back and encamped without Canon
Shot of the River. Thus both Armies continued all Night ready for Action. At
break of Day, D. John moved in order of battle, to force the passage of the
River, where a bloody dispute ensued, till, after a considerable Loss on both
sides, the Portugueses standing their ground, the Spaniards who fought at great
disadvantage, were forced to give way, and retire into the plain of Ebora. D.
John discouraged at this repulse, put 3000 Foot, and 600 Horse, under the
Command of Francis Gattinara Count of Sartirane into Ebora, resolving to march
back into Castile without coming to a battle, if possible to avoid it by
marching over the Mountains. His first days march met with no obstruction,
because the Count de Villaflor was marched before, in order to choose an
advantageous Post to give battle in, where the Horse might be of small use, in
which the Spaniards were much Superior to him. Some there were, who advised to
march on all Night, but D. John thinking that would look too like flying,
refused that wholesome advice. In the Morning he was informed, that the
Portugues Army was at hand, being covered from him by the tops of the hills. It
was no time now to think of avoiding a battle, and therefore D. John drew up
his Army, and being possessed of a high hill, thought good to remove and make
himself master of two others that lay in the way to Estremoz. At the same time
the Portugueses not knowing any thing of the Enemies design, had resolved to
possess himself of the same place. Hereupon the Count de Villaflor advancing
with the Horse, fell upon the rear of the Spaniards, whose Horse were upon the
Plain, their Foot having already gained the hill. D. James Cavallero facing
about with his Horse, received the charge and made good his ground, so that the
Portugueses having spent half the day and gained no advantage, began now to
faint under the toil and heat, which D. John perceiving, he speedily possessed
himself of the two hills he aimed at, drew up his Horse in four bodies upon the
Plain, placed his baggage in their Rear, and planted his Canon upon the hills.
On the other side, the Portugueses seizes the hill which D. John had quitted,
looking upon it as part of Victory, The battle of Ebora.
to possess the ground the Enemy had designedly abandoned. About three hours
both Armies continued in these Posts, refreshing their wearied men, when D.
John thinking he had given them the slip, began to continue his march, but the
Count de Villaflor perceiving it, resolved not to suffer him to go off, without
hazarding a battle. The signal being given, he advances, and the Portugues Left
wing of Horse first charged the Right of the Spanish, who recieved them with
such Resolution, that the Fight continued a long time doubtful, till Emanuel
Freire one of the Portugues Generals of Horse wheeling about with some
Squadrons he had reserved, set upon the Enemies flank and broke through them,
whereupon the whole wing was soon put to flight, as was the reserve coming to
their relief, and the Left wing which was ordered to relieve the Right by
reason of the distance and badness of the way, could never be brought to
engage. Mean while Count Schomberg, who commanded the Portugues Foot, resolved
to attack the Enemy upon the hill. This being an Action rather rash than
valiant, the English auxiliaries undertook climbing the hill upon their hands
and feet, and though many of them fell, yet the greater part gained the top,
which encouraged three Regiments of Portugues Foot, to ascend a farther way
about which was much easier. This extravagant rashness, of the English, so
terrifyed the Spanish Foot, that they immediately without sense of shame betook
themselves to flight. In a moment their whole infantry was put to the rout,
notwithstanding D. John alighting from his Horse, performed all that man could
do to make them rally and face the Enemy. But now the victorious Portugues
Horse, coming in to second their Foot, there ensued a terrible slaughter, for
it was no longer a Fight. The Duke of St. German who had been sent before to
mark out a Camp, hearing the noise of the Canon, hasted back, and finding the
whole Army dispersed and routed, with much difficulty persuaded D. John to save
himself by flight. So both the Generals hasted away to Aronches* D. James
Mazacan whose squadron had not been broke, gathering as many of the Horse as he
could, made the last effort against the victors, but being overpowered, he was
forced to give way to the stronger side. D. John of Austria defeated.
Of the Spaniards were slain in this Fight about 4000, the wounded were more,
and above 3000 taken, and among them the Marquess del Carpio, Eldest Son to D.
Lewis de Haro. Of the Portugueses above 1000 were killed, and many wounded. All
the Enemies Canon, and baggage, as also D. John's most splendid Equipage was
taken.

6. The Prisoners taken in Fight were all sent to Lisbon, where the joy of the
multitude was as extravagant, as their rage had been for the loss of Evora. The
King therefore finding all was secure at home, sent those Troo^ ^he had kept at
Lisbon, to bridle the Rabble, under the Command of the Count de Castanheda, to
join the Count de Villaflor, The Count de Villaflor recovers Ebora.
with orders to lay Siege to Evora. These two Generals put their orders in
Execution, and f^^mally besieged that City, yet knowing no Enemy could come to
it is relief, forbore any assaults to spare their Men. The Count de Sartirane,
who as has been said, was made Governor of that City by the Spaniards,
defended it with much bravery, the Space of Eleven days, being ignorant what
was become of the Spanish Army, but being then informed of it is defeat by a
Letter from D. John, in which he ordered him to provide for the safety of his
garrison, he then Surrendered the place upon honorable conditions.

7. D. John having gathered the remains of his broken Army, D. John atttempts
Elvas, but is represed.
and received some recruits out of Gallicia, sent D. James Cavallero, with a
good body of Horse and Foot, to endeavor to Surprise Elvas, but the garrison
having taken the Alarm, he was repulsed, and forced to retire without effecting
any thing. To add to the misfortunes of the Spaniards, their great Magazine of
powder which they had laid up at Aronches, was accidentally blown up, which
ruined many of the new works they had made about the Town since they took it,
and killed above 2000 of the garrison and inhabitants.

8. Winter put not an end to Action, The Duke of Ossuna builds, a Fort not far
from Almeida.
for the Duke of Ossuna, who Commanded upon the Spanish Frontiers, about Cuidad
Rodrigo, though he could gather but a small Force, yet being ambitious of Fame,
he resolved to (...) a Royal-Fort, not far from Almeida the Portugues Frontier.
He marched to the place he had pitched upon with what strength he could make,
and began the work which was extremely difficult by reason of the
unseasonableness of the weather, and the danger from the Enemy, to oppose whom
he encamped before the work with all his Force to cover the Laborers. Peter
Jaques de Magallaens, who commanded upon those Frontiers, was then sick, and
Alfonso Furtado de Mendoza was substituted in his place. D John of Austria who
was now returned to Bajadoz from Court, where he had been to answer to what was
objected against him upon account of his late defeat, hearing of this
undertaking of the Duke de Ossuna, sent him large Supplies under the Command of
the Count Bouette, with which accession the Duke was now increased to about
7000 Fo^^ and about 2000 Horse. Not above a Canon shot from him lay the
Portugues Army, consisting of a like Force. Mendoza perceiving the Duke was not
to be drawn to a battle, his only design being to cover his work, and it being
a rashness to attack him in his Camp, thought the only way to draw him thence
would be to enter the borders of Castile, and put all things to Fire and Sword.
To this intent he sent out a party of Horse to Almeida, which the Duke
perceiving, charged and there (...) a ^ot dispute; the Portugueses giving way,
and drawing on the Enemy till the rest of their Forces came up with them. Thus
the Fight was protracted till the gross of both Bodies came to Engage, and then
the Spanish Horse gave ground, and had been utterly routed, had not the Count
de Bouette stood firm with his Troops, and given those that fled time to Rally.
But the Duke perceiving there was no likelihood of standing the shock of the
Portugueses, sent a Squadron of Horse to fall into their Camp, which they
understanding, drew back to secure their works, and the Spaniards design, being
no other than to discharge themselves of them, both parties as it were by
consent, returned to their Camps. The execution on both sides was equal, in all
about 800 Horse fell, but not so many Foot. This drawn battle was the last,
neither side being desirous too far to provoke the other. However the Duke
finished the Fort he had begun, into which he put a strong garrison, under the
Command of D. Gregorio Tapia. Thus ended the Action of this Year, with the Year
it self.

Anno, 1664.
1. NO sooner the Spring begun to open then the Portuguese Army to repair to
their general Rendesvouze at Estremoz. Being assembled to the number of 15000
Foot, and 4000 Horse, under the Command of the Count de Castanheda, they
marched into the Frontiers of Castile, with a Resolution to besiege Valencia de
Alcantara, a place strong by Nature, but not regularly fortifyed. In their way
they spent some days upon the Banks of the River Caia, about the Bridge of
Badajoz, showing themselves there, as it were to provoke the Enemy to Battle.
D. John of Austria, who was then in that City, had a sufficient Body of Horse,
but neither Foot enough, nor any store of Ammunition to encounter the
Portuguese, having lost all the foregoing Summer. However to do what the time
would permit; he caused all the Frontier Towns to be strongly Garrisoned, and
his Horse to attend the motions of the Portuguese Army, so as to keep them from
straying to waste the Country, but not to hazard an Engagement. The Count de
Castanhed^ besieges Va^lencia, de Acant^^^.
The Count after a few days, marched and invested Valencia. This Town is seated
upon a cragged and rocky Ground, by it runs a rapid Stream, and on its North
side is a large plain; it had no modern Fortification, as was said before,
however some new Works lately cast up, added to the Natural Situation of the
place, rendered it of a considerable Strength. Fabritius Rossa, an Italian of
known Valor and Conduct, was Governor of the Place, and had with him a
resolute Garrison of Spaniards and Italians. The Count de Castanheda,
perceiving the strength of the Place, and resolution of the Garrison, resolved
formally to besiege it, and to that purpose, possessing himself of the
Monastery of St. Francis, which was within Cannon shot of the Wall, planted
there his first Battery, and then raised several others in convenient Places.
Mean while D. John of Austria, being in care for the Town, sent D. James Correa
with all the Horse, either to attempt putting some Succor into the Town, if he
found an Opportunity, or at least by his Presence, to encourage the Defendants.
Correa having marched up to the Portuguese Lines, and finding them in a posture
to receive him, attempted nothing, but wheeled off again, and marched back till
Night over-took him. Then having ordered his Troops to halt, he sent out Count
Bouette with a Party, to bring in some Provisions for his wearyed Men. The
Count being departed, a sudden cloud of Dust which arose, being driven by the
strength of the Wind, so terrified the Spaniards, who imagined the whole
Portuguese Army was coming upon them, that they dispersed and fled about all
the Hills, casting away their Arms, and leaving their Baggage, so that all
their Commander James Correa could do, was not of any effect to bring them
again into a Body. Count Bouette returning with the Provisions he had gathered,
found only the scattered Baggage, and marks of their flight, whereupon he went
after, and having overtaken them in the Morning, they returned together with
dishonor to Badajoz. But the Count de Castanheda making use of his time, and
having now made several Breaches in the Walls fit for an assault, sent to
summons the Governor to surrender in time, since all hope of Relief was
vanished, and the place was in no condition to hold out. The Governor to gain
time, entered upon a Treaty, but proposed such high Terms that they were
scornfully rejected by the Portugues, and immediately the Batteries were
renewed with more fierceness than before. Then followed a furious Assault,
which the besieged stood with such undaunte Resolution, that after a great
slaughter on both sides, the Portugueses were compelled to give it over. This
repulse moved the Count to carry on his Works more deliberately, and endeavor
to spare the Blood of his Soldiers. But it was not long before Ammunition began
to grow scarce in the Town, which obliged the Governor to hearken to a
Capitulation offered him by the Portuguese, for fear least they becoming
sensible of his want, should afterward impose harder Conditions upon him.
However, though the Proposal was most grateful, yet he carried himself very
high, and would not seem to comply, but upon powerful Arguments and
Persuasions. At length, after much debate, it was concluded, Valencia taken by
the Portuguese General.
that besides all other Honorable Conditions, the Governor should be allowed
to send to D. John of Austria for Relief, and that if he were not then
relieved, he should surrender the Town. In the mean while all Hostilities were
to cease, and a Messenger having brought this account to D. John, he sent D.
James Correa with 3000 Foot, and what Horse he had to attempt to succor the
Town, but he being much inferior in all respects to the Besiegers, thought not
fit to expose his small Forces to certain Destruction. After the expiration of
the four Days, the Governor delivered up the Place, marching out with his
Garrison upon as hono^^^le Conditions, as he could himself demand.

2. Whilst D. John of Austria's Credit daily decreased on account of these many
losses, The Duke of Ossuna ass^ults Castle Rodrigo, and is repulsed.
the Duke of Ossuna thought it fit to raise his own Reputation. In order
hereto, he marched to Castle Rodrigo, a Portuguese Town, encompassed with an
old but strong Wall, and several Outworks; yet better secured by the Courage
and Experience of its Governor, John Ferreira, who had there in Garrison a
Regiment of tried Valor. This place the Duke hoped to have carried by Storm,
but having been several times beaten off with great loss; he sat down quietly
before it with 7000 Foot, sending about his Horse to gather Provisions. After a
few days lying still, as if he had no further design against the Place, he
marched off, that he might the better surprise the Garrison, for in the dead of
a dark Night, he returned again, attempted to scale the Walls, where the Watch
was negligently kept, yet being discovered, and the Town taking the Alarm, he
was beaten off, and no hope left of prevailing, either by an Assault, or
Surprise. Both these Designs failing, he resolved upon a formal Siege, and
accordingly raised his Batteries, whence he shook and ruined the Walls with his
heavy Cannon. Peter Jaques de Magallaens, who commanded the Portuguese Forces
in those Parts, and to whom the defense of that Garrison belonged, having
gathered all the Forces of that Province, marched with speed to its relief, and
posted himself on a Hill, opposite to the Town, so disposing his Troops that
the Enemy could not judge of their number, hoping thereby to move them to raise
the Siege, which fell out as he expected; for the Duke not being able to judge
of his Strength, thought not good to expose himself to uncertainties, and
therefore drew off from the Place. Peter Jaques having gained this Point,
resolved to pursue the Enemy, and force him to a Battle before he received the
Reinforcement he expected from D. John. It was no hard matter to draw the Duke
to a Battle, he being a Man that relied more upon Chance and Fortune, then
Prudence and Conduct; therefore as soon as he perceived the Portugueses were
not superior to him in number, he chose his Ground, and drew up his Men. Both
parties being disposed for the Fight, the Spaniards made the first ons^^
advancing hastily and Firing; but their Precipitation^ (...) them into
Disorder, which the Portugueses taking the advantage of, they fell in with
their Horse and Foot, and in a moment put them to the rout. The Duke overthrown
by Peter Jaques de Magallaens.
The Duke, who had rather play the part of a Soldier then a General, having in
person several times charged the Enemy, seeing himself almost abandoned by his
own People, and beset by his Adversaries, at last saved himself by Flight. Of
the Spaniards, about 2000 were killed, and near 500 taken; of the Portugueses,
800 were lost: All the Spaniards Baggage and Cannon, with the Duke's Equippage
were taken. This Action was performed about the beginning of the Summer;
afterward the Heats increasing, and both Parties being sufficiently worn and
tired, they retired into quarters of Refreshment, and nothing more happened
worth the relating; let us therefore pass on to the ensuing Year.

Anno, 1665.
1. WE are now drawing to the end of this tedious War, and though betwixt the
death of King John, and the Conclusion of the Peace, there happened several
things remarkable enough in the Civil Government; yet I have thought fit not to
interrupt the Series of Marshal Affairs now drawing to a Period, but rather to
put an end to the course of these extern contentions, and when I come to relate
the intestine Troubles and Confusions, then at once to sum up those Accidents
that preceded in order to them, that then the Reader may with the more ease to
his Memory, take first a view of the whole War, and next of the strange
Catastrophe that ensued, with all the previous Accidents tending to it.

2. Before the main Armies could take the Field, both parties ceased not to
infest their Enemies Frontiers with frequent Incursions. But for the most part,
these Actions were inconsiderable, A Body of Spanish Horse routed.
being rather like Robberies, then public Hostilities. The first Action of
moment we find this Year, was an incursion made by 1000 Portuguese Horse,
toward Badajoz, plundering and burning all the Country before them. Count
Marsini at this time, commanded on the Spanish Frontiers, who upon the news of
the Spoil made by the Portugueses, commanded D. James Correa General of the
Horse, with 500 Men to oppose the Enemy. Correa after representing the weakness
of that number, having received a check for his seasonable Advice, marched out.
The Portugueses were then dispersed, but hearing of the Approach of the Enemy,
assembled their Troops, and having laid part of them in Ambush, with the
remainder charged the Spaniards, who meeting less opposition then they had
expected, thought themselves secure of the Victory, till being encompassed by
those that rose out of the Ambush, most of them were either killed or taken. D.
James Correa, with those few that could escape, fled to Badajoz, not much
troubled at his loss, because he had been contrary to his Judgment and Advice,
sent upon the Action with so small a Force.

3. Whether it was that the Portugueses were resolved to stand upon the
Defensive, and therefore spared their Forces; The Marquess of Caracena General
of the Spaniards.
or that the Difficulties their new rising Kingdom labored under, would not
permit them to be so forward as the Enemy, is hard to determine; but certain it
is, the Spaniards were generally the first that took the Field. So this Year,
the Marquess of Caracena, who with a general Applause for his good Service in
Italy, and the Low Countries, had been appointed General for this War, having
taken a review of his Army, which he found to consist of 12000 Foot, and about
6500 Horse, marched into Portugal, with a full Resolution to besiege
Villaviciosa. This Town is the ancient Seat and Patrimony of the Dukes of
Braganza, and is properly called Villaviciosa, because of the pleasantness of
the Air, the fruitfulness of the Soil, the beauty of its Forests, and other
Delights wherewith that Territory abounds. The Town it self is seated on a high
Hill, and is divided into three parts. The first which is in the nature of a
Suburb, contains several Monasteries, many Inhabitants, and the stately House
of the Duke of Braganza. To this joins the Town, encompassed with an old Wall,
but little inhabited. Above all, stands the Castle, well enough fortifyed for
that time, having a Ditch, a covered Way, a Half Moon, and other Works.
Christopher Brito, was at this time Governor of the place, and had under him
several expert Commanders, and 1000 Garrison Soldiers, besides the Townsmen
that were fit to bear Arms. As soon as Brito understood the Enemy advanced
toward him, he secured and strengthened three strong Posts without the Walls,
viz. the Duke of Braganza's House, which was built like a Castle; The Marquess
of Caracena, besieges Villaviciosa.
the Fort of St. Benedict, and the Gate called No. Eighteen Companies of
Spanish Musketeers immediately assaulted these three Posts at the same time
with much Bravery, but they were all three with no less Valor made good by the
Defendants. However, Brito considering those places were too far remote from
the Town, to be kept without great hazard of weakening his main Strength, drew
off his Men the Night following, and abandoned them. As soon as Day appeared,
the Spaniards commanded by Roderick Moxica, entered the Houses next to the Town,
without any Opposition, all that were able to bear Arms, being withdrawn into
the Town. Here the Soldiers committed all the Outrages that could be expected
from the cruellest Enemy, sparing neither Sex nor Age; ravishing Women, and
profaning even the Churches, till some religious Men who had made their
Escape, giving an account of these barbarous Proceedings to the Marquess of
Carazena, he took Order to cure this Licentiousness of the Soldiers. Being thus
possessed of the Suburb, the Marquess planted his Cannon against the Town, but
being impatient of delay, he assaulted the Wall with Scaling Ladders, and at
the same time applied a Petard to one of the Gates, yet all in Vain, for he met
with such vigorous Resistance, that he was compelled to draw off his Men. Next
he applied himself to undermining, but the Earth being unfit, this Work proved
more prejudicial to him than to the Besieged. At last, having made some
Breaches in the Walls, the Italian Foot were ordered to mount them, which they
performed with as much Gallantry as could be imagined, but those who to divert
the Besieged, were to Scale the Walls, being easily repulsed with great Loss,
by reason their Ladders were too short, and all the Strength of the besieged
making good the breaches, all that the Italians could do was to lodge
themselves under the Walls. In the Mean while the Spaniards who besieged the
Castle were not Idle, but having battered it gave a most furious assault though
with no better success than the Italians had done, yet with greater slaughter
on both sides. In this Action Brito the Governor received three wounds, and
lost several Officers and Soldiers of good Note. After these repulses, the
Marquess proceeded cautiously, yet never ceasing to batter the works with his
Cannon. At length receiving intelligence that the Portugues Army was upon it is
march from Estremoz to relieve the place, least he should find his Forces
divided betwixt the Town and the Castle, he resolved to bend his whole strength
against the Town and to leave the Castle for another time. However least the
besieged should have the opportunity of relieving the Town from the Castle, he
commanded the Spanish Foot to attack the palisade of the Castle, whilst the
Italians gave the General assault to the Town. This Action was very hot, both
parties being obstinately set down not to give way, but at last Valor must
give place to number, and the Italians having gained the tops of the Walls and
breaches, such of the defendants as escaped were forced to retire into the
Castle: Nothing being now left the besieged but the Castle, the Marquess sent
to Summons the Governor to Surrender, threatening the danger of delay, who
nevertheless sent the messenger back with a very slight answer. The Marquess
being now wholly intent upon taking the Castle, raifed a battery against it
upon the top of the Church, dedicated to the Conception of our Blessed-Lady.

4. Whilst the Castle was thus pressed by the Spaniards, the Count Castanheda
General of the Portugues Army, The Count de Castanheda the Portugueses General,
advances to relieve Villaviciosa.
advancing to its relief, sent Francis Carneiro a Captain of Foot, with only
two Soldiers, who with an unparallelled boldness rode through the besiegers, to
give the governor an account of the approaching relief, and the two Soldiers
with the same bravery and success, returned to their General with the News of
what they had done. In the next place, the Count called a Council of War, to
consult whether it were fit to hazard a battle, where it was unanimously
decreed to Fight the Enemy. The Count being joyful at this universal agreement,
sent presently a Tr^mpeter, to advertise the Marquess of Carazena of his
approach, and to let him know now pleasing it was to him to give battle to so
great a General. The Marquess looked upon this message only as a bravado, and
sent back an answer accordingly, then calling a Council of War, after sundry
opinions had been heard, the Marquess his opinion prevailed which was to give
the Enemy battle. This done he made choice of a Plain below the Castle, whether
he marched with his Army, leaving 1500 Foot, which he judged a sufficient
strength to keep in the besieged.

5. Near to Villaviciosa is a Plain commonly called the Plain of Montesclaros,
The Battle of Montesclaros.
encompassed about with Hills and Rocky cliffs, but pleasant and diversifyed
with Trees and Vineyards, and full of ditches and other impediments to Armies.
Into this Plain, the Portugueses came first leading 16000 Foot, and 6000 Horse.
The Spaniard was much weaker, having lost many men in the siege besides those
he had left at the Castle. The Marquess of Carazena knowing the nearer the
Enemy drew to him, the more advantageous the ground was for him, because there
was not Room to spread abroad, he caused his men to possess themselves of that
ground, his Foot stretched out, keeping the side of the Mountain, and his Horse
marching in the Plain on the Left. This his celerity did not a little startle
the Count of Castanhena, for that his Foot and Artillery were not as yet come
up, and he feared to be Forced to engage before they could reach him, but Count
Schomberg upon advice from him, hastening their march, delivered him from this
perplexity. The Marquess drew up his Foot in two Lines, the Horse because the
ground would allow no more Front were drawn up in five, the Spanish Horse had
the Right wing, the Foreigners the Left. In the Portugues Army, almost all the
Horse were on the Right, and the Foot on the Left, the nature of the place not
allowing the Horse to be imbattled on both wings, yet among the Horse were
disposed some Companies of chosen Foot. That wing which consisted only of Foot,
was in two Lines, yet all was so contrived that the Horse could speedily
relieve the Foot, or the Foot the Horse as occasion required. Things being in
this posture, after the Canon had played, The Marquess Commands Alexander
Prince of Parma, General of the Foreign Horse, to charge the Portugues Right
wing, which he performed with such Valor and fury, that he drove the first
Line of the Portugueses in great disorder upon their Rear. The Spaniards having
in the pursuit broke their Ranks, fell in upon the pikes of the Foot, that had
been mixed with the Horse, which sorely galling them, quite changed the Face of
Affairs; for whilst they Labored to extricate themselves from that peril, the
Horse who before had fled, rallying charged them afresh. They that before
thought themselves victorious, being thus pressed on all sides began to give
way and fall into disorder: Then Count Rabata who Commanded the German Horse,
seeing them just ready to fly, rode up a in Rage, and upbraiding the cowardice
of his men, brought them on to the Charge afresh. The Prince of Parma also
rallying those that were dispersed, the battle was again renewed, and the
Portugueses charged more fiercely than at the first onset; insomuch that the
Spaniards prevailed driving their Enemies, and the Germans having made their
way through the Right, were falling in upon the Left wing. The Portugues
General perceiving the danger, sent Count Schomberg, the Count de St. Lorenco,
and other chief Officers, to give a check to the Enemy. These having gathered
the dispersed Troops, and drawn fresh succors from all sides, restored the
Fight, yet so that both wings were joined together, and so pressed the harder
upon the Spanish Troops, almost tired with the fatigue of the long Service.
Hereupon the Marquess of Carazena, who from a Hill viewed the Action and gave
orders, seeing his Left wing born down, sent orders to James Correa who
Commanded on the Right, either to come immediately to the relief of the Left,
or else by charging upon the Left of the Portugueses to draw them away to him.
Correa obeyed not his orders, whether through cowardice, or Treachery, or that
the ground would not permit, is uncertain. Thus the Italians and Germans being
forsaken by their Friends, and beset on all sides by their Enemies, were almost
all cut off, yet dyed not unrevenged, having made a great slaughter, and amidst
the multitude, slain many Officers of note, Count Schomberg narrowly escaping
when his Horse was killed under him. Now at length the Spanish Right wing came
on, after their Left was utterly lost, but it was a matter of much difficulty
to charge over the heaps of dead Bodies, and scattered Arms. Besides the Horse
were gauled by the scattering Companies of Foot, who with their Pikes,
discomposed and broke their Ranks, so that they were forced to wheel often, and
rather defend themselves, then offend their Enemies. At length being seconded
by their Foot, they gave such a violent Charge, that the Portugueses, who had
stood long to it before with various Fortune, fainting, began again to decline,
till their General, the Count of Castanheda seeing that was the last effort,
coming in with his Guards and what Troops he could gather, and acting the part
of a Soldier, as well as of a General, inspired new Courage into them, and
restored the Fight. In this Heat, when the Success stood doubtful, two things
concurred to bestow the Victory on the Portuguese. One was the taking of James
Correa, General of the Spanish Horse, the other, that the Swissers serving in
the Spanish Army, being discontented for want of their pay, went over to them.
The Spanish Horse dismayed at these two unexpected Accidents, immediately fell
off, the Portugueses pressing upon them, yet so as not being suffered to
pursue, the others rather retired then fled. Nothing remained now but the Foot,
who being beset, for that Count Schomberg had seized all the advantageous
Posts, The Spanish Army totally routed.
sought desperately, having scarce any hopes left to escape. The Fight had
lasted seven Hours, and both sides being tired, both the Spanish Horse and
Foot, because the Portuguese did not pursue, marched off with Speed, and began
to gather up such as had fled farther, so that they made a considerable Body.
Count Castanheda unwilling to suffer so great a Party to escape, sent
Vasconcellos and John de Silva with some Troops of Horse, who wheeling about a
Monastery, fell in with them, and stayed their March till the Count came up
with the rest of the Army. The Spaniards being thus enclosed without hope of
safety, either by fighting or flying, were finally overthrown and cut to
pieces. About 4000 Foot of several Nations, who before the Spaniards were
enclosed, had retired to a place of Strength, seeing the whole Army lost,
surrendered upon Discretion. Near 1000 more, who had fled to the Woods, were
either taken, or perished there. In all about 5000 of the Spaniards are
reported to have been killed, and not fewer taken, and of both sorts were many
Officers of Note. Nor was the Victory cheaply bought, above 2000 of the Victors
being slain, among which were several remarkable Persons. This was the decisive
Battle of Montesclaros, which finally settled the Crown upon the Head of the
new King of Portugal. The Marquess of Carazena seeing all lost, made his way to
Villaviciosa, where he ordered the Forces he had left there, to continue the
Siege, to rise from before the Place, least they should be overwhelmed by the
Victorious Army. They with all speed drew off their Artillery, and marching in
good Order, though often attacked by the Portugueses, made goo^ their Retreat,
first to Jurumenha, and thence to Badajoz, whither the small remainder of the
Army was fled. Thus the Marquess in his old Age, tarnished that Reputation he
had gained in his Youth.

6. This great Battle was the last Action of Note, King Philip of Spain's Death.
that concluded the War betwixt Spain and Portugal; for this Year, on the 17th.
of October, dyed Philip the IV. King of Spain, leaving that Crown to his Son
Charles II. then but four Years of Age, and the Government being in the Queen
his Mother, she soon after concluded a Peace with Portugal. Having now put an
end to the War, we shall in the few remaining Years, have occasion only to
treat of the Deposition of King Alphonso, which insued, and the tendencies to
it.

7. However, to the end that Narration may be no ways interrupted, though this
be not exactly the proper place, we will proceed without interruption to what
remains. Great debates had been at the Court of Madrid, after the death of King
Philip upon the subject of Peace or War. Not only the multitude, but even the
most considerable of the Nobility, considering the great Expense, the many
Losses, and the little Progress made in the War, were inclinable to Peace. The
Queen her self was for it, but politic seemed averse, the better to discover
the dispositions of the People. Nor would she seem to comply with their desires
alone, till the English Ambassador then Resident at Madrid, had signified to
her, that unless she would hearken to some Proposals of Peace, the King his
Master should be obliged to protect and defend his Brother the King of
Portugal, with all his Forces both by Sea and land. These Threats joined to the
general consent of her own Subjects, at length drew the Queen to assent to a
Treaty. By her the King of England was chosen Mediator, and Guarantee for the
Treaty and Peace that was to ensue. Commission was given to the Marquess del
Carpio, then a Prisoner at Lisbon, to make the Overtures, and Treat with full
Power. Not to enter into the tedious Transactions of the Treaty, or to ^^ll up
too much space with the Articles at large, the substance of them whereupon the
Peace was finally concluded was this. That both Kings should restore all Places
taken during the War, which either of them possessed, appertaining to the
jurisdiction of the other, except Ceuta, on the Coast of Africa, which the
Marquess del Carpio^ ^^served to his King. That all Confiscations made during
the War, should be restored by the Peace. That all Trade and Commerce should be
free betwixt the two Crowns, and the Portugueses in Spain to enjoy the same
Privileges as the English did; the Spaniards in Portugal the same they stood
possessed of in the time of King Sebastian. That all Prisoners on both sides be
set at liberty without Ransom. That the Portugueses have free passage through
all the Dominions of the Catholic King, either by Sea or Land. That all
Controversies arising on account of Trade, or otherwise, shall be amicably
composed betwixt the two Kings, without having recourse to Arms. That the King
of* Portugal, if he think fit, may be admitted into the League that is betwixt
his Catholic Majesty, and the King of Great Britain. All other points to
remain in the same Condition they were in during the Reign of King Sebastian.
That the King of England be Guarantee for these Articles concluded, and
Mediator in all such Differences as may happen to arise. Upon these Conditions
the Peace was concluded betwixt his Catholic Majesty, and the King of
Portugal, through the Interposition and Mediation of the King of Great Britain;
this was the end of that War, which had now continued 28 Years, and thus the
House of Braganza was established upon the Throne of Portugal.

The Conclusion of the History.
HAving now brought the War to this happy Conclusion, A word concerning the
following Sheets.
for the House of Braganza, it remains we should show into what Troubles and
Confusions they brought themselves to the endangering of the new gotten
Kingdom, to the ruin of their Head, the then King, to the perpetal in famy of
the disloyal Actors, and to the astonishment of all their Neighbors, who were
spectators of their monstrous proceedings. It will not suit with the brevity of
this History, to clear all the matters of lesser moment, which others have
handled at large, and for the most part with more Partiality, then solid Truth.
Let it suffice, that nothing shall be omitted which is worthy of Memory, and
might seem to influence, or promote those alterations that happened in the
State. The account of the War with Spain has been taken from the best Authors
that have treated thereof, but in the ensuing Discourse, I have not only
consulted Authors, who as was said before, are too Partial, or else wanted
Information; but having had the advantage of living a considerable time in
Portugal, I have received great Light into those Affairs from several Persons
of Prudence and Judgment, who were Eyewitnesses to all the Transactions. But
because it may be offensive to some to lay the Truth too naked, I shall abridge
the Relation as much as may be, giving all the respect to the Living, that the
Subject will bear without wronging the Dead. Nothing of Favor nor Affection
can draw my Pen to favor either side, as well in regard I am a Stranger to
both, as for that I can expect no Reward or Interest from those that are
deprest, but ought rather to mistrust being cried down by the prevalent
Faction. Whatever my Fortune is, I will not conceal the Truth, but to avoid all
Reflection, will barely relate the matter of fact, without discanting upon it.

King Alfonso in his Infancy, when he was but three Years of Age, The source of
King Alphonso's Misfortunes.
had been taken with a Palsy, which during those very tender Years, was hard
to be removed; but as he grew up in Strength, fit Remedies being applied, he
became perfectly cured, so that no sign of it remained, except some small
Contraction in his Right Hand. This fatal Palsy, may be said to have been the
very Source of all this unfortunate King's Calamities, for though, as has been
said, there was scarce any token of it left in him; yet his Enemies made their
use of it, to persuade the ignorant, that it had affected his Brain, and that
he was consequently become unfit for Government. To gain their slanders the
more Reputation, they never ceased to accuse him of false Crimes, and to
blacken in the most odious manner, his youthful Oversights and Extravagancies,
which in themselves were no more then what are daily seen in those raw Years,
where Power is joined to heat of Blood. The Nobility were averse to him,
because he was naturally vehement, and therefore they feared he would in time
crush their Pride, and make them sensible of that distance which ought to be
betwixt a Monarch and a Subject. His Mother a haughty Woman, became implacable,
because being always used to rule, she must against her Will resign up the
Power to him. His Queen it is most likely, bore more Affection to his Brother
then to him, as is visible by the Privacies that passed betwixt them, from her
first coming into the Kingdom. His Brother could not withstand the Temptation
of a Crown, which by stretching out his Hand might be secured, and by delaying
too long, might have slipped away for ever, if the King had either had Issue, or
outlived him. And in fine, the giddy multitude were ever lovers of Change, and
so artificially prepared by the horrid Reports daily spread against the King,
that many of them looked upon him no otherwise, then as a Monster, or a Fury,
for so was he represented to them, and the custom of Portugal is such, as their
Kings are but little seen by the People. The Count de Odemira Governor to the
young King. His (...).


King John dying, and his Queen entering upon the Regency, D. Francis de Faro,
Count of Odemira, was appointed Governor to the young King Alphonso, who being
a Man of excellent parts, and allied to the Blood Royal, omitted nothing that
might be conducing to the Improvement of his Charge, taking care that he should
be (...) in such learning, as became a Prince, and (...) into him such notions
of Politics, as his Age was capable (...) was not naturally addicted to study,
and therefore perhaps made not so great an Improvement, as his Governor
expected, who not considering his Age, would perhaps have him to be a Man
before his time, and therefore was much offended, that he would addict himself
to the Company of other Boys like himself, and follow the Sports used among
them. But generally speaking, the King's greatest delight was in violent
Exercises, and particularly in making parties of Boys, and seeing them fight.
Among the rest that used to divert him, was one Antony Conti de Vintimiglia,
the Son of a Genoese Merchant, but born at Lisbon, who being crafty above his
Years, by always applauding and furthering the King's Designs, so worked
himself into his Affection, that he took no Delight in any pastime without him.
Conti knew so well how to improve his Fortune; and the King's Favor, that at
length, he became by his continual attendance upon him, an Eyesore to the
Count de Odemira, and generally to all the Nobility, who were jealous that a
Man of mean extraction should have the Ear of their Prince, fearing he might in
time grow up so as to cope with their Grandeur. Hereupon the Queen joined her
Authority to that of the Count, to forbid the King's farther entertaining of
young Conti. He obeyed for a while, or at least saw him but by stealth, till at
length impatient to be curbed, he slighted their injunctions, and fell again to
his former familiarities with him. The Queen and Count who had no power to
constrain, seeing their advice rejected, were force to connive at this return
of their Familiarity, hoping that Time, or some Accident would change the
King's Inclination. The King being of Age to be able to mount a Horse, his
Governor instructed him carefully in that manly Exercise, as believing this
might conduce to draw him from other less honorable Pastimes, but it proved
not as he expected; For Alphonso took the advantage of the riding place, to
admit not only Conti, but also many others of the meanest sort, whom he
delighted to see wrestle, pitch the Bar, and Fight, not sparing at times to mix
himself among them. The Count not knowing what other course to take to break
the King of that Company, adventured one day to cast them all out of the Place
in the King's sight, reproaching and threatening them all, but particularly
Conti, to whom he denounced Death, if he were seen again with the King, who
though at that time he said nothing, yet he highly resented it, and afterward
was mindful of this Boldness of his Governor. The absence of Conti lasted not
long, for the King's Mind being wholly bent upon him, and some who thought to
make their Fortunes by flattery, representing this Separation as a Diminution
of the Royal Authority, he was soon recalled. Being to return to Court the more
to terrify his Enemies, he endeavored, and that successfully, to incline the
King to mischievous Sports, such as fighting of Mastives, Bulls and Horses, and
to flinging of Stones with Slings, which often flying at Rovers, did harm to
People at a distance. These accidents were the cause that no Murder, or other
Mischief, was committed in the City, but what was improved by his Enemies, as
if Countenanced by Alphonso. But now the Count de Odemira to draw him from
these unseemly Exercises, put him upon Fencing, in which he made no great
Improvement, because he would not observe Rule, but wholly put himself upon
cutting and thrusting with all his Force in such sort, as he often eluded Art
it self.

Within the same Palace with the King, lived his Brother Peter, The Queens
Ambition, and Differences betwixt the two Brothers.
and their Mother the Queen Regent, a Woman not so zealous for her Children, as
careful to preserve the power she had got, being used to rule, and disdaining
to part with it. The Infant, so all the Children of Kings are called, (except
the Heir to the Crown, who alone has the Title of Prince) and his Brother were
ever at Variance, nor was it possible to reconcile them, because the Elder
looked upon it as a Presumption in the younger, who blamed and condemned all
his Actions, and the younger being supported by his Mother and the great ones
of his Party, never ceased to give him fresh provocations. Antony Conti
perceiving the King was now at those Years, that the Charms of Beauty began to
work upon him, lost not this opportunity of securing himself in his Favor, but
by all possible means endeavored to heighten his Desire, and promote his
Pleasure. The Queen Mother observing that her Son, though he carried it with
great Dissimulation in respect to her, could not forbear casting many amorous
glances upon her ^adies, and fearing least the splendour of the Crown might
induce some of them to submit to his Will, sound no expedient to secure their
Honor, but by taking away all Opportunity. To this purpose, she appointed him
a separate Retinue, and a particular apartment in the Palace, which, though he
was of Age she had forbore doing before, least he should wrest the Government,
she was so unwilling to part with, out of her hands. This sudden change for
some time withheld Alphonso, always beset with the great men of the Kingdom,
from the mean company he before took delight in. But Conti fearing least if he
took to a solid deportment, his favor would soon decline, never ceased till he
drew him back from those grave formalities, to the practice of his former
violent and extravagant Exercises. It is worth the observing, that though in
Portugal it be one of the things the Nobility and Gentry most value themselves
upon, to ride at a Bull with a spear and strike him therewith, yet, one of the
great crimes objected against Alphonso, is that as he was riding in the Plain
beyond Tagus, he ran with his spear at a Bull, but so unfortunately, that his
Horse being gored he was cast to the ground and taken up for dead. His
delighting in unruly Horses, his liking to fierce Dogs and many other such
youthful excesses are urged against him and painted out as the blackest
infamies. Yet nothing has since been more improved to his disadvantage, or then
made a greater noise, Slanders cast upon the King.
than his attacking alone three men in a dark Night, whom for a considerable
space he set very hard, till Number prevailing he at length fell, having
received at their hands two wounds and was saved from farther peril by his
servants coming in. These very Actions alleged against him, prove that he was
not so Lamed with the Palsy, as was pretended by his adversaries. And as for
the extravagancy of quarrelling in the street, it is a fault so habitual to
Youth in all parts, that to object it to him, as a crime unpardonable, looks as
if indeed there were none real to accuse him of. But it is most certain that
what in the unfortunate is accounted Vice, in the fortunate passes for Virtue.
However after he was recovered of his wounds, the Council of State in the Name
of the Kingdom made a remonstrance to him, upbraiding him with things past and
desiring him for the future to have more regard to the safety of his Person.
Indeed as it proved a course piece of Court-ship to pray their King to spare
his Life that he might afterward End it miserably in imprisonment. This
remonstrance had such effect upon the King, that though he did not abandon Vice,
yet he changed those his fierce inclinations, for others more soft and secure,
such as are the intriegnes of Love, so that now his whole delight was in
Feasting and Women. He walked the streets of Lisbon at Night with a Train of
bravoes, ranging to lewd houses, and sometimes those that accompanied him
committed outrages upon such as they met: Neither was this all, for at length
even by day he would slip out or suffer women to be brought to him to the
Court. To divert him from these scandalous courses, his Mother with some of the
Nobility, contrived to fill his mind with business, giving him some part in the
administration of public Affairs, yet so as that the supreme Authority might
still remain in her hands. Thus Alphonso was brought to give audience with his
Mother, and to assist in Council, and was not at all averse to it, so that though
he did not quite forsake his vices, yet he had not so much leisure to indulge
them. Conti was not at all displeased at these proceedings, hoping this would
be the means for advancing his Fortune, and therefore lost no time or
opportunity, but plied the King with immoderate suits for himself and his
companions. The first thing the King asked for him of his Mother, was that he
might be admitted into the order of Knighthood called of Christ, which as she
durst not absolutely refuse for fear of provoking her Son, so she delayed
granting it, still putting him off from time to time with seveal excuses. Conti
perceiving her subtilty, sailed not to press the King, urging how unworthy his
grandeur it was to be refused that which was in his power to take, and by these
and other insinuations so fiered his mind, that at length he forced the Queen
to condescend to all that was asked for him. Being thus raised from the degree
of a Merchant to that of a Minister of State, not only the meaner sort made
application to him in their Suits, but even the Nobility had recourse to him in
matters of moment least his interest should thwart their designs, nay even the
Queen herself, though contrary to her haughty inclination, refused not to truckle
to his greatness, fearing she could not maintain her Authority by opposing him.
But he knowing all this Courtship was Feigned, used Art against Art. showing a
good countenance to all yet at the same time arming himself against all
Emergencies. To this purpose he began to make a party in the Court, introducing
instead of the experienced Nobility, all the youth into places of honor, and
preferring some of mean parentage; till the Queen, fearing least the increase
of his party should prove her downful, began openly to oppose him. Thus the
Court was divided into factions, some siding with the King, others with the
Queen, and others adhering to Neither. Conti ceased not to blow the Coals, but
his chief aim was to persuade the King to take upon himself the Government,
urging, as the truth was, Denis, Alphonso the 5th and Sebastian Kings of
Portugal took upon them the administration being yet younger than he. That
which most moved the King, was that his Mother falling sick at this time, the
whole Court was made to him, which gave him to understand what a diminution it
was to his splendour, and therefore he began to be inflamed with a desire of
absolute command. The Queen recovering and reasuming the care of the
government, found the King more intractable than he had been before, as being
wholly bent upon wresting the power from her by force, if she should refuse to
resign. This was a deadly stroke to her ambitious Spirit, which abhorred the
thought of falling from that height wherein she had upheld herself for so many
Years; nor could she be without some care for the Kingdom, if it were wholly
left at the disposal of a wilful and unexperienced Youth, beset with a crowd of
dangerous and unskilful favorites and Counselors. Being perplexed and
tormented with these thoughts, she resolved to set up her Younger Son Peter
against the King, The Queen sets up the Infant against the King.
that so he in hopes of attaining the Crown through her means might be wholly
at her devotion, and at the same time Alphonso fearing to lose his right might
be kept in awe. Therefore to prepare the Infant who of himself was willing
enough, she persuaded him he ought to be declared Prince and Heir to the Crown,
alleging that his Brother was impotent, and consequently the Kingdom must
devolve to him. For the Executing of this design, she tampered with all the
Nobility and Magistrates, intending to call the Cortes or Parliament to confirm
her resolution, but finding it a matter of greater difficulty than she had
expected, most men abhorring to set up two Brothers, as it were two King's, to
rend the Kingdom and destroy themselves, and thinking it a rashness to condemn
Alphonso as impotent before any proof were made of his Ability, she desisted
from the method, but not from the design. Her next practice then was to set out
the Infant in the most splendid apparel, to cause him to show himself often to
the People, to give him a Family composed of all such as were disaffected to
his Brother, and to put him into a house the best in Lisbon built by
Christopher de Moura Marquess of Castelrodrigo. Having thus set up the Infant
in opposition to his Brother, and secured him to herself, her next artifice was
to counterfeit a desire of quitting the regency and retiring into a Monastery
of Nuns. For this purpose she drew up a subtle writing intimating her pretended
desire, and yet so worded it that the great men and principal Ministers to whom
she sent it for their advice, soon saw into the depth of it, which was that she
desired to be, as it were, constrained to continue the Regency, yet so as she
must be drawn to condescend by the removal of Antony Conti and the rest of his
party from about the King. Those to whom the writing had been communicated
being all her creatures, The Council combine with the Queen.
and fearing least if she were suffered to abandon the government, they should
by the King be deprived of the preferments they enjoined, resolved not to
forsake her least they should be involved in her fall. Therefore by writing
they gave her to understand, that though she were resolved to lay down the
administration of the Kingdom, it was not yet time to do it, till she had
removed from the Person of the King, those that seduced and led him into ill
courses. Nothing could be more pleasing to the Queen than this answer so pat to
her purpose, since they had fulfilled all her wishes without obliging her to
express them. However that all might seem to be carried by the advice of the
Council, knowing they were all resolved to perform her will, she would have
nothing done but what should be there discussed and given under their hands.
The Council met accordingly, and, though some of the gravest among them opposed
the design, as too visible an affront to the King, yet it was carried, The
faction seize Conti the Kings favorite in the King's appartment and send him
to Brazil.
that Conti and his adherents should be seized, and sent into banishment
contrary to the will of the King, for this Council sat not to serve him, but
his Mother. In pursuance to this resolution, the Queen having secured the King
in her Lodgings upon pretense of business, the Duke of Cadaval with his Party
Entered the King's apartment, where Conti then was. He seeing a Throng and
suspecting some danger locked himself in, but the Duke without respect to the
Sacredness of the place, or to the Remonstrances of the Count de Castellomelhor
who would have diverted him from that Action, offered to break open the door,
whereupon Conti seeing no hopes of escaping, and the Count not able to relieve
him or acquaint the King, delivered himself up to the Duke upon promise of
Life. At the same time some some others of Conti's partisans were secured
partly in the palace and partly in the Town, all which were immediately put
aboard a Ship that lay ready to Sail in the River and sent away to Brazil. The
Queen being informed that all she had commanded was put in Execution, led the
King forth into the great Hall, whither she had assembled all the Nobility,
Ministers of State, and Magistrates of the City, the better to appease, and
terrify the King. Here a Remonstrance was made to him in the Name of the
Kingdom, full of grievous complaints against his Conduct, and against his
Favorites, whom to prevent any farther ill consequences they declared they had
been obliged to send into banishment. This done having kissed his hand they
departed. It was no small surprise to the King to be brought so unexpectedly
into that assembly, and therefore not rightly conceiving the drift of what had
been said, he began to ask the meaning of it. Garcia de Melo told him that to
satisfy the complaints of his People, they had sent Conti and his adherents
into banishment. He scarce believing they durst offer him such an indignity,
began loudly and in a rage to call upon Conti, and running to seek for him
threatened to follow him, wheresoever they had sent him. Melo told him his
search would be in vain for that he was now under Sail for Brazil, that as the
case stood he must have either parted with Conti or his Crown. At this answer
he seemed somewhat to compose himself. Then calling for Emanuel Antunes, who
only had escaped of all his former Favorites, he shut himself up with him and
the Count of Castellomelhor. These two gave him a full Relation of what had
passed, and here were laid the first Foundations of the Counts ensuing
greatness. After this meeting, the King appeared unconcerned at what had
happened, and rid according to custom that Afternoon, but he had learned to
Counterfeit, and had other thoughts within his breast than what appeared by his
countneance.

This mighty act of policy which the Queen had contrived to perpetuate her
Regency, Count Castelmelhor succeeds in the King's Favor.
was the very cause of her speedy falling from it. Count Castelmelhor, a Man
above exception for his Birth and Parts, had now succeeded in the Kings Favor,
in the place of Conti, and omitted not to encourage him in the resolution of
taking upon him the Government. Besides a young Lady belonging to the Queen,
for whom the King had a more then ordinary Affection, made him the more
earnest, discovering to him all his Mothers private Discourses. For the better
carrying on his Design, the King ordered the Count, whose waiting Week was
expired to wait on another, least one might succeed him, whom he could not so
well confide in. This done, he retired according to custom to Alcantara, a
House near Lisbon, carrying with him his Brother and a great Train. That same
day he returned to Lisbon, and visited his Mother, discoursing so lovingly with
her, that all resentment seemed to be passed, but on a sudden, without
acquainting her, he went back to Alcantara, accompanied only by the Count de
Castelmelhor, and the Count de Antouguia. From thence he dispersed Letters into
all parts of the Kingdom, to the Officers of the Army, and Governors of Towns,
acquainting them, that being now at Age, he had taken upon him the Government.
The King resolves to take the Government upon him.
Then he ordered all the Nobility and Ministers of State that were at Lisbon,
to repair to him to Alcantara. The Queen astonished at this News, and fearing
to be cast down from her Regency, assembles the Council of State, where it was
resolved that Emanuel Pacheco, should be placed upon the Road to stop all those
that should offer to repair to the King; that the Queen should write a Letter
to him in soft Terms, desiring him either to delay some time his taking the
Government upon him, or at least to admit her to bear a great part with him,
and that in case persuasions failed, she should then use Force to constrain
him. Accordingly Pacheco turned back those that were going to Alcantara; the
Guards, and all the Queens Adherents, were ordered to be ready in Arms to
support her, and a Letter was sent to the King from her, full of alluring and
soft, but all deceitful Expressions. But before the sending of the Letter, the
People of Lisbon perceiving that the Court armed against the King, began to run
into tumult for his Defense, fearing least any violence might be offered him.
This zeal of the Multitude was what humbled the Queen, and therefore seeing no
hope left of prevailing by open force, she had recourse to Artifice and
Entreaty, and therefore, as has been said, sent a submissive Letter by the
Bishop of Targa. In this Letter among other things, the Queen urged to have the
Cortes or Parliament called, that she might there resign the Government, but
the King and the Count perceiving this was only a contrivance to gain time, an
answer was sent her by the same Bishop. The purport of this Answer was, that
the King considering the great Burden of care that attended the Government,
was willing to ease his Mother, who had long labored under it, of that Toil,
and to take it upon himself. She now plainly perceiving that there was no
longer hope, either by Force or Art, of retaining the Government, resolved at
length to quit it, least it should be violently taken from her. However, she
wished it might be done in the Palace, that the World might believe it had
been freely resigned, and not to be forcibly extorted from her. Those who were
acquainted with her Subtilties, advised the King not to trust himself to her
Power, which made him delay some time at Alcantara. However, at length finding
himself secured on all sides, and the Queens Interest declining, since the
People of Lisbon had declared for him; he repaired to the Palace, where in the
presence of the Nobility, Ministers of State, and Magistrates of the City, She
is at length forced to resign.
the Queen delivered up the Seals into his Hands, which is the usual Ceremony
in Portugal, when a King takes upon him the Government. This Ceremony was
performed on the 23d. of June, 1662, the King then wanting but one Month of 19
Years of Age, whereas according to the ancient custom of Portugal, their Kings
were always reputed of Age at 14, and accordingly at those Years, the Regency
ought to cease.

The Queen Mother thus discharged of the care of Government, She pretends to
retire, but stays at Court in hopes to wrest the Power from her Son.
began again to talk of retiring, but that after such a manner, that no Body
believed she truly meant it. For first she talked of building a new Monastery,
but could never find out a convenient Place, then of erecting an Apartment for
her self, near some of the old ones, but none would admit her. And this it was
believed was her desire, only to protract time, and to continue in the Palace,
till some new emergency might again call her to the Government. But now all the
Court was made to the King, all the Nobility attended him, and there wanted not
crowds of Flatteers and Sycophants to fawn on him. His principal Ministers and
Favorites were the Counts of Castelmelhor, and Atouguia, and Sebastian Caesar
de Meneses. These managed all principal matters of State, and on their Counsel
he chiefly relied. His Enemies however never ceased to slander him, spreading
it abroad, that being wholly void of Sense, he only spoke such Words as they
put into his Mouth. Count Castelmelhor endeavoring to establish himself
absolutely in the King's Favor, eased him as much as was possible of the
public cares, indulging his Inclination to Horses, Arms, and even to Women,
but without any public Scandal. At this time the Count delivered out of
Prison, Henry Enriquez de Miranda, who had been confined by the Queen, and he
being now brought to Court, became one of the King's greatest Favorites, and
yet though he was raised to this Degree, there never happened the least
Disorder betwixt the Count of Castelmelhor and him. Much otherwise was it with
the Count of Atouguia, Caesar de Meneses, and Count Castelmelhor, but the
latter not thinking himself yet thoroughly established, would not attempt so
soon to cast them down. Count Castelmelhor rises,
At length having wholly gained the ascendant over the King, and having all
things as prime Minister at his disposal, he lodged himself in the Apartment
that had belonged to Prince Theodosius the King's eldest Brother. He only
wanted now some charge that might always keep him about the King's Person, and
there being none at that time vacant, he thought of one that of late had been
suppressed, or incorporated into that of the Secretary of State; in Portuguese
it is called Escrivao da Puridade, that is the private Secretary, This
employment he begged of the King, who readily granted it, and though the
Secretary of State insolently enough disputed it, caused him immediately to
settle him in the possession thereof. By this charge he also obtained the right
to a Seat in the Counsel of State. Being thus raised to the highest pitch of
Favor, he began to bestow preferments without measure upon all his Friends and
Adherents, and at the same time omitted not to crush and terrify his Enemies,
that the power of the one party, and the dread of the other might be a sure
stay to his greatness. Those that affronted the King in the Person of Conti
banished.
In the next place, he advised the King to show some resentment for the
Affronts done to his Person, during the Queen's Regency; as particularly in the
forcing away of Conti out of his Apartment, and other the like Insolences,
which if not punished, might draw him into contempt. In pursuance of this
Advice, the Duke of Cadaval, Garcia, and Emanuel de Melo, the Counts of Sour,
Pombeiro, Peter Vieira, Secretary of State, who had often audaciously reproved
the King, and some others, all guilty enough, were sent into Banishment.

This proceeding against so many persons of Note, though but an act of Justice,
The Queen Infant, and their party hold Consultations against the King.
ministered occasion to their partisans to revile anew the King and his
Government. And now the Queen seeing her self excluded from all public
Affairs, began again to cherish the Infant, and to hold frequent and private
Consultations with him, wherein it was always inculcated that the King was
stupid and unfit for Rule. Count Castelmelhor who was not ignorant of all their
Machinations, contrived all ways he could to separate them, but all in vain.
For the Infant building upon the notion of his Brothers Incapacity, had more
mind to be himself a King, then to be next to a King. Therefore he carried
himself with profound Dissimulation, studying all ways to elude the Arts of the
Favorite. But the Count seeing he could not otherwise prevail upon him to
desist from his Cabals, persuaded the King to change all his Servants, putting
in their places such as he could confide in, that so he should have the less
opportunity of carrying on his Designs. The next thing was to persuade the
Queen at length to retire from Court, as she had so often pretended to desire,
though by her proceedings it plainly appeared nothing was more distastful to
her than the thoughts of a private Life. Yet seeing the King so inclinable to
have her retire, she again has recourse to her Dissimulation, and sends to ask
leave to withdraw to some private House, because the Apartment she had begun to
build was not yet finished. The King's Answer was, that it became not her
Granedur to quit the Palace for a private House, but that if she were so
desirous of a retreat, she might cause more Diligence to be used in finishing
her Structure, which till then, had gone on very slowly. Soon after, Alfonso
being informed that his Mother never ceased to use all Arts to advance his
Brother Peter to the Throne, being terrifyed with the danger of his Crown,
which yet at last, by these same Practices, was ravished from him; he sent an
absolute Order for her to depart from the Palace. This positive command
pressing, and fearing to be forced away, she at length resolved to depart, and
accordingly on the 17th. of March, 1663, withdrew to the new Apartment she had
built at a small distance from Lisbon, being attended thither by the King, The
Queen at last forced to retire.
the Infant, and all the Nobility. The Queen Mother being thus removed, the
Infant seemed now wholly devoted to please the King, except in one only thing
which he knew to be offensive to him, and that was in frequently visiting his
Mother, and entertaining private Discourses with her. Nor was she wanting often
in public to warn him of the danger of this his assiduousness toward her,
whether she really meant it as dangerous to him, or rather did it artificially
to make the King the more odious, and procure themselves the greater
Commiseration. Thus with great difficulty, Queen Luisa was at the last not only
put out of the Regency, but even out of the Palace.

Alphonso, to whom the nearness of his Mother had been a curb, The King grows
more loose in his Life.
being now delivered from* that restraint, ran more licentiously into all the
Vices of Youth. Count Castelmelhor fearing a disorderly Life might hasten his
fall, in whose Ruin he must himself be involved, studied several means to
reclaim him, or at least to conceal his Extravagancies, but it is a work of
great difficulty to correct the vicious Inclinations of Youth, especially when
supported by the luster of a Crown. In short, his Vices were too visible to be
excused, but to lay to his Charge all the Villainies his Adversaries have
aspersed him withal, were too much to wrong his Memory; for it is certain, that
no insolence was committed during his Reign, which the malice of his Enemies
has not reproached him withal. However, so certainly it was, that the King
indulging his Appetites and Vicious desires, the whole burden of the
Government was in a manner devolved upon the three Favorites, that is, the
Counts of Castelmelhor, and Antouguia, and Sebastian Caesar de Meneses.
Castelmelhor had long meditated to overthrow the other two, but as long as the
Queen continued at Court durst not attempt it, least they having lost the King
should become an accession to and strengthen her party. Now she being removed,
there remained no other obstacle to the fulfilling his desire, and therefore by
often buzzing^ false informations into the King's Ears, he first caused the
Count de Atouguia to be expelled the Court and soon after to be banished the
City. None remained now to cope with him but Meneses, Conti recalled from
Brazil.
who to support himself persuaded the King to recall* Antony Conti from Brazil,
hoping that he being returned and restored to his former Favor, would not in
gratitude omit to stand by the man that had been the cause of bringing him back
from banishment. The Count could not be long ignorant of this practice, and
therefore immediately so worked the King, that Meneses was banished before
Antony Conti could arrive to support him. Soon after Conti arrives from Brazil,
the Ship that brought him being received into the port of Lisbon with sound of
Trumpets, firing of Cannon, and all other demonstrations of joy, as if it had
been the reception of some Sovereign Prince. Yet all this was but a glimmering
of happiness to Conti, for Count Castelmelhor having persuaded the King, that
as it was a Vindication of his Royal Authority to recall him from banishment,
whither he had been sent in contempt of Majesty, so to entertain him at Court
would only serve to provoke the Nobility, But banished the Court.
to whom the very name of Conti was odious, for these reasons without suffering
him to Land at Lisbon, he was sent away into the Country with express Command,
not to presume to come near the Court. Nevertheless to the End it might be
thought this exile was not the effect of his jealousy, but rather of his care
both for the safety of the King and Conti, he omitted not to caress him at that
distance, sending him frequent presents, and a considerable employment at Court
falling, he caused it to be conferred upon him though absent, and bestowed a Rich
Benefice upon John Conti Brother to Antony, who was in orders. Conti was not so
dull, but he could Easily see through these Artifices. Therefore he used all
his endeavors to obtain an interview with the King, Conti privately meets the
King.
not doubting but if he once saw him, he should be restored to his former
favor. Such industry was used to compass his design, that at length he had a
private meeting with Alphonso at Alcantara the Count being then absent. At this
conference the King's former affection was so revived, that he offered to carry
him immediately to Court. But Conti fearing his sudden and unexpected return
might prove dangerous, desired it might be put off for the present, only
praying the King, that he would recall from banishment those Noblemen who had
been exiled for adhering to his Mother. This interview, and the proposal made
by Conti being made known to the Count by one that had overheard their
discourse, he soon discovered the design was to make a party to ruin him. To
the End then to prevent his Enemy and turn that destruction upon himself, he
employed several Spies to observe all his words and Actions, not sparing any
expense for intelligence. By these means at length he discovered that Conti had
conspired with the Noblemen to restore the Queen to the regency, A conspiracy
against the King discovered and mercifully puninished.
leaving the King nothing but the empty name and Title without any power or
Authority. Having got knowledge of this Treasonable practice, and found
witnesses to prove it, he instantly acquaints the King, who appointed judges to
examine the matter. Upon a full hearing and sufficient proof, several of the
conspirators were convicted, and yet (though by his Enemies the King had always
been accused of excessive cruelty) not one of the Criminals suffered death,
only D. Theodosius de Melo Brother to the Duke de Cadaval was banished Five
Leagues from Lisbon, Sebastian Caesar de Meneses into Algarve, and Antony de
Conti to O Potro* The General depositions involved the Queen Mother in the
common guilt, whereupon a Secretary was sent to examine her, but she refusing
to answer, the King let that fall. Count Castelmelhor puffed up with this
success, removed from the apartment he was in before to another nearer the
King, where it being observed by such as envied him, that more Court was made
to him than to the King himself, his name was thereby rendered the more odious,
and he being now arrived to the highest pitch of his greatness, and capable of
no increase, began soon after to decline.

Simon Vasconcellos Brother to Count Castelmelhor, The Counts brother favorite
to the Infant.
after serving in the Army several Years with great Reputatation, coming now to
Court, so gained the ascendant over the Infant, that it was observed as very
remarkable to see the two Royal Brothers so vastly differing otherwise in
inclinations, yet so addicted to these two Brothers, that they seemed not to
move without them. Soon after the Infant falling sick, Vasconcellos attended
him with such diligence, that he not only confirmed himself in his favor, but
incurred the ill will of all his other principal Servants, who upon this
disgust quitted the Infante's, Service, but very few days past before they were
all recalled by the King except only the Count de Ericeira. All things being
thus restored the King preferred Vasconcellos not only to be Gentleman of the
Bedchamber to his Brother, but also constituted him Superintendant of his
House. This his preferment again displeasing the Family they all quitted their
Employments, and it being too great a condescension to recall them again, others
were put into their places, for the most part creatures of Count Castelmelhor,
and therefore not acceptable to the Infant, He thereupon thinking himself
beset with so many Spies, resolved to alter his course of Life, so as he might
become less suspicious to his Brother and at the same time more popular. The
Infant counterfeits a Religious Life to gain followers.
Nothing could be more fit for these designs than Religion, to that therefore
he seemed wholly addicted being sedulous at Prayers, visiting Churches, reading
pious Books, conversing with Religious Persons, and employing the rest of his
time in other Studies. Being thus taken up he seldom visited the King, as if he
had been wholly bent upon Heavenly Affairs. Some thought his change of Life to
proceed from a Disaster which happened, and was that Augustine de Ceuta fell
suddenly dead at his and the King's Feet; but those who pretended to see
farther thought it only a politic device to gain applause, and get the Crown
from his Brother. Whilst these things were in agitation, A match concluded for
the King.
on the 1^th. of March, 1665, arrived at Lisbon the Marquess de Sand from
France, where he had concluded a Match for the King with the Princess of
Nemours, and by the Infante's order had made overtures on his behalf to the
Duke of Bouillons daughter, which also had taken effect, so far as they were
agreed in words, though the Articles were not signed. This Marrige was proposed
in order to secure the succession of the Crown, in case the King as had been
given out should be incapable of getting Children. But now the Infant having
changed his mind, upon what account is uncertain, could by no persuasions be
prevailed upon to consent to this marriage, although the King himself pressed
it very home. This match being thus broke off, the Marquess de Sand having in
order to conclude for the King first enquired whether the report that went of
the King's impotency were true, was assured by the Count Castelmelhor, that the
King had already several illegitimate Children, which was a sufficient evidence
against that imputation. All things being then disposed for the coming of the
Royal-Bride, the Marquess returned to France, to Conduct her to Lisbon.

On the 25th of February, 1666, The Queen motherdyes.
the Queen Mother falling sick and perceiving her End to approach, sent to both
her Sons who according to custom were then at their diversion of Hunting at
Salvaterra, to come and take their last Farewell of her. They came not till the
3d day after when having kissed her hand and received her blessing they
departed, and within an Hour after she expired, making a very Pious and
Religious End. She was a woman of a wonderful resolution, a great Soul, and
singular wisdom which appeared in the administration of the government both in
Peace and War. It was she that pushed her husband to take the Crown, she helped
to keep it on his head, and she by her industry and care secured it to his
posterity. Her skill in matters of government was above the capacity of a
woman, and she was so sensible of the danger of discord betwixt brothers, that
she obstructed Edward brother to her husband King John, from making his escape
when he was confined by the Emperor, least returning home he should not brook
the greatness of the King his Brother. But what appeared most rare in her was
that being a Spaniard, a name odious to the Portugueses, yet she knew so to
carry herself that she gained the Love and esteem of the whole Country. Yet all
these good Qualities were somewhat sullied by her unbounded ambition, and
insatiable desire of rule, which were the cause she would never quit the
government, or Court, till forced from them both, and that she increased the
hatred betwixt her two Sons by setting up the younger in opposition to the
Elder. In fine, to give her her due, her Verrues far surpassed her vices, and
it may justly be said of her that she was the glory of her Family, the
deliverer of Portugal, and the honor of Spain*

The Queen Mother being dead, the King believed himself more safe, and on the
contrary the Infant deprived of her support, thought himself more exposed.
Count Castelmelhor who till then had stood in some awe of him because of her
power, acted now with more freedom. Thus the Infant growing more discontented,
The Infant grows discontented, and the King jealous.
the King at the same time grew the more jealous of his reservedness, and
consequently averse to all those he saw him favor, or cherish. Upon these
discontents, some of his Servants fearing to offend quitted him, and others
were removed from him, so that his retinue was much below the dignity of the
Brother of a King. Some days he bore with this hardship, till the News of the
New Queens being set forward, obliged him to press the King, that he might
appear like himself at her reception. The King ordered him to give the Names of
such as he desired should attend him, but not approving of those he made choice
off, nothing was concluded upon, though many debates passed betwixt them on that
account. At length on the 2d. of August, 1666, the Fleet which brought the
Queen entered the River of Lisbon, the News whereof being brought to the King,
he is reported to have received without the least demonstration of joy, or
satisfaction, which was then looked upon as an ill omen of the future success
of that Marriage. The Marquess de Ruvigny who Commanded the French Fleet having
sent to the Infant to beg leave to pay his respects to him, he laid hold of
this opportunity, to put the King in mind how dishonorable it was to them
both, that the Admiral should find him so ill attended. What could be done in
so sudden an Emergency was, that the King sent his own Servants to attend his
Brother during that Ceremony. This was no way pleasing to the Infant, who
being highly incensed against Count Castelmelhor, The Infant enraged against
Count Castelmelhor.
as the only man that had obstructed his having those Servants he desired,
forbore not openly to revile and threaten him with the severest punishment,
when occasion should offer, which Vasconcellos the Counts Brother, who was
present resenting, went away and quitted his Service. So now there remained
with him but two Servants of any Note or Quality, whereupon he sent a message
to the King, to desire he would give him leave to retire from Court, since he
would not allow him to live in that Splendour that was due to him. Nothing could
have more incensed the mind of the King than this message did; insomuch that
tho^ Count Castelmelhor, fearing least the discord betwixt the two brothers
should run too high, used all his interest, to obtain of the King for the
Infant those Servants he desired, he could never prevail. Therefore the
Infant perceiving the King's obstinacy was not to be overcome, since it had
not yielded to the entreaties and power of the Count, when he had amidst the
rest of the crowd, hid his want of attendance at the Queens solemn entry into
Lisbon, he withdrew himself to Quelas a League and a half from the City,
accompanied only by Roderick de Meneses. Fame having immediately spread abroad,
not only through the City but through the whole Kingdom, the News of his
retreat; the universal report was that all things were preparing for a Civil
War. At Lisbon Peter's party was already more numerous than Alphonso's, the
virtues of the former were every where extolled, and the vices of the latter no
less exaggerated; but above all the affection of the one, and the aversion of
the other to Count Castelmelhor weighed more than all other things, with the
People who bore him an implacable hatred. Many of the Nobility interposed to
pacify the brothers, but all their endeavors proved in vain, for neither of
them would abate any thing of his demands. When all other means failed, the
Queen who then was indisposed sent for the Infant, Strange show of affection
betwixt the Infant, and the Queen.
who being come to her, they received one another with such affection, as
seemed to be a sufficient earnest of the Love that was growing betwixt them.
Here the Queen prevailed that he should not depart the Court, and should wholly
leave that affair to her management, which he could not refuse her, being as
was believed already somewhat fired with that Sight of her. At length the
difference betwixt the Brothers was reconciled, the Prince chose other Servants
and the King allowed of them. Yet though they seemed to have laid aside all
animosities, the grudges betwixt them were of a higher nature than to be so
easily forgot. But Peter was supported with a deep dissimulation, Alphonso had
little of that Art, and for the most part threatened much more than he would
perform, which was the cause that he was often heard to let slip very harsh
expressions against his Brother. He having long meditated how to rid himself of
these displeasures, at last ^ixed upon a Method, which was to beg of the King
the Post of Constable of Portugal, which is the same as Generalissimo. The more
he insisted in demanding, the more positive the King was in refusing, as being
not ignorant of the danger of such a Grant. Count Castelmelhor was astonished
at this Request, and spared not to tell the King, that it was not the General's
Staff, but the Crown that he aspired to, and that it were well to crush his
aspiring Spirit. Nor so satisfied, he used all his Endeavors to find out, who
had advised him to demand that Post. At length it appeared to him, that Counsel
could proceed from none but the Counts of Torres and St. John, who had been
excellent Commanders in the Portuguese Army. Them therefore he instantly
removed from him, sending them away to their Charges on the Frontiers.
Nevertheless, though the abetters were removed, the causes of dissension still
remaining, the differences betwixt the two Brothers, grew daily higher and
higher, and at last the Queen who ought to have labored to compose them,
became her self a Party, leaving the Interest of her Husband to adhere to that
of his Brother. Besides her proper Inclination to the Infant, two things
perhaps might conduce to move the Queen to this unjust proceeding, Motives of
the Queens Aversion to the King.
the one that the King was already grown weary of her, and the other (from
which perhaps his Aversion proceeded) that he was jealous of her too great
Propension to his Brother. Count Castelmelhor contriving how to dissolve this
knot of Affection that was betwixt the Queen and the Infant, thought nothing
so effectual as marrying of him, which without delaying, he proposed to the
King, who approving of the Advice commanded his Brother to make choice of a
Wife. He having desired some time to consider of a matter of that Importance,
returned his Answer in Writing, signifying in substance, that he was ready to
comply with the King, only praying that a Servant of his might be employed to
go to the Courts of Europe to find out a Lady fit for him to match with.
Neither the King nor the Count saw into the design of this deceitful Answer,
which was contrived only to protract time, and therefore they approved of it,
and admitted of John de Roxas, whom he had named to go upon that Embassy.

About the beginning of the Year 1667, 1667.
the King went to Salvaterra, The Queen and Infante's Party increases.
according to custom, with all the Court. There the Cabals were continued
betwixt the Queen and the Infant, and now the party they had gained, was more
numerous then that which adhered to the King. But some time after, an Accident
that happened was improved to heighten their Animosities. A French Man
belonging to the Queen, was murdered upon the Road in Alen^ejo by a Carryer,
who fled and took Sanctuary, but being forced from thence, was carried Prisoner
to Coimbra, and thence conducted to Lisbon. There he was tried before all the
Tribunals, till he came to the Council of State, none daring to pronounce
Judgment against him, because he implored the protection of the Church, as
having been taken out of Sanctuary, a thing never permitted in Portugal. The
Queen, who thought nothing was done to thwart her, but through the Malice of
Count Castelmelhor to her, being enraged, that Justice was not done upon the
Murderer of her Servant and Countryman, railed bitterly at him, laying all
her discontents to his Charge. Nor yet so satisfied, she refused to be present
at the Bull Feast, usually kept at Lisbon upon St. Anthony's Day, alleging she
could not show her self to the People, till Justice were done her. Among the
rest that took upon them to vindicate the Queens cause, The Infant openly
espouses the Queens quarrel.
the Infant was the hottest, as looking upon the Injuries done to her, to be
levelled at himself, who had wholly espoused her Interest. Therefore he ordered
Count Castelmelhor to bring the Secretary of State, who had carried himself
very disrespectfully toward the Queen, in the Affair of the Murderer, before
the Council, to answer for his Insolency. There contrary to his Custom, Peter
inveighed largely against him, and with such vehemence, that the Council signed
an Order for his Banishment, which notwithstanding all the Count's opposition,
was obeyed, and he sent into Exile. This Success against the Favorite,
encouraged the Infant to aim at greater things, his party daily increasing;
for besides the Queen, there adhered to him the Duke of Cadaval, who had been
Banished by the Counts Procurement, D. Sancho Manuel, who after defeating the
Spanish Army at Estremoz, had been removed from his command by the same
Interest, and many more of the Nobility, on sundry other Accounts, besides the
thoughtless multitude, stirred up by the desire of Novelty, and animated with
the name of so many Heads of Note. Notwithstanding the Strength of this
Faction, it was yet thought too soon to attempt any thing against the King
directly, and judged more proper to let the Storm fall upon his Favorite, The
Faction level against the Favorite.
who being once cast down, the King would be left exposed to all their
Practices. To consult of the means of removing the Count, there was a great
Meeting held of all the Infante's Confederacy; he also being present. There
most Men being averse to Murder, if the thing might be otherwise performed, it
was resolved to seize upon, and send him away, either into India, or some other
remote parts of the World; yet so, that if he should make resistance, or
attempt to escape, then he should be killed. Many days passed not, before the
Count had entire Information of the whole Conspiracy against him, and having
laid it before the King, he was by him empowered to use such means for their
common Security, as he should think most effectual. He presently doubles the
Guards at the Palace, arms all his own Creatures, set his Spies, and stirs not
out of the Palace, without a sufficient Train and Guard for his Security. This
sudden change at Court, alarmed the City, so that the People ran in heaps to
the Palace for Information, but finding that there was no interruption of
public Affairs, nor any thing but the increase of the Guards, they soon
dispersed and returned to their Houses. The Infant finding his project
defeated, to avoid all Suspicion, retired to his Country House at Quelas.
Whilst he was there almost in despair for the great disappointment he had
received, a Discovery was made, or pretended to be made, for the certainty of
it could never appear, that the Count had hired People to poison him. Hereupon
his Partisans advise him to be very circumspect in securing himself, and they
on their part were not wanting in spreading abroad the danger they pretended
him to be in. Having thus prepared the Multitude, and being sensible that the
Count could not but study to secure himself by his downfall, the Infant made
instant application to the King, to punish him according to the hainousness of
the Offense he alleged. To this effect he wrote to the King, acquainting him
that he was convinced the Count practiced against his Life; that therefore he
demanded he should be banished from the Court, or else, that he himself should
be forced to fly into Foreign parts for Safety. Both the King and Count having
read this Letter, referred the whole matter to the Council of State. There it
was fully discussed, one party affirming that it was a Presumption at one time
to accuse the King's Favorite, and assign his Punishment in such a manner as
seemed to threaten the King himself; that if the Count were justly accused, he
ought to be tried according to the known Laws of the Kingdom, and if convicted,
to be punished; but that if it should appear he was wronged, care ought to be
taken, least the Prince's aspiring practices should not be prejudicial to the
King. The other side on the contrary being devoted to the Infante's Interest,
urged all the plausible Reasons they could gather to show that he ought to be
complied with, Right or Wrong, either in regard he was the King's Brother, or
for fear he might effect that by force, which he could not obtain by Entreaty.
After conferring both Opinions, they came to this Resolution, That it should be
put to the Trial, The King offers the Infant Satisfaction.
whether the Infant could be appeased by Submission, and all manner of humble
Application. To this effect the Marquess of Marialva was sent by the King to
acquaint the Infant, that the Count was ^^ady to come and beg his Pardon upon
his Knees. But he considering, that to accept of this Submission would no way
forward his End, for that the Count would still remain at Court, after two days
delay, sent back the Marquess with his Answer, signifying that nothing but the
Banishment of the Earl could satisfy him. Alphonso hoping his Brother's Fury
might abate in time, delayed sending to him again for the present, whereat he
being the more enraged, caused a Letter to be delivered to the King, among
other things, threatening not to appear at Court, as long as Co^nt Castelmelhor
continued in it. A Cabinet Council being called upon this second Billet, some
were for apprehending the Infant himself, as now grown too dangerous, others
more moderate, were only for securing his Family and Adherents, and so leaving
him naked. This latter Advice was approved off, but the Execution being
delayed, and Peter having received Intelligence thereof, he stood upon his
Guard, arming all his Followers, and promising to live and dye by them. Next he
summons the Counselors of State, The Council and Magistrates of Lisbon combine
with the Infant.
and Magistrates of Lisbon, who being met at his House, he inveighed before
them against the King his Brother, and Count Castelmelhor, impeaching him of
Practices against his Life, and desiring their assistance to be revenged of
him, since the King would not consent to his Banishment. After having spoken to
this effect, he gave them the same in Writing, to which they unanimously
answered, they would stand by him, and support his Dignity to their utmost.

It is easy to conceive how much King and Count were concerned at this
audacious proceeding, The King fearing the faction, offers to compound with the
Infant.
which was an absolute usurpation upon the regal Authority, for it was no less
in the Infant to summon the Tribunals, and in them it was not much less than
Treason to obey the Summons, but above all, to engage to stand by him. Finding
by this Trial how great the strength of his Party was, they resolved if
possible to mollify him, and therefore the King sent to him to discover, who
were the Count's Accusers, that so he might be proceeded against in due form of
Law. The Infant positively* refused to discover the Evidence, unless the Count
were first removed from Court. Alphonso put it to the Council and ablest
Lawyers, whether it were legal and beseeming the King's Dignity, that the Count
should be removed before the Witnesses were known, and it was carried by the
Majority, that the demand was unjust and unreasonable. This their result, under
their Hands, the King sent to his Brother; at the same time sending away
Expresses to the Commanders on the Frontiers and Seaports, to suffer no Man to
depart the Kingdom. By these means the expectation of a Civil War, which till
then, had gone no farther then Lisbon, was spread abroad throughout the whole
Kingdom. The Infant advising with his Friends upon the result of the Council
sent him by the King, they came to this Resolution, that in case his Majesty
persisted in protecting the Count, then Peter without his consent should speed
into the Province beyond the Mountains, where the Count of St. John had the
command of the Forces, which he should march to Lisbon, and joining with the
multitude by open Force should constrain the King to comply with all his
demands. Having fixed this Resolution, he sent the King a long Letter full of
invectives against the Count, and complaints that he could not obtain Justice,
concluding that his Majesty made more account of the Earl then of him, and
seeing both could not live together, he had resolved to quit the Court. Upon
what Account he intended to withdraw, we have seen but just before, not to
submit to the King's Will, but to force him to comply with his. And though he
pretended privately to withdraw himself, yet the preparations for his Journey
were so public, that there was none so blind, who could not discover it. Nor
was this done without cause, for the report of his removal being spread abroad,
and that it was in the nature of a Flight from the Favorite, the whole City
began in a moment to rise in mutiny, several of the Nobility openly fomenting
it, and declaring that was the day, on which according to an ancient Prophe^ie,
Lisbon mutinies at the instigation of the Nobility.
the Streets of Lisbon were to run with human Blood. Seven Thousand Men are
reckoned to have appeared that day in Arms, to stop the Infante's Journey, and
to decide the Controversy betwixt the Count and him. This popular Fury being
made known to the King and Count, they both perceiving themselves too weak to
withstand the violence of that Storm, resolved instead of that lofty Course
they had followed before, to stoop to Necessity, and try what good Words could
work upon the Infant. To this purpose, the King sent him a Letter, full of
most loving Expressions, desiring him to suppress that Tumult, which had been
raised on his Account, and to come to Court, where all things should be
disposed to his Satisfaction. The Answer to this Letter, was in no less
obliging Terms, only in the Conclusion, the Infant again intimated, that the
King must resolve either to part with the Count, or him, and must take his
choice before things came to Extremity. Count Castelmelhor perceiving, that
neither Threats nor Entreaties prevailed upon the Infant, and that the mutiny
in the City was grown to such a head, it would endanger both the King and
himself, resolved at last to consent to leave the Court, the King promising
him, that as soon as that Storm were blown over, he would take a progress on
pretense of visiting the Frontiers, and in his return, would restore him to the
Court, The Queen assists the Infant.
and to his Favor. But least his Banishment should seem wholly extorted by the
Infant, he persuaded the Queen to interest her self in that affair, and beg it
of the King, that he so might rather seem to have condescended to her entreaty,
than to the necessity imposed upon him by his brother. She fearing to disoblige
the Infant, or thwart his designs, would not intermeddle in it, till by a
messenger sent to him she had his direction how to proceed. Nor was she
satisfied with one message, but sent again for more particular instructions, so
great was her concern for him, and so little for her husband. Being now fully
informed of his will, she concludes the business with the King and Count, who
submitted to withdraw himself upon faith given for the safety of his person.
But before he departed, he would have articled that the Infant upon his
removal, should clear him from the imputation of the design of poisoning him.
Whether his conscience accused him of any such practice, or whether he feared,
being once cast down, his innocence could not protect him against the malice of
his Enemies is uncertain. Thus the Count being assaulted on all fides by the
Infant, by the Queen, by the Nobility, and by the multitude, and not able to
stand the shock of so many Enemies, at length withdrew from the Court, The
Count withdraws.
and lodged himself in a Monastery about Seven Leagues from the City. But as
his expulsion was not the End, but rather the means to compass the designs then
carried on, so the divisions and distractions at Court instead of ceasing,
increased, for as long as the ambition of the Infant, and the King's neglect
of the Government lasted, only the pretense but not the cause of these troubles
was removed.

Nothing could be more grievous to the King, The King in great perplexity.
than to consider, that upon all occasions his brother being backed by the
multitude extorted from him, whatever he desired, which made it plain to him,
that at last he would not forbear to aim at, or fail of wresting from him the
Crown. His violent nature made him more open, when he should have been most
circumspect, and therefore his thoughts being filled with the hatred his
Brother bore him, the jealousy he had of his Wife, the perfidiousness of the
People, and the disloyalty of the Nobility; he could not forbear inveighing
against his Brother in public, and even before the Queen, who he knew gave the
Infant a particular account of all his words and Actions. In this perplexity,
he caused the extraordinary companies that had been raised by Count
Castelmelhor, to be filled up for the security of the palace. The Infant
resolves to proceed.
On the other side the Infant flushed with success, resolved wholly to root
out all that was left of the Favorites party about the King, for though the
Count himself was removed, yet his creatures remained at Court, and nothing of
moment was Transacted without his advice, had by messengers betwixt them.
Before the Infant could put his designs in practice, he was advertized by the
Queen of all the words the King daily let fall against him, The King betrayed
by the Queen.
and perhaps of more than ever had been spoken. This intelligence caused him to
hasten the Execution of his projects. The principal men at that time remaining
near the King of Count Castelmelhor's faction, were Henry Enriquez de Miranda,
Emanuel Antunez, and Antony de Sousa de Macedo the Secretary of State. Of these
the chiefest was Miranda whom therefore the Infant resolved first to destroy,
and to that end sent some privately to warn him to depart the Court, before he
run himself into greater danger. Despair so seized the unfortunate man,
considering the expulsion of the Count, that he attempted to kill himself, but
being prevented, he fled fearing to be torn in pieces by the Rabble. Count
Castelmelhor having received information hereof, instantly advised the King to
be circumspect in all his words and Actions, for that it was easier by fair
means to supplant his Brother, than by open Force. His advice being approved by
the King, upon the next occasion that offered, he summoned his Brother to
appear in Council where some important matter was to be debated, but no kind
messages or Letters were of any Force to move him to come, till the Queen sent
for him, when he appeared with a great Train of followers, and full of
dissimulation. The King received him not so coldly as before, but being no
Master of the Art of Counterfeiting, could not so well hide his just
displeasure as the other. However this feigned reconciliation might have
produced some good Effects, The King makes choice of Antony de Sousa de Macedo
in the place of the Count.
had it not been decreed by fate that the unhappy King must perish. To hasten
his ruin it fell out that Alphonso, who was not used to that continual burden
of business, seeking on whom he might lay that weight, pitched upon Antony de
Souza de Macedo one of the Counts creatures, who for some words spoken to the
Queen had been ordered into banishment, but unknown to her lay concealed at
Court. In order to raise him to the Honor of prime Minister, the King begged
of the Queen that she would forgive his offense, and consent that his
banishment should be remitted, but notwithstanding his repeated instances, and
submissive entreaties she remained implacable. Alphonso thinking to Conquer her
obstinacy by extenuating the crime, put into her hands the order of Council for
his banishment, wherein it was expressly set down, that rather for to satissfy
her resentment, than for that his fault deserved such punishment, they had for
some days thought fit to send him into exile. This which should have been a
motive to appease, so enraged her, that she flew out into many extravagant
speeches unbeseeming a private woman, and much more a Queen, The Queen 's
undecent behavior toward the King.
and after venting her fury in this undecent manner without any regard to the
King's presence, she flung into another Room, whence she sent a billet to him
demanding to have Antony de Souza severely punished. The King hoping her
passion would fall by degrees, and that she might be brought to reason, showed
not her billet according to custom to the Council of State, but she on the
contrary becoming daily more intractable, and he not able long to hide his
resentment, their animosities swelled to such a pitch that the Court was almost
empty, all men shunning him as declining, and she admitting none to her
presence being wholly Transported with the desire of Revenge. Mean while Antony
de Souza appeared more openly in the palace than he had done before, being
always well attended to prevent danger, But there wanted not those who soon
spread it among the People, that he threatened the City in case he were expelled
the Court, that he would repair to the Army with the which he would return to
punish their Rebellion with fire and Sword. Many such like discourses were
framed and given out on purpose to incense the People against the King, and fix
their affections upon his brother, as their deliverer from Tyranny and
oppression. Things being thus disposed the Infant to requite the Queens
Favors and raise himself one step nearer to the Crown, resolved by open Force,
if other means failed, to expel Antony de Sousa from the Court. In order hereto
on the 5th of October, 1667, he went from his House to the Palace accompanied
by a great Number of the Nobility, The Infant heads the Rabble.
and all the Rabble of the City following in a most Tumultuous manner. Being
come to the Palace, he stayed till all the Counselors of State summoned by
him the day before, were come, that the foulness of the Action might be
somewhat disguized by their presence. They being all come, he enters with them
the King's Bedchamber before he was awake, who was not a little surprised to
see such a crowd Rush in upon him at so unseasonable an hour. Then the Infant,
told him, that his Crown and Person were in extreme danger, the multitude being
in Arms about the Palace, demanding, Antony de Souza should be delivered to
them, to receive condign punnishment for the affront he had done to the Queen.
To these words he added more threats in the name of the People, but as he would
have run on, the King in a rage interrupted him, calling aloud for his Sword.
The Infant according to his usual dissimulation calmly offered him his, which
he would not accept. The Noise of the Multitude filling the Palace, brought
the Queen to the King's apartment, where she found him in a violent passion,
and enquiring, as if she had not known, what the matter was, he told her that
Antony de Souza in malice and despite to his Authority had been murdered, and
that now they came in Tumultuous manner to force him to pardon the murderers.
But she who knew better, replied that Souza was living, which the King would
not believe till the Duke of Cadaval having dragged him from his lurking place,
brought him into his presence. At his sight he was somewhat appeased, and then
the Queen, Infant, and the rest of their followers left him abruptly. When
they were gone, the King said he forgave them, who had so undecently urged the
expulsion of Antony de Souza, to which the Count de Sabugal then present
insolently answered, they stood not in need of pardon but deserved praise, and
this he repeated till the King told him, he would bestow pardon and praise
where each was requisite. So much is regal Authority depressed, when faction
prevails. Antony de Souza, this Tumult being over, continued still in the
Palace, which the Infant observing, consulted with his Friends what was next
to be done. One among them hotter than the rest, said the next thing was to
assume the Crown, whilst the Peoples affection stood for him, but he took him
up very short, being unwilling as yet to have the secrets of his heart pryed
into, as fearing an Action done in that Tumultuous manner could not be durable.
Antony de Sousa, and Emanuel Antunes the remaining Friends of the King forced
to fly.
It was resolved that Antony de Souza and Emanuel Antunes should be threatened
with death, unless they departed the Palace. They perceiving no power was left
in the King, or their friends to protect them, stole away privately, without
the King's knowledge by Night.

Next Morning the King missing them, ordered search to be made for them, The
King abandoned by all Men.
but in vain, for his orders were wholly neglected. In this Condition, finding
himself forsaken by his Friends, and oppressed by his Enemies, he knew not
which way to turn himself, or of whom to ask Advice. His Council sided with the
Infant, his Queen favored him, the People followed, and the Nobility adhered
to him. Thus all things being in extreme Confusion, even the moderate party
began to think no way was left to settle Peace, and restore Tranquillity; but
the assembling of the Cortes or Parliament. The Magistrates of Lisbon, and the
Common Council, were the first that petitioned the King to summon the three
Estates, but he being sensible, the only design was to dethrone him, put them
off from day to day, without any positive Answer: Whereupon they took the
boldness to write to all the principal Towns of the Kingdom, exhorting them by
importunate petitioning to extort the King's Consent. A few days after, the
Council of State, at which were present, the King, Queen and Infant,
unanimously made their Application to him, to the same effect, but he being the
more convinced it was a design laid against his Person, became the more
obstinate in refusing, so that nothing was done for that day. But the next day
the Council meeting again, and sending him a most audacious remonstrance full
of invectives against his Conduct, and urging the necessity of assembling the
three Estates; and besides not only the Magistrates and multitude of Lisbon,
but generally of the whole Country pressing upon him with Threats and open
Violence, he was at last constrained contrary to his Inclination to comply with
their demands: For it was now come to that pass, that the Council did not
advise but command him, wheresoever he went, the clamours of a Parliament
followed him, and from all parts Letters were brought, urging the same thing.
It was now equally dangerous to him to refuse, or to call the Cortes, for the
intent was not to do justice, by calling them, The King forced by his Enemies
to call the Assembly of the States.
but to palliate disloyal practices under that Name. Not content to have
extorted a compliance to the meeting of the States, though the King desired it
might be delayed till his return from Salvaterra, which would be about the
middle of February, they obliged him to send out the Writs of Summons, for the
first of January, 1668, so impatient is the desire of Rule. After this Violence
committed upon him, the King finding himself beset on all ^ides by his Enemies,
and no hope left of safety among them, his Crown, Liberty and Life being all in
eminent danger, he resolved to fly to some other place. To this purpose he
caused Horses to be provided, and Boats upon the River, He designs to fly to
the Arm^* but is prevented by his Brother.
thinking to try his Fortune in the Province of Alentejo, but his Brother who
wanted not Intelligence, having all the Power, prevented his Design.

The time appointed for the meeting of the Cortes or Parliament being come; the
Queen, who well knew the King would be deposed by them, The Queen knowing the
King would be deposed flies to a Monastery.
disdaining to appear her self in a less Sphere than that she had been raised
to, resolved before Hand to separate her self from him. Accordingly on the
21st. of November, 1667. she retired to the Monastery of Franciscan Nuns,
called Esperanca, into which, when she was entered, she gave out she was a Maid,
as being untouched by the King, and that she came thither for refuge amidst
those Confusions that embroiled the Kingdom. Presently after, she sent the King
a Billet, writ with her own Hand, to this effect, That she had left her Country
and Friends, to become his Wife, but finding she was not acceptable to him, and
fearing the dangers that threatened on all sides, she had resolved to return
into France. That she desired his leave, and the restitution of her Dower,
since the Marriage was void for want of Consummation. Having read this Billet,
the King was so enraged, that he immediately took Coach, with a resolution to
force her from the Monastery; but the Infant who was privy to the whole
matter, was there before him with a vast Company, and withstood him, so that he
was forced to return without doing any thing. Amidst all his Misfortunes, and
the Affronts put upon him, nothing so nearly touched Alphonso as this last
offered him by the Queen. As soon as settled, she sent for the Infant and
conferred with him in private, as was then given out about her return into
France, but the more received Opinion, and approved by the Event, was that
there they agreed to be Married; as soon as her Marriage with the King could be
made void. Her next Care was to send to the Chapter of the Cathedral Church of
Lisbon, to desire their Judgment for the dissolution of the Marriage, then she
sent for all the Nobility, who being come into her Presence, she demanded their
Assistance and Protection; and lastly, she sent an Express into France, to
acquaint the King and her Kindred with what she had done.

Mean while King Alphonso overwhelmed with such a continual stream of
disasters, following one upon the Neck of another, being insulted by the
Commonalty, contemned by the Nobility, deluded by his Brother, and forsaken by
his Wife, stood as one amazed, and almost stupefied, not knowing what course to
take. Nor was there any left to extricate himself out of this Labyrinth of
Confusions and Miseries. But now approached the last act of this Tragedy, and
all that had been before acted under a mask, must appear barefaced to the
World. Therefore the Council of State being assembled together with the
Magistrates of the City, it was resolved the King should be laid aside, and
the Government put into the hands of his Brother. Yet that the Action might
appear the more justifiable, they agreed to endeavor to persuade the King to
resign up the Government to his Brother, but in case he refused, then it was
concluded he should not only be deposed, but imprisoned. However that it should
be left to the determination of the Parliament, whether the Infant should be
enthroned as King, or the King restored to his Liberty. This Decree being
passed in the morning by break of day, the whole Council went without the
Infant, to acquaint the King with their Resolution. Amongst them the Marquess
of Cascaes more insolent then the rest, being told by the King's Servants that
he was still asleep, bid them awake him, at the same time fell himself a
knocking rudely at his Door. Insolent words of the Marquess de Cascae^* (...)
The King being thus disturbed; ordered the Council to be admitted. Then the
Marquess of Cascaes, with a loud Voice accosted the King in these very Words,
without the least respect or common Civility. Thou lie wallowing in Sloth
and Pleasures, when the ruin of the Kingdom threatens thee and us through thy
Fault. Therefore since thou art unfit to Rule, or get Children, pass from thy
Self willingly that Burden, which thou art not able to bear, to thy Brother
Peter, least the Kingdom be deprived of a King, and the Royal Family of an
Heir, and least thou be forced to that against thy Will, which thou will not
freely consent to. The rest of the Council spoke to the same effect, though not
altogether in such audacious Language. The King, though surprised at so
traiterous a Proposition, answered, That he was a lawful King, and brought to
that pass, by the Malice and Perfidiousness of his Enemies; Alphonso resolutely
denies to resign the Crown.
but that however, no Fear or Danger should force him to resign the Crown as
long as he had Breath to draw; yet if they would use Violence to him, that then
he would appeal for Justice to the supreme Tribunal, which is above all Kings,
against those that violated his Authority, and wrongfully snatched his Crown.
Being thus disappointed of their first attempt, the Council repaired to the
Infant, where they protracted their Debates till late at Night, for being
resolved to use force, they feared least the People, who before took their part
against the Favorites, should be of another Mind, when the matter came to
touch the King's Person. However, after much time spent in fruitless projects,
they came to this Resolution, That the King should be forcibly deposed and
imprisoned, that for the better palliating that odious Action, and involving
the People as a party in it, the Infant himself accompanied by all the
Nobility and Magistrates, should put it in Execution, that the King's
confinement should be at first concealed, till by spreading abroad several
rumors, the People were prepared to allow of it; and lastly, that either by
Art or Threats, the King should be obliged to sign an Act of Renunciation, The
Infant heads the multitude, and sets upon the King, and ex^orts from him an
instrument of Resignation.
to the end, it might be thought, the King had voluntarily given up the
Government to his Brother. All things being thus disposed, at break of day the
Infant repairs to the Palace, attended by an infinite multitude. There he set
a Guard upon the King, and having locked all the Doors that led to his
Apartment, he sent Antony Cavide to notify to him, that by the general consent
of the Kingdom he was deprived of the Government and his Liberty, and also by
the most terrible Threats to extort from him the signing of the Instrument of
Resignation prepared for him. The unfortunate King seeing himself wholly in the
power of his Enemies, and fearing the utmost effects of their Malice, signed
the Instrument which was immediately made public as a justification of the
Treasonable Practice. It contained in substance, that he freely resigned the
Government to his Brother Peter and his Heirs, reserving only to himself Three
Hundred Thousand Cruzados a Year, with the Mansion House of the Family of
Braganza. A Cruzado is Four Hundred Reis of Portuguese Money, and Three
Thousand Reis, is just Twenty Shillings English, so that 300000 Cruzados, makes
the just Sum of 37500 l. Sterling. But how well even this miserable Composition
for a Crown was observed, may appear by his being kept ever after a Prisoner,
with only a few Servants of no Note, such as his Brother thought fit to allow
him, so that in all probability his Expense could not amount to the tenth part
of that Sum.

The unhappy King being thus dethroned, The Cortes meet.
and made Prisoner, the Cortes or Parliament summoned by him met soon after at
Lisbon, about the beginning of February, 1668, to destroy him by his own
Authority. At first there were great Debates amongst them, whether it were at
all lawful to take an Oath to Peter as Regent, and next Heir to the Crown, or
whether the Crown should also be transferred to him; some doubting whether the
first were justifyable, and others more violent, urging the latter ought to be
done. At last the Majority agreed to the settling the Regency and Succession
upon Peter, but were generally averse to his usurping the style of King,
thinking it enough, that he who was judged unfit for Government, was removed
from the Helm. Peter after having put it to the Vote, whether he should assume
the Crown, finding his Pretension rejected, endeavored to have it believed he
was averse from it. But the Queen who intended to make him her Husband, and
could not endure to think of losign any part of her Title, The Queen presses to
have Peter declared King. He is received as Regent.
or abating any thing of her Pride, and being a Woman, that knew not how to
dissemble her Vanity, urged the matter more home to the States, who
nevertheless decreed, that he should exercise all the regal Power, without
assuming the style. The Controversy being decided, there arose another, which
was whether the King should be allowed his Liberty, or confined, but in
Conclusion, it was determined he should undergo perpetual Imprisonment.

There had been a League offensive and defensive, 1668.
concluded betwixt France and Portugal, Peace with Spain.
at the beginning of the Year 1667, against Spain, by which the French were
obliged to give the Spaniards a powerful diversion in Flanders, which they
performed with great Success. After that some Overtures of Peace being made by
the Spaniards, the Portugueses began readily to give ear to them, and though
the French Ambassador pressed that the Negotiation might be in common with his
Master, as in justice according to the League betwixt them, it ought to have
been; yet the Prince who now ha^^ the Government, more mindful of the peculiar
Interest, which was to secure the Power he had newly gotten, then of what in
Honor was due to France, entered upon a separte Treaty of Peace with Spain.
His Majesty of Great Britain was the Mediator, and in his Name the Earl of
Sandwich assisted at the Conferences. At length the Peace was concluded betwixt
the two Crowns, on the 13th. of February, 1668, and published 10th. of March
following. This Peace was highly cried up among the Rabble, as an effect of the
Government of the Prince, when all Men plainly saw, and were sensible that in
reality the victories obtained by King Alphonso, were the only motives that
obliged the Spaniards to propose it, and that the Overtures had been made while
he was yet at the Helm, which must have had as good a success, had he remained
time enough in the Throne to bring things to Perfection, and perhaps he might
have done it without the dishonor of abandoning his Confederates the French.

On the 13th. of February 1668. the Chapter of the Cathredal of Lisbon, with
others, they had culled out all prepared for the design, pronounced the
Marriage betwixt King Alphonso, The Marriage of the King and Queen declared
null.
and the Princess Mary Francis Elizabeth of Savoy null, and that therefore both
of them were left at Liberty to dispose of themselves. Then the three Estates
and Magistrates of Lisbon, as they had been before directed, moved the Prince
and Princess, that since the former Marriage was declared null, they would
consent to match together, on pretense it was for the good of the Kingdom. This
they were moved to, in regard they were unwilling to restore her Dower, and the
Parties were no less ready to consent to what themselves had before contrived
and agreed betwixt themselves. However though there had been care taken for the
disanulling the former marriage by such persons as were wholly in the interest
of the cause, there was yet started a scruple, that it was not Lawful to
proceed to a new match, especially with the Brother of the former husband
without a dispension. But the Prince, though pretending only to comply with the
Cortes had not been negligent in that Affair, for not long after the
Publication of the nullity, arrived in Portugal the dispensation from the
Cardinal of Vendosme the Popes Legate a Latere in France, by which it appears
the dispensation was granted by one that was a party interessed in the Affair,
and precedent to the sentence of nullity. The Infant marries the Queen.
Upon these grounds they made no difficulty to proceed to the Nuptials, the
Ceremony whereof was performed at Alcantara by the Bishop of Targa,
Administrator of the Archbishopric of Lisbon, on the 2d of April 1668. After
the marriage, fresh instances were made that the Prince might be declared King
by the Cortes, but this attempt also proving ineffectual, he notifyed to them
that on the 9th of June following, he would take his Oath to maintain the Laws
of the Realm, and receive from them theirs of fidelity, which was accordingly
performed. The three Estates continued their Session after this till the first
day of August, 1668, when they broke up. Several months being passed after the
consummation of this marriage, when the thing done was not to be retrieved
without horrid scandal, and embroiling the whole State of the Church, then at
last the Prince bethought himself of sending to the Pope to confirm the
Cardinal's dispensation. Pope Clement the 9th who sat in St. Peter's chair,
seeing no possibility of recalling what was past, and relying upon the
information of the Chapter of Lisbon, did expedite a Brief directed to James de
Sousa Chief Inquisitor, Antony de Mend^za commissary for the Bull of the
Croisade, Martin Alphonso de Melo Dean of Evora, Lewis de Sousa Dean of Porto,
and Emanuel de Meneses Archdeacon of Evora, impowering them to dispense in his
name with the said marriage. This Brief was dated December the 10th. 1668.
These persons so authorized accordingly in the Popes name, delared the marriage
of King Alphonso null, that of his Queen with the Prince to be good and valid,
and all the Children that were, or should be gotten between them to be
Legitimate, which sentence they pronounced upon the 18th of February 1669.

When the unfortunate King had been detained a considerable time Prisoner in
the Palace of Lisbon, 1669.
it was thought necessary to remove him, King Alphonso sent prisoner to the
Island Tercera.
least the People coming to themselves and commiserating the sufferings of
their Sovereign, should make some commotion that might endanger the present
government. It was therefore resolved to send him into the Island Terecera,
whether he was conveyed by the Count de Prado, then Commanding the Portuguese
Fleet, and there continued several years under a strict Guard. At length not
only the People of Lisbon, but throughout all Portugal understanding by those
who came from that Island, that he led a most miserable Life in that remote
Island, and was almost reduced to the last extremity through sufferings and
anguish of mind, there was cause to apprehend they would in time be moved to
resent his calamities, and perhaps be stirred up to revenge them upon those who
were the cause thereof. Besides it fell out that the King of Spain at the same
time fitted out a Navy at Cadiz without declaring for what intent, which being
known at Lisbon, those who dreaded the Return of the King, as having been the
promoters of his Ruin, presently imagined it was to take him from his
banishment. For these reasons he was sent for with all possible speed, and
brought back into Portugal, He is brought back and confined to the Castle of
Cintra.
where he was lodged in the Castle of Cintra upon the Sea Coast not far from
Lisbon. In this place he was not only observed and Guarded, but as closely
confined as if he had been a common Malefactor, the very Windows of his
lodgings being made up, so that he could not look out, but that what Light he
had, came from above his height. This account of his usage in that place I
received from Dr. Reis a Physician at Lisbon, whose Son was Physician to the
King, and who had several times the opportunity of seeing him, being sent for by
his said Son to assist his Majesty when indisposed, for scarce any body else
was admitted to see him. In this deplorable condition the wretched King
continued till his death.

But before we give an account of his End, it will be fit to set down those few
matters of moment that preceded it. And indeed there are but few things that
can furnish matter for History. Portugal ever since the conclusion of the Peace
with Spain, having been engaged in no War, nor furnished any other important
subject to treat of. Warlike Kings, and turbulent governments are the properest
for swelling of Histories, the great accidents and Councels then occurring
giving great variety to dilate upon; but in a peaceable and quiet State, there
is little to be found more then the settled and regular proceedings which being
always in a manner the same, are not worth the writing because they neither
delight nor instruct in the reading. Some few things remain, which being of no
mighty consequence shall briefly be set down, that we may at length put an End
to this History. The new Prince regent, as has been said, Birth of the Infant
Mary Frances.
was Married to his brothers Wife, Mary Frances Elizabeth of Savoy on the 2d.
of April. By her he had before the End of the same year a daughter named Mary
Frances, the only fruit of that surprising marriage. And though at first it was
looked upon, as a great token that God approved of their proceedings by giving
them issue so suddenly, yet afterward those very persons who cried up this
providence, could not but be undeceived when they perceived, that these Princes
living together about 16 years never had any other Child, and even she dyed
without being married. All things having succeeded prosperously to that Prince,
as he that had established himself in the government, secured his Brother,
gained his Wife, and now got a Daughter, his only care was how to continue in
amity with all the World, that so he might firmly Establish his new attained
power. He preserved Peace both at home, and abroad in such Tranquillity, that
for several years there will remain nothing else memorable of him to posterity.
In the Year 1677, 1677.
the Portugueses of the continent of Brazil in America seeeking to extend their
borders, A Portuguese Colony at Rio de la Plata in America, destroyed by the
Spaniards.
which reached to the great River called de la Plata, passed over the said
River and Planted a Colony at Buenos Aires, which the Spaniards looking upon as
an incroachment upon them, they gathered to a body in those parts, and falling
upon the Portuguese Planters, put them all to the Sword. Advice hereof being
brought into Portugal, the Prince Regent expressed his resentment by his
Ambassador at the Court of Madrid, demanding Reparation of damages. The thing
was long in debate, both parties arguing for their Right to the place and
protracting time. At length the Portuguese weary of delay began to let fall
some threats of a War, but with so little preparation to it, that the Effects
were not to be feared. However the Spaniards being more inclinable to compose
the difference amicably, than to enter upon a War on so slight an occasion, The
difference adjusted.
sent into Portugal the Duke of Giovenazzo their Ambassador extraordinary, who
after several conferences with the Portuguese Ministers, concluded the matte^
to the satisfaction of both Parties. The Infanta only Daughter to the Prince,
being now almost marriagable, and her Father despairing of having any more
Issue by his Wife, he thought of disposing of her, and having cast about to all
parts for a fit match, at last pitched upon the present Duke of Savoy, then a
youth under the tuition of his Mother. Ambassadors were sent on both sides to
Treat in the Year 1680, 1680.
who so managed the affair, A match concluded betwixt the Infanta and the Duke
of Savoy.
that all things were concluded and agreed upon. And to remove the only
obstacle which was the Law of Lamego, whereby it is enacted, that the heiress
of the Crown Marrying a Forreigner, she shall forfeit her Title, to provide I
say against the obstacle of this Law, the Cortes were summoned and met at
Lisbon the same Year. There they passed an Act for dispensing with the said Law
for that time, provided it should not be a president for any other. This
impediment being taken away, there seemed to remain nothing to obstruct the
happy conclusion of the Nuptials but the distance of the Parties. the Duke of
Savoy, who according to contract was to come into Portugal, sent before over
Land a considerable Number of Coach and saddle Horses. On the other side the
Prince Regent fitted out a squadron of 12 men of War, to Conduct the Duke to
Lisbon. All the Ships were gilt and painted, but above, all the Admiral was
gilt from stem to stern, the poop and prow down to the surface of the Water,
and the sides down to the gunwale. The great Cabin was painted by the best
Masters in Lisbon, and the floor laid in squares of Ebony and Ivory. The Bed
was most Rich, and the Royal-Standard all of Cloth of tissue, with the arms of
Portugal in the highest raised Embroidery. Portuguese Seamen being at that time
scarce, especially able ones, great encouragement was given to all strangers
that would enter into the Service. When all things were prepared, this sightly
Squadron set Sail in the Year 1681, and arrived safe at the Port of Villafranca
in Savoy, expecting there to take the Duke of Savoy on board. The Match broke
off.
In the mean time all things were preparing at Lisbon, with the greatest
splendour imaginable for his reception. Triumphal Arches were built,
extraordinary bull Feasts contrived, and all the Gentry strove to outvie one
another (even to the ruin of their Estates and empoverishing their Families) in
Gallantry. Yet all these mighty preparations were cast away, for when it was
thought the Duke would have gone aboard the Fleet, he at first began to delay
and protract time, and after deluding them in this sort as long as he could, he
at last positively broken off the Match. His subjects had always been averse to
it, and that with good cause, as being unwilling to part with their Sovereign
without hope of ever seeing him again, as going to leave them for a Crown; and
then if he should return, it must be with dishonor, as being disappointed of
the End for which he left them. These considerations had at last prevailed upon
his Mother, his Council, and himself, to alter their resolutions, so that though
the Articles of the marriage had been ratified on both sides, and so great an
expense made toward the comsummating of it, all that had been done was
dissolved and came to nothing. The Fleet returned to Lisbon with small
satisfaction, and found as little there either at the Court for the affront put
upon it, or in the City for the extravagant and useless expense it had been put
to. This was the End of the designed marriage of the Infanta with the Duke of
Savoy.

The year 1683, put an End to the long sufferings of the most unfortunate
Alphonso the 6th King of Portugal. Death of King Alphonso.
He dyed on the 12th of December, at the Castle of Cintra, in the Fortieth year
of his Age, and 16th of his imprisonment. It is impossible to give a just
character of him, fear of offending the prevailing party having stopped the
mouths of his Loyal Servants and Friends, who best knew and would speak
honorably of him, and there being no credit to be given to the slanders of his
adversaries, whose chief care it ever was to reproach his person, and blacken
his Actions. And this perhaps is the greatest of calamities Kings are subject
to, that their misfortunes do not terminate with their Lives, for never Prince
was yet dethroned though never so barbarously, but his memory was also rendered
odious to prosperity, by all the Arts that malice could invent, because
prevailing wrong could not subsist but under the color of Right, and to defame
justice oppressed, is to flatter and support iniquity Reigning. To say King
Alphonso had no vices, were to say he was not man, yet to make them so
enormous, as some would have them believed, were only to vouch for malice, and
countenance disloyalty. Through the course of his Reign, that is, whilst he was
in power, there appears none of his actions that have been urged against him,
though aggravated with the most malicious circumstances, which have not been seen
in thousands of Subjects and yet passed unpunished, either as without the reach
of the Law, or excused as the effects of extravagant Youth. For his judgment,
as it could not be expected to be so solid at his Years, as in a riper Age, so
neither can it be found by his words, or deportment that he was any way
defective therein. And lastly as to his impotency in regard to procreation,
that, if true, could have been no lessening of his personal right to
government, but it is so far from being certain, that I have heard several
persons affirm they knew his illegitimate issue, whose mothers if they durst,
would upon Oath confirm the assertion. But there is nothing so certain, as that
Portugal never was more successful both by Sea and Land than under this
government, for under him were obtained four of the greatest victories against
the Spaniards, which produced the Peace, the glory whereof was ascribed to his
brother, who had done nothing to purchase it. And if any object that those
Triumphs were due to the Generals, we must deprive all King's of the glory of
warlike Exploits, who do not actually Command their Armies in person, besides
that it is no small honor to him that he chose such Counselors as could
direct, and such generals as knew how to act so much for his advantage. And as
for the maritine affairs greater Fleets came home yearly from India and Brazil,
and far lesser losses were sustained by Shipwreck during his Reign than in
many years after. This may suffice in some measure to do right to the memory of
this unhappy Prince. Yet it may not be ungrateful to add one word more,
touching certain words reported to have been spoken of him just before his
death. The closeness of his confinement, and the danger of reporting his words
abroad by those who heard them, is the cause that we cannot be so positive in
this particular therefore I do not avouch it for a certain known truth, but as
a rumor whispered about where People durst speak. It is said of him that when
he was in the last agony, and as it were breathing his last, he should say, I
am now going, but it will not be long before the Queen shall follow me, to give
an account before the dreadful tribunal of the wrong she has done me. As I do
not averr this for a certainty, so it is very observable the said Queen
outlived him but a very short time, The Queens death.
that is, only three months and a few days. Her death was on the 27th of
December, of the same year 1683, and since there is little to be said in her
commendation, it will be better to be altogether silent than to make
reflections upon the dead.

King Peter II. now seated on the Throne of Portugal, King Peter upon the death
of his brother, succeeds in his Throne.
by the Death of his Brother, received the Compliments of all Foreign Princes
upon his accession to the Crown. In the Year 1684. and the first of the new
King's Reign, D. Francis de Tavora, being Viceroy of India, the City Goa, the
Capital of all the Portuguese Conquests in those parts was besieged with a
mighty Army by the Raja Savagi an Indian Prince, 1684.
who took part with the eldest Son of the Great Mogul, Goa besieged by the
Indians.
Aurenge Zeb, then in Rebellion against his Father. The Inhabitants defended
themselves with Resolution, and sent to acquaint Aurenge Zeb, with the danger
they were in upon his Account, praying Relief. He presently commanded his
second Son to march with an Army of 100000 Foot, and 80000 Horse, and a great
Train of Artillery to their Succor. Upon the approach of this mighty Army, The
siege. raised.
the Raja raised his Siege and departed, in his way destroying all the Country
about Goa. The Siege being raised, the young Prince sent to assure the
Portugueses, that his Father would be always ready to assist them against their
Enemies. They in return, sent a solemn Ambassy to the Mogul, by whom a settled
Friendship was established with that great Monarch. The King having long
continued a Widdower, and having no Issue, but only one Daughter, was earnestly
pressed by his Subjects to Marry to secure the Succession. Hereupon, by the
advice of his Council, he resolved to demand in Marriage one of the Daughters
of the Elector Palatine, and accordingly in the Month of October 1686, he named
the Count de Villar Mayor, his Ambassador Extraordinary to that Elector upon
this occasion, who set forward in December following, for Heydelberg, where he
arrived in the beginning of the Year 1687, with a very splendid Retinue. In
June he made his public Entry, which was extraordinary magnificent, and the
next day after he had Audience, in which he demanded of the Elector, his
Daughter, the Princess Mary Sophia in Marriage, for the King his Master. At the
same time, in compliance to the Request of the King of Portugal, a Squadron of
Men of War was fitted out in England, and sailed under the command of the Duke
of Grafton to Rotterdam, there to take aboard the new Queen, and conduct her to
Lisbon. On the 8th. of July, the Ceremony of the Marriage was performed at
Heydelberg, on the 10th. the Queen set out on her Journey toward Rotterdam, on
the 27th. she went aboard the English Squadron, 1687.
at the Briel, and on the 11th. of August, King Peter Marries the Princess of
Newburg.
arrived in the River of Lisbon. That same day the King went aboard to receive
the Queen, and conducted her ashore, where the Marriage was consummated the
same Night. The exact Neutrality which Portugal has observed during the late
Wars, which have harrassed and exhausted the greatest part of Europe, is the
cause there is nothing worthy our Observation to add relating to that Kingdom.
Only this may be observed, that as the War has improverished other States, so
they by continuing in Peace, have vastly enriched themselves, and so improved
their Maritime Strength, that they have at this Present, near 100 Seamen, for
one they had 20 Years ago, for now they Trade in their own Vessels to all parts
of Europe, whereas at that time, all their Commodities were transported upon
Foreign Bottoms. And moreover their own particular Trade to their Plantations
in America, and to India is vastly augmented. Such are the Fruits of Peace,
especially when other Nations sink under the Calamities of War. To conclude,
there remains nothing more, but to set down the Royal Issue of Portugal. The
Present King Peter II. on the 11th. of August, 1687. as was said before,
married Mary Sophia, Princess of Newburg. He had issue by her, first John, born
in 1689, and dyed the same Year. Secondly, another John, born in 1690. Thirdly,
Francis born, 1691. Fourthly, Louisa, born in 1694. And lastly, Emanuel born in
1697.

FINIS.
An Alphabetical Table, containing the Principal Matters in this History.
A.
ABidis exposed, brought to Court, teaches the People to yoke Oxen, Plow and
Sow, page 13 He Reigns. p.14. Actions of the Lusitanians in Africa. p. 31
Actions in the Province of Alentejo. p. 426 Actions of John Fernandez Vieyra in
Brazil against the Dutch. p. 428 Actions in the Province of Beira, p. 433, and
468 Actions betwixt the Rivers Duero and Minho, p. 439 Actions in Africa, p.
305 An account of the Portuguese Conquests in India. p. 319 Adrian the
Emperor. p. 78 Affairs of America. p. 425 Of Castile. p. 290 Of Africa and
India. p. 438 Of India. p. 472 Africans invading Spain destroyed. p. 104 Africa
and India. p. 452 L. Agnes de Castro cruelly murdered. p. 228 Alans and
Suevians in Lusitania. p. 83 Albertus the Cardinal, Governor of Portugal. p.
367 Alcazer and Tangier on the Coast of Africa taken. p. 287 Alliances in
Africa and Asia. p. 413 Almanzor again makes great Spoil. p. 135 K. Alonso the
I. of Leon successful against the Infidels. p. 114 K. Alonso the II. of Leon
called the Chaste. His Conquests. p. 117 K. Alonso the III. of Leon, called the
Great. p. 122 King Alonso the IV. of Leon, resigns the Government to his
Brother Ramiro. He repents and raises War. p. 127 K. Alonso the V. of Leon,
under tuition. p. 137 Is slain. p. 139 K. Alonso the VI. of Leon, flies to the
protection of the Moors. After his Brothers Death returns, and is received by
the People as their King. p. 148 His Wives and Issue. p. 149 K. Alonso the I.
of Portugal, his Birth. p. 158 He Knights himself. Besieges his Mother, takes
and puts her into Irons. p. 159 Being himself besieged by King Alonso of
Castile, he articles for his Deliverance, and breaks his Faith. Wars with the
Moors* Then with Castile. p. 160 Is saluted King. p. 162 Defea^s the King of
Castile. p. 163 Takes Lisbon. Particulars of the Siege. p. 165 Overthrows the
Moors with a handful of Men. Another like Exploit of his. p. 166 Wars with
Leon. p. 167 Being put to flight breaks his Leg, fulfilling his Mothers Curse
when he put Fetters upon her. Besieged in Santarem by the Moors, sallies out,
and defeats them. p. 168 His Death. p. 172 His Arms, Wife and Issue. p. 173 K.
Alonso the IId. of Portugal his Birth. p. 180 He attacks the Towns given by his
Father to his Sisters. Is routed by the King of Leon. p. 181 Recovering,
defeats the Army of Leon. Is reconciled to his Brethren. p. 182 Laws enacted by
him. p. 183 His Death, Wife and Issue. p. 184 K. Alonso the III. his Birth and
Actions, till his Assumption to the Crown. p. 192 He is received as Regent.
Puts away his Wife and marries another. p. 193 Conquers Algarve. p. 194 His
Cruelty toward his lawful Wife. p. 196 Resumes his former Gifts, and opposes
the Clergy. p. 198 His Description, Death and Issue. p. 199 His Arms, Men
famous in his time. p. 200 K. Alonso the IV. wholly addicted to his Pleasure.
p. 219 At variance with his Bastard Brother. Ibid. Marries his Daughter to the
King of Castile. p. 220 Enters Castile with an Army. p. 225 Aids the Castilians
against the Moors in Person. ^. 226 The two Kings overthrow the Infidels. p.
227 His eldest Son privately marries the Lady Agnes de Castro. p. 228 His
Death, Wife and Issue. p. 229 His Arms. p. 230 King Alonso the V. his Birth.
His accession to the Crown, and Differences betwixt the Queen and Nobility. p.
279 He marries the Regents Daughter. Takes upon him the Government, and
confirms all that had been done by the Regent. p. 283 Takes Alcazer on the
Coast of Africa. p. 287 Takes Arzila and Tangier. Changes his Title. p. 289
Wages War with Castile, in defense of the rightful Hei^ess. p. 290 Prosecutes
the War. p. 291 Sails into France. p. 294 Resolves to end his days at
Jerusalem. p. 296 His Death. p. 297 His Issue and Discoveries during his
Reign. p. 298 K. Alonso the VI. takes upon him the Government. p. 5^^ The
source of his Misfortunes. p. 529 Slanders cast upon him. p. 533 Resolves to
take upon him the Government. p. 538 Those that affronted him in the person of
Conti Banished. p. 541 He grows more loose in his Life. p. 542 A Match
concluded for him. p. 545 He offers the Infant^ satisfaction. p. 552 Fearing
the Faction offers to compound with the Infant. p. 553 Is in great perplexity.
p. 5^5 Betrayed by his Queen. Makes choice of Antony de So^^a de Macedo, in the
place of Castelmelhor. p. 556 Is abandoned by all Men. p. 5^9 Forced by his
Enemies to call the assembly of the States Designs to fly to the Army, but is
prevented by his Broth^^. p. 560 Resolutely desires to resign the Crown. p. 562
Is sent Prisoner to the Island Tercera. Brought back and confined to the Castle
of Cintra. p. 566 His Death. p. 569 P. Alonso marries Elizabeth Daughter to the
K. and Q. of Castile and Aragon. p. 360 He is killed by a fall from his Horse.
p. 307 Alonso Son to K. Edward I. that had the Title of Prince in Portugal. p.
275 An incredible Relation. p. 121 An Astrological Prediction. p. 275 Antonius
Pius Emperor. p. 78 D. Antony de A^aide Favorite to K. John the III. his
Character. p. 331 Antony de Sousa, and Emanuel An^unez, the remaining Friends
of the King, forced to fly* p. 559 Antony the Bastard, declared Protector by
the Rabble. p. 356 His Birth and Education. He enters Lisbon, and is saluted
King. p. 357 His Army routed. He is forced to fly and abscond. p. 360 He
arrives at the Terzeras with a Fleet from France. p. 361 His Fleet destroyed by
the Spaniards. p. 362 He flies into England. p. 363 Dies in France. p. 364
Arian Heresy first spread in Lusitania. p. 92 Arms of Porto. p. 34 Artilius
again overthrows the Lusitanians. p. 31 Augustus Caesar comes into Spain. p. 69
Is acknowledged Emperor of the World, and temples erected to him. p. 70 Azamor
on the coast of Africa submits to the King of Portugal. p. 303 (...) is taken
by force. p. 323
B.
BAbel^Tower built. p. 3 Bacchus in Spain. p. 11 Badajoz Besieged. p. 497 Baia
recovered. p. 379 Barbarities of the Rebellions Rabble. p. 255 Barbarous
Sacrifice. p. 17 Battle betwixt two Kings. p. 292 Betwixt private Men and their
Forces. p. 199 Of Ourique and Reflections upon it. p. 162 Of Elvas. Spaniards
defeated. p. 499 Of Evora. p. 514 Of Montesclaros. p. 524 Beatrix Daughter to
K. Emanael married to the Duke of Savoy. p. 326 Bemoy an African Prince flies
into Portugal. Is murdered by Peter Vaz da Cunha. p. 305 K. Bermudo advanced to
the Throne, overthrows the Moors. He resigns the Crown. p. 117 K. Bermudo the
II. looses many places, and is routed by Almanzor. p. 134 K. Bermudo the III.
succeeds. p. 140 Betus the VI. King of Spain. p. 5 Birth of our Savior. p. 71
Of King Emanuel's fourth and fifth Sons. p. 320 Of Camaen the great Portuguese
Poet. p. 321 Of King John's Son Peter now reigning. p. 446 Of the Infanta, Mary
Frances. p. 567 Bishop of Lamego going Ambassador to Rome, taken by the
Spaniards. p. 402 Blanch Divorced from the Prince. p. 221 Body of Spanish Horse
Routed. p. 521 B^gud the African ravages the Coasts. p. 65 Both sides cease
from Hostilities. p. 434 D. of Braganza Beheaded for High Treason. p. 301
Brigus IV. King of Spain. p. 4 Brutus the Consul takes the City Lacobrica, and
destroys the Country about Braga. p. 42 He destroys near 60000 Galicians,
Conquers Lusitania and Galicia and Triumphs at Rome. p. 43
C.
CAcus chosen General. p. 12 Cadiz Assaulted by the English. p. 380 Caesar
comes into Lusitania. p. 57 Subdues the Herminij, and routs a vast multitude.
p. 58 His remaining Actions in Spain. p. 59 He returns, and expels Pompey's
party. p. 62 Overthrows young Pompey at Munda. p. 63 Conquers the Lusitanians
and settling Peace at Beja, calls that City Pax Julia. p. 65 Cai^s Caligula
Emperor. p. 74 Carthaginians come to relieve the Phaenicians. p. 15 They are
defeated. p. 16 Expelled by the Romans. p. 26 M. of Caracena General of the
Spaniards. p. 521 Besieges Villaviciosa. p. 522 C. Castenheda Besieges Valencia
de Alcantara. p. 517 Advances to relieve Villaviciosa. p. 523 Castile separates
from Leon and erects a Government under two Judges. p. 126 Castilians enter
Portugal. p. 263 C. Castelmelhor succeeds in the King's favor. p. 538 He
rises. p. 540 His Brother favorite to the Infant. p. 544 He withdraws from
Court. p. 555 Catherine Infanta of Portugal married to King Charles II. of
England. p. 502 Celtae settle in Portugal. p. 14 Cessation of Arms betwixt
Spain and Portugal for three Years. p. 267 With the Dutch. p. 403 Charity of
the Spaniards to the distressed Portugueses. p. 277 Charles V. the Emperor
marries Elizabeth, Sister to K. John III. p. 332 K Charles I. of England, then
Prince of Wales, in Spain. p. 367 Chindasuindus possesses himself of the
Kingdom by force. p. 100 K. Chintila holds two Synods. p. 100 Christian and
Moorish Armies Engage. p. 346 Christian Dominions in Spain divided betwixt the
two Sons of K. Alonso. p. 123 Church settled. p. 80 Church of St. James the
Apostle in Galicia Dedicated. p. 123 Cincinnatus succeeds Caesar. p. 60 City
Braga founded by the Carthaginians. p. 19 City Mirtiry built by the Tyrians. p.
21 Civil Broils. p. 132 Civil War in Portugal. p. 282 Citadel taken from the
Spaniards. p. 397 Conspirators incense the People against the Spaniards. p. 392
Resolve to put their designs in Execution. p. 387 Meet and execute their
design. p. 395 Their Deputies confer with the Duke at Almada. p. 388 Claudius
and Aurelianus Emperors. p. 80 Claudius and Nero Emperors. p. 75 Clergy joins
in Rebellion with the Laity. p. 189 Cneus and Sextus the two Sons of Pompey in
Spain. p. 62. Coimbra taken by the Advice and Assistance of the Monks of
Lorvan. p. 144 Columbus after discovering America arrives at Lisbon. p. 308
Combat betwixt two Women. p. 267 Common complaints when subjects will rebel. p.
186 Complaints made to the Pope and all things adjusted. p. 186 Condition of
Portugal. p. 381 Considerable losses of the Portuguese in India. p. 485
Conspiracy against the King of Castile, discovered. p. 258 Against the
Protector. p. 261 Against the New King John. p. 403 To seize Cartagena. p. 416
Against King Alonso VI. p. 544 Constantine the Great. p. 80 Conti seized by the
faction and sent to Brazil. p. 536 Is recalled from Brazil, but Banished the
Court, privately Meets the King. p. 543 Conversion of Lusitanians from
Arianism. p. 94 Coroco^a a famous Robber. p. 71 Cortes meet, and instead of
settling Peace widen the breach. p. 280 Meet again. p. 415, 436, and 563. First
Council of Braga. p. 83 Council and magistrates of Lisbon combine with the
Infant. p. 553 Counterfeits personate King Sebastian. p. 348, and 367 Count S.
Lorerco his Actions in Alentejo. p. 452 Crassus destroys near 40000 Spaniards.
p. 61 Croisade brought into Portugal. p. 287 Customs of the Inhabitants. p. 17
D.
DEath of Prince Philip, the Empress, and others. p. 333 Debates about
proclaiming the Protector. p. 261 K. Denis his Birth and Succession to the
Crown. He marries Elizabeth, Daughter of Peter, King of Aragon. p. 209 Has
differences with his Brother Alonso. p. 210 Enters Castile the second time. p.
211 Is chosen mediator betwixt the King of Castile and the lawful Heir then
banished. p. 213 An unjust sentence given by him against the rightful Heir. p.
214 He is at variance with his Son. p. 215 His structure and other Works. p.
217 His Wife and Issue. p. 218 Denis Son to K. Peter enters Portugal with an
Army. p. 269 Design to murder K. John. p. 441 Differences betwixt Castile and
Portugal, composed by the Pope. p. 195 In the Cortes about ransoming Prince
Ferdinand. p. 278 Adjusted. p. 568 Discoveries in North America. p. 319
Dolabella again subdues the Lusitanians. p. 44 Double Treachery. p. 484 Duke de
Alva with the Spanish Forces draws near to Lisbon. He passes the River Tagus.
p. 358 The Forts upon the River taken by him. p. 359 Duke of Braganza refuses
to go into Castile. Is made General. p. 364 Duke of Lancaster invited by the
Portuguese, Lands in Galicia with 2000 Horse and 3000 Archers. p. 269 He meets
K. John. P. Henry of Castile marries his Daughter. p. 266 Duke of Medina
Sidonia being suspected in Spain, Challenges K. John. p. 408 Dutch contrary to
Faith given, take several places in India. p. 425 In Brazil receive succors.
p. 437 Beaten out of Angola in Africa. p. 449 Prepare to make War upon
Portugal. p. 454 In Brazil. p. 376 They take the Capital City called Baja. p.
377 Other Actions of theirs after taking Baja. p. 378
E.
EArthquakes. p. 57, and 332 Earthquakes, Inundations, and Storms, for 8 years.
p. 178 Eclipse of the Sun. p. 245 K. Edw. holds a Parliament. His Expedition to
Tangier. p. 276 He dies of the Plague. p. 278 His issue. p. 279 P. Edward his
Birth. p. 274 P. Edw. contracted to Ellenor Sister to Alonso, K. of Aragon. p.
272 Edward Brother to K. John IV. p. 435 Effects of love. p. 142 Egica King. p.
106 Q. Elizabeth's provocations, and K. Philip's design against her. p. 369
Ellenor II. Daughter to King Alonso, married to Peter King of Aragon. p. 227 Q.
Ellenor flies to Castile. p. 256 Princess Ellenor contracted to the Emperor
Frederick III. p. 286 Elvas and other places delivered to K. Philip. p. 356 K.
Emanuel his Birth and descent. He is proclaimed King. p. 313 Marries Elizabeth
Widow of the late Prince Alonso. p. 315 Then Marries the Sister of his last
Queen. Sends succors to the Venetians against the Turks. p. 316 Founds the
Monastery of Belem. p. 317 His Queen delivered of a Son. p. 318 He receives the
Order of the Garter from K. Henry VIII. of England. Punishes his Lord Steward
for his Cruelty to a Servant. p. 322 His Eighth Son Born. p. 323 Birth of his
Tenth Child, and Death of his Queen. p. 324 He Marries again. p. 325 His Death.
His Structures and other Works. p. 327 His Wives and Issue. p. 328 Ambassadors
sent to all Courts of Europe. p. 401 Ambassadors of Castile sent away without
Answer. p. 281 Emerita Augusta, now Merida, Founded by Augustus. p. 69
Endeavors used for obtaining of Bishops, but in vain. p. 470 Endeca Usurps the
Crown of Portugal. p. 96 He is Deposed and shorn a Monk, by Leovigildus the
Goth. p. 97 Engagements by Sea. p. 172, and 337 English and Portugueses take
Towns in Castile. p. 248 Enterprises on the Frontiers of Alentejo. p. 462 C.
Ericeira succeeds D. Roderick de Castro in the Government of Tangier. p. 489
Ervigius succeeds Wamba. p. 105 His Actions. p. 106 Exploits in India. p. 342
F.
FAbius Maximus defeats the Spanish Army, and kills Curious their General. p* 38
Fabulous's relation. p. 161 Faction levelled against the Favorite. p. 551
Faithless proceedings of the Dutch in Brazil. p. 429 False Sebastian executed.
p. 368 Famine in Portugal. p. 318 Famous Battle of Aljubarata. p. 263 The
Account given of it by the Spanish Historians. p. 264 Favila succeeds Pelagius.
p. 114 K. Ferdinand of Navarre, kills K. Bermudo, and becomes sole Monarch of
Castile, Leon, Portugal, Galicia, and Navarre. p. 141 He is called the Great.
His Conquests over the Infidels. p. 143 Dying, divides his Dominions. p. 145
Ferdinand King of Portugal, his Birth. He engages in War against Castile. p.
236 Enters into League with the Moorish King of Granada. p. 237 Marries the
Lady Ellenor divorced from her Husband. p. 241 Joins in League with John of
Gaunt against Castile. p. 242 Enters into League with the King of Castile
against him of Aragon. p. 244 Underhand treats with the Dukes of Lancaster and
York, about subduing Castile. p. 245 After the Peace he again submits to the
Antipope. p. 249 He falls sick. p. 250 He dies. His Character, and Issue. p.
251 Fifteen Thousand Spaniards slain by Mummius. p. 30 Five persons appointed
to govern after the Death of the King, and Cardinal Henry; the same to decide
the Controversy concerning the succession. p. 352 They rule Portugal. p. 354
Flavius Gundemarus Reigns. p. 99 Flavius Suintila Reigns. He utterly expels the
Romans. p. 100 Fleet of Castile worsted by the Portugueses. p. 211 Fleet of
Castile ravages the Coast. p. 248 Fleet of French at Porto. p. 163 Fleet of
English, French, and Flemmings, in the River of Lisbon. p. 164 Fleet sent
against the Dutch. p. 377 Forces of Castile overthrown by those of Portugal. p.
146 Foreign Alliances concluded. p. 410 Fort S. George on the Coasts of Africa.
p. 300 Francis Barreto prosecutes the War in Brazil. p. 465 His further Actions
in Brazil. p. 470 He bolds the Dutch close Besieged in Brazil. p. 476 Turns his
blockade at Arrecife into a formal Siege. p. 480 Francis de Lucena the
Secretary put to Death upon account of a supposed Conspiracy. p. 419 Froila a
Portuguese Count, rebels. His submission. p. 138 K. Fruela kills 60000 Moors. p
115 Fruela II. Usurps the Crown. p. 126 Fulvius overthrows the Spaniards. p. 29
Funeral Pomp of the Lady Agnes de Castro. p. 232 Further Discoveries in Guinea.
p. 307
G.
GAlba governs the Province. p. 32 Galba Emperor. p. 76 Galicians overun the
most part of Lusitania. p. 66 Galienus Emperor. p. 79 Garzia has for his part
Galicia, and the North of Portugal. p. 124 Gargoris finds the use of Honey. p.
12 Gascons come into Portugal and assist the Christians. p. 136 General
Council. p. 276 Gerion comes into Portugal. p. 5 He becomes King. Introduces
Idolatry. p. 6 S. German Duke Besieges Olivenca. p. 492 Goa Besieged by the
Indians. The Siege raised. p. 571 Gonzalo Hermigues his Actions. p. 169 Goths
who they were. p. 82 They enter Spain. p. 85 Great and bloody Battle. p. 111
Dearths and Storms. p. 20 Famine. p. 177 Fleet from Lisbon for the Conquest of
Ceuta. p. 271 Floods, Storms, and Sickness in Spain. p. 65 Preparations in
Spain and Portugal. p. 422 Guimaraens betrayed to the New King. p. 262
H.
HAmilcar subdues all Spain. p. 22 Hannibal settles in Spain. p. 23 Marches
into Italy. p. 25 Henry the Count, marries the Bastard Daughter of King Alonso
of Castile. p. 149 Opinions concerning him. p. 151 His Original of Burgundy. p.
153 His coming into Portugal. He gains the Affection of King Alonso, who
marries his Aunt. He takes to Wife, Teresa the said King's Bastard Daughter,
and has in Dower the City Porto, and its Territory. p. 154 Overthrows the
Infidels, and takes Almanzor Prisoner. For his good Services, receives other
Territories of King Alonso. p. 155 Another Overthrow given by him to the Moors.
A Moorish King restored by him. He performs other great Actions. p. 156 His
Death, Character and Issue. p. 157 Henry K. of Castile in Portugal. p. 238 He
invades Portugal. p. 242 Quarters in the Suburbs of Lisbon. p. 243 Henry Prince
of Portugal marries Blanch Aunt, to the King of Castile. p. 220 He contracts
with the Lady Constance, Daughter* to D. John Emanuel. p. 221 Henry the
Cardinal Regent. p. 341 His Birth. He is declared Protector, and crowned King
p. 349 His Death. His Eulogy. p. 353 Henry Son to the King of Congo, comes into
Portugal. p. 322 Hercules governs Spain, and leaves the Crown to Hesperus p. 10
Hercules the Theban in Spain, ^verthrows Cacus. p. 12 Hesperus deposed, and
Atlas set up in his p^ace. p. 10 Hostilius Mancinus overthrows 30000 Spaniards.
p. 37 How things stood in Africa and India. p. 444 Hypocrisy of a Nun. p. 367
I.
S. James the Apostle in Spain. p. 74 D. James de Lima Governor of the Province
betwixt Duero and Minho. p. 453 Iberus II. King of Spain. p. 4 Jews conspire
against the King, and are punished. p. 106 Fly out of Castile into Portugal. p.
304 Banished the Kingdom. p. 314 Ingratitude of certain Gentlemen. p. 350
Inhuman Murder. p. 140 Insolent Words of the Marquess de Cascais to the King.
p. 561 Interregnum of an Hundred Years. p. 11 John, Bastard Son to K. Peter,
aspires to the Crown. p. 252 Before assuming the Crown, he murders Count John
Fernandez And^yro. p. 253 He is declared Protector of the Kingdom. p. 254 The
Castle of Lisbon taken by him. p. 255 His Contrivances to usurp the Crown. p.
256 He fails Sick. p. 272 He dies, his Character, Wife and Issue. p. 273 His
Arms, discoveries in his time. p. 274 His Funeral. p. 275 John II. proclaimed
King, his Father arrives 4 days after. p. 296 His Birth. p. 299 He is again
proclaimed King. p. 300 Styles himself Lord of Guinea. p. 303 Is poisoned. His
Death. p. 309 Is reputed a Saint, his Virtues. p. 310 More of his good
Qualities. p. 311 His Issue, Discoveries during his Reign. p. 312 John the III.
King, his Birth. p. 329 He is proclaimed King. p. 330 Marries Catherine Sister
to the Emperor Chapter the V. p. 331 Sends Succors to the Emperor. p. 333
Ordinances made by him. p. 335 He dies. p. 338 Actions abroad during his Reign.
p. 339 John the IV. proclaimed King in India. p. 403 He rewards those that
suffered for the Conspiracy at Carthagena. p. 420 His last Sickness and Death.
p. 489 His Wi^e and Issue. p. 490 John Prince of Portugal, privately marries
Mary, Sister to Q. Elenor. p. 244 He murders her. p. 245 John Prince of
Portugal, marries Joanna Daughter to Charles the V. He dies. His Princess
delivered of a Son. p. 336 D. John of Austria with the Spanish Army, invades
Portugal. Takes Aronches. p. 501 Takes Alconchel. p. 502 Burns and plunders the
Country. p. 503 Takes Villabuim and Borba. Besieges Jurumenha. p. 504 Takes
Jurumenha. p. 506 Enters Crato. p. 507 Comes again into Portugal with an Army
of 21000 Men. p. 509 Besieges Evora. p. 510 Evora is delivered to him. p. 511
Marches out of Evora to give the Portugueses Bartle. p. 512 Is defeared.
Attempts Elvas, and is repulsed. p. 515 Islands of Bayona in Galicia. p. 45
Jubelus III. King of Spain. p. 4 Julian the Count Favorite to King Roderick.
p. 108 Is sent Ambassador into Africa. p. 109 Meditates Revenge. Brings the
Moors into Spain. p. 110
K.
KIngs of the Alans and Suevians. p. 83 King of Castile obstructs the Marriage
of the Lady Constance. p. 222 King of Castile marries the Daughter of K.
Ferdinand. p. 249 King of Castile invades Portugal. Is at variance with Queen
Ellenor. p. 257 Kings of France and Portugal meet. p. 294 King of Spain's
Favorite disgraced. p. 421 King bent upon public Rejoicing for Peace. p. 270
Kingdom of the Suevians united under Remismundus. p* 91
L.
LEovigildus the Goth wars upon his Son Herminigildus, on account of Religion.
p. 96 He persecutes the Catholics, but dies one himself. p. 97 P. Lewis dies.
p. 338 Lisbon besieged by Sea and Land. p. 258 The Siege raised. p. 260
Mutinies at the instigation of the Nobility. p. 554 Plundered by the Spaniards.
p. 360 Most of it burnt. p. 243 Lisias made King. p. 12 Lominij three Sons of
Gerion. p. 8 Lusitania governed by Lieutenants. p. 99 Lusitanians revolt, and
are reduced. p. 44 Lusus ascends the Throne. p. 10
M.
MAgellan discovers the streights of his Name. p. 325 Manner of lamenting the
death of a King. p. 174 Many places in Portug. taken and destroyed by the
Moors. p. 133 Recovered. p. 137 Marcus Aurelius Emperor. p. 79 Margaret of
Savoy, Duchess of Mantua, governs Portugal. p. 382 Mary Francis Elizabeth,
Wife to King Alonso the VI. assists the Infant. p. 554 Motives of her aversion
to the King. p. 549 Her undecent Behavior toward the King. p. 557 Knowing the
King would be deposed, she flies to a Monastery, p. 560 She presses to have
Peter declared King, p. 563 Her Marriage with the King declared null, p. 564
Her Death, p. 571 A match concluded betwixt the Infant and D. of Savoy, p. 568
It is broke off. p. 569 Mauregatus the Bastard usurps the Crown. p. 116
Mauritanians ravage Spain. p. 79 Maximin Emperor. p. 79 Means proposed to
reconcile different pretensions* p. 351 Meeting at Lisbon about K. Ferdinands
Marriage. p. 241 Men famous for Learning. p. 93 Mezerbal subdues Portugal. p.
17 Michael Prince sworn Heir of Castile, Aragon and Portugal. p. 315 He dies.
p. 316 Military Action in the Province of Tralosmontes. p. 413 Monks of
Claraval come into Portugal. p. 159 Monte Mayor taken and demolished. p. 145
Moors to the Number of 200000 Foot, and 40000 Horse landed in Spain. p. 111
They overrun all Spain. p. 112 Ravage the Country. p. 177 Vanquished at Elvas.
p. 183 Moriscoes banished Spain. p. 372 Morocco King slain. p. 347 Moron
surrendered. p. 494 Mountainous People descend into the Plain. p. 1^ Murderers
fly to Castile. p. 229 They are racked. p. 231 Mutiny at Lisbon for the loss of
Evora. p. 512 On account of a supposed Miracle. p. 320
N.
Nabuchodonosar in Spain. p. 15 Negotiation abroad. p. 488 At several Courts.
p. 441 In Foreign Courts. p. 464 In France and Rome. p. 446 Nerva Emperor. p.
77 New Coin. p. 336 New Governors placed in the Frontiers. p. 401 New Queen
gains Friends by her Generosity. p. 242 Noah's Flood. p. 1 His Offspring why
dispersed. p. 2. Normans invade Galicia, and are cut in pieces. p* 132 Notable
Example of Loyalty* p. 193 Number of Infidels, and greatness of Booty. p. 227
O.
OBservations on the Rise and Fall of Portugal. p. 354 Odemira, Count Governor
to the young K. Alonso the VI. His manner of proceeding. p. 530 Of 18000 Men
only 50 escaped* p. 348 Oliva taken by the Portuguese. p. 478 Only the Duke of
Braganza could give the Spaniards jealousy. p. 382 Ordono the 1st. King of
Castile rebuilds many Towns. He is overthrown by the Moors. p. 121 Ordono the
II. K. of Castile succeeds Garcia. He twice overthrows the Moors. p. 124 Being
vanquished by the Infidels, recovers and spoils the Country. p. 125 Ordono the
III. King of Castile disturbed by Rebels subdues them. p. 130 He takes Lisbon.
p. 130 Ordono, surnamed the Wicked, advanced to the Crown: p. 131 Orus Libicus,
or Hercules comes into Spain, kills the Lominij, and makes his Son Hispalus
King. p. 8 Osiris comes into Spain, kills Gerion, and gives the Crown to his
three Sons. p. 6 He returns into Egypt. p* 7 Ossuna Duke builds a Fort not far
from Almeida, p. 515 Attacks Castel-Rodrigo, and is repulsed. p. 519 Is
overthrown by Peter Jaques de Magalhaens. p. 520 Other Conspirators punished.
p. 302 Other military Actions. p. 412 Other War like exploits. p. 407 Otho
Emperor. p. 76 Overtures of Peace rejected. p. 259 Outlaws surprise Evora. p.
167
P.
PArticular Affairs of Portugal. p. 115 Peace after the Birth of Christ. p. 73
Concluded betwixt the Kings of Castile and Portugal. p. 212, 230, 243.
Confirmed with mutual Alliances. p. 213 Concluded at the instance of the Pope.
p. 240. Concluded betwixt the two Crowns. p. 297. Betwixt France and Spain. p.
500. With Spain. 564 Concluded without the knowledge of the English. p. 249
Concluded. p. 266 Not observed. p. 269 At length established, p. 270 Ratified,
p. 271* Pelayo, or Pelagius the first that opposed the Moors. p* 113 People of
Braga subdue Porto. p. 68 Averse to the Queen. p. 281 Of Evora mutiny p. 283
Perpenna chosen General of the Lusitanians* p. 54 Vanquished by Pompey, and put
to Death. p. 55 Persecution under Galienus. p. 79 Peter the Is It: King of
Portugal his Birth: p. 230 Begins his revenge whilst Prince. p. 229 He punishes
the Murderers of the Lady Agnes de Castro. p. 230. His Death, Justice, and
Magnanimity. p. 234. Laws Established by him. His Person, and Interment, p.
235. His Issue. p. 236 Peter King of Castile flying from his Rebellious
Subjects, refused protection in Portugal. p. 233 Peter the II. now King of
Portugal, whilst Infant and Brother to K: Alonso, counterfeits a Religions
Life to gain followers. 545 Grows discontented, and the King his Brother
jealous. Is enraged against Count Castelmelhor. p. 547. Strange show of
Affection betwixt him and the Q. 548: His and the Q. party increases. He openly
espouses her quarrel: p. 550 Resolves to proceed. p. 556 Heads the Rabble, p.
557 Heads the Multitude again. Sets upon the K. and extorts from him an
instrument of Resignation, 562 Is received as Regent, p. 563 Marries the Queen,
p. 565 Upon the Death of his Brother succeeds in the Throne, d. 571 Marries the
Princess of Newburg. p. 572 Peter, Bastard Brother to K. Alonso the first of
Portug. p. 170 Peter the Infant made Regent, by a Cooper and a Tailor heads
the Rabble. p. 282 Takes up Arms and is declared Rebel, 284 Comes to a Battle
with the King. And is killed. p. 285 Philip Prince of Spain, marries Mary
Princess of Portugal. p. 334 Philip the II. of Spain, and first of Portugal,
arms to secure the Crown of Portugal, whilst they prepare to oppose him. p.
35^ His Birth, 364 He enters Portugal. Grants an Amnesty, Holds a Parliament,
365 Grants Privileges to Portagal. His public entry into Lisbon, p. 366 Holds
another Parliament, Returns to Castile, p. 367 He dies, p: 370 His Description,
Wife and Issue, p. 371 Philip the III. of Spain and II. of Portugal his ^irth.
He comes into Portugal, His Reception, p. 372 He holds a Parliament, His stay
and return to Madrid, p. 374 His death, Wife and Issue. p. 374 Philip the IV.
of Spain, and III. of Portugal, his Birth. p. 375 His accession to the Crown.
p. 376 Rewards the Portuguese, p. 380 His Death. p. 527 Pinto the D. Agent
conspires with some of the Nobility, p. 380 Piso kills 5000 Lusitanians, p. 56
Plague. p* 228 At Lisbon, p: 277, 301. 353* In Portugal, p* 306 In Lisbon where
the Queen dies of it, p. 270 Pompey subdues many places, p. 55 Pope Alexander
grants the Investiture of the Kingdom of Portugal to Alonso under a Tribute, p*
171 Porto rebuilt, Its Arms, p. 84 Portugal, how divided by Augustus, p. 71
Governed by Commissioners, p. 370 Portuguese Fleet wastes the Island of Cadiz,
p. 240 Portuguese Army destroyed by the Moors, and the King's Standard taken,
p. 277 Portuguese Ambassadors Brother beheaded for a Murder in England, p. 475
Portuguese Army routed. p. 293 Portuguese General endeavors to draw away the
Spanish Army from Olivenca, by giving a diversion. p. 492 Portug. Army lays
siege to Fort S. Christoph: near Badajoz. p. 495 Portuguese Horse under Count
Schombergh routed near Badajoz. p. 501 Portuguese Colony at Rio de la Plata in
America, destroyed by the Spaniards. p. 567 Portug: Fleet all but one Galley
taken by the Castilians. p. 246 Portuguese Ambassador at Rome. p. 409 Not being
admitted, returns home. p. 422 Portuguese Army in Estremadura. p. 423
Portuguese Affairs at Rome. p. 434 Portuguese Fleet slips up the River to
Lisbon. p. 259 Portuguese Nobility insult their King on account of his
Favorite. p. 146 Portugueses attempting Barcarota repulsed with loss. p. 491
Portugueses ravage the Frontiers of Estremadura. The same in the Province of
Beira. They take Codissera. p. 431 They attempt Badajoz. p. 432 Preamble to the
Conclusion. p. 529 Presents of the first fruits of India sent to the Pope. p.
323 Prime Ministers of Spain resolve to draw the Duke out of Portugal. p. 389
Princes Rupert and Maurice, fly to Lisbon from the English, and are protected.
p. 457 They put to Sea with a Portuguese Squadron, and return without fighting.
p. 459 Prince proceeds in his disobedience. p. 216 Prince marches off with the
scattered Army. p. 293 Princess governs Spain. p. 337 Principal Conspirators
seized and punished. p. 405 Priscilian the Heretic Condemned. p. 88
Proceedings ordered to run in the name of D. John of Portugal. p. 397
Proceedings of several Ambassadors. p. 460 Prodigies seen in the Sky. p. 128,
223, 375, 345 Prodigious Birth. p. 91 Progress of the Carthaginians in Spain.
p. 21 Of the War in the Province of Alentejo, p. 411 Of the Portuguese Arms in
Brazil. p. 455 Prosecution of the War in Brasil. p. 442 Protector proclaimed
King. p. 262
Q.
QUeen Luisa prepares to invade Castile. p. 494 Her Ambition. p. 532 She sets
up Peter the In^ante against King Alonso. p. 537* The Council combines with
her. p. 536 She is forced to resign the Government. Pretends to retire, but
stays at Court in hopes to wrest the Power from her Son, p. 537 She, the
Infant, and their party hold Consultations against the K. She is at last
forced to retire. p. 542 Her Death. p. 546
R.
RAmiro I. King of Leon, his Actions. p. 119 Ramiro II. of Castile and Leon,
destroys a great Army of Infidels. p. 128 Ramiro III. succeeds under the
tuition of his Mother, and Aunt. p. 132 Rebels seize the Queen. p. 180
Recaredus succeeds. He becomes a Catholic. p. 97 He dies. p. 98 Remarks upon
the number eight. p. 111 Upon some conceits of the Portuguese Authors. p. 152
Remismundus marries the Daughter of Theodoricus. p. 92 Ricciarius his Reign. p.
88 He is overthrown by Theodoricus, King of the Goths. His end. p. 89 Richila
makes himself master of Lusitania and Andaluzia. p. 88 Robert Labril and
Richard Cambil English^men, with a Fleet of 63 Ships, arrive at Lisbon, and
assist the Portugueses against the Moors. p. 177 Roderick last King of the
Goths. p. 108 He ravishes Florinda the Daughter of Count Julian. p. 109 His
Army of 120000 Foot and 10000 Horse. p. 111 Roderick de Alencastre defeats a
Party of Moors at Tangier. p. 477 Roderick de Bivar commonly called Cid, his
Birth. p. 139 Roderick de Castro in the Province of Beira. p. 454 Romans come
into Spain. p. 25 Defeated by the Spaniards. p. 27 Twice defeated. p. 28
Romantic Story of King Ramiro. p. 129 Rout of the Christians. p. 347
S.
SAguntum destroyed. p. 24 St. Vincent's Body translated to Lisbon. p. 171
Sancho I. of Castile an Usurper called the Fa^. Returns and expels Ordono. p.
131 Sancho II. overthrows his Brother Garcia and takes him prisoner. p. 147
After subduing Portugal, he Conquers Leon and become^ sole monarch. p. 14^
Sancho I. King of Portugal, succeeds his Father Alonso. p. 17^ His Actions
under his Father. p. 174 He repairs an^ builds many Towns. p. 175 Takes Silves
in Algarve with the help of a Foreign Fleet. Subdues Algarve, and adds that
Title to Portugal. p. 176 His Death and Issue. p. 179 His Arms. p. 180 Sancho
II. King of Portugal ascends the Throne. p. 185 He entirely defeats the Moors
at Elv^^. p. 186* His Subjects ripe for Rebellion, though he is blameless. They
cavil at all his Actions. p. 188 He is betrayed by all his ministers. p. 189
His Brother Alonso made Vicar of the Kingdom by the Rebels. He flies to
Castile. His Death. p. 190 His person described. p. 191 Sappho the Carthaginian
gathers Gold in Spain. p. 1^ Schism in the Church. p. 247 Sebastian King of
Portugal his Birth. p. 340 His accession to the Crown. Odd Actions of his. p.
341 He prepares for an expedition into Africa. p. 342 Passes over into Africa.
Defeats the Moors, and returns to Lisbon. p. 343 Has an interview with the King
of Spain* makes preparations for a second Voyage into Africa. p. 344 Not to be
moved from his resolution. p. 345 He and the Nobility embark in a Fleet of 1000
Sail, with 18000 Landmen, they land at Arzila. p. 346 His Character. p. 348
Sertorius his origin. p. 45 He comes into Lusitania, his practices, his Warlike
exploits. p. 46 He is worsted by Pompey and Metellus. p. 46 Routed by Metellus.
p. 50 The Romans sustain great losses by him. p. 51 Is again overthrown by
Metellus and Pompey. p. 52 Recovers, and worsts the Romans. p. 53 Is murdered.
p. 54 Several people plant new Colonies. p. 17 Great Battles. p. 19 Towns
founded. p. 20 Pretenden to the Crown. p. 350 Military expeditions. p. 239, 406
Persons suffer martyrdom in Japan. p. 421 Enterprises on the Frontiers of
Alentejo. p. 438 Synods. p. 95 Sextus Pompeyus appears again and makes great
commotions. p. 6^ Sham Conspiracy. p. 425 Sicanus succeeds in the Throne. p. 10
Sicceleus resigns. p. 10 Siculus the next King. p. 11 Sidonians in Spain. p. 14
Si^ns of our Savior's Birth in Spain. p. 72 Silves again recovered. p. 187
Single Combat. p. 221 Sis^butus chosen King. p. 99 Sisenandus succeeds in the
Throne. p. 100 Small incursions made by the Spaniards. p. 485 Small incursions
in Beira. p. 484 (...) of Egypt threatens Jerusalem. p. 319 Some persons
apprehended upon a false information of their corresponding with Spain. p. 479
Spain divided by the Romans. p. 26 Spain and Portugal divide the World betwixt
them. p. 308 Spaniards return and rout the Consul. p. 29 They try the Governor
of Tangier without success. p. 417 They carry off a great Booty. p. 479 They
besieg^^ Olivenza without success. p. 445 Overthrown. p. 11^ Spanish Army
advances to relieve Badajoz. p. 497 Spanish and Portuguese Fleets arrive at
Brazil. p. 379 Spanish Forces defeated. p. 424 Spanish Army on the Frontiers of
Portugal. p. 427 Storms. p. 239 Strange Action of a jealous Woman. p. 197
Strange trial of ^n innocent Bishop. p. 135 Stratagem of the Christians against
the Moors. p. 141 Success of the Portuguese against the Dutch in Brazil. p. 447
Suevians, Vandals, Alans, Burgundians, and Selingi. p. 82 Suevians incorporate
with the ancient Lusitanians. p. 86 Suevians, Alans, and Selingi, join in
League against the Romans. p. 87 Suppression of the Knights Templers. p. 214
Synod at Toledo. p. 98
T.
TAgus V. King of Spain. p. 5 Taking of Santarem. p. 164 Talent used in
Portugal. p. 178 Tangier and India. p. 456, 461, 465 Tantalus commands the
Lusitanians. p. 41 Tercera Islands for Antony the Bastard. p. 361 They are
reduced. p. 362 Theodoricus having Conquered Spain, puts it under Governors. p.
90 Theodosius Prince of Portugal, made Captain General of all the Forces in the
Kingdom. p. 466 He dies. p. 475 Three Brothers fall at variance. p. ^45 Three
Spanish Galeons secured in the River of Lisbon. p. 39^ Tiberius succeeds
Augustus in the Empire. p. 74 Titus and Domitian. p. 76 Total Eclipse. p. 177
Trajan Emperor. p. 77 He reduces the Lusitanians revolting. p. 78 Truce for a
year. p. 225 Truce not duly observed. p. 267 Trial of Ordeal in use. p. 119
Tubal Lands in Portugal. p. 3^ He is first King of Spa^^. p. (...) T^lga
succeeds. p. (...) Tumults against the Queen. p. (...) Two great losses to
Portugal. p. 380 Two Kings set up in Lusitania. p. 90 Two Kings meet in
friendly manner. p. 244 Two Synods held by Recesuindus. p. 101
V.
VAlencia de Alcantara taken by the Portuguese Gener. p. 518 Vasco de Gama sent
to discover India. p. 314 Very small matter of martial exploits in the year
1655. p. 483 Vespasian Emperor. p. 76 Vice Queen and others seized. p. 396
Villaflor Count and Portuguese General marches to relieve Evora. p. 511
Recovers Evora. p. 155 Viriatus his Original. p. 33 He is worsted by Metellus.
p. 34 Routs Vetilius, defeats Plancius, and overthrows Cl. Vnima^us. p. 35
Worsts Nigidius. p. 36 Is obliged to retire by Fabius Emilianus. p. 37 Rotus
^opilius and is himself put to flight by Pompey. p. 38 He again defeats the
Romans, makes Peace with them. The Peace broken. p. 39 He is killed by
Treachery. His Funeral Pomp. p. 40 Viscount de Villa Pouca burns two Towns in
Galicia. p. 463 Vis^o Duke conspires against the King's Life. Is stabbed by the
King himself. p. 302 Vitellius Emperor. p. 67 Ulysses in Portugal. p. 13.
W.
WAmba his strange advancement to the Crown. His Wars in France and Spain. p.
102 Rebels in France subdued by him. p. 103 War betwixt the people of Braga and
Porto. p. 76 Betwixt Castile and Portugal. p. 210, 224 In the Provinces betwixt
Duero and Minho, and Tarlos Montes. p. 428 In Brazil. p. 436. Betwixt the
Romans and Suevians p. 87 Prosecuted in Brasil. p. 461 Betwixt the Christian
Kings of Spain. p. 140* In India with the Dutch. p. 477 In India unsuccessful
to Portugal. p. 482 Proceeds coldly on both sides. p. 474 Renewed with Castile.
p. 296 Wetericus Usurps. p. 99 Witisa Son to Egica Reigns in Portugal. After
his Fathers Death he is Monarch of all Spain. His cruelties. p. 107 Wonderful
Dearth. p. 14
Y.
YOrk Duke arrives at Lisbon with 3000 Men. His Son contracted to the Princess
Beatrix. p. 247
The End of the Table.

