The famous History of PALMENDOS SON to the most Renowned Palmerin D' Oliva,
EMPEROR of CONSTANTINOPLE, And the Heroic Queen of THARSUS.

Wherein is likewise A most pleasant Discourse of Prince Rifarano, the Son of
Trineus Emperor of Almain, and Aurecinda, Sister to the Soldane of Persia.

With their Knightly Deeds, and Acts of Chivalry; Their Famous Adventures, and
most Worthy Resolutions. Newly Corrected and Amended, and most Profitable and
Delightful for all sorts of People.

LONDON: Printed by E. Alsop, and are to be sold at her house in Grubstreet,
near the Upper Pump. 1653.

The Epistle to the Reader.
THere is no doubt but among those who shall peruse this History, some there are
that will esteem it worthy a more advantageous title then that of Letters, as
well in regard of those things therein frequently handled, as in respect of the
exactness of the Dialect whereof it is composed, which sufficiently commends
it self and the ability of the Author, whose works (whereof this is but a part)
can hardly be paralelled by any for the gracefulness of discourse, or the
sublimity of conceits.

Here are no long and tedious Apologies, but at the first dash you will find
matter of substance and delight; the Reasons go altogether along without
assistance, and their ornament allowed them with freedom of conceptions, the
fecundity of language; and yet that is not passed promiscuously.

But as concerning the several subjects whereon this History is grounded, they
are sufficient to draw and allure the inclination of the mind, and the scope of
the matter equally incident, and naturally delightful to all sorts of people of
both sexes; and it were an error to imagine, there are some things so
particular to the one, that the other cannot touch upon the same without some
injury thereunto; briefly, whatsoever may fall into discourse, and under reason,
are the objects the Author aims at.

All the wisdom of the Pagans is contained in those Epistles and Orations of
Seneca; and we are beholding to the Author of this History for the very
Quintaessence of Romancy* wherein we shall yet stand amazed at the perfection of
those things here treated on: and to say that any has joined Art to abundance,
and mingled mildness with Majesty, or has raised his style, without either
losing himself, or straying from his subject, that is it which in truth we find
no where better performed then in this History. And if any little defects be
found herein which has happened in the Press, I hold they ought to be born with
(they being but literals) in regard the matter it self is full of variety.

It is altogether impertinent to insist further in the praise and commendations
of this work, but I shall leave it to all those that are delighted, and desire
to edify themselves by History, first to read, and then to judge; and in so
doing I doubt not but when they have weighed the matter and the phrase in the
balance of their own reason; they will acknowledge that it is both pleasing
and profitable, and if in this kind it find the like vitility in these times as
it has done heretofore, then has he his desire, who is

Thine etc. A M.

THE HISTORY OF PALMENDOS: Son to the famous Palmerin d'Oliva, Emperor of
Constantinople, and the Queen of Tharsus. Discoursing likewise of the Prince
Rifarano, son to Trineus Emperor of Almain, and Aurecinda sister to the Sultan
of Persia; their Knightly deeds of Chivalry, famous Adventures, and worthy
RESOLUTIONS.
CHAP. I. How Belcar and Tyrendos being in the Court of the Emperor Palmerin,
received their Order of Knighthood; and how Belcar departed secretly from
Constantinople: And of the Combat he fought in the Realm of Macedon, against
the three Sons of a Knight that lodged him.
NOt long after the destruction of the magnificent Monarchy of the Romans, was
erected a new Empire in Greece, which the incomprehensible bounty divine
favored with continual happiness, placing the good Prince Palmerin d' Oliva in
the Crown and lawful Government thereof; as well in respect of his great
prowess, high and Knightly paradoxes, which with vigilant care he used for the
defense of such an estate, the only renown whereof brake the designs of many,
that by hostility sought to disquiet him; as, also in regard of the notable
lineage and posterity discending from him, of whose virtues and heroical
perfections, this present History of Palmendos his son is contrived, and
therefore to be placed at the end of his fathers travels. In which discourse
already extant, (gentle Readers) you have understood how the Emperor Palmerin
so loved and honored Knights errand, that from the furthest parts of the world
they came to his Court, because yearly he continued a sumptuous spectacle in
form of a Tourney, for the exercise of Knightly and military discipline: And
with such religious zeal was this worthy practice followed, that the Court
might well be called the School of Arms, and Nurse of civility. For this cause,
many Kings Princes, and great Lords, sent their sons to be there educated among
whom the good Knight Frysol King of Hungaria sent one of his, named Belcar, and
the Duke Eustace of Mecaena another, called Tirendos; that they might deserve
their Knighthood at the hand of the Emperor the true mirror and Idea of
manhood, and so consequently they to participate some part of his bounty and
prowess.

The time then being come that Belcar son to King Frysol should receive his
order of Knighthood, he humbly entreated the Emperor that he might enjoy it at
his hand; and Tirendos son to Duke Eustace of Mecaena, desirous of the self
same honor, made the like request unto his Majesty: Whereto the good Emperor
(who loved them both with singular affection, knowing how well Chivalry would
be employed by them) right willingly condescended.

Hereupon, after they had performed the accustomed vigil, he knighted these two
Princes with great royalty desiring God to bestow such favor on them, as at no
time they might degenerate from their famous predecessors. And to Belcar,
embracing him in his arms, he said, My good Nephew, heaven accomplish in you
such perfections of manhood, as each one may know you to be the son of the
worthy Knight Sir Frysol, a Prince so hardy and valiant, as any that ever
followed Arms. The ceremonies being ended, they all returned to the Palace,
where the new Knights being unarmed, rich Robes and Mantles were brought them,
for the greater honor of the feast, which in the Court at this time exceeded.
But Belcar took little pleasure in beholding the diverse occurrences at this
Assembly, because his mind mas more busied with expectation of future glory,
which made him thus to commune with himself.

Belcar thou have now no longer time to rest, seeing thou have received the
honorable order of Knighthood, and that at the hands of the Emperor thine
Uncle, whom the divine providence has endued with so many laudable virtues:
nor does any thing want in the King thy father, that is required in a man at
arms. If then hitherto thou have lived in pleasures and delights, henceforth
thou must bequeath thy self to travel, to show that thou do resemble in
some things thy Ancestors, who with great labor have attained such fame and
renown, as the memory thereof shall remain immortal. And if thou will not
darken this honor, then must thou hasten thy departure from the Court* and
follow the search of strange adventures, as they did in their days for thine
example.

After many and sundry thoughts that fought together within his spirit he
concluded to depart accompanied but with one Squire, and that so secretly as
could be devised. Thence would he travel directly toward Macedon, to make the
first proof of his valor in the adventure of Francelina, who was enchanted in
the Isle of Carderia, as was declared in the history of Palmerin di Oliva. And
at this time was little talk of any other thing, then of the number of Knights
that daily sought to win her in marriage and with her the Kingdom of Thessaly:
for such was the promised guerdon and recompense, to him that could deliver her
out of the enchanted Castle, but hitherto all the Knights lost their labor,
for none was able to finish the adventure. Belcar being earnestly provoked with
the fame of this occasion, which was generally reputed strange and full of
danger, resolved to frame his journey thither, because he earnestly desired to
bring the enchantment to end: his reason herein not to be disallowed for beyond
the achievement of great honor and praise, he should be endued with so fair a
Princess, as could not he judged inferior to any. In this surpassing desire,
concealed from any one but himself, in regard of his perfect hope to compass
the same: three days he honored the feast with his presence, and the fourth
day early in the morning putting on a rusty green armor, which for this
purpose he had secretly provided, carrying likewise in his Sheeld for his
devise, a Castle Gules in a field Argent, unseen of any, he left the city,
riding on toward the realm of Macedon.

The Emperor soon after understanding hereof, was not a little glad of his
worthy enterprise, which he witnessed in the presence of all his Lords and
Barons, saying. So help me God, as my opinion and hope is persuaded, that
Belcar will so honorably follow arms, as each of you will rejoice to hear the
discourse of his fortunes: heaven further and favor his attempts, directing
all his actions in such sort, as no tongue may control his noble forwardness.
Belcars departure was liked of every one, except Tirendos who was thereat
marvellously offended, because he had not acquainted him with his intent, for
gladly would he have born him company, and therefore he determined never to
give over travel till he found him, as it came to pass very soon after. In
mean while, Belcar made such speed in his journey, as without meeting any
adventure to hinder him, in short time he attained the limits and confines of
the Empire: and entering the frontiers of Macedon, that night he was lodged in
the Castle of an old courteous Knight, who fitting at his gate, and seeing
Belcar pass by in the evening, somewhat late, entreated him for that night to
let him be his Host, which he not willing to refuse, was well content to accept
his offer. After that Belcar was unarmed, the old Knight so well liked his
brave constitution of body, his affable qualities, and modest speeches, as he
had great pleasure to sit and talk with him, and falling from one circumstance
to another, the good old Knight perceived in the end, that his guest was one in
great favor with the Emperor Palmerin.

Now must I let you understand, that this courteous old Knight had three sons,
by nature proud and evil disposed, envying the liberal hospitality which their
father used to traveling passengers; wherefore the good old man, too well
acquainted with their malicious behavior, took them aside to admonish them,
that they should use no frowning or discourtesie to his guest. Know my sons,
quoth he, that this night we have in our house one of the Emperors Knights,
whose countenance does witness that he is of high descent: I pray you
therefore do him all the honor you may, entertaining him with cheerful and
hearty good will, not using any speeches, but such as are modest and meet for
Gentlemen. They answered that they would fulfill his commandment; yet their
father was no sooner gone, but they concluded altogether on the morrow to
assail Belcar at the entrance of a Forest, which was not far distant from the
Castle, to try if he were such a man as their father commended him to be: and
being thus resolved, they would not be seen at supper, but early in the morning
clasping on their Armor, they rode to the place of their appointment. The
reverend father seeing the ingratitude and disobedience of his sons, did all
the honor he possibly could to Belcar; who requiting his gentleness with many
thanks in the morning set forward on his journey: And scarcely had he ridden
two leagues but he met the three brethren under a wood side, when the eldest of
them came to him with these speeches. Sir Knight you must of necessity Just
with me, otherwise your passage may not be permitted, for now I am desirous to
make proof if thou be so valiant as men do esteem thee. Belcar, who stood in
doubt of a greater ambush, took his Lance from his Squire, and in very
courteous manner thus replied. You may be ashamed, Sir Knight, to assail any
Gentleman belonging to the Emperor in this sort, and happily you may deal with
such a one, who shall give you but little time to sit down and repent ye.
Trouble not your mind with such imaginations (quoth another of the brethren)
but prepare your self to try the event. At which words they fetched their
carreer, and encountered together with such vigor, as their Lances flew in
shivers up into the air, Belcar being not moved in his saddle, where contrary
wise he gave his enemy such a puissant stroke with the counterbuste of his
staff, as it was too late for him to call for a Chyrurgian. When the other two
brethren saw this spectacle, and being persuaded that their elder Brother was
wounded to the death, provoked with extreme rage and indignation, they came to
Belcar ^^th these words.

In an evil hour (Knight) did thou give that blow, because thy death shall
recompense the fame. So they ran both together fiercely against him, the one
failing in the meeting, and the others hap so good, as he gave Belcar a small
wound on the Arm; yet being of resolute courage, he buckled with them so close,
as one of them he sent to keep company with his eldest brother, and the other
he brought into such extremity, that he fell from his horse deprived of his
senses. The Squire that came with these three brethren, seeing the bad fortune
of his Masters sons, rode presently back to the Castle, and finding the aged
Knight in his chamber thus began.

Alas my Lord, in an unhappy hour did you entertain the Knight that lodged here
last night, who (as it seems) came only to kill your sons. So delivered he the
whole discourse of the fight, which provoked the sad father to shed forth
abundance of tears: yet did he especially condemn his sons, whose pride and
arrogance had thus caused their own death. His servants understanding the cause
of his laments, went presently to the place where the brethren were
discomfited, and there they found two of them deprived of life, the third
likewise in very great danger, unless speedy provision were made to prevent
it. So causing him to be laid in a Litter, and the other two on a Knightly
B^er, they thus brought them to their fathers Castle* where their Lady mother
met them with wonderful effuse of tears and lamentations, as one would have
judged her altogether void of sense and discretion, then any way pertaker of
humane wit or reason. Like sorrow was made by one of her daughters, who loved
her brethren very dearly, and after she had somewhat pacified her self, she
made a solemn vow to her mother, never to take rest in her mind and thoughts,
until she were thoroughly revenged on the murderer. Wherefore when her two
dead brethren were buried, she departed against her fathers will, accompanied
only with two Squires to seek Belcar, intending to be revenged on him by one
means or other.

CHAP. II. How Belcar came unknown into Macedon, where he bare away the prize
of the Tourny which King Florendos had appointed, to honor the marriage of the
Princess Denisa: and how he discovered himself to Alderina, daughter to the
Duke of Pontus and Durace.
BElcar riding in great haste toward Carderia, finding the heat of the day very
troublesome, he alighted at a fair Fountain to refresh himself a while, where
long he had not stayed, but in a path leading directly to the same place, he
beheld a company of Knights and Ladies coming, attended on with a very
sufficient train. It was the Duke of Pontus and Durace, who rode to Macedon to
the marriage which the king Florendos had made, between his daughter Denisa and
the King of Thrace, Nephew to the wife of Caniano. This Duke had his espoused
Lady Laurana with him, as also one of his fair daughters named Alderina, who
rode foremost in the troop, beguiling the time in talk with her Ladies: yet
intending to stay till the heat was past, and in the mean while to solace her
self at the Fountain. There she arrived before Belcar had put on his Helmet, so
that she beholding his amiable countenance, his rich armor, and yet having no
company but one Squire: as a Lady wise and wall governed* she saluted him very
graciously, whereat Belcar was somewhat amazed, doubting she knew of whence and
what he was. But soon did he alter that opinion, and rather thinking this
kindness to proceed of debonair courtesy, imagined her of high calling, for
which cause he made her humble reverence, and seeing how many followed his
Lady, among whom he might peradventure be known, he called for his horse
minding to ride a contrary way. Alderina hereat somewhat moved, because she
desired to know of whence he was, thus spoke, Sir Knight, abide here hardly at
your ease, and for our coming do not forsake a place so sweet and delectable:
you see the heat of the day is such, as scantly will permit you to travel. If
you go to adventure your fortune in the Tourney at Macedon, you may ride with
the Duke my Father, who will be very glad of your company, and much more my
self, because my good hap was first to find you here.

Belcar humbly thanking her for this courtesy made an excuse that he could not
go to Macedon, because he had urgent affairs elsewhere, and whither he must
travel with all speed: wherefore taking his leave again of her, he rode which
way liked him best, only to escape unknown of this company. And meeting a
Squire, that came after the train with the carriage, he demanded if he knew the
Lord that rode by so well accompanied; to whom the squire answered that it was
the Duke of Pontus, who rode to Macedon to the feast of the King Florendos for
the marriage of his daughter Denise, and that the Duke had his fair daughter
Alderina with him, to see the Iousts and Turnament which was now prepared. So
soon as Belcar heard these words, he presently conjectured, that the Lady
which came first to the Fountain was the Dukes daughter, of whom report had
made great commendation. Hereupon he determined to go see this assembly, in the
most secret manner as he could devise: for he had time enough to accomplish his
voyage. So forsook he the way to the Isle of Carderia, framing his journey
toward Macedon, and coming near the City, he overtook two Knights that rode to
the Triumph: they having reciprocally saluted each other, the two Knights
demanded of Belcar if he came to Ioust? I come to see (quoth he) what men at
Arms will enter the field at this time of brave exercise. Then let us ride
together if you please, (said they) for we left our countries for the self same
cause. Thus rode they on friendly together, and arriving at Macedon, they found
the field all covered with Tents, which belonged to the noble personages that
were come to the feast. For this cause the two Knights gave in charge to their
Squires, to provide their Pavillion, which was purposely brought with them,
entreating Belcar likewise to keep them company: whereto (because he would not
enter the City) he gladly consented, thinking he should hardly find a more
convenient lodging.

On the morrow there arrived the Duke of Pontus, before whom rode the King
Florendos, as one willing to welcome his new kindred: but Alderina showed such
Majesty in countenance, as every eye wondered at her rare perfections,
notwithstanding she was somewhat sad and pensive, the cause proceeding from her
desire, to know the Knight she saw at the fountain, whom yet she could not by
any means forget. When Belcar beheld her arm in arm with the King of Thrace,
and in what costly garments she was attired: he imagined her more fair, then
when he saw her at the fountain, so that he resolutely intended, if he could
not finish the adventure of Francelina, to give himself to travel, and to
enterprise such attempts as might be thought worthy the love of this Lady. All
this while the Queen Griana, wife to the King Florendos, very honorably
entertained the Duchess Laurana, and the young princess Denisa accompanying
Alderina, would not forsake her till the marriage night.

On the morrow following, the King, the Queen, and the new married couple, came
into the field to behold the Tourney, where they were no sooner mounted on the
scaffolds, which were sumptuously adorned as beseemed so great personages: but
both on the one side and the other, they might behold great store of armed
Knights, chiefly they that came from the Court of the Emperor, who because he
could not be present at his sisters marriage, sent many of his bold Barons to
honor the assembly. The brave exploits in feats of arms there performed,
surpassed them of greatest reputation, and among other, the Dukes of Anemon and
Mensa so well behaved themselves as they had well near gained the honor of the
first assault, if Belcar had not suddenly arrived, who stayed a while to behold
the order of the Iousts, intending to help the weaker part, when at length he
said to his companions: follow me my friends to assist the vanquished. So
giving his horse the spurs, he ran fiercely with his sword drawn, against
Bellequin the son of Mosso, who did the greatest harm to the other side: and
with him he met so bravely in his carreer, as horse and man went both to the
ground. Afterward, he dealt so roughly with all them that durst meet him in the
face, as in short time courage began to revive in those Knights, who (in the
judgment of all the beholders) were before esteemed vanquished.

Which the Duke of Anemon perceiving, and his company to grow into such
disgrace, he was thereat exceedingly offended, and thrusting himself among the
thickest, gave Belcar a very great stroke with his sword on the Helmet: for
which he received speedy repayment, for Belcar, raising himself in his
stirrops, returned the Duke such a cruel blow through the sight of his helmet,
as he fell to the ground astonished between his horse legs. Then breaking in
amidst the praase, he gave such sharp entertainment to all that met him, as the
King Florendos, and the other great estates that accompanied him, were driven
thereby into great admiration: nor was he known to any there but the Princess
Alderina, who being seated on the right hand of the Queen Denisa, could not
smother her thoughts, but thus spak. What think you (Madam) of the Knight in
Green Armor? What do I think? answered the Queen, truly never did I see the
man who might equal or paragon himself with him* for that he alone has done
more in this tourny then all the other: and greatly would it content me to know
if he be descended of noble blood as he delivers good testimony of his
knowledge in feats of Arms.

Madam, (quoth Alderina) I cannot think him less then you doubt of, in respect
he concealeth himself so closely, and would not willingly be known of any.
Herewith she recounted how she found him at the Fountain, bare headed without
his helmet: and this I can assure you (quoth. she) that as you confess him
valiant Arms, so can I witness him of such brave feature and complexion as
there is no one absolute point wanting in him. Your speeches said the Queen,
makes me much more desirous to know him, wherefore I will send one to him for
the same purpose. Then I beseech your Majesty, answered Alderina, to send one
of my Pages, who shall attend for him till the end of tho Tourney, and then
conjure him in your name, that he send you word of whence and what he is: and
if he stand loath to be known, to resolve him from your Majesty, and me, that no
living creature shall bewray him by our means. Your counsel I very well allow,
said the new married Queen, but I would that this Embassage should rather go
from you, because he remembering what knowledge you had of him at the Fountain*
will happily manifest himself unto you rather then any other. Hereupon Alderina
called one of her pages named Gracian, artificially instructing him in his
errand to the green Knight: that using instant entreaty, accompanied with a
singular desire, he should gain the mean to return with his name and parentage.

All this while Belcar showed such rare deeds of Chivalry, as having well
labored the adversary, and none lest that would confront him: he went as
Conqueror forth of the Lists, where he met the two Knights that came with him
thither, who stayed more desirous to note his behavior in the fight then to
intrude themselves in place of such danger, and being not a little glad of the
honor he had done them, in that their companion bare away the palm of victory,
they rode on each side of him toward their Tent, being followed all the way by
the Princess Page, who awaiting due time to deliver his message, took Belcars
horse by the bridle, and using such means of secret conference, as Belcar
stooped* to hear him, he softly thus whispered with him. Sir Knight I would it
might like you to ride aside a little, that I might deliver a matter of
secrecy to you. He who was so courteous and affable as any man could be,
presently left his two companions, when Gracian thus began his message.

My Lord, Alderina daughter to the Duke of Pontus and Durace, has at this time
sent me to you, to let you understand, that she has received just cause of
offense toward you* in that she coming to see this Tourney, you disdainned to
make offer of your company: Notwithstanding if you will grant one request that
she makes by me, forgetting all passed ungentlness, she will gladly leave
further to misdeem of you. My friend, answered Belcar, the thing must be very
difficult or impossible, that I would not enterprise to obtain the gracious
pardon of so choice a Lady as is thy Mistress: it may be that I have trespassed
in duty toward her excellency, but in sooth mere ignorance of her estate was
the only cause. And when I left her at the Fountain, far was my intent from
coming to this Tourney, in so much as I was thereto (in a manner) constrainned,
notwithstanding excuses of as great importance as those I used to thy gentle
Lady.

It rests now, (quoth the Page) that you grant my Mistress her earnest
desire, which is, to know what you are, and why you conceal your self in such
sort: For beholding your noble and valiant behavior, she sets you beyond all
other in her conceit, and promises withal under the word of so great a person
as she is, not to reveal it to any, if you be willing it should be so. Highly
may I commend my fortune (said Belcar) that a Princess so gentle and perfect,
would deign to enquire after my poor deserts: and though I had vowed to conceal
my self from the whole world, yet would I strain courtesy with that vow for
her sake. Say to her therefore, courteous Page, that my name is Belcar, Nephew
to the Emperor of Constantinople; and the cause why I would not willingly be
known to any, is the small portion of time since I received my Knighthood: And
having not yet done any thing worthy my name, or to be accounted among the
actions of honor, I determined not to publish the same, til I might do it with
good testimony. Thou may also assure her from me, that he^ceforth I shall
serve as her devoted knight, hoping under favor of her name to gain such
account, as both I and mine shall remain perpetually bound to her excellency.
And when I have accomplished any thing, that may he reputed worthy honorable
commendation, I will come my self, and offer therewithal to her my heart, which
has received such an impression of obeisance to her, as henceforth it will
attempt nothing, but in her sweet regard: proof may she make hereof in
commanding me; for such is my desire to be employed in her service, as were I
assured my death consisted in the attempt, yet could not any fear thereof
withold me. Let me further entreat her, not to disclose my name to any one,
because at this time I will not visit the King Florendos, and the Queen,
notwithstanding I am so near allied unto them. With this answer returned
Gracian to his Lady, who attended his coming in great devotion, so that he was
no sooner entered the chamber, but she demanded the success of his message. All
well Madam, answered the Page, but you must keep it very secret, because the
Knight himself has so desired. Which after she had faithfully promised to do,
he told her, that the Knight was Belcar son to the King of Hungaria. May it be
so, quoth the Queen Denisa? then is he my Nephew; and thinks he scorn to be
known to us? Right gladly would I have seen him, for from our infancy we were
nourished together: And well may you assure your self, Madam Alderina, that he
has been evermore benign and courteous, which makes me not rejoice a little,
that his fortune in Arms is equal with his other virtue; yet seeing he desires
to pass unknown, let us keep the same so secret as we may. It were needless
to demand if Alderina were pleased, when she heard that Belcar was issued of so
great and illustrious blood, offering himself withal so religiously her Knight:
wherefore now she began extremely to affect him and imprinted the remembrance
of him so lively in her spirit, as nothing might deface it again. Thus hourly
ranged Loves passions in her heart, wherein they took immediate ambush, so soon
as she beheld him at the Fountain.

CHAP III. How Belcar fearing to be known, departed secretly from Macedon, and
by the way met with a Knight, whom he vanquished: And how he fought a cruel
Combat with him that defended the Bridge where the fair Francelina was
enchanted.
SO soon as Belcar had ended with Alderina's Squire, he minded to depart
presently, fearing lest the King Florendos would send for him, as indeed he did
soon after: for he greatly desired to know the Knight that bare away the honor
of the Tourney. But his expectation was greatly deceived, in that Belcar was
already departed; whereof the King could not be persuaded, but that he missed
his presence in the Triumph following, which he compared to the pastime of
little children, in respect of the former day, when the unknown Knight
performed matter of incredible valor. And albeit the Queen Denisa, and the
Princess Alderina heard every judgment passing on the Knight, yet would they
yield no other answer, but that he seemed to be one of the best esteemed
Knights in the Emperors Court. Belcar then having graciously thanked his two
companions for the courtesy and humanity they had used toward him, took his
friendly farewell of them, feigning an earnest constraint, which commanded his
presence in matters of importance. The Knights loath to loose so good a friend
made offer to go with him in his travel; but he excused their request with a
necessary venial wherewith they were pleased, and he had liberty to depart.

And riding along the way where he met Alderina, he happened into a fair green
meddow where (because no lodging was near at hand) he determined to make his
hostage that night: But as he thought to enter into a sound sleep, a sudden
imagination caught hold on his senses, presenting them with the rare beauty of
Alderina, during which passion, he was constrained thus to parley with himself.
In sooth, Belcar, right well may thou be charged with discourtesie and
ingratitude, having made so slender show of civility to so fair a Princess as
the Dukes daughter of Pontus; full well may it beseem thee to amend this fault,
and by the dutiful repentance fitting a Knight, recover the note of thy former
blemish. After many amorous discourses, he concluded (if he could finish the
adventure of Francelina) to make choice of this Lady only as his wife; and in
these imaginations a sweet slumber overtook him, wherein he continued till the
next morning, when mounting on horseback, and riding not past the space of two
miles, he met with a Knight at Arms, who demanded if he came from Macedon, and
if she Nuptials of the Kings daughter were finished: Belcar answered, that they
were now in performing, and if it liked him to travel thither, he should there
find matter enough to be employed in. The Knight left Belcar to his journey*
and so without any further speeches they departed.

But if you be desirous to know the man, it was Cardino, who departed from
Constantinople with Colmelio, in search of the Damosel that brought such a
sudden message to the Emperor Palmerin, as you may read in the last Chapter of
his History. And albeit they had traveled many Countries to find her, yet
could they not hear any tidings of her, because she presently returned to the
Castle of Carderia from whence the Fairies sent her to the Court on that
occasion, the intent thereof being no other, but only to extol and commend the
future prowess of Palmendos, Son to the Queen of Tharsus and the Emperor
Palmerin, and that the Knight who should come to finish the enchantment of
Francelina, might be received with greater honor and magnificence. Cardino had
tried his fortune in this adventure, but he could speed no better then others
had done before him, wherefore hearing of the feast and open Court held at
Macedon, he went as one doubtful to come short to the Triumphs, till Belcar
had thereof certainly resolved him. These Knights were not parted the space of
a mile, but Cardino met the Damosel, who was sister to the two brethren slain
by Belcar in the wood, she having followed him to the Court of the King
Florendos, was advertised by a squire of his success in the tourny, and how he
rode the common high way leading to Carderia, whereupon she made good have
after him, and met with Cardino soon after their departure, to whom she began
in this manner.

I beseeeh ye Gentleman to resolve me certainly, if ye met a Knight in green
Armor or no the most traitorous and disloyal man that this day lives: for my
father having done him all the honor he could devise, while one night he came
and lodged at his Castle, and on the morrow morning (the more to content him)
commanded my three brethren to accompany him somewhat on the way; but he, a
most inhumane and unthankful wretch, without any occasion slew two of them,
and put the third in great danger of his life. And in this just cause I pursue
the villain, in hope to meet with some worthy man* who detesting such notorious
and horrible ingratitude, will (in taking compassion on my grief) revenge this
injury. So well could the traytresse color her speeches, and set so fair a
gloss on her cautelous presopopey, as she imprinted in the heart of Cardino a
dutiful regard to revenge such wrong; wherefore he thus answered.

Damosel, if it be so as you say, the Knight cannot excuse himself, but that he
is both a Traitor and a Fellon, nor will the God of Heaven suffer him to escape
unpunished in this world. The Damosel with terrible oaths protested what she
had said desiring him to give her aid, if no other occasions might hinder her
suit* Right gladly (quoth Cardino) will I perform my duty herein; for that I am
a professed enemy to such offenders* and shall cause him to pay dearly for his
treachery. So rode he with the Damosel after Belcar, but all that day they
could not overtake him. On the morrow they got sight of him on the edge of a
Mountain, whereat the Damosel not a little contented, desired Cardino now to
rouse his forces against the Tyrant that had so dishonored her. Cardino
promising to accomplish her desire, gave the spurs to his horse, and gallopped
after Belcar, and in a great Bravado thus cried to him. Stay Traitor, unworthy
the name of a Knight, and receive thy guerdon at my hand, for slaughtering him
that entertained thee with all humanity. Belcar hearing himself thus injured,
was immediately provoked into choler, and turning toward him that touched him
with disloyalty, he thus sternly answered.

But little to thy profit will it be, to pursue me with such false and lying
accusations. So clasping his helmet, he ran furiously against Cardino who met
him with no less courage and vivacity, and breaking his lance bravely,
somewhat scarred the skin of his enemy: but Belcar welcomed him with so sound
a salutation, as he fell down with the saddle between his legs, so sore
astonished with his fall as he was not able to stir hand nor foot, which Belcar
perceiving, rode on and there left him. The Damosel seeing Cardino in such
woeful plight, alighted from her palfray, and with the help of his Squire
binding up his wounds, determined to bring him to some place for help using the
greatest shows of lamentation that could be. Ah heaven (quoth she) why give ye
strength to wicked men against the good and virtuous? suffer not this disloyal
villain to do any further danger, but rather give some miserable end to his
unworthy life. By this time the Squire had mounted Cardino on his horse, and so
they returned the same way they came, happening to the place where Belcar had
broken his fast the morning before.

There they understood by their Host, that he was gone to prove the adventure
of Francelina, whither the Damosel would gladly have followed him; yet was she
loath to leave Cardino in such danger, and therefore abode there with him three
days, using all the means she could to heal him, because that for her sake he
was so wounded: where we will leave them, and return to the only thread of our
History.

So long rode Belcar, that he arrived within half a days journey of the Castle
where Francelina was: This Fortress appertained to a Lady that was a Widow,
who had two fair daughters, and a son already knighted, of no less valor in
feats of Arms, then learned and well seen in diverse other Disciplines. In this
place was he mavelous well entertained, the Lady of the Castle being a woman
of great honor, and her daughters of very Courtly and civil behavior. After
supper, Belcar entered into conference with them, and among many other things,
enquired the cause that moved so many Knights to attempt the adventure of that
Isle; when the Ladies son, who was named Lypes, answered him in this sort.
Believe me sir, I have ever accounted the man but badly counseled, that takes
such pains to travel hither, seeing it is so long time since any Knight arrived
here, who returned not without dishonor, because the action and exploit of
this enchantment (so wonderfully compacted by the three Faries) is of such
efficacy, as it behooves him that shall finish the same, to be of most rare and
exquisite perfection.

But tell me then (quoth Belcar) the state of this adventure, and wherein
consists the greatest peril thereof; for as yet have I not met with any one
that could tell me the truth, to satisfy my long and earnest desire. Better
then any other (answered Lypes) can I discourse the same unto you, because I
have often accompanied Knights traveling thither as you now do, and seen many
Combat with him that defends the entrance on the bridge* albeit to their great
disadvantage. Know then (gentle sir) that the Isle of Carderia stretches in
diameter very far, being on the one side enclosed with the sea, and on the
other are most wholesome Bathes and rivers* which hinder the salt waters from
coming near the Castle: At the foot whereof is builded a mavelous artificial
bridge, heretofore accessable for all Knights errant, but since the time that
Francelina was enclosed within the great Dungeon, there might not enter any
stranger; those of the Isle only come and go, but others not. Upon this bridge
are erected three Turrets, one of them being in the midst, and the other two
at either end. In the first is a Knight, surpassing the common stature and
proportion of men, so fierce, hardy and courageously, as since the time of this
enchantment, he has not been dealt withal by any one, that could in ought
disable his prowess, only the Lord of the Isle of Lique excepted, son to him
whom the Emperor Palmerin vanquished, when in the Tourney he conquered the
Sagittary. He, being named Lynedes, was so resolute and magnanimous, as he
fought against the Knight of the bridge from morning till night; and though the
Combat was fierce and cruel, yet could no want of courage be discerned in him;
which fell not out so with the guardant of the bridge, because the loss of his
blood so weakened him, as his heart began utterly to dismay. But an ill
favored Dwarf, who never stirs from the Beacon of the first Turret, to
discover such Knights as come along the field, by winding an enchanted Horn
that hung about his neck, therewith so revived the Knights strength again, as
if he had but even then entered the combat.

In this sort the fight continued till Sun setting, when Lynedes perceiving his
enemy to wax feeble again, and that the Dwarf as yet blew not his Horn, brought
the Knight of the bridge into such extremity that he fell upon his hands to the
ground. Then running swiftly over the bridge, he came to the Turret in the
midst thereof, the gates whereof being open before, clapped together at his
arrival with such a fearful trembling of the whole building, as Lynedes fell
to the earth in a swoon.

In this trance he remained a great while, so that his Squires fearing he was
dead indeed, bemoned their Master with very grievous lamentations: But when he
came to his former feeling, they saw he was so cruelly wounded as they carried
him to his tent* where three days he remained to re-obtain his health; and on
the fourth, feeling himself able to sit on Horseback, and not willing to make
any further proof of this adventure, he departed thence sorrowing for his bad
fortune. And this I tell you sir for a certainty, that when the Dwarf sits as
Sentinel in the lanthorn of the first Tower, perceiving the Knight of the
bridge to have the worst of the combat, he with the sound of his Horn renues
his strength, which is the cause that no man is able to deal with him. Seeing
then this enterprise brings such danger, and oftentimes death withal, I could
wish that hereafter no man would attempt his own ruin.

You tell me matter of marvel, answered Belcar, and right skillful were the
Fairies in framing this enchantment; so it should seem, that they have (...)
enclosed the Lady there without great occasion* being assured that some Knight
shall end the adventure, to which each one travelleth with this courageous
hope, that he is the man for whom it is reserved. Nor can I be dissuaded from
it, if many heretofore have fallen in that error, therefore no doubt of what
shall happen can hinder my determination. If I happen in my trial to be
overcome, I shall but increase the number of them, that could not attain ye
height of their enterprise, and no other dishonor can I receive. Lypes
earnestly entreated him to forbear the voyage, and so did his sisters likewise,
into whose grace he was greatly entered, especially the youngest, fair and
debonair beyond the other: but all their persuasive reasons could not change
him; for Belcar having traveled so far for that purpose, might not by any
occasion whatsoever be withdrawn from making proof of his fortune. When Lypes
saw him so obstinately inclined, he made offer to bear him company, if it were
but only to show him the way which friendly courtesy Belcar accepted; so on
the morrow they mounted on horseback, and came to ye Isle about midday. There
was set up a rich Tent for this young Prince, which the sisters of Lypes had
sent thither by three Squires, with all necessary provision for his attempt;
and in the evening Belcar went to view the Isle, regarding the Tower wherein
Francelina was imprisoned; invocating on God in his spirit, to endue him with
such ability, as he might deliver her, and bear away the honor of the
adventure. These imaginations so busied his thoughts, as all that night he
could entertain no other, but oftentimes thus talked with himself. Ah Belcar,
why should thou thus delay time, and not rather courageously attempt the
execution of this enterprise? Admit thou want force answerable to a matter of
such dignity, yet should the renown and generosity of thine Ancestors stimulate
thee hereto, being son to one of the best Knights that lives this day under
the Zodiac, and nephew to the great Emperor, with whom none may be equalled.
In these, and such like conceits he consumed the night, and in the morning
(having armed himself) came to the Bridge, where in a convenient place near the
first Tower, he espied the Knight that defended the passage, whose huge stature
somewhat amazed Belcar; and as he offered to step on the Bridge, the Knight
very proudly thus spoke.

Withdraw thy self Knight, unless thou will enter fight with me, for I am here
to deny passage to any. For no other cause come I, answered Belcar, but to try
thy manhood, and pass the Bridge if possibly I may. With these words he gave
the Knight such a sound stroke on the Helmet, that he thought the fire flashed
out of his eye, and so they began a long and dangerous combat, the Knight
giving Belcar many cruel blows with his Iron mace, and he defending them so
well as he could, till having somewhat wearied his enemy, and thinking to do as
he heard of Lynedes, but the Knight gave him such a forcible stroke on the
shoulder, as he was constrained to set one knee to the ground to escape the
fall. Herewith the Dwarf blew his Horn, which rejoiced them within the Castle:
albeit the Prince was astonied-hereat, yet he dissembled the same from being
espied.

The Knight having recovered his former strength, assailed Belcar with
mavelous fury, who notwithstanding held out courageously, and one thing
comforted him above all other, which was, that none of his adversaries blows
gave him any bleeding wound, but bruised his flesh a little under his Armor,
whereby he fought at his own pleasure. Three times the Dwarf blew to animate
his Champion, by which means Belcar was much overlaboured, because he could
find no opportunity to rest himself: but considering if he showed less valor
then he had done, in vain he might account his traveling thither, and greatly
would it redound to his shame* if the Emperor should be advertised thereof. In
the end, he had brought his enemy into such a state, as he got on the bridge
without any more resistance, and came to the Tower that stood in the midst
thereof; but the gates closed together so furiously, that he was smitten to the
earth deprived of his senses*

Lypes being glad that he had recovered the bridge, came to him, and with the
help of the Squires carried him into the Tent, where suddenly unarming him,
they applied such remedies as brought him to his former senses. He had no
sooner feeling of himself, but he entered into many ruful lamentations, as well
for his misfortune and disgrace, as also with the pain he felt of his
adversaries strokes, whereof his Armor being battered to pieces was a
sufficient witness. Comfort your self, my Lord (quoth Lypes) and let your
wonted courage exile this anguish, remembering that these eight years no Knight
came to the Isle, only Lynedes excepted, that won like honor as you have done
at this instant: Greater reason have you then to cherish your fortune, then
thus to condemn it with exclamations. Ah my friend (answered Belcar) little
pleasure take I in this success, for that my intent proceeded further; but
seeing there is no remedy, I must with patience bear my shame; for of matters
so divelishly enchanted, can seldom arise greater good: But cursed be the
Fairies and their hellish charms, that deal so discourteously with poor
traveling Knights.

CHAP. IIII. How Belcar concluded to combat with all such as came to prove the
adventure of Francelina: and how among other he fought with the Marquess of
Trosse, whom he vanquished, and afterward with Tirendos to whom he made himself
known.
BElcar being indifferently calmed by the courteous behavior of Lipes,
determined to recover his passed foil by actions of Chivalry, and therefore
resolved to continue in that place, to combat with all such as came to try the
adventure: but to his intent he added this principally, yt what deeds of Arms
he there performed, or in any other place where he might be employed all should
be for the love of Alderina, daughter to the Duke of Pontus, whom above all
other he meant most constantly to love. And if his fortune were to be
vanquished by any Knight, he would then forthwith return to the Court of the
King Florendos. This design he discovered to Lypes, who was not a little glad
thereof, saying, that he should apprehend great matters by his enterprise,
because continually many good Knights resorted thither. And because (quoth he)
you are so resolutely minded, nothing shall make me to forsake your company,
but to behold the knightly Chivalry, which I am out of doubt to see executed by
you. I offer my self to accompany you in all loyal service. Now the better to
furnish their wants, he sent to his mothers house for all kind of provision,
that might agree with the time of their abode there. By this time Belcar found
himself able to vear arms and therefore went to take his place of charge, at
what time the Marquess of Trosse came to hazard his fortune. This Marquess
was a brave and hardy man at Arms* and although he came from his country well
accompanied with Knights Squires, and Pages: yet caused he them to stay a
pretty distance from that place, and came thither but with one Squire that
carried his Lance. When Belcar saw him make so courageously toward the bridge,
he mounted on horseback and coming to him, thus spoke.

Gentleman, you may not pass here, except you first try the Ioust with me,
because I have established here such a Law, as that no Knight shall have
battle with him that keeps the Bridge, until he have first dismounted me: for
having received some foil in this place not many days since, I will not suffer
any one to prevail in this adventure, unless he bring me first into
subjection. Great boldness is this in you (answered the Marquess) that you
will take in hand to bear a burden of such weight: but I think you do it to
this end, that you would depart hence with greater shame and confusion, then
ever you sustained heretofore. That quarrel (quoth Belcar) shall our swords
soon decide. And so without any more speeches they fell to the combat, wherein
the Marquess showed very Knightly and gallant behavior, albeit Belcar cast
him from his Saddle, and afterward fought with him on foot a long while* but in
the end the Marquess was vanquished, and understanding the name of his
Conqueror, returned to the place where he left his company, and after he had
recovered better health, he rode straight to Macedon, where he recounted his
overthrow by Belcar. Of this news the King Florendos and the Queen were very
joyful saying they had a Nephew that was so named, wherefore they desired to
know what Arms he wore? when the Marquess told them he was in green armor.
Without question (quoth the King) it was the same Knight that won the honor of
the Tourney, and went hence secretly least he should be known, wherewith I
cannot be justly offended, because both in this enterprise and knightly valor,
he resembles his worthy father King Frysol.

Each one in Court was well pleased with these tidings, but above all other the
Princess Alderina, because she had bequeathed his remembrance to the secret
closet of her heart, and as the days, so her lovely affections to him
increased, in respect of the great praises was every where bruited of him,
which made many worthy Knights to adventure their fortune with him with whose
conquest he still gave grace to his own report. But let us now return to the
damosel that followed Belcar, to be revenged for her brethrens death she seeing
Cardino was indifferently recovered, took her leave of him, because she
intended to prosecute her enemy. It so fell out, that Tirendos son to the Duke
Eustace, who traveled to find his companion Belcar arrived at the same lodging
where the damosel was, and noting her complaints, which she could deliver very
artificially, he took compassion on her, promising to assist her in what he
could. Demanding the cause of her sorrowful lamentations, she told him how she
had two brethren traitorously slain, by a disloyal Knight whom her father
entertained into his castle, and she pursuing the murderer, met a courteous
Knight that undertook to revenge her cause, yet his misfortune was such, as he
was likewise dangerously wounded which made her griefs the more impatient.
These flattering griefs so beguiled Tirendos, as he again made her promise of
his aid, inquiring of her where the wounded Knight was.

My Lord (quoth she) he is here in his chamber, meetly well recovered by my
pains and diligence. No sooner was Tirendos entered the chamber, but he
immediately knew Cardino, for whose hurt he was a great deal more sorrowful:
and therefore vowed to him and the damosel, if ever he met the Knight to be
revenged on him. After many courteous embracings and kind speeches, he told
Cardino how Belcar and he were both Knighted in one day, by the Emperor of
Constantinople, from whence he very suddenly and secretly departed: and ever
since have I followed in search of him, yet in no place can I hear any tidings
of him. What arms does he bear? said Cardino, White, as I take it, answered
Tirendos, and such as are both rich and costly. No such Knight have I seen (quoth.
Cardino) happily he may be now at Macedon, at the magnificent nuptials of the
Princess Denisa.

Thither would I go, said Tirendos, had I not past my promise to this Damosel;
nor can my mind enjoy any quiet, until I have found the Knight that so wronged
her and you. All this night they were very merry together, especially the
damosel for Tirendos his promise, because he seemed a man of sufficient valor
to accomplish her desire. On the morrow they took their leave of Cardino* and
journied toward the Isle of Carderia, where they arrived as Belcar was managing
his great horse: and no sooner had the damsel espied him, but she presently
knew him by his Armor, wherefore dissembling pitiful looks, she thus spoke to
Tirendos. Behold Sir the Traitor that did put my Brethren to death, I think
the Heavens stayed him in this place, that vengeance might be taken on him for
the shame he has done me. Tirendos was not a little glad hereof, because he
should now make the first trial of his Chivalry. But Belcar (who knew him by
his Armor, being the same wherein he received his order) was scant well
pleased with his presence, because he doubted that he was sent to find him:
notwithstanding, he would make a little proof of him in the Ioust, and
therefore he came to him with these words. You may pass no further this way
Sir Knight, because I stand here to make denial thereof. Little count shall I
make, answered Tirendos, of such as thou art, that traitorously murtherest
Gentlemen, who gave thee welcome beyond thy deserts, which I will cause thee
buy full dearly. That would I fain see, said Belcar, if it be in thee to make
me confess that which I never thought, much less committed. Thou lie as a
homicide, answered Tirendos, I will make good what I have said, therefore get
you to your tools. Herewith they gave the spurs to their Horses, and met very
valiantly together, so that with breaking their Lances, they gave each other a
little wound, Belcar losing his stirrops, and Tirendos cast forth of his saddle
to the ground: but recovering himself presently, he came against his enemy with
his sword drawn, saying, Alight sir you were best, or I shall slay your Horse.

That will I gladly do (quoth Belcar) but it shall be to embrace you, for I
have no will to enter combat with you. Alas sir, said Tirendos, it is no time
now to scoff, albeit I am from my horse, I am not vanquished. Great pleasure
took Belcar to reason with his singular good friend, and alighting from his
Horse, thus replied. I speak for your good (sir) if you can see it; but seeing
reason will not rule you, I am content to deal with you a little. Tirendos
somewhat offended at his fall, began to strike at Belcar very reughly: but he
who was loath to wrong his friend, threw his Sword and Shield to the ground* and
with open arms came to embrace him, saying. My perfect friend Tirendos, I have
heretofore had experience of thy valiant behavior, wherefore forgive thy
brother Belcar, for not acquainting thee with my departure from Constantinople,
yet was I assured, that thou would follow in search of me.

How now (quoth Tirendos?) are you then my Lord and loving friend Belcar? In
sooth the error committed* was only ignorance of you: put off your Helmet
that I may be resolved; for your disguised Armor made me mistak you. So
casting down their Helmets, they embraced each other very courteously, when
Tirendos thus spoke to Belcar. Hardly can I be persuaded, my Lord, that you
would consent to such treason as this Damosel has informed me withal. Declare
I pray you (quoth Belcar) whence arises this slander; for another Knight (who
I think I have slain or sore wounded) pursued me with the like quarrel;
doubtless this Damosel is some bad woman, to accuse me with any such
disloyalty. She told me* said Tirendos, that you being honorably entertained at
her fathers Castle, where one night you were very friendly lodged, on the
morrow, her three brethren bare you company on the way, and two of them without
any cause you did murder* leaving the third in very great danger.

Ah traiterous Damosel, answered Belcar, what an evident slander has she
raised on me? and herewith he rehearsed the whole discourse* according as you
have read it in the first chapter of this Book. She seeing the two Knights
agree thus friendly, with the tears in her eyes, gave forth these speeches.
Miserable and unfortunate that I am, what a subtle collusion do I hear? This
Knight is as false and disloyal to me, in not revenging my shame, as the
murderer that has so highly wronged me: But seeing I am thus circumvented,
and he a perjured wretch by breach of his promise unless I speedily die, I
will cause him to repent it, and be sufficiently revenged on them both.

So gallopped she the same way she came, and Belcar with Tirendos went into the
Tent, where they discoursed together on many matters, Tirendos declaring how
Cardino was the other Knight that fought in the damsels cause, for which the
Prince was greatly offended with himself* and to wear away that conceit,
acquainted Tirendos with his fortune at the Castle, and of the task he had
taken in hand, which he liked so well, as he concluded likewise to bear him
company. Thus Lypes and they two remained there together, oftentimes resorting
to visit his mother and sisters, who would not suffer them to want any thing:
And such was the fame of Belcars victories, as the whole Realm of Macedon, and
the Emperors Court of Greece, was cloyed with the daily reports thereof. But
here will we leave these Champions a while, and speak of the good Knight
Palmendos, son to the Emperor Palmerin, and the Queen of Tharsus.

CHAP. V. How Palmendos understanding that he was Son to the Emperor Palmerin,
caused himself to be armed Knight: And how he entreated license of the Queen
his Mother to go see Constantinople, which at length very hardly he obtained,
and what happened thereon.
CArefully did the Queen of Tharsus nourish her young son Palmendos, whom she
had by the Emperor Palmerin, when he followed the exercise of Arms, and was
entertained by the Admiral Alfarano in the Realm of Pasmeria, as you may read
in his worthy History. This child, as he grew in years so did he increase in
all virtuous behavior, being unable to shadow his royal descent; yet to hinder
his desire from search after his father (the Queen and all the Nobility so
entirely affecting him) no knowledge might be given him thereof, lest by that
mean he should become a Christian* And that he might be instructed in those
heroical qualities, which beseem a Prince of so high calling, the Queen
committed him to the charge of the Brother to the deceased King her husband, a
Knight of great wisdom and valor; by whom he was so worthily educated, as he
won the love of every one in general. Rigor he would requite with mercy and
clemency, and charity he preferred in all his actions; notwithstanding as he
showed courteous and benign countenance toward the good, so did he sternly and
severely oppose himself against the bad, so that by his exquisit prudence, and
choice care in honorable causes, in his youth he would learn to manage the
affairs of the Realm, wherein he showed himself so quick of spirit, and
susceptible, as he waxed to be such a politic Economy, that the Queen
intended to put the Royal Government into his hands. If he were thus enriched
with all perfect virtues, nothing wanted in him for brave constitution of body,
whereof he made no show of pride or presumption; but became so famous through
all the neighbor Marches and limitrophes of Tharsus, as the very best would
come to offer him their service.

The Court was filled with resort of Nobles and others; for beside the Royal
Nature he brought from his Mothers womb, according to the Idea and celestial
influence of his constellation, he was born and naturally inclined to Arms,
which made him evermore converse with the most skilful in that science. But one
day before he was armed Knight, a very aged, decrepit and over-spent woman came
and sat down on a step in the Porch of the Palace, attired in such poor
garments, as her naked flesh was seen in many places; and there sat she
trembling in such sort, as though her soul were ready to forsake her body. Such
as passed in and out the Court were greatly amazed hereat, and moved to pity
her case very much so that Palmendos came himself to behold her; and seeing she
would use no speeches to him, went in again and sat down to dinner. Afterward,
coming forth to walk abroad for his delight, he found her sitting there still
in the same place, wherefore he called his Cousin Ozalio to him, who was son to
his Uncle and Tutor, saying. Can we not understand what this poor old woman
would have? Ozalio as desirous as the Prince, came to the old woman, demanding
of whence she was, and if she stood in need of any thing? But she without
answering one word, gave him a very frowning countenance, and afterward
scornfully turned her back toward him: wherewith Ozalio somewhat offended, did
give her such a spurn with his foot as she tumbled quite beside her seat,
whereat Palmendos and his Lords merrily laughed: But their pastime was quickly
altered into admiration; for after the woman arose again, she seemed of such
huge deformed stature, as each one was amazed that had beheld her before; and
turning her self angerly toward the Prince, she used these speeches.

Ah Palmendos, little regardest thou to resemble the Emperor of Constantinople
thy father, whose gentleness and sweetness stretches as well to the meanest
persons, as them that are Lords, and of great account. What gainest thou in
rejoicing at the injury done me by thy Knight? I pray that the great imperious
Monarch Cupid (quoth she, with lifting up her eyes and hands to heaven) may so
cruelly wound thy heart with the love of fair Francelina, and cause thee to
conceive such gracious thoughts of her, as thou may leave this idle and
delicious life thou leadest* to win the honor that is gotten with pain and
travel. So did thy father heretofore for the fair Princess Polynarda, whom he
loved so religiously, as with the dexterity and strength of his body, he
assayed to gain the reward which Fortune provideth for her chiefest favorites;
whereon imperially he is now mounted, accompanied with ye greatest felicity,
that can happen to any one under this Hemisphere. Leave then these wanton and
Courtly surfettings, wherein thy mother labors to contain thee, and now
begin to manage Arms, which may make thy name perpetual, and yield the reward
of immortal glory: for it will redound to thy great shame, being son to so rare
and so invincible a Knight, not this way to imitate his laborious deeds. And
when I shall see thee thoroughly wrapped in the passions of love* I will think my
self satisfied with revenge of the dishonor, which thou have suffered to be
done to me in thy presence.

The old Woman so breaking off immediately vanished away, to the great terror
of all the beholders, especially of the young Prince Palmendos, whose senses
were for a while estranged; and walking up and down musing on the old Woman's
words, his heart was so enflamed with the love of her he knew not, as he was
enforced thus to common with himself. What may the Lady be with whom (at the
report of this woman) I find my self so distraughted? Doubtless, if her words
be no fables, but that I am son to the Emperor of Constantinople, it behooves
me to enterprise such actions, as I may be judged somewhat to resemble him.

While his spirit was thus busied with diversity of these thoughts and no one
daring to interrupt him* Ozalio went into the Queens chamber, and telling what
had happened, she was therewith greatly displeased. Immediately she came down
into the great Hall, and finding her son thus perplexed, took him by the hand,
causing him to sit down by her, and then begun to him in this manner. I know
not (my son) what follies it should seem the old Hag has troubled your mind
withal; but refrain from giving credit to them and I shall tell you the very
truth of all. Madam (answered Palmendos*) I am certain you will not dally with
me* notwithstanding I cannot but marvel, that you would all this while conceal
the original of my birth; for the Emperor Palmerin being such a worthy
accomplished Knight as he is esteemed of every one little occasion have I of
disdain to be his son, and you much less to keep it from me. Wherefore I
humbly entreat your Majesty, to resolve me faithfully of this present doubt, to
the end, if it be so, I may show my self forward in duty, in causing the bud to
flourish that came from such a noble and virtuous stalk. And fear not that for
his sake I will abandon you; because it is impossible for me to leave the Law
wherein I have hitherto lived, for a strange opinion which I am ignorant in.

Ah my son (quoth the Queen) the Gods so inspire and direct your designs that
you may perfectly accomplish what you have promised; for the only fear to lose
your company has caused me to conceal the thing you are so desirous to know,
But seeing you have heard what I can no longer dissemble assure your self my
son, that the old woman has told nothing but truth. Hereupon she recounted the
whole History, how to have issue by such a peerlesse Prince, (imitating
Thalestris Queen of the Amazons, who for the like cause acquainted her self
with the valiant king Alexander) she by the counsel of a wise Magician,
amourously beguiled the Emperor Palmerin. Lastly, she entreated him not to
forsake her while she lived, because her life was only prolonged by his
presence.

Great matters have you told me (answered the young Prince:) the Emperor then
knows not that he has any child by you? No verily (replied the Queen,) nor
would I he should know it for the whole world. Nor can he, I think understand
it by any (said the Prince;) yet, in mine opinion, I count it necessary that
one day I should go see my father: But trust me Madam it shall not be without
speedy return, because I am determined not to leave you, or give over (with my
will) the Country and Kingdom which the heavens have appointed me to rule and
govern. Thus reasoned the mother and her son on diverse matters; and henceforth
the Prince showed himself more cheerfully disposed, intending very shortly to
be armed Knight and to be called the Knight of Cupid, bearing for his Devise,
an Heart wounded with an Arrow. For himself he provided an Armor as red as
blood; and for Ozalio whom he loved as his brother, a fair white Armor: and
were both Knighted by Ozalio his father, who was one of the best Knights in all
those parts.

Having thus received their order, a very solemn feast was made in honor
thereof, during which time Palmendos gave away sundry sumptuous gifts: Yet
could he not be unmindfull of Francelina, or forget one jot of the old Woman's
words, because he had lodged them so near his heart, as they were (in manner) a
martyrdom to him. For ease whereof he determined to see Greece, as also to
visit the Emperor his father, and learn some tidings of his unknown Lady: for
he persuaded himself that the old Woman's speeches grew upon no small occasion.
And finding the Queen his mother one afternoon at good leisure, among diverse
other proceedings between them, Palmendos earnestly entreated her to grant him
one request: which the Queen (who loved him as her proper life, and not
thinking he would have desired any such thing) agreed unto very willingly. Then
would I good Madam quoth he) not have you conceive any displeasure, if I make a
brief voyage to Constantinople, to see the Emperor my Father, and the good
Knights in his Court: for since the time you assured me that I was his Son, my
desires have been unmeasurable to travel this journey. Yet I swear by the
sincere and inviolable faith, which the Child above all other owes to his
Mother, to return again with all possible speed. Alas my Son (quoth the Queen,
giving a bitter sigh) your words have so sharply pierced my heart, as me thinks
I feel my very thread of life cut in sunder, the fear of this present
extremity, withheld me from uttering mine own ruin: but seeing I cannot
hinder what I have willingly consented to, with what patience I can I will bear
my misfortune. One thing yet would I commend to thee, if zeal and love to thy
Mother may solicit any compassion: that thou would return to the place of
thy birth as soon as thou can, that mine eyes beholding thee once more before
I die, my soul may pass with greater comfort into another world. So help me
God, answered Palmendos, as I intend not to break the least of your
commandments, nor will I deceive you in my short and speedy return. Since then
my son (quoth the Queen) you will needs undertake this voyage, I would advise
you to have good store of hardy Knights with you, that your entertainment by
the Emperor may be the more honorable. Madam (quoth he) I am certain my Lord
will not esteem any thing the more of me for my company, because it shall
suffice that I am King of Tharsus wherein consists the point of my renown: as
for my pain in travel* some report of good success in Chivalry shall wipe
that away. For (as you are not ignorant thereof) his Majesty traveled alone
through the world, opposing his unconquerable mind against all adventures
whatsoever: yet did the divine bounty evermore shield him from peril and death,
and as he, so many other famous Kings and Potentates. What enterprise was more
dangerous then ye of Jason, when he won the golden fleece in the Isle of
Cholcos? or that of the gentle Champion Theseus, when he conquered the Minotaur
in the inextricable Labyrinth of Creet? yet the Gods defended them in all their
attempts. In my time (Mother) I have seen, that poor and simple ships have
sailed in the sea, with great fortune in tempests and outrage, and at length
have returned home richly furnished: on the contrary I have noted that sundry
gallant vessels* have cut with full sail through calm and quiet seas, favored
both with wind and weather, and at the very entrance of the Havens mouth, have
split on some Rock, or sustained other mischance. Needless then were my fear
of the sea or fortune, because (where ere I go) death tracks me as my shadow,
and dare not strike till he be commanded: therefore I am thus determined to
have none with me but Ozalio and two Squires, because we will travel as mean
Gentlemen, and try our manhood with the Knights of Europe, before the Emperor
shall have any knowledge of me.

The Queen would no more contrary his intent, but referred all things to his
own disposing, wherefore Palmendos having sent for the chief Lords of the
Realm, declared to them openly his mind: giving them this express charge, to
obey the Queen his Mother, and his Uncle, whom he left as Lieutenant General of
the Province in his absence. They all sorry that he would so soon depart knew
not how to hinder it, he being so resolute: notwithstanding, they promised to
fulfill his command, wishing him a tranquile and prosperous navigation. Soon
after the Q. went into her Cabinet, where her hand supplying the office of her
tongue, she wrote a friendly letter to the Emperor, which she accompanied with
a ring, like to that she gave him at his departure: to the end that by this
Jewel, Palmendos might be the sooner known of him.

Ship and all things ready for this voyage, he took his leave of his Lords and
subjects, and afterward of the Queen his mother, who biting in her grief as
well as she could, delivered him the Ring and the Letter, the contents whereof
thus follows.

The Letter of the Queen of Tharsus to the Emperor Palmerin.
To the most Illustrious and Famous Palmerin d'Oliva, Emperor of
Constantinople, the most loyal of Lovers, most accomplished of Knights, and
above all the Princes that inhabit the center of the earth: The Queen of
Tharsus his entire and perpetual friend, sends health, humbly kissing the
hand of his Majesty.
IF the Heavens had so bountifully bestowed those perfections on me in my
cradle, which the most accomplished Ladies make their vaunt of, as Fortune was
afterward favorable and courteous unto me, in adorning my head with the royal
Diadem of Tharsus: needless had my recourse been to Charms or Magic (O
favored and fortunate Prince) when I sought your acquaintance in the realm of
Pasmeria. But since by that small talent wherewith nature endowed me, the
destinies granted me the sweet aspect of your love, after I beheld you with our
Admiral Alfarano* my pristine virtue could not prevail against unquenchable
desire, because the fame of your renown was so cara^^red in my spirit, as my
former chaste and bashful continency, was in the end irrecuperably contaminate.
Yet can I not repute this chance as matter of misfortune, seeing the heavenly
powers were so benign, as from that act proceeded Palmendos our only son:
from whom I still hid that you were his father, albeit by strange means he was
not long since advertised thereof, from which time he has so prevailed by
entreaties, as he has constrained me (not without great grief, and doubtful
fear never to see him again) to suffer him come see his noble father. And
hardly could I yield thereto, but that my confidence in you is such* as you
will quickly return him again, so soon as you have seen and known him for your
son. At this accident I hope you will not be offended, when you consider the
world injoys a young Prince: whose virtuous qualities, and good carriage of
himself, presage his future commendable fortune. In this sort have I sent him
accompanied only with his Cousin, because he thus persuaded me; that when you
traveled the world, it was commonly alone, and as a simple Knight errant, and
least you should be scrupulous in acknowledging him your son, beside the
conjectures of his phisiognomy, proportion of body, and other your perfect
resemblances: I have by him sent you a Ring, like that which I gave you when
you parted from me, which Rings* if you compare together, you will remember the
words I spoke wanted no relation. Once more I conjure ye* by the honor and
reverence of the firm love, you always bear so religiously to the only
Mistress of your heart, that you will quickly return our son again, that he
may yet be some comfort to my following date of time, while I enjoy my being in
this nether Region.

The most humble of your friends, the Queen of Tharsus.


CHAP. VI. How Palmendos by means of a Tempest on the sea, was brought to the
Isle of Delphos, where after he understood the adventure of the Temple, he went
on shore. And how after he conquered the son to the Giant Baledon, who held the
Island in forcible subjection.
PAlmendos with Ozalio and their Squires embarked, the Mariners hoised sail
and set away merrily, the Prince commanding the Pilot to make toward Thrace,
because he hoped to hear some tidings of Francelina, whom he had made chief
mistress of his affections. But after they had sailed half a day a violent
contrary wind arose, which drove them three days and three nights, as the
Mariners could scant tell in what part they were. At length this rough and
boisterous tempest ceased, when Palmendos desirous to know in what country
they were: was answered by the Master, that they were in Europe in the
Mediterranian sea, very near to the Isle of Delphos, where after so long and
uncomfortable weather, Palmendos would go on land to refresh himself. In this
Isle the Pagans were often wont in ancient time, to come and visit the Temple
of Apollo, as also to consult with his Oracle; and at this time was Lord
thereof a Giant named Baledon, the most fierce and cruel Tyrrant in all those
three parts of the world. This Giant had a son no less valiant then himself,
and after he had by force gotten this Island, he builded a strong Castle on a
little Promontorie, descending so artificially into the sea, as having a huge
Rock on either side, it was well defended from the extremity of the water. No
other port for landing would he permit in all the Island, then this only,
he^med in with the two Rocks, between which he had fastened a great chain of
iron, which commonly lay somewhat shallow in the water. But when any vessel
came to anchor in that port, certain villains which he kept in Towers for the
purpose, would hoise them up with the chain in such sort, that they could
depart no more thence except the Giant pleased: and thus would he roh and spoil
all that landed there, that all those parts lamented to hear of his villainy. If
happily he met with any Knights who resisted his will then would he outrage
them by force of Arms, and afterward put them into an infectious stinking
prison. The Merchants and others that used traffck, from them would he take all
they had, and afterward deliver them over unto a most cruel death, so that all
such as had notice of his tyranny, fled that place as the dangerous gulf of
Caribdis.

Yet notwithstanding there was in this Island a great adventure, for in the
time of the Gentiles, there inhabited a wealthy Priest, a Magitian, and
wonderful investigator of hidden things, he was high Priest of the Sanctuary
in the Temple, as also he had the general administration through the whole
Province: he having a comely beautiful daughter, endued with all virtues
requisite in a Virgin, and her he gave to the service of the Oracle. It so fell
out, that the Duke of Feria, a very gentle and gracious youth, became enamoured
of her only by report, for oftentimes he had heard her commended, to exceed in
beauty the choicest dames of that Country: wherefore he made sundry requests
to enjoy her as his Wife, but all his labor was to no purpose, because her
father would not part with her. And as it often happens, that the Messenger
who is twice or thrice sent to one place, to obtain a matter earnestly desired,
will devise what means he can for the behoof of his Master, more to escape the
shame of refusal, then for any great good will (happily) to the party: even so
fell it out with the minister of this suit, for seeing he went and returned so
often without avail, he got one day to speak with the Maiden her self, whom he
labored with so many persuasions, and whetted on to ^^^n in a secret marriage,
as she became ravished with the love of the Duke, and promised if his master
could cunningly steal her from her father, she should go with him whither he
pleased.

The Duke not a little glad of this answer* presently journied to the Island,
where being arrived, he advertised the damsel, that he would stay for her in
a convenient place near her fathers Palace, whither she should not fail to
come, so soon as the silent night had brought every one asleep. But the Priest,
who by means of his Magic foresaw all these practices, and knowing the place
where the Duke of Feria stayed for his daughter: caused two fierce enchanted
Lions to descend from the mountains which came with ravenous mouths on the
unprovided Duke, and he no way able to defend himself, they rent and tore him
cruelly in pieces. Which pitiful spectacle when his Squire that came with him
beheld, he gave such a lamentable shriek, as the damosel (whose eyes and ears
were carefully waking) easily heard it. In like sort did diverse others of the
house, who came forth with lighted torches to understand the cause, but the
maiden hearing too soon in what case they found the Duke, came running from the
Castle as a mad Woman to accomplish the Sacrifice. Such was her grief to behold
her vowed Husband thus cruelly massacred, as she taking his Rapier, set the
pummel thereof to the ground, and placing the point opposite to her heart, with
mavelous violence threw her self thereon as one disdaining to live, being
robbed of her love. Nevertheless, she was herein deceived, for the Sword
passing through her right side, she fell upon the dead corpse and so lay a while
alive, breathing forth many grievous sighs and lamentations. And finding in her
bosom a sheet of paper, with her own blood she wrote twelve mournful verses
in form of an Epitaph: then seeing her latest hour to hasten on, with rufull
mones she delivered these speeches. Seeing it is so, my sweet choice, and
paragon of courtesy, that for my sake thou have endured this martyrdom, it
will remain as a gall in my conscience, that I did not end thy funerals
according to thy desert. And that my father may know what wrong he has done
us, I will leave some occasion for his too late repentance* yet I desire no
other recompense, but causing our bodies to be buried in one Coffin, he will
suffer (for a perpetual remembrance of this stratagem) this Epitaph to be
engraven thereon.

Forbear mine eyes more to bemone thy friend,
Whose peerless virtues, time, nor death can stain*
Despise the man that thus procured his end,
And has withal his only daughter slain.
Ah angry fate, and Planet most unkind,
What more in humane act could ye devise:
Then step between the heart, the eye, and mind,
And pierce that vein which could them all suffice?
But fith in life our fortune was so bad,
To miss of that which we desired most:
Yet now in death the same is freely had*
Wherefore of love in death we make our boast.
This Epitaph ended, she yielded the humane tribute to nature, for afterward
her body made no motion of vital moving: and it cannot be esteemed as fabulous
that love should cause the death of any one, because in ancient Histories, we
may find innumerable of recent and modern examples thereof. But return we to
the Priest* who understanding that his daughter ran forth with such a clamor,
followed her immediately, fearing she would offer some violence on her self,
and finding her dead, holding the Epitaph in her hand, he was in great danger
to make a third in this woeful tragedy. Ah miserable and desolate wretch (quoth
he) if thy knowledge had efficacy in working the Duke of Feria's death why was
it not sufficient to prevent thy daughters mishap? unhappy was the hour when
first I practiced this divellish sorcery.

Many other sorrowful lamentations he made over the dead bodies whom we may
aptly compare to the loyal lovers Piramus and Thisby: but afterward he erected
a costly Sepulcher of brass, and having embalmed them according to the ancient
ceremonies of funeral pomp, he intombed them in the Temple both together, and
caused the Epitaph to be cunningly graven thereon. Not long after, considering
himself deprived of his lawful heir, and how greatly he had perverted the
course of nature very extreme grief ended his days: but ere he died, he
enclosed the treasure of the Temple with such enchantments, and with so strong
and fearful a guard, that from the time of his death it was very dangerous to
come near the place. And till the time of Palmendos arrival there, there durst
not any one make trial thereof, albeit before Baledon abused the Island,
Knights of diverse Regions came to prove their fortune: and the Giant himself
came thither for the same occasion, but seeing he could not approach the Temple
perceiving the Island to be fair and delectable: he got it by force of arms,
the people thereof being unable to resist his hostility.

Let us now remember where we left before, the arrival of Palmendos in this
Island of Delphos, to whom one of the Mariners told all these things, as also
the horrible villainy of the Giant: wherefore he entreated him not to anchor in
that Port, because (quoth he) we shall all be either slain or taken prisoners.
Why? said Palmendos* is no man able to punish his pride and tyranny? seeing
Fortune has conducted me hither, and will permit me to have a sight of him I
will not depart without some proof of my self; for if I be son to the Emperor
Palmerin, I must not be frighted with the name of Giants who rather resemble
huge Colosses without any souls, then humane creatures, much less strange
adventures, how hard and dangerous soever they seem. If I would acquire praise
and honor immortal, long time must I follow military exercise, as my father
did in his younger days, prevailing against diverse such Monsters, and bringing
innumerable enterprises to happy end: Turn prow then toward shore, and boldly
let us enter the Port, without any fear of this deformed Goliath. With much ado
they set into the Port, where they were no sooner entered, but they saw
themselves enclosed with the chain; which sight dismayed both the Master and
Mariners, but Palmendos and Ozalio presently put on their Helmets and Gantlets,
standing ready for defense of all the rest.

The Giant being advertised that a rich ship was got within the chain,
commanded his son presently to take Arms, and with sufficient assistants to go
and take all the strangers prisoners; whereto the young Tyrant was very ready;
and entering with three Knights into a boat, he came directly to the ship, where
Palmendos standing foremost, the Giants son thus spoke to him. How dare thou,
Knight, be so bold, as to enter our Port without license? I dare do more then
that (answered Palmendos) in despite of such disloyal villains as you are, who
by treacherous means entrap the innocent, and afterward exercise what cruelty
you please upon them; but now is the time come, I hope that shall guerdon you
with recompense answerable to such brutish behavior.

The Giants son displeased with these words, sought with his Knights to enter
violently the ship: But Palmendos and Ozalio being too high above them, gave
them so many sharp repulses, that young Baledon received his deaths wound at
the Princes hand, and Ozalio sent one of the Knights to bear him company. With
this foyl the boat speedily returned, and they advertised Baledon of what had
happened, bringing his son slain up into his chamber; wherewith he was so
wonderfully enraged, that he vowed to revenge his blood with the death of all
the strangers. In bitter anguish of heart, he called for his Armor, preparing
himself to the dismal attempt; in the mean time, the two Knights that escaped
back alive, stood on the shore reviling the Prince, willing him to prepare, for
his death was coming.

If your Master (quoth Palmendos) be so valiant as you report let him deal
alone with me in single fight, and if I chance to vanquish him, let him
accomplish what I shall set down and I will grant him life* On the contrary, if
he conquer me let him do with me and mine as him pleases. Tell him that
Bravadoes and proud speeches cannot daunt resolute minds; and if he dare grant
me safe conduct, with good assurance not to offer me any wrong, I will
presently come on shore, and try my fortune with him.

CHAP. VII. How Palmendos came on land to combat with the Giant Baledon, whom
he vanquished, and afterward delivered many Knights out of his prisons, among
whom were two young Princes, being Moors, who in traveling to the Emperors
Court, were by a tempest cast on this Island.
RIght soon went the Knights to the Giant with Palmendos challenge, who being
very well pleased therewith, came down proudly to the Port, with these
speeches. Which is the wretched Knight, that dares so peremptorily venture on
shore, to receive the death he has justly deserved? I am the man (answered
Palmendos) and I will be so good as my word, if thou will faithfully promise me
safety from thy people. By the hallowed faith (said Baledon) that I owe to our
Gods, thou shall be as secure as thou can require, albeit I die under thy
sword in combat.

The Prince loath to waste the time in words, called for a skiff to carry him on
shore, which the Mariners unwillingly consented to, being loath to lose a Knight
so valiant. In brief, he came on land, and no one with him but his cousin
Ozalio, who would not at any time forsake his company. Baledon pranceth up to
the plain before his Castle, commanding his attendants on pain of their lives,
not any way to trouble or molest his enemy. Now are the champions covered with
their swords and shields, and with such fury do the weapons clash upon the
Armor, as though Vulcan and his Cyclops were at work with their hammers. You
must think that the Giant being a man of monstrous stature, dealing with a
young Prince, but a gristle (in a manner) in comparison of him, did often bring
his life to very perilous exigents: Notwithstanding so did the Heavens favor
Palmendos, and despise the manifold tyrannies of the Giant, as after a long,
cruel and bloody fight, Baledon had received so many wounds, as he was
constrained to fall at the Princes mercy; for which Palmendos humbly thanking
heaven, boldly set his foot upon the Giant, saying. Confess thy self, Baledon*
vanquished by me, and let me enjoy the prisoners which thou unjustly detainest
in thy Castle, for the remainder of thy life hangs on the point of my sword.

When the Giant beheld his great pomp so overthrown, and he had no mean now
left wherewith to defend himself, he breathed forth these sorrowful speeches.
Ah angry Gods* how strange and diverse are your judgments, in suffering both me
and my son to be foiled by one Knight? Now see I well, that mine infinite and
wicked offenses committed against men without desert, has thrown this
wreakfull sentence on me. Then calling his servants, he commanded them to
conduct the Prince into the Castle, and deliver all his prisoners to him, with
any thing else he should command them.

So went the Prince with his cousin Ozalio and two of the Giants servants to
the Castle, the rest remained to bring their Masters dead body, and when they
were entered into the base Court, they met the Giantesse heavily lamenting and
cursing the Knight who was cause thereof. But Palmendos made no account of her
words, commanding all the prisoners to be presently brought before him, which
indeed were very many, both Knights, Merchants and other traveling strangers,
who had long time been kept there in captivity; and now seeing they were so
generally called, they verily thought to die, or endure some cruel torment; but
finding the contrary, I leave their joy to the Readers judgment. Then
Palmendos called for the Knights Armor, that each one knowing his own Armor
might be armed therewith, For this their happy deliverance, they all fell down
at the Princes feet, desiring God to reward his honorable pains.

But among the prisoners, there were two young knights of comely stature, being
both Moors, who had not long time been held in that servitude* and witnessing
by their countenances that they were descended of royal parentage. The one of
them was Rifarano, son to Trineus Emperor of Almain, and Aurecinda the Soldans
sister, as you may read in the History of Palmerin d' Oliva; the other was
named Lecefin, son to the Sultan of Persia, being the youngest of three which
he had by the Princess Zephira. These two young Lords were nourished together
by the Sultan, because he beheld the towardly inclination of Rifarano, whom he
ever imagined would prove a worthy Knight: and because he was son to his
sister, and the Emperor Trineus his great friend, he loved him as Lecefin his
own child. Rifarano coming to the age of ten or twelve years, waxed very
forward in all commendable exercises, and one day reasoning with his mother,
desired her to tell him the cause, why she went so continually clad in
mourning, the truth whereof she discoursed to him, and how his father was the
Emperor Trineus of Almaign. When Rifarano understood that he was son to one of
the chiefest Princes in Christendom, he made greater account of himself then
he did before, and disposed himself to matters of higher quality, so that being
of years to receive his Knighthood, he requested the Sultan to honor him
therewith: which he with right good will performed, causing Iousts and
Tournaments to solemnize that time withal, wherein Rifarano still bare away
the prize. Following arms and chivalry he still continued, and with good success
won such fame through all Persia, as the Sultan thought to join him in marriage
with the King Maulerino's eldest daughter. But he would never hearken to such
matters for that he had secretly vowed to see the Emperor his father, whereto
his Mother (whose days long sickness had now shortened) evermore provoked him
that Trineus beholding the fruit of her love, might think the better of his
acquaintance with her.

After the obsequies and royal funeral, as well beseemed a Princess of so
great regard, and Rifarano loath to stay, his mother being dead: he desired the
Sultan that he might travel to Constantinople, to see the Court of the
Emperor Palmerin, and thence he would go to his Father in Almaign. Albeit very
unwilling, yet the Sultan condiscended, whereat the young Prince Lecefin, who
loved Rifarano as himself, began to conceive great sorrow: wherefore he
entreated his father, that he might travel with him in company, persuading him
that it would be a cause of his cousins more speedy return. The Sultan liked
hereof very well, and although he was yet very young, he gave him his
Knighthood: and so with diverse presents from his father and Zephira, as also
Letters to both the Emperors, accompanied with thirty hardy Knights they took
shipping, and by means of an exceeding rough tempest on the Sea, they were
driven perforce into this Isle of Delphos, where being hemmed in with the
Chain, and flattered by the Giant to come on shore, without suspecting any
treason they went to his Castle, and finding outward friendly entertainment,
they were fetched forth of their beds and thrust into prison, and twenty of the
Knights that came with them cruelly murdered, the rest were brought into the
Dungeon to their Masters and afterward the Giant took the spoil of the ship at
his pleasure.

But to come to our purpose, Rifarano and Lecefin seeing themselves delivered
from this dolorous life, much worse then that of the slaves of the Galleys they
spoke to Palmendos in this manner. Tell us in courtesy, good Knight, by what
means you have obtained our liberty? for we marvel we see not the Giant who
brought us hither by villainy and treason. Gentlemen (quoth the Prince) I am a
Knight born far hence, and being by the angry seas cast upon this Island, I
determined to come on shore, where being no way able to escape the death
present before mine eyes, I was constrained to Combat with the Giant you talk
of, who to allure me the sooner to the battle, promised me security from any
save himself. But heaven giving me strength, to erect a mortal Trophie of his
slaughtered body, has thereby given you all freedom again.

Might we not said Rifarano, know your name to whom we are so much indebted for
our deliverance? as for us it is necessary you should know of whence and what
we are, that if we should hereafter grow ungrateful for this kindness, the
meanest in the world might justly condemn us. This young Prince (quoth he) is
named Lecefin, Son to the noble Sultan of Persia, and I his unworthy Nephew,
issued from Trineus Emperor of Almaign, brother by marriage to the
incomparable Prince Palmerin d' Oliva: hereto he added the whole discourse of
their trouble, which you have heard already. In happy time came I hither,
answered Palmendos, to succor so good and noble knights as you are, chiefly
for your near alliance to the Emperor Palmerin, whom I continually desire to
serve, and shortly shall present my self unto him: but first (by the favor of
Fortune) I would have his ears so acquainted with some actions of account as
might move his spirit with the more affection to see me. And seeing you go so
soon to his Court, let me entreat this favor at your hands, as to conduct this
company with you which I have delivered from prison, and present his Majesty
with them from me, as also the wife and daughter of Baledon the Giant: for it
is both just and reasonable, to dispossess this Island of such bad people, as
have with such horrible tyrannies so long time abused the same. For I dare say,
the people that inhabit this Isle, will more gladly submit themselves to the
Emperors Regiment, then be held in slavery by such Hellhounds. In mean while
we will leave some good Knight of this soil as Governor thereof in his
highness name, until he have disposed thereof as shall seem best in his
wisdom. Willingly would I make proof before your departure of a strange
adventure couched in the Temple: that if I die in the attempt, you may revenge
my death, and happily live to finish the same. Rifarano and Lecefin made
answer, that they would fulfill any thing he pleased to command them, for which
Palmendos requited them with many thanks.

CHAP. VIII. How Palmendos placed in the government of the Isle of Delphos, an
ancient wise Knight named Guillador, by whom he understood the danger and the
difficulty of the adventure in the Temple, whether (notwithstanding) he
afterward traveled: and how he fortunately ended the same.
AFter all the Knights and Gentlemen had armed themselves, Palmendos caused the
Giantesse and her daughter, to be fastened with a strong chain to a pillar, lest
they should offer some violence on themselves, and the chain in the port he
commanded to be taken away, with all other dangers that might hurt travelers,
then summoning the people of the Island, he thus began to confer with them.

My Brethren and friends, I cannot think but you all rejoice to see your selves
delivered from the miserable servitude, wherein the Tyrant Baledon has long
time held you; henceforth therefore I intend, that you shall acknowledge for
your liege Lord and Sovereign the famous and virtuous Emperor Palmerin d'
Oliva, to whom I will make present of this Island which the God of heaven has
suffered me to conquer: for you know the Giant is slain, his wife and daughter
likewise remain my prisoners, and to his Majesty will I shortly send them. Let
me therefore entreat you, to continue his true and loyal Subjects, and I shall
so behave my self with his Highness, as he shall henceforth defend this Island
and you: for the government whereof in mean while, I will leave one that shall
be chosen among you, who shallswear to resign his office to him whom the
Emperor shall please to send hither.

The Knights and Gentlemen of the Island were greatly contented, when they
heard Palmendos use such gracious speeches, acknowledging themselves happy to
remain the Emperors vassals; whereupon they swear fidelity to him, and elected
a reverend Knight of the Island, named Guillador, to whom the authority of
Deputy was committed, and then they caused the Giants body to be burned, for
the horrible villainies he had done in his life time, to which execution all the
people of the Island resorted, not so much for the sight thereof, as to honor
the patron of their deliverance.

Every thing thus wisely and discreetly pacified, he determined to try the
adventure of the Temple, whereupon the new Governor desired him, not to hazard
himself in a matter so perilous, for that many Knights had lost their lives in
the attempt; which made Palmendos far more desirous to know wherein the
greatest danger thereof consisted, at whose request Guillador thus began the
discourse. Know, my Lord, that the Temple wherein our Priests great treasure is
hid is a place now overgrown as a thicket of young trees, by reason of the long
time since any one durst approach the same; and in that wood is a savage wild
Boar, of more cruel nature certain then that which Hercules slew on the
Mountain Erymanthus in Arcadia: And when any one does offer to enter the Temple
he comes forth of his den, and makes him sure for ever returning again. In
sooth (quoth the Prince) these news are very terrible in hearing, yet never was
there any adventure in the world so difficult, but one or other has
accomplished it and I trusting only in the help of God, will try if this
enchantment were ordained perpetual, not fearing all the Boars or devils in the
world.

I am sure, my Lord, (quoth Rifarano) that if you finish not this enchantment,
it will never be accomplished by any other, therefore boldly set upon it, for
gladly would I endure part of the pain: and by the faith of a true Knight, I
shall assist you with my uttermost endeavor. No other help do I desire
(answered Palmendos) then the favor of the Gods only, and I hope they will
not be far from me, if so I stand in need thereof; notwithstanding I humbly
thank you for your good will, and if I happen to fail in mine enterprise, you
shall make no better witness of your words, then courteously to hazard the
adventure, to recover the honor lost by me; for which cause, as also to
beguile the tediousness of travel, you shall accompany me to the Temple. So
willing the Merchants and other prisoners to stay in the Castle, Palmendos,
Ozalio, Rifarano, Lecefin. and the rest of the Knights being all well armed,
set toward the Temple, many of the Island traveling with them to guide them
the way, and do other needful services.

Now had Palmendos caused to be made by mavelous subtle cunning, a coat of
Arms, composed of wax, and other like clammy mixtures, wherewith he covered all
his Armor, that the sharp bristles and tusks of the Boar might have no power
to hurt him: And in this sort they rode on together. Being at length come to a
convenient place, which was within sight of the Temple, he beheld the brushie
thornie plain, which made him doubt how he should get thither with his horse.
Yet resolute for all chances* he takes an Iron Mace that he had brought from
the Giants Castle, and forward goes to the Temple, desiring all his companions*
that not one of them should follow him; wherewith Ozalio and Rifarano were
somewhat offended, yet being loath to break his commandment, they stayed, using
hearty and zealous invocations for his good success.

Palmendos making way with his Mace through the enchanted briars, espied a
Knight before him, who presently winded a mighty horn, at the sound whereof the
ugly and monstrous Boar came forth of his den, and ran before the Temple gate,
there staying for Palmendos, with such horrible grinning of his tusks, as the
very sight thereof was sufficient to fray a man of good courage. By this time
the Prince gained a convenient place by the Temple side, when beholding the
cruel beast come running fiercely toward him, he commended himself to the
heavens, and fell to his work. So thick a^ hall slew the enchanted bristles
from the Boar at the Prince; but the coat of wax so confounded their strength
as they could not pierce his Armor, which only had been the death of many
Knights before: But the Prince gave the beast such such a sound stroke with the
Mace on the head, as he staggered to and fro, unable to sustain himself; and
following this good advantage, thrust his sword so deep down his throat, as
casting forth a great deal of blood upon the Prince, at length he tumbled down
on his side, when half a dozen good strokes with the Mace, made him safe for
stirring any more. And although this was a natural Boar, yet had he been
divelishly enchanted, and brought into that place by the Priests Magic, as the
Lions were that killed the Duke of Feria: this Boar was appointed by him to
guard his treasure in the Temple, which (as you hear) was slain by the hand of
Palmendos. And even as the Boar of Calidon, that was sent to torment the whole
Country, died by the valor of Meleager, who after made a present of his head
to the fair Atalanta, as a notable experience of his magnanimity in like sort
did the Prince of Tharsus, as a remembrance to all that should come thither,
cut off the Boars head, and as a trophie of his victory set it on a pillar in
the same place where he obtained it. He had no sooner put off his coat of wax,
which was well laden with the Boars bristles, but he saw the Knight of the Horn
come toward him with a huge Mace in his hand saying. Unhappy was thy coming
(Knight) into this Desert, when thou must buy thy boldness with thy dearest
blood. Herewith he gave the Prince such a cruel blow, as made him set one knee
to the ground, and so long endured the sharp sight between them, as they both
being far spent and over-laboured, fell down to the ground, not able to stir
themselves,

Palmendos in short time recovering strength, arose, and seeing his enemy was
not to be found, boldly went to enter the Temple, the gates whereof stood now
wide open, which greatly augmented his desire to enter. Being come within the
porch, two Images of brass stood on either side, who with monstrous trumpets
blew such forcible wind on him, as he was three or four times carried forth
again therewith: but pressing on still with all the strength he had, he got
such sure footing within the Temple, as he felt no more of that violent wind.
Passing forward in the body of the Church, he came to the magnificent Sepulcher
wherein the Duke of Feria and the high Priests daughter were interred, which
was so rich, sumptuous, and rarely invented, as he had never seen the like
before.

Having read the Epitaph he espied the sword wherewith the most perfect Damosel
in love had slain her self; then mounting on the bars that environed the Tomb,
he took the sword in his hand, and in remembrance of the accident, as also for
the beauty thereof, he hung the same at his girdle determining to take it with
him, and so walked higher to find out the treasure. At length he came to the
Sanctuary, where stood the ancient costly Altar for the sacrifice, having
thereon an Idol of massy gold upon the head whereof was a most rich Imperial
Crown, and in his right hand a Scepter so curiously framed, that it was
impossible to see Jewels of greater price. In the Idols other hand was a Book
fast sealed with four great buckles of gold; and in such a marvellously costly
Chair was the Image set, as nature her self would have been driven into
admiration, to behold a matter of such surpassing excellency. All about the
Altar stood many Basins of Gold, and before it hung diverse images of silver
with lighted Lamps, from whence came such a sweet smell of Myrrh and other
Aromatic drugs, and the light caused the precious stones in the Idol so to
glister, as it would have ravished any eye to note the Majesty thereof.
Palmendos carried away with contemplating this sight, and not able to withdraw
his eye from gazing thereon: at length beheld the dark night to draw on, the
Lamps in this holy conclave having so beguiled him, wherefore he concluded not
to depart thence till the morning, that he might behold the other singularities
of the place.

CHAP. IX. What illusions appeared to Palmendos in the Temple, one whereof
resembled the beauty of Francelina, wherewith he had a great deal of talk, and
how Ozalio with the other Knights came and found him.
PAlmendos sat down on a curious pillar intending to repose himself till the
next morning but immediately he heard such a brute and rumor, as though the
whole world had been in one moment assembled. Hereupon he arose, and
courageously drawing his sword (because he doubted some ambush or new charge)
went directly to the Sepulcher of the Duke, where he beheld a Damosel with her
hair about her ears, and all her garments soiled with blood, which very sight
grieved him to the heart. This was the shadow and representation of the Priests
daughter, who after she had delivered many bitter sighs, with a voice hollow
and trembling, thus spoke.

Am I not more wretched and unfortunate, then any other under the Globe of
heaven? yes questionless, seeing the fatal Destinies has appointed me to
endure perpetual cruel and rigorous martyrdomes, for thy sake noble Duke of
Feria, the only record of mine afflicted soul, for whom love took such
privilege on me, as I feared not to offend my self with mine own hand. But who
has robbed one of the Sword that so suddenly made the sad execution of my
life? Ah Palmendos, think not to carry it away so lightly* for that sword is
yet more necessary for me. With these words she ran violently upon him, and
shook him as if she would have torn him in pieces: at which instant there arose
such a thunder and trembling of the earth, as he thought verily the Temple
would have sunk, and the four elements resolve and turn into their former state
of Chaos. By reason whereof the Prince could not continue his magnanimous and
wonted vigor, but fell down deprived of his understanding, as though pale
death had taken possession of him. During this trance, a fair Virgin richly
accoustred (whom the old woman that told him of so many things at Tharsus, had
sent thither by her Post) came and took him by the hand, saying.

Arise Palmendos my noble Lord, and come to her, who seeing the fearful state
wherein you are, only by fantasies represented to your eyes, do entreat you
not to disable your heroical and noble courage, at the sight of vain and
fantastical visions, for it beseems not so good and accomplished Knights, as
you are, in such sort to pass through strange adventures: Be of good cheer
then, and repute this hour of your renown, to surpass all the bravest men in
the world: because since the essence of this enchantment, no Knight could enter
this Temple but you alone. Wherefore by good reason ought the treasure to be
yours, which has so long time been concealed here: take hence then the Golden
Idol on the Altar, with all the other rich and precious jewels, and send them
to the virtuous Emperor your Father. And for your sake shall this temple
hereafter be frequent and accessable for any, which you shall consecrate to the
name of Christ, and of the treasure you shall yet find, you shall erect a
Monastery of Virgins, in honor of that incontaminate maiden, that brought the
Savior of al mankind into the world, who has given you strength to run
through these actions, that this place may be reverently and devoutly used,
which heretofore has been blasphemed with Idolatry contrary to the bounty
inexpuisable, making to sinful men vows, offerings, and sacrifices. And albeit
you are not as yet a Christian, yet for my sake enter that unspotted faith, for
the time will come, wherein you shall sundry times say, happy was that hour
wherein you found me. Having taken good order for all that I have said, contain
your self no longer in these countries, because in other climats is reserved a
tryumphal Scepter for you, enriched with honor and eternal praises.

In vain it were to ask, if Palmendos was filled with great marvel, hearing
the damsels voice, who came to comfort him in this austere calamity, and could
so well decipher his affairs, for the ecstasy and radishment of his spirit,
which evidently appeared in his countenance, delivered ample testimony thereof.
Nor were these words any thing else but fuel to increase loves fire already
burning: nevertheless, seeing himself in a place so commodious, where freely
he might hold that with this Damosel, he called up his spirits, and boldly made
this answer. Madam, for the reverend honor you bear to your God, conceal not
who you are that know me so well, entreating you to pardon my presumptuous
request, because your rare and perfect beauty, which is the only spur to my
demand, has confounded me with greater admiration then all the strange sights
I have yet beheld: all which, (in respect of your excellence) I hold as
diabolical and frivolous; for you seem celestial and sent by the Gods into
these nether Regions, where having discovered the future event of my destinies,
my heart has thereby received incredible joy and contentment. Be not abashed
courteous Knight (quoth she) at any thing I have said, for it is long since I
knew what I have uttered* and in regard of your worthy valor, I love and
esteem ye above all other in the world, so that I have left the Countries of my
original only to see and tell ye what I have done, desiring you to excuse me
in the rest, as concealing of whence and what I am, because at this time you
cannot be satisfied therewith, yet ere it be long we will meet again, and then
shall you understand more of me, by one request I must make to you, which as
yet may not be manifested. Wonderful will that consolation be (quoth the
Prince) to me, that you will command any thing wherein I may express my
forces, and in that devotion, I have vowed evermore faithfully to continue your
friend: offering in witness of this obeisance, to serve henceforth as your
Knight, with promise not to prejudice the least of your commandments, so long
as my stars give me leave to breath. Nor will I further press you to tell me
what you are, seeing your will stands not thereto: but till that gracious
hour of commandment come, I will accomplish your appointment, erecting here a
Monastery of virgins for the service of your God, and your words have made me
thirst with unquenchable desire, till I be resolved as concerning that faith.
While she returned him many thanks for his friendly offers, the old woman
arrived who made him enamoured with the love of Francelina in his Realm: she
taking the Damosel by the hand said, Go with me fair daughter, and leave this
most discourteous Knight, who suffered me to be misused before him in Tharsus:
whereof I hope to take sufficient revenge, by the extreme passions his heart
shall endure hereafter.

No sooner had she ended these words, but immediately they both vanished away,
wherewith the Prince greatly admiring, was driven into such a profound conceit
of her rare beauty, as he thought even there to yield up his Ghost, because he
imagined never to have seen her like. Herein his judgment was no whit
beguiled, for he did as many young Lovers do, show themselves favorable Judges
in their own causes. Now enters he into conceit* because the old woman had
taken her away, that this Damosel was Francelina, she whom he had so lively
imprinted in his heart, as for her love he had left his native Country. Thus
compassed with grief on every side, entered into these terms. Alas old Woman, I
know not what thou may be, yet very true do I find thy words: but small to my
avail did Ozalio smite thee in my presence, that I must requite with so long,
irksome, and lingering penance. Ah cruel enemy, why did thou rob mine eyes so
soon of their unspeakable content? thou sufferedst me to see, that my love
might grow the more immeasurable: but thy words were such daggers to my heart,
as never can I taste a sharper corosive. And if this were the object of
Francelina (for fairer creature did the Sun never shine upon) at no time shall
my soul enjoy rest, till once more I have seen her again. Thus entercoursing a
thousand opinions, he stood a long time as driven to the Antipodes, accusing
himself with base pusillanimity, and blaming the old woman who had so robbed
him of his forces, as he could not stay the Lady with him, by whose presence
and gracious speeches, he supposed himself in an eternal beatitude.

But now is the clowdy night chased toward the Occident, when he determined to
effect what the damosel had commanded him: and going to the Altar, he took the
golden Basins and the other sumptuous things, making them ready to be carried
thence, despoiling likewise the Idol of the Crown, Scepter and Book. But as he
would have lifted the Image forth of the chair, he found it so heavy as he was
not able to stir it: wherewith he being offended, said. And I shall do thee
more honor then thou have yet received of me: so lifting up his Mace, he made
it fall in pieces to the ground. From out the body of the Image, flew a very
strange bird all black, giving such fearful shrikes and cries, as the Prince
was thereat amazed: and following her out of the Temple, he beheld a great many
more such like birds with her, they flying altogether with that noise, the same
way where Ozalio and his Knights attended, whereat they likewise marvailing
were certified by the men of the Island, that this prodigy signified Palmendos
entrance into the Temple: for they had heard before, by sundry learned
Nigromancers, that these were certain infernal spirits which should be chased
forth of the Country, when the adventure of the Temple was finished* Rifarano,
Ozalio, and all the Knights glad of this news, went where they beheld the
monstrous wild Bore, and thence to the Temple, where Ozalio first found the
Prince opening a great chest, which contained the Priests principal treasure,
consisting of such rare and inestimable Jewels, as (it was thought) the like
was never seen before. Palmendos beholding his friend Ozalio, ran and embraced
him mavelous kindly, the like did he to Rifarano, Lecefin, and the rest, all
of them extolling the happy star that guided the Prince: and he acquainted them
with all things since his departure from them, saving his conference with the
Damosel, because none of them should suspect his love. Then entreated he
Guillador to send for some skilful man who might undertake to devise and build
the Monastery: in short time the greater part of the Clergy was sent for, and
among them to a virtuous man of special knowledge, he gave the charge and
superintendance of the work, as also bountiful store of Gold* and Silver, which
was taken out of the Priests wealthy Chest. All things he committed to the
trust of Guillador, that the Temple, Monastery, and ways thereto, should be
done in decent order: but he whose heart was only dedicated to the Ladies
beauty, which appeared unto him under form of a bodily illusion, took small
delight in any thing else, but in her gracious and divine remembrance. Now did
he hasten the day of his departure, desiring Rifarano and Lecefin to make speed
to the Emperor, and present the Gyantesse, her Daughter and the other
prisoners to him, as also all the Treasure was found in the Temple from a
strange Gentleman religiously vowed to his service: who in respect of great
affairs that called him elsewhere, could not come to kiss his Majesty's hand,
which he will no with all speed possible. Rifarano and Lecefin were loath to
leave Palmendos, but seeing it must needs be so, they soon after conveyed the
Gyantesse and her Daughter on shipboard, they making great moan to be carried
from the Island. In the same Ship was the Crown, Scepter, Image, Basins, and
all the other Treasure carried, and in another ship the prisoners found in the
Castle on the promontory, with all things else expedient for the voyage: then
Rifarano and Lecefin taking their leave of Palmendos and Ozalio, went on board
where the Gyantesse and the treasure was, commanding their anchors to be
weighed, their sails hoised, the wind then serving fit and favorable, and so
are they sailing toward Constantinople. As yet above Palmendos in the Isle of
Delphos, to see what Guilladors workmen would compass, in so great a work as
he had given them charge of.

CHAP. X. How Rifarano and Lecefin, (with all their train arrived in
Constantinople, where they were honorably received by the Emperor and them of
the Court, greatly marvelling at the news he heard of Palmendos, and what
afterward followed.
AT what time Rifarano and Lecefin should arrive at Constantinople, there were
assembled many great Lords and Barons, in honor of a solemn feast, which the
Emperor made for the marriage of the Hungarian Prince Ditreus son to King
Frysol, and twin brother to Belcar. Ditreus so soon as he was armed Knight,
went to the Emperors Court where he was worthily welcomed, and albeit he was
his Majesty's Nephew, yet he loved him with a particular affection, his
courteous and civil manners, joined with his forwardness in arms, gave hope
that he would prove a valiant Knight hereafter. He had not been long in the
Emperors Court, and thoroughly acquainted with every one, but he grew enamoured
with the beauty of Esquivela, daughter to the Sultan of Babylon and Alchidiana,
so that being one day in the Chamber of his cousin Philocrista, eldest daughter
to the Emperor, devising with her and her sister Melicia: he got such apt time
and occasion, as he made his intent known to Esquivela, she modestly answering,
that if he faithfully meant to make her his wife, she would settle her choice
upon him only. Ditreus who was thereon resolved, desired the Emperor and
Empress to grant that marriage: they being willing to gratify their Nephew,
as also to prefer the young Princess: with the consent of King Frysol
affianced them together, and Ditreus fearing the marriage would be deferred too
long, solicited the Emperor in such sort, as he sent with all speed to make
the same known to the Sultan. In mean while his Majesty summoned the chiefest
Lords of the Empire, to prepare a Triumph in honor of this feast, for the
accomplishment whereof nothing wanted, save only the Ambassadors return that
went to the Sultan.

But now are Rifarano and Lecefin entered the Haven of Constantinople, intending
to land before the Emperor should know any thing of them, because they came
not in such equipage as happily he would expect. Being then all Armed, except
with their Helmets, they rode through the City but with two Squires only that
brought their Lances and Helmets, they being wonderfully noted of every one,
and reputed for some strange Lords of great birth, and in this sort they came
to the Palace where very boldly they would have entered, but the guard stayed
them, to understand the cause of their coming. We are, quoth they, two Knights
of Countries far hence distant, and hither we come to see and serve the
Emperor Palmerin. You must then leave these offensive Arms, answered the
Guard, if you mean to go where his Highness is: or else declare your proper
names to us, that we may go see if it be his pleasure you shall come in this
sort before him. Our Arms we will not leave said Rifarano, because it ill
beseems an honest Knight so to do: but you may go certify his Majesty, that
here is Lecefin son to the Sultan of Persia, and the Princess Zephira, in
whose company is Rifarano, Son to the Emperor Trineus of Almaign, who humbly
desire to kiss his Highness hand. His Majesty had no sooner notice of their
names* but (in exceeding contentation) he sent his son Primaleon with diverse
other Knights, to entertain them as beseemed, and the Moor Princes seeing every
one give place to him that came foremost, immediately they reputed him to be the
Emperors son, whereupon they alighted, when Primaleon courteously embracing
them said.

My Lords, you are more then welcome to my fathers Court, his Majesty being not
a little glad of your arrival, so taking each of them by the hand, he conducted
them into the great Hall, where the Emperor sat in his chair attending their
coming, and then approaching the state, made offer to kiss his Highness
hand, but he took them in his arms, and would not suffer them saying. Know my
good cousins, that I account my self greatly indebted to you, in that you would
forsake your own Countries to visit me so far off, and that I may not fail in
the use of your names, let me understand which of you is Rifarano, albeit you
both stand equal in my grace and favor: yet being singularly desirous to
continue my love to the Princess Zephira, I must consequently esteem and
affect all that come from her. On the other side, as well for the indissoluble
amity, entirely grounded in our young years between the Emperor Trineus and
me, as also in regard of the alliance united between us: I am constrained to
love his lineage and posterity, and thus I would have you both persuaded, that
greater good could not happen to me, then the sight of them they esteem so
dearly. Heaven so prosper and favor you in all things, as they have thoroughly
comforted my spirits, by the very hearing of my good friends and confederates
the Sultan and Zephira, whose health I pray you resolve me of, for it is long
since I heard any thing from them.

My Lord, answered Rifarano, at what time we departed Persia, we left their
persons in most safe disposition, and they by us (humbly kissing your Majesty's
hand) have sent this Letter in sign of the reverence and love they bear you:
now for they could not themselves come so far, they have sent this Prince their
son named Lecefin, in their stead to do any serviceable duty in your royal
Court^ As for my self, I am Rifarano, son to Aurecinda, expressly leaving my
Country to have knowledge of your excellency, and with my uttermost endeavors
to follow your service: craving this license, that I may go see the Emperor
Trineus my father, whose son I account my self not only happy to be, but
greatly accuse my self of ingratitude, that I have so long time deferred this
voyage. Lecefin kissing the Letter, upon his knee delivered it to the Emperor,
which he commanding to be opened, took and read as follows.

The Letter of Zephira, wife to the Sultan of Persia, to the Emperor Palmerin.
To the right happy and most fortunate Prince, Palmerin d' Oliva, mirror of
courtesy, and surpassing all good Knights: Zephira wife to the Sultan of
Persia, perpetual vowed friend to your imperial Majesty, kisseth your Higness
hand, wishing your increase in all felicity.
KNow (most noble Emperor) that the long and vehement affection of my son
Lecefin to see Constantinople, only to offer you his service, and behold the
magnificence of your Court: has caused the Sultan my husband and me, now to
send him in company of Rifarano, Son to the Emperor Trineus, to satisfy the
desire they had, in visiting you on our behalf. And albeit they deserved
greater royalty for such a voyage, yet would they have no other company then
thirty Knights: knowing that ostentation in show, would not purchase them the
more estimation at your hands, and therefore they come no otherwise accoustred.
Notwithstanding if the sincere amity you evermore showed me, has acquainted
you with the inward integrity of my heart, whereby you have deigned me place
among your most affectionate friends: I desire you in regard of that zeal, to
entertain these two, and accept of this present, as coming from the hand of
her, who has not her equal in good will to your excellency. And to witness my
bounden duty in acceptance hereof, I vow both me and mine evermore to your
obeisance: persuading my self that your wonted debonair courtesy, will not
suffer me disdained in the offer I make.

The most obedient of your friends, Zephira Soldanesse of Persia.


For this gentle Letter from the Sultan and Zephira, the Emperor gave Lecefin
their Son many thanks, again and again welcomming him to the Court, then
turning to Rifarano, he said. I well perceive my Lord Rifarano, that you are
the undoubted Son of the Emperor Trineus, because you so lively resemble him
in face, well have you done to come see so good a father, and the more do I
thank God for your arrival here, at this time when we intend to hold open
Court, to honor the approaching marriage of our beloved cousin: and so please
ye to stay the intended Triumphs, here shall you see good store of worthy
Knights that mean to tempt Fortune for the Garland of honor.

This news dread Lord, answered Rifarano, are not a little welcome to us, in
respect that next the principal point of our voyage, which was to kiss your
Majesty's hand: we were desirous to behold the valor of your Knights, for
their renown is spread through the whole world, and now we shall well witness
the same, coming at a time so apt for the purpose. Nor can we forget a worthy
Knight whom we met in our journey, being named Palmendos, without his second or
match in martial affairs, and I think there is no one man living, except your
Highness* the mirror and Paragon of chivalry, that worthily may be equalled
with him: Right sorry are we, because we can deliver no better knowledge of the
man, by reason of his desire to pass unknown, and therefore concealeth himself
in all places where he travelleth. This famous man (right noble Lord) humbly
kisseth your highness hand, having sent you such rare and inestimable riches,
as when you have seen them, you will judge that the like present was never
given to any King or Emperor as we are to present your Majesty withal from this
unknown Knight. The charge of this message we undertook in that our selves with
diverse other Knights were delivered from the cruel bondage of Baledon, the
Giant in the Isle of Delphos, where we endured miseries, not fit to be
recounted in this gracious assembly. Yet the heavens gave Palmendos power to
kill this Tyrant: After which victory, he has seized the Island subject to
your Majesty, until you send some such Governor or Lieutenant as best likes
you: wherewithal, as testimony of his honorable victory, he has sent you the
wife and daughter to the Giant to dispose of them as shall seem best in your
wisdom. Hereto he added the whole discourse of the Temple, and how Palmendos
had ended the enchanted adventure thereof. Without doubt (quoth the Emperor,
being driven into great admiration) I cannot imagine who this worthy Knight
should be for if he have ended such a weighty enterprise, it must needs follow
that he is peerlesse in Chivalry; and if it be his fortune to see our Court, I
shall requite him with all the honor I can: but tell me, is he a Moor, or a
Christian?

A Moor born as I think (answered Rifarano) notwithstanding he well
understands this language; and such is his brave constitution of body, as I
think a more gallant Gentleman was never seen. But may it please your Majesty
to send for the wife of Baledon, and her daughter, as also the rich present
abiding in your port? The Emperor requiting them with many thanks, sent for the
prisoners be brought on land, commanding the two Princes to be unarmed, and
sent them two costly Turkish Robes, which his son Primaleon and Ditreus saw
effectually executed, with all things else necessay for men of such calling: In
mean while he sent for the Empress and his daughters to behold the rare and
precious treasure sent by Palmendos.

When the Empress and her daughters were come into the Hall, they entertained
the strange Knights exceeding courteously, but Lecefin regarding the beauty of
Philocrista, grew into such conceit of her singular feature, as she stood in
his thoughts beyond all compare. She with her sisters Flerida, Bazilia and
Melicia, (for so were the Emperors daughters named, gave them a maidens welcome
to the Court, such as beseemed them toward Knight errant, as also because they
were Princes of so honorable birth. After that, the Giantesse, her daughter,
and the rest of the prisoners through a mighty throng of people, were brought
to the Palace, one of the Knights in behalf of all the rest, kneeling before
the Emperor, thus spoke.

Mighty and invincible Monarch, the hardy Champion and ^lower of Knights, named
Palmendos, who delivered us from cruel Baledon in the Isle of Delphos, has
sent us (with this inestimable treasure) unto your Majesty, as to the only
Lord and Prince of the world, of whom he carries most humble and religious
opinion, that you should take compassion on our miseries, and grant us access
to our own houses. Good friends, said the Emperor, your honest report of this
Knight, to whom I am so much beholding, does make me more earnestly long to see
him in our Court: whither you all (for his sake) are so heartily welcome, as ye
shall well perceive the same before ye depart: afterward (in Gods name) go when
you please. And these were not words alone, but deeds did confirm the same, the
Emperor rewarding each one of them with such liberal gifts, as they esteemed
his largess and munificence equal with that of Xerxes, Julius Caesar, or
Alexander the great* Afterward he sent for the Giantesse and her daughter, and
to them offered very honorable kindness: but their hearts were so swollen and
confounded with grief, as they would make no answer at all; whereupon he
appointed them a convenient place in the City, with provision of all things for
their necessary uses: but the Giantesse falling into an extreme lunacy, died
soon after thereof; yet her daughter became a Christian, and lived long time in
the Emperors favor.

Now are all the sumptuous utensils brought before his Majesty, the Idols
Chair, his Crown the Scepter, Book, and the rest, which being well and
advisedly regarded, were judged the like never to be seen before: whereupon his
Majesty took the Book laboring with all his strength and cunning to open the
same, and after delivered it to his Barons to try what they could do, but all
their labor being lost, he said. I think this Book can be opened by none other
then him only that conquered it; let it therefore be carefully kept till his
coming: Now call I to mind the Damsels words* that departed so suddenly
without answer; and verily I am persuaded, this Knight is the man she spoke of,
who has sent us this treasure from the Isle of Delphos.

With these speeches of the Emperor, diverse of his Knights grew somewhat
offended, to hear such commendations pass on him who was unknown; wherefore
they intended if ever he came thither, to make such proof of his valor and
prowess, as the Emperor should perceive he spoke but by affection. Not long
after his Majesty sent one of his chief Knights to Delphos, and with him such a
train as beseemed the expedition, there to see all things ordered to his
highness use, and to prevent insurrections, if any were like to grow; giving
the Knight charge, if he found Palmendos there, to request him with all speed
to visit the Emperor. But the Knight came short of his intent, for he had set
sail toward Constantinople, according as you shall hear hereafter:
Notwithstanding the Knight was very graciously welcomed thither, and the
possession of the whole Island surrendered to him, which in the end was
transferred to one of Palmendos sons, being a pleasant, fair and opulent
Country, navigable for all passengers whatsoever.

CHAP. XI. How Palmendos sailing in the Aegean sea, recovered the Sultan of
Babilons Son from Ocurites King of Culaquin, who rode along that Coast of
Greece: And how after he had overcome his strength, he took him prisoner, and
sent him to the Emperor Palmerin, with diverse Christians which he delivered
from his Captivity.
RIfarano and Lecefin being no sooner set from Delphos, but Palmendos followed
the speedy building of the Monastery, causing religious observations to be used
in the Temple: for the people of the Island were good Christians, although the
Giant Baledon was a Pagan. The Monastery being stored with fair Virgins, he
would have them called the Sisters of Francelina, and many Ladies of great
birth resorted thither to live religiously in service of the worlds Creator:
Palmendos much delighted to behold the Christians Religion, meaning when time
and place served to be further instructed therein.

Having ordered every thing to his own contentment, and placed Guillador in
Justice till the Emperor sent some other: he with Ozalio took shipping,
sailing six days with prosperous winds toward Constantinople, yet first he
determined to land in Thrace, because he would hear some news of the Emperors
Court, and of Francelina if possible he could, Riding thus with the favor of
Aeolus and Neptune, he came within sight of the two destroyed towns Sestos and
Abidos, when one of the Pilots certified him, that he saw diverse ships and
Foists eagerly fighting together, which made Palmendos to come up on the deck,
to see if he could discern what they were. Hearing the great tumult and cry
made in the vessels, especially in two that seemed better provided for war then
the other: he was desirous to go more near them, wherefore he commanded the
master so to do, that they might help them which too much were oppressed. Now
to acquaint you with the cause hereof, it is so, that when the Sultan of
Babylon and Alchidiana understood the marriage intended by the Emperor,
between their daughter and Ditreus Prince of Hungaria, they were very joyful
of so great alliance, and therefore would send them great store of riches by
their youngest son, who had not yet received his order of Knighthood. This
young Prince was named Abenunco, a gentle youth, and very well given, who
earnestly entreated his mother, to obtain so much of the Sultan his father,
that after his sisters marriage, he might stay a while at Constantinople, which
suit at her request the Sultan granted, and therefore sent him by sea well
accompanied with Knights. Abenunco sailing along the coast of Thrace, met with
Ocurites King of Culaquin, who was son in law to the great Turk, and reputed
the hardiest Knight among all the Turkish Nobility: his Majesty having given his
daughter in marriage to this Barbarian, she being one of the most accomplished
Ladies in all Heathenesse. Ocurites knowing the inveterate malice between the
Emperor and his father in law, (the more to please him) provided himself of
good strength by sea, and daily came upon the coasts of Greece, sending
vauntcurriers with strong Brigandines before him, to discover what Christians
stirred abroad, and sundry times took many of them captives, as now he intended
to do by the Soldans son. When Ocurites by the streamers and banderolls heard
of the Babylonian Prince, and knew (withal) that his father was a chief friend
to the Emperor: in great fury with his ships he set upon him, Abenunco with
his Knights defended themselves so well as they could. During this conflict
Palmendos approached very near them, and of a Galley filled with Christian
slaves, he demanded the cause of this fierce encounter.

Sir, answered one of the slaves, he to whom this great train of shipping
appertains, is Ocurites King of Culaquin, and son to the great Turk, that
with diverse of his league and faction daily coasts on Greece, to endamage the
Emperor Palmerin, enemy to his Father, and those he has now met withal,
belong to the Sultan of Babylon, they sailing (as we understand) toward
Constantinople. When the Prince heard what the Christian had said, he bravely
encouraged his cousin Ozalio, in assisting the well-willers to the noble
Emperor: so coming to the Kings ship he thus spoke.

Nor shall thou Ocurites offend so good a Prince, as is the Emperor of
Constantinople, herewith he began to lay about him valiantly and Ozalio not one
inch behind him, made the enemy well understand his invincible courage.
Palmendos knowing the King by his rich Armor, gave him such a puissant stroke
with the hills of his Sword on the Helmet, as made him stagger, and at length
fall down, when offering to rise again, Palmendos caught him so strongly by the
helmet, as he pulled it violently from off his head, keeping him still under his
sword in such subjection, as at length he was carried prisoner into the Princes
Cabin, and there committed him to the charge of four trusty Knights. In mean
while Ozalio fought with the Kings brother, who understanding that Ocurites was
taken prisoner, did what he could to recover him again: but Ozalio stepped
between him and his purpose, still laboring him with so many hardy strokes, as
at length he smote his head from his shoulders. The rest beholding their King
taken, and his brother slain, beside the great massacre made among them, and
that they were not able to withstand their fortune: a number fell headlong into
the sea, rather then they would die under the enemies sword. Palmendos seeing
no further resistance but that the Turks were utterly discomfited* he caused
such prisoners as were taken to be made sure, the ships likewise to be seized
on as his own: then coming to Ozalio, whose forwardness he commended, he willed
him to see all things disposed as beseemed such a victory; afterward he
embraced the Soldans son, and diverse courteous ceremonies passing between them,
the one for his happy deliverance, the other reported what he had done was for
the Emperors sake, at length Palmendos used these speeches.

My Lord, willingly would I bear you company to Constantinople, but that a
voyage of great importance does urgently call me to another place, yet seeing
you are delivered from the Tyrant Ocurites, and all your Knights in sufficient
safety, let me obtain this favor at your hands, to take the King with you to
Constantinople, and all the Christian prisoners delivered from captivity. Them
shall you present on my behalf to the Emperor Palmerin, requesting that this
ancient Christian enemy may be safely kept, until I come to see his Majesty,
which shall be with all the expedition I can. Worthy Sir answered Abenunco, it
grieves me that your journey lies not presently to Constantinople, because I
should think my self happy in having your company, being the man to whom I am
continually bound for my life and liberty: and hereof I am assured, that over
and above your gracious welcome, you shall win the honor of the famous
triumph, ordained by the Emperor at the marriage of my sister with the Prince
of Hungaria.

And heartily sorry I am, answered Palmendos, that I cannot be present in so
worthy an assembly: whereof at this time you may well excuse me, not doubting
but I shall come with some sufficient amends for my stay. These speeches he
uttered, his thoughts being far otherwise, for so soon as he heard of the
Iousts at Constantinople he determined to go thither secretly without making
himself known to any, but as a strange Knight to adventure his fortune among
other: wherefore he departed from Abenunco who offered him many rich presents
for his great kindness, yet would not he accept of any. Abenunco returned him
many thanks chiefly for his promise, that he would in short time visit the
Emperor in person: so after many courteous speeches, and sundry familiar
farewels, Palmendos commanded his Pilot to lanch into the high Seas, for that
he intended another kind of course.

CHAP. XII. How Abenunco arrived at Constantinople, whose coming greatly
rejoiced the Emperor, but much more his Sister Esquivela. And how Lynedes Lord
of the Isle of Lique, and the County of Pelada his cousin, came to Just against
the Knights of the Court, attending the Tourney for the marriage of Ditreus.
GReatly did Abenunco commend his fortune* in finding so good succor at a time
of such necessity, and all the Knights in his company held opinion, that
Palmendos was the only flower of Chivalry: but above all other the Christian
slaves, accounting their deliverance for a miracle, imagined the author thereof
was some great friend to the Emperor. In this joy they sailed till they came
to Constantinople, where his Majesty being advertised that the Soldans son was
arrived, commanded Primaleon, Ditreus, and many of his best Barons to go and
conduct him to the Court. In the mean while Abenunco clothing himself most
sumptuously, caused the King Ocurites and the Christian prisoners to be carried
on shore, that he might not fail in the charge given him by Palmendos: So the
Babylonian Prince riding to the Court, with all the prisoners going orderly
before him he gave charge to one of his chiefest Knights, that he should
present them to his Majesty; and being come into the Emperors presence, the
Knight delivered these speeches.

High and mighty Monarch of the world, behold here the King of Culaquin, son to
the great Turk* who keeping the seas with a great power to endamage your
Empire* our Master the Prince Abenunco and we fell into his danger: from which
a worthy Knight, named Palmendos, by deeds of rare and haughty Chivalry
delivered us in a time most needful, and therefore has sent both us and him
to your excellency, desiring that Ocurites should be safely kept till he come
himself. These sundry good turns received from a Knight unknown, drove the
Emperor into a wonderful admiration; and because he could not imagine whence
they should proceed, therefore he was the more desirous to behold the Knight:
whereupon he committed the King to a strong Tower, commanding he should have
all things necessary for his health, and a Page to attend on him lest he should
offend himself.

But now is Abenunco by Primaleon and the other Princes brought to the Emperor*
who embracing him very honorably in his arms, gave him such entertainment as
beseemed his estate* and because he was not yet knighted, he willed that he
should be bedfellow to his son Primaleon, which united a faithful League of
Amity between them, hoping one day to travel as companions in Arms together.
Abenunco having likewise told the Emperor of his good success and wonderful
deliverance by the means of Palmendos, gave no little contentment to Rifarano
and Lecefin, who imagined themselves as much beholding to the Prince as any.
Afterward he was conducted to the Empress chamber, where she and her Ladies
graciously welcomed him, but especially the Princess Esquivela his sister,
because he came to confirm what she most desired. My Lord and brother (quoth
she) nothing could happen to my greater contentment, then to have your presence
in the honor prepared for me; whereto seeing our gracious parents could not
come, they have for my sake sent you in their place: and doubt not but your
entertainment shall be such as shall agree with their expectation and your own
worthiness. Fair sister (answered Abenunco) the Sultan our father hearing of
the honor the Emperor intended, by giving you in marriage to the Prince
Ditreus his Nephew, has sent me to thank the Emperor on his behalf, offering
for this: contract to articulate with his Majesty, in all such things as with
honor he shall demand. As for our gracious mother, Alchidiana, she has sent
you by me jewels and treasure beseeming your degree, that on your marriage day
you may witness the royal race from whence you are descended; not doubting but
before you depart this court, to make the magnificence of the Babylonian Prince
so famous, as the most opulent Lord of Asia shall not compare therewith.

Diverse other speeches passed between the brother and the sister, till the
coffers of treasure were brought and delivered to the Princess; which when
Ditreus behold, he judged them to exceed the limits of all frugality, and might
full well beseem the greatest state in Christendom. Now did the Emperor cause
the Tourney to be openly proclaimed, and the fifth day following the marriage
was solemnized, great store of worthy Knights resorting day by day to the
Court, that all the field appointed for Triumphs was covered over with Tents.
Among other came thither Lynedes, the Lord of Lique, he that hazarded himself
so far in the adventure of Francelina, being (in sooth) reputed one of the most
valiant men at Arms in all Greece; and the renown of this marriage drew him
from his Castle, accompanied only with the County of Pelada, his cousin who
albeit he was younger then Lynedes, yet was he thought little inferior to him
in Chivalry. This County had espoused a Lady of great parentage and loved her
with such singular affection, as he brought her in company to see the Iusts at
Constantinople.

Being there arrived, they would not enter the City, but set up their Tent far
distant from all the rest, and afterward sent a Squire to the Court, to publish
that whosoever would hazard himself in the Tourney, should find two Knights
there ready in the field, that would Just with any one that durst enter the
Lists; such therefore as were minded to make proof of their valor, might be
entertained for three or four courses. These speeches being heard by the Duke
of Pera, he stepped to the Squire, and thus answered.

You may (my friend) return to your Masters, and say, that such as are minded
to Just, will not stay long before they enter the field. Then turning to the
Knights of the Court, he proceeded in this manner. Doubtless these Knights are
valiant and hardy, that are loath to show themselves slothful in any virtuous
exercise. With this answer the Squire returned back to the Tent, and the two
Cousins being satisfied therewith, prepared strong Lances at the entrance of
their Pavilion, for all such as should come to Just against them: But the
County entreated Lynedes to suffer him to make the first trial of his fortune,
which he did in regard of his love to his Lady, who had caused the Tent to be
so commodiously placed, as she might at pleasure behold all the pastimes,
docking herself in most gorgeous attire, and bravely attended on by her waiting
woman to out countenance such as came against her Lord and husband.

The Emperor understanding what message the Squire had brought, imagined that
these two Knights were Palmendos and his Cousin Ozalio* for when one thing
continually beats on a man's conceit, he imagines every thing conformable to
the same. Wherefore he told his opinion to the Prince Rifarano, who could not
think them to be the Lords of Tharsus, yet to satisfy the Emperors mind, he
mounted on horseback, and being accompanied with other Knights of the Court,
rode to the Tent, where the two Cousins remained. Saluting the Squires, he
entered, finding Lynedes unarmed, but his Cousin was provided at all points
except his helmet: whereupon he demanded if they were the Knights that sent the
challenge to the Court? To whom the Lord of Lique answered, that they were.
Then Rifarano proceeded thus. Gentlemen, ye have attempted a thing (in my
opinion) but little for your ease: but I think you did it to this end, that you
might meet with some one to abate your pride and presumption.

When that comes to pass (answered Lynedes) we shall but accompany many
others, who unable to effect their haughty enterprises, have remained frustrate
in their designs: in vain therefore shall you take any further care for our
affairs; but if you will go arm your self, return and prove what this Knight
can do, who is more desirous to sight with his sword then with his tongue;
otherwise you offer injury to the order, which every noble mind prefers as
his proper life. Rifarano somewhat moved with these words, took his leave, and
returned to the Emperor, assuring him that these Knights were not Palmendos and
Ozalio, notwithstanding they seemed good and hardy champions descended of some
great birth, in that they were so worthily accompanied, with women of choice
and singular beauty, as also Gentlemen of civil behavior. Hereupon many
Knights jousted with the County, who still bare away the honor of the field,
Lynedes all this while not arming himself, for the worthy success of his
cousin deservred high comendation, whereof his Lady was not a little proud, to
see her husband perform such chivalry. Rifarano and Lecefin envying the
Counties glory, intended to see how they should speed in the joust, yet they
desired to defer it till the last day, when they vanquishing the County and
Lynedes his cousin, might bear away the whole praise of the Triumph: but others
came in the mean time and altered their intent, as you at large shall perceive
hereafter.

CHAP. XIII. How Arnedes Son to the King of France, and Recinde his Cousin,
Son to the King of Castile, came to Constantinople, where Arnedes vanquished
Lynedes and his cousin in the Ioust, by which occasion they were greatly
honored of the Emperor.
THe King of France, father to Lewis Duke of Burgundy, being at the extreme
point of his life, among other things remembered, that when the peace was
concluded between the Emperor Palmerin and him, they determined upon an
alliance by marriage, if God granted them issue whereby to do it: to the end
that in the heroical house of France, sons and daughters might be nourished,
proceeding from such worthy Ancestors, as the like might not be found through
the whole world.

For this cause, when the time likewise should conveniently agree therewith, he
commanded his son to remember the Emperor of his promise; which Prince Lewis
promising his dying father to perform, with exceeding sorrow accomplished his
funerals, and making choice afterward for his own fancy, in hope to fulfill his
fathers desire in his issue, he married with the daughter to the King of
Castile, by whom he had three sons, and two daughters that were born at a
birth. His eldest son was named Arnedes, whose mind was evermore given to arms
and military discipline, wherein time and use made him so expert, as he was
esteemed the only champion of France: it came so to pass, as the King of
France married one of his daughters with the King of Sicily, at whose marriage
Arnedes won such fame by his chivalry, as the report of him was blazed through
many provinces. To this marriage likewise came one of his cousins, son to the
King of Castile, and named Recinde, who conceived so goodliking of Arnedes
behavior, that they swear an inviolable league of amity between them twain
never to forsake each others company in matters of arms: wherewith the Queen was
highly contented, because she loved her cousin Recinde with entire affection.

King Lewis seeing his son Arnedes of years to have a wife, and fearing he
should elsewhere dispose his liking, one day called him into his chamber, and
thus conferred with him. My son such is the natural inclination of my love
toward thee, as I would not wish any thing to thee, but to have thee as well
contented therewith as my self: to this end I use these speeches, for that our
late Kingly father of famous memory, at the very shutting up of his latest
days, gave me charge to join thee in marriage with the Emperors daughter of
Constantinople, that such issue (as no doubt) shall proceed from you both may
somewhat resemble their famous Ancestors. Wherefore I am determined, right soon
to send an Embassage to him to solicit this marriage, which I hope he will
like well of, and this I can assure thee, if fame tell no leasings that the
Princess Philocrista now aged sixteen years, is a Lady of such rare and
singular beauty, as nature has not framed her like under the moving of these
eight Spheres.

When the Prince Arnedes saw that his father talked so courteously with him
about these affairs, he humbly entreated him not to travel any further in the
matter, for there was time enough hereafter to deal in such occasions:
wherewith the King pacified him, because he saw his son so cold (as he thought)
in matter of marriage, nor would he trouble him any more therewith afterward.
But the young Prince wise and advised in concealing his own desires, having
long before heard fair Philocrista commended beyond compare, as also the deeds
of the Knights in the Emperor Palmerins Court, he had no leisure now to forbid
them his remembrance, so that fain would he compass a secret journey to
Constantinople, intending if the Princess pleased to demand her of the
Emperor in marriage, and if his Majesty would not consent thereto, he intended
to do such exploits in Greece, as the honorable praise of them should compass
his love. This was the project of Arnedes resolution, which in secret he
imparted to his cousin Recinde, who with mighty persuasions animated him
herein: vowing that till death they would loyally continue friendly companions,
and so well govern themselves by disguising their persons, and contrarying
their languages in these affairs, as the most skillful head should not search
the depth of their intent. When the two cousins were thus determined, Arnedes
imagining it no wisdom to juggle with his father, went and requested a favor
at his Highness hand the effect whereof was thus.

Gracious Lord and Father, quoth he, my desire is (without your displeasure)
that I may go see the Princess Philocrista, as well to like as love before any
motion of marriage: and because my cousin Recinde will bear me company, I would
have your Majesty so persuaded, that in secret disguising we will pass unknown
of any, much less give occasion of suspect what we are, not doubting but by
our virtuous behavior, to yield you content by our voyage, and our selves good
report. Beside, the world is well acquainted therewith that this Emperor of
Constantinople, had not won such fame and renown, but only by the innumerables
Trophies, erected in diverse regions of his youthful travels, which are
examples sufficient for Knights of high desire, not to desist from worthy
enterprises for the object of death, who without regard of time or place,
pursues in ambush the steps of the worthiest. Nor let doubt of our stay in
Greece hinder us, good father; for as we go not to build any dwelling there, so
is the hope of our return to be expected more speedy. It greatly displeases
me, answered the King, that I have promised to mine own coffeehouse, and
which much more will redownd to your disadvantage; but seeing I have past my
word, and in this sort you mean personally to visit Greece, go in Gods name,
who guide and send you safely home again, else will your stay more hurt me then
can you imagine.

Humbly taking his leave of the King, because he would not have his departure
known, he secretly got him to Marseilles, accompanied with none but his cousin
Recinde, his dwarf and three other, where finding a ship ready they hoised sail
and away, landing at the first port they came to in Greece, and commanding the
ship to stay for them at Constantinople* One day Arnedes and Recinde rested
themselves where they landed, and the next day rode forward on their journey,
understanding by the way brave triumphs were ordained at the Court, which
pleasing them not a little, they made such diligent speed* as they arrived
there three days before the sports were ended, even at the very instant, when
the County had vanquished another Knight in the Ioust. Arnedes beholding the
brave behavior of the Conqueror, and that the Knights made dainty who should
try his fortune next, noting beside the honorable assembly there present with
the Emperor (who marvelled what these two new come Knights should be, until
he had advisedly marked their Arms, when immediately he judged them to be
Frenchmen) gave the spurs to his horse and ran against the County, each of them
breaking their staves gallantly without any further danger. At the second
course the County was unhorsed by Arnedes, whereat the Emperor and his Lords
very much rejoiced, highly commending the behavior of the French Knight. Needs
must we think, that Lynedes was offended seeing his cousin thrown so furiously
to the ground, wherefore arming himself speedily and mounting on horseback,
with a very strong Lance he angerly encountered Arnedes, who gave his enemy as
good as he brought. Lynedes was very choleric that he had sped no better,
whereupon at the second race, Arnedes met him so full in the carrier, as he
cast him out of his saddle over the crupper of his horse: he thinking to
recover himself, and loath to forsake the rains of his bridle, caused his horse
to fall backwards upon him, that he was the worse for this long time after. But
Arnedes he remained fresh and frolic* as though he had yet done nothing at
all, wherefore he came to his companion, saying.

Now let us go kiss my Lord the Emperors hand, seeing there is no more to be
done here: and so in the troop they withdrew themselves, early one marvelling
at this Frenchmans valor, because they knew Lynedes was accounted one of the
hardiest Knights in Greece. When the Emperor saw them coming toward him, he
advanced himself to entertain them, and embracing them graciously in his arms,
said* Right welcome are you Gentlemen into this Country, where you have
exceedingly contented me by your fortunate success: let me therefore know of
whence and what you are, that I may love and esteem you accordingly.

It is the wonted grace and virtue of your Majesty answered Arnedes, that makes
you evermore regard poor traveling Knights, although their deserts be nothing
equivalent; the renown whereof spreading through all Regions, caused us to
forsake France, to come and offer you our service. We are, my Lord, Knights
attending on the King of France, where hearing the daily report, what
magnificent Chivalry was here continually exercised; we came (so please* it
your Majesty) to live in your Court, as men willing to learn the rules of
Martial Discipline, not doubting but to gain such grace, as shall satisfy the
desire that moved us hereto. I thank you (answered the Emperor) for the pain
you have endured in this journey, which amply declares the generosity of your
brave minds; because such principles cannot proceed but from a haughty and
resolute courage. With these words (for this day) he returned to the Palace,
commanding Arnedes to go on his right hand, and Recinde on his left, they both
marvelling to see the goodly train of Knights that attended on the Emperor.

All the way his Majesty eyed Arnedes very much, imagining he saw the lively
countenance of Lewis Duke of Burgundy, and therefore desired to know his name
and parentage, telling him whom he resembled in many points. In truth, my Lord,
answered the French Prince, it does not beseem me to dally with your Majesty: I
am King Lewis his eldest son, therefore I am the more like to him. And for his
sake, said the Emperor, must I needs love you the more, because heretofore I
received by him and his brother great honor. Yet because he perceived that
Arnedes was unwilling to be known, he cut off these speeches; and being come to
the Palace, after the Princes were both unarmed, he welcomed them as beseemed
their estates.

Primaleoh daily accompanied Arnedes and Recinde, because his father had so
commanded him; yet could not the French Prince but marvel, that all this while
he might not see Philocrista, the cause whereof was, the Ladies were loath to
be seen till Ditreus Wedding day, when each one would surpass in bravery, till
which time he was glad and fain to hold himself contented. Now had Bruquell his
Dwarf leisure to get acquaintance with Risdeno, Primaleons Dwarf, for they were
both of like stature and quality, and therefore their familiarity was not long
in breeding. Lynedes and the County displeased with their hard fortune, yet
they were in hope to recover their foil at the marriage Tourney, which made
their griefs the better pacified, now leave we them a while to speak somewhat
of the Princes of Tharsus.

CHAP. XIIII. How Palmendos and Ozalio landed four days journey from
Constantinople, from whence they parted after they had changed their Armor:
and how by the way they lodged in the house of an ancient Knight, of whom
Palmendos heard the discourse of the adventure of Francelina, and what they did
afterward.
Our gentle Knight Palmendos, merrily sailed on, hoping in short time to
content his earnest desires, and having left Abenunco by Sestos and Abidos, he
commanded his Pilot to strike to the nearest port for Constantinople, so with
favorable wind and weather they came to Saint Lordin, which is a maritine
City, four days journey from Constantinople. There he and Ozalio went on
shore, only to change their armor and Shields because they would gladly
escape unknown: and having made a quick dispatch, they rode till they came to
the house of an ancient Knight, poor in goods, but noble of heart and person,
who invited them friendly to be his guests, and there were they right
courteously entertained, though not with dainty and delicate viands, yet with
indifferent good cheer, and kind humanity, which especially proceeded from the
Knights wife and her fair daughter, who diligently noted the behavior of these
Knights. Such was the countenance of the young Damosel, as by the continual
office of her eyes, her heart began to be somewhat touched, and fain would she
participate of the pleasure her mind conceived; whereto Palmendos likewise was
somewhat provoked, seeing his eyes over-busied with bathing in the flood of
delight, which the presence of this Damosel only procured.

All supper time these queint glances endured, when among other talk they had
together, the old Knight demanded of his guests if they traveled to the
Tourney at Constantinople; for yesterday (quoth he) came I thence, not a little
marvelling to see the number of Knights come thither from all Countries.
Herewith he discoursed the success of Arnedes against the County of Pelada and
his cousin, and how the two Frenchmen continued Masters of the field. But can
none in the Emperors Court (quoth Palmendos) where are such store of valiant
Gentlemen, out go those French cousins in deeds of Arms? Truly sir, answered
the old Knight, it is a matter much to be marvelled; nevertheless I think if
Belcar, son to the King of Hungaria, and brother to the Bridegroom that shall
be, could come thither, he would dispossess the French men of the victory they
have gotten of County and Lynedes, considering what fame is daily bruited
abroad of him, for his rare prowess in guarding the adventure of Francelina.
And since the time of his famous attempt, no Knight has there arrived in hope
to end the enchantment, but Belcar evermore has been his conqueror, yet
Francelina continues in the Castle of the Fairies still, and shall till some
Knight (more fortunate then Belcar) can get her forth, notwithstanding he has
vowed no one shall do it, seeing himself has failed in the trial except he
first surpass him in valor and prowess.

Palmendos hearing the name of Francelina, was assailed with such a sudden and
vehement passion, proceeding from the unquenchable flame, wherein his heart lay
burning for her love as his countenance altered, and his very soul was touched
with the word Francelina. Wherefore most instantly he desired the Knight his
Host, to tell him of what race the Lady was descended, and (withal) to proceed
in discourse of the adventure, which so many worthy Knights had lost their
labors about: likewise to tell him, in what Country the Castle was, where the
Fairies had appointed this enchantment, because he had sundry times heard
speeches thereof, yet could not meet with any one to resolve him of the truth.

Know then good Sir, answered the old Knight, that this Lady is one of the
fairest and most gracious Princesses that this earthly habitation enjoies,
between the two Tropiques of Heaven, Daughter to the King of Thessaly, now
prisoner to the great Turk, she being taken forth of her Cradle, and enclosed
in the Castle of Carderia, by the three enchanting Sisters of the Island,
because they foresaw by their Magical Art, that her Father (who was their
noble Friend) never could be delivered from the captivity of the Infidels, but
by the means of some perfect accomplished Knight. Thus did they direct this
enchantment, that the readiness of Francelinaes beauty, might be blazed by
them through all Regions, and desire to gain the Kingdom of Thessaly (for he
that shall deliver the Lady must enjoy her as his Wife, next heir after the
death of the captive King) might encourage Knights to come prove this
adventure: whither many have gone in hope of happy conquest, as the aforenamed
Prince Belcar did, but he wants strength as sundry other have done, yet will he
make the access to the Fortress more difficult, until he for whom the
Princess is destinied, arrive there with such puissance and magnanimity* as
shall enforce him to forsake the place. Many other things as concerning the
history of Francelina (already set down in the Book of Palmerin^d Oliva) did
the old Knight recount to the Prince Palmendos, who having with great attention
noted all was stricken mute and much amazed: for so was his spirit carried away
with new and diverse thoughts* that he could not tell what to do or say. Now he
remembers the old Woman's words, and saw there was some likelihood of truth in
them, thinking because she had spoken so much of Francelina, that she was one
of the Fairies which framed this enchantment; the end and abolishing whereof he
thought was reserved for him only* comparing all passed conjectures together,
which made his heart conceive incredible joy, and thus often to parley with
himself.

Alas Palmendos well might thou account thy self favored of the stars and
Fortune, if thou could conquer a Lady of so rare and perfect beauty, and
thereby attain the Kingdom of Thessaly, adjoining to the confines of thy Lord
and Fathers Empire. Such was his inward joy conceived by these news, in hearing
her spoken of whom his heart most of all honored, as he said to the old
Knight. When you understand, gentle Sir, that Palmendos is come to the
Emperors Court, let me entreat you to travel thither, and there shall I cause
him to requite the courtesy, which we being strangers have h^^e received. Then
commanded he one of his Squires to bring a great bag of Gold and Jewels which
he powered forth upon the Table, giving the old Knight and his Daughter the most
part thereof: to the end he should see her honorably married, and furnish her
with all things beseeming such a beautiful Bride. The Knight and his daughter
seeing so much treasure, fell down on their knees and would have kissed his
hand: but he very kindly took them up in his arms, saying this was nothing in
respect of that he would do for them hereafter. For his mind being ever given
to liberallity, received such contentment by the speeches of his Host: as rare
and precious things seemed of no account, for her sweet sake who was the
Goddeste and Mistress of his heart. All this night he passed in premeditating
what he ought to do in the present occasions, at length he resolved to go see
the Tourney, without making himself known to any one, because soon after he
would journey to the Isle of Carderia, hereupon he sent a Squire in the morning
to St. Lordin, to leave order that the ship should meet him at Macedon. Then
courteously taking their leave, Ozalio and he rode toward Constantinople,
whither the old Knight would have born them company, but Palmendos persuaded
him to the contrary, and so set away in great have, arriving in the evening
within two miles of Constantinople, from whence he sent a Squire to the City,
to understand what was done at the Court, and when the chiefest day of the
Tourney should be, The Squire well discharged his Masters command, and returned
with full satisfying him in every point, wherefore Palmendos and Ozalio
determined between themselves, not to ride together in company, but each one
alone with his Squire, and to return thence very secretly again: nor would they
stay there but the two chiefest days lest happily they might be discovered, and
so s^ack their journey to the Isle of Carderia.

CHAP. XV. How Palmendos came to Constantinople, where he won the honor and
prize of the first Tourney: and how he intended to depart thence on the morrow,
lest he should be sought for on that occasion, and what else happened.
WHen the long expected day of marriage was come the Emperor with all his
knights were very richly clothed, but especially Arnedes, son to the King of
France, he was exceeding brave both in attire and countenance, for the hope he
had to see fair Philocrista, to whom he had religiously dedicated his heart.
Now set they forward in order to the Temple, the Empress with Philocrista and
her other daughters accompanied the Bride, with all the Ladies of blood royal
in the Court: so that if one should sit down to decipher their sumptuous
attire* or else in speeches to commend their beauty, it would over-travell the
eloquence of Demosthenes or Cicero. But Philocrista was the fairest star
amongst them all, which drew the Prince Arnedes mind into such admiration as
had not his eyes been witnesses of the same, hardly could report have induced
him to believe it. For even as the Sun the most excellent of all the Planets,
showing it self in the Horizon does confound the brightness of all the stars
together, and dazels their eyes which long gaze thereon; even so resembled the
princess Philocrista, whose celestial portraiture, disgraced all the other
Ladies, and altered the judgment of Arnedes in such sort, as he reputed her far
beyond the Goddess that appeared to the shepherd Paris on the mountain of
Ida, when of him she was judged to be fairest of the three.

The Empress and her Ladies all mounted on their palfrays, with such pomp and
state as was never seen the like: Primaleon on a lusty courser of Barbary, with
rich caparisons after the Turkish manner, conducted the Bride, and Abenunco her
brother rode with the Princess Philocrista. Lecefin who loved her more
advisedly, rode on her other side for companies sake but Arnedes, whom love
impatiently overmastred used such means by managing his horse, as he got the
Prince of Babylon out of his place moved thereto by earnest desire, that he
might contemplate her beauty more easily: whereat Lecefin was marvellously
offended, conceiving a mortal hatred against him, perceiving he had a rival in
his love. Recinde accompanied the Princess Melicia, who in his eye seemed both
fair and modest, Rifarano telling her by the way, that this Knight came with
him that conquered the County, and for his laudable virtues deserved
estimation; whereupon she began to confer with Recinde, which she could do with
singular regard, in respect of the rare gifts bestowed on her by nature. In
brief, this royal train is come to the T^mple, and there is the marriage
solemnly effected, returning to the Palace with the self-same majesty they
went thither, What should we wast time in speaking of the feast, when there is
none so simple but considers, that the feasts of Emperors exceed common
repetition: then may we repute this solemnity answerable to that of the Gods,
made at the nuptials of Peleus with the Goddess Thetis. After dinner, the
Lords and Ladies fell to dancing, a fit occasion for Lovers to commune with
their Ladies, yet dissembled with such cunning modesty, as the eye and action
were chief messengers of the heart, each Lady holding such opinion of her
beloved, as their several hopes was for the honor of the Tourney.

The time being so passed over, as the new married couple must to the place of
amorous contentation, the Empress with her daughters brought Esquivela into
the bride chamber, leaving her in bed attending for the coming of the
bridegroom, who was soon after honorably conducted thither by the Emperor,
and so committed to enjoy her whom he had so long desired. Now are the Knights
close in their chambers, when A^nedes thus communed with Recinde. What think
you, cousin of the beauty of Madam Philocrista? did you ever see a more rare
and perfect creature? right soon must I give ease to these urgent affairs, and
ease the burden of mine overcharged spirit; therefore will I presently
dispatch a Courrier to the King my father, that he may with speed send
honorable Ambassadors to the Emperor, whereby this desired marriage may be
concluded: Mean while I will found the bottom of this amorous flood, and try
if the judgment of fair Philocrista be answerable to her excelling beauty; and
if the inward virtue agree with the outward singular perfections, I may repute
my self the happiest Knight in the world, in compassing the love of so
inestimable a jewel. In sooth my Lord (answered Recinde) great cause have you
to commend the Lady, and I desire that the like fortunate success may befall
me, as I doubt not but will speedily happen to you: for on mine own behalf, the
grace and courtesy of Melicia has given me a favorable entrance, which if it
proceed not to my hearts desire, much better had it been that I never had seen
her.

With these words Arnedes embraced his cousin, saying. How sweetly do these
speeches sound in mine ears, seeing thereby thou art my trusty companion in all
things; let this hope persuade thee that he on whom all actions do depend, will
by his divine bounty so direct our course, as we shall enjoy a successful end:
If I speed according to my hearts intent, in thy cause will I endeavor my self
to the uttermost; therefore let us continue our resolute courage, and make the
Grecians understand, that France yields as good Knights as any Country else.
And thus concluding, then slept for that night.

On the morrow the Emperor the Empress, the Bride and the young Princesses,
went to the scaffolds richly prepared for the sight of the Tourney, where no
void place was left, but every where filled with Lords, Ladies, and
Gentlewomen. Wonderful was the resort of Knights and hardy Champions, each one
in Armor very costly and curious, having their feathers, pendants and favors
decked with the devises and colors of their Ladies* as it was a most
beautiful^ spectacle to behold them, yet hereon consists not the substance of
our History. Now strive Lynedes and the County his cousin, like two furious
Lions, to recover the foyl they sustained by Arnedes: who perceiving this was
the time to win him honor when the Goddess of his thoughts sat to behold
him, welcomed the challengers as he had done before. In like sort did Rifarano
behave himself; for he unhorsed every Knight that ran against him. But by this
time is Ozalio got in through the throng, and he begins to deal with the
Courtiers very roughly, which made the Lords and Ladies wonder what he was. And
then Palmendos seeing his friend well wearied comes bravely prancing into the
field, so disguised, that Abenunco and Rifarano could not know him. A while he
stood regarding the Emperor his father, so honorably placed with his noble
Lords and Barons on the scaffolds: Then viewing the Empress with her gracious
train of Ladies, he wondered at such pomp and magnificence, thus speaking to
himself.

Sovereign Creator and director of all things, how am I bound in duty to thy
Majesty, having made me the son of such a father, as not only is reputed, the
best Knight under heaven, but is also the mightiest Prince on the face of the
earth. Seeing then thou have bestowed on me such grace and favor, as that I
should issue from such an excellent personage, I must endeavor my self to
resemble him, and by something declare that I am his son: for although now I go
against the Knights of his Court, I hope he shall have small cause to mislike
of me, when he knows my forwardness in other matters on his Majesty's behalf.

Then beholding a Knight ready to encounter him, he brake off his musings, and
gave him such a welcome, as he tumbled headlong down to the ground. Like
success had diverse other Knights of the Court, which Arnedes seeking angerly
to revenge, accompanied the other in misfortune, and after him Pernedin son to
the Duke of Pera, one of the best esteemed knights in Greece. Rifarano next ran
against Palmendos, and three courses they past bravely with the break of the
lance, but at the fourth Rifarano was dismounted; whereupon Recinde came to
revenge his cousin Arnedes foil, whose fortune was as bad as any of the other,
and Lecefin had his disgrace likewise for company.

The Emperor moved to admire this Chivalry, ignorant who this gallant should
be, affirmed that he never saw his equal in prowess; the like did Primaleon,
being very desirous to know his name. To whom Abenunco answered, that he
imagined him to be Palmendos, because he much resembled him in brave
constitution of body. At these speeches the Emperor was exceeding joyful,
requesting Abenunco to go understand the truth thereof: But Palmendos had
thrust himself in the thickest of the crowd, which now went out of the Lists,
because the sports were ended for that day, so that Abenunco could by no means
come near him* and therefore was fain to return unresolved. So went Palmendos
closely to his lodging again, where being unarmed, he found that he had
received three wounds that day in the Just, the greatest whereof he took by
Recinde the Prince of Spain: but when he saw Ozalio in good disposition, he was
right joyful, commending him for his worthy behavior. And for that he was
wounded, he stayed there two days without returning to Constantinople, lest if
he went again, his intent might be prevented: Afterward he rode to the Realm
of Macedon, in the very same Arms he wore at the Tourney, continually having
Francelina in his mind.

CHAP. XVI. What conference Arnedes had with the Princess Philocrista after
Supper, whereupon he sent a Messenger to the King his Father: And how after
Recinde, Rifarano and others had won the Prize of the second Tourney, they
intended to follow in search of the Prince Palmendos.
VEry much ashamed were the vanquished Knights of the hard entertainment they
had received by Palmendos, and most of all the Prince Arnedes, because he was
unhorsed before his Mistress Philocrista; wherefore he vowed to be revenged, or
he would die the death: And so diverse other Knights that murmured against the
Conqueror, did the like. But the Emperor perceiving this coffeehouse, came
to Arnedes, Recinde, and Rifarano, and to put them from these melancholy
conceits, he showed them very pleasant countenance, saying, they ought not to
mislike with what had happened, in that themselves showed very sufficient
Chivalry, and desired them at the next Tourney to compass the knowledge of the
strange Knight. If he come again (answered Arnedes) it may be happily be to his
disadvantage; for he having already disgraced so many, the sport will hardly
end without his foyl. By this time was Abenunco come back to the Emperor,
declaring how he could not speed in his intent, wherewith his Majesty somewhat
offended, said.

Nor will any quiet sleep enter my head, until I know the name of that worthy
Knight; and were it not I should be esteemed over-fond, I would my self travel
till I found him. All the Knights marvelling at these speeches, concluded when
the Triumphs were ended, if so be the strange Knight returned not again, to
adventure themselves in the search of him; and they who were most forward
hereto, were Arnedes, Recinde, Rifarano, Lecefin and Pernedin son to the Duke
of Pera: these gallants without any further conference together, constantly
vowed to die, or bring back the Knight again to the Emperor, if they might
meet with him in any place.

Supper being ended, Primaleon and Ditreus took Arnedes and Recinde with them,
going to sit and devise with the Ladies, when Arnedes got the mean to court
Philocrista, and Recinde his chosen Mistress Melicia; what contentment they
received by this good opportunity, I refer to such as are desirous to break the
Ice of their amorous passions to them that hold them in so severe servitude.
Diverse familiar speeches tossed up and down, as of the Tourney, and their
unhappy disgrace: Philocrista pitying that Arnedes should take it so
discontentedly, thus spoke* Me thinks (sir) you should not be offended at so
small a matter; for oftentimes the best Knights have no better success: and we
have so well beheld your valiancy, that the Conquerors have cause to complain
of your coming as the vanquished have of the Knight departed, who as yet is
unknown to any in this Court* Arnedes hearing the gentle speeches of
Philocrista, bashful modesty withheld him a while from making any answer, yet
at length Love unlocked his lips in this manner.

Madame (quoth he) the rare ornaments wherewith nature has accompanied your
divine perfection, causes you to speak so favorably on my behalf, although no
desert in me can apprehend the least part of this kindness: but were I
possessed with any such ability, the very glance of her eye, who has power to
command me, would increase my strength, and make me invincible, wherefore my
desires cannot be satisfied, until I recover my liberty lost in this Tourney,
the conceit whereof is more intolerable to me, then the labor to Sisiphus in
rolling the restless stone. The Heavens will further your attempt herein
(answered Philocrista) and I heartily desire it may so come to pass, because it
were against reason that you coming so far to see my Lord the Emperor, should
receive so unkind a reward for your labor. This sweet reply redoubled the
French Princes joy, for which he humbly thanked Philocrista, with so many
courtesies and amorous shows, that she well perceived the effect of his grief
proceeded from the passions of a lovers spirit.

Recinde (on the other side) had so communed with Melicia, that she perceiving
how many offers he made to be her Knight, favorably gave him entertainment: and
more then any thing else it pleased him to note her beauty, wisdom and good
grace, which set his eyes, and all his senses to work. And if they that are in
such delight with their Ladies, give some refrigeration to their hearts
enflamed with the fire of love; how could Lecefin but be in extreme jealousy,
seeing his rival thus to parley with Philocrista? gladly could he have wished
him without ransom in the strongest prison of Persia.

But now is the hour of rest come* when the Emperor withdrew himself to his
chamber, and all the Knights likewise to their lodgings, where Arnedes still
meditating on the words of his beloved, immediately wrote to the King his
father, that he should send Ambassadors to the Emperor, for conclusion of the
marriage; and till they came he would there stay at the Court, without any
further speeches of the matter till their arrival: so sealing his packet as it
should be delivered to his fathers hand, he sent one of his Squires the next
morning away therewith in post; who made no less speed then the Prince had
commanded him. Afterward he called Bruquel his Dwarf aside, commanding him not
to stir out of Constantinople, because he was to be part about some matters of
importance, and if the Emperor in the mean while asked for him, to make him
that answer; or any other that enquired after him. Moreover, that he should
from time to time confer with the Princess Philocrista, assuring her of his
zealous affection to her service; which that he might the better execute, he
was ridden abroad to take the air of the fields. The Dwarf very willingly
performed every thing he had in charge, not daring to break the least article
he was commanded.

The time being come of the Tourney, rare Chivalry was there delivered on all
sides; but Arnedes, Recinde and Rifarano had ye chiefest honor, attending when
the strange Knight should show himself again: And when they saw he came not,
they immediately determined the execution of their enterprise, without
returning into the City, or knowing which way each other rode, but even took
their chance as fortune directed them. The Emperor was glad that his Knights
had won the day, yet could he not but marvel that the stranger was seen no
more: Then coming to the Palace, and seeing none of those five which were
departed in the search of Palmendos, he could not tell what to imagine. Of
every one he desired to be resolved; yet could he not be answered to his
content; wherefore B^uquel made answer for his Master as he was commanded,
which made his Majesty then to conceive the truth indeed, whereof he was not a
little glad, hoping now to hear more of the strange Knight.

When the solemn feast for the marriage was ended, the Knights returned to
their own Countries; so did Ditreus and Esquivela toward Hungaria, with an
honorable train sent by the Emperor. Philocrista was sorry for the departure
of Esquivela, whom she loved as if she had been her sister, because from their
young years they were educated together: Nor could Abenunco her brother go with
them so far as happily he would, because the league of amity between him and
Primaleon enforced him to stay. King Frysol received his son Ditreus, and his
fair daughter Esquivela with incredible joy, humbly (by letters) thanking the
Emperor for the honor he had done him, returning his Knights with rich and
precious gifts. But come we now to the five Knights, that were departed in
search after Palmendos.

CHAP. XVII. How Arnedes met with Palmendos, who left him half dead, and had
afterward been slain by Lecefin, if Pernedin had not happily arrived, and what
followed.
ALready you have heard how Arnedes departed secretly from Constantinople, in
se^rch of the Knight that foiled him in the Tourney* demanding of every one he
met by the way, if they saw not a Knight in red armor, having a little silver
flower for his device in his shield, but no one could answer him to his
expectation, whereupon, the night being hard at hand, he came to an Hermitage
at the foot of a Mountain, where with the old father he lodged that night*
contented with his poor and homely refection. On the morrow, bidding his Host
heartily farewell, he had not rode an arrow shot from the Hermitage, but he
espied two knights come riding together, and staying to see what they were, at
length he knew the one to be Palmendos, which good hap pleasing him not a
little, he intended by fair means or force to cause him return again, wherefore
he came to him with these words.

Sir Knight, I think my self favored of Fortune by meeting you here, in that I
left the Emperors Court for nothing else but to seek you, because his Majesty
desires to see and know you in respect of your brave behavior a^ the Tourney;
therefore I entreat you, for the love you bear his highness, to return back
with me, that I may discharge my promise herein to his Majesty. You did not
well, sir (answered Palmendos) to promise any thing depending on another man's
will; and for that at this time I have urgent occasions elsewhere, I cannot
satisfy his Highness desire, albeit I am ready in any thing else to do him
service: and so I beseech you answer on my behalf. Knight (quoth Arnedes) I
pray you consider hereon a little better, and think that such speeches cannot
discharge me of my duty; therefore determine right soon to go with me
willingly, otherwise I must compel you to return perforce. Perforce? no, (said
Palmendos) well may I go with my will, if so be I please. I wish it for your
good (answered Arnedes) and the remembrance of your valor in the Tourney,
causes me to bear with you very much: but seeing you will not willingly yield
hereto, provide for the combat; and think not that your bravery at the triumph,
shall any thing avail you now in this place. If you will needs enforce me to it
(quoth Palmendos) let yours be the shame: as for my self, in respect of my love
to the Emperor, I would be loath to combat with you. Hereupon they so furiously
encountered together, that both of them were sent to the ground; and afterward
they fought a cruel combat at the sword, till Arnedes with the great expense of
his blood, having received many a grievous wound, fell down at the Prince of
Tharsus feet, who having made clean his sword, that was very bloody, and put it
into the sheath said.

I think you will not hereafter seek to enforce any knight, remembering how
dearly you have paid for this boldness. (...) mounting on horseback (albeit he
was likewise wounded) he rode on his journey with Ozalio. The Hermit with whom
Arnedes lodged all night, having beheld this combat, moved with charity and
compassion, came down the Mountain, to succor Arnedes, who lay bleeding in the
grass and unclasping his Helmet to give him air in short time he recovered his
senses again: when seeing none but the Hermit, and that the Knight was gone, he
reputed it for an act of great humanity, in not killing him outright, his life
standing at his mercy: Afterward he thus spoke to himself. What shall I now do,
if not complain of the instability of Fortune? was not my coming into these
Countries unhappy where I thought to win honor and renown, when all things
turn to my shame and reproof? since my strength is not correspondent to the
valor of my mind, I must give over the exercise of Arms, which Fortune (I see)
envies I should follow. Longer would he have continued in these pensive moans,
but the Hermit interrupted him in this manner.

My son, give thanks to him that delivered thee out of the Knights hands, and
has not suffered both body and soul to perish: Let idle and undecent thoughts
be now abandoned and lift thy mind to the place of eternal comfort. With these
words he bound up his wounds so well as he could, minding to lead him to his
Hermitage. But as one mischance happens not alone, so fell it out at this
instant: for he was no sooner gotten on foot, but Lecefin his mortal enemy
arrived; and knowing him to be his rival in love, drawing his sword, thus spoke.

Now shall I teach thee, my capital enemy, what it is to love her whom thou art
not worthy to serve, and that shall I make thee presently confess or buy thy
boldness with the price of thy blood; for a Lady of so care perfections,
stands too high out of a Frenchmans reach. Herewith he violently struck at
Arnedes, whom the good old Hermit seeing in such dangerous case, did take him
in his arms, desiring Lecefin not to seek his death, that had of late e^caped
it so near But Lecefin being a Moor, and therefore the more inexorable, would
give no ear to his words, but cruelly gave the old man such a stroke on the
head, as that therewith he fell down dead to the ground. Ah dogged and disloyal
Traitor (said Arnedes, when he beheld this tragical act) why have thou slain
this religious Father that never offended thee? the Heavens I hope will not let
thee pass unpunished, but plague thee as such a damnable deed requires.

So taking his sword as well as he might, by reason of his former hurts, he
sought to defend himself and revenge the Hermits death: but all was in vain;
for (without a mavelous chance) Arnedes death was now ordained. In a happy
hour arrived there Pernedin son to the Duke of Pera, one of them that departed
in the search of Palmendos, who knowing both the combatants st^pped between
them saying. Why how now Gentlemen are courtly friends become enemies in field?
Arnedes, who was no longer able to hold out, falling down to the earth, said.

Ah Pernedin, revenge my wrong on this inhumane wretch, who seeing me cruelly
wounded before, by the Knight that bare away the honor of the Tourney, without
any cause set violently upon me: And this villainous Moor, not content to wrong
me alone, has slain this holy Hermit, because he dissuaded him from dealing
with me, that had been so hardly entreated before. What tyranny is this in a
Knight? answered Pernedin, by my Sword, did not my love to Rifarano overruled
me, the gentle prince that brought thee to the Court, here I would make thee to
breath thy last: but I shall declare this treason before the Emperor and his
Barons, what manhood thou have used to a wounded man, whom thou durst not deal
with had he been in health: wherefore get thee gone I advise thee, or I shall
send thine accursed soul to hell. At these words, Lecefin was so ashamed of
himself, as mounting presently on Arnedes horse, he rode away not speaking to
either of them, knowing he had notoriously blemished his honor: wherefore he
went to ^ Monastery of Nuns near at hand, to have his wounds bound up, that he
had received by Arnedes.

When the sisters knew that he was of the Emperors Court, they entertained him
very courteously, and one of them being a cunning Chirurgian, undertook in a
short time to heal his wounds. Now was Pernedin both offended and grieved, to
see the old Hermit slain, and Arnedes in such danger; wherefore calling the
Novice that always attended on the old Father, they led the wounded Prince into
the Hermitage, and afterward fetching the dead body, buried it as they could
conveniently, applying sovereign salves (whereof the good old man was never
unprovided) to Arnedes wounds. But Pernedin seeing there was no more help, and
they likewise ignorant in those kind of unguents thought it more meet they
should go straight to the City of Constantinople.

There may you (quoth he) sooner recover your health, because men of skill and
knowledge shall take special care of you: and for my part, I will willingly
accompany you thither, albeit I have not sped in the cause of my departure. It
will be to my shame, answered Arnedes, that the Emperor should see me in this
dangerous plight; notwithstanding I will at this present be councelled by you,
being never able to recompense this honorable kindness.

CHAP. XVIII. How Pernedin brought Arnedes to Constantinople, where the
Emperor, the Empress, with their Daughters Philocrista and Melicia, came to
visit him; what talk the two Dwarfs had together.
PResently after that Arnedes was brought (by the means of Pernedin) to
Constantinople in a Litter, because he could not endure to sit on horseback:
news of this mischance was brought to the Emperor, who growing into extreme
anger against the Moor, said. Well may Lecefin resemble the Sultan his father,
a man full of treacherous and ignoble practices; but he must not thus think to
wrong a Prince of France. So stepping frowningly from his Chair, he went to the
Princes chamber to see him, charging his Physicians and Chirurgians to tend him
as well as if they had his own person in cure.

Then Arnedes revealed the whole discourse of that which happened between
Palmendos and him, at the end whereof the Emperor thus answered. I wonder that
the Knight should be so desirous to do me service, and yet does sly in this
sort from me; doubtless he is gone to prove the adventure of Francelina, if he
rode that way you say he did, and it may be his fortune to end it, I hope,
except our Nephew Belcar exceed him in valor, and that I can hardly believe he
will.

When the Emperor departed, he commanded that the Empress and her daughters
should go visit the Prince, which she accordingly did, taking Philocrista and
Melicia with her, she being greatly offended at the injury done to Arnedes.
Philocrista* very much bemoned his mishap, yet wisely and discreetly as became
a sober virgin; for the love she bare him was derived from gentleness and
virtue, which she noted him to prefer in all his actions, and nothing had she
in more especial account, then to conserve her chastity pure and unspotted.
Arnedes was joyful to see her he loved so dearly, how she sorrowed for his
hard fortune, and blamed Lecefin as a disloyal Traitor: which gentle speeches
did more comfort his heart then all the Physic or cunning in the world could
do.

While the Empress and her daughters beguiled the time with him, Amenada a
woman Dwarf that attended on Philocrista, and Risdeno her Nephew, came to
Bruquel, Arnedes Dwarf, who used sundry lamentations, for the great mishap had
befallen his Master. Amenada comforted him in the best sort she could, saying,
that in respect his wounds were not mortal, there was no doubt but he would
soon recover them; and the rather, because the Emperor had given such charge
of him, as his own person could not be better attended. Ah (quoth Bruquel)
would God it were no worse: then breaking forth a renting sigh, he proceeded in
this manner.

Ah my noble Lord Arnedes, how dear does her beauty cost thee, for whom thou
leftest thy Country? where the only reputation of thine estate, being
^^tracted from such an high and illustrious lineage, was sufficient to have
obtained her, without hazarding thy life in so many perils and dangers. Amenada
marvelling at these words, was immediately wrapped with a curious desire to
know which was the Knight he named, and therefore she labored Bruquel with
entreaties: for her Lady Philocrista knew his Master to be a Knight of France,
yet none but the Emperor could tell that he was the Kings son. All things that
I can possible (quoth the Dwarf) will I do for you, this only excepted, which
without his command I dare not attempt, because my liberty stretches not so
far; yet will I promise you to ask him the question, and if he be pleased, I
will satisfy your desire.

Melicia, who was earnest in affection to know more as concerning her Lover
Recinde, seeing these Myrmedons thus conferring together, and over-hearing some
of their speeches, after they were departed to their chambers, she demanded of
Amenada, what talk she had with Arnedes Dwarf: whereupon she repeated the whole
discourse, to the no little content of Philocrista, because this way she might
attain to more knowledge of the French Prince. And as she heard her say, that
he left his Country for the love of a Lady, she presumed immediately her self
to be same, for commonly, it falls out, that Lovers will favor themselves in
semblable judgments and conjectures: wherefore she commanded Amenada, to await
B^uquel for performance of his promise.

The dwarf when he saw convenient time to talk with his Master, he gave him to
understand what had past between him and Amenada, which pleased him so well as
nothing could do more, and commended to him the pursuit of his practice. On the
morrow, the Emperor and Primaleon dined together, wherefore Amenada went to
find out Bruquell at his lodging, and he meeting her by the way, first of all
told her* that he would perform the promise he made the day before: but (quoth
he) before I satisfy you herein, I must request one thing of you.

Demand hardly what thou will quoth Amenada, for thy suit being honest, thou
can not be denied* You must promise me then, said Bruquel, that to no living
creature except Madam Philocrista, you disclose what I shall reveal to you. So
is it Amenada, that for the love of her only, Arnedes my honorable Lord and
Master, eldest son to the King of France, has forsaken his native Country, in
that the renown of her excellent beauty spread by fame through all those parts,
caused him to cut through the dangerous seas, to credit with his eyes what his
ears were cloid withal. And having at full contemplated her sweet face, he
finds that nature willing industriously to imbellish the chief piece of work,
has taken all ability from human report, how curious or eloquent soever it be,
thoroughly to accomplish the praise of her merit: wherefore he has sent a
Currier to the King his father, that his Majesty should send Ambassadors hither
to confer with the Emperor on a marriage between my Master and your Lady, and
till they come to dispatch this occasion, he will not be known hereof to any
one, except it be to her gracious self only. Humbly then desire her, with some
benign clemency to entreat the heart, which her divine figure has secretly
ravished and made her thrall, so shall she give cure to his wounds, and make
him the most fortunate Champion that ever entered field for his Lady: otherwise
he can not long enjoy his vital motion* and by his death shall occasion diverse
other beside, especially his cousin Recinde, son to the King of Castile, who
loves him as his proper life, and as he bare him company in this voyage, so
will he take part of the hardest fortune, for the love and near alliance, that
is between them.

So, well could this tall Pigmy use his language to gain success for his
Masters intent, as he made no more difference between the two Princes, in
respect of their loyal unanimity together: then was between the two Pythagorick
companions, Orestes and Pylades, or Nisus and Eurialus, that would one die for
another. Greatly did Amenada marvel hearing that a Prince of so high and great
birth, would adventure through such dangerous travells, only for the
accomplishment of a marriage, and might have gained it with much less labor,
wherefore she thus answered.

In sooth, if I had not promised to acquaint my Lady herewith, I durst not for
my life discover such weighty matters, because I cannot tell her the whole
discourse, in that her Sister Melicia is never from her, and then shall she
know as much as my Mistress. That ^urteth not replied Bruquel, never conceal
it through fear of her presence, for she is such a wise and well governed
Princess, as she will rather modestly hide it, then any way seek to spread it
abroad, and will (beside) nothing at all mislike thereof. This he spoke, for
that she had her part in the play, namely by her love to the Prince Recinde,
and if perhaps Philocrista should be slow or opinitive in her love, Melicia
happily would council her not to refuse so good an offer, in brief, that they
might reciprocally advise one another, as sick folks who had surfeited both of
one disease, and so oftentimes it comes to pass, that two thoughts afflicted
with one kind of martyrdom, receive together more consolation, then they could
by any other that feel not the like torment.

Bruquel having done his endeavor, for the conciliation of Philocrista with
his Master, returned immediately to him, whom he found attending in silent
devotion, to understand the issue of this amorous stratagem, and after that the
dwarf had word by word recounted all his negotiation, Arnedes was wrapped in such
unspeakable joy, as he imagined the hour happy when he met with such an
ingenious Truch man; Amenada on the other side, when she espied time for the
purpose, interpreted so well and faithfully the intent of the Prince to her
mistress Philocrista, as she therewith was carried into a thousand
imaginations. And albeit the Knight despaired not in his suit, but rather
imagined so sweet a countenance would be inclined to mercy: yet she had so lost
her liberty in this cause, by seeing her beloved so dangerously wounded, as now
she feared to send him any severe or rigorous answer, wherefore she thus spoke
to her Dwarf. I am offended that thou did promise Bruquel to acquaint me with
this news, but seeing what has happened cannot be prevented thou shall then go
to Arnedes, and tell him from me, that I marvel he would thrust himself into
many perils, for which I account my self beholding to him, and promise him in
requital of his hard sufferings, to accept of him as my loyal husband, if my
gracious parents will so permit it: with this condition that he adventure not
the least speeches hereof to me, but hold himself sufficed by knowing my will
herein. And that I may be assured of the vehement affections he bears me,
desire him to feed on this answer, as on the most sovereign Balm or perfect
Cataplasm, that may soonest of all consolidate his wounds: so hastening his
cure and co^valescence, that (if it may be) he honor me with his presence to
morrow.

After Philocrista had instructed Amenada in her Embassad^, she took Melicia
aside, to whom because they loved each other with sincere affection,
Philocrista discovered this amorous intent, and Verbatim reported what the
Dwarf had told her: which discourse well contented Melicia, chiefly when she
heard that her Knight Recinde, was of ye royal blood of Castile. By this time
is Amenada come to the French Prince, and has delivered the message from
Philocrista, wherewith he was so cheerfully animated as soon after he
determined to forsake his bed, but before the dwarf returned again, he desired
her to convey a French ditty to her mistress, which for her sake, he devised
that morning, and withal to entreat the Master of the Emperors chapel, to
order it in parts, after the ^rt of music: the ditty was thus.

The finest gold is by the touch discerned,
The Adamant the sturdy iron draws;
The proof hereof in love may well be learned,
For by these twain I shape a lovers cause.
You Madam framed of the finest Gold,
Upon the touchstone of my heart is tried;
And I composed of the Iron mold,
Follow the virtues that in you abide.
Then since the touch tells if the Gold be pure,
And rugged Iron shows the virtuous stone:
Take Touch and Iron both into your cure,
For (Madam) they belong to you alone.
After that Amenada had received this Ditty, she said to the Prince, that she
could not tell how her Mistress would like of her, bringing her such a
presumptuoes message: yet if she were displeased therewith, she would disguise
every thing so well, as each of them in the end should receive contentment. So
returning to the Princess Philocrista, she told in what extremity the Prince
was for her love, and to mittigate his passions, had framed that ditty: which
when she had read and well noted, she accounted her conquest greater, then if
she were possessed of all Asia. Sundry times did the Empress and her daughters
visit the French Prince, to the unspeakable contentment of the secret Lovers,
who awaited nothing but the coming of the French Ambassadors, for the
confirmation of their long desired hope: but let us leave them a while, and
come to Rifarano, who is all this while in the search of Palmendos.

CHAP. XIX. How Rifarano being in the search of Palmendos, met with a Dwarf
traveling toward the Emperor, to complain on a wrong a Knight had done him,
and how to revenge the Dwarf, and gratify the Emperor herein, Rifarano went
to combat with the Knight before his Castle.
Six days together read Rifarano, after his departure from Constantinople,
without hearing any tidings of the Knight he sought for, and now in the
evening, he met a Dwarf on horseback accompanied with four Squires, of whom he
inquired likewise as concerning the knight In sooth, quoth the Dwarf, I saw not
any such, but tell me I pray you from whence you now come. From the Court of
the Emperor Palmerin, answered Rifarano. How happy then am I, said the Dwarf,
to meet you here, because I have evermore heard, that thence comes many good
and virtuous Knights, wherefore I shall pray (in respect of the good* I wish to
so benign a Prince) that you may soon find the man you look for, and likewise
that his Majesty may pity my cause, in revenging me on a Knight that has
shamefully outraged me, I giving him no cause of offense in the world. With
these words he gave a mavelous sigh: whereupon Rifarano desiring to understand
the cause, the Dwarf thus began.

Know gentle Knight, that albeit God has fashioned me as you see yet did he
bestow on me riches and possessions and among other things I have a strong
Castle not far hence, there fell I in love with a beautiful damosel. Daughter
to a Ge^tleman my near neighbor, with whom I dealt in such sort, as soon after
I enjoyed her in marriage. Living afterward in all prosperous felicity, we
walked abroad to recreate our selves, in a pleasant field near adjoining to my
house, where this proud and discourteous Knight (who long labored to have my
Wife in marriage, and by reason of his evil conditions could not obtain her)
came accompanied with two of his Kinsmen (as bad disposed men as himself) and
there took my Wife perforce from me, carrying her to a castle of his two days
journey from hence, where he keeps her under strong guard, and has sent me
word by one of his Squires, that if I complain hereof to any living creature,
he will come and kill me with his own hand in my Castle. Yet being unable to
endure this villainous oppression. I am going to tell my cause to the Emperor
Palmerin, who I hope will speedily do me justice herein, being a Prince thereto
greatly addicted, as I have heard report.

Rifarano marvelling at this horrible injury, said to the Dwarf. Show me the
Castle where the Knight abides; for I doubt not but to do so much in the right
of thy cause, as he shall yield recompense for this fault, and fear hereafter
to offer the like to any one, without any further troubling the Emperor
herein. The Dwarf accepting this friendly offer, that night lodged Rifarano at
his Castle, where he was exceeding well entertained, and on the morrow, taking
six Squires with them, rode to the Knights Castle, where espying one upon the
walls, Rifarano demanded if his Lord were within. Marry is he (answered the
Squire on the walls) he is now sporting himself with that tall fellows love:
but I am sorry that you would be so badly counseled (quoth he to Rifarano) as
to come to end your life in this peace. Be not thou so careful for me
(answered Rifarano) but go, and let thy Master understand, that I would speak
two or three words with him, on certain matters that very nearly concern his
honor. The Squire went presently to his Master, who hearing that the Dwarf had
brought a Knight with him, took the Gentlewoman by the hand, and brought her
with him to a window, where opening the casements that they might see her, said.

Knight that did call me hither, say boldly what thou can; for I well
perceive thou come to seek thine own ruin. And there did thou find thy
dishonor (answered Rifarano) when by force and treason thou did abuse this
Gentleman, who never gave thee any cause of offense; wherefore restore his
wife, whom thou unjustly detainest: or if reason may not thereto persuade thee,
come down and enter the combat with me, and I shall let thee know the price of
thy villainy. I had not thought replied the knight of the Castle) that thy
indiscretion had been so great, as to think I would win a thing so hardly, and
deliver it from me so lightly; nor shall the paragon of my heart be again in
the custody of so base an excrement of nature. Then he spoke to the Dwarf in
this manner.

Thou wretched and ridiculous creature, come thou likewise to make one in
the Tragedy? begin with thine own hand thou were best, or I shall plague thee
with extreme torments. So took he the Gentlewoman in his arms, and oftentimes
lasciviously kissed her, she striving in tears to hinder his imbracings,
wherefore he said. Good Madame, seek no occasion whereby to offend your self;
for you shall see me pluck down the bravery of this Knight, and make the
monster your husband safe from troubling you any more. Tush these are but words
(quoth Rifarano) let me see thee come armed into the field, then shall I live
in hope of some deeds: And if thou will have me imagine thee courageous, bring
down the Lady with thee, that the conqueror may carry her whither him pleases.
I am content (answered the Knight) because thou shall see how little I esteem
thy threatening, and soon shall all controversies be ended between me and thee,
that hereafter may arise on this occasion.

Quickly had be armed* himself and came forth leading the Lady in his hand;
which when the Dwarf saw, he durst not tarry, but got him a bow shoot further
off. So fell the Knight and Rifarano to the combat, which continued long time
doubtful on either side; but at length Rifarano had the upper had of his enemy
having given him many cruel wounds on his body. When the Squires of the Castle
saw their Master overcome they would forcibly have carried the Lady into the
Castle again: but R^farano advertised thereof by her cry, made them forsake her
and run hastily into the Castle. Then taking her by the hand said. Come with
me, Lady, and I shall deliver you to your husband that loves you loyally, as
you may be persuaded by this I have done at his earnest entreaty.

Many humble thanks she requited him withal, seeing her self free from this
injurious enemy; and the Dwarf seeing this fortunate success, came and humbled
himself at the conquerors feet, embracing his wife with abundance of joy, being
neither of them able to express their contentation, for that tears and inward
motions of comfort had deprived them of speech. Afterward the Knight had
recovered himself again, and came stealing on Rifarano thinking to murder him
but the Dwarf espying him, cried out; whereupon the Prince returned, and once
more getting him into subjection, with his his sword smote his head from his
shoulders.

The Dwarf not a little joyful for this victory, desired the Prince that he
would accompany him to his Castle, because that traiterous Knight had a brother
and two cousins who hearing of his death would presently pursue them Whereto
Rifarano courteously condescended, and mounting the Gentlewoman behind her
husband* they journied thence with all speed possible. But ere they could
recover the place where they would be, they were pursued by the Knights Brother
and his two cousins; when the Dwarf and his wife now verily thought to die;
notwithstanding, such was the brave behavior of Rifarano, that one after
another they sped as the Knight of the Castle had done, and so without any more
interruption they got home to their Castle, where they feasted the Prince very
sumptuously. On the morrow he departed thence, continuing his travel after
Palmendos, and by the way, he succored a distressed Countess against a cruel
brother in Law of hers, named Diole who sought forcibly to deprive her of her
possessions; but by the rare chivalry of Rifarano, he lost his life in that bad
attempt. And here with the Countess we will leave Rifarano, having too long
forgotten our chief Knight Palmendos.

CHAP. XX. How Palmendos arrived in the Isle of Carderia, where first he
vanquished Tirendos in the Just, and and next the Knight that guarded the
passage of the Bridge, and also diverse other that assailed him at the third
Tower, and how he came to the Gardengate where Francelina was.
NOt long since you understood, how after Palmendos had vanquished Arnedes, he
followed his way with long desire to see Carderia, wherefore omitting all
occasions that might hinder his voyage, he determined to make no stay till he
come to the Isle, and very soon after it was his chance to arrive there, when
he implored the help of heaven in finishing this adventure, and as a sacrifice
after victory, he promised to offer his soul to the holy character of
Christianity, and to be baptized so soon as he could. At this time Belcar kept
not the passage of the bridge, because he was departed certain days before, to
visit the King and Queen of Macedon: for they hearing of his wonderful deeds
of Arms, in defending that ^ridge, sent for him to the Court by an express
messenger. And truly he would not have gone (so resolute was he in his
enterprise) but that the Princess Alderina secretly commanded him by a Letter
written with her own hand: she having discovered the truth of all to the Queen
Griana, entreating her by some means to continue the Duke her father there,
till that time Belcar came from the Isle of Carderia.

The Queen liked hereof exceeding well, and knowing her Nephew could not join
in more honorable marriage, then with the chaste and virtuous Alderina: she
conferred with the Duke and Duchess of Pontus, who likewise were glad of so
noble alliance. For this cause the Queen sent one of her Ge^tlemen to Belcar,
accompanied with Alderinaes page, who closely delivered the Prince the letter,
the substance whereof follows thus.

The Letter sent by the Princess of Durace, to Belcar Son to to the King of
Hungary.
To the right valiant and renowned Prince Belcar, Son to the King of Hungary: a
Maiden very easy to be deceived, sends health condign to his deserts.
EXcuse me, Lord Belcar, if I write to you what the abundance of my spirit
inforceth, because if it were of any thing else, I fear I could not end,
without confused wandering in this discourse: so extraordinarily are my senses
herein perplexed, as they can enjoy no little breathing time of rest or quiet.
And if you would exactly consider, from whence this molestation proceeds, you
should find the ground thereof to be violent and excessive love, which on my
behalf was faithfully entertained, and dedicated to none but only you: a
reason to procure this Letter the more favorable entertainment, and to be read
with as good will as it was written. Know then, that I do not without great
occasion silently complain of you, because me thinks you seem a promise
breaker, or rather a prevaricatour in love toward me, as the reading of this
Letter will cause you to confess, if that reason be not alienated from your
judgment, which ought to direct your compass in all affairs.

What think you now will be the vulgar opinion of your attempt, nothing but
that you desire to have ye name of Francelinaes true champion, considering the
mavelous exploits in Arms, which daily you perform in her defense: making
hereby the renown of her excellency more memorable, and all Gentlemen more
desirous to visit that Isle. Wherefore I now perceive you are not my Knight;
but rather that your service is only for the fair Princess Francelina: which
induces me to believe, that the speeches used on your behalf, when you
departed from the Tourney at Macedon, were mere forgery and dissimulation; an
act sufficient whereon to raise condemnation (unless I speedily perceive the
contrary) and to repute you the most disloyal Prince that ^ver made profession
of manhood. But to prevent this persuasion (whereto common speech by your
absence hasteneth me) and that it may not be resolutely set down in my mind, I
pray you come hither with what speed you can, before my departure hence to
Durace, that I may apply some remedy to my continual Martyrdom, which in loves
unquenchable sire my heart suffers by your occasion. Else send me word
suddenly what is your intent, as concerning the principal points dilated, and
by no other messenger then this bearer, whom I charg with some speeches by word
of mouth: him you may boldly trust and acquaint with your secrets, as the most
faithful messenger I could devise to send.

The Lady known to you, whose death is near at hand,
If pi^y cause you not to come, the peril to withstand.

This Letter, and other matters of credence wherewith Alderina right well
instructed Gracian, were the only means that the Prince Belcar came to
Macedon, who left Tirendos (in mean while) defender of the Bridge at Carderia,
hoping to return thither again very shortly: but other matters happened to him
which excused that labor, according as you shall read hereafter.

Now come we to the Prince of Tharsus, whom Tirendos perceiving ^o approach the
Bridge, came and denied him passage according to the order; whereupon they fell
to the Just, Tirendos fortune proving so bad, as he was sent to measure his
length on the ground; whereat the beholders were greatly amazed, for that since
the departure of Belcar, he had prevailed against many a Knight. Among the rest
the Queen of Thessaly mother to Francelina, who was come thither five or six
days before, because the last of the three Fairies that caused the enchantment
in the Fortress foreseeing she could not live long, hastened the coming of
Palmendos, as you have heard before, and after ward sent word to the Queen,
that soon after her death she should see her desires accomplished.

The death of the Enchantress was no sooner known to the good Queen (who had an
extreme affection to see her D^ughter free from the Magical conjurations, that
thereby the King her husband might be delivered from cruel servitude amongst
the Heathen) but she departed from Thessaly and came to the Isle of Carderia,
where she, nor any of hers could pass further then the bridge; wherefore they
erected Tents and Pavilions in the field, attending there the end of the
adventure, when she seeing that Tirendos was vanquished, wished such success to
the new come Knight, as that he might happily finish the enchantment.

Palmendos perceiving how his first adversary would trouble him no further
approached to the gates of the first Tower, where he beheld the great Knight
ready to offer him battle, wherefore he alighted from his horse, and drawing
his Sword, said. If the providence of the heavens have destinied me to conquer
this enterprise, far be all pusillanimity and cowardice from me, till I have
delivered the gentle Princess here enclosed: forbear then mine eyes as yet to
covet the fight of Francelina, albeit you desire to behold her, and I will keep
promise with you so soon as fortune pleases.

After these words, he closely buckled with the Knight of the Bridge,
continuing a long, dangerous and doubtful combat with him, the Dwarf in the
Lant horn sundry times with his Horn renewing his Champions forces: yet by the
man of invincible courage, who was ordained to be his Conqueror, he was
confounded maugre all his divellish helps. So forward he marched to the second
Tower, and as the gates were clapping together, according as they did to the
Prince Belcar, he thrust his Sword between the gates, when immediately the
thunder ceased, and they fell back wide open as they were before.

At this good hap the beholders were greatly amazed, especially the Queen of
Thessaly, who followed on still accompanied with Ozalio, and to him she highly
commended the worthy behavior of this Knight: Ozalio answering her, that she
had good cause to applaud her stars, having sent hither a Knight of such royal
descent, as his like was not to be found through all the Christian kingdoms.
Tirendos in this while was carried into his Tent by his Squires, where he so
grieved for his disgrace, as he was ready to die in despite thereof. Now is
Palmendos come to the last Tower, which was defended by three Knights armed cap
a pe, and they with three sharp Lances stood ready to receive him at the point,
wherewith he being somewhat amazed, said to himself Whereon think thou
Palmendos? what? beginnest thou now to dismay? tush man be of good cheer, thou
labourest for her, with whose beauty none in the world may compare: if by
coming so far thou have done more, then any Knight before thee could perform,
commit thy self to God and Fortune for the rest, and follow thine intent though
thou die therein. Now begins he courageously to adventure on them* who joining
altogether against him, overthrew him that he could hardly arise again
notwithstanding recovering his feet, he pursued with such unconquerable hope as
at length he drove them before him over the bridge, when both they and the
first Knight of the Tower vanished away t^gether, and in like manner did the
dwarf that sat in the Lanthorn, with a horrible shaking of the earth and the
whole fortress. The Queen Ozalio, and the rest, fell down, and hon^ured heaven
for this victory, persuading themselves that the worst of the adventure was
past, as for the Prince himself he followed the matter with such alacrity,
considering fair Francelina was the reward of his travel, as nothing seemed to
him impossible. So passing on* he shund the p^stern that guided the way to the
garden, which was guarded by two furious enchanted dogs, there through the
wicket he beheld a Fountain, with sundry ^^odly damsels about it, and in the
midst in a curious chair of cloth of gold sat Francelina the sweet Goddess
of beauty, so wonderfully decked in rich ornaments as it would have made any
heart enamoured to beheld her. Palmendos ravished with the sight of her, stepped
in at the door not dreading any peril, when presently the enchanted dogs ran
upon him, as though they would have torn him in pieces, and long time very
dangerously they did assail him, tearing his armor cruelly in pieces, that he
was now driven to despair of his life: yet in the end with much ado he
prevailed against them albeit they brought him into exceeding great perplexity,
as he never felt the like in all his life before.

CHAP. XXI. What gentle speeches and gracious devises, Palmendos had with fair
Francelina in the Garden, where they supped together: and how after he had told
her what he was, he gave her the King, which he received of the Queen his
mother at his departure from Tharsus.
FRancelina already had felt the flames of love, in as vehement manner as the
Prince Palmendos, because the Fairies (knowing the end of the enchantment was
at hand) told her that ere long she should be conquered, and delivered from
that Castle by one of the best Knights in the world, she being at her birth
appointed his wife, in recompense of his adventurous travels.

And this discourse she sealed with so many rare commendations of the Knight,
as her heart was surprised with love in such sort, that she longed every hour
to see the man appointed for her husband. And as the Pilot long perplexed with
outrageous tempests, mounts to the top to see if any Haven for rescue is at
hand: so this Lady tossed too and fro in the rough billows of love, oftentimes
left her Dungeon and came upon the walls expecting the coming of this promised
Knight. By good hap she espied when Palmendos came to the bridge, beside the
trembling of the Castle at the departure of the Knights, touched her heart with
a sign of present comfort, whereupon in this bravery she went with her damsels
into the garden, expecting the issue of the Knights fortune that presaged so
much before hand. In brief, he being entered the garden, as you have heard
already, she being directed by the Fairies what she should do, when she
perceived the dogs overcome, arose with her Damsels, and went toward the
Knight, showing many gracious countenances for his welcome; but Palmendos
seeing her approach so near him, fell on his knee, offering to kiss her hand,
whereat Francelina bashfully blushing, offered him the like, saying.

It is my duty* Sir Knight, to use such humility, albeit your courtesse has
prevented me, for this wonderful adventure finished by you declares your rare
perfection in Chivalry, being second to none that at this day bears Arms. Yet
ere you take me hence, I would request one favor at your hands not any thing
to make you doubt the loss of her, who freely gives her self as your own, but
for that you have delivered me from the enchantment* my request granted, you
may dispose of me as your loyal spouse and wife. Madam answered Palmendos, I
now think my self no less beloved of heaven, then favored by fortune, hearing
you say that I am yours, and you are mine, which makes me think all my labors
nothing in respect of you: therefore dem^nd what you please, for I being your
professed servant, must with all reverence obey your command. A thousand thanks
good Knight (quoth. she) albeit such speeches agree not with your calling, I being
only in your subjection, and ready to attend as your hand-maiden: but me
thinks it were necessary you should take a little rest being good to regard the
end and period of all things, let me therefore humbly entreat you, to come
refresh your self for the better conservation of your health.

So went they both together to the Fountain, where Palmendos was unarmed by the
Princess Francelina and her damsels, and a costly Mantle was brought to wrap
about him, then sat he down by his Lady, in another chair covered all over
with Gold. There was Lillies, Roses, Violets, and all the sweet flowers that
the earth afforded, and of incomparable beauty: the maidens beguiled the time
with sundry sounds of instruments, and thereto sung many dainty Canzonets, as
if Apollo, Orpheus, Arion, and all the other fathers of heavenly Music had
been present, which so attracted the senses of the Prince, as his memory began
to wax drowsy and forgetful imagining himself in a very beatitude, where he
seemed to see, not only the perfect beauty of a Goddess but a divine shadow,
which carried away both his heart and eyes in contemplation.

Of the like opinion was the young Princess, marvelling at the brave
constitution of her Knight, and esteeming her self beyond all other in
happiness, that Fortune had sorted her out such a husband: and in sooth these
Lovers were the fairest couple that ever were joined in marriage together, not
unfitly compared to Leander and Hero, the two goodliest stars that were in
their times. In this surpassing contentation, they continued till a Damosel
(understanding that supper was prepared) there set before them a table ready
covered the wood whereof was very precious, delivering a savor much like to
Balm and thereon was set all sorts of costly viands: hard by stood a Cupboard
richly adorned with Basins and Cups of gold, which were embellished with such
precious stones, as the value of them was reputed inestimable.

But these Lovers could eat very little, because they had work enough to regard
each other; for there is nothing in the world more agreeable to one enamoured,
then to contemplate the object of his thoughts, because love making a breach
into the body, and planting his siege against the very soul, hinders the
passage of nourishing meats, and makes them feed on his lovely devises, which
are such as every one of you that have tasted thereof, can best apprehend the
pleasure and sweetness thereof. Hence proceeds delightful dreams and fancies
of the mind, when the eye takes a full view, and the lively drought of the
object beloved through the penetrails and rayons of the stomach, which graves
on the heart the perfect portrait of the thing beloved. And what morsel more
delicious, what wine more pleasant, or liquor more ambr^sions can one find
wherewith to satisfy the soul esprised with the brand^n of Venus, then the
exact contemplation and secret discourse, which the spirit makes to his only
choice, when he beholds himself reciprocally beloved of her whom he loves?
doubtless none at all: happily some other might be spoken of which seem to
yield more content, but then they are transitory, and of no continuance.

In this sort supped Palmendos and Francelina, when the damsels withdrawing
the Table, went to take their own refection, leaving these twain to devise
together: Then approached the Knight to the Mistress of his heart, and said.
Madame* how happy may I name the hour of my nativity, seeing the celestial
bodies appointed me such a planet, as made me gain the honor of your love: Now
find I that for truth which you told me in the Temple of Delphos, that in short
time I should see you at mine own pleasure. Command then I beseech you, what
you would have me do, and show me the way to gather some fruit by the perpetual
service I have vowed to your divine beauty, that I may give some cooling to the
unquenchable flame, wherein my heart is more and more tormented. The Princess
replied, My Lord, I cannot but admire to hear you say that you have seen me in
another place: In sooth, at the age of three years I was fatally enclosed in
this Castle, where never since entered Knight or any other stranger, but only
you. As for my request, whereto you have promised, this it is, That you attempt
not against my chastity, until our marriage be solemnly performed, which may
not be, till you first have rescued the King of Thessaly my father from the
long imprisonment wherein the Turk has kept him. This adventure you must needs
undertake, which doubtless you shall worthily effect, and so be Lord of me, and
of the Realm of Thessaly, whereto I am lawful heir after my fathers decease;
for performance whereof, I commit my self into your custody, provided you keep
your former promise.

Palmendos attentively noted her words, and afterward remained a while silent,
imagining whether he should ^^nd or accompany his Lady to the Emperor or in
mean space keep himself unknown to any, till he had ended the adventure in
Turkey, bringing at his return the King of Thessaly* with him, if the heavens
favored him in his deliverance; at length breaking off this silent
determination, he answered in this sort. Madam, so fervent and inexpuisable is
the love I bear you* as to gain the Monarchy of the whole world, I would not
offend the very least of your virtuous thoughts: And albeit I had not promised
what you required, my own regard should have taught me better government. For I
account my self the happiest Knight under heaven, not by any honor or praise
gotten in this adventure, but only to see myself subject to such incomparable
beauty, and one so nobly descended. And now Madam as I shall not account any
pains or travel too much for you, thinking my self sufficiently happy, that the
stats did so fortunately shine upon me in this action. I shall entreat you not
to return to your fathers house, but I will leave you to the Emperors charge,
the Prince whom I love and desire to (...), hearing patiently the burden of my
grief in your absence, till time allow us a gracious meeting. Be assured her of
assur^ my noble Lord (quoth ^he) that never shall I love any but you to whom
the fatal d^stinies have only appointed me and no less will my torments be in
your absence then yours, being now deprived of my former liberty and the same
transferred to ^our disposing.

Spending the time thus in amorous conference, at length he told her all that
happened to him in the Temple at Deiphos, where if he saw her not in person, yet
he did behold her lively representation, and had a great (...) of talk with
her, whereat Francelina could not but (...), yet commending the wisdom of the
Fayries in appointing her so noble a husband. Now she desires to understand his
name and birth, wherewith at large he truly acquainting her, yet willing her
she should not reveal it to any, till he returned with the King of Thessaly her
father. Then did he give her the King, which he received of the Queen his
Mother when he came from Tharsus, requesting her to keep it carefully, because
he must show it to the Emperor his father, as the token whereby he should
discern him to be his son.

CHAP. XXII. How Palmendos and Francelina going to the Queen of Thessaly, met
without the Castle diverse Knights and Ladies of the Isle, which attended their
coming: What reverence the Lord of the Isle did him; and how he brought the
Queen to see the Castle.
HIghly pleased was the Princess Francelina when she knew her spouse to be son
to the Emperor Palmerin, and all this night they beguiled the time with sundry
discourses pleasing to them both. The next morning, the Princess brought her
love to behold her stately lodging, where she caused him to put on a costly
black Armor left there by the Fairies purposely for him, as also a goodly
sword, by virtue whereof he might bring such as him pleased into a sound sleep;
so causing two Damsels to bear his helmet and lance, they intended to walk
forth of the Castle.

Now shined fair Francelina brighter then the morning star, her head attire
adorned all over with Carbuncles, Diamonds, Rubies, Emeralds and Oriental
Saphir^^, and her upper garment being a long robe of cloth of gold, curiously
figured with pearls and precious stones, as the value thereof was imagined
inestimable. In this and far greater pomp then I can set down, they left the
Castle, meeting by the way sundry Knights and Ladies of the Isle, and among
them all was an ancient grave Gentleman, father to ye three Fairies, whom they
invested in the government of this Isle after their death he falling on his
knee before Palmendos and Francelina, delivered these speeches. Adventurous and
most fortunate Knight happy was the Planet that ruled at thy birth seeing that
by thy virtue and wonderful prowess, thou have made this place accessable,
which so long time has continued full of trouble. Reverend sir (answered
Palmendos) the sovereign bounty has made me the instrument of your good, and
therefore I rejoice a great deal the more: if you be either Father, Uncle, or
allied to those noble Da^ies, that by their knowledge have done so much for me,
I give you all the right here to be had by the conquest of Francelina. I humbly
thank you sir (answered the Knight of the Isle) for offering me such a
courteous gift, whereof I am altogether unworthy albeit my daughters by their
secret Philosophy in this action still directed your course: but leave we these
speeches till better opportunity, and go we to comfort the Queen of Thessaly,
who on the Bridge attends your coming; for till you have brought her
daughter over the Bridge the enchantments are not ended, and then shall the
Castle be in the former state, as it was when Francelina came first hither. And
is my gracious Queen and mother here (said the Princess?) then I see my joys
will meet altogether. So walked they willingly over the bridge, attended on by
many Lords, Barons, and Ladies when the Queen seeing her daughter come toward
her, hardly could she refrain from swouning in the arms of Ozalio, who was
likewise ready to do as much at the joyful sight of his friend Palmendos, yet
at length she embraced her daughter, saying.

What abundance of tears have issued from mine eyes, since the time I saw my
beloved daughter? How many hitter anguishes of heart have I endured, and
breathed innumerable sighs and clamors into the air, for the absence of thee
and the King thy father, every hour expecting the release of you both from
imprisonment? How irksome is the remembrance O perfect substance of mine
entrails) that I was a mother so cruel and severe to banish thee so long time
from me? But herein I consented to the persuasion of the Fairies, who promised
that by thy imprisonment, I should recover the King my husband out of
thraldom; it now remains whether their words will sort to effect or no.
Wherefore (sir Knight) seeing you have exalted the soul that lay despairing in
the floods of extremity, by delivering my daughter from these magical charms;
let me entreat thee to follow thy fortune, and accomplish all my joys together,
in restoring him for whom this sorcery was invented* that the remainder of our
life may be more happy then it has been since the time we first met together.

Palmendos sorrowing to see the Queen thus lament, encouraged her in this sort.
Good Madam torment not your self with any further grief, seeing I have
determined to lose my life, or else to bring with me the King of Thessaly: in
the mean space, assuage your sorrows by the presence of your daughter, whom the
heavens have alloted to be my wife and thereby confirmed you my gracious
mother. By this time the Knight of the Isle had made such provision in the
Castle as they might there lodge according to their content, because more
convenient place there was not near at hand, and there three days they sported
themselves in pleasure, marvelling at the ingenious devises there framed by the
Fairies, so that the Castle seemed as a terrestrial Paradise. Which Palmendos
perceiving and that it was seated in a sweet and fertile climate, he intended
to send for people of his own native Country, whereby it might be better
inhabited, and because some memory of him and Francelina might be reserved to
following posterities.

The Knight of the Isle feasted them very royally, and nothing was wanting that
might any way delight them; when Palmendos falling into conference with the
Queen* desired that she would accompany her daughter to Constantinople, there
to stay with her in the Emperors Court, as sent from him: and that she should
moreover assure his Majesty, that he having finished his voyage into Turkey,
would no longer conceal himself as he had done. My noble son (quoth the Queen)
I shall willingly perform what you have appointed; but I would know if you mean
to take any strength with you against the Turk, because I would send for aid ^o
Thessaly, and beside, crave assistance of the Emperor who I am sure will
succor me with all his legions. Gracious Madam and mother (answered Palmendos)
I will take no other company with me* then I brought hither for such business
must be done rather by adventurous hazard, then by bringing forces into the
field: so that were yours and all the Emperors united together, yet should we
never compass our intent that way. But you shall understand that I being upon
the sea not long since, met with the King of Culaquin, son in law to the great
Turk, as he coasted along Thrace, with his Rovers and Pirates, only to endamage
the Empire so far as he might; yet by good hap I took him prisoner, and sent
him to his Majesty at Constantinople. If happily by secret subtilty I cannot
prevail, I shall move an exchange of these two Kings, coloring the matter with
many plausible reasons: in brief, I will do as the occurrences shall best advise
me, wherein I hope the divine bounty will direct me the best course, that I may
compass the issue of mine affectionate desire. The Queen rejoiced very much,
when she heard that the King of Culaquin was likewise prisoner, and ho^ing to
have her husband in exchange for him, she more diligently hastened the
departure of Palmendos; the like (though loath to leave his company so soon)
did fair Francelina, not doubting but her Lord and husband would soon return,
and knit up all their joys with the presence of the King her father.

CHAP. XXIII. How the Queen of Thessaly and Francelina her daughter, departing
from the Isle of Carderia, were accompanied on the way by Palmendos and Ozalio,
when taking their leave each of other, the Queen and her daughter rode to the
Emperors Court, where they were very graciously entertained.
Loath are these Lovers to part asunder, but the causes being urgent they are
constrained to make a virtue of necessity: wherefore taking their leave of the
Knight of the Isle, as also of all the Lords and Barons that so friendly bare
them company all this while, after many amorous and ceremonial courtesies,
accompanied with sighs tears, and sorrowful looks, and they had brought them
half a days journey on the way, Palmendos and Ozalio rode toward the seaside
where they had left order that their ship should meet them.

The Queen and her daughter, without any trouble to hinder their journey,
arrived at the City of Constantinople, sending one of her Knights to the
Emperor to let him understand the cause of her coming, as also the discourse
of all that had happened. The Knight discharging his duty as he was commanded,
his Majesty requested to know his name, who had so fortunately delivered
Francelina. Dread Lord answered the Messenger, he is called Palmendos, the most
valiant and courteous Knight of all these parts of the world. Much good have I
heard of the man, said the Emperor, but comes he now in company with the
Queen? No my Lord, replied the Knight, because the future deliverance of our
King, has procured his journey into Turkey. Then the Emperor commanded
Primaleon and his Barons, to go accompany the Queen and her daughter to the
Court, which they with all diligence performed, for that the fame and renown
spread of her through all those regions, increased their desire to behold her.
Arnedes likewise would have gone with them, but as yet he was not perfectly
recovered, and beside he waxed daily very melancholy, seeing the Ambassadors
of France stayed so long, nor could he hear any tidings of his cousin Recinde.
The Queen of Thessaly and her Ladies came attired in mourning black, expressing
her sorrow for the King her husband: but Francelina like glorious Cynthia, in
her chiefest pride, clothed (as you have heard) in most stately ornaments,
drew every eye to behold her beauty. Primaleon having saluted the Queen, gave
her place and rode with the Princess her daughter when carried away in conceit
with her surpassing feature, he entered into these speeches* Me thinks (Madam)
the Fairies were too much injurious, to lock up in prison such admirable
beauty, in that any gentle heart beholding you would the sooner adventure for
the King your father, having such a gracious reward set down for his travel:
wherefore Palmendos has good occasion to boast, if fortune permit him to
deliver the K. of Thessaly. And I quoth Francelina, account my happiness
nothing inferior gaining thereby the most valiant and debonair Knight, that
ever enterprised actions of chivalry, which makes me esteem the Fairies wise
and discreet, by enclosing me in the enchanted castle, for very few would have
thrust their lives in peril having once seen me, where contrariwise to get
honor by the adventure, they made proof of that which was only destinied for
Palmendos, he being the man that justly may be called the ^ower of Knights.

In this matter I will not contend with you, answered Primaleon, for the
virtues and graces of your beloved, is such, as no man worthily may be compared
with him, wherefore you have good reason to affect him: and he likewise is
bound to constant permanency, if your divine looks have pierced his heart as
they ought. The Emperor and the Empress, with Philocrista and their other
daughters came to the Palace gate to welcome the Queen* when she and her
daughter alighting from their palfrays, with humble reverence saluted his
Majesty, who with his Empress honorably entertained them conducting them into
the great Hall, where the Queen began in this manner.

Most mighty and invincible Monarch* Palmendos the noble Jewel of Knighthood,
by us kisseth the hand of your imperial Majesty, having sent you this young
Princess to be kept under your protection, till he return from Turkey with my
espoused Lord the King of Thessaly, if fortune grant his deliverance from the
cruel infidels, for which I continue in hourly devotion, as well for the great
desire I have to see the King my husband, as also to see the Knights speedy
return, who only dedicateth his travells to your highness service. With these
words she delivered her daughter to his Majesty, and the Empeperour receiving
her very graciously, showed himself exceeding joyful for their arrival,
desiring them to use his Court as their own, and to be as frolic there as if
they were in Thessaly. Beside, he prayed God so to direct Palmendos in his
attempt as he might deliver the King her husband from captivity: withal, that
if he had requested asistance in the cause, he should have had his Majesty's
power at command: then taking Francelina by the hand, he said. To you daughter
Philocrista, I commit the honorable charge of this young Princess, until
such time her Knight ^e returned. My Lord answered Philocrista I shall right
willingly fulfill your commandment, being no less glad of such a companion,
then to have the Lady present with me for whom such rare deeds of Chivalry have
been performed the Empress took the Queen by the hand, and Philocrista her
charge Francelina, they all sitting down under a sumptuous Canopy, where the
knights regarding them, especially the Empress and the two Princesses,
imagined a second judgment for the Apple of beauty. And admit we Arnedes for
the gentle shepherd Paris, yet he imagined his Philocrista to be most perfect,
although Francelina was very far beyond her, all the Knights concluding that
they had never seen more choice beauty, except the Empress when she was in the
slower of her youth. But Philocrista never attained her mothers perfections,
albeit she had two sisters named Flerida and Bazilia (which by the author of
Palmerin are named Belisa and Melicia) that came very near her in resemblance,
especially Flerida of whom we shall have occasion to speak hereafter, when we
come to the noble Prince Edward of England.

The Emperor entreated Francelina, to tell him (if she could) of whence
Palmendos was, whereto the Princess modestly thus answered. Dread Lord, I can
reveal no further of him, then that he is commander of a Kingdom, and diverse
other Signories of great estate: what else I know of him, I am to be excused
till his coming, when himself will manifest his Country and original, not his
valor and courtesy, for that is blazed through most parts of the world. For
this discreet answer, she was greatly commended by the Emperor, who noting her
comely gestures and behavior, esteemed her discreet and well advised: and
seeing the Ring on her finger that Palmendos gave her, he thought it very much
resembled his own Ring, which the Queen of Tharsus gave him at his departure.
Now could he not contain himself, but demands of her, of whom she had that
costly Jewel, so like one that he held in great estimation; she answered, that
Palmendos gave it her, after her deliverance from the Isle of Carderia, whereat
his Majesty greatly marvelling imagined the Knight to be the Queen of Tharsus
son. Now was he much more desirous to see him* then before, remembering what
kindness she showed him in the realm of Pasmeria: then causing his own Ring to
be brought, and compared with that the Princess wore, they were found in every
point so like and conformable, as hardly could the one be known from the other.
Indeed they were made both by one workman, and magically charmed like in
resemblance, as the perfect signal to discover the original of Palmendos: which
made the Emperor conceive some suspicion, that this unknown Knight should be
his Son, especially when he called the Queens dark speeches to memory, which
she used after her acquaintance with him. Yet would he not reveal this doubt to
any one, but past it over with fresh welcomming the Queen and her daughter, and
delivering in speeches, that he was glad Belcar kept not the bridge, when it
was Palmendos fortune to arrive there, yet was he sorry for Tirendos mishap:
albeit he commended the courtesy of the conqueror, in exacting no further on
the Prince of Mecaena. ^

But leave we Palmendos and Ozalio traveling toward Turkey, and speak a little
of Recinde the Castilian Prince, being one of them that followed in his search.

CHAP. XXIIII. How Recinde pursuing the search of Palmendos, rescued a Merchant
from five Thieves, whom he discomfited on the mountain: And how by the means of
an Archer that bent his bow against him, he came to the mouth of a deep Cave,
where he killed a Lion that kept it, and delivered thence a Lady, which was
enchanted into the shape of a Serpent.
REcinde leaving Constantinople, for the same cause as the other Knights did,
happened to the same place where Palmendos lodged the night before, demanding
of his Host, if he had seen any such man: who made this answer. Verily the same
man that had the honor of the Tourney, was my guest this last night, and never
did I see a more courteous Gentleman, which makes me hope, he will end the
adventure of Francelina, whither he is gone as he told me he would. With these
words the Spaniard was well contented, minding to follow him to the Isle of
Carderia, and riding by the way, he heard a very lamentable cry, which caused
him to look about, when he espied one hanging on a tree by the arms, and five
villains hard by, making a fire, to dress some food they had killed on the
mountain. Coming to the man that hung in this woeful plight, he cut him down;
and understanding that these villains had robbed and so misused him, he caused
the Merchant to take his weapon, and so they setting upon the Thieves, slew
three of them, driving the other to flight: by which means the Merchant had
most of his treasure again, for which he thanked the Prince: and mounting on
horseback, he accompanied him on the way.

Not far had they gone, but they met a Knight unarmed, of huge constitution and
evil favored, having a Turkey bow in his hand and a quiver hanging by his side
full of arrows, of whom they desired to know which way they should get out of
the Forest: The discourteous Knight (without making any answer) let fly an
arrow at them, wherewith he killed the Prince Recindes horse; he being not a
little moved at this mishap, grew into a great choler against him, who made no
longer stay, but ran from them so fast as he could. Recinde and the Merchant
still pursued, till having lost the sight of him, and marvelling where he
should be hidden at length they found the mouth of a very dark Cave, which they
suspected the Knight had taken for refuge: whereupon the Prince entreated the
Merchant to stay there without, because he intended to search the Cave, and be
revenged on him that had so wronged him.

Not far had he gone under the earth, but he heard a pitiful voice crying for
help, which caused him to return back again, when at the entrance of the Vault
he beheld a mighty Lion, which came forth with the Knight, and ran upon the
Prince exceeding furiously: but he who could not be frighted with matters of
greater moment* so valiantly defended himself against the beast, as in short
time he laid him dead at his foot. Now ran the Knight back again into the cave,
and the Prince after him so fast as he could, till at length he came into a
goodly Hall, which was hanged round about with gorgeous Tapistry, and therein
might one behold all such as passed by the mouth of the cave, as if they had
discerned the same in a Glass. While he stood beholding this beautiful
prospect, he saw the Knight coming toward him armed, and drawing his sword,
thus spoke to the Prince.

Wretched Knight, overmuch foolish hardiness has brought thee to this place,
for I shall let thee see the danger incurred by thy presumption. More
indiscreetly (quoth the Prince) have thou behaved thy self* in killing my horse
without any occasion of offense. Herewith they combatted a long while together,
till the Knight seeing himself unable to resist the Prince, would have saved
himself in the chamber he came from, offering to keep the door against him as
his defense: but Recinde thrusting after him into the chamber, he beheld a
great and hideous Dragon lying there, the sight whereof somewhat amazed him;
yet seeing the beast stirred not against him he continued his former quarrel
with the Knight, bringing him at length into such subjection, that with his
sword he smote his head from his shoulders. The Serpent terrified with extreme
fear, began to shrink back, when Recinde lifting up his sword to strike, the
Serpent spoke in this manner.

Sir Knight, for Gods sake pity me, and seek not to shed my blood, having no
way offended you; so shall I be perpetually bound at your commandment, for
delivering me from this cruel Knight who has forcibly kept me here the space
of six years. The Prince hearing these words, held down his sword, when the
Serpent thus proceeded. I am no Serpent, sir, as happily I seem in your eye,
but a most unfortunate and abused damosel having suffered the most miserable
life that ever woman endured, living (against my will) in the custody of this
traitorous Knight. If thou art a humane creature (answered Recinde) I marvel
thou should have the shape of such a deformed beast. I know (said the
damosel) what representation I have in your judgment; but I dare assure you on
my life that I am no Serpent or any thing else but a most distressed woman.
Which well she might affirm because the Knight n^w slain to conceal her the
more cunningly, made her to resemble so by Art magic, as you shall understand
the whole at large.

He loved this Damosel so extremely, she being the daughter of an ancient
widow, dwelling not far off, as seeing he could not obtain her in marriage, by
reason of his bad manners, and ill favored body, so labored with a Magician,
a friend of his, to cause her to resemble a Serpent to any but himself. Her
mother and brethren (being ignorant of this treachery) seeing such an ugly
Serpent among them were so affrighted at this strange metamorphosis, that they
fled presently out of their Castle. The Damosel following to understand the
cause of their fear, wandered sorrowfully after them through the fields, where
she was surprised by her Lover, and brought to the Cave prepared by the
Sorcerer, appointing she should continue in that appearance, until one of the
best Knights in the world should arrive there, and valiantly win her out of his
custody, only by his death to be delivered, and six years she had abode in
that place, seeming a beautiful woman to her Lover only, and to all others a
monstrous Serpent.

Recinde driven into wonderful admiration bemoaning her cause, thus spoke. In
sooth this is the most strange accident that ever I heard of; but seeing your
Lover is dead, boldly may you depart the chamber, and return home to your
mother again; for in time (perhaps) this hideous shape will forsake you. My
Lord (quoth she) I have many times striven to get forth of this prison, but all
my labor has been in vain; for by like sortiledge has the Knight bound me
here, as he got me from my mothers Castle. So am I persuaded (answered the
Prince;) wherefore seeing of your self you cannot depart, I will try if my
strength will release you of this servitude. Then taking his arming girdle from
about him, he made it fast about the Serpents middle and forcibly thought to
pull her out of the chamber; but the strength of the enchantment over-mastering
him, when he had gotten her to the very door, would violently pluck her back
again. Yet Recinde being all heart and courage, gave not over for all these
resistances, but at length by exceeding labor and travel he got her into the
Hall, and then she seemed a very beautiful woman, who falling down at his
feet, entreated him not to forsake her, till that he had brought her to her
mothers Castle. So going forth of the Cave, she told the Merchant all that had
happened, which made him answer her in this sort.

Madam, both you and I are highly beholding to this Knight, for he has
miraculously called you from a lamentable sufferance, and not only has he
saved my life, but helped me to my goods again which were utterly lost:
wherefore we have good cause to think that he is the only Paragon of Chivalry*
So breaking of these speeches they took the Knights horse, because he had slain
the Princes, and mounting the damosel behind him, brought her home to her
mothers Castle, the ancient Lady being not a little joyful to see her
daughter, whom she reputed utterly lost: likewise her brethren were very glad
to see their sister restored home again. As for their friendly entertainment
you may judge it by the cause, which being of nature must needs surpass all
other.

CHAP. XXI. How Recinde arrived at the Isle of Carderia, where understanding
that Palmendos had ended the adventure, he went to seek Belcar at Macedon: and
of the Combat he had with him, by the false persuasion of the Damosel that
followed the revenge of her brethrens deaths.
FOur days stayed Recinde and the Merchant at the old Ladies Castle, and then
taking their leave, the Prince commended the Merchant to his own occasions, and
he rode strait toward the Isle of Carderia, desirous to try his fortune in the
adventure, as also to find the Knight he sought for: but being there arrived,
he understood how Francelina was delivered, Palmendos gone toward Turkey, and
Tirendos abode at the Castle with Lypes and his sisters, from whence he sent a
Squire to Macedon, to certify Belcar what had happened, as also to entreat him
to stay there for his coming.

As for the Prince Belcar, he being now with Alderina his chosen Mistress, to
speak of all circumstances entercoursing between them, would be more labor to
me then pleasure to you. She accuses him with a great many articles of
ungentleness, that he would travel for Francelina, being before her vowed
Knight; and he excuses all under this point that what he did in a place of
such trial, was only to eternize the name of Alderina, and nothing to the
advantage of Francelina; nor could the greatest Monarch on the earth have
commanded him from that service but only the gracious Letter sent by her:
wherefore he desired to return thither again, to make her more famous till the
adventure were ended. To stay her answer, and appease his hot desire, at that
very instant, the Currier arrived sent from Tirendos, whose message being
heard, highly was the Princess contented but Belcar overcome with exceeding
grief, because fain he would have tried his fortune against Palmendos.

Now come we to the Damosel again, that pursued Belcar for the death of her
brethren, according as you have sufficiently heard before. She understanding
that he was in the Court of Macedon, so highly loved of the King Queen, and the
whole nobility she was out of hope to work him any injury there; wherefore she
intended to return home again: and by the way she happened to meet with the
Prince Recinde, when beginning her accustomed complaints, she delivered the
same discourse which she had done to Cardino and Tirendos, saying, that the
Knight who had so traitorously slain her brethren, sojourned in the Court of
Macedon.

Recinde desirous to win honor by succouring the distressed, and hoping he
might find the Knight he sought for at Macedon, answered her in this manner. If
it be, damosel, as you say, that the Knight in such traiterous sort slew your
brethren, I promise you, by the faith I bear to Chivalry, that to my power I
will revenge your wrong, because all Gentlemen receiving this Order, are bound
by duty to assist Damsels injuriously wronged by disloyal varlets. The crafty
deceiver fell at the Princes feet, affirming what she had said with many oaths.
Go then with me (quoth Recinde) to show me the Knight, and either I will lose
my life, or make him confess his villainy The effronted palliard mounted on her
palfray, and such speed they made in travel, as at length they arrived at
Macedon; when entering the great Hall, they found there the King, Belcar, and
diverse noble Barons, whereupon the Damosel thus spoke to Recinde.

See here, my Lord, the Knight that slew my brethren: I beseech you make him
know before the King, the treason he committed against harmless men: for his
Majesty not knowing the enormity of the case, reputeth this offender to be one
of the most courteous Knights in his Court as my self perceived at my last
being here. Recinde having with humble reverence saluted the King Florendos,
turned to Belcar with these speeches. Sir Knight, this Damosel has sworn to
me, that you have traitorously slain two of her brethren, after you had been
friendly entertained at her fathers house: if you did so, surely it was an act
far unbeseeming you, and by force of arms I shall make you so to confess it, if
you have the hardiness to enter the field with me. Belcar greatly offended to
hear himself so charged, and evermore by one that sought to bring his life in
danger, in anger thus replied.

In sooth, Knight, I cannot but think thy discretion very simple, in saying, if
I have the hardiness to enter the field with thee; and thy presumption is as
insolent, as this Damosel is trothless and disloyal, in accusing me without any
cause: notwithstanding I hope to recompense you for light belief, and that
false woman likewise, the instrument of thy folly. After these speeches he went
and armed himself for the combat, which the King many ways labored to hinder;
but Recinde continued so resolutely against Belcar, that the King could not
dissuade the matter, wherefore he thus spoke to Recinde.

Seeing you will not at my entreaty give over this rashness, let me understand
the name of him that will not grant so small a matter, especially to one that
is able to yield thanks therefore. I am (quoth Recinde) a Knight of a strange
Country, who came to the Emperors Court at Constantinople, mean while the
Nuptials of the Hungarian Prince were solemnized, whither likewise came a
Knight unknown, bearing a silver flower in his shield: he having won the honor
of the Tourney, departed secretly from the assembly, which made me follow in
search of him: and in respect I am but a poor Knight errant. I desire no wrong
may be offered me in the battle. Be thereof assured, said the King that none
shall meddle with you but your adversary only: And trust me it grieveth me to
the very heart, that coming from the Court of the Emperor Palmerin my son you
should here enter the field against Belcar, who is one of his Majesty's
chiefest favorites. When Recinde heard Belcar named, on the one side it
displeased him, that he was to deal with a Knight so famous and renowned; on
the other side it grieved him as much, when he considered the near alliance
between him and Melicia, whom he loved as his very soul, so that willingly he
would have forborne the combat but that he could not with honor gainsay it.

Now the King desires the Duke of Pontus, and another of his chiefest Barons,
to judge the fight according to conscience, and without any exception oi
person. Soon after the champions enter the Lists where breaking their Lances
bravely in the carreer they were both dismounted: notwithstanding they quickly
recovered themselves and drawing their swords fell to the combat. Long while
they continued a most furious fight sharp and cruel wounds being delivered on
either side, that judgment could not be given who was in greatest danger: but
his Majesty seeing Belcar wax feeble, and that it was like this fight would end
both their lives, as one loath to see the death of either, he threw his staff of
peace between them; and coming down from the window where he st^od into the
field he desired them at his request to give over the fight. My gracious Lord,
answered Recinde, that may we not consent unto unless the Damosel that
complained of Belcar, will first remit the injury he has done her. My self
will thereto persuade her, said the King* in mean while do you travel no
further in this controversy, seeing you have both showed sufficient and
haughty chivalry.

So went the King to the Damosel, who was wonderful glad to see Belcar in such
dangerous estate, as no Knight before had brought him in the like. Damosel
(said he) seek not the death of two so good Champions as these are, but (for my
sake) pardon Belcar, if he have in ought offended, and I shall cause him to
make such amends, as your self shall like well thereof: beside, such courtesy
shall you find at my hands, as happily shall yield occasion of thanks while you
live. Hereto will I never consent, though I die (quoth she) and more would the
present death of Belcar content me, then if the whole Monarchy of the world
were under my puissance, considering the enorm and detestable treason wherewith
he villanously wronged my father and brethren, which makes me I cannot
discharge my Knight of his promise. The King with great instance entreated her
again, and so did all the Lords attending on him: but all was in vain, she was
so resolutely grounded in her wickedness, as she accounted it pleasure to be
self-willed therein. Whereupon, the Queen (heartily sorry to see Belcar so sore
wounded) understanding the obstinate refusal of the Damosel; she accompanied
with the Duchess of Pontus, and the Princess Alderina her daughter, came
altogether and desired her, to discharge her Knight of his promise, and the
Queen would entertain her amongst the Ladies of Honor in her Court.

All these prayers and requests nothing availed, to move any pity in this
inexorable Damosel; which the Queen perceiving, and that she continued so
obstinate in cruelty, she made a solemn oath* that if she did not presently
pardon the two Knights, (hearing a murmuring among the the people, how her
accusations against Belcar were false and slanderous) that her self should die
a most shameful death. The Damosel seeing the Queen so displeased, was afraid
of her cause, and beside* she grieved to behold the tears of fair Alderina,
wherefore she alighted from her palfray, and falling at the Queens feet,
desired her not to regard her great error of ingratitude, which she had showed
to the King her husband, in denying a matter consisting in her power: but for
her Majesty's sake, she was content to pardon both the Knights. The Queen
embraced her in sign of thanks, sending word to Recinde, that he should proceed
no further in battle. So the Damosel went with the Queen and her Ladies to the
Palace, and both the champions accompanied the King, who bringing them to
their chambers, commanded that his chief Physicians and Chirurgians should give
very diligent attendance to see their wounds healed.

Daily would the Queen, accompanied with the Duchess of Pontus, and the fair
Princess Alderina her daughter, come to visit them, so that at length they
reconciled the two Princes to amity; and shortly after, the Queen (in regard of
her promise) caused the damosel to be very honorably married, when Belcar made
her openly confess, that her accusations were most false and untrue, in respect
that he never saw any of her brethren, before that night wherein he was
entreated by her father to lodge at his Castle. But leave we these, and let us
now return again to our noble Knight Palmendos, whom we left preparing his
voyage toward Turkey.

CHAP. XXVI. How after Palmendos and Ozalio embarked for Turkey, they landed at
a Po^t near the Castle of Albaizo, where the King of Thessaly was kept
prisoner: and how Palmendos intended to be at the Tourney, which was prepared
for the marriage of the Captains son, and what was his success.
AFter that Palmendos and Ozalio had left the Queen of Thessaly, and her
daughter Francelina, they posted with all speed to their ship: the Mariners
having in the time of their abode there, happened on a Turk left there in the
Haven, by reason of extreme sickness, wherefore they of Tharsus, knowing him
to be a Moor, took him into their ship and by the time of the Princes arrival,
he had very well recovered his health. He understanding that Palmendos would
sail into Turkey desired to grant him passage thither, and in recompense of that
gentleness, he would direct him whither he pleased, because he knew all the
Ports and creeks of the country, and most of the Cities and Towns on the land.

Palmendos joyful of this good hap, accepted him for his patron and without
concluding to what place they would first sail, he willed them to make toward
the nearest port to the City of Tubant, demanding of the Turk if he knew any
harbor of surety near that place. My Lord (quoth the Turk) I will conduct you,
if you please, into a straight of the sea, which is very secret, where
oftentimes ride diverse great vessels, and no other place of lodging is near at
hand, but my fathers house only, which stands a days journey from Tubant,
and the like from the Castle of Albayzo, where the great Turk at this present
keeps the King of Thessaly and all his treasure, under the charge of a good
Knight who is the Captain of the Castle, and this place he reputeth as the
strongest hold in all the country. Moreover this dare I avouch Sir, that there
is no part so little in all that country, but I know it as well by night as by
day, even as perfectly as the port whereof I tell you: there may you abide in
assurance and do what best your self shall please uncontroled by any, this will
I make good for the great courtesy I have found. Palmendos seeing how fortune
favored him committed his conducting to the Turk who was named Oricano, when
at length they came to the port near Tubant: then Oricano went on shore with
the Knights, to take some order for their good entertainment; but finding not
his father at home, entreated his mother and two brethren, who were not a
little glad of his safe return, to use those Gentlemen so courteously as might
be, expressing what kindness he had found at their hands.

Palmendos rejoiced that they were in a place so sure and secret, and near
Albayzo Castle, where the King of Thessaly was detained in captivity, yet kept
he on his rich black armor, which the Fairies left for him at the Castle of
Carderia, his good sword likewise he had by his side, wherewith he could
inchant and bring asleep any one by drawing it forth. It was large and short as
a woodknife or fauchion, most artificially damasked and garnished with three
sorts of Diamonds, the whole sheath being composed of one, the mosse-bar and
pummel of an other, and the handle of the crest rare and precious Calamite that
ever was seen, the blade of ye finest tempered ^eel that could be in any sword;
in brief the like weapon was hardly to be found through the world.

By this time Oricano's father was come home, who re^oycing to behold his son,
showed very loving countenance to the Princes for his sake: when amongst other
talk Palmendos requested to know of the old man* whence he came so late,
whereto the poor man humbly thus answered. I come, sir* from a Town not far
hence, whither I went in the morning to sell fish, because great number of
Knights are assembled there, against the marriage of the Lords daughter, with
the son to the Captain of Albayzo Castle: and I stayed the longer, to see the
Bridegroom and his sister, who is reported to be the fairest woman in the
world. By many great Princes she has been requested in marriage, but she has
refused every one, saying she will never ^e married, but with him that can win
her by martial prowess: for which cause many brave and gallant Knights are come
thither and on the third day of the feast have appointed a Tourney for her
love, the resort being so great to see this Lady, as if the great Turk with all
his Bassaes and Ianizaries kept Court there.

Palmendos attentively noting this tale, considered with himself, that if he
could by subtle trains entire this Lady to Love, he might easily get into
Albayzo Castle, where he should the better compass the stratagem, to set the
King of Thessaly at liberty. For this cause he determined to be present at the
Tourney, and in bed acquainted Ozalio with his whole intent, who thought it the
only way to work their enterprise. On the morrow Palmendos told the Fisher
that he would make one in the Just* so giving him good store of money, he
prayed him to regard his ship and mariners till he returned, and so he set
forward with Ozalio and Orycano, who served them faithfully during all this
business.

Not far had they rid, but they met with a Page that attended on Iffida, for so
was the beautiful virgin named, the Captains daughter, and occasion of this
triumph. Palmendos then asked him if the Tourney held the day following. It
does, sir, (answered the Page) by general agreement, and so please you to be
there, you shall see many valiant Knights enter the field, where I hope the
partakers of Ripole (for so was the Bridegroom called, shall bear away the
honor of the day: and sundry brave champions will adventure for the love of
Iffida my Mistress, whereby they may gain the better mean to offer her their
service, intending therefore to be on her brothers side, who is the chief man
in this enterprise.

The Prince calling to mind the perfections of Francelina, breathed forth a
sigh that came from his very soul: and on the other side he was mavelous
glad, that he had so fortunately met with the Ladies Page: and being desirous
to gain some acquaintance with her, he spoke to the youth in this manner.
Gentleman, I think the graces of your Mistress to be so amiable, as in one
instant they are sufficient to captivate all such as behold her, and therefore
I can assure you, that with the better will and more sincere affection is he
provided to her service, that never saw her; which I speak on mine own behalf,
who abandoning the place of my original, have with insupportable travels crossed
many Countries, only to come let her understand my extreme devotion, to be her
perpetual and faithful servant, whereto the renown of her beauty induced me,
which I think is spread over the face of the whole earth. And seeing my hap was
so good to meet with you, albeit you know me not, nor have I yet deserved any
thing at your hand: yet let me entreat you to do one favor for me, the issue
whereof, beside your achievement of notable reputation in debonair courtesy,
which all of your young years ought to have in singular commendation: I hope I
shall let you sufficiently perceive, that you deal not for an ungrateful
person, nor will ye mislike your travel in the cause.

What would you have me do? answered the Page, in respect you seem a man of
virtue and quality: if it be a thing possible for me and honorable, I will
with all my heart accomplish it. A thousand thanks for your friendliness
(answered Palmendos) and for nothing else is my suit, but that you would say to
your Lady Mistress, how that a strange Gentleman, which came into this Country
only to see her graces and virtues, most humbly commends himself to her
favorable opinion, earnestly desiring that she would accept him as her Knight
in the Tourny, where to morrow he intends to show himself* as one that will
overbalance her most favored in weight of affection, and will be accounted
second to none in exploits of Arms, having no better mean, whereby to acquaint
her with the insupportable burden of his heart: and that she may well perceive
it, I will not be on her brothers side, but against them that take his part,
hoping to send them vanquished out of the field, or make them glad to take
their heels, by the strength and hardiness her divine beauty shall give me, so
please her to grant me the aforesaid favor; and which will cause me to account
my self the most happy Knight on whom the planets have breathed their celestial
influence.

The Page seeing Palmendos fair, and so richly armed, imagined him to be some
great personage* wherefore be modestly thus replied. My Lord, this dare I not
do for any man living without I knew the party to have some familiarity with my
Mistress: nevertheless, being a matter of so small consequence, and that you
deserve much more then this on my behalf, I shall deliver her this message for
your sake who have so importunately requested it. Palmendos requited the page
with many thanks, and to make him the more forward in the matter, he took a
bracelet of gold from his arm, and gave it him. So beguiling the time with
other speeches* at length they arrived at Pris^a (for so was the Town called
where the triumphs were appointed) the field being covered all over with costly
pavilions, wherefore Palmendos made choice of a convenient place, and there
commanded his rich Tent to be presently erected. Mean while the Page
courteously took his leave* and entering the town, went straight to his Mistress
lodging, where having first dispatched the answer sent from her sister, and
seeing her so conveniently apart from her Damsels, he rehearsed all that
Palmendos had said unto him. I wonder (quoth she) what the Knight should be,
that durst send me such a presumptuous message, seeing he says he is a
stranger, and for my love has forsaken his Country. Believe me Madam
(answered the Page nor do I know him, but he seems to be descended of great
parentage, and is one of the goodliest personages that ever I saw; as for his
courtesy and liberality, behold Mistress what a costly bracelet he has given
me, that never did any thing for him in all my life.

Me thinks this is very strange (replied Iffida) that this Knight should come
from far Countries to see me; and very ungrateful might I be reputed, if I
should not thank him for so great pains; therefore fail not, but show me him to
morrow, so soon as he does enter the Lists, that I may give good heed to his
behavior. Herein (quoth the Page) will I accomplish your command because right
well I know him by his rich Armor, as also the lusty Courser herd on
yesterday. Thus made the Page a train for love, which afterward reached to the
heart of his Mistress, where having kindled the fire her self, she felt the
sparks so to leap about her imaginations, as all this night she could enjoy no
rest, for thinking on the Knight that came from far Countries.

CHAP. XXIIII. How Palmendos came to the Tourney appointed for Iffida, where he
won her by his Knightly Chivalry, and by that occasion obtained her love. And
how they spoke together by the means of their Ambassador, so that Palmendos and
Ozalio easily entered the Castle of Albayzo.
ON the morrow, which was the appointed day of the triumph: Iffida decked her
self in most sumptuous ornaments, and after dinner came with the Bride and
diverse other Ladies, to the scaffolds and pavilions prepared for them in the
field. Then assembled the Knights on all sides, and entered the Lists, each one
to show his prowess, but because the greater part were on the Bridegrooms side,
therefore the contrary went apace to wrack, and the other were verily judged to
bear the prize out of the field, if Palmendos and Ozalio had not suddenly
arrived. For they knew better how to handle their weapon^ then the Knights of
this Country did, and that they made them very well perceive, chiefly
Palmendos, who did mavelous exploits, as Iffida (without any instruction of
her Page) knew well enough the man that sent her the message; whereat both she
and all the beholders were amazed, to see him play the Devil so among the
Knights, that no one dealt with him but was unhorsed. When they saw there was
no more work to do, they withdrew themselves into their tent, and would not
unarm themselves, lest some treachery should be practiced against them, as
oftentimes at such occasions it happens, when the vanquished attempt
unhonourably against the Conquerours. When Ripole saw his Knights discomfited,
he was exceedingly agreeved therewith, because he entirely loved his sister
Iffida, and doubted she would now convict him of great dishonor: but she,
whose mind was no where else then on the Knight to whom the victory was due,
extolled his admirable magnanimity to the heavens, as the rest of the History
will plainly discover, and knowing no better mean to work by, she called the
Page aside, whom the Prince had employed as his Ambassador, and thus she spoke
to him. Unspeakable (in mine opinion*) is the generosity of the Gentleman
stranger, who has right well performed the resolution whereof by thee he
assured me yesterday: very necessary it is therefore that thou go thank him on
my behalf, for his long journey and great pains taken for my sake: beside, as
he has sufficiently showed me his fortune in deeds of arms, so do I desire
secretly to see his person; in which request to satisfy me, if he will this
night to me to my brothers b^nquet, which is provided for the new married
couple, I shall not fail to esteem him among my chiefest favorites.

While every one was busily censuring on the Conqueror, the messenger from
Iffida came to Palmendos Tent, where briefly discharging what he was commanded,
and the Prince mavelous glad of this good fortune, thus answered.

Gentleman, I desire you to ^ell your Lady that nothing shall make me disappoint
her pleasure, because the only occasion of my long travel, was extreme desire
to offer her my service, and right happy shall I account my self, if she will
employ me in any thing to her content. To be at the Bridegrooms banquet* me
thinks should argue over much boldness, in respect of the slender acquaintance
and habitude which as yet I have with him, or any of his company:
Notwithstanding I would willingly be there after the banquet, to guide mine eyes
to the place where they might feed on the celestial and gracious countenance of
your Mistress, yet with this entreaty before hand, that I would not be known to
any what I am. And if it happen I may confer a little with her in secret. I will
tell her such things as all the rest of her life time shall yield her
contentation, wherein likewise if you will be loyal and favorable to me, to
compass both her good and your own: your guerdon happily will be such, as you
will a hundred and a hundred times think the hour fortunate, when by so good
chance you met me on the way, for though you see me here but in simple
equipage, and as a Knight errant I am the Lord of many Provinces, great estates
and wonderful riches. My Lord (answered the Page) right willingly will I
adventure my person, in doing you all the faithful service can be devised, the
actions no way stretching to the dishonor of me and my Lady: and such good
order will I likewise take, as you shall not be known to any, but only her
that longs to see you.

Hereupon Palmendos unarmed himself, and putting on a Turkish mantle taking his
good sword under his arm, he and Oz^lio went with the Page into the great Hall,
where the banquet was: afterward they closely got to a convenient place, where
both Iffida and he might behold each other which, he did but with faint and
deluding looks; only to add some grace to his subtle determination, which he
had practiced for the K. of Thessalies deliverance. And while in this
counterfeit contemplation he busied his eyes, the Page cunningly went to Iffid,
and whispering in her ear, said. See, Madam, the conquering Knight of the
Tourney, who desires you very instantly, to conceal him only to your self, in
that his travel hither was to no other end, but to see if your gracious gifts
and beauty were answerable to the renown blazed thereof so far hence in his
Country, hoping to compass the matter so, (for to me he has opened the very
secrets of his heart) that when you have further knowledge of him, you shall
not only have occasion to love him, but account your self likewise beholding
to him in respect of the voluntary pain he has suffered for your sake. The
rest of his speeches I shall acquaint you with at better leisure, in place more
convenient for such discourse.

Iffida who was prudent and well advised did forbear to confer longer with her
new sollicitour, least her love should be lightly espied by any: then secretly
she glanced on Palmendos, whose thoughts were busy to compass his intent and
seeing him so pensive, she immediately interpreted this Saturnine taciturnity
to her own advantage, thinking it proceeded from the ravishment of her beauty,
as her Ambassador had before persuaded her: herewith she judged in him more
elegancy of form and sweetness of complexion, then in any other Knight
whatsoever, which made her so esprised with his attracting regard as to allay
the extremity of this heat, she desired nothing more then to speak with him,
that she might be resolved of whence and what he was. Palmendos stirred not
from his place, nor thought he long of his stay there because he hoped to
gather some fruit thereby: but warily marks the amorous looks of Iffida, and
how her eye was the messenger of her inward desire, all which he covertly
imparted to Ozalio, who moved not one foot from his dear friend.

They fearing lest their long stay would cause suspicion went their way* which
made Iffida likewise repair to her chamber, and calling the minister of her
love aside, began in this manner.

Ah Page, how truly did thou discover the perfections of the strange Knight,
whose behavior and discreet modesty, joined with his rare and martial
prowess, makes me repute him for the chiefest man, that ever came into this
Country. Madam answered the young Counselor if you would see innumerable
virtues conjoined in one body, I beseech you hasten your speaking with him and
let not the happy hour miscarry through your default, which the fatal destinies
have so graciously appointed: his lovely speeches shall acquaint you with his
indowment, which you may behold so correspondent in every point, as you can
wish (...) nothing but is to be found in him. How should I speak with him said
Iffida, without impeach to my honor, which hitherto I have carefully regarded*
unless it be by thy means in some secret place, free from the hurt of
suspected persons, wherewith the world is now mightily stored? I shall tell you
how Madam, answered the page; you know my Lord your father willed you the other
day, that you should return to him with all possible speed, which will serve as
a fit occasion, to take your honest farewell of this company: if then you will
depart hence to morrow toward evening, you may lodge by the way at my mothers
house, whither I will go before with the two Knights, and cause her to say that
they be both her Nephews, who now are friendly come to visit her, so may you
confer together at your pleasure. The invention is good answered Iffida, yet
must you be very circumspect herein, that the drift of our intent be not
discovered.

The complot thus concluded, the Page went in the morning to Palmendos, and
making him not a little glad with this news, caused both the friends to mount
on horseback, and set forward with him to his mothers house, seated in a
pleasant place between Tubant and the Castle of Albayzo. When the Gentlewoman
saw the two Knights, she was much abashed, but her son soon resolved her in
every point: and that she might boldly call them her Nephews her self being a
stranger born far from that country. The mother being thoroughly instructed by
her son, desired their intent might take good success, whereupon the Page
returned to his Mistress who had in this while so well ordered her departure,
as the new married, nor any other could gather suspicion: then forward she sets
for her journey had have, so surely had love seized on her heart, having no
other company with her, then her four waiting damsels, and two squires of her
fathers.

N^w is she come unto the long desired place, where being very graciously
entertained, both by Palmendos and Ozalio, as also the Pages mother, Iffida
being not to learn her lesson, desires to know what Knights they were, that so
friendly saluted her. They are (quoth the Pages mother) my two Nephews, who
having not seen mo of long time, are come to know if they may stand in any
stead: as also to offer their service to my Lord your father, if in any thing
it shall please him to employ them. Right heartily welcome are they answered
Iffida, and of duty I must needs thank them for the good will they bear my Lord
and father for which cause, as also their near alliance to you, I love them as
they were my proper brethren.

Palmendos coming to her with great reverence, gave her humble thanks for her
honorable kindness, and while they spent the time about other familiar
conference supper was set on the table in a pleasant Arbor, where Iffida could
digest no meat, her eyes were so busied in beholding her champion, afterward
they walked up and down the garden; and she seeing the pages mother was deep in
talk with Ozalio, as one loath to lose so good an opportunity, she begins
with Palmendos in this manner.

I cannot but marvel at my self, (Sir Knight) that being nothing touched with
the love of sundry Gentlemen which heretofore have diverse times offered me
their service, my heart should by you (whom I never saw before these two days
past) so vehemently be provoked to love, so that I cannot hear or think on any
thing, but it is broken or rejected by the remembrance of you: let me then
entreat you not to repute me as careless of my chastity, or forgetful of the
modesty beeesming a Virgin; For the worthy behavior I see couched in your
incomparable personage has fatally depeived me of my formen liberty, and
yielded me wholly you captive; not doubting but you will so esteem of your
conquest, as not to impeach the same by any dishonorable attempt, considering
my noble birth and parentage. And to satisfy my earnest longing desire, only
abouted to have further knowledge of your estate, acquaint me with the secret
considerations of your heart and what you will command me, in guerdon of the
pains you have taken for my sake: wherein (my honor defended) I will yield
that willingly to you, which none else but you can have of me.

Madam (answered Palmendos) I cannot express my high good fortune, finding
such grace and courtesy at your hands* being on my part no way as yet
deserved, but time may yield the due to every gentle mind, and make me able to
requite such extraordinary favor. And think not sweet Goddess of my heart,
that in pitying the unsupportable burden of my oppressions, you shall any way
incur the detection of lightness, but rather of honorable and well-governed
care, when you shall behold the place whereto I hope safely to bring you: for
Madam, setting aside my simple outward appearance, I am a King born, and
Governor of sundry famous Provinces, and this attempt proceeded only of
religious zeal, to make you Lady of me and mine, as your wondefull fame at
first took the sovereignty of my heart.

How can I worthy Lord (quoth Iffida) but stand amazed; that you being a King
and a man of so rare fortune in managing Arms, should come hither for so simple
a damosel as my self, not worthy to cast mine eyes to such preferment? yet not
to dissemble with you as concerning my resolution, without my fathers consent,
I neither may or will go hence with you, because it were both disobedience and
injury to nature.

Notwithstanding, one thing I will do for you, which never heretofore I offered
to any Knight I will bring you to my Father, and tell him you are one of this
Gentlewomans Nephews, she being my Nurse in the time of mine infancy: to him
must you offer your service, and no sooner shall he behold your Knightly
chivalry, but he will gladly accept you as his Son: so with my Parents consent
you may convey me hence, and in mean while I shall keep secret your estate,
albeit it were good that you tell him the truth. Pamendos, who desired nothing
but to get into the Castle, and to compass the same by any way he could, thus
replied.

Madam, such is the extremity of my vehement passions, as no one can recure
them, but she from whom they took their Original; nor do my vital spirits
receive any force to execute their office, but from your gracious and gentle
disposition: therefore I will go with you when you please to your Father, and
say what you can best imagine, for the peaceable assurance and fruition of the
good pretended.

These words he uttered with very cheerful countenance, by reason of the hope
wherewith his heart was encouraged, seeing the practice of his negotiation
stand now on the terms himself desired: the Lady on the other side was so
ravished with his love that she could not be satisfied with beholding him, or
consent to forsake his company, till time of constraint came that they must to
their lodgings where Iffida could not sleep through the whole night, her
slumbers were so broken by the abundance and plurality of amorous discourse,
which chased all other imaginations from her spirit.

In these extremes poor Iffida was tormented, a disease clean contrary to that
which troubled Palmendos, who only sought by dissimulation to recover the good
King of Thessaly, whereof he conferred in bed with Ozalio, what stratagems and
subtilties he must compass in the action; entreating him most affectionately,
they having once getten entrance into the Castle to show himself hardy and
valiant, putting every one to the sword when the watchword should be given.
When the morning was come, Iffida decked her self in her brave accoustrements,
and coming into the garden, found there ye two Knights armed except their
Helmets, she praying them to go with her to the Castle of Albayzo, that she
might have the honor of presenting them to the Captain her Father.

This matter being soon concluded they all mounted on horseback, and about noon
arrived at the fortress, the foundation and structure whereof caused Palmendos
to wonder, in that it was placed on a high and mighty rock* and stored with
such munition for war, as it was thought impregnable. Being come to the gate,
Iffida lighted from her hackney and entered taking the Knights by the hand, the
Arches permitting them quietly pass, without any fear or further inquiry what
they were, seeing them so well acquainted with fair Iffida, whom the Captain
loved so well as none might gainsay what she commanded.

Afterward the bridges were drawn, and the gates strongly barred according as
they were wont to be so the Princes entering the great Hall, Palmendos
diligently looked about him, thinking each hour a year till the skirmish were
sought in this strong Hold thanking the heavens that had so well guided them
thither.

CHAP. XXVIII. How Palmendos and Ozalio slew the Captain of Albayzo Castle, and
all the Guard that then kept it, taking the King of Thessaly forth of the
Tower, where he had remained captive twenty years: and what did happen unto
them in the mean while.
WHen the Captain of Albayzo Castle (who was an honorable old man, and put in
chief trust with the great Turks treasure) saw his daughter accompanied with
two such brave Knights, he was thereat exceedingly amazed* as if this
occurrence had already presaged the conflict and cruel slaughter, which was
immediately to follow in the Castle, wherefore he said. Why daughter? how
chances it that you are come without your brother? My Lord (quoth she) the
desire I had yester-night to see you, hastened my return in company of your two
Squires, my four waiting damsels, and these two Knights, who are both Nephews
to my Nurse, where I found them as I passed by that way; and hereof be assured
good father, that this Knight (pointing to Palmendos) is one of the most hardy
and courteous Gentlemen that ever you knew. Whereof his victory in the tourny
at my brothers marriage, has given me evident example, as also the honest
speeches he has used to me this morning, declaring his earnest desire to offer
you his service: under hope whereof I have been his guide hither esteeming the
acquisition of such a man rare, and of great consequence, and will chiefly help
the strength of your charge.

He is the better welcome (answered the Captain) and in recompense of his good
will* he shall command any courtesy at my hand. For all these words, he had
other matters in his mind; and because his daughter praised him so much, so
much the more willingly could he have spared his company in the castle, for
that his presence made him misdoubt and fear somewhat: yet to dissemble the
matter, and take away all occasion of contrary mistrust, with a counterfeit
merry countenance, he said.

Go daughter and s^lute thy mother, mean while these Knights shall be unarmed:
Which words he spoke to be assured of their Armor and weapons, intending they
should not have them again till they were forth of the Castle. But Palmendos
hearing these words, began to misdoubt their interpretation, and therefore
thought best not to use any more speeches; but going with Iffidae^ Page into a
fair chamber, in stead of unarming themselves, they clasped on their helmets
and taking their shields with resolved courage, came forth having their good
swords ready drawn, Palmendos now intending to try the virtue of his enchanted
sword, or else to put both their lives in danger.

The Page seeing this sudden alteration, driven into as great a quandary as if
he had been new metamorphosed, began to cry out very pitifully tearming this
act abominable and scelerous disloyalty; wherewith he ran down to advertise the
Guard thereof* but they themselves were not far behind him, because Palmendos
knew this enterprise was not to be deferred, therefore he and Ozalio came into
the Castle Court, where they found the Captain threatening the guard, that they
had so lightly suffered the Knights to enter: but they excused themselves on
Iffida* who brought them with her: wherewith the Captain turning about, and
seeing them come in such fury, he cried to the Guard, saying. Take Arms my
loyal and faithful Knights, and let us murder these false villains, who have
beguiled us so treacherously.

Palmendos having instructed Ozalio, to keep sure the gate that none might
issue forth, or more rescue come in, remembering his sweet Lady Francelina,
determined to die or deliver her father from imprisonment.

Now makes he proof of his sword charmed by the Fairies, which as he lifted
about head, caused every one that came against them sleepily to stagger and
when they offered to strike with their weapons, they fell down as though they
had been in a sound sleep, being all in that case deprived of their lives, both
the Cap^ain, the Guard, and the rest that could be found except the Turk who
guided them by sea, and the Page that came with these news to Iffida, saying.
Alas Madam, we are all betrayed by the false Knights that entered the Castle
with us: right worthy am I of a thousand deaths, in that your father and all
the guard have lost their lives by my means.

When Iffida and her mother heard these uncouth news, they came down as women
distr^cted of their wits, and seeing this lamentable massacre, she fell down on
her fathers dead body, uttering these words. Ah my good Lord and father, pardon
me that was the cause of this thy death, and seeing innocently I have been so
circumvented by a false Tra^ my life shall presently follow thee at the heels,
to accomplish thy obsequies with more solemn pomp and ceremonies. Herewith she
offered to run her head against a marble pillar, but Palmendos came and stayed
her, when she being greatly offended thereat, raging against him, thus spoke.

Thou cruel, false and disloyal Knight, seeing thou have slain my Father and
his chiefest friends, why do thou not also send me to bear them company? Tell
me thou bloody Barbarian, what did move thee to repay my faithful love with
such extreme rigor? How durst thou deceive me so treacherously considering
what favor I showed thee on so small acquaintance? with guilefull and
dissembling speeches, thou secretly saidest thou wast a King: but if thou be
one, it is of Robbers and Thieves, and art come hither to steal the great
Emperors treasure. Miserable and unhappy that I was in giving credit to such
false persuasions, the end whereof sorteth to such monstrous effect.

(...) such as heretofore have known me, imagined me wise and discreetly
inclined, henceforth they may well term me a disloyal daughter, being the
only cause of my fathers death: But though unwittingly I have been deceived,
yet will I complain on Fortunes instability, that by the report of I know not
what, frivolous and vain ostentation should so easily change my heart. But what
will the mighty Emperor of Turkey say, when he shall understand the truth of
this slaughter* wrought only for the stealing hence of his treasure? Foolish
and miserable girl that I am* why did not I remember the sundry injuries his
Majesty's brother sustained by the Emperor Palmerin of Constantinople, when he
traveled the world as a Knight errant? had I but remembered those stratagems,
they would have forewarned me from affecting this stranger: yet if the fatal
decree made me so soon subject to him, why could he not favor me with my
fathers life?

Palmendos little regarding her injurious speec^^^ desired her to be better
pacified, promised if she wou^ be part with him, to set the Crown of Tharsus
upon her head, which he would give to his Cousin Ozalio, and join her in
marriage with him if she pleased. Moreover he assured her, that he would not
take any thing out of the Castle, but the King of Thessaly whose deliverance
could not be compassed by any entreaty, and therefore he ransommed him with the
lives of so many.

O Mahomet (cried Iffida at these words) why suffer thou Christians to make
such incursions on thy people and Countries? Why did thou create and appoint
women so near to men, seeing that for them they pass through innumerable
torments? The brother to our great Emperor the Turk, was cruelly murdered by
the means of a woman and now by me is his Captain my father brought to the like
end his prisoner likewise the King of Thessaly thereby delivered: How can I but
loath and despise my life being hemmed in on every side with such monstrous
affliction?

Needless is it now to remember mortal encumbrances, or to think ^n the wars
which Hesione and Helena caused between the Greeks and Troyans: Lavinia between
Aeneas and Turnus, or De^anira between Hercules and Achelous, and afterward
among the Centaurs: For the Wars which will spring by these new occasions, ere
long time be spent I fear will be so horrible and infamous, that they will
deface the memory of them done so long ago. Afterward the mother and her
daughter ran furi^usly on Palmendos, laboring to do him what injury they
could: but he (unwilling to hurt them) suffered their violence, til Ozalioes
Squire seeing their impatience, and fearing with their knives they would in the
end murder him, took up one of the Guards hatchets, and therewith deprived the
mother of her life.

Iffida extremely raging at this grievous spectacle, rent her hair from her
head, and with her nails most cruelly martyred her fair face; then being
suddenly surprised with a raging apoplexy, she presently died without using
any more speeches. The Page grieving to behold this woeful accident, determined
not to live any longer after her; But first upon the wall he wrote certain
dolorous verses, which afterward were converted to a funeral ditty, in this
manner.

DEad is the bud of Beauties chief delight,
The fairest flower on whom the Sun did shine,
The choice beloved of many a famous Knight,
The pride of Honor, precious and divine:
The lovely Maid of whom the Nymphs did sing,
That Nature never framed so rare a thing.
Had Paris seen this wondrous piece of Art,
Proud Venus had not carried Beauties prize;
Pallas and Juno would have stood apart,
To see their gifts one Virgin royalize:
In every point surpassing curious,
Had Fate and Fortune been as gracious.
Ungentle star that domineered the day
When first my Lady Mistress breathed this air.
What angry object stood then in the way,
To cross the course that was begun so fair?
You lowering heavens, why did ye oppress
The Saint whom you so many ways did bless.
But wretch, why stand'st thou charging these with guilt,
And art thy self the Author of this ill?
Thou hapless Boy thy Ladies blood have spilt,
Thy Master and his servants thou did kill.
When first thou travell'dst for this trothless man.
Even in that hour these miseries began.
But Sovereign Love, immortal and divine,
Whose gracious name did shadow this abuse;
Can thou permit before thy holy eyn,
This heinous deed exempt from all excuse?
O mighty Love, what will thy Subjects say,
If foul offense go unrevenged away?
Stand I expostulating this or that,
When on my back the weighty burden lies:
Wast no more time with vain and idlechat,
But for this fault be thou a sacrifice.
Fair Iffida thy Page does follow thee,
The only engine of this Tragedy.
These verses fixed upon the wall by the Squire, he ran hastily and caught up a
sword from one of the slain Knights, and setting the point thereof against his
heart, said. If you (Madam by my means have received this fortune, reason
requires that for your sake I should endure as much: and with these words he
fell upon the sword.

This was the second act of the tragical Comedy begun at Prissa* and thus after
continued in the Theater of Albaizo, where all they of the Castle miserably
ended their lives, except three or four damsels and their waiting women: who
likewise were so amazed at this lamentable spectacle, as they thought
themselves half deprived of life. Palmendos being stricken in a dump by these
accidents, stood a good while not able to speak a word, which his cousin Ozalio
perceiving, and marvelling at his alteration, he came and comforted him in this
sort My Lord, you must now leave all dumpish musing, and rejoice for your good
success in this attempt; never trouble your thoughts with other imaginations,
but let us determine our departure hence, before the matter be further
manifested, otherwise we may fall in danger a hundred times more to be feared,
then were we enclosed in the inextricable Labyrinth.

Your reason is good, cousin (answered Palmendos) wherefore presently we will go
seek for the prison, wherein my Lord the King has been kept so long: after
they had searched a good while in vain, at length they found him in a strong
Tower, bound with huge bars of iron, he being so lean wrinckled, pale and wan,
as they marvelled to see him so withered away.

Palmendos beholding him in this grievous plight, remembering this was the
father to his best beloved Francelina, compassion caused the tears to trickle
down his cheeks; but the King not perceiving this humanity, rather amazed to
see their swords* so bloody, thought they were come to end his miserable and
distressed life, wherefore he willingly prepared himself thereto, saying.
Sovereign redeemer of humane nature, to thee I commdnd my soul, which must now
leave this loathsome prison; be thou then my intercessour to thy merciful
Father, having so patiently for my sins suffered punishment in this wretched
place: And seeing he has reputed my body unworthy of longer being in this
life, be thou my gracious mediator for my soul, that in his judgment it be not
banished from eternal felicity promised to the good.

This prayer having stopped the passage of Palmendos speech, Ozalio used these
words to the King. My Lord, be not dismayed, we come not hither to offer you
any outrage, but to deliver you from this thraldom, and carry you with us to
Constantinople, where you shall find your Queen and fair daughter Francelina,
by whose means your troubles have now taken end, and there they stay only for
your coming.

Afterward he declared the whole success of the action; and breaking the bars
of the little wicket, took him forth of that dark prison wherein he had remained
twenty years, such mavelous hatred did the great Turk bear him. Yet could he
not be certainly resolved of his liberty, till he saw the Captain and the rest
that were slain, when embracing the Knights, he thanked God and them for his
happy deliverance.

Palmendos thought it necessary to make no longer stay there, wherefore
commanding one of their Squires to fetch a good horse out of the Captains
stable, they caused the King to mount thereon: then remembering the former
speeches of Iffida, he would not suffer any thing ese to be carried from the
Castle.

CHAP. XXIX. How the King of Thessaly departing with Palmendos from the Castle
of Albayzo, they met the great Turks daughter by the way, whom the Prince
carried thence by the virtue of his Sword. And how Ripole having taken order
for the burial of them that were slain, he went to complain thereof to the
great Turk.
PAlmendos remembering his return to Constantinople, and devising how he might
safely get away from the Castle of Albayzo, he caused all the Gentlewomen that
were left alive to be locked in one chamber: and so soon as it waxed dark,
leaving the great gates wide open, and the bridges down, they all rode away,
Oricano being their guide as he was before. About midnight they came to the
Pages mothers house, where among the trees in the Garden, they espied diverse
lighted torches, and a sumptuous bed in the midst of the Arbor, at which
sight not marvelling a little, they stayed there a while: but Palmendos
desirous to be further satisfied herein, gave his horse to Oricano, and drawing
his virtuous Sword, charmed all that were in the Garden fast asleep, by which
means he came to the rich beds side, wherein he saw a very beautiful Lady. Her
name was Marencida, eldest daughter to the great Turk, and wife to the King
Ocurites of Culaquin, whom Palmendos found near the gulf of Tanais and
Meotldes: she now journeying to recreate her self with her mother at a fair
Castle not far from this place, whither she went three days before in great
anger from the Court, because the great Turk loved another of his Concubines
better then her. Marencida mourning for the taking of the King her husb^nd,
craved leave of the great Turk her father, that she might go visit her mother
for seven or eight days, where with her she might bear a share of her grief and
heaviness: So parting from the Court honorably accompanied and alighting at
this pleasant bower to refresh her self because the night suddenly prevented
her, she commanded the Grooms to prepare her bed for that night in the Arbor,
her Ladies, Gentlewomen and Guard being all there about her. Palmendos having
with his sword charmed all her attendants ^sleep approached near the beds side,
when the Princess thinking on her husbands imprisonment, gave many grievous
sighs from the depth of her heart, cursing the Knight that took him, as also
Constantinople for unjustly detaining him; and to these mournful regrets added
these speeches.

My noble Lord Oh that I had some sure and loyal person, that might conduct me
to the place where thou art, to the end my longing mind might be satisfied with
the sight of thee, and these two sources of tears stayed from further streaming
over; for living here my griefs grow intolerable, and I abide the most desolate
Lady in all Asia. Other lamentable speeches she uttered till nature no longer
able to withstand the charges of drowsiness, caused her to fall fast asleep;
and Palmendos having heard what had passed, imagined that she was the great
Turks daughter, wife to the King Ocurites, whom he sent to Constantinople.
Wherefore seeing all her Guard soundly sleeping, he folded down the bed
clothes; and because the precious Calamite in his sword by nature draws the
body of man or woman to it, as the Adamant does the Iron, the Lady presently
arose into his arms; and being so kept asleep by his enchanted sword, lay as
quiet in his arms, as fair Daphne did with Phoebus, when Jupiter converted her
into a Bay Tree. Wrapping her costly mantle about her, he departed safely from
the guard, and coming where Oricano stayed with his horse, made such shift as
he mounted into the saddle, and so gallopped to the rest of his company, who
marvelled not a little that he had got so good a booty.

Great have they made* till they got on shipboard when Palmendos laying her
upon his bed, and using her reverently, because she was of such honor, he put
up his virtuous sword into the sheath, when very soon after Marencida awaked;
and seeing her self in the company of strangers, crying out with fear, she
said. Alas, where am I? what? have I no one about me that I know? how came I so
strangely into this place? Why Fortune have thou not yet afflicted me enough?
are my stars grown into such hatred toward me, as in my sleep to seek my
destruction? And what are you that have been so bold as to take me out of my
bed? this audacious behavior will return you no other guerdon, then the very
sharpest death that can be devised. Madam, answered Palmendos, from that we
shall keep our selves so well as we may; as for my self, I am a Knight of a
Country far hence, and hearing by chance what moan you made for the captivity
of the King your husband, as also how desirous you seemed to see him in
Constantinople, I was greatly moved to pity your affliction, and as one willing
to pleasure you herein, as also what other thing you shall command me I took
you forth of your bed, promising you by my religious vows to Chivalry, not
only to show you the King Ocurites, but also to guard your chastity
incontaminate, as free from the least spot of dishonor as when you happened
into my custody.

False and disloyal Knight (quoth she) how can I but receive shame and infamy
by this treachery, having in such sort been taken from among my Guard? If I
desired to see the King my husband, it was only to content my mind, which is
thereto moved with vehement affection: yet might my meaning be ^at enough from
my words, because I could not do it without my fathers license, and more
willingly would I end my life in this place, then go with thee of whom I can
imagine no good thought, but as thou have feloniously stolen me from my bed, so
will thou hereafter traitorously murder me. I am neither thief or traitor
(answered Palmendos) but a Knight ready at your commandment, if so you take my
service in good worth; and seeing you are now in my power determine to go with
me willingly or perforce, and think not I intend your death, for it is far from
my thought I promise you.

Then began Marencida to fear her hair, which seemed as the golden wier, and
beat her fair hands so white as the Alabaster, with outcries as a Woman
deprived of her senses: when the Prince pitying these feminine importunities,
drew his sword, and to ease these extremes charmed her a sleep again* During
this time, Ozalio had told the King of Thessaly the whole news of his daugh-
Francelina, whereto he gave good attention, because since the time of his
imprisonment, he had not heard any thing as concerning the affairs of his
Realm, or that the Queen his wife had any such daughter, wherefore the tears
trickling down his face, he came and embraced Palmendos, saying, In sooth my
son, all the grievous torments I have heretofore endured, seem nothing in
respect of the comfort I now feel, that my unknown child shall enjoy a man so
virtuous* and for this Ladies taking I am likewise glad, because by this mean I
shall be sufficiently revenged on the Turk. Thus does God (answered Palmendos)
show himself a just Judge, and the true directer of all humane actions,
limiting every occasion according as best him pleases, but we were best to
make what speed we can hence, else may we repent our coming among these
inex^rable tyrants. Marencida awaking again, and not persuaded with all the
courteous entertainments he could devise, she still continued her former
acclamations, not unlike Ariadne at the coming of Bacchus, when she was found
forsaken by Theseus at the seaside: in like sort did she renew her
maledictions, invocating on Neptune and Thetis, as also the Tritons, their
Heralds, Monsters, Nimphs, and Sirens, that she might suffer shipwreck in the
sea, and the fishes feed on her unhappy carcass. But Ozalio pitying her
dolorous complaints, and finding his heart somewhat esprized with her love,
entreated Palmendos to grant him one request, which above all things else he
required at his hands, when the Prince yielding unto any thing his cousin would
demand, Ozalio proceeded in this manner.

My suit is (worthy Lord and cousin) to enjoy this Lady as my Wife, to whom I
know the destinies have fatally reserved me, considering the sudden change, and
inexplicable controversy my heart indureth: whereas the continual accompanying
of beautiful Ladies heretofore, could never move my frozen affections, and now
I feel them not warm but boiling. Easily may you (quoth Palmendos) obtain this
demand of me, if nothing else stand in the way to hinder it, and as much do I
desire your advancement, as any way I can be covetous of mine own, hoping while
I live to see no divorce between us, but that our estates shall continue
equally together, and in witness of my word, I deliver you the charge of this
Princess, hereafter to dispose of her according to your desires. Ozalio now
uses all decent courtesies to Marencida, thereby to gain favor in her conceit:
yet all was in vain, for she would not afford him any good countenance, but
remain in her wonted obstinacy.

When the poor fisherman understood by his son Oricano, how his guests had
delivered the King of Thessaly out of Albayzo castle, he thought it no longer
tarrying for him in Turkey, wherefore he came and entreated the Prince
Palmendos, that he might sail with him into Christendom, which suit was very
soon obtained; so he, his wife and family came all aboard the ship, the Prince
promising to reward their gentleness liberally.

Now let us come to the Guard, and them that attended on Marencida, who waking,
and not finding their Lady in her bed, began to chafe and rage in most extreme
manner; some rending their hair and beards violently, others running mad among
the Trees, thinking she had been metamorphosed in the Garden; nor could they
imagine how to escape the danger, when the great Turk should hear of this
mishap. These comfortless creatures thus amazed, not any one of them daring to
go tell the Emperor hereof, they determined to fly the Country, and return no
more to the Court, leaving Marencidaes Ladies and Gentlewomen mourning in that
unhappy place, where (about noon) Ripole brother to Iffida arrived, returning
from the wedding with his wife and diverse brave Knights: but when he understood
the cause of their sorrow, he was stricken into such a quandary, as he would
pass no further before he enquired more of this event. In the mean while he
sent a Squire to Albayzo Castle, to advertise his father of his coming; and
the Squire prauncing up to the Fortress, marvelled to see the gates wide open,
but much more when he saw the slaughter of the Knights, and the Captain himself
lie slain among them: now was he surprised with such fear, as he had not the
heart to tarry there any longer, but trusting to the speedy succor of his
horse legs, gallopped with all speed to his Master; where standing a while, as
a man beside himself, at length he thus spoke.

Pardon me (my Lord) in declaring a bloody and tragical report, your worthy
father, and all the guard of the Castle, lie cruelly murdered in the base
Court; and because I found the great gates open* I doubt the treasure and
riches in the Castle has occasioned this massacre by some robbers and thieves.
Ripole hearing these unlooked for news, was terrified in such sort as he could
not tell what to say, but mounting on a lusty courser, he rode to the Castle,
the Gentlemen bringing his wife fair and softly after. But when he beheld this
woeful spectacle, and what a butchery Palmendos sword had made, his servants
feared he would have followed in this hard fortune. Nor can I here set down the
rufull mones which Ripole made over his father, mother and sister; no doubt
they were as strange and irksome as this accident: but when they had searched
through the Castle, and found nothing wanting but the King of Thessaly, they
judged the authors of this tyranny to be Christians, and that they likewise had
carried away the Queen Marencida.

After he had taken order for interring the dead, he rode immediately toward
the great Turk, having heard of Iffidaes Nurse, all that had happened between her
and the two Knights; and being come before the Emperor he fell at his feet,
delivering the signs of an afflicted spirit, which only sought for grace and
mercy. At length he declared the substance of this wreakfull occurrence, as
well that of Marencida his Majesty's daughter, as the other of his fathers
death and deliverance of the King of Thessaly, affirming his sister Iffida to
be the only cause thereof, and by what trains she had been beguiled, himself
being altogether innocent of the treason: notwithstanding, he freely offered
himself at his gracious disposition, to abide whatsoever he would assign him.
These words so wounded the Turk to the heart, as he remained silent a great
while, anger having so locked up the passage of his speech: yet furiously at
length starting from his Chair, he railed on the Gods, stars, devils, and all
the infernal powers. Ah Mahomet (quoth he) doubtless thou art angry with me, or
else do take but little care of thy servants, that evermore have extolled thee
above all other Gods and Prophets: but much I wonder thou would thus forget
me, unless thou will have me think thee extremely offended, or that the hope is
vain and frustrate which is reposed in thee: You stars, not inclined to favor
me, but rather affecting my total ruin, wherein have I so hainously offended
that you should take so sharp and rigorous vengeance on me? what may this
presage to me hereafter, but some great misfortune and sudden mutation in Asia?
Yet will I so carefully foresee these affairs, as the seditious performers of
this villainy shall not carry it away so lightly.

Like sorrows made this Infidel for his mishap* when many of his Knights,
without attending other commandment, got ready Foists, Galleys, and other
vessels for war, to pursue the causers of this tragical accident; but their
labor was spent in vain, albeit not long after they heard the truth of all;
which procured such hatred between the Turks and the Grecians, as they ceased
not, till with hostility they h^d invaded Greece; but it was not during the
reign of the Emperor Palmerin, or any of his race or next posterity; for while
they lived, the Turks durst not stir against them: yet long time after, when
Ottoman a fierce and proud Prince governed, infinite evils happened in Europe,
where he took and sacked many good cities, towns and castles. Now would the
great Turk not suffer Ripole to be further tormented, because he was found
altogether innocent in the action; but sent him back to the Castle of Albayzo,
making him Captain thereof, as his father was before. And long time continued
he sad and melancholy, thinking he had received wonderful dishonor by the loss
of his daughter Marencida; nor should he ever recover the same, till Greece
were beaten flat to the ground, and the Emperor Palmerin with all his kndred
utterly destroyed. Where in these ragings we will leave him, and return to our
purpose.

CHAP. XXX. How Palmendos with his company arrived at Constantinople, where the
Emperor came and received them at the Port* What speeches he had with the
Queen Marencida, after they were come to the Palace; how joyfully likewise the
Queen of Thessaly and Francelina her daughter, welcomed home the King her
father.
THe Mariners cheerfully hoysing their sails, left the coast of Turkey, and
lanched into the main sea, having the wind and weather so favorable, as
without any impeachment they attained the Bosphore of Thrace, where Palmendos
sent his cousin Ozalio before to the Emperor, that the King of Thessaly might
be entertained with honor beseeming so great a Prince. Ozalio making speed in
a swift little Pinnace, being landed went directly to the Palace, and finding
the Emperor in the great Hall, conferring with his Lords about the enchanted
Bird, which that morning had delivered many pleasant notes* wherefore he
expected some comfortable news, when Ozalio falling on his knee, began in this
manner.

Dread Lord, I am the servant and friend to the noble Palmendos, whose renown
has heretofore been blazed in this Court, and he humbly entreats your
Highness by me that you would entertain the King of Thessaly, whom he has
brought from Turkey, with such grace and honor as beseems his dignity: By
this time I think they are entered the haven, in that they were not far off when
I left them, I being sent before to acquaint your Majecty herewith. The Emperor
exceeding joyful at these news, rose and embraced Ozalio very graciously, and
causing all his Knights and Barons to prepare themselves, said, that he would
go to the Port in person to welcome them.

Right soon were these tidings bruited through the Court, wherewith the Empress
and her Ladies were highly pleased, especially the mourning Queen of Thessaly
for her husbands return, and fair Francelina for her lovely friend, whose
absence made her imagine every hour a year: wherefore in have they got them
before to the Port: attended on by their Ladies and Gentlewomen, where
Palmendos being newly come on shore with the King, thus spoke to him. Behold my
good Lord, your Queen and daughter, who are joyfully come to salute your
arrival. But when he looked on Francelina, the whole quire of heaven was
present in his thoughts. The Queen very earnestly beheld the King her husband,
when seeing his hair and beard so strangely overgrown, beside, his skin and
complexion so wonderfully altered, as doubtful in mind, she came to him with
these words. Are you (my Lord) the King of Thessaly, for whom my heart has
suffered exceeding grief? I pray you resolve me presently* without holding me
in longer suspense, in that your deformed estate has greatly perplexed my
remembrance.

Madam (answered the King) it is no marvel though you know me not, considering
the long time since you saw me last, which the integrity of our love has made
us imagine of greater compass, although the accustomed revolution of years, do
not diminish or increase one moment in their natural course: notwithstanding* I
am the same King your husband, who have felt more passions for your absence,
then anguish or torment in my miserable captivity. But seeing the immortal
bounty has suffered me once again to see you, before my soul forsake this
passible body, which was my continual desire during my tribulation: now care I
not though Death presently do his duty; for seeing the circle of your arms have
embraced me, I am the readier for my mother Earth to receive me.

Now are joyful tears plentifully poured forth on all sides, and embracings so
vehement, as though they should never unfold again, the liberty of speech being
hindered all this while; for Palmendos and Francelina were transported into a
second heaven, where the outward ceremony served to confirm the inward
contentation, at length the Queen taking Francelina by the hand thus spoke to
the King. See here (my Lord) your daughter, of whom I was but newly conceived
when you went from Thessaly, happy and fortunate may she justly be termed, in
that her destiny has delivered you from prison, restored me my former joy and
given her the most perfect Knight that ever bare Arms.

When the King beheld his daughter so fair and gracious, he took her in his
arms, expressing with silent favors his hearty joy: and in this while the
Emperor came with his train, alighting from his horse to welcome the King of
Thessaly, whom when he beheld so spent and dis-figured, the tears fell from his
eyes, and embracing him in his arms, said.

My noble brother, heaven have the honor for delivering you from our common
enemy; where albeit heretofore I was glad of your rescue, yet was I agrieved at
your imprisonment, being then my self (as you know) in the Turks power,
although he gave me more liberty then you, in hope I would have aided him with
my uttermost ability: My desire then to get from his service, constrained me to
deal somewhat hardly against you, an error too notable, and I confess worthy
reprehension: but God pardoning the offenses of the repentant has in pity
regarded us both, and by his inexpuisable goodness, directed all things to a
happy end.

My Lord (replied the King) the whole discourse thereof have I heard by
Palmendos, which gives me reason not to think any fault in you, when you could
not otherwise help the same: But let us leave occasions past, seeing heaven
has so miraculously delivered me, that I should come my self to present the
entire affection wherewith I am bound to your Highness service. Nor could any
thing in the world (said the Emperor) more delight me, then your coming with
the Knight I have so long desired to see; with whom I cannot but be offended
(these words he merrily uttered) in that he has tarried so long time from me.
Then Palmendos falling on his knee, modestly answered in this manner. Dread
Lord, if heretofore I have provoked your displeasure, I confess such punishment
is due to me as you shall ordain, and willingly will I endure it, to fashion me
the better to your service wherein I would employ my self according to your
appointment, although it were to sight against the gates of Death; whereof I
gladly could afford some proof, so please your Highness to enjoin me such a
task, as may express my zeal and forwardness. And that you may know the name of
your voluntary servant, I am that Palmendos, who was since the hour of my birth
destinied to follow your virtues, humbly entreating to discharge your
remembrance of any coffeehouse I have heretofore occasioned, in that mine
own mind still persuaded me, I wanted worthiness to come before your Excellency.

The Emperor beholding him of such gallant stature, did not a little marvel at
his rare perfections, wherefore taking him graciously in his arms, desired he
would command any thing wherein he might stand him in stead, for he was not
able to requite his high deservings. Afterward came Primaleon, and courteously
entertained him; the like did Abenunco, signifying how much he was bound to him
for his happy deliverance: then came Arnedes with the other Lords and Knights,
all of them embracing the hardy champion that went away with the honor of the
Tourney.

By this time had Ozalio brought Marencida on shore, she wondering to behold
such state and royalty, wherefore she desired to know the place of her landing.
Madam (answered Ozalio) this City is called Constantinople, and among this
flourishing troop of Princes, who have vouchsafed their coming hither to this
Port, there may you behold the famous Emperor Palmerin, who is here in person
to receive the King of Thessaly, and the worthy Knight that delivered him from
prison: your self likewise will esteem him a virtuous Prince, by the good
entertainment you shall enjoy, when once he understands your state and
calling; so that I hope you will not repent this voyage, were it but to have
knowledge of him alone.

How miserable and unfortunate am I (quoth she) to fall into the mercy of my
fathers capital enemy? how can my griefs but grow into an exceeding surplusage?
If I see the King Occurites my husband the meeting will be with mavelous
heart-break on either side, being both of us captive to the very worst enemy we
have. The Emperor and his Lords kindly saluted her, but she would not once bow
her self, or make any answer, whereat the standers by very much wondered,
tearming her a woman of rough and unseemly behavior, saying, nature might much
better have made her a man. Mounting all on horseback, in most comely order
they rode to the Palace, where the Empress and her Ladies met them in the
Court. To tell the courtesies, gratulations and welcome there used would ask a
world of time, yet but little to the purpose: let it suffice then, they are so
well entertained as you can any way imagine.

Palmendos taking Marencida by the hand, brought her to the Princess
Philocrista with these speeches. I desire you Madam to accept this Lady into
your company, and give her such good counsel as you can best devise, for she is
descended of royal blood I assure you. Sir Palmendos (replied the Princess) I
must obey what you command me, for the love I bear to you and your sweet
friend: and I imagine my self fortunate, having such a precious gage from a
Knight so perfect; nor shall she be worse entreated then mine own self.

Marencida hearing these gracious speeches, and what courtesy Palmendos used
to the Princess, perceived that she was the Emperors daughter, wherefore she
gave her many thanks, showing better countenance then before she did to any:
which Philocrista took very kindly, and mounting up the steps with her into the
Hall, she came to Francelina with these words. This Lady, (Madam) does now
supply your place, seeing Lord Palmendos is returned, for now your company with
me must discontinue because reason and your fatal love does so command me,
notwithstanding, I hope our amity shall continue.

Fair Princess (answered Francelina) we are both so far yours, and so good
part have you in my Lord, as you shall find your self no less contented then
abashed when you know all: therefore fear not that I will forget your friendly
familiarity, rather will I continue your loving sister, as our further
assurance of our mutual agreement. Sundry other speeches passed between the
two young Ladies* in mean while Marencida looking about her, and remembering the
great pomp, state and riches of her father, she made but slender account of the
Emperors Court, which was not at this time so well stored with Knights as it
was wont to be, whereupon she giving a great sigh, thus uttered her mind.

You know, Emperor of Constantinople, that the sumptuous royalty of my fathers
Court, does exceed the greatest Princes in the whole world, as also how many
mighty Lords serve him with homage and fealty, because heretofore you have seen
the same; where if you were so adventurous and hardy, as to kill without fear
of them (as the whole world knows) the mighty Emperor mine Uncle, think, I
pray you, what miserable case the Lady is in, so traitorously brought from her
own Country, and now delivered captive into your custody, wherein me thinks, in
respect of the renown spread abroad of you, you should take example by my
adversity, and rather grieve then glory therein, as I see you do, considering
that inconstant Fortune is still variable, and does not always allow men
felicity. This I speak not, whereby to gain the more favor or honor in your
Court, because death would be much more welcome to me, then to live in the
vexation of mind I do: wherefore I entreat you again (if entreaty may beseem an
adversary) hereafter to conserve your reputation in such sort, as I may receive
no impeach to mine honor, and you shall comfort me better therein, then all the
commendation of your fame can do.

To these words she added many ^ufull complaints, as the Emperor being
therewith moved to compassion replied in this manner. I understand, Madam full
well what you have said, and know beside, that the feminine choler which
governs your spirit, makes you use such kind of language, as is clean exempt
from all the rules of womanly modesty: nor am I now to learn, that the strength
of earthly Kings and Potentates is less then nothing, when God is bent
repugnant against them, whereby we are all to resolve that we can do no good
act without his assistance.

According to his direction came I unto your Uncles Court* before whom I
protest, and crave no mercy in the day of vengeance, if I slew him, or ever
thought to do it, being too far carried away from minding any such intent, by
the honor I had before received at his Highness hands. Yet was I privy to his
forcible detaining of the Lady, and labored to restore her to her Lord and
husband, she being daughter to the renowned King of England, and wife to the
now famous Emperor Trincus of Almain: herein (me thinks) I committed no
offense, he keeping her most unjustly profaning thereby the sacred Laws of
royal equity.

And because the wise have evermore patiently endured their fortune, being
either good or bad, I verily persuade my self, Madam, that you will forbear to
complain and lament in this unseemly manner, knowing your self to be conquered
by the most courteous and debonair Knight that this day lives in Europe, even
he that in Hellespont overcame the King Ocurites your husband.

These news so grieved Marencida to the heart, when she heard the Emperor say,
that the King her husband and she her self were both taken captive by one
Knight, as frantick-like she could have eaten her flesh with anger: but the
young Princess Philocrista conducting her to her chamber, appeased her fury
with diverse friendly speeches and courteous behavior. But let us now return
again to the Prince Palmendos, who in this time unarmed himself, that the
Emperor might at more pleasure behold him.

CHAP. XXXI. What courteous conference Palmendos had with the Emperor, the
Empress, and Primaleon: And how being afterward baptized, he was affianced to
his Lady.
AFter that Palmendos had put off his Armor, he threw a rich Turkish robe
about him embroidered all over with Oriental Pearls, which he brought from
Tharsus with him, according to the modern custom used among the most
magnificent Kings of Asia, intending to wear it when he should come into the
Emperors presence. Being returned into the great Hal and each one covetous to
understand his Original, Primaleon took him by the hand, and sat down, when
the Emperor began in this manner. My noble friend Palmendos, longer must you
not conceal your self, your renown being so lavishly bruited through all
Countries: tell me then, I pray you, of what parents you are issued, as also
what you think else convenient to acquaint us withal.

Gracious Lord (answered Palmendos) with you whom I so reverence by honor, I
may not dissemble in any point, for that I were unworthy your presence if I
should deal double with so great a state. Know then mighty Emperor, that I am
son to the Queen of Tharsus, the affectionate servant and vowed friend to your
Majesty, forsaking my Country by a strange occasion, so soon as I understood
where my father remained, which long before was concealed from me. The cause of
my coming into your Highness Court, was the fame and praises I heard of
Francelina, to whose service the fatal destinies enjoined me at my very
essence, in that I never affected any other Lady, yet reputing my self unworthy
of her grace and favor, or to be seen in this honorable Court. To this he
added the discouse of the old woman that appeared unto him in the Palace at
Tharsus, and how she blamed him for his idle and slothful life; yet hiding how
she assured him to be his son because further opinion should pass till that
were discovered. But (quoth he) as hitherto I have lived according to the Law
of Mahomet* so now would I willingly receive Christian Baptism which I
faithfully promised for my good success, when heaven made me able to deliver
this worthy Princess.

When the Emperor heard these things, he presently judged Palmendos to be his
son, by the sudden and summary supputation he made of his age, and of the time
he was in Pasmeria where the Queen his mother came so subtly acquainted with
him. Bashful hereof he was, when he looked on the Empress, as his vermilion
color plainly discovered, yet did he discreetly shadow the same:
notwithstanding, the Empress misdoubted somewhat, remembering her dream of the
Queen of Tharsus, and what the Emperor himself had told her before; yet made
she no show of any such matter, wisely governing her thoughts from outward
suspicion, whereupon the Emperor thus began again.

In sooth my especial good friend Palmendos, I now love and esteem you much
better then before, understanding that you are son to the Queen of Tharsus, who
did me so great honor in her Countries; her very name makes me to remember my
travels in those parts: So that I know not how to express my joy, hearing your
self so well resolved, to forsake the Ethnic paganism of your blasphemous
Gods. Wherefore I am thus advised, not to prolong so good an occasion, but to
morrow you shall receive the holy character of Christianity, and be likewise
affianced to your Lady Francelina: for reason required herein to hasten your
right, seeing for her you have endured such dangerous travels, and forsaken a
Realm of so great Estate the riches and fertility whereof I am well acquainted
withal.

The King and Queen of Thessaly were not a little glad, when they heard that
Palmendos was heir to a Kingdom but much more was their joy, understanding his
Original, whereof the Emperor would not as yet make further inquiry, till he
were better assured of the certainty: and good occasion falling out so well, as
the Empress, her Ladies, and every one departing to their chambers, leaving the
Emperor and Palmendos secretly conferring together, of ma^ters concerning the
Isle Delphos and such like; but at length his Majesty opened his mind, saying
he imagined him to be his son, wherefore he was desirous to be therein resolved.

In respect, my good Lord, (answered Palmendos) that truth must and will come
forth at length, know then mighty Prince and my gracious father, that in the
Realm of Pasmeria, you begat me your son, the night before you departed from
the Queen my mother; for she being advertised of your rare perfections, became
impatient in her amorous affections, and composed the mean of your
acquaintance, by a charmed drink provided for that purpose. And here behold the
effect of this action, my self your humble son and obedient servant, yet did my
mother give me a further testimony hereof, having her self given you the like
at her departure: but Francelina has the same now in possession for to her I
gave it after her deliverance: And evermore she concealed this matter from me,
till miraculously I was informed both thereof and as concerning Francelina,
because she feared I would forsake my country, to come and serve in your
highness Court. As concerning my behavior since that time, somewhat I am sure
has happened to your hearing, yet of such small and slender value, as they
neither beseemed this place, or your person. The Emperor ravished with conceit
of this report, knew not which way best to signify his joy, for considering
the strange course of the action past, and what the success thereof now
proved, his spirits were carried away with wonderful imaginations.

Ah my noble son Palmendos (quoth he) full well am I assured of what thou have
said although nature has shaped thee not much unlike me, and given thee such
heroical courage as I had in my younger days; and albeit the Empress may well
be offended with me, when she shall be thus thoroughly resolved, yet is her
wisdom and modesty such, as she will not mislike what I allow. With these
words the Emperor took him by the hand, going with him immediately to the
Empress Chamber, and after his Majesty had kindly kissed her, he entered into
these speeches.

I know well Madam, that heretofore you have held good opinion of my loyalty,
and that I ever loved you entirely, as your self could desire no better proof
thereof: but the cause why I use these words at this instant, is a little
scruple that long since entered my mind, and I fear will offend you when the
same is known. Yet least further doubts should trouble your thoughts, I protest
before him who is the only searcher of hearts, and I swear by all the divine
assistants about his tribunal, that never with my will and knowledge did I
contaminate our wedlock-bed, much less have I infringed the laws of marriage,
or poluted the inviolable faith I solemnly gave you.

Notwithstanding such has been my former fortune, that another woman beside
your self, by charms obtained what was your right, then must you not (Madam) be
so severe and rigorous, as not to pardon me, seeing I have voluntarily
confessed my offense, beside, the fault not proceeding from me delivers my
cause to be more innocent.

Remember then Madam, what sometime you told me concerning the Queen of
Tharsus, your dream I perceive was not altogether in vain: in that she had such
knowledge of me, by means of an enchanted drink I received unawares, as
engendered Palmendos this gentle Knight. My Lord (answered the Empress) with a
smiling countenance at the first time I beheld Palmendos, I was persuaded what
you have told me, so lively does he resemble you in countenance and personage:
wherefore I not only pardon you, being ignorant of begetting such an excellent
and perfect creature but thank heaven that you were the father to a son so
famous. As for Palmendos, he shall now accept me as his mother, and I will love
him no less then my own son Primaleon; with sundry other speeches were these
joies confirmed, and Palmendos right lovingly embraced by the Empress, at
length Primaleon came, and he being thoroughly acquainted with the matter, took
the Prince in his arms, thus speaking.

Has the mighty governor of the heavens appointed, that the only flower of
chivalry should be my brother? wherein can I more honor that superexcelling
bounty, then confirming my thanks to him by kindness to the worthy copartner
of my vital blood, drawn from the self-same source where I received my
original? Assure your self therefore my most noble brother, that Primaleon is
vowed to imitate your rare fortunes, and treading the self-same steps you have
done to eternize the name of our renowned father: continuing in the mean time,
so ready at your command, as he that honors you with most most zealous
affection. Might I enter the boldness (answered Palmendos) as to title you by
the name of my brother, the second step of my desires were attained, and though
I dare not strive to coequal with you in kindness* yet will I over pace you in
duty and affection* continuing the servant of Primaleons welfare, while the
star of my birth day vouchsafes me breathing.

Here is occasion offered me of large discourse concerning the several
salutations of the Courtly personages, so soon as this news happened in their
ears* how the Lords and Knights came to gratulate this new come son, and the
Ladies likewise striving to excel them in courtesy: but it were needless
labor, considering the King and Queen of Thessaly concern this present
occasion, and with their daughters joy unite them altogether preparing for the
religious observations, to be used on the morrow at the christning of Palmendos.

On the morrow the Emperor and all his Barons, mounted on horseback, the like
does the Empress withal her Ladies and in most honorable manner they ride to
this solemnity: so passing in this pomp through the City, ty, they alighted at
the Church of S. Sophy, where Palmendos was religiously baptized, and afterward
affianced to Francelina by the religious Archbishop, she being attired in as
sumptuous ornaments, as when Andromache, was espoused to the valiant Hector of
Troy, or Cleopatra Queen of Egypt* when she contended in magnificence with
Mark Anthony the Triumvirate her husband, drinking one of the pearls that hung
at her ears esteemed worth two hundred and fifty thousand crowns. For even as
the Carbuncle, the most rich and precious of all the oriental stones, does in
the dark give such a clear and illustrious splender, as not only illuminateth
all the place, but also sets the regarders eyes to wonder thereat: of no
less virtue seemed Francelina in the Temple, as the only and perfect Phoenix
of her time. In like pomp and royalty they returned to the Palace, there being
such a sumptuous feast prepared, as beseemed the time of so general rejoicing,
where wanted no honorable devises to accompany the same. And during the time
of this their honorable pleasure, here think I good to pause a little, while
you consider on the discourses passed, and I have more leisure to perfect the
rest of this History.

FINIS.

