THE MAGISTRATES Concern in Christ's Kingdom.

A SERMON Preached at the Assizes at Winchester.

July 14. 1697.

By ROGER FARBROTHER, Vicar of Holy-Rhoods in Southampton.

LONDON, Printed for William Keblewhite at the Swan in St. Paul's Churchyard.
M DC XC VIII.

To the Worshipful Alexander Alchorne Esquire, High Sheriff of Hampshire.
SIR,
IT was at Your Desire that this Discourse was prepared, it appeared at the
Assizes with Your Approbation, and now at length in public by Your Command.
It Is aim is to make the Magistrates Duty Christian, by laying before him the
Relation he bears to the great Mediatorial King, the Honorable Trust he is
advanced to in his Household, what Service he owes his Church and is capable of
doing for her; in which consists the great Dignity of his Office, and without
which it would remain Heathen still. And how weak soever the performance may
be, or how unfit for the Press (for which you are answerable who have promoted
the Publication and carried it beyond its Design) yet the Foundation I doubt
not will prove good; and this weak Essay, if it can attain no further, may at
least provoke some abler hand to set this seasonable Truth in a better Light,
whereby some good may accrue to the Public herein, which by whomsoever
conveyed, will be highly acceptable (I know) to You, and to all the True Sons
of the Church of England, particularly to

SIR, Your Most Faithful and Humble Servant R. Farbrother.

PSALM. II. XII. Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way.
THE Psalmist here, whether by extatick rapture, or by the softer Whispers and
Inspirations of the Holy Spirit (more common to him) was favored with a
prospect of the Messiah's Kingdom, of its Rise and Power. A Kingdom which
should be the delight of all Mankind, as well as the Glory of their Maker who
would erect it: Over which the Infinite Father would set his equally Infinite
Son, who was qualified for a perfect Government, and to enrich all Mankind from
his own Bounty and Fullness: and in the emanations of which God would erect to
himself brighter Trophies of Glory, and address more powerfully to the love and
admiration of all rational and intelligent Beings, than he had done in that
great Work of Creation.

One thing there was in this great Work which shows it to be more than Humane,
a thing so unlikely in reason to come to pass, that it could never have entered
into the Prophets thoughts, had not some Being of higher rank and greater
foresight discovered it, which might have tempted the Prophet to, and almost
have excused him in, the disbelief of the whole Scene. And which may seem so
strange to us, that did not our times produce instances of it more than enough,
we should hardly believe those Histories that did relate it, viz.

That when God would erect a Kingdom so glorious and so great, redounding every
way to the Honor and Advantage of Mankind, would repair our corrupted Nature
and miserable State, make us a gracious tender of all the Happiness both of
this and of a future Life; and this by the Wise and Gracious Government of his
own Infinite Son; who first should signify his love by such a surprising
instance, as to lay down his worthier Life a ransom for ours, by whom also the
Father would give us a most perfect Law, and make us proposals of the greatest
good.

That yet this Kingdom of his Son, erected for these gracious purposes, should
find violent opposition from Men; and that not only the ruder People, but their
Governors also should conspire against it, and with attempts as furious, as
they were unreasonable and vain, oppose the Omnipotent Hand, and ward off the
offered Mercy: That God should be so careful to do Man the greatest Good, and
Man should be as diligent to frustrate and prevent it.

This though by our constant experience it is become familiar to us; yet, as it
betrays the overgrown corruption of our State, so to any Man that has a
competent sense of those Mercies, which the Father tenders to all Mankind in
the erection of this Kingdom of his Son, it may justly seem a wonder.

With admiration at this folly and ingratitude David begins this Psalm, Why do
the Heathen rage, and the People imagine a vain thing? The Kings of the Earth
set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together against the Lord and
against his Anointed, saying, let us break their bands asunder, and cast away
their cords from us. Whilst yet these cords, were only the cords of love, of a
love stronger than death, free and generous, and the Glory of its Infinite
Author: And these Bands were the wholesome Laws of the Gospel, just and
reasonable, such as the Magistrate needed not to be jealous of, nor the People
uneasy under; admirably adapted to our Nature and Condition, to make us happy
here; and to dispose and fit us for that complete felicity hereafter, to bring
us to which was the great end for which this holy Economy and Spiritual
Kingdom was erected.

Wherefore the Psalmist to let them know how vain and dangerous this their
opposition would be; tells them that this promised King was the only Son of the
High and Great Creator; whose Scepter as it was right, so it was Divine too,
would extend its Dominion over all Nations, and break in pieces all that should
oppose it.

And because he foresaw that this opposition would chiefly be formed by Princes
and Magistrates, therefore he addresses to them, to persuade them as a
consequence of all this, to pay a voluntary Homage and loving submission to
this great Prince, to promote his Government, and to seek his favor. Kiss the
Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way.

Before I come to form my Exhortation, it may be necessary (and I shall do it
briefly) first to explain the terms, and to show, who are the Persons spoken
to, who this Son or the Person spoken of, what it is to kiss the Son, and what
is meant by perishing from the way.

1. Who the Persons here exhorted are, appears from v. 10. Be wise now O ye
Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the Earth; serve the Lord with fear, and
rejoice with trembling: Kiss the Son, etc. Answerable to that v. 2. The Kings
of the Earth set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together; which we
find applied, Act. 4. to Herod and Pontius Pilate, the Rulers of the Jews, the
Elders and Scribes whilst they were forming their several Oppositions and
Persecutions against Christ and his Apostles.

So that by Kings and Rulers in the second v. that opposed this Messiah and his
Kingdom, by Kings and Judges in the 10th. v. that are exhorted to a better
carriage, to submit to this Government and to kiss the Son; are meant
Magistrates of all ranks; not only Kings the Supreme, but all subordinate
Magistrates also, to which is committed in any degree the execution of the Laws.

2ly. Who this Son is? The ancient Jews make no question of it, but this was
meant of the Messiah the Son of God; and we find the Apostles arguing from it
amongst the Jews of their time without any contradiction, which shows it to be
the known and approved sense amongst them, but the modern Jews since, who had
occasion to argue against the Minaei, or Heretics (as they opprobriously
called the Christians) and the Socinians, who like not to hear so much of the
Son of God, and of his Inheritance; are content that David only himself should
be here intended.

Whereas the Son, simply as in the Text, or the Son of God, as in v. 7. The
Lord has said unto me thou art my Son; does properly denote the only Begotten
and Essential Son of God, and is never found in Scripture, when intended of one
single Person to signify otherwise; and Heb. 1. 4. the Apostle proves that it
could agree to none else: To which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art
my Son, this day have I begotten thee.

The like challenge to which we may make; to which of the Kings of Israel did
he say? Ask of me and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and
the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy possession.

Can that v. 11. agree to any other than this Eternal Son? serve the Lord with
fear, and rejoice with trembling; or especially that in the latter part of this
12th. v. If his wrath be kindled yea but a little, blessed are all they that
put their trust in him: Now to trust in any thing but God only, was an
abomination to him, Jer. 17. 5. Thus says the Lord, cursed be the Man that
trusts in Man; which not only proves that this Son was the Son of God; but
also that he was truly God, the only proper object of our Trust and Reliance:
Which I think is a sufficient argument against the present Jews; as well as
this, and the frequent and express application of this Psalm, and of this title
of Son in it, to the Messiah the Son of God in the New Testament, is a
sufficient Proof against all that call themselves Christians, that it is Christ
the Son of God, the great Mediatorial King that is here spoken of.

3ly. What it is to kiss the Son? A kiss anciently amongst Christians was a
token of their mutual charity, commonly used by them before the Communion, and
in the close of their Prayers; amongst Friends, of Familiarity and Benevolence:
from Subjects to their Prince, of Reverence and Subjection: and to God or Idols
(which were supposed by their Worshippers to be Gods) it was a token of
Adoration, Love, and Obedience: And this signification it bore, not only in the
usages of the Persians and Jews and other Oriental Nations; but also of the
Greeks and Romans.

In the Old Testament we find not, that properly taken, it was either enjoined
or used in the Service of God, but only of Idols; to which there was a twofold
manner of application by it; to kiss the Idol, if they were permitted and could
reach it: or else to kiss their hand instead of it, and with respect to it. The
first could not be done to the Invisible Person, and the second he had no where
required, but that it was an usual rite, in the Idol Worship, we find (which
gives us sufficient light into the Phrase) 1 Kings 19. the number which God had
reserved to himself, were every Knee that had not bowed unto Baal, and every
mouth that had not kissed him; and Hos. 13. Let them that sacrifice kiss the
Calves; and this was a joining themselves to the Idol, and a Profession of all
religious Duty to him.

This usage we find also in that very ancient Book of Job, chapter 31. If I beheld
the Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in brightness, and my heart has
been secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hand, -- then I should have
denied the God that is above; this would have been a Profession of all
religious honor toward those Creatures, and a denying of the True God.

From hence and the civil use of it together, the word got into the sacred
Poems, particularly the Psalms and Canticles; changing its signification, to
denote, instead of the Action, the Duty and Affection signified and expressed by
it: And accordingly to kiss the Son, is with the highest Affection and most
ardent Love; to own him for our King, being ready to perform to him all Holy
Adoration, Honor, Service, and Subjection.

4thly. What we ought to understand by perishing from the way. From the right
or just way, say the Septuagint, and our old Translation, ( i. e.) lest you
lose, or err from, the way prescribed in the Gospel, lest this Son of God in
his displeasure leave you destitute of his Grace and Guidance; either that his
Church should be withdrawn from you, or you separated and seduced from his
Church.

So that the sense of the whole, or the Exhortation here made is to this
effect, That the Father having given all Power and Dominion to his Son, and for
most gracious ends made him the Head over all things: That the Magistrate
should, especially in his public Capacity, express all possible Love and
Adoration to this great King, lest he provoke him to withdraw his Grace and
Guidance; and so both the Magistrate, and the People through his neglect,
should be drawn or driven from their due subjection to that Spiritual
Government, and so forfeit the privilege, and incur the penalties thereof. Kiss
the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way.

From which words thus explained I shall raise these three enquiries.

I. How Magistrates as such are concerned with this exalted King the Son of
God. Kiss the Son.

II. What he does expect of them in this their public Capacity, that they may
approve themselves to him and avoid his anger. Kiss the Son lest he be angry.

III. How they may best secure themselves from this particular effect of his
displeasure, of being deprived of his Grace and Guidance, or having his Church
removed from them, or they seduced from the Church. Kiss the Son lest he be
angry, and ye perish from the way.

I. Then how Magistrates as such are concerned with this exalted King the Son
of God? Kiss the Son. Where I shall first show the Nature of his Kingdom, and
2ly. The Magistrates concern in it.

1st. As to the Nature of his Kingdom; He, as the Son of God, has an original
Right accrues to him, as the Maker of all things, and so as Lord and Governor
of all; and so all Honor and Obedience was due to him from all capable Beings,
so soon as they came from under his Hand, and had their Being bestowed upon
them; and this is an absolute Despotick Dominion, inherent in him together with
the Father and the Holy Ghost, that one God, by whom all things were made:
which will always remain to him, so long as there are Men or Angels, or any of
his Handiwork to be governed by him.

This Government he exercised (according to his Infinite Perfection and
Holiness) with exact Rectitude and Wisdom: Acting in pursuit of that great end
of his own Glory, to magnify his Goodness and Wisdom toward Man, the supreme
Inhabitant of this lower World, which he had not presently upon his first
Production advanced (as he had done the Angels) to the utmost height of created
Dignity, of seeing his Face, and ministering in his Presence. Yet into his
Earthly Body he had Breathed a Soul capable of all this: and had provided the
Earth for his Habitation; Not such a despicable point as our New Theorists
would make it; though small in comparison of those Globes of Light, which he
had made to adorn, and wait upon it, and to inform Man (whom he had made
capable of contemplation) what Glory and Adoration was due to his Maker, and to
cherish this darling Creature, with their Light and Influence. Man was made
Innocent and Good: and thus far the Son of God was invested with no other
Power, than that Original One, founded in his Creation and Providence.

But when Man fell, and corrupted his own Nature, exposing himself to the
punitive Justice of God, and had set himself by the Rebellion he had committed,
and by the disorder he had contracted, at a wider distance from that end for
which God had made him; the Holy Presence and Happy Enjoyment of his Maker:
Then, to rescue Man, was a Work worthy of God, and in which he would show
himself as far surpassing his Creatures in adorable Goodness, as he was in
Power, and so as fit an object of Love, as he was of their Homage and
Subjection.

This gracious Office the Son of God undertakes; a New Covenant is hereupon
made with Man, and this Son of God made the Sponsor of it; which at first
consisted but in Promises, Types, and Umbrages; but yet proved effectual even
then, to reform some of these degenerate Creatures, and by an anticipation of
the future Sufferings to bring them to the intended Glory.

In which his undertaking we may suppose a new Dominion to accrue to him; not
as God, to whose Fullness there could be no such accession, but as Mediator
which he had now taken upon him to be; and thus he called Abraham, and gave
Laws to the Jews, and immediately presided over them, by virtue of this
acquired Dominion; which Authority, though it resided in him who was God, and as
yet only God, yet it did not reside in him as God, but as Mediator which he was
about to become.

And he seems not yet to be possessed of his whole Kingdom, giving to Israel only
a kind of Municipal Laws, which did not extend to, nor were intended for those
his whole Dominions, which originally belonged to him as God, nor which as
Mediator he should afterward possess.

But when he actually took upon him our Nature, engaged in, and had performed
that part of his Office, which was incumbent upon him to do upon Earth; when he
had laid the Foundation of his Church, promulg'd his Law, suffered Death, and
was Risen again and ascended into Heaven; Then he had the full of this
adventitious Dominion conferred upon him as Man, or rather as Mediator God and
Man: In which capacity, viz. of Man as well as God, the Father delegates to
him, and deposits with him the whole Government; as with Power to send the Holy
Ghost to superintend the Affairs of his Church, to act as the supreme Minister
and Viceroy of his Kingdom: So with complete and absolute Authority, over all
the Orders of Angels, and over all Spiritual Powers good or bad; over all the
Powers of the Earth, whether they were Civil or Ecclesiastical; and over the
whole Creation, and all the Powers and Agencies thereof whether Politic or
Natural: That he should govern all things; and should finally complete this his
Undertaking, and close this his happy Reign with Judgment and Eternal
Distributions.

Thus after his Sufferings and Exaltation, we find it one great part of the
Apostles business to proclaim this his Royal State and Kingly Authority. That
God has exalted him, and given him a Name that is above every Name, at which
every Knee should bow of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things
under the Earth, and that every Tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is
Lord. That he is above all things; That in all things he has the Preeminence;
and particularly, Ephesians. 1. 21. That God has set him at his own right Hand in
Heavenly Places, far above all Principality, and Power, and Might, and
Dominion, and every Name that is named, not only in this World but also in that
which is to come, and has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be
the Head over all things to his Church, which is his Body.

In which words there are two things, which if well considered, will solve this
whole Enquiry: 1st. That he is above all Principality, and Power, and Might,
and Dominion, even in this World, as well as in that which is to come; and 2ly.
That he is thus made the Head over all things to his Church, or for the good and
benefit of his Church:

From the first it appears, That the Magistrate has his Authority from him, and
acts by his Commission; the Supreme Magistrate immediately, and the
Subordinate, mediately, and by his intervention; but that absolutely there can
be no Authority, but what is derived from this Fountain and Head of all
Authority: That when he said, Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, he,
as a new advanced King renewed the Pattent of all Temporal Powers, which since
they hold only under him.

2ly. Christ this Son of God, being invested with this Universal Dominion, and
Authority, for the good of the Church; for the sake of which he undertook his
Office of Mediator, and to the good of which he wholly directs every Branch of
that Office; whatsoever Power he, as Mediator, does any where delegate, he does
it to this end, That, that Power may in its kind be serviceable to his Church.
Which shows,

2ly. The Magistrates concern in this Kingdom. For it follows from hence, that
every one that wears his Commission, is obliged to attend diligently to the end
for which it was designed, and to manage his Authority to all the advantages
thereof that he can; for therefore is this Power given him; for it cannot be
supposed that Christ having received this Authority from the Father, for the
good, and advantage of his Church, would delegate it upon any other condition,
or to any other wholly different end.

Which we may be somewhat more confirmed in by considering, that the Church is
there said to be his Body; which must betoken a great and endearing tie and
relation betwixt them, as there is betwixt the Head and the Members; and tho
this Union be not Natural, but Mystical and Spiritual, neither do we comprehend
the Nature of it, what it is now, much less what it will be hereafter: Yet we
know that the Principle of this Union is the Holy Ghost, and this great King
has signified himself to be linked to the Members of his Church in such strict
Bands, as no Union upon Earth, either Natural or Moral can justly represent: He
styles them his Children, his Brethren, his Friends, and his Spouse; which are
the strictest of all Moral ties, and there is nothing upon Earth more endearing.

When by Natural Similitudes he would express this their nearness to him, they
are such as hardly admit even of a numerical Distinction; as the Vine and the
Branches, the Head and the Members, Bone of his Bone, he calls them, and Flesh
of his Flesh, and intimates his design to be, to make them hereafter one with
himself and with his Father.

Now the Church being a Society of Men to which this great King is thus
intimately united, which have entered into Covenant with him, engaged to perform
strict and sincere Allegiance to him, and to maintain Charity and Communion
with one another, in order to their glorifying him here, and becoming the
Trophies of his Love hereafter: and this Society being capable of much
advantage, or hindrance from the Civil Magistrate; and the Magistrate having
this Power and Authority by which he acts, from this Son of God, as Mediatorial
King (for under that formality it is given to him, and so also he imparts it) it
appears that the Magistrate has a great concern in this Kingdom, to execute
the Power he has received to the good thereof.

For the good of the Church was the only direct and immediate end for which
this Mediatorial Kingdom was erected, and therefore all the Powers of that
Kingdom must have an Eye and Tendency to that End, and this being an end so
pleasing to this great King, must stir up a suitable zeal for it, in all those
that have any regard for him.

The immediate and proper end of Civil Government is indeed the safety and
happiness of Society; but it is a great error to think that this is the only end
of it, and all that the Magistrate has incumbent upon him; this is only in
order to a further and more worthy end, to serve hereby that great Lord who has
given him this Authority, and to promote the Interest of this Kingdom, for the
sake of which he had this Authority conferred upon him: And as the last and
consummatory Regal Act of this Mediatorial King will be to judge; considered as
a Public Person, he will be found the greatest Friend to that Government,
which has most industriously promoted the Interest thereof.

So that the Magistrate may be supposed to kiss the Son, as he is here
exhorted; when he looks upon himself as a Minister of this Kingdom, and with
the greatest application of mind, suitable to that Love and Reverence which is
due to this great King, takes the Interest of this Kingdom to be the great
concern of his Office, the greatest end for which he came into the World, and
that the Glory and Excellency of his Character consists in this, that it gives
him the grateful opportunities of bearing a part in this great Work.

What these opportunities are will somewhat appear from my second Enquiry which
is this;

II. What this Son of God does expect of them in their Public Capacity, that
they may approve themselves to him, and avoid his Anger. Kiss the Son lest he
be angry.

He expects then in general, that by an impartial and vigorous use of that
Sword, that he has put into their Hands, they should encourage Virtue and
restrain Vice.

There are two reasons why the Magistrate should be especially careful of his
Duty at this time (which might serve as my Apology, if I needed one, for this
my particular application to him, at this opening of the Circuit;) The first
appears Deuteronomy. 23. 9. When the Host goes forth against thine Enemies, then keep
thee from every wicked thing: This is eminently our case, as no one needs to be
told. And the second is, the too obvious corruption of manners, and visible
decay of Virtue and Goodness amongst us.

The first shows it to be a season for reformation of manners, and the second
that they want much to be reformed; and both together give us such a prospect
of the anger of this Son, and of our danger, as every one in his Station should
be diligent to divert, and do what he can toward the appeasing of this great
King, upon whom alone all our safety does depend; and here, particularly he
expects of the Magistrate, that he should advance the Interest of the Holy
Kingdom he has set up, by the promotion of Virtue, and restraining of Vice.

How much this will conduce to that end, I shall show first, and 2ly. How the
Magistrate may effect it.

1st. How far the promotion of Virtue, and extirpation of Vice by a vigorous
execution of the Laws, may serve the Interest of this Mediatorial Kingdom of
the Son of God, may be seen (as also, the Magistrates concern in that Kingdom
which I disputed before) by comparing the Laws of our Nation, with those of
this great King of Heaven; for so far as these Laws agree, so far in promoting
the one, you advance the other also: and to promote the keeping of his Laws is
to promote the Interest of his Kingdom, which is, to bring as many as can be
prevailed upon, by obedience here to be happy hereafter.

Now his Laws are a complete Compendium of all that is just and reasonable, and
fit for Man to do, which display to us the greatest Goodness, suited exactly to
our condition and circumstances, and particularly furnishing us with the best
and most perfect Rules of living, fit for God to require and Man to perform,
comporting with the Glory of the one, and the Happiness of the other; and also
perfectly adjusted to the benefit of Civil Societies.

He that looks diligently into the Laws of this Mediatorial Kingdom contained
in the New Testament, will find, (to the confirmation of their Truth, and the
Honor of their Author) that they make up a Rule of Practice of the greatest
Perfection, proper to make the observers of them, Good and Happy, both here and
hereafter, recommending as the Apostle has summed it up to our hand: Philip. 4.
Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, -- just, -- pure, --
lovely, -- of good report, -- are virtuous and worthy of true commendation.
Such are the Laws of his Kingdom.

Now (thanks to the Grace of God, and the Wisdom of our Ancestors) our National
Laws differ little from these; our Lawgivers having piously taken their Pattern
and Directions from these Laws of our Mediator, especially as to Virtue and
Vice; the great Concerns of both Kingdoms; and that with as little difference
as the Nature of these Kingdoms would well permit, enjoining and prohibiting
all along the same Actions: And although this be done from different Principles,
the one of Reason, the other of Revelation, under a different cognizance, one
taking account of the outward Actions only, the other of the Heart and
Affections, and differ as much in the Nature and Degree of their Sanctions: Yet
commanding the same thing, and each in their way enforcing it, they are
mutually helpful one to another.

On the one part, these Laws of our great Mediator, were they universally
observed, would do in a manner all the Business that Humane Laws are intended
to do: The King then would need no Guards, nor the People any Magna Charta,
there would be no Rebellion, nor Oppression, nor any Invasion of the Rights
either of God or Man, but Virtue would be every Man's Guide, and every Man's
Defense. So that the Magistrate has no wrong done him by the setting up of this
Kingdom, but has great reason to propagate Christianity, were it only for the
sake of that Peace and good Order, the proper end of his Function, which it
would produce.

So on the other part, where Humane Laws are executed with that vigor, which
the naughtiness of the Times requires (for the Laws are made for the lawless
and disobedient) so far as Virtue is encouraged, and Vice suppressed, so far the
Business of Christ's Kingdom is done also: And although there is more required to
make Men true Christians, than the correcting of some visible Faults: Yet it is
somewhat even to have gone thus far; the contagion of their ill example by
which others might have been infected is removed, and the Offender himself is
brought to some thought and sobriety, and some taste of morality, which by the
Grace of God he may fall in love with, it may ripen in him in time to a full
conversion, and so he may become a sound Member of Christ's Kingdom, who was
scarce a tolerable one of the Commonwealth before.

Besides, there are not a few amongst us that choose to follow a Multitude, and
to live after the example of the greater number; the great Bane of our Nation
at this time, where Vice and Atheism are like to carry it in the Poll, and to
vote Men out of their Religion and Morals; and what they want in number they
make up in noise and appearance which serves the turn as well: God is
Blasphemed aloud, his Authority contemned, and his Word ridiculed, Lust is
gloried in, Immorality made a Badge of Honor, and others led away by the
example: Now if the Sword of Justice did smite these Scorners, the simple that
are so ready to follow them would beware, and avoid those Paths which they saw
discouraged by the best of Men, and duly rewarded with Shame and Punishment. To
consider then

2ly. How this may be done.

In order to which it is necessary in the first place, that the Magistrate
possess his Breast with a Love and awe of this great King, and keep steady to
the Rules of Virtue and Religion himself; the first will give him Zeal, and the
second Authority in this great Work.

His Love will make the concern his own, and he will not desert nor be lukewarm
in that cause, which the Son of God died to promote; it will make him to watch
all opportunities of advancing the Honor, and doing the pleasure of his great
Lord.

And his regular Life will procure him an esteem amongst all sorts of Men, and
make his endeavors the more effectual; whilst the good love him, and the evil
cannot help it but they must reverence and fear him; for Vice is always
sneaking and cowardly, shrinks and is out of countenance at the sight of
goodness, especially when it has the advantage of Eminence and Authority: The
Criminal stands condemned before his Sentence is past, and at the Presence of
such a Magistrate, his Reason and Conscience are awaked, and his vapid
ingenuity restored to vigor, he feels in himself the Force of Justice and the
Folly of Offending.

Whereas if the Magistrate should be notoriously Wicked, the Offender would
blame not his Crimes but his Fortune, which whilst the other sat upon the
Bench, brought him to the Bar, where of right they ought both to have stood.
The Law is all Penalty, and the Sentence received with regret when administered
with a Wicked Hand: It Is hard to suffer from ones own Party, this is engrossing
of Vice, and looks like a personal Pique, that he should punish the Offender,
that loves the Offense. Solomon thought the good life of a Magistrate, to be a
constant exercise of Justice, and a Satyr against Vice, when he tells us,
Proverbs 28. That they that forsake the Law praise the wicked, but such as keep
the Law contend with them.

Supposing then that the Magistrate himself will keep the Law, and give a good
example in his own Person; as knowing well that he himself must be judged by
this King of Kings; who accepts not the Persons of Princes.

What is more expected of him is; that he should be diligent, just and
impartial in the execution of his Office; that he should answer his Character,
to be a terror to evil Works, and that both in small and great Persons too
whose example is more malignant; with equal Zeal at least against Blasphemy and
Profaneness, the direct oppugners of Christ's Kingdom, as against Murder and
Theft, the disturbers of the Public Peace and Safety: That he would mind that
it is the Cause of God that he is acting in, and would do it no otherwise than
he would have it to appear when he is giving his Accounts before that great
King: That he is set over Men, that have Immortal Souls, and an Eternal
Interest to be secured, to which a due execution of the Laws may contribute
very much: That he is fallen into those times, in which his diligence and
courage are necessary, where threatening Judgments call for Reformation, where
great Men as well as small want to be reformed, and a more than ordinary deluge
of Wickedness is to be stopped.

He should consider, that where Providence gives a liberal Education and a
great Estate, it is a Qualification, and a Salary too, for the discharge of some
greater Duty; and therefore in the fear of God, he should wait upon that Office
to which the Divine Providence, and the Laws of the Land have called him,
studying the Laws, and readily taking cognizance of all proper causes;
searching out the cause that he knew not, and not waiting too long for formal
Impeachment; an obstruction of Justice which Solomon sharply reproves in his
time, Prove. 24. If thou say behold I knew it not; does not he that pondereth
the heart consider it, and he that keeps thy Soul, does not he know it? and
shall not he reward every Man according to his Works? That where new Vices
spring up, (in this prolifick Age) those that have a hand in the making of our
Laws, would take care to provide against them.

I do not pretend to instruct the Magistrate in these known things, but only to
exhort him to a conscientious Practice of them; by which, besides the eminent
Service he will do his Country, he will promote the Interest of Christ's
Kingdom, and pervert the anger of the Son of God, who has called him to this
Trust and Dignity in his Household. And so I proceed to my

III. Enquiry, how the Magistrate may most effectually secure both himself and
those under his care, from this particular effect of the Sons displeasure; that
either the Church should be removed from them, or they seduced from the Church.

The Magistrates care to maintain Society, and to promote Moral and Political
Virtues, is (as I have showed) a good step toward, and a preparing the Soil
for, Virtues that are Spiritual, a disposing the Kingdoms of Men, to become the
Kingdoms of Christ.

And it is certain also, that where Men live under a vigilant and regular
Government, are accustomed to feel the force of Laws, and to pay a due
deference to Temporal Powers; their Minds will be less wanton and better
disposed to submit to a Spiritual Authority. This is the general part of the
Magistrates Duty toward this great King.

But here, is a more special one, in which this Mediatorial King is more nearly
concerned; the defense, and protection of his Church.

That this is the thing chiefly intended in the Text, no one can well doubt if
he considers the Psalm: how Kings and Rulers are first reproved for opposing
this Anointed of God in the building and propagating of his Church: and then
after the Nature of this Church or Kingdom of the Messiah, and its extent are
declared, Kings and Judges of the Earth are commanded to serve in this Church
with fear, and to perform all loving and respectful Duty to the Son, lest they
perish from the way: Now if the Magistrates of the Jews, that threatened and
persecuted those that Preached the Word and opposed the first Building of
Christ's Church, if those were of that number that set themselves against this
God's Anointed: Then, to support and defend, and in their way to propagate his
Church, to be nursing Fathers to it, and to take all care that his Truth and
Worship be cherished amongst us, is here meant by Kissing the Son lest they
perish from the way.

It Is easy to observe, that when God is provoked to punish either a Nation or
particular Persons, he frequently does it by themselves* brings the evil he
inflicts out of their own miscarriages, and makes their own Sin the Instrument
(as all Sin is naturally fitted to be) as well as the meritorious cause of
their Punishment; as Sloth is punished with Want, Sedition threatened with the
Sword, etc. and therefore the Magistrate is properly exhorted here to take care
of the Church lest he be deprived of it.

The Magistrates neglect of the Church, the withdrawing his necessary care of
its protection and defense, has both a Moral and Natural efficacy toward the
producing this effect.

As the want of that regard and care for it which is due, may justly be
expected to provoke this great King to withdraw such a mercy, where it is so
little deserved, and so ill treated: So when the Government of a Nation
neglects to restrain the oppositions that arise against the Church, and to
interpose their Authority in its defense and protection; it is very natural (in
this loose Age) that it should either degenerate into Profaneness, or else be
overrun, and subverted by its Scismatical Opposers.

In those better times, whilst Christ, and that Authority he had lodged in the
Church, were revered; the Censures of the Church were of themselves more
sufficient for its Support and Preservation: And yet those Censures, even then,
wanted not a punitive, and vindictive Power, which God (to supply the defect of
the Christian Magistrate) inflicted either immediately himself, or by some
invisible Ministry.

And as God has afforded him this precedent to direct his carriage in that
vacancy, as he had that of the Kings of Israel before, and of the Christian
Princes afterward: So it is very certain, that the greater decay there is of
true Piety (which in these latter days our Savior has given us reason to
expect) the more need the Church has of a zealous and vigilant Magistrate for
her Defense.

Now which, amongst this great variety of Sects, is the Church to which the
Magistrate owes this Defense, I need not to be long in telling you: What Church
can it be supposed the Magistrate should protect but the Church established by
the Law? Neither need I insist, that the soundness of her Doctrine, and the
excellency of her Institutions, have been allowed by the most Learned Minister
of the Foreign Reformed Churches, and proved by those of her own. I may easily
take it for granted that our Magistrates believe all this, who, as a legal
Qualification, have received the Holy Sacrament, when put to them as a Test to
distinguish the Members of this Church, from those of any other opposite
Communion: And it is to be hoped we have very few that either for Honor or
Preferment, would prostitute their Consciences at that Holy Table.

Now this Church may justly expect protection from the Civil Government, as
being incorporated into it: especially if that be true, that she has reposited
in the Government that Original right which she anciently and justly exercised,
of consulting and adjusting her own Affairs.

And this Mediatorial King does certainly expect of the Magistrate in the
Churches behalf, that he should with all Diligence, promote her Interest and
Safety; enforcing her Discipline upon her own Members, and being watchful over
all her Enemies and Opposers.

But for the Magistrate to be unconcerned in such an Affair, or to be so far
overawed by that empty and popular name of Moderation, as to encourage Men by
impunity, to Oppose and Blaspheme this Holy Institution, to permit the
Foundations of Christianity to be undermined, her most venerable Articles to be
disputed and ridiculed, and every carnal and wanton mind to set up a Religion
for it self; to let in all these Evils upon us, to make the Church a Hostage
for the State; to slacken her defense to gratify her Enemies, and to retire
from her in time of danger:

Whether this would be to kiss the Son lest we perish from the way; or rather
to betray him, and pull down this judgment upon our selves, I leave you to
consider,

Whilst I heartily pray with our Church (in which I know all the True Members
of it will join with me) That it may please God to bless and keep the
Magistrates, giving them grace to execute Justice, and to maintain Truth.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Will. Keblewhite at the Swan in St. Paul's Churchyard.
SErgeant Wiseman's 8 Chirurgical Treatises Folio.

Monsieur Du Pius's Condemnation by the Archbishop of Paris with his own
Retractation 4to.

Primitive Heresy Revived in the Faith and Practice of the People called
Quakers, etc. 4to.

A Discourse showing who they are that are now Qualified to Administer Baptism
and the Lord's Supper, these two by the Author of the Snake in the Grass, 4to.

A Letter of Advice upon the Modern Argument of the lawfulness of Simple
Fornication half Adultery and Poligamy 4to.

The Delusions and Errors of Antonia Bourignon and her growing Sect, detected,
which may serve for a Discovery of all other Enthusiastical Impostures 4to.

An Enquiry into the Nature, Necessity, and Evidence of Christian Faith in
several Essays, in Two Parts 8vo.

Fifteen Sermons on several occasions and upon various Subjects 8vo. These
three by John Cockburn D. D.

Bishop King's Discourse concerning the Inventions of Men in the Worship of
God, the 4th Edition 8vo.

Mr. Clutterbuck's Vindication of the Liturgy, etc. 8vo.

Mr. Ray's Classical Nomenclator for the use of Schools, 8^.

Dr. Pope's Life of Bishop Ward 8vo.

The Anatomy of the Humane Body, or a short and full view of all the Parts of
the body by James Keill. M. D. recommended by Dr. Edward Tyson 12mo.

An Examination of Dr. Burnet's Theory of the Earth, by John Keill A. M. of
Baliol College in Oxford 8vo. Printed at the Theater.


