The Famous and Delightful HISTORY OF The Golden Eagle:

Giving an Account how Albertus, King of Arragon, being at the Point of Death,
was advised to procure the Golden Eag^e, kept by the Queen of Ivyland, for his
Recovery: How his three Sons went in search of that Adventure, and what befell
them on the way; how Innocentine the youngest, prevailed, and got the Golden
Eagle, with the Advice his Horse gave him: How his two Brothers robbed him of
the Eagle, and accused him to the King, for which he narrowly escaped Death,
being utterly Disgraced, until the Queen arrived, who restored him to Favor,
and then married him, etc. with many other Adventures, both Pleasant and
Profitable.

woodcut of man in bed, four men standing nearby

Licensed and Ente^^d acco^^ing to O^^^r.

London: Printed by and (...) and sold (...) the Bo^ksellers.

woodcut of small castle and several people

The History of the Golden Eagle, etc.
Chap. I.
How Albertus King of Arragon, falling into a languishing Disease, was advised
by his Physicians to provide for Death; and the News being spread over the
Country, many Magicians came to him, who told him, that if he could recover the
Golden Eagle from the Queen of Ivyland, he should questionless recover his
Health, etc.

ALbertus having of late buried the Soul of his Life Lysimena, his most
indulgent Queen, fell into extreme Melancholy, which as it is commonly the
Parent of all Diseases, so it brought him into a most tedious and languishing
Sickness, which caused him to make Moan both Day and Night; witness the bitter
Groans, and passionate Expressions for the loss of his departed Consort: at
last, being importuned by several of his Nobles, and hourly entreated by his
three Sons, Philonzo, Cruentius and Innocentine, he consented to send for the
chiefest Doctros in those Parts, to consult about the State and Welfare of his
Body; which Doctors being arrived, were presently conducted to the King's
Chamber, at whose sight the King broke out into these sad Expressions:

Ye are come to look upon a delining King; ye may endeavor to use your Skills,
but I am confident your Labor will be lost. Alas, my Disease is too inward to
be found out; and if ye Cure me, it must be more by Miracle than Skill: If ye
can Cure an almost broken Heart, or repair my half-decayed Lungs, or restore my
near-wasted Breath, then draw near: But, alas, my Lysimena -- And there his
Sighs denying him liberty of Speech, he made Signs to be no more troubled, and
turning from the Company, and almost from his own Senses, he groaned himself
into a deep Melancholy.

The Doctors as yet being not thoroughly acquainted with his Disease, verily
supposed him departing but it proved otherwise; for his Sons, and the rest of
the Nobility informing the Doctors of his Grief, desired them to use their best
Endenvours for his Recovery; which accordingly they did, but finding little
hopes of Life, in respect that the Distemper of his Mind bad so much impaired
the Temper of his body, they only prescribed him Cordials, which indeed
something revived and exhilerated his Spirits, but could not give the least
hopes of Life, in respect that Nature was much extenuated and weakened by his
extraordinary Melancholy.

The King, whether less insensible of his Disease, or somewhat more enlivened
by the Prescriptions of the Doctors, desires two of the ablest of them to be
brought unto him, of whem he demanded their free and absolute Opinions; The
Doctors after a short Pause, who having more respect to Conscience than Gain,
told him that they might prolong, but not Cure; and being about to proceed into
further Discourse, there suddenly came in some of the Nobility, and whispered
with one of the Doctors, which the King perceiving, demanded the Cause; to
which the Nobility replied, That there were newly arrived several Magicians,
who hearing of his Majesty's Distemper, came out of affectionate Duty to employ
their Skill for his Recovery; the King hearing this, dismissed the Doctors, and
admitted the Magicians, who being entered, and after the Performance of their
several Duties, applied themselves in this manner:

Mo^^ Renowned Sir, We the most humble of all your Servants, being by Report
informed of your Majesty's heavy and grievous Disease, have by our Industry
found out a Means (which though a may seem impossible to your Majesty) will
without question restore you to your former Health; which means (craving the
Favor of your Majesty's Patience) we shall forthwith discover: Know then, most
excellent Prince, that under the Jurisdiction of Agrippina, that most famous
and invincible Queen of Ivyland, there is a Golden Eagle, in whom there is a
secret and infallible Remedy for your Disease; therefore if any of those
Heroic Spirits which are belonging to your Majesty, will endeavor to procure
this Eagle, your Majesty's Life will questionless be preserved: We shall not
therefore trouble your Majesty's Ears with any further Relation, but leave your
Majesty to the Prosecution of what we have related; only we will be bold to
desire your Majesty not to be doubtful, for he that your Majesty shall least
respect or expect, shall perform this dangerous and almost impossible Design;
so we leave your Majesty to your most serious Considerations.

Chap. II.
The Magicians being gone, the King sends for his three Sons, and acquaints
them with what the Magicians had told him, proffering to divide his Estate
between them, if they could recover the Eagle from the Queen of Ivyland,
wishing them to take what Treasure they would for their Occasions.

THe Magicians being departed, the King immediately gave Command that his three
Sons should come unto him; they as diligent to obey, as he was willing to
command, forthwith presented themselves before him. The King after some
Discourse, told them now his Days were near finished, and Nature began so much
to decline in him, that he was past the Skill of Doctors; therefore let me
advise you, as a dying Father, that as ye were born Brothers in Nature, so to
continue in Affection. Sir, replied the Eldest, if it please the Gods to
dispose of you to Death, we must labor for that Portion of Content which may
be proportionable to our Sorrows; for the Decrees of Fate are not to be
resisted; and one Reason tells us, that what we cannot remedy, we must
patiently endure: But for my part (and I dare say as much for my Brothers) I
would willingly hazard my Life for the Prolongation of yours. Sir, I hope that
you will please to apprehend that the Possessions which are like to fall to us
after your Death, do not any way incite us either to hope, or wish for it. With
that, the two other Brothers not able to contain any longer; desired their
Father to employ them in any thing whereby they might express their Obedience
to him. To which the King (joyful to see their passionate Obedience) replied,
That there was but one way to save his Life, which was to do according to the
Directions of the Magicians, who informed him, that if he could by any means
recover the Golden Eagle from the Queen of Ivyland, that then he should be
restored to his former Health; But, says he, I find it a thing impossible,
therefore I shall not trouble myself with the Thoughts of obtaining it, for the
Queen is of that Power and Strength, that if I should preswade any to attempt
it, I should be guilty of their Deaths, and so depart this World with a
burdened Conscience; But, my Sons, I am very well content to leave those
Slaveries which are Attendants to a Crown; I can only pray for you, and that is
my uttermost.

Before the King had made an end of his intended Discourse, his Sons
interrupted him with Sighs, that floated in Tears, and as well as their Sorrows
would permit, they in most humble manner desired the King to grant them a Boon
before his Departure; to which the King pleasingly replied, Enjoy your Desires,
provided ye ask what is necessary for me to give; Speak, what is your Boon? to
which they replied, Renowned Sir, It was not long since you were pleased to
bless our Ears with the Discourse of the Magicians, who have assured both you
and us, that if the Golden Eagle can be recovered, your Health shall be
renewed; Then know, Sir, that as our Bodies are Derivatives from you, so they
are by all Laws, whatsoever, to be at your Disposing; and here we present
ourselves before you, and protest with all our Souls to hazard, nay lose our
Lives, but we will obtain the Eagle; for you know, Sir, that Resolution backed
with obedient Affections, knows no Impossibilities; Sir, we shall not arise
from our Knees till you have granted our Request, and at your Royal Consent, we
will forthwith fly into Action.

The King seeing them thus resolved, thought it superfluous to endeavor to
discourse them out of their Resolutions, but told them, that since their
Obedience made them so ready to undertake so great a Hazard, his Affections
should prompt him, at their Return, to divide all his Treasure (which at that
time was very great) amongst them; in the mean time he advised them to provide
themselves with what Money they would, and all other Aceutrements necessary for
their Adventure, which they accordingly did.

Chap. III.
How the King's three Sons provided for their Journey, and took leave of their
Father and departed, and what happened between them in their Journey.

THe three Brothers having prepared themselves for their Journey, came in
humble manner to take leave of the King, whom they found, as formerly, very
much troubled with Melancholy; but the Eldest addressing himself unto him,
began in this manner:

Royal Sir, We your most obedient Sons, in order to our dear Affections, more
than your Royal Command, present our selves to crave your Blessing upon us, and
our Designs, before our Departure, not despairing of our Desires, we humbly
crave. -- The King looking upon them with a Countenance that imported
unexpressible Grief for their Departure, raised himself upon his Pillow, and
with a stretched out Arm gave them his Blessing, withal advising them as they
were Brothers in Nature, so to continue Brothers in Affection, and to have a
care that neither Envy nor Ambition, or ambtious Envy, should raise a factious
Difference amongst them, but as they departed Brothers, and so consequently
Friends, so they should adventure and return in the like Amity they departed;
And so the greatest Blessing that a dying Father can bestow upon his Departing
Children, accompany you; but before you go, let m^ as a Father, advise you of
two things; The one is, the Pleasure of the Gods by the neglect of your. Duty
to them; the other is, The Danger of evil Company, which may seduce you to many
Inconveniences; and so farewell* what I want in Words, I shall supply in
Thoughts.

Thus these ^^r^e Brothers having received the Sum of their Desires, depa^^^^
from the Presence of their Father, and so taking leave of their Friends at
Court, departed: At last, having journied three Days, they came by a mistake of
thou Way into a great Wood, where being in a Wilderness of Doubt, they
consulted what was best to do; Philonzo, the elder Brother, beginning already
to find the Encumbrances of Travel. expressed himself to the others, as follows:

We see, dear Brothers, the many Troubles the want of Consideration brings upon
us; we have (as I have weighed in my more serious Thoughts) undertaken a most
dangerous, troublesome, and almost impossible Design; To prevent this, how
shall we advise? If we should return home, we should turn our noble
Undertakings to Ignominy and Shame; and if we proceed, without question we
shall lose our Lives; and what will the World say but this, They have the
Effect of their Rashness; for the more dangerous a Design is, the more it ought
to be discust; but they that like Phaeton, mount at Impossibilities, shall at
last fall like him with Shame and Dishonor; therefore, Brothers, let me hear
your Advice. To which Cruentius, the second Brother, replied,

It Is true, rash Beginnings have most commonly fatal Conclusions: For my part,
as yet I never weighed the Business, nor the Danger, but altogether depended
upon your Judgment as an Oracle, not dreaming but you had known the Difficulty
of the Business: But stay now, I better consider the Matter, methinks it should
not be so difficult, for sure we three can conquer one Eagle; for, Brother, you
shall catch her, and I will warrant you my Brother and I will hold her; but
where shall we find her? Fie, Brother, quoth Philonzo, I see you as much err in
the Matter, as I did in the Manner of the Business. This Eagle is a Bird kept
for her Sovereignty in a great City walled round with Brass, pallizado'd with
Iron, guarded with Lions and Dragons, and commanded by Giants, and we must,
before we come to this City, encounter with several Knights, which attend
purposely for such Attempters as we must be: Many have attempted, but never any
as yet returned to tell the manner of their Attempts; therefore, Brother, the
Business is of more Intricacy than you imagine. O monstrous, cried Cruentius, I
am more than half dead already with the Relation, tall no more of it: What,
Dragons and Bears, Lions and Giants, Brazen Walls and Iron Pallizadoes? Oh how
am I thundered to Death! Attempt it, who will, for my part I Will starve here
rather han be eaten with Bears, and Lions, and Dragons, and -- Oh horrible
Giants, not I. Brother Innocentine, What say thou to these terrible things?
what, art not afraid? Well I have Fear enough for you both, but, good Brother,
speak. To which Innocentine the younger undauntedly replied:

As I am youngest in Years, so I am last in Speech, and I could wish I might be
the least; but in respect I am to make answer to both your Demands, I must a
little exercise your Patience: It Is true, the Danger is great, therefore the
more noble; but had you, my Brethren, according to my Father's Advice,
importuned the Gods before you had undertaken this great Design, questionless
the one had not been filled with Doubts, nor the other with Fears, nor I with
Shame for you both; you seem to be as much displeased at my Words, as I am at
your Actions; shall we begin to tire, before we begin to do? For Shame, let not
the World have this Advantage of our Reputations: If we return home, we must
expect to undergo a Disgrace worse than Death; If we dye, we dye in high
Attempts; who knows but the Gods may show extraordinary Favors, and smile at
our Designs, being we do it for our dear Father's Life? If the worst come to
the worst, we can but dye, and we had better do so than live as if we lived
not: but I perceive my Discourse offends, I will therefore be silent.

Chap. IV.
How Philonzo and Cruentius hearing the Discourse of their younger' Brother
Innocentine, robbed him of his Treasure, and left him bound in a Wood, where
they afterward lost themselves.

CRuentius hearing his Brother's Discourse, which was contrary to his
Expectations, told him that he was a very rash Boy, and understood not what he
spoke; For, says he, shall we cast away our Lives, because the World should say
we died nobly? Brother, says he to Philonzo, are we bound to be Fools because
he is mad? No, let us leave him to the Thoughts of Honor, whilst you and I
consult what is best to do; so walking a distance from him, they sat down, and
began thus to express themselves: Brother Cruentius, I have both in this short
time considered the Shame and the Danger, let us endeavor to haste to
Mesemptronia, a City which I am sure cannot be far from this Place, where we
may refresh ourselves, and have further Discourse. But what shall we do,
replied Cruentius, with you foolish Boy? you perceive how refractory and
inconsiderate he is, and makes slight of that Danger which we know to be very
great: If we leave him, questionless he will return home and incense the King
against us; what we shall do in this I know not, but leave it to your
Discretion. Let Us force him with us, quoth Philonzo, and make him do according
to our Wills; if not, we will threaten to kill him. No, quoth Cruentius, that
cannot be, for then he will pry into all our Actions, and make a Discovery at
our Returns; but, Brother, quoth he, our Business requires haste, let us
therefore take away his Treasure, and bind him, and leave him in the Wood; for
it is better one perish than two: and if the worst comes to the worst, that he
should be unloosed and return home, we know at our return how to persuade that
what he has related is only Lies to disgrace us, and by that means to
insinnuate the more into Favor himself, and injure us. I like this Advice
well, quoth Philonzo; let us quickly put it in Execution, for the Night
hastens; with that returning to Innocentine, they asked him, what he intended
to do; who replied, What they did not. And so you shall, quoth Cruentius; and
so both running together laid hold on him, and without hearing him speak, bound
him, and took away his Treasure, and turning his Horse loose to range in the
Woods they departed. Thus ^^y poor Innocentine miserably bound, insomuch, that
the swelling of his Hands and Feet made him most sadly lament his grievous
Tortures: But Philonzo and Cruentius having rambled up and down the Wood for
the space of two Hours, could by no means find the Way out, insomuch that they
despaired of traveling any further that Night, but having not rode a
Flightshot further, it happened that a Dog having lost his Master, came fawning
on Cruentius, who presently laid hold of him, and tying him in a String,
followed the Dog, who forthwith brought them out of the Wood, and presently
after to a Shepherd's House where the Dog received present Entertainment; but
Philonzo and Cruentius none, where we shall for a time leave them, and return
to Innocentine, whom they left bound in the Wood.

Chap. V.
How Innocentine was unbound by an Hermet, and how afterward he saved a
beautiful Lady from Ravishment, and how the Lady requited him.

INnocentine being fast bound by his unnatural Brothers, lay till the Approach
of the Evening in a most miserable Condition, till at last a Hermet coming from
his Cell, to take the Cool of the Evening, heard the Groans of poor
Innocentine, and being moved with Pity, he addressed himself to the place (I
may well say) of Groans, where being come, his Eyes saw, what his Heart pitied,
his Heart pitied what his Hand relieved; for he forthwith conducted him to his
Cell, and made such Preparations for him as his. Necessity required, so that
the next Morning he was in a Condition to travel; but the Hermit viewing his
Guest, read in his Countenance the Characters of a noble and ingenious
Disposition, observing by his Deportment, that he was not a Man of ordinary
Education, besides being led by his own Inclinations, he accosts his Sra^ger in
this manner:

Sir, I perceive that Youth and Education prompts you to Bashfulness, and your
Bashfulness hinders the Liberty of your Speech, I therefore heartily entreat
you to inform me of your present Condition, and what I want in Power, I will
supply in Prayer for you; I will not stand to trouble you to relate the
Misfortunes, it is enough, and too much that I saw them, only tell me which Way
you intend to steer, and what you want.

Innocentine all this while amazed at the Courtesy of the Hermit, knew not
presently what to answer, but as well as his late Distemper, attended with a
multitude of Thoughts, would permit, he thus replied:

Most charitable Father, I could grieve that I was sorry for my last
Misfortune, in respect that the Happiness of your Acquaintance is derived from
it, I Will not trouble your Patience with the discouse of my Misfortune; only in
short, I am going upon a Design to save the Life of a renowned King, but this
Misfortune has put me out of a Capacity to follow my Intentions. Come, says
the Hermit, I know your Disease, I Will be your Physician, take this Cordial,
giving him a bag of Gold and Jewels, and return no complimental Answer, for I
am bound to do it; and if you want a Steed, I have one for you which this very
Day stragled hither, pray take him and use him as your own; but for this Sword,
which I intend for your use, pray return it if you live, if not, conceal the
Virtue, for it will preserve you against all Enchantments, which are now very
common to my woeful Experience, neither need you fear, whom you encounter with
it, for you shall not want success.

Innocentine not a little rejoiced at what the Hermit had told him, desired
liberty to depart, in order to which the Hermit conducted him to his Horse; but
it fell out that the Horse was his own, which he thought his Brothers had
carried away with them; the Hermit observing him look so strictly upon the
Horse, told him that he could not promise him the like Service from the Horse,
as he did from the Sword; No, Sir, quoth Innocentine, I believe I am better
acquainted with the Horse than you, for Yesterday he was mine, till taken from
me by Misfortune: but however, I cannot but express my hearty Thanks to you,
and at my return you shall know more of me; in the mean time, let Peace abide
with you; let me only beg your Directions to Green Ivyland, for I am altogether
a Stranger in these Parts. Your ready way, quoth the Hermit, is to go to
Mesemptronia, a City about three Leagues from hence, the way is direct through
several Villages, where you may at your pleasure enquire; but there is a
Forest which lies between a little Town called Corumbus and Mesemptronia,
where you must have a careful Eye, least you be set upon before you can provide
for Resistance; this is all that I can advise you, and so farewell.

Thus they departed, and after the expense of some Hours, Innocentine came to
the Forest which the Hermit told him of, where he was no sooner entered, hut he
was welcomed with many loud and lamentable Shrieks, which struck him into
Admiration; but being of an undaunted Spirit, and remembering the sad Estate he
himself was in the Day before, resolved to find out the place where he heard
this lamentable Noise; and being more directed by the Ear than the Eye; he at
length effected his Desires, for imemdiately in a Valley he espied two Villians
about to ravish a Lady of an incomparable Beauty, and being passionately
exasperated, he flew upon them like Lightning, but giving them leave to mount
themselves, they instead of fight presently run away, perceiving it was their
Brother: Innocentine perceiving their Flight, clapped Spurs and followed them,
but the Lady perceiving it, and fearful that two to one might be very
disadvantagious, cried out with what strength she had, Help, help, which
Innocentine hearing, fearing some other Accident had befallen the Lady,
speedily returned, but when he came, he found no such matter, but the Lady
being heartily glad of h^^ return, applied her self to him in this manner:

Most noble and renowned Knight, my late Fright has so disordered my thoughts,
that for the present I cannot return you those Thanks which are due to your
Merits; but if you please to add one Favor more to the rest, which is to
conduct me to my poor Habitation (from which place those Villians you saw,
having surprised me in a solitary Walk, dragged me) you will very much increase
my Happiness. To which Request Innocentine condescended, and in short time came
to the Place where he found a welcome Entertainment: So after many Ceremonies
past between them, the Lady requested to know what his Name and Birth was; to
which Innocentine replied, So much confidence have I of your Worth, that I will
not keep the least of my thoughts from you; so composing himself, he told her
his Name, Birth and Design, and likewise told her how his Brothers had dealt
with him, which he was confident were those whieh would have ravished her, had
not he by Providence prevented them; the Lady hearing his Relation, was much
astonished, but at last recalling herself from her Admiration, proceeded as
follows:

Most magnanimous and ingenious Knight, I cannot but acknowledge my Life and
Honor to be protected by your Virtue; I shall therefore in part of a Requital
communicate something to you for your Advantage, which in short is this: Not
far from this place there is an enchanted Castle kept by two Ladies, at which
Castle, (if you please to go) you woodcut of small castle and several people
shall find civil Entertainment from the Ladies; one of them will much press you
to Marriage, but by no means consent, but promise at your return to give
Satisfaction to her Request; tell them that likewise you have a short Journey
to take but the Horse dying in the Journey, you are now quite destitute; then
they will presently carry you into a spacious Stable, where they will show you
many Steeds, and bid you take your Choice; but refuse them all, but one, which
seems to be the meanest, and they will be very unwilling to lend you him: you
shall know him by this Sign, as soon as you come into the Stable you shall find
him said, and all the rest standing, I will not now any longer detain you,
leave your Horse with me till your return, and you shall accomplish your
Business. Thus Inocentine and the Lady parted, but we will now leave him and
return to the other Brothers, which are by this time come to Mesemptronia.

Chap. VI.
How Philonzo and Cruentius came to the Shepherd's House, but could not be
entertained; and how they lay under an Oak that Night, and the next Morning
took their Journey for Mesemptronia.

PHilonzo and Cruentius being come to the Shepherd's House immediately alighted
and knocked at the Door, but the old Shepherd and his Wife being newly gone to
Bed, were very unwilling to rise; at last the Shepherd hearing them grow more
violent in their Knocks, arose, and looked out of (I cannot say the Window) but
out of a Hole or Cranny, and asked. Who was there; to which Philonzo replied, A
couple of Passengers which had lost their Way in the Wood, and by a Dog which
we followed brought hither. The Shepherd's Wife which but a little before was
awaked out of her Sleep with sighing for the Loss of her Dog, starts out of her
Bed and cries, Oh, her dear Cut, and so runs down and lets in her Dog, and
after many Expressions of insufferable Joy, having entertain^^ her Dog with
many a sweet Kiss, she went to Bed and slept very heartily, whilst Philonzo and
Cruentius begged very earnestly for Entertainment to protect them from a Storm,
which they perceived was hastening upon them; but all their Entreaties were in
vain; for the Shepherd told them, That he and his Wife were abused not long
since by a Couple that desired to be entertained as they did, and therefore he
would not admit them by any means: At last, when they saw their Entreaties were
in vain, they departed, trusting themselves to the Protection of an Oak, where
they had not long reposed, but a great Tempest of Thunder and Lightning
disturbed them of their Rest, so that they forsook the place, as deeming it
dangerous to lie there in such tempestuous Weather; so wandering up and down all
Nigt, without any Rest, in the Morning they prepared for their Journey, and
being at last refreshed with the Heat of the Sun, they spurred cheerfully along
till they came within View of a (not stately but) well situated House, not far
from which, they espied a beautiful Lady walking so solitary, that she hardly
took notice of her own Thoughts: Philonzo riding toward her, and surprising
her on a sudden, put her into such an Amasement; that for the present she knew
neithre what to do or say; but Phi-well skilled in the Rudiments of malicious
Impudence, begins to accost her in this manner:

Madam, quoth he, I very much commend your Choice, you have chosen a pleasant
Morning, and a sweet Air for your private Meditations. Sir, replied the Lady,
the Walk and the Air would be more pleasant if you were further from it; I
wonder a Knight, as you seem to be, should be so unadvised, or rather uncivil,
to intrude without Notice or Acquaintance; Sir, if you are noble, show it by
your Eorbearance. to which replied Philonzo,

Madam, had you been less Beautiful, I had been less Ambitious; but, Madam,
your Beauty is the Author of my bold Intrusion, but I hope you have Goodness to
pardon, as well as I have Infirmities to offend. Sir, quoth the Lady, the
Vanity of Courtship has taught me to dislike a Courtier, I will therefore
leave my Walk to your Enjoyment. Nay, quoth Philonzo, I cannot so suddenly
dismiss you, for your Beauty has made such a Conquest of my Heart, so either
return what your Beauty has robbed me of, or I must be enforced to take it.
Sir, quoth the Lady, I neither know your Intent, not Meaning, but I expect you
to be civil, therefore wrong not my Expectations. At which Words, Philonzo
beckoning to his Brother Cruentine that stood within sight, presently with much
Rigor and Incivility laid hold on her, and dragged her into a Forest which
was within half a Mile, being assisted by his Brother Cruentine. I need not
tell the Reader of the many Tears, the grievous Complaints, the sundry Prayers
this poor distessed Lady made to those inhumane Villains, but all to no
purpose: For had not an unexpected Knight passed by, who hearing the Shrieks of
one in Distress, boldly approached to place, where he found these Villains
endeavoring to rob her of her Chastity, whom they 'spying, perceived him to be
their Brother, which they left bound in the Wood, ran away, and at last arrived
at Mesemptronia, where being come, they presently went to to their Inn, and so
to Rest, not at the least troubled at their barbarous Cruelty; the next Morning
approaching, they arose, and commanded a plentiful Dinner to be provided, and
that such Company as the City afforded should be invited to keep them Company,
being Strangers at that Time; to which their Host, preferring his own Gain,
condescended, and fore with sent for a Crew of the most notorious Cheats the
Town could afford, who plausibly treated the new come Guests, telling them of
the many Courtisans the City abounded withal, which were presently sent for,
and a great Banquet provided, to the Admiration of the diligently joyful Host;
but after some Days of their abode they began to feel a Consumption in their
Pockets, which caused them to consult of their Departure.

Chap. VII.
How Innocentine had his Desire in the enchanted Castle, with a Promise to
return; how he recovered the Golden Eagle from the Queen of Green Iveyland, and
how his Horse was turned into a Man, who afterward directed him what to do.

AFter Innocentine perceived which Steed it was which the Lady advised him to
request, he was very importunate with the Ladies to let him have that Horse
which was laid; to which they replied, Alas, that was the worst in the Stable,
desiring him to make some other Choice; but he replied, That the other were too
good and too lusty for him, in respect that he was a very bad Horseman. The
Ladies seeing that woodcut of man riding horse he would not be denied,
endeavored to enchant him, but their Enchantments could not take Effect,
because the Hermit's Sword, was a Preservative. Thus seeing all their Labor in
vain, they made him swear that he would return again, and he should have his
Desires; but to be short, having swore according to their Desires, the Horse
was brought forth, he leaping upon him, was on a sudden carried to Green
Iveyland, and in his Journey overthrew many Knights which waited there to
encounter any that should approach: But he with his good Sword and Steed made
slight of 'em; then he approached to the Brazen Walls, where he was welcomed
with the Roaring of Lions and Dragons, but as he brandished his Sword they fell
into a dead Sleep, then Innocentine passed freely: not long after he came to a
Fort which was guarded by Giants, who when they perceived his Approach,
presently came running at him with great Violence, but he no sooner brandished
his sword but they fell all asleep. At length, having many more Difficulties,
which are now too tedious to relate, he came to the Place where the Queen and
the Eagle was: The Queen and her Attendance beholding a Stranger so near her
Presence, began to rebuke his Insolency; but he brandishing his Sword, the
Queen and all her Attendance fell asleep, insomuch that they could not be
waked; in the mean time Innocentine alighted and took the Eagle, with no small
joy, and was departing, but his Horse would not by any means stir a Foot from
the Pl^ce, which made Innocentine in a doubt what to do; but beholding the
incomparable Beauty of the Queen, he drew near and saluted her as she slept,
after which, Innocentine cut off a Lock of the Queen's Hair, and left a Lock of
his in her Bosom, and then he took a Ring of rich Value from her Finger, and
put one of his in the same place; then finding her Picture about her Neck, he
took that off, and supplied the Place with his own. Having done these things,
he writes these Lines, and pins them upon the Sleeve of her Garment: Renowned
Queen, what here is done,
Was acted by a Monarch's Son:
But before I could depart,
I took your Eagle, left my Heart:
Accept the Change, and pardon the Abuse;
Virtue whilst you remain, will be in use.
Having thus done, he mounts his Horse with the Eagle in his Hand, and was
immediately brought to the Forest where he preserved the Lady from Ravishment:
His Steed making a Stand at a great River, would not go any further,
notwithstanding Innocentine used all the Skill he could with Switch and Spur,
but at last his Horse spoke, and bid him forbear, and alight; Innocentine not a
little amazed, alighted, then the Horse began to tell him, he must chop off his
Head, and throw it into that River, withal bidding him not to be afraid for he
intended him no Harm; But, says he, when you have throw me in, stand with your
Sword by the River, and in what Shape soever you see me appear, knock me down
again, till I arise in the Shape of a Man; Innocentine being something amazed
at this sudden and strange Alteration, knew not for the present what to do, but
after a little pause, he resolved to do it, which being done, he threw the Head
into the River, and it rose up the first time like a Lion, but he presently
knocked it down, then it rose up in several other Shapes, but he still kept it
down, but at last it arose like a tall proper Man, and then he helped it out,
which being done; the Man bid him fear nothing but follow his Advice, and give
Ear to him, whilst he informed him of something which might conduce to his
Benefit: I was, says he, a Knight in that enchanted Castle which you had me
out of, and all those fair Steeds you saw, were enchanted Knights; I am
likewise the Husband of that Lady you preserved from the Violence of your
Brothers, which Brothers will meet with you before you come home, with full
Resolution to kill you; but fear not, but hide the Ring and Picture, which you
had of the Queen, and desire them not to kill you, but tell them you will never
discover them to your Father, then they shall take away your Eagle and let you
go; Thus as you have preserved me and mine, I will preserve you and yours.

Chap. VIII.
How Philonzo and Cruentius obtained a counterfeit Eagle in the City of
Mesemptronia, and returning home met their younger Brother Innocentine, and
robbed him of his Eagle, and what after happened.

PHilonzo and Cruentius having spent most of their Money, at last agreed with
some in the City to get them an Eagle; which they pretended they could do,
which was not long effecting, for they got a very great Fowl, the nearest they
could like an Eagle, and gilded his Feathers, and brought it to them, which
they with much Joy accepted, giving a large Sum for it, and forthwith departed
the City; but as they traveled, it was their Fortune to meet their Brother
Innocentine carrying an Eagle in a silver Cage, at the sight whereof their
Eagle trembled and dyed; but without the least Salute to their Brother, they
run upon him, and would have killed him; but he, according to his Advice had
hid the Ring and Picture in a private place about him, which they discovered
not, but took away Cage and Eagle, with full intent to kill him; but he with
many passionate Expressions diverted their Intentions, promising them to become
their Servant, and never betray them to his Father: they hearing these
Promises, saved his Life, and so he became their Servant, and they journeyed
together; at last coming home, and carrying their Eagle in Triumph, they were
joyfully entertained; the King embracing the two Eldest, and commanding the
Youngest to be immediately put to Death for those Lies which his Brothers had
related of him; but Innocentine heartily begged of his Father that he might not
be put to Death, and so did his Brothers seemingly, but that he might be made
Inferior to the worst Servant in the House, to which the King, though,
unwilling, agreed: Thus was poor Innocentine, that deserved a just Reward, cast
out of his Father's Favor for ever. But it happened that not long after the
Queen of Green Ivy-land, hearing where her Eagle was, came with a great Train
to Arragon, and presented herself to the King, who was absolutely cured by the
Virtue of the Eagle. The Queen receiving that bountiful Entertainment which her
Estate required, asked the King how many Sons he had; to which the King
replied, Two; she desired she might be allowed so great a Favor as to see
them; immediately they appeared; so she called Philonzo, and asked him if he
was the Man that made so gallant an Attempt for her Eagle; he replied, It was
his poor Endeavor that obtained it. Pray, says she, let me see some Assurance;
did you leave me nothing, nor take nothing from me? No, replied Philonzo. Then,
quoth the Queen, you are not the Man; after him was presented Cruentius, whom
the Queen in like manner greeted, but he replied as Philonzo did, That he took
nothing from her, nor left any thing with her. The Queen concealing her Anger,
told the King that these Mysteries past her Imaginations; desired the King
ingeniously to tell her if he had no more Sons. Renowned Queen, I must confess
I had another Son, which now I own not; I think he may be living amongst the
mean Servants of my House, but for a Son I own him not. To which the Queen
replied, she must needs see him; Alas, replied the King, I think him not worthy
of my Presence, much more of so renowned a Queen as yourself: but to satisfy
your Requests, he shall be called; in the mean time the King departed, whilst
Innocentine approached the Queen's Presence, to whom the Queen discoursed as
follows:

Are you the youngest Son of this Royal King, or no? he replied, with a
blushing Countenance, No. What, are you his Servant? he replied, No. Friend,
you speak very mysterously, discover thy self. Then know, incomparable Lady,
that my Father being incensed against me, condemned me to dye; but by the
Request of my Brothers I was preserved, and became a Servant to the worst of my
Father's Servants, contenting my self with these poor Habiliments, which indeed
were they as rich as could be imagined, were too mean to be presented before so
worthy a Person, as, Madam, you are; and for myself, I could tremble into Ashes
at the sight of so excellent a Creature as your virtuous self; but I shall
remove so unworthy an Object from your Sight, and crave License to depart. No,
replied the Queen, you shall not; I have a few questions to ask you. My
Rudeness, most unparrall'd Lady, shall be as obedient to reply, as your Grace
shall be ready to demand, although I am unworthy to be the least of your
Creatures. The Queen hearing him express himself with so much Humility, and
Excellency of Speech, the King forgetting his Son was there, came suddenly into
the Presence of Queen, and beholding his Outcast, started back; the Queen
perceiving it, desired the King to yield her so great a Favor as to stay to
hear her ask his Son two or three Questions; the King not using to deny the
Request of such Persons, sat down, whilst the Queen thus expressed herself to
Innocentine: Was it you that took my Eagle from me, pray answer me without
Ceremony? To which he bowing himself, replied, Madam, I did. And what Token
left you with me, or took from me? Madam, a Lock of your Hair. Where is it?
replied the Queen. Next my Heart, Madam, replied Innocentine, and here it is.
But what did you leave me? said the Queen. A Lock of mine, replied Innocentine.
Great Prince, (said the Queen to the King) and here it is; but pray let your
Patience expect my farther Discourse with him; Come hither, said the Queen, to
bashful Innocentine, do you know this Picture and this Ring? Yes, Madam, and I
hope your Greatness knows these, (showing her the Picture and Ring which he had
took from her.) Come, says the Queen, give me the Picture, and instead of the
Shadow, take the Substance; I am resolved, renowned King, not to depart, till I
have made him Possessor of all I have. Admire it not; for it is nothing but
Truth.

The King, like a Man transported, at first thought the Queen to be possessed of
a Frenzy, but after more serious Debate, found all Truth which she had related,
and presently sent for his two Sons, Philonzo and Cruentius, and commands their
Heads to be struck off; but Innocentine seconded with his incomperable Lady,
persuaded his Father to save their Lives, and banish them; which the King,
though unwillingly, consented to, after which he embraced his Son, and told
him, in Requital of his great Abuses, he would settle his Kingdom upon him. The
Queen joyful to see the King embrace his Son, desired the King that hereafter
he would please to own her as his obedient Daughter. So Innocentine and the
Queen were shortly after married, and departed into their own Country of Ivy
land.

FINIS.
woodcut of prince and princess joining hands, several other people present

