A SERMON Preached at the Triennial Visitation Of the Right Reverend Father in
God, JAMES, Lord Bishop of LINCOLN, Held at HARTFORD, June 12. 1700.

By PHILIP FALL, Rector of Shenley in the County of Hartford, Prebendary of
Durham, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

Published by his Lordship's Command.

LONDON: Printed by W. Bowyer, for John Newton, at the Three Pigeons,
over against the Inner Temple Gate, in Fleet Street. 1700.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, JAMES, By Divine Permission Lord Bishop
of LINCOLN.
MY LORD,
WHEN Your Lordship was pleased, upon a Motion of the Reverend Dr. Stanhop,
seconded by the rest of the Clergy who heard this Sermon, to command me to
print it, I had nothing left me but to obey, at the hazard of meeting with
Readers less equal, or less indulgent, than the Learned Auditory in which I
preached it. I was called upon to attend His Majesty into Holland before I
could transcribe it for the Press, which is the Excuse I have to plead for its
not appearing sooner. And here I must crave leave to acquaint Your Lordship,
that the first New Book put into my hands at my Landing on the Other Side,
chanced to be the Rotterdam Journal, that gives an account of the Works of the
Learned. In the Article relating to England, I found a glut of Printed Sermons
amongst us complained of and reflected on in so rude and in so injurious a
manner On voit icy (Londres) des Sermons sortir en foul de dessous la Press.
Nos yeux ne voyent que Manne. En voulez vous scavoir la raison? C'est que les
Ministres ayant la liberte de lire leur Sermons en Chair, en achetent de tout
faits, et n'ent d'autre peine que de les lire, and passent ^our habiles gens a
peu de frais. Histoire des Ouvrages des Scavans, par Monsieur B -- Docteur en
Droit. Mois de Mars, 1700. Art. XIII. page 124.
, as might well discourage me, and others of my Brethren, from troubling the
World any more with our Labors in this kind, could we believe that the Author
of that Journal spoke any body's Sense but his own. He charge us
indiscriminately with a Plagiarism, of which I doubt whether the best
Intelligence and Information he could get, if he were put to it, would furnish
him many Instances. Indeed we do not usually hear of our Printed Sermons being
preached over again among our selves, but we have heard of their being
frequently so by certain Gentlemen abroad, with whom we shall never quarrel for
doing us that honor. The committing of Sermons to the Memory, is no such
infallible Means to prevent pilfering of other Men's Works, as the Journalist
would insinuate; and perhaps the Press has as often helped out at a dead lift
those who use that Way, as those who use the other. He might have learnt from
My Lord of Sarum's excellent History History of the Reformation of the Chapter of
England, Vol. l. Book III. page 317, 318.
, what Reasons set our First Reformers, who were Great and Wise Men, upon
Writing and Reading their Sermons, contrary to the general Practice before in
England; and what Accuracy and Exactness in those Composures has resulted from
the keeping up of that Usage among us ever since. And certainly so long as good
Sense, good Method, and good Language, shall make up the Character of good
Preaching, that which obtains in the Church of England shall take place of the
Declamatory Way, which for the most part has little to recommend it besides the
Noise and Heat of Action. Such flashy and frothy Pomp of Words without Matter,
shall vanish with the Breath of the Speakers; when the finished and elaborate
Discourses of our Sandersons and Tillotsons, read from the Pulpit, shall weigh
upon the Judgment and the Understanding, and shall convey a Light and
Conviction into the Mind that shall make every Man wiser and better who once
heard or now reads them. I forbear saying any more, lest while I am
endeavoring to right the Learnedest and most deserving Body of Men in the
Christian Church, from the Exceptions of a Person who has not treated them with
Common Respect or Good Manners, in a Paper designed to fly over all Europe, I
should seem to magnify my own Performance. The Meanness of it is, as it
happens, the best Apology that can be made for its Publication; for that will
render it less liable to the Suspicion of making Plagiaries, as there would be
no Robbers if none Traveled but Poor People. Your Lordship knows how willing I
was to have the Province assigned me at Hartford transferred to another, who
would have discharged in much better: but your Lordship insisting on your first
designation and appointment of me, it became me to submit. I then began to
think what would be most proper to say at that Meeting, and was determined to
the Choice of my Subject, by the Consideration of the State of that Part of
Your Lordship's Diocese where the Visitation was to be, abounding with ignorant
Fanatical Lay-Teachers, who make a Property of our People. And I entered the
more readily upon the Subject, that I was sure to have the best sort of
Dissenters on my side, who join with us in declaring against an Anarchy in the
Church, and in asserting a Separation from Other Works to Ministerial
Functions. Whatever Defects of another nature this Sermon may labor under, I
hope it will be found to contain honest and seasonable Truths, and to have Some
Things set right in it which peradventure were not altogether so before. Such
as it is, I lay it at Your Lordship's feet, and gladly embrace this occasion of
telling the World, what satisfaction we the Clergy of the Diocese of Lincoln
take, in having a Prelate of so much Candor and Temper, Affability and
Goodness, and of such other excellent Qualifications, set by a Great and Just
King to preside over us. Your Lordship fills a Chair venerable for Antiquity,
for extent of Jurisdiction, and for a long Succession of pious and learned
Bishops, in whose steps Your Lordship worthily treads. As Your Lordship goes
before us and governs us with the Care and Tenderness of a Father, so in return
I dare promise Your Lordship, without fear of being disowned by my Brethren, a
Filial Duty and Adherence on our part. I have always thought the Strength and
Glory of a Clergy to lie in their being thus united to their Bishop: and of so
happy an Union may we, York Lordship's Clergy, ever be an Example and a Pattern
to others. As for my self, besides the Ties of a Presbyter to his Diocesan, I
have very particular Obligations to Your Lordship, as my Benefactor. I hold my
Preferment in Hartfordshire from Your Lordship's Gift; and though the Possession
of it has been hitherto attended with some Trouble, yet that does in no wise
diminish my Gratitude and Thankfulness for the same. That Your Lordship may
never blush to have conferred Favors upon a Person wholly unmeriting them,
shall be the continual study and endeavors of,

MY LORD, YOUR LORDSHIP's most humble, most dutiful, and most obliged Servant,
Ph. Fall.

ACTS xviii. 3. And because he was of the same Graft, he abode with them, and
wrought: for by their Occupation they were Tentmakers.


A Just Vindication of the Sacredness and Prerogatives of our Holy Office,
cannot be thought an improper Argument to treat of in this Presence. We scarce
have an opportunity of handling it professedly, or with Decency, unless at such
a Time and on such an Occasion as this. Faith, Repentance, and the general
Duties and Obligations of Christianity, are the trite and repeated Themes of
our Discourses to the People, in the progress of our Ministry: But when we
solemnly meet together, as we do this Day, something more peculiarly relating
to our Selves, and to the Privileges or Exercice of our Function, is (I
conceive) expected from him on whom the Command is laid to fill up the Place
where I have now the honor to stand. The bold Invasion of the Ministry by Men
without Character or Mission, engaged in mean and sordid Occupations, rude and
unlearned, destitute of all those Helps and Assistances which can now only be
acquired by a liberal and ingenuous Education, is an Evil that spreads in this
Nation, and that (as I have with grief observed) too much affects this Part
where our Lot is fallen, and our respective Charges lie. When Men divide from
the Church, and proceed upon Principles which do not destroy the necessity of a
settled and orderly Ministry, there is room left to hope that they will not
superinduce Heresy to their Schism, but that at least the Essentials of
Christianity will be preserved whole and entire among them. The Case is
otherwise, where illiterate Artisans and Mechanics set up for Teachers. The
very Foundations of Religion must be subverted by the Unskilfulness of such
Guides, who know not how to fix upon rational and coherent Systems of Things.
As their Ignorance exposes them to be deceived, so their Presumption leads them
on to the deceiving of others. What an overheated Imagination suggests is then
confidently delivered, the Ancient Doctrines are laid aside, Monstrous
Opinions are set on foot, Errors are accumulated and multiplied without number,
and all ends at length in Frenzy and Enthusiasm.

Whatever some may think, the Evangelical Ministry is no less sacred than the
Legal Priesthood was. As then, so now, there is a particular Order of Men
appointed by God, who have the Direction and Intendency of Holy Things
committed to them, exclusively to others. No man takes this Honor unto
himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron Heb. v. 4.
. Here we have a plain Rule laid down, and upon it are all those succeeding
Sanctions grounded which condemn Sacrilegious and Uncanonical Intrusions into
the Ministry. But neither Divine nor Humane Laws are proof against Spiritual
Pride and Ambition. No Fences can keep it from breaking in upon the Public
Establishment and order. Mere Laics Non omit tam ipsius etiam conversationis
haereticae descriptionem, quam futilis, quam terrena, quam humana sit; sine
gravitate, sine auctoritate, sine disciplina; ut fidei suae congruens. --
Simplicitatem volunt esse prostrationem disciplinae, cujus penes nos curam
lenocinium vocant. -- Omnes tument, omnes scientiam pollicentur. -- Ipsae
mulieres haereticae, quam procaces! quae audeant docere, etc. -- Ordinationes
eorum temerariae, leves, inconstantes; nurc neophytos Onlocant, nunc seculo
obstrictos, nunc Apostatas noslros. -- Alius hodie Episcopus, cras alius: hodie
Diaconus, qui cras Lector body Presbyter, qui cras Laicus. Nam and Laicis
Sacerdotalia munera injungunt. Tertull. de Praescript. Haereticor. cap. xli.
page 217.
Men without Call, take up the Genser, and usurp an Office which does not
belong to them.

And as the Work into which the Ministers of the Gospel are sent requires a
special Designation, so likewise it requires peculiar Qualifications and
Endowments. A due Preparation must precede it, and many Degrees of Probation
must be passed through, before one presumes to enter upon it. Such a measure of
Knowledge in Divine Matters must be treasured up, as may in some sort supply
the Defect of those Extraordinary Succors which are now withdrawn, and were
never conferred but on the First Preachers of Christianity. Nor is that to be
attained but by the same Means by which all other Kinds of useful Knowledge are
acquired; viz. by Labor, Application, and Industry. The Sacred Writings, in
which the stupendous Mysteries of Divine Wisdom are locked up, ought to be
first and chiefly studied: but then all the necessary Auxiliaries of Humane
Science and Learning must at the same time be taken in, so far as they
ancillate to the Truths of Religion. To the Use of these Means a Blessing is
promised, and such an Assistance of the Holy Spirit as is needful, in the
Ordinary Way we are now in. Rash Men, who without these Qualifications assume
an Authority to Teach in Separate Congregations, are forced to set up other
Pretenses. Conscious of their Incapacity, they run back to the Miraculous Ages
of the Church, and cite the Example of the Inspired Doctors and Evangelists,
who merely through a Divine Power, and without Letters, did with amazing
success propagate the Gospel over the whole Earth. They boast of the same
Illuminations, and Effusions of the Spirit, which were poured out upon those
Ancient Servants of God. But the Vanity of their Claim is sufficiently detected
by their shameful Stumblings, by the many palpable Fundamental Errors which
they fall and lead others into. It Is not difficult to guess that the Spirit of
God can never be the Author of Doctrines, that undermine the Faith which he
himself did once deliver.

Further, the Ministry is a State of Life so abstracted from Secular
Occupations and Affairs, that it is incompatible with them. It is a State of
Retirement and Recess from the Cares and Concerns of the World. He that
dedicates himself to God, and to the Services of Religion, is thereby
understood to have renounced all other Professions and Ways of Life. It is a
Profession distinct of it self, capable of taking up the Whole Man, and of
filling up all the Spaces and Intervals of his Time. To attend constantly on
Divine Ministrations and Offices, to labor in the Word and Doctrine, to exhort
in public and to admonish in private, to be instant in season and out of
season, to watch over the Flock, to oppose the growth and to stem the torrent
of dangerous and prevailing Errors or of yet more dangerous and prevailing
Vices, to visit and comfort the Afflicted in their Sorrows, to assist Dying Men
in their last Throws and Agonies, to leave no other Part of the Duty of a
faithful diligent Pastor unperformed, is certainly a Task adequate to the
longest, the most active, and the most painful Life. Meditate upon these
things, give thy self wholly to them, says the Apostle to his Disciple Timothy 1
Epist. IV. 15.
: But how will he give himself wholly to them, who has a Multitude of Avocations
of another nature, that swallow up the best Portions of his Leisure, that
divide and distract his Thoughts, and that stifle and deaden that lively Sense
of Divine Matters which one engaged in Spiritual Functions ought always to bear
warm upon his Mind? From thence it appears, that the Exercice of a Lay-Vocation
is irreconcilable with the Dispensation of Sacred Things. And therefore as They
to whom a more excellent Work is committed, should not meddle with Cares
foreign to their Function, and should be so liberally provided for as to be
wholly free and exempt from those Cares; so They whose proper Employment lies
another Way, and who have Business more than enough of another Kind cut out for
them, ought to look on the Priestly Office as a Trust, which as they have no
Right to invade, so they have neither Abilities nor Opportunities to discharge.
It Is absurd to think that the sacred Depositum should be lodged in hands always
paddling in Dirt: so I call earthly mechanic Occupations, opposed to holy and
heavenly Ministries.

But why (are we told) should a Secular Calling be thought inconsistent with a
Spiritual Trust and Charge, when it is well known that St. Paul, whom God made
the glorious Instrument of converting so many Nations, professed a Trade, and
actually wrought at it, at the same time that he went about doing the Duties of
his Apostolate? Are the present Ministers of Religion greater than St. Paul, or
have they Prerogatives above him? Let them, as he did, relieve their
necessities by the labor of their hands, or let them confess themselves
Hirelings, and those only true Ministers who like him preach the Gospel freely,
and seek a Supply not from the Sweat of the people, but from some honest
Vocation of their own.

This Language is frequently in the mouth of those wild Sectaries who overthrow
all Rule and Order in the Church, who abolish all Distinction betwixt Profane
and Sacred Things, and among whom to sit all day in a Shop incapacitates none
to be a Teacher. They are Enemies not to be contemned. Their Numbers, their
many Errors in the Faith, and the open defiance they stand in to all regular
and instituted Ministry, renders them, if not formidable, yet considerable
enough to be took notice of. They become more and more so every day through the
countenance and encouragement they receive from Deists, Libertines, and other
loose People of the Age; who hating all Religion, will ever be ready to close
in with any Side or Party that helps on their Design of destroying it; and
which can by no other Method or Means be so effectually accomplished, as by
taking away the Credit and Reputation of Holy Functions. It is not therefore
our own Cause so much as the Cause of God and Religion that we plead, when we
stand up for the Honor and Dignity of our Ministry: which nothing can more
depretiate, than to suppose an Obligation, or even (as the State of the Church
is now) a Permission to join mechanic Labors with it.

And to give a reply to the Example said to be set us by so great a Man as St.
Paul, I have purposely chosen for my Subject the very Text that mentions his
exercising the Ministry and a Trade together. I shall take some pains to
consider this Place of Scripture, and to rescue it out of the hands of those
who draw Conclusions from it dishonorable and injurious to our Sacred
Profession. And forasmuch as I would dispatch this Matter at once, and answer
every Objection that carries some Show of Authority, I must bespeak your
Patience if peradventure this Discourse exceeds somewhat the usual Length. And
because he was of the same Craft, he abode with them, and wrought: for by their
Occupation they were Tent-makers.

The Persons spoken of here are Aquila and his Wife Priscilla, converted Jews,
who formerly dwelt at Rome, but then at Corinth. Claudius Caesar had by an
Edict expelled the Jews our of Italy, as both St. Luke in this Place, and
Suctonius in the Life of that Emperor In Claud, cap. xxv.
, inform us. Aquila and Priscilla were exiled with the rest. Upon this they
withdrew into Greece, and went to live at Corinth, a wealthy and trading City.
These Persons had an Occupation and a Calling, which was that of Tent-making:
They were by their Occupation Tent-makers, says the Text. The Word in the
Original is (...), which whether it be rightly translated or no, I I think it
not material to dispute. In shall only observe, that some Critics have
rendered the Word otherwise. Now whilst Aquila and Priscilla were at Corinth,
St. Paul came thither also, meaning to preach the Gospel in that City, as he
had done before in the other Cities of Greece, and more lately at Athens. The
Work he came about requiring some stay See Verse. 11. and 18.
, he took up his habitation in the House of Aquila and Priscilla: and the
reason given in the Text why he chose to sojourn and to abide with them, is,
because he was of the same Craft; by which is understood, that he likewise was
a Tent-maker as they were. And accordingly it is said that in fact he wrought
and labored with them in that Occupation. It Is added, that every Sabbath he
resorted to the Synagogue, where he reasoned with the Jews and Greeks,
persuading them, and testifying unto them that Jesus was the CHRIST. This is
the full import of the Text, which we now have under consideration.

In discoursing thereon, I shall do these three Things.

I. I shall inquire in what sense it can be admitted that St. Paul was a
Tent-maker, what Motives induced him to practice that Occupation whilst he
traveled about preaching the Gospel, and how far Christian Ministers are
concluded by his Example in this Matter. II. I shall account for some Passages
out of Ancient Constitutions, Councils, and Fathers, which might be turned upon
us in the present Controversy. III. Having proved that Evangelical Pastors and
Ministers, are by the nature of their Function dismissed from Manual Labors
and Occupations, and generally from all those Cares with which Secular Persons
are taken up and perplexed; I shall show how much they are to blame, if through
Love of the World they voluntarily resume and involve themselves in those
Cares; if through Levity of Spirit they dissipate their Time in foolish
Diversions and Amusements, or even in fruitless and unprofitable Studies; if
they do not, in so privileged and recollected a State of Life, bend their
utmost application and endeavors, to the enriching of their Minds more and
more with the Knowledge of Things excellent and proper for them, to the
adorning of their Province, and to the fulfilling of their Ministry; since
therefore they enjoy this Exemption and Immunity that they may be enabled so to
do.
I. I shall inquire in what sense it can be admitted that St. Paul was a
Tent-maker, what Motives induced him to practice that Occupation whilst he
traveled about preaching the Gospel, and how far Christian Ministers are
concluded by his Example in this Matter.

In order to which I must observe, That it was a Custom among the Jews, of what
Rank or Quality soever, to teach their Children some ingenious Craft or Art,
not only as a remedy against Idleness, but as a reserve in time of Want,
whereto their frequent Expulsions from home, and Dispersions abroad, had taught
them they might be reduced when they least dreamed of it. A Man born to an
Estate, and unacquainted with Labor, if Misfortunes drive him from his Native
Country, and divert the Stream that was wont to supply and flow in to him, must
needs be very miserable: whereas an Artificer will live any where. Artem
quaevis terra alit. This the Jews used to express by saying, in their
sententious way, that if there be a six years Famine, it will not come near the
dwelling of an Artificer (...) Buxtorf. Florileg. Hebr. p. 23.
. We have a memorable Instance of this Custom in those two young Jewish
Brothers, Chasinai and Chanilai, whose Story Josephus relates at large Antiq.
Jud. lib. xviii. cap. 12.
. They, with other Jews inhabiting the City of Neardaea in the Province of
Babylon, were a remnant of the Captivity planted there by the Kings of Assyria.
Chasinai and Chanilai were Persons of note amidst their scattered Tribes. They
were nevertheless put with a Weaver to learn the Trade, which, says the
Historian, was no disparagement to them (...), etc.
, for the reason before rehearsed. But their Master handling them one day
somewhat too severely, the high-spirited Youths could not brook that usage:
They resented it to that degree, that they flew out into Arms, drew many
Followers after them, took the Field, and well nigh caused a Revolution in the
State of Parthia. Whether this Custom was common from the beginning of all the
Oriental Nations, or that they borrowed it from the Jews, as they did many
others, I cannot say; but thus much is certain, that it remains in force among
diverse of those Nations to this day. It makes a part of their Religion, and is
passed into so general a Law, that he who fills the Throne is not dispensed
from it. Even he also must profess some Trade, and now and then sit and work at
it, with those very Hands with which at other times he weilds a Scepter
Knolles's Turkish History, Vol. II. page 943.
. The Lettered Men among the Jews, having like others learnt some piece of
Mechanism in their Infancy, spent afterward their interstitiary or spare-Hours
therein, and one would wonder what homely Crafts some of them took up with.
Thus Rabbi Jose was a Currier or a Leather-dresser; Rabbi Jochanan was a
Shoemaker, and from thence was firnamed Sandalar, i. e. one that makes
Sandals or Shoes; and so of others Drus. Prae^erit. lib. v. page 188.
. What particular Art Rabban Gamaliel Ben Juda (President of the Sa^hedrin,
after its translation to Jafne) was versed in, I know not: but of him we have
an Apophthegm yet extant, delivered to his Disciples, which says, that the
Labor of the Hands ought to be joined with the Study of the Law (...) Buxtorf.
Florileg. page 161. Drus. Apophth. lib. 1. page 15.
. And this seems to have been a common and received Maxim among the Rabbis,
handed down from one to another, and so taught uniformly in all their Schools.

St. Paul was brought up at the feet of the Hebrew Masters Acts xxii. 3.
, and early imbibed all their Documents and Precepts. The Authority then of the
Rabbinical Chair, added to the many Examples before him among his Cotemporaries
and Equals, must easily prevail with him to take up a Craft, although his
present Circumstances might not require it: and when nothing remained but to
make choice of one, his Genius and Inclination, or other Reasons which it
concerns us not to know, might as easily determine him to that of Tent-making.
Which after all was none of the despicablest Employment, if we understand the
Word in the Original, not of Tents strictly so called, but of Aulaea, that is,
rich Tapestries and Canopies, such as were wrought only for the Palaces of
Kings and Nobles, the Word admitting of both constructions alike Vid. Critic.
S. in loc.
. Whatever it was, it is plain that St. Paul's Birth and Education were above
it. He was born with the Privilege of a Roman Citizen Acts xvi. 37, 38. --
xxii. 25, etc.
, which was a Mark of Distinction in those days, when conferred on single
Families or Persons, and not on a Mixed Multitude or City. It was for the most
part the Reward of Services done by Strangers and Men of another Country and
Nation to the Roman State and Commonwealth, and it ennobled those who had
merited to obtain it. And that this was the Case of St. Paul, the excellent
Grotius has shown, by observing that Tarsus, the Capital of Cilicia, in which
Saint Paul was born, was no Colony nor Municipium of the Romans, having the Jus
Civitatis annexed to it, how large Franchises soever it might otherwise be
invested with by them: that consequently this Honor which St. Paul challenged
as his Birthright, must have been derived to him from one of his Ancestors,
that had signalized himself in the Wars of Augustus Caesar against Brutus and
Cassius, or in those of the same Augustus against Marc Anthony: from whence is
to be collected (pursues that incomparable Person) that St. Paul was issued of
a wealthy and opulent Family Tarsus non Colonia erat, sed (solummodo) libera
Vrbs, Plinio. tesle, lib. V. cap. 27. Concessam Tarsensibus libertatem ab
Antonio dicit Appianus, Civil. lib. V. Et Dion Crysostomus I. Orat. Tarsens.
multa privilegia recitat ab Augusto tributa Tarsensi Civitati, non autem jus
Coloniae aut Municipii, qualibus jus Civitatis Romanae competebat, ut diximus
D. ad Municipal. Et Vlpianus inter Ciliciae Colonias Tarsum non nominat. Restat
ergo ut aliquis majorum Pauli bellis civilibus, quae inter Caesarem Augustum
and Brutum Cassiumque, aut etiam inter eundem Caesarem and Antonium
intercessere, jus illud sibi comparaverit. Vnde colligas ex opulenta familia
fuisse Paulum; neque vana esse quae veteres Graeci ad hunc locum dixere. Annot.
in Act. xxii. 28.
. And accordingly Photius brings in our Apostle answering Lysias in Terms,
which none could use but one that was well Descended (...). Epist. cir. page
145.
. Now Tarsus was an Academy, which for the Profession of all the Liberal
Sciences, contended with the then celebrated Schools of Athens and Alexandria,
nay surpassed them, if we may believe Strabo (...) (scil. Tarfens.) (...).
Geograph. lib. xiv. page 673. and 675.
, a Writer of good credit. There St. Paul laid the first foundations of his
Studies; there he furnished himself with the Learning and Wisdom of the Greeks;
read, perused, and digested their Books; as appears even now by his Quotations
out. of Aratus Acts xvii. 28.
, Menander 1 Cor. xv. 33.
, and Epimenides Tit. i. 12.
, Authors of great name in Ancient Greece. From Tarsus he went to Jerusalem, to
the end that under the Discipline of the Hebrew Sages, and of the Doctors of
his own Religion, he might acquaint himself thoroughly with the Institutions
and Divine Philosophy of Moses. Here is nothing that suits with the Character
of a poor Handy craftsman: here are Strains quite beyond it: and to set out
upon such a Journey and Expedition, merely for the improving and the perfecting
of his Mind, must be confessed to have been an Undertaking of which a mean
indigent Person, one servilely bound to a Trade, could not be capable. Such
Men's Thoughts as well as Abilities have used to creep a great deal lower. I
marvel how this came to be so much overlooked, and this great Apostle, who for
the eminency of his Knowledge, and his exquisite Skill in all polite and humane
Literature (abstractedly from those admirable Gifts and Graces of the Holy
Ghost, with which he was afterward endowed) might be compared to the most
renowned Philosophers of old; how he, I say, should now be thought to have
originally been neither better nor worse than a poor paltry Artisan.

The great Credit and Esteem which St. Paul was in at Jerusalem, shows him to
have been no vulgar and obscure Man. He was known to the High Priest, and to
all the Estate of the Elders Acts xxii. 5.
, that is, to the whole supreme Council of the Sanhedrin. He had access to
them, and we find him entrusted by them with a Power and Commission, which for
their own honor, and the honor of their Religion, they would never have put
into mean and disreputable hands. For they made him Inquisitor of the Faith, as
it were, among them. They authorized him to search after the Christians, and to
commit to prison as many as he found of that way Acts ix. 2.
. Having, in pursuance of that Power, made a cruel havoc of the Church at
Jerusalem Acts viii. 3.
, he was going to do the like at Damascus, when a miraculous voice from Heaven
struck him to the earth, and wrought his Conversion Acts ix. 3. etc.
. My manner of Life, (says he, in his Defense before King Agrippa) which was at
the first among mine own Nation at Jerusalem, know all the Jews Acts xxvi. 4.
. He who could boldly appeal to the Testimony of a whole Nation, and call upon
it to witness his Conversation and manner of Life, must have made a Figure in
it above what a silly Plebeian and Artisan can in reason be presumed to have
made. Such a one might perchance be known among his Neighbors, but could not
be considerable enough to draw the eyes and observation of a great People upon
him. And when we hear Festus crying out from the Tribunal on which he sat with
Agrippa, Paul! thou art beside thy self! much Learning does make thee mad Acts
xxvi. 24.
! we can never think that he took the Man who stood before him, and to whom he
thus spoke, for one of the Common Tribe of Mechanics: but to account
rationally for those Words, we must suppose them grounded on an intimation of
St. Paul's Learning, and other great Qualifications, given before to the
Governor, by some of the Jews themselves, who knew St. Paul, and with
implacable malice persecuted him for this very reason, that he, a Pharisee, a
Man of such note and reputation, had deserted them, and now turned upon them
that very Learning which he had acquired in their Schools.

St. Paul then was a Tent-maker, and took up that Craft, no otherwise than as
the greatest Rabbis and Doctors among the Jews took up some one some another
Calling. And as what they did was merely by way of prevention against sudden
and surprising Turns of Fortune, to which all Men are subject, so they were not
thereby understood to derogate from the Dignity of their Rank, or to debase
themselves into the condition of ordinary Mechanics. There is a visible
difference betwixt the taking up of a Craft in that Way, and the assuming it as
a proper Vocation, and making it one's daily Task and Business. The first may
be the effect of Prudence and Caution, but an Idea of Vileness and Contempt is
affixed to the last. In a word, it may with as much truth be affirmed, that the
most illustrious Professors of Wisdom among the Jews, were all but so many
abject Handycraftsmen, as that St. Paul was so. He has been too much lessened
by this Notion and Conceit of him, which some heretofore have too easily
entertained, and others of late have industriously promoted, because they have
had an End to serve in it.

Thus much being premised, his making Tents at Corinth after he was called to
be an Apostle and a Preacher in the Christian Church, is next to be examined:
and thereupon the following Considerations will arise, which will demonstrate
that his Case was Singular, so that the present Ministers of Religion neither
are nor can be concluded by his Example in this Matter. Here then,

1. We ought to remember how exceedingly zealous and observant he himself says
he was of the Prescriptions and Traditions of his Fathers Gal. i. 14.
, which indeed he speaks with reference to the Time that preceded his
Conversion: But by what he declares in another Place, touching the very point
now in question, that unto the Jews he became as a Jew, that he might gain the
Jews; to them that were under the Law, as under the Law, that he might gain
them that were under the Law 1 Cor. ix. 20.
; he clearly intimates that in the whole Course of his Ministry he preserved a
great regard for the Jews, and (so far as could be done) complied with such
Popular Customs as he found among them, that by so doing he might the better
ingratiate himself with them, which he judged would facilitate the progress of
the Gospel, the noble End he pursued and aimed at in all his Labors. To work
sometimes with his hands, and in that to keep up to a conformity with their
learned Rabbis and Doctors, was a Method of Insinuation very likely to take
with that People, tenacious of their Old Customs even to superstition; and it
was, we know, attended with success. This then is no otherwise to be looked on
than as an Act of Condescension in the Apostle purely prudential and temporary,
accommodated to the Weakness and Prejudices of the Jews, whom he sought to
gain, and not designed by him to be a standing perpetual Rule to those that
should succeed him in Pastoral Cares and Offices.

2. The unsettled Condition of the Church at that time, is what ought also to
be considered on this occasion. There was no certain Provision as yet made for
those who labored in the Ministry. The voluntary Offerings and Contributions
of the Faithful, were the only Fund which the Church then had to answer all
Exigencies. And though the Charity of the Apostolic Ages was indeed wonderful,
nevertheless since the Apostle tells us that not many Mighty nor Noble were
called 1 Cor. i. 26.
, but the far greater part of those Primitive Converts throughout the World,
were Persons more remarkable for the piety and sanctity of their Lives, than
for the largeness of their Estates, or the splendour of their Fortunes, it is
evident that the Treasure of the Church could not be great, the small number of
the Rich bearing no proportion with the multitude of the Poor. In that state of
things, who can wonder if St. Paul, out of mere generosity and nobleness of
Mind, chose rather to take up that Craft which in his younger years he had
learnt in view of such an Incident and Emergency as this, and to draw those
Supplies from it which his long and expensive Voyages in the Service of the
Gospel might sometimes cause him to want, than to be a Charge to the Churches
which he saw already burdened above what they could bear? But where there is
not a Parity of Case, nothing can be inferred from such a Practice. He that is
called to serve at the Altar in a Nation thoroughly converted to Christianity,
and able to afford an honorable Maintenance for the support of Divine Offices,
needs not do that for it which St. Paul did for the poor proselyted Jews and
Gentiles in his days.

3. When St. Paul wrought at a Trade, it abated nothing of his Vigilance and
Care for the Churches, it obstructed not his attendance on the Duties of his
Ministry, and he could have done no more though he had not wrought at all. The
Work of God did not stand still, while the other went on. So many Countries
traveled over and over, so many Nations brought to the Knowledge of Christ and
to the Obedience of the Cross through his means, are a proof of this Truth. He
labored with his hands, and yet he preached and wrote as if all his Time and
Thoughts had been spent in Study and Meditation. And the reason of that is
plain. The wonderful assistances of the Holy Ghost, common to him with the
other inspired Men of that Age, were to him instead of those. When ye shall be
brought before Rulers and Kings for my sake (says our Blessed Savior to his
Apostles) take no thought beforehand what ye shall speak, neither do ye
premeditate: but whatsoever shall be given you in that hour, that speak ye: for
it is not ye that speak, but the Holy Ghost Mark xiii. 9, 11. Mat. x. 19, 20.
. St. Paul then, relying on this Promise of the Holy Jesus, might very safely
bestow some of his Hours of leisure and retirement in working privately for his
Necessities, which he could not have spared had he been left destitute of those
extraordinary Helps and Succors he trusted to from above, but must have
employed them in preparing himself for such Solemn Performances as the nature
of his Function required. And can he in this be followed and imitated by the
present Preachers of the Gospel? who by unwearied Pains and Toils, by a
continual bent and intendment of Thought, by a frequent substraction even of
the necessary Refreshments of Life to gain Time, must now endeavor to acquire
that, or indeed but a very small measure and proportion of that, which the
First Ministers of Christianity received from the immediate Influx of God's
Spirit, who enlightened their Minds, and put the very Words into their Mouths
that they were to use when they spoke in public.

4. St. Paul seems to have been aware of the ill use that might be made of the
Example he gave, and therefore takes great care, throughout his Writings, to
assert the Liberty and Privilege of the Evangelical Ministry, and to free it
from any such obligation to Manual Labor. He professes that what he did was
purely voluntary, and the result of his own Choice, and ought not to be made a
matter of Duty or Necessity in others. he shows the equity of making a
Retribution to those who spend themselves, and neglect their own Temporal
Concerns, to procure our Spiritual Good. The IXth Chapter of his First Epistle
to the Corinthians, is a long set Discourse upon that Subject. There he clearly
insinuates, that of all the Apostles, truly or falsely so called, he only and
Barnabas, the Companion of his Travels Barnabas, Pauli diu comes, multim ab
exemplo ipsius traxerat. Grot.
, wrought with their hands. He tells the Corinthians, that he and Barnabas had
power to forbear working likewise Verse. 6.
, and to challenge an Honorary from the Churches, as well as others that did
so. For, as he argues, Who goes a warfare any time at his own charges? Who
planteth a Vineyard, and eats not of the Fruit thereof? Or who feeds a
Flock, and eats not of the milk of the Flock? If we have sown unto you
Spiritual Things, is it a great thing if we shall reap your Carnal Things? If
others be partakers of this Power over you, are not we rather? Nevertheless, we
have not used this Power -- 7, 11, 12.
. The Power he speaks of, is an Exemption from Manual Labor, and a Right of
being provided for by the Church, which the other Apostles claimed and used,
but which he and Barnabas, of their own accord, and upon particular motives,
did decline. As it was a Spontaneous Act of them two, so it could be no Law to
the rest of the Apostles, nor to any subsequent Ministers of Religion. Neither
would the Reasons always subsist, that had put him and Barnabas upon a Practice
in which he owns they stood single and alone. God would soon enlarge the
Borders of his Church, and then nothing could hinder Christian People from
enlarging themselves also toward their Teachers. Do ye not know (for thus he
immediately subjoins) that they which minister about Holy Things, live of the
things of the Temple? and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers of the
Altar? Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel should
live of the Gospel -- 13, 14.
. Here he referrs to that remarkable Saying of our Blessed Savior, that the
Workman (even he who lays himself out on the great Work of Men's Salvation, and
is painful and diligent therein) is worthy of his Meat Matt. x. 10.
, and ought consequently to enjoy a Vacation from other Works and Labors.

Nor did St. Paul always live by making of Tents. Sometimes he accepted of the
Benevolence of the Churches. For in his Epistles, he speaks of supplies sent
him once and again from Macedonia 2 Cor. xi. 8, 9. Phil. iv. 10, etc.
.

I proceed,

II. To account for some Passages out of Ancient Constitutions, Councils, and
Fathers, which might be turned upon us in the present Controversy.

1. Such is that cited out of the Apostolical Constitutions (commonly, but
untruly so called) in which the Apostles, whom the Fictitious Author personates
all along, urge their own Example to stir Men up to Bodily Labors. We are
(thus they are made to speak) employed in dispensing the Word of the Gospel; we
do not therefore disuse the Labor of the Hand; but are occupied some in making
Tents, some in Fishery, some in Husbandry (...). Lib. II. cap. 63.
. If St. Paul made Tents, whilst he went up and down the World planting and
gathering Churches, he wrought privately in a House and at his Lodging. Text.
, and mostly at Night 1 Thessalonians. ii. 9. ii These. iii. 8.
, after the Day spent in public Exhortation and Teaching: But how Fishery and
Husbandry, or the like Rustic Arts, which require the Day, and a settled
Residence in a Place, should be consistent with that unfixt ambulatory Life
which the other Apostles led no less than he, is not to be comprehended.
Fishers some of them we grant to have been at the first, and to have upon
occasion practiced that Calling, even after our Lord's Resurrection, and until
the Day of Pentecost Joh. xxi. 3, etc.
. But when they had on that Day received the last Seal of their Ministry by the
Mission of the Holy Ghost, and thereupon they became (as 'twere) Other Men,
entered upon a New Scene, dispersing themselves among all Nations to preach the
Kingdom of God, it cannot be shown that from thenceforwards they meddled any
more with that or other the like Occupations. In short, the Author of these
Constitutions is an Impostor, who to give a reputation to his Dreams would
entitle the Apostles to them. And I am deceived if this Passage be not as good
an Instance of the Spuriousness and Suppositition of the Book, as any thing
that has been observed out of it for that purpose, by learned Men of all
Communions.

2. There is a Canon of the IVth Council of Carthage that is indeed very
express, and the Words in which it is conceived are these: Clericus victum and
vestimentum sibi, artificiolo, vel agricultura, absque officii sui detrimento
paret Can. 52. Huc etiam spectant Canones 51, and 53, ejusdem Concilii.
Clenicus, quantim, libet verbo Dei eruditus, artificio victum quaerat. Can. 51.
Omnes Clerici, qui ad operandum validiores sunt, artificiola discant. Can. 53.
. But besides that the Clause, absque officii sui detrimento, eludes the force
of the Canon, because it is not understood how a Clerk can exercise a Trade, or
Agriculture, without detriment to his Office, I have this further to answer:
That it is with great reason doubted whether there ever was such a Council, held
(as it is said) anno 398. (the learned Justell absolutely denies it Quod fingunt
de alio Concilio Carthaginensi, quod IV tum vocant, and Honorio IV. and
Eutychiano C^ss. convenisse narrart, plane repudiandum est; nec fides adhibenda
Canonibus CIV quos sine auctoritate huic Concilio aseribunt. Praefat. ad Cod.
Canon. Eccles. Afric. page 317.
) or, if there was, whether the CIV Canons that now go under that name, are the
true and genuine Acts of that Council Du Pin. Nouvelle Bibliotheque, Tom. II.
page 356.
. This we certainly know, that in the ancient Code of the African Councils,
there is not the least mention made either of that Council or of those Canons;
although there are no fewer than XVI several Councils of Carthage, all of them
held under Aurelius Bishop of that See, from the Year 394 to 419 inclusive, and
moreover the two Councils of Hippo and Milevi, taken into that Code. How a
Council in which so many Decrees had been made for the Reformation of
Church Discipline, should come to be omitted and left out of that Code, is (if
such a Council had been) altogether unaccountable: considering especially, that
the same Aurelius, under whom that supposed Council is said to have been held,
presided also in the great Council of Carthage of the Year 419, which fixed the
African Code. Nay, there is a Canon in this last, directly contrary to that
very Canon in the other out of which the Objection is made. It Is the XVIth I
speak of, which forbids Churchmen to take Farms, or to be other Men's Baylies,
or to get their Living by any sordid illiberal Employment; but to remember what
is written, that no Man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of
this life (...).
. We must think the African Bishops strangely inconsistent with themselves, to
believe them capable of approving and disproving, of allowing and condemning,
one and the self same thing almost with a breath. Wherefore since the Authority
of this last great Council, called the Council of Carthage by way of
excellency, and under that name received of old by all the Eastern Churches
Vid. Ann^r. dectiss^^ Bcveregii in Canones Conc. Carthag. page 202.
, is uncontrovertible, that of the other may very justly be suspected and
called into question. Neither are those CIV Canons of the IVth Council of
Carthage to be found in the ancient Collection of Dionysius Exiguus Ext. ap.
Christoph. Justell. Biblioth. Jur. Canon. vet. Tom. 1. page 183. and seq.
, who exactly transcribes the African Code: nor the least footstep of them to
be seen in the no less ancient Abbreviation of the Councils made by Fulgentius
Ferrandus Ext. ibid. page 447. and seq.
, who was Deacon of Carthage in the time of the Emperors Justin and Justinian,
and was no doubt perfectly acquainted with the Records and Affairs of that
Church. Further, in some Manuscripts they are entitled, Statuta Ecclesiae
antiqua; and particularly in one, Statuta Ecclesiae Orientis antiqua Council.
Labb. Tom. II. page 1198.
; so uncertain is the account which we have of them. Lastly, in the Is It of
those Canons mention is made of the Doctrine of Original Sin, in opposition to
the Pelagian Heresy, that was not heard of in Africa until the Year 411, that
is, 13 Years after the Date of those Canons; which shows that they must be a
latter Compilation. All these Remarks put together destroy any Argument deduced
from those Canons, and built on no better Authority than that of the Council to
which they are attributed. A fitter opportunity could not be offered me to
declare my sense about that Council, than now when so many Learned Men are met
together, part of whose Business it is to inquire into such things. But because,

3. In the approved Writers of the IVth, Vth, and the next following Centuries,
we sometimes meet with Expressions seeming to injoin Manual Labor to the
Clergy, I must likewise consider them; and I shall do it so, as to account for
whatever we find of that kind in the Books of those Times. What I have to say
amounts in short to this: That where Clerks are exhorted to work and labor
with their hands, it is meant not of Parochial, but of Conventual and
Congregational Clerks. Devout Men began early to form themselves into Religious
Communities, and to live under certain Institutes or Rules; which among other
Exercices proper to the Ascetic Life, such as Prayer, Fasting, and the like,
recommended Manual Labor also, as a means to avoid Idleness, and to keep the
Body under. There were two sorts of Persons that entered into those Societies,
and embraced that kind of Life, viz. Laymen and Ecclesiastics. Of the first,
some before their retreat from the World had been trained up in one Calling,
some in another: Some had been Husbandmen, some Artificers Multi ex servili
condition, and ex vita rusticana, and plebeio labor, ad Monasticam vitam
transibant. D. Aug. Lib. de Oper. Monach. cap. xxii.
. These were not only allowed, but excited to work at their several Crafts, so
far as it could be practicable in a Cloister, and they might spare time from
their Devotions: and that not for private gain, but for the benefit of the
Society, or of the Poor. In process of time, as Sloth and Inaction have ever
been the blemish and reproach of the Monastic Orders, these Men refused to
work; pretending thereby to fulfill that Saying of our Blessed Savior in his
Sermon on the Mount, Consider the Lillies of the field how they grow, THEY WORK
NOT, neither do they spin Matt. vi. 28.
. In opposition to these Men, St. Augustine, at the request of Aurelius Bishop
of Carthage spoken of before, wrote his Book de Opere Monachorum, as he himself
tells us in his Retractations Vt de Opere Monachorum Librum conscriberem, illa
me necessit as compulit, quod cum apud Carthaginem Monasteria esse coepissent,
alii se su^^ manibus transigebant, -- alii vero it a ex oblationibus
religiosorum vivere volebant, ut nihil operantes -- se potius implere
praeceptum Evangelicum jactarent, ubi Dominus ait, respicite volatilia coeli,
and lilia agri, etc. Propter hoc venerabilis senex Aurelius, Ecclesiae ipsius
Civitatis Episcopus, ut hine aliquid describerem jussit. Lib. II. cap. 21.
; and much has been said since against the Laziness of those plebeian Lay-Monks
by St. Cyril of Alexandria Epist. ad Calosyr. Oper. Ton. (...) page 365.
, St. Isidore of Pelusium Lib. I. Epist. 49. ad Paulum Coenobiarch. and 298. ad
Lucam Coenobiarch.
, and others, who came after St. Augustine. As for Ecclesiastics living in
Monasteries, they were subject to the Discipline of those Houses, and so fell
likewise under the obligation of laboring with their hands. This is noted by
Epiphanius, as a known Practice in the Monasteries of Egypt Advers. Haeres.
Lib. III. Tom. 2. Haet. 80.. 6.
. And there is not much to be said against it: Because though these Men might
retain their Character, yet they were under no actual, or no full and plenary
Exercice of their Function. Some of them were shut up in those Houses by way of
Correction and Punishment Conc. Agathcan. 50. Conc. Epaon. can. 22. Conc.
Aurel. III. can. 7. Conc. Narbon. can. 6. Conc. Tolet. IV. can. 29. and 45.
Hortatus sum ut ageres poenitentiam, -- ut solitudinem peteres, ut viveres in
Monasterio, etc. S. Hieronym. Epist. ad Sabinionum Diaconum, qui virginem ad
stuprum sollicitaverat. Oper. Tom. I. page 231. Edit. Froben.
: and it was not inconvenient that they who had demeaned themselves disorderly,
should there be made to expiate the Faults and Errors of their Lives, by hard
and severe Labor.

But now these and the like Cenobitical Constitutions neither did nor could
affect the Parochial Clergy, living in the great and open Commerce of Men,
attending on the Public Ministries of the Church, busied in Pastoral Cares,
obliged to have a constant eye over their Flocks, and in a word taken up with
other more weighty Affairs to be able to do that also which recluse and
solitary Men might have leisure enough to do. And so St. Augustine tells the
Monks, in the Book abovementioned: agnoscite Ecclesiarum quibus servimus talem
consuetudinem, ut nos ad illa Opera ad quae vos hortamur, vacare non sinant De
Op. Monach. cap. xxv.
. But we need only read St. Jerome's Epistles to Nepotianus and to Rusticus, to
know the sense of the Church about this matter. In that to Rusticus, who had
chosen the Monastic Life, St. Jerome presses the necessity of filling up the
Vacancies of his Time with Bodily Labor, so as never to be Idle; and he
largely and elegantly describes that great variety of Work of all kinds which
might occupy a Man shut up in Solitude Facito aliquid operis, ut te semper
Diabolus inveniat occupatum. -- Vel fiscellam texe junco, vel canistrum lentis
plexe viminibus, sarriatur humus, areolae aequo limite dividantur, in quibus
c^m olerum jacta fuerint semina, vel plantae per ordinem positae, aquae
ducantur irriguae. -- Inserantur infructuosae arbores, vel gemmu, vel surculis,
ut parvo post tempore laboris tui dulcia poma decerpas. Apum fabricare
alvearia, -- and Monasteriorum ordinem, ac regiam disciplinam, in parvis disce
corporibus. Texantur and lina ^^piendis piscibus; scribantur libri, ut and
manus operetur cibum, and animus lectione saturetur. In desideriis est omnis
otiosus. Aegyptiorum Monasteria hunc morem tenent, ut nullum absque operis
lab^re suscipiant, non tam propter victus necessitatem, quam propter animae
salutem. Tom. I. page 45. and 46.
: whereas in that to Nepotianus, who was a Secular Presbyter, and had a public
Charge, he says nothing concerning it. What can his Silence argue, but a
concession that Nepotianus would find so much employment in going about to
acquit himself honestly and conscientiously of the Duties of his Function, as
would supersede the necessity of joining Manual Labor thereunto?

To bring this Point to a Conclusion: The very Heathens would not suffer the
Ministers of their Religion to do any servile handy Work; and therefore
Aristotle contends that Rusticks and Artisans, and the like laboring and
trading People, ought not to be advanced to the Dignity of the Priesthood; and
he calls it a disrespect to the Gods that such Men should be appointed to serve
at their Altars (...). Polit. Lib. vii. cap. 9.
. Among the Jews, by God's own special command and direction, the Priests and
Levites had no part in the inheritance of the Land Numb. xviii. 20, etc. Deuteronomy.
xviii. 1, etc.
, lest a necessary culture thereof should debase their Minds, and defile their
Hands, and make them less fit for Sacred Ministrations. They lived upon the
Provision which God had reserved for them, Tenths and Offerings; and the other
Tribes worked for them, whilst they had nothing to do but in their several
Classes and Courses to attend the Service of the Temple. Nor do I find that
they took up mechanic Crafts and Arts, though but in the way that I have shown
the greatest Rabbis and Doctors among that People took them up. Those Rabbis
and Doctors, being indifferently of other Tribes, and having nothing to do with
the dispensing of Holy Things, might use their liberty in that matter. But the
Priests being the peculiar Servants of the most high God, Men whom he had
sanctified, separated from the World, and appropriated to himself, such
mechanic Labors would not so well have become them.

Indeed the Jews did abusively afterward distinguish betwixt two sorts of
Priests, calling the one Sacerdotes clerici, and the others Sacerdotes laici
sive plebeij; as our famed Lightfoot observes, out of the Writings of the
Masters Hor. Hebr. ad Matt. ii. 4. and iterum, Op. Posthum. page 28.
. The Sacerdotes laici sive plebeij, were the unlettered and unskilled in the
Law, or those whom Bodily Defects and Blemishes had disabled and rendered
incapable of executing Priestly Offices. It was never intended that they should
be frustrated of a Portion among their Brethren, the Law having declared it
self very expressly to the contrary: They shall eat of the bread of their God,
both of the most holy, and of the holy: only they shall not come nigh unto the
Altar, because they have Blemishes Lev. xxi. 22, 23.
. And yet through the growth and prevalency of Pharisaism, which in this as in
many other instances made the Law of God void, it came to be a Saying in
aftertimes, ne detur oblatio Sacerdoti laico (...) Vid. Lightfoot ut s^pra.
; by which means these Persons fell into neglect and contempt, and were often
reduced to Poverty. Among these, it is not impossible but some may be found that
had recourse to their own Industry, in the way of Arts and Trades, compelled by
a Necessity which excused them, but which could not have been urged to excuse
those who did eat of the Sacrifices, had they been seen taken up with any other
Work than that of their Function.

The Council of Eliberis, elder by some years than that of Nice, forbade to
admit among the Clergy, the Liberti, or affranchized Bondmen of Gentile Masters
Can. 80.
: by reason (says the learned Aubespine Merito cavebant ne Liberti, querum
Patroni essent Gentiles, ordinarentur: nam ab eis fabriles aut officiales
operas exigere poterant Patroni, quas soliti erant stipulari c^m eos liberate
donarent: tenebanturque Liberti non solum Patronis eas praestare, sed aliis
etiam quibus eae locatae essent. At indignum prors^s neque ferendum, ejusmodi
operis, pictoriis puta aut fabrilibus, Cleric^s distrabi and im^ediri, qui
nullis aliis rebus quam sacris vacare aut studere deberent. Gabr. Albaspini
Aurel. Episcopi not. in Council. Eliber. page 87.
) of the abject Services and Dependances, which their Patrons continued upon
contract to exact from them, even then after their Manumission. It seemed
intolerable that the Ministry should be prostituted to Men of that Rank, who
might be called back to their old Trades of Painting, Carving, and the like, as
often as it pleased their Patrons to set them thereto, or to hire out their
Labor therein to others.

In the VIIth Year of Queen Elizabeth, all that had any Office or Cure in the
Church of England, were obliged to subscribe the following Declaration: I shall
not openly intermeddle with any Artificer's Occupation, so as covetously to
seek a gain thereby, having in Ecclesiastical Living to the sum of XX Nobles,
or above, by Year Bishop Sparrow's Collection of Articles, Injunctions, Canons,
etc. of the Church of England.
. He must have a great deal of Phlegm that reflects on that which gave occasion
to such a Declaration, and keeps his Temper. It was briefly this. The Church
had been so impoverished by Sacrilegious Alienations of its Patrimony and
Revenues, that many of the Inferior Clergy, not able to live upon the small
Remnant that was left and scattered among them, more like an Alms than a Reward
proportioned to their Labors, were forced for a Subsistence to betake
themselves to Trades, and other mean and vile Occupations Bishop of Sarum's
Hist. of the Reform. of the Chapter of England. Part II. Book I. page 202. Dr.
Heylin's Hist. of the Reform. Edw. page 61.
; to the manifest neglect of their Charge, and the great disgrace of their Holy
Calling. Thereupon the aforesaid Declaration was drawn up: which still gave
leave to those whose Livings came under such a Value, to get a Supply as well
as they could, in some other Way, which they might superadd to the Sacred
Employment they were in. With submission, the Credit of the Church and Ministry
was not enough consulted and provided for by that Act. Therefore the
Convocation which sat in the Year 1603, having thought better thereon,
ordained and enacted, that from thenceforth no Ecclesiastical Persons should
give themselves to any base or servile Labor Can. 75.
. By this Decree the Honor and Sacredness of our Office has been retrieved and
asserted: This is also to be noted, that at the beginning of our Reformation,
such an indigence there was of Ministers, as made it necessary to take in some
Artificers, and to fill up Vacant Cures with them. These Men did not demean
themselves so decently as became the Character conferred on them. Something
still stuck by them, savouring of their former education and manner of living.
Therefore anno 1560, a Letter from Matthew Parker, newly consecrated Archbishop
of Canterbury, was directed to Edmund Grindal Bishop of London, signifying,
that whereas lately for want of Ministers, they had ordained several
Artificers, who had behaved themselves not to the credit of the Gospel, care
should be taken that no more Artificers might be ordained for the futur.
Regist. Grindal. MSS. fol. 7. The reputation of our Church suffered upon the
occasion of these Men, the Papists not being wanting to upbraid and reproach us
with them, as appears from Rastal's Answer to Bishop Jewel's Challenge. See
Heylin's Hist. of the Reform. Eliz. page 175. But our Church was then in a
State of Infancy, and a Generation of better and abler Men quickly sprang up
that superseded the necessity of those Ordinations. I cite Bishop Grindal's
Register upon the authority of the reverend Dr. Kennet, whose learned account
of the Antiquities of his own Parish Church of Ambrosden, shows him excellently
accomplished to go on further in the like curious Researches.
and a Decree it is worthy of them that made it, viz. the Fathers and
Representatives of the purest and best constituted Church in the Christian
World.

Upon the whole Matter, let any reasonable Man judge, who are the truest
Ministers, and the likeliest to carry on the great and noble Designs of
Religion; either They, who have devoted themselves early to this Work, who have
beforehand qualified themselves duly for it, and who desire to lay aside other
Occupations and Affairs only that they may without distraction attend upon this
very thing; or They, who being entangled in various Worldly Callings, trained
up in them from the beginning, necessitated to exercise themselves daily in
them, and to be always running round and toiling in that Circle, do, merely
upon the presumption of a lively Fancy and a voluble Tongue (natural Gifts,
which not only very Bad, but very Ignorant Men may have) take upon them to
Teach, when they themselves very much need to be Taught. But taking no further
notice of these Men, who can deceive those only whom God in his secret and
inscrutable Judgment has given up to a Spirit of Error and Delusion, I shall
turn the Discourse to our selves, and show,

III. That Evangelical Pastors and Ministers, being by the nature of their
Function dismissed from Manual Labors, and generally from all those Cares and
Occupations with which Secular Persons are taken up and perplexed; they are
much to blame, if through Love of the World they voluntarily resume and involve
themselves in those Cares; if through Levity of Spirit they dissipate their
Time in foolish Diversions and Amusements, or even in fruitless and
unprofitable Studies; if they do not, in so privileged and recollected a State
of Life, bend their utmost application and endeavors, to the enriching of
their Minds more and more with the Knowledge of Things excellent and proper for
them, to the adorning of their Province, and to the fulfilling of their
Ministry; since therefore they enjoy this Exemption and Immunity that they may
be enabled so to do.

I hope none of my Reverend Brethren will be offended with the Freedom I shall
use in speaking to this Head. I must pursue my Subject, and I would be
understood to direct my Discourse to none so much as to my self.

1. They are, I think, not excusable, who having given themselves up to the
Ministries of Religion, and being thereby dispensed from Secular Cares, involve
themselves in them when they need not. And here are not meant the just and
necessary Cares of a Family, but Cares and Occupations in meddling with which
Clergymen bewray Habits and Dispositions of Mind too much estranged and
alienated from the Spirit of their Calling. We must with shame confess that the
Fault I note here is no new evil in the Church: as appears from so many Decrees
of General and Provincial Councils, Synodical Letters, Capitulars, and other
Ancient Monuments, where loud Complaints are made against it Can. Apostol. 6,
44, 81, and 83. Council. African. I. de quo S. Cyprian. Ep. 66. edit. Pamel. seu
1. edit. Oxon. Conc. Eliber. can. 18, and 20. Conc. Arelat. I. can. 12. Conc.
Nicaen. I. Oecumen. can. 17. Conc. Laodicens. can. 4. Conc. Carthag. I. cap. 6,
8, 9, and 13. Conc. Carthag. III. cap. 15, and 16. Conc. Carthag. an. 419. in
causa Apiarii. can. 17. Conc. Chalcedon. Oecumen. can. 3. Conc. Arelat. II.
can. 14. Conc. Tarracon. can. 2. Conc. Constantinop. in Trull. can. 10. Conc.
in Palatio Vern. can. 16. Conc. Forojul. ceu Aquileiens. can. 5. Conc. Cabilon.
II. can. 5, 8, 12, and 44. Conc. Aquisgran. I. can. 40, 61, 92, and 93. Conc.
Romans an. 826. can. 12. Conc. Paris. an. 829. can. 13, and 28. Conc. Clovesh.
can. 8. ap. Spelman. Conc. Angl. Tom. I. page 247. Canones Saxon. Aelfrici,
can. 30. ap. eund. Tom. I. page 579. Conc. Land. an. 1102. can. 1. and 8. ap.
eund. Tom. II. page 22. Synod. Westminster. an. 1138. cap. 9. ap. eund. Tom. II. page
41, etc.
. There, we find Ecclesiastical Persons taxed; some, for taking Lands and
Grounds to Farm, and doing that which properly is the Business of Yeomen and
such like People; some, for assuming the management and superintendency of
Great Men's Estates, as their Stewards and Baylies; some, for accepting of
Procurations, Wardships, and Testamentary Trusts, which to execute they were
always following Courts, and going to Law; some, for trading and trafficking
openly as Merchants, resorting to foreign Markets, buying cheap and selling
dear, as the Words of some of those Councils are; some, for making a profit of
their Money by Loan and Interest, setting up Banques, and turning downright
Usurers and Extortioners; to say nothing of those whom we find no less censured
for thrusting themselves into Public Administrations, and ambitioning Posts and
Places in the Civil Government. Against these, and such as these, so many
Canons and Constitutions have been made, both in former and latter Ages, that
if one should undertake to collect them, and reduce them into a Code, they
would swell up to a Volume. As they show the zeal and concern of the Church all
along, to keep Evangelical Ministries free from profane and unclean Mixtures,
so they are all but a larger Comment on that Text of St. Paul, that no man that
warreth intangleth himself with the affairs of this life, that he may please
him who has chosen him to be a Soldier ii Tim. ii. 4.
. Which words of the Apostle are expressly laid down by the Is It and IIId
Councils of Carthage, and others subsequent to them, as the ground of the Laws
they enacted against Clerks busying themselves with Cares that did not belong
to them.

Some Men naturally are more stirring than others, delight more in Business and
Action. When such Men come into the Church, it is pity they do not use that
Diligence and Industry with which God has endowed them, in matters commendable
and proper for them. They would prove admirable instruments of doing good, and
they would surpass all others of their Profession. Nor need they fear that
their Talent should rust, through want of employment. For there is not a nobler
Scene for Business and Action than the Ministry, though in a way different from
the Cares and Labors of the World.

2. They greatly abuse this Exemption and Immunity, who through Levity of
Spirit dissipate their Time in foolish Diversions and Amusements. This is a
Fault in the other extreme, incident to Men of another Complexion. For this
flows from a sauntring and unactive Temper, from a Mind dissolved in Sloth, and
averse to every thing that is serious. This Humor is of all others the most
opposite to the Ministry, and by being indulged must render a Man useless and
unserviceable in it. I would make all the allowance that can be for Humane
Infirmities, and for Propensions which perhaps were born with us: But certainly
the most innocent Pastimes must become criminal in Men called to a Sacred
Trust, who postpone the discharge of their Duty to them. Indeed he who has an
awful sense of God and of Holy Things upon his Mind, who is convinced of the
infinite value of Souls, and has duly weighed the importance of the Work laid
before him, will not think that he has much leisure to spare in the pursuit of
Pleasures and Recreations, be they otherwise never so harmless and inoffensive
in their own nature. When Synesius was named to fill the vacant See of
Ptolemais, the Good Man pleaded a certain inclination he had for Hunting, as a
reason for which he conceived himself unapt for so great a Charge: For a Bishop
(thus he expresses himself) ought to be a God-like Man: like the Deity, he must
be above all Sports and Divertisements (...). Epist. CV ad Fratrem. page 247.
. St. Isidore will not allow so much as a little Mirth and Laughter to a
Priest: saying, that a Priest is the Angel of Almighty God; but Angels know not
what Laughter is; those glorious Creatures minister to God with Reverence and
Fear (...). Lib. I. Epist. 319. ad Derotheum Presbyterum. page 85.
. These are the Thoughts which those two excellent Men had of the Ministry,
from which they banished every thing that favored of a light and frivolous
Spirit. If we therefore of the Clergy enjoy a demission from Secular Cares and
Toils, it is not that we may thereby have an opportunity to be Idle, and to
bury our selves in a soft, casie, and voluptuous Life; but that being freed
from all interruptions, we may give the better attendance on our Calling, and
labor so much the more sedulously and indefatigably in our own Way: and we
should have very ill grace to claim such a Privilege, upon other Terms than
these.

3. Even they make but an ill use of this Exemption and Immunity, who addict
themselves to fruitless and unprofitable Studies. In Men who ought to spend
their Time to worthier purposes even this is a Fault, and deserves no better
name than that of a more laborious sort of Idleness. And verily when we
consider the vast number of Books that swell up the accounts in our Libraries,
and have been written by Divines on all the various Topics of Profane Learning,
we cannot but wonder how Men laboring in God's Vineyard, should find vacant
Hours for such Productions and Superfetations as those. Had not the Titles
taken care to inform us of the Quality and Profession of the Men, we could
never have guessed from the Contents of the Books, in which nothing is found
having a taste and relish of that Spirit of Religion which should have animated
the Authors, that such Works had been the Lucubrations of Persons in Holy
Orders. A Minister's Pen ought to be dedicated to God's Glory, and to the
Defense of the Truth. He unhallows it, and desecrates himself, that turns it to
light and unbecoming Subjects. The fabulous Relation of the Adventures of
Theagenes and Chariclaea, which appeared in the IVth Century, written with all
the beauties of Language and Invention, might have passed uncensured, had a
Layman been the Author of it. But when that Romance began to walk abroad with
the venerable name of Heliodorus Bishop of Trica in Thessaly prefixed to it,
the whole Church was offended and scandalized at it, notwithstanding what was
said to lessen the Scandal, viz. that it was a Work which Heliodorus had
composed in his younger years. A Synod of the Bishops of the Province met, in
which Heliodorus was called upon to disown and retract the Book. Upon his
refusal, he was deservedly Deprived (...). Hist. Eccles. Lib. XII. cap. xxxiv.
page 296, and 297. Vid. etiam Soerat. Hist. Ecc. Lib. V. cap. xxii. page 287.
. The vain Man was so blown up with the pride and conceit of being the Parent
of that Fiction, that rather than lose the merit of it, he was contented to see
himself degraded of the Episcopal Dignity and Character, which is the glory and
perfection of the Evangelical Sacerdoce.

I would not seem by any thing I have here said to condemn Humane Learning,
which at the entrance of this Discourse I have laid down as a necessary
Qualification for the Ministry, in opposition to those Ignorant Pretenders who
assume the one without any Tincture of the other. But as the best of it ought
to be used only as an Accessory to Divine Researches and Enquiries, so there
are Studies in that way that are indeed but Trifling. And you will all, no
doubt, concur with me, that a Minister of the Gospel, who, when he should be
laying himself out in things solid and useful, should be writing Sonnets and
Epigrams, or evaporating his Thoughts in Airy Speculations and Theories, that
have no subserviency to Religion, and can only conduce to the gratifying of an
idle and itching Curiosity, would be able to give but a very ill account of his
Time to God. Therefore,

4. It is they that make a right use of that Leisure which an Exemption from
secular Cares and Labors affords them, who bend their utmost application and
endeavors to the enriching of their Minds daily more and more with the
Knowledge of Divine Things. This is the Knowledge in the acquisition of which
it is intended that Christian Ministers should spend their still, quiet, and
peaceful Hours. And indeed, how can they find a gust for such Studies as I last
spoke of, who have for the proper Objects of their Meditations, the glorious
Attributes and Works of God, the wonderful Mysteries of our Redemption by Jesus
Christ, the great and saving Doctrines of the Gospel, and all the august
Evidences given there concerning a Futur State and our hopes of a better Life
after this? Such Matters as these are worthy of the profoundest Contemplation
and Incumbency, not only of Men, but of Angels. To these the Clergy are
understood to have consecrated their Studies; and could it be supposed that any
one of that Sacred Order should prove deficient in the Knowledge of these, so
as not to carry a perfect Scheme of them in his Mind, and be able to account
readily for them, he knows nothing to any purpose, though otherwise he could
number the Sands on the Seashore, or solve the most difficult Phenomena of
Nature. It Is a noble Thought of St. Isidore (...). Lib. I. Epist. 151. page 47.
, as there are many in that Author, that the Priests of God ought to ressemble
those Living Creatures attending on the Divine Majesty in a Vision to Ezekiel
Chap. i. 18. and x. 12.
, and said to have been full of eyes, to denote their sagacity and insight into
Heavenly Revelations and Oracles.

And if ever it was necessary for the Clergy to excel in that Knowledge and in
those Studies which peculiarly belong to their Profession, if ever it concerned
them to be conversant about and to strive for a Mastery in the Divine Tactics,
it is now. There is a Swarm of Atheists, Deists, Skeptics, Spinozists,
Socinians, and other Enemies of our Holy Faith, gone out amongst us: Men with
whom a Servant of Jesus Christ will often be called to encounter. It behooves
him therefore to be furnished with such Arms, as may enable him to do it with
success. Would it not grieve him to see the best Cause in the World baffled and
defeated, only because he wants Abilities to defend it? The meanest Christian
ought to be ready always to give an answer to every man, that asks him a
reason of the Hope that is in him i Pet. iii. 15.
: How much more ought the Ministers of the Church to be mighty in words Acts
vii. 22.
, workmen that need not to be ashamed ii Tim. ii. 15.
, able by sound Doctrine to convince gainsayers Tit. i. 9.
, and to cast down every high thought and imagination that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God ii Cor. x. 5.
? It Is that they may the better qualify and capacitate themselves in this way,
that by the Laws of God, the Sanctions of the Universal Church, and under the
Protection of Christian States and Governments, the Clergy enjoy an Exemption
and Immunity from Secular Cares and Labors.

5. and lastly: They enjoy this Exemption and Immunity (and those among them
are exceedingly to blame, who do not use it to that End) that they may adorn
their Province, and fulfill their Ministry in every Part of it. That is, that
they may be continually busied and employed in advancing the Honor and Service
of the great Maker and Preserver of the World: in reconciling Men to him by
Repentance, and the administration of Holy Rites: in teaching and instructing
the Ignorant: in relieving anxious and doubting Consciences: in rebuking
profligate Sinners, and warning them of the dread and terrors of an approaching
Judgment: in composing Differences, and promoting Peace, Charity, and a
reciprocal Good Will among all People: in plucking up Sin and Vice, and
planting the Seeds of every Christian Grace and Virtue in the Earth: in
purifying their own Lives, and giving heed to their own Sanctification, that
they may be shining Examples to their Flocks: in praying night and day to God,
that he will bless their Endeavors, and afford them such a Measure of his
Divine Spirit as may be sufficient to carry them through their Work. The World
cannot envy a Vacation from Secular Cares and Labors to the Clergy, nor any
other Privilege annexed to their Sacred Function, whilst it sees them intent
upon such things as these.

And praised be God, the Father of Lights, and the Author of every good Gift
Jam. i. 17.
, for that in the midst of so general a Corruption and Degeneracy as prevails
in our Age, he has not left his Church destitute of honest and faithful
Pastors, who strenuously pursue all the Ends I have named, answer all the
Qualifications and Characters I have laid down: That is, who are eminently
conspicuous for their contempt of and abstraction from Earthly Things, for
their grave and sober Deportment, for their sound and useful Learning, and for
their constant Assiduity to their Charge. I cannot better express it than in
the Words of St. Cyprian Epist. lxvii. ad Foelicem Presbyterum, etc. page 174.
Edit. Oxon.
, which are so nicely adapted to our Case, that one would think they had been
suggested to him by a Prophetic Spirit, and that when he wrote them, he had in
view, not the State of the Church in his Time, but in ours. Non sic tamen,
quamvis novissimis temporibus, in Ecclesia Dei, aut Evangelicus vigor cecidit,
aut Christianae virtutis aut fidei robur elanguit, ut non supersit portio
Sacerdotum, quae minime ad has rerum ruinas, and fidei naufragia, succumbat;
sed fortis and stabilis, honorem Divinae Majestatis, and Sacerdotalem
Dignitatem, plena timoris observatione, tueatur. Although (says he) we are
fallen into the Last Days, nevertheless the Evangelical Spirit and Vigor is
not sunk, nor the strength and power of Christian Faith and Virtue enfeebled to
such a degree, in the Church of God, as that there should not be yet remaining
a Portion of Holy Priests, who amidst all these ruins and shipwracks of
Religion are not unmindful of their Duty, but stand firm and unshaken therein,
going on with great zeal and courage to assert the Honor of the Divine
Majesty, and to maintain the Dignity and Reputation of Sacerdotal Functions.
Praised be God, that no Particular Church upon Earth can boast of a greater
number of such Worthy Men, than the Protestant Orthodox Church of England. I
reckon it, not the least advantage I have gained from my Attendances abroad,
that I have received many Convictions of this Truth, by comparing the Clergy of
this and of other Churches. To those who deny them their due Commendation, I
shall only say, that I wish them the like opportunities of Conviction.

May God, in his infinite mercy, keep up a Succession of such Pastors in his
Church, so long as there is a Sun in the Firmament. May their Excellent Example
quicken Me, and others of their Brethren, who flag behind them. May the World
be just to them, and esteem them very highly in love for their Work's sake i
These. v. ^3.
. May their People have the wisdom not to withdraw themselves from under their
Conduct, to follow Blind Guides and Seducers. May they feel a kind and benign
Influence of Heaven going along with them, and prospering every thing they do,
or undertake, for the glory of God, and for the benefit and instruction of
Mankind. May none of the Enemies of God be able to stand before them. May the
great and sacred Truths of Religion, be ever victorious and triumphant in their
Discourses and Writings. May they every where beat down the Kingdom of Satan,
and on the fall of it build up the glorious Kingdom of Jesus Christ our Lord.
And from him the Everlasting High Priest, the supreme Pastor and Bishop of
Souls, may they one day receive the Crown and Reward promised to their Holy
Labors. Amen.

THE END.
BOOKS printed for John Newton, at the Three Pigeons in Fleetstreet.
MR. Falle's Account of the Isle of Jersey, with a new and accurate Map of the
Island. Dedicated to the King. 8o.

His Sermon before the Garrison in Jersey, April 10. 1692.

His Sermon at White Hall, December. 30. 1694.

His Sermon before the Lord Mayor, April 21. 1695.

Mr. D'auvergne's Relations of the Campagnes in Flanders, for the Years 1692,
1693, 1694, 1695, 1696, and 1697.

New Observations on the Natural History of this World of Matter, and this
World of Life: In two Parts. Being a Philosophical Discourse, grounded upon the
Mosaic System of the Creation, and the Flood. To which are added, some
Thoughts concerning Paradise, the Conflagration of the World, and a Treatise of
Meteorology: With occasional Remarks upon some late Theories, Conferences, and
Essays. By Tho. Robinson, Rector of Ousby in Cumberland,

The Anatomy of the Earth. By the same Author.

A Charge given at the General Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the County of
Surrey, holden at Dorking on Tuesday the 5th day of April, 1692. and in the 4th
year of their Majesty's Reign. By the Honorable Hugh Hare Esquire, one of
their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for that County.

Pendragon: or, The Carpet Knight's Calendar. A Poem.

ERROR.
PAge 46. Line 7. for, They greatly abuse this Exemption, read, They greatly
abuse of this Exemption.


