The Famous and Renowned HISTORY OF Sir Bevis of Southampton GIVING An Account
of his Birth, Education, Heroic Exploits, and Enterprises, his Fights with
Giants, Monsters, Wild-Beasts and Armies, his Conquering Kings and Kingdoms,
his Love and Marriage, Fortunes and Misfortunes, and many other Famous and
Memorable Things and Actions, worthy of Wonder; With the Adventures of other
Knights, Kings and Princes, exceeding pleasant and delightful to Read.



Licensed and Entered according to Order.

Printed for W. Thackeray at the Angel in Duck-Lane, and J. Deacon at the Angel
in Gilt-Spur-street, 1689.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Here present you with the pleasant History of the Famous and Renowned
Knight, Sir Bevis of Southampton, a Man for his Virtue and Valor, highly
esteemed throughout the World: In whose many Actions and glorious Achievements,
you will find things that may reasonably surmout an ordinary credit, however in
perusing them, you may plainly perceive the difference between Elder times and
these we live in, which are too much divovled into effeminacy, and please your
self in consulting the many rare Adventures of such, as gave themselves up to
the practice of Arms and Love, which being mingled in their many excellencies,
appear as beautiful and gay as a Bed of Roses and Lillies, in their blushing
Glory and innocent Candure, and as the noble Enterprises of others have stirred
up the Spirits of such as read them, to an illustrous imitation of what is
truly great, and held in the highest esteem: So past all peradventure, what is
here laid down, will not come behind the most exaulted Actions of Heroes, set
forth to the best advantage, either in Love or Arms, those two Excellencies
that adorn mankind; for here you will find our Champion, though early crushed
by the adverse hand of Fortune, making his way to Glory, before he could aspire
to Manhood, cutting it by Dint of Valor and Heroic Conduct from a dejected
state by degrees, till he mounts to the highest pinnacle of Honor, in rescuing
the distressed, destroying Monsters and Tyrants, gaining Kingdoms, and
converting Infidels to the Christian Faith, obleiging by his Affability and
excellent parts Queens and Princesses, to lay their Diadems and Grandeur at his
feet, and doing such things as have amazed Mankind. Therefore for the honor of
our Country, of which he has so well deserved, let his Memory live in the
thoughts of every true English Man, and be to them a pattern of Heroic Virtue,
that by imitating him, they may raise the very name of the British Empire, as
formerly it was, to be the Terror of the World, which is the wish,

Reader, Of your most Humble Servant S. J.

THE Famous and Renowned HISTORY OF Sir BEVIS of SOUTHAMPTON.
CHAP. I.
How Sir Guy Earl of Southampton, having married a fair Lady, had by her Sir
Bevis; and how she afterward caused her Husband to be treacherously slain in
the Forest, and married the Knight that slew him etc.

IN the days, when England was more immediately renowned, for the famous and
valiant Achievements of other Knightsland Warlike, Champions, whose greht
Actions and Heroic Enterprises were loudly trumped by Feign, in each part of
the World. There dwelt at the ancient and celebrated Town of Southampton, a
Knight called Sir Guy, who in his Travels and search of Adventures through the
Countries of Flanders, France, Almain, Cicile, De^m^rk, Gascom, Hungary,
Culabria, Burgundy, Poland, Normandy, Maine, Turkey, Eastland, Norway, Picardy,
Scotland, Lumbardy, etc. signalized his Valor in the Courrs of diverse great
Princes at Tilt, Tournament, and many mortal Combats, ever striving to right
the injured, and such as suffered wrong (...) their too powerful oppressors,
and having spent his younger days in the exercise of Arms abroad, every where
gaining a high esteem, at length Age rendering him unfit for great exploits, he
resolved to give up the remainder of his lift to a more settled state in his own
Country, and thereupon returning laden with Laurels won with infinite hazard
and danger, as also with the Presents and Favor of Emperors, Kings and
Princes: he at length settled in the Town of Southampton, the place of his
birth, but long he had not ^est^d there in all solitary conrentment, and
adicted himself to works of Piery and Charity, before King Edgar having been
sufficiently informed of his high deserts, made him Earl of that place, and
calling him to Court, appointed him his Steward, or rather Viceroy, in which
place he so well discharged his trust, in doing Justice to every man,
countenancing virtue and suppressing vice, that he gained an universal
commendation: and being now where he had daily the sight of a great many
beautiful Ladies he bethought himself of Marriage, that so he might leave
behind him an Heir to possess his great Wealth and Virtues; and casting his
Eyes upon the Daughter of the King of Scotland, who was then in the English
Court, he so prevailed with the King of Scots, by the means of King Edgar his
Master, that he soon had her to Wife; though this Marriage, by reason she had
secretly placed her affections before, on the Emperor of Edmain's Brother,
prove altogether unhappy to the Earl, as in the sequel will appear.

The Marriage Rites being performed with great splendour, and graced with the
presence of the two Kings, and the Nobles of both Kingdoms: In process of time
the Lady brought him forth a Son, whom they agreed to be called Bevis,
afterward known, or commonly called by the name of Bevis of Southampton, whose
Knighly Adventures and noble Actions are the subject of this pleasant and
renowned History. However the Lady still keeping up her affections for her
former Lover, whose name was Sir Murdure, by reason he was sprightly, young and
active, and Sir Guy her Husband on the contrary, being much in years, and not
so apt as she required to satisfy her youthful desires, adicting himself
rather to his Devotion, and to obtain a pardon for Sins by a thorough
Repentance; which made her begin to conclude her self unhappy in this Marriage,
and wished she had been given to him she more dearly affected, suffering her
discontent daily to increase, till at length growing from a dislike to a hatred
of her Lord: She resolved to be rid of him, and thereupon sent a trusty
Messenger to the Emperors Court, to acquaint Sir Murdure of her great Love to
him, and the dislike she had of her Husband, assuring him, that he ever had her
heart and entire affection, though forced by the commands of a Father, she had
given her hand to another, which made her life uneasy, and that now there
remained no way to render it comfortable, but by removing the man, who hindered
the mingling of their mutual Passions and Affections, and that to complete both
their happynessess, he would undertake to kill him, she would so contrive it as
to give him the opportunity, by persuading him with a slender Train to hunt the
Boa^ in the great Forest then adjoining to the Town of Southampton, and there
with a strong well armed Guard might effect it at leisure.



At the wicked proposal of the Lady, Sir Murdure stood for a while mute and
much amazed, but at last, the great Love he had ever born to so beautiful a
Woman, as was the Countess, and not knowing any other means to enjoy her, whom
he now understood was as willing to yield, as he to entreat, consented to obey
her pleasure, telling the Messenger, that on the first day of May he would
arrive in England with a Company of well armed men, sufficient to bring about
what she desired, and that done, lay himself at her feet, and reing him with a
gallant Steed, he dismissed him.

The Lady having heard the answer of the Knight, was much pleased thereat, and
then upon feigning her self ill at ease, she sent a Servant to her Husband, to
advertise him of it, who immediately came to her, and with much love and
tenderness enquired into the cause of her grief, who with a sigh replied, that
she was ignorant of it, unless it proceeded from a longing mind she had for to
taste the flesh of a Wild-Boar, and when he demanded where one might be found,
and it should at any rate be taken, she said she had been inf^^med, that a Boar
had a long time haunted the neighboring Forest, but taking her Lord about the
Neck, she with a dissembling k^^^ entreated him not to hazard himself against
so dangerous a Creature for her occasion, and rather than it should be, to
suffer any inconvenience; however as she wished, he would not decline it, but
calling for his Horse, his Lance and Sword, with only two of his Servants, he
betook himself to the Forest in search of the Wild-Boar, but there he had not
long been, but Sir Murdure, who had placed himself in ambush, burst out upon
him, and reviling him by the name perfidious Traitor, for bereaving him of his
Mistress, whom he had a long time loved, and for whom he had suffered so much,
he told him though he now enjoyed her, it should not be long for that both he
and his Son should die.

The Earl thus surprised, called to his Servants to advertize them of the
Treachery, saying, at the same time, he would however in his own right, defend
himself to the utmost, when having his Lance in his Rest, he run against Sir
Murdure, and hitting him full, bore hi^ to the ground, and thereupon drew his
Sword, and being about to strike off his Head, he cried out to his Fellows for
rescue who came so furiously upon the Earl, that he was forced to desist, and
defend himself, when having slain diverse of them, they being twenty in number,
and wanting his Armor, through the many wounds he had received, he was at last
obleiged to forsake his Horse, who was likewise sorely wounded, and about to
fall under him, yet he fought courageously, but his Servants being slain, and
he enclosed on every side, fainting through loss of blood, he said to Sir
Murdure, for the honor of Knighthood and true Chivalry at this time spare my
life, having me unarmed, at so great a disadvantage, and I promise, old as I am
to arm my self, and meet you and your Train, and if you kill me then, I shall
freely pardon you my death; but they would in no wise hearken to him, for
whilst he was about to proceed, in requiring his life to be spared, Sir Murdure
with his Spear run him through the body, and those that accompanied him gave
him so many wounds that he dyed on the place; after which the unworthy Knight
cut off his Head, and sent it by one of his Servants, as a Present to the Lady,
assuring her he would be with her that night: whereat she appeared much
overjoyed, and received it with great satisfaction; promising to be at his
Devotion: And accordingly he soon after Wedded the Lady, it being before given
out that her Husband the Earl was Murdered by a Band of Robbers.



CHAP. II.
How Bevis was delivered to Sir Sabre to be put to Death, by the command of his
Mother and Step-Father. The means by which he was saved; and how, in the Habit
of a Shepherd, he kept Sheep, and in some part revenged his Fathers Murder.
How he left the Land, etc.

BEvis hearing of his Fathers Death, greatly lamented it; and being of some
years of understanding, soon perceived by his Mothers carriage, and whisperings
amongst the Servants, as also Sir Murdure's high Entertainment, that she had
not the least hand in the contriving it, and thereupon took the freedom to tell
her his thoughts, in such bitter Language as incensed her grievously to
chastize him; but finding him obstinate and fearing one day he would not only
discover but revenge his Fathers Death, she resolved to make him away, and
thereupon consulted with one Sir Sabre, over whom she had a great power and
influence, to destroy him; who accordingly promised it, without any intention
to perform it. Wherefore, that he might keep notwithstanding in her good
opinion, he took him home to his House, pretending it required great Privacy;
and there he informed the Youth of the danger he was in, and how that he had it
in charge to kill him, but on the contrary was resolved to conceal him, till
such time he was able to bear Arms for the recovery of his Fathers Estate:
adding, That he, for the Friendship he bore Sir Guy, would then assist him with
a power sufficient to effect it, and whilst he had an opportunity, to convey
him to his other Uncle, who was an Earl in Wales, he should keep his Sheep upon
the neighboring Downs. At this Bevis wept for anger, to be so used by his
cruel Mother whilst his Fathers Murderer revelled in his Palace, yet concealed
it as well as he could, in hopes, one day to be revenged, condescending to have
his rich Clothes changed for those of a Shepherd, all tattered and ragged; and
in that disguise drove forth Sir Sabre's Sheep each morning, warily guarding
them upon the flowery Plains, and chearing himself with his Pipe of Reeds,
wearing a Shepherds Scrip, and carrying in his hand a Crook, and at Even he
brought them home again, contenting himself with course Fare and a homely
Lodging; till coming to the Age of sixteen years he exercised the first proof
of his valor upon a fierce and cruel Wolf, lately come into those parts, that
destroyed not only many Sheep and tender Lambs but killed some of the Shepherds
that sought to defend them, and put others to the slight; and thinking to do
the like to Bevis, who was coming to the Field, met him open-mouthed, but Bevis
with the end of his Crook struck him so full on the head as he came at him,
that he fell to the Ground; when closing with him, he with much ease strangled
him with main force, which made the Neighboring Shepherds exceedingly rejoice,
and much praise the courage and resolution of Bevis, who by this Act had
delivered them from fear and danger. And soon after he began to show his
strength, insomuch that none were able to contend with him, either at
Wrestling, Running, Throwing the Bar, or at hard Blows, so that his Renown
began by degrees to spread abroad, and many both loved and feared him.

Bevis not well pleased in his mind to follow this employ, whilst those that
were unworthy of it, possessed his Fathers Estate, although he, as much as in
him lay, strugled to conceal his Quality: yet had he many Conflicts with
himself, and thus expostulated: Shall I, said he, who am the Son of an Earl,
born to large Fortunes, thus suffer hunger and cold, go in tattered Garments
and lie hard and uneasy, the Ground being for the most part my Bed, and the
Sky my Canopy, it must not be; but rather will Bevis suffer any danger, and
boldly contemn the malice and Fury of his Enemies. And whilst he was in these
meditations, he heard from the Town of Southampton the sound of Trumpets,
Hoitboys and Fluits, which made him address himself to a Traveller coming from
thence, to know the meaning of it, and from him understood that Sir Murdure
held a great Feast, freely for all Persons that would participate of his
Dainties in honor of his Marriage-day, which he had done every year on that
occasion. This made Bevis being now so near the Town, resolved to be a
Spectator of the Revels that were kept in his Fathers Palace, which, in the
Disguise he was in, he thought he might do without discovery, and by that means
learn something that might turn to his advantage. So leaving his Sheep at a
venture, he hasted thither; but being about to enter, and the Porters seeing
him in so tattered and ragged a Garment, they churlishly thrust him back,
telling him, if he expected any of their Masters Bounty he must stay in the
Lodge, or at the Door, for such a beggarly Fellow as he must not expect to sort
himself with such noble Guess as were in the Palace: at which being angry,
Bevis replied, that he must and would enter and sit at the Table with the
Master of the Palace himself, and to that purpose he was come. But they still
thrusting him back and giving bad language, from words they fell to blows, when
Bevis thor^^ghly enraged felled one of them with his Fist, and laid the other
with a st^^ak of his Truncheon dead at his Feet, and so passed into the Hall,
where he found the Guess seated in a splendid manner, the Tables loaded with
varieties of diverse kinds, and Wine flowing in abundance; when Bevis finding an
empty place sat down, which Sir Murdure, who sat with his Countess at the
upper end of the Table, noting, and angry that such a Guess had been admitted,
began to chase at his Porters, at the same time rising from his Place, and
charging him under the penalty of severe punishments to depart: but Bevis told
him he expected a better welcome, especially in a place he had been so intimate
in; and that though he were in a poor Garment he knew not but that he was more
noble descended than himself, and that in proof thereof, if he found himself
aggrieved, and if he might have Arms provided him he would enter the Combat
against himself, or any Knight of the Company. This so incensed Sir Murdure,
that disdaining to reply, he drew his Sword to have taken his Head for
offering, as he deemed it, such an affront to himself and his noble Guess: at
which Bevis leaping from his place, with his Truncheon warded the Blow; nor
then did he fail to hit Sir Murdure with such force, as brought him to the
ground, and was about with a second stroke to finish his days, when the
Countess and other Ladies cried out to the Knights to run in and prevented it,
and Bevis finding himself amidst so many drawn Swords, thought it time to
retire, which accordingly he did, securing or making good his Retreat with Sir
Murdure's Sword, which he had wrested from him, wounding diverse that had been
too forward in pressing on, crying in vain to the Porters to shut the Gates and
keep him in, that they might be revenged of the Affront.

Bevis thinking himself partly revenged of his Father-in-law, went secretly to
Sir Sabre and told him all that had passed, who was much displeased thereat,
saying, That it would soon be known who he was, and the^ himself must
consequently suffer for concealing him, However he caused him to be hid in the
Wood for some time, till he thought the se^^ch might be over. Nor did his
conjectures much fail him, for the Countess, after recovering from the Sound
she fell into, upon supposing her Husband slain, declared, that she verily
Believed it was ^er Son Bevis, as well by his voice as a mark in his Face, that
had took in disguise to disturb her Peace, vowing the destruction of Sir Sabre
at he had not made him away: And thereupon, in a great rage, she went attended
with a Guard to his House, and finding him there, charged him as false and
faithless to his promise, threatening him with Tortur^s and Death, for abusing
her Trust: but he on the contrary, all edges ^e had been obedient to her
Commands, producing the Clothes he had p^^posely dipped in the Blood of a
Swine: however, so confident she was of the contrary, viz. That he was not made
away, that having rated and reviled him as long as she pleased, without
harkening to any of his excuses, charged two Knights to carry him to a Castle
adjoining to the Forest, and there Imprison him till hers and he^ Lords
Pleasure were father known.

Bevis hearing of the misfortune of his Uncle, resolved at the hazard of his
life to set him at liberty: and with this resolution, getting a Palmer's Gown,
and arming himself under it with a trusty Sword, he went and knocked at the
Gate, in which disguise he had entrance, without being suspected, and by main
force having subdued the Keepers or Warders, he with an Iron Bar he found
there, burst in sunder the Doors for more speed, and finding Sir Sabre there in
Chains, he set him forthwith at Liberty, and binding the Keepers in the same
Chains left the Castle; yet knowing they would be narrowly sought after, Bevis
agreed to leave the Land in search of Adventures, and Sir Sabre giving out that
it was not Bevis, but an unknown Knight in disguise, who had done the Mischief,
and wrought his deliverance; Bevis being to his knowledge certainly dead, his
Possessions that had been taken from him were again restored, and he received
into fovour.



CHAP. III.
How Sir Bevis was shipwracked in a Storm, taken Prisoner and sold to sundry
Merchants, who presented him to the King of Armony, who kindly entertained him.
How the fair Princess Iosian fell in Love with him. And how he fought with and
overcome sixty Sarazens, and was doomed to dye, and how delivered.

BEvis having taken the Sea in a small Bark, a great Tempest happened, almost
as soon as it was put from Land, and continued with such Fury, that all rule
was lost, and the Ship riding furiously before the Wind, beaten with Rain,
Thunder, Lightning and the Waves of the Sea, neither Sun, Moon, nor Stars
appearing for many days, they were at last driven into a strong Haven in the
Mediterranean Sea, possessed by the Sarazens, where the Vessel being broken on
the Rocks, Bevis with some few got on shore, but there, contrary to the Rules
of Hospitality, they were encountered and taken Prisoners by a great power of
the Infidels, who sold them to the Merchants, bound for the Coast of Egypt, who
presented Bevis, as a very comely Personage, to the King of Armony, who then
had to his Daughter a Princess exceeding fair and beautiful, adorned with all
the rare perfections that make Womenkind tempting and desirable, on whom Bevis
fixing his Eyes, began to think he had never seen any so charming, her Eyes
seemed like two Stars, her Forehead like polished Alablaster, her Cheeks
out-did the Roses, and her Lips and Teeth might compare with Rubies and Pearls,
all her other parts being proportionably beautiful; but above all she was
possessed with a virtuous mind and courteous behavior.

Bevis being now in the Court of Armony, the King had great delight to see a
Youth so comely, well set and strong proportioned in his Limbs, every part of
him expressing a more than manly form, and promising extraordinary strength;
wherefore giving him words of comfort, he began to question him about his Birth
and Parentage, who freely told him that he was Son to Guy Earl of Southampton,
and that his Father being treacherously slain by the consent of his Mother, who
likewise sought his Life, he had betaken himself to travel, and being
unfortunately taken Prisoner, he had been sold to those Merchants who had
presented him to his Highness. Upon this the King embraced him, and told him he
was now more dear to him, as being the Son of Sir Guy, whose Fame had sounded
loud in those parts, and his many noble Actions made his name immortal;
however, grieving that the World had lost so brave a Man by Treatchery, that
could not have been overcome by fair force, constituted Bevis his great
Chamberlain, committing to his care and charge Vestures of Gold, Silver and
Pearls, Diamonds and other precious stones and great riches in abundance, being
wonderfully pleased, as often as his great Affairs would give him leisure, to
hold discourse with him of many things, for Bevis was no ways ignorant of any
Learning. And so it happened, that he had not long been in this place with a
promise of being made General of the King's Army, when occasion should require,
and to that purpose received the Order of Knighthood.

But fair Josian, the King's Daughter, fixed her Eyes upon him, and from liking
changed to Love, insomuch that at length she passionately doated on him; nor
did she refrain to let her Father know it, who promised not to restrain her in
her Inclination, but rather further it, in consideration Bevis would renounce
his Religion and become a Proselyte to Mahomet, and undertook on a day to
discourse him on this occasion. For taking him by the hand and leading him into
a pleasant Garden, under the shade of Orange Trees, he made him sit down by
him, there being none but these two, all others being strictly forbidden
entrance, he thus began.

Bevis, said he, What if the most beautiful Lady of my Kingdom courted,
honored and adored by Kings and Potentates, should notwithstanding neglect
their Favors, and cast her Love upon one of a much lower degree, ought he not
to condescend to any thing that shall be desired for such a Wife, and perhaps
in a short time a Kingdom into the Bargain? To this Bevis, when he had paused
and blushed a while, making an humble obeisance, replied, That certainly that
Man was most happy of all others, and ought to esteem his Life and Fortunes to
mean a return for such a gracious condescension. Ay, but continued the King,
suppose that the case require him to abjure his Religion, and that your self
was the Man on whom this great Fortune would bestow her self, and could do it
upon no other Terms, would you receive her upon this condition? Now whilst the
King was impatiently expecting his Answer, Bevis fell upon his knees, and with
hands and eyes up-lifted to Heaven, implored God to strengthen his Faith, and
protect him from falling into so great a Wickedness: Then rising and bowing low
to the King he said, Most gracious Lord, if I must answer in this point, I
could for the Lady you mention, who, if I may presume to guess at your meaning,
is no less than the fair Princess, willingly Sacrifice all the Service of my
Life, wade through Seas of Blood and Danger, nor think any thing sufficient to
merit so much condescending Goodness, no not my Life; but for the Christian
Religion, that dearer part of Life, on which depends my eternal happiness, to
renounce that, and deny the Lord that bought me: pardon Mighty Sir, if in this
I must refuse any compliance, no, not for ten Thousand Worlds, nor all the
Beauties of them.

The King hearing Bevis thus unalterably fixed, and firm to the Faith he
professed, waved to press it further, and fell into other discourse, and in the
end, his great Affairs requiring him in the Palace, he departed. Nor was it
long after, that Bevis showed by proof how far he durst hazard himself in the
vindication of the Religion he professed; for being abroad on a Christmas Day,
well mounted and armed, he met sixty Sarazens who as Enemies to our Savior,
began to joke upon Bevis in relation to the day, who returning them smart
answers, which they took for a reviling their Prophet Mahomet, they began to
urge him more: to which he replied, if he was but so well armed as Sir Guy his
Father had sometimes been in that Country, they should soon perceive their
vile Mahomet should not be able to deliver them from his just anger. At that,
said one to the other, Do you hear how this Christian Hound reviles our
Prophet, and boasts against us, wherefore let us no longer delay to chastize
him with death. Upon this, they all prepared to assault him, who with his Fist
beating one of them (with his Neck broke) to the ground, wrested from him his
Sword, and so laid about him that heads and arms strewed all the place, and in
a short time he drove those that survived before him to a River, wherein they
desperately threw themselves, for fear of the Sword, and all but two perished,
who hasted to the Court with the dismal News, desiring he might be put to death
for cursing, as they suggested, their Prophet, the Law of the Land making it
Death, etc.

The King though he loved Bevis, yet enraged that the valor of his Kingdom was
so much eclipsed by a Stranger, consented, notwithstanding that according to
the Law of the Country, he should suffer Death: of which fair Josian having
notice, hastily entered her Father's Chamber and throwing her self at his Feet,
with Tears besought him not rashly to put his severe Commands in execution, but
rather allow so much respite as the Parties might appear Face to Face, and then
if it appeared Bevis was guilty of what had been witnessed against him, he
might more justly suffer him to receive his Doom. These words of the beauteous
Princess so far prevailed that the King consented, and thereupon she dispatched
two Messengers to order Bevis to come and confer with her about his safety, who
accordingly found him on his Couch, for he had sustained in the Battle above
twenty Wounds, and was faint through loss of Blood, yet seeing them approach,
and supposing they were the two Sarazens that had escaped his Fury, and came
now privately to assassinate him, in revenge of the death of their Fellows, he
looked so sternly on them, and began withal to gather his Sword that they
retired from him, and durst only deliver their Message at a distance: but he
not crediting it, but rather supposing it a trick to decoy him into some ambush
they had laid for his Life, as not knowing what the King had determined, he
refused to go, threatening them with Death if they did not instantly depart: who
carrying this Message, or rather refusal to the Princess, and she knowing it
was no time to dally when the Life of a Man whom she loved above all Mankind
was in the Balance, laying aside all scruples and niceties, she went attended
with two Knights to his Chamber, where Bevis perceiving so bright a Creature,
who had long since conquered his affections, rose and threw himself at her
Feet, expressing himself altogether unworthy of so great a favor, and
expressed a thousand thanks, with all imaginable respect, but she not suffering
him long to kneel, clasped her snowy Arms about him, and raised him gently from
the ground, and as she raised him stole a gentle kiss, at which Bevis in a
manner ravished with joy, began to demand the cause of her coming, who
thereupon told him what had been witnessed against him, and in what danger he
was, and how she had interceeded on his behalf, and obtained so much favor of
the King, as to hear him in Person as to the matter whereof he stood accused,
giving him Instructions how he should behave himself, and promising to deal
further with the King on his behalf, she left the Knights to dress his Wounds
and departed.

CHAP. IV.
How Sir Bevis won the favor of the Princess Iosian, and killed a monstrous
Boar in the Forest, and fought with and overcome fifteen Forresters, that
estayed to take the head of the Boar from him. and how King Bradamound of
Damascus proclaimed War, for Iosian and was overcome, etc.

BEvis by this visit of the fair Princess, having in a manner new Life put into
him, his Wounds were soon cured, and his kind Advocate in the mean while had so
taken off the edge of the Kings Anger, that when the matter was rightly
understood, he was not only cleared but his Accusers doomed, at their choice,
either to sight him, or to suffer Banishment; who having too lately experienced
his more than humane force, gladly chose the ^atter. And now Bevis not only
frequently enjoyed the presence of the fair Princess, but gained great
Reputation in the Court, being either loved or feared of all: And whilst he was
thus happy, News came by many of the Villagers who had sled from their
Habitations, That a monstrous Boar was lately come into the Neighboring Plains
and had killed diverse Shepherds and Travelers, so that the Forest was
rendered impassible; and many assembling to destroy him, when they beheld his
fiery Eyes, his huge Tus^s and his horrid Bristles that stood up like a grove
of Spears, they ^^d from him, yet some of them were taken and carshed to
pieces, so that the entrance of the Den where he usually abode, was strewed
with the bones of the slain.



Bevis waiting upon the Princess, at the arrival of this News, greatly
rejoiced, as now finding an opportunity to signalize his valor for her sake;
and therefore without delay besought her that he might enterprise the killing
of this Monster; and although she used many Arguments, to dissuade him from so
great a danger, he nevertheless thirsting after Glory, so importuned her that
she consented he should try his fortune for ridding the Country of so great a
mischief.

Bevis having obtained leave, being well Mounted and Armed, rode secretly to
the Forest, whilst the Princess sent after him her best Wishes, and having
roused the Monster, he came at him with open Mouth, his Bristles standing up an
end, and with a horrible grunting or roaring set upon Bevis, who run against
him with his Lance, but that shivered in pieces, and obliged him to draw his
Sword, so that laying upon the Monsters Head, and nimbly avoiding the Fury of
his Tusks, a dreadful contention ensued, for so hard was the Skin of the Beast
that he appeared, in a manner incapable of receiving any wound; insomuch that
he began to be weary with striking, and a little retired; which the Boar
perceiving, came at him more furious, and with his Tusk gave him a deep Wound
in the Thigh; but as he attempted to redouble it, Bevis thrust with great
force, his Sword under his nether Iaw, where, the Skin being somewhat foft, it
entered, and he following hard upon it, so far it went that it pierced the
Boars heart, who thereupon fell down with a horrible groan, which made the
Forest tremble, and breathed his last.

The Boar thus dead, Bevis sundred his Head from his Body, and bearing it upon
his broken Lance, returned in Triumph with the spoil: but by the way being met
by fifteen Forresters, and they envying him the Glory of so great an
Achievement, resolved amongst themselves to kill him, and take the head from
him, that they might have the praise and reward as being taken for those that
slew the Boar; and so before he was well aware, they set upon him, incompassing
him on every side; when about to draw his Sword, he found he had left it with
the Body of the Boar, which made him throw down the Head, and with the
Truncheon of his Spear, beat two of them that attacked him to the ground,
sorely bruised and wounded, and so laid about him, that in spire of the
resistance they made, he killed nine of them in a shore space; and those that
remained, perceiving his matchless Prowess, and the mighty force of his
Strokes, supposing him not to be of mortal Race, retired from him, and at
length secured their Retreat, amongst the Trees and Thickets, and by that means
saved their Lives, so that Bevis had now leisure to take up the Boars head, and
depart to the fair Princess, at whose feet he laid it; but she, that he might
gain the better esteem with her Father, desired him to carry it to the King,
which he accordingly did, and was very kindly received, his Fame for this deed
spreading far and wide, the Country People calling him their Deliverer; which
did not a little please Josian: so that, holding a private Conference with him,
they passed their mutual Vows, never to Marry, by consent, unless they Married
each other.

To cross these happy Lovers, Fortune, that seldom long plays true, so ordered
it that Bradamound King of Damascus having heard the Fame of Josian's Beauty,
and earnestly desiring to have her to Wife, sent boldly to demand her, of her
Father King Ermine, swearing by his Gods if she were not sent, according to his
desire, he would come with an Army and take her by force, and not only so, but
destroy his Country with Fire and Sword: at which insulting Message, King
Ermine, being a little alarmed, and much enraged, assembled his Nobles in
Council, to consult what ought to be done on this occasion, and at the instance
of Josian, who protested against Bradamound; it was agreed that the defiance
should be returned, and Bevis, who gladly accepted it, made General of King
Ermine's Forces; and for his great Credit amongst the Soldiers, Dubbed him a
Knight, from which time we must call him Sir Bevis; so that Forces being every
where raised, an Army of 20000 Men were mustered, and fair Josian, the better
to furnish out her Knight, brought him a famous Steed called Arundel, almost as
renowned as Bucephalus, and having caused him completely to be armed, she
girded on a Sword called Morglay, the force of whose well tempered edge no
Armor could resist; and so clasping him in those Walls of Steel, gave him a
gentle Kiss: at which he, smiling, said, Dear Madam, this Favor has made your
Knight half a Conqueror before he enters on the War, and be assured no force
can overcome the Man that undertakes your Quarrel. And now Sir Bevis being
armed and mounted, caused the Trumpets to be sounded and the Banners to be
displayed, marshalling his Men in such orders as was admirable in so young a
General, who had not been greatly acquainted with the Trains of War; so that
now nothing but a Foe being wanting, the Army marched to meet the proud King
Bradamound, before he entered the Country to spoil or waste it; and accordingly
Sir Bevis soon found him encamped upon a large Plain, but the Pagan King being
double the number, set little by it; yet after both Armies had for a while
faced each other, and bid defiance, a fearful Combat ensued, so that the
Showers of Arrows in a manner darkened the Sky, and what together with the
clashing of Swords, the Shouts of the Victors, the cries of the Vanquished, the
neighing of Horses, and the noise of warlike Instruments, it seemed as if the
dissolution of all things was at hand, insomuch that the wild Beasts in the
forests and mountains stood amazed and trembled, as wondering what so great a
clamor and confusion should mean: and because the Saraz^ns much sto^ked about
the Standart of their King to defend it, it being born by one Radison a
Giant-like man, Bevis, the sooner to discourage them, furiously with his Sword,
broke into that quarter, and making his way over heaps of the Slain, dispersing
his Foes on every side with a terrible destruction, he charged upon him with his
Spear, which violently entering, his Shield pierced his Armor and run quite
through his Body, so that he fell dead to the ground, and with a horrible
g^oan, breathed out his last: And so proceeding to charge the rest, he s on put
them to the rout, and brought away the Standard, which so discouraged the
Infidels, that they fell into confusion, and fled into all Parts; when
Bradamound, in a rage, supposing to restore the Battle, ranged through his
disordered People, and came where Sir Bevis was cutting down whole Ranks,
instantly reviling him by the name of Christian Slave, and urging him to the
Combat with many loud reproaches; upon which a dreadful Fight happened, the
one sighting through true courage, and the other through rage and despair; but
at length Sir Bevis, with a redoubled blow, cutting through Bradamound's
Helmet, which thereupon falling off, and he likewise to the Ground, cried out
for mercy, offering Cities, Towns and Castles for the Ransom of his Life, at
which Sir Bevis smiling said, is this the courage you show for fair Josian, to
fetch whom, you have taken all these Pains, and caused so much bloodshed,
however, though you deserve to dye for your bold presumption, yet since I find
you thus humble, make a solemn protestation that you will, whenever it shall be
required, make a tributary Vassalage and do Homage to King Ermine, holding your
Kingdom at his Pleasure, and I will not only save your Life, which is now in my
Power, but set you free from the Swords of the enraged Soldiers, who thirst
after your Blood.

King Bradamound being of a proud Temper, paused a while at these Conditions,
imposed upon him by the Conqueror, but finding he must consent or loose his
Life, with much regret he chose the former, and accordingly Proclamation was
made, to spare the Lives of the flying Enemy, of whom already about 20000 were
slain, insomuch that the Plains blushed, and became slippery with Blood: and
now the Battle being entirely won, Sir Bevis giving the spoil to his Soldiers,
returned to King Ermine, to give him an account of his success, who greatly
rejoiced thereat: but the Princess had a greater share of the Joy, to find her
self not only freed from the man she hated, but in great likelihood to be
Wedded to him she most passionately loved; for now the King was so highly
pleased with Sir Bevis's brave and generous Conduct, that he recommended his
Daughter to his private Entertainment and Reception, so that with his consent
he had have to visit the beautiful Lady in her Chamber; who when they were
together by themselves, earnestly beholding him, said, with a sigh, and then a
rosy Blush overspread her Virgin Face: How long will it be, Sir Knight, before
you will fully understand how much I love you, and how passionately? pardon my
free expression, I desire to be your Wife: to which Bevis, over-ravished with
Joy, yet dissembling, as well as he could, the excess of his Passion, replied,
Most lovely Maid, it cannot sink into my Thoughts, that she whom Kings have
courted, and truly deserves the greatest Potentate on Earth, will condescend to
wed a Stranger, who though perhaps nobly born, yet is destitute at present of
those mighty Fortunes, that your merit justly requires and abundantly deserves:
Thrones and Scepters I have none, nor can I incircle your head with a sparkling
Diadem, of which you may otherwise furnish your self.

Sir Bevis expressing himself as aforesaid, and being misconstrued by the fair
Josian, she said he slighted and contemned her proffered Love, and therefore
sought those excuses, grew angry or appeared seemingly so, upbraiding him with
too much neglect and coldness of affection, pressing her resentments so home,
that she urg^d he could not, as he said, he nobly descended and prove so cruel
to one that dearly loved him, and so far proceeded on that Subject, that Sir
Bevis sensibly sin^ing his honor touched, went discontented from her Chamber;
nor did she at that time further endeavor to slay him: However, soon after
having notice that his discontent had creat^d an Indisposition both of body and
mind, she she sent to comfort him, and in the end paid him a Visit, again
unfolding to him the secrets of her Heart; and there it was concluded between
them, that the Princess becoming a Chri^^ian, he should marry her: but knowing
her Father would not suffer her to do it upon that condition, it was further
agreed, that with all her Jewels and Treasure they should secretly depart for
England: but this Conf^r^nce and ^greement, being overheard by two of King
Bradamound's Knights, taken to the late Battle, they secretly advised King
Ermine of it, and he thereupon consulted them what was to be done to prevent a
business t^^t ^o h^^^y displeased him, for he would not by any means hear that
his Dau^^^^r should renounce the Religion of her Country, though otherways
^^ll^ng enough she should be married to this renowned Stranger; so that ^^a^^
he should carry away the Lady by stealth, it was resolved he should be ^^cured
till matters could be better understood: but how with honor (...) do it, the
King was at a loss, till in the end, these two evil Counselors put it into his
mind to send him with a Letter to King Bradamound ^ho therein should be
required to make him his Prisoner. This being thought best to take the
imputation of dishonor from King Ermi Sir Bevis was sent for, and this Message
imposed upon him, under pretense that none was so worthy as himself to receive
the Homage of a King he had brought into subjection: and then a Letter being
provided for the purpose, sealed with King Ermine's Signet, contrary to the
knowledge of fair Josian, he undertook, upon the h^^^^^ of his Knighthood to
perform the message, adding that peradventure King Bradamound being now in his
Strength, might refuse what he in time of danger had promised, but if he might
have his Horse and Armor with him, he would force him, if so he refused, to
tender his Homage, but being dissuaded therefrom by the King, as not
convenient on this occasion, he took his leave and departed toward Damascus.

CHAP. V.
How Bevis having conquered King Bradamound's Army, and brought him to do
Homage to King Ermine, he and Iosian plighted their troth. And how King Ermine
purposely sent him to Damascus to have him destroyed. How he threw down the
Images there, and fought the whole City, but at last put into a Den of Dragons.
What miseries he suffered there, with other things.

SIR Bevis being on his way, mounted, for speed, on a Horse of little strength,
and a Sword of small force by his side, as he was riding by a Forest he espied
one in a Palmer's Waed at his repast, who seeing him coming, rose to meet him,
and invited him to partake of his slender fare, which Sir Bevis not refusing,
alighted and fell too; when the Palmer began to ask him diverse Questions, and
amongst the rest, in what Countries he had traveled, and being informed, he
further demanded, if he had never in his Travels met with one Bevis an
Englishman born a^ Southampton; at which Sir Bevis being a little surprised,
as wondering who it should be that enquired after him in so strange a Land,
demanded why he enquired after him, and who he was: whereupon Sir Terrey, for
so was this seeming Palmer named, told him that he being Son to Sir Sabre, and
his Father being in great danger to loo^e his Life, by the Tretchery of Sir
Murdure of Almain, unless within a time limited he could find a Champion to
answer him on his behalf in the Field, for that he had contrived the sending
away of Bevis Son to the Earl of Southampton, who was committed to him to be
slain, he had sent him in search of Bevis, to come and be his Champion, whom he
knew, by this time, to be of strength sufficient to undertake the Combat, and
had charged him, on the honor of his Knighthood, not to return till he had
found him, or so far had knowledge where he was that he might send to acquaint
him with it: To this Sir Bevis replied, That he knew the Man, and had
contracted intimate acquaintance with him, but at present being bound on a
Message to Damascus, he could no further accommodate him with his presence;
however, upon his return, he would so far oblige him in the matter, that Bevis
should come to England, and undertake the Combat. Then Sir Terry desired to
know in what City or Town he abode, that he might go to him, and deliver what
he had in charge: But Sir Bevis telling him he had passed his word, not to
discover him to any person without his own consent, he could not oblige him in
his request; however he might return and not doubt but he would follow him, for
the certainty of which, himself, as he was true a Christian, would become bound
and obliged; and so having lovingly embraced each other, they parted, and took
their several ways, Bevis for Damascus, and Sir Terry for England. Sir Bevis
being come within sight of the City, was wonderfully taken with the
pleasantness of it, as being adorned with Castles, Towers and stately Palaces,
shining with Gold and precious Stones; and at the Gate was placed an Eagle of
Gold wondrous large, whose Eyes were two great Carbuncles, which in the night
gave a large light to Strangers passing thitherward; so that boldly entering, he
made toward the Palace of the King to deliver his Letter, not dreaming it
contained matter against his Life: but by the way passing through their
heathenish Temple, he espied a great number of People preparing to do a
Sacrifice to their Idols with Songs and much false Devotion, whereat inflamed
with a Christian zeal, he thrust in amongst the Superstitious rout, and tearing
down the Idols, brake them in pieces and trampled them under his feet; which so
offended the Pagans that they resolved to put him to Death, with the most
exquisite Torments; when gathering thick about him, some of them laid hold of
him, but were soon obliged to let go, for perceiving himself in danger, he drew
his Sword and dispersed them on every side, scattering the Pavement with their
heads and mangled Limbs, insomuch that the Multitude continually increasing,
the Vproar waxed exceeding great, and many that fled from his revengefull
Sword, hasted to Alarm the Court, telling the King, that if he did not succor
the Citizens with his Guards, there was a Man, or the Devil in the shape of
one, who would put them all to the Sword; further adding, he had already
destroyed their Gods, in whose power and protection they trusted, and was
coming toward the Palace, killing and beating down all that stood in his way,
or opposed him.

At this news, the King caused all his Men to Arm, and as he was issuing over
the Bridge, Sir Bevis was come to the foot of it, and perceiving it was the
King, made signs that he had a Message to him, greeting him from King Ermine,
who at the first sight of him started back, as well knowing who it was; but
being environed with armed Men, and perceiving that Sir Bevis had sheathed his
Sword, he sternly demanded his business, who, not forgetting his Distance,
bending his knee to the Ground, delivered the Letter, the Contents of which
were these.

To King Bradmound, King Ermine sends Greeting:
WHereas Sir Bevis of Southampton came lately a Stranger into my Court, and
occasioned the Quarrel between you and me, in dissuading my Daughter to yield
her self your Wife, and has since gone about to make her renounce her Religion,
intending privately to carry her away to his own Country, I thought good to
advertize you thereof; wherefore, that there may be a right understanding
between us, for the future, I not thinking it convenient to lay hands on him my
self, have sent him to you to chastize him at your Discretion; wherefore by no
means let him escape, for he being once removed I doubt not, but it will be
easy to work my Daughter to a compliance with your Demands, that all
animosities may cease between us: and so we bid you heartily farewell.


This pleased Bradmound, and made him change his Countenance into terror, as
knowing Sir Bevis was now abandoned by King Ermine, and put into his power to
revenge the mischief he had done him, and began immediately to consult what
Death or Torture he should be put to, some gave Counsel to Burn him to Ashes,
others to Flee him alive, others again to draw him through the City, and hang
him upon Tenters; but at last they concluded to cast him into a deep filthy
Dungeon, where two fierce Dragons were kept: and now Sir Bevis plainly
perceiving that there was mischief plotted against him, said, Sir as I am a
Knight, let me dye the Death of a Soldier, in the Field; the which if you
grant me a Horse and Armor, to dye valiantly fighting, it will more redound to
your Glory, and the courage of the Knights that shall have the honor to slay
me. But the King without any reply, not thinking it fit to trust so dreadful a
Man with Arms, who already unarmed, in a manner as he was, had made his City
tremble, commanded him to be seized; whereat Sir Bevis grasping a Sword, for he
had broke his own in the former Combat, stood upon his defense; and although
they drew up the Bridge, and hemmed him in on every side, he killed fifty
Knights before he could be taken: but then, weary with continual fighting, and
his Sword breaking at the same time, he yielded to fatal necessity; and no
sooner had the Infidels got him in their power, but they bound him in strong
Chains, and carried him to the Dungeon, where by Cords they let him down a
wonderful depth: but long he had not been there ever the Dragons perceiving
him, came out of the corners where they had made their Dens, with terrible Cries
and Howlings, frighting even those that heard them from above, whereat Sir
Bevis finding himself in a great strait, and ready to be devoured by those
Monsters, redoubling his force, he burst his Chains in sunder, and found as
Fortune would have it, in the place where he lay, an old rusty Sword, with
which, after a cruel fight, in which he received many Wounds from their Teeth
and Claws, he killed the Dragons, and freed himself from the present danger,
but suddenly fell into worse; for having nothing wherewith to subsist, unless
the flesh of the Monsters he had slain, which were rank Poison, he must
inevitably perish for hunger; yet Death was not so terrible to him, as the
thoughts he should disappoint Sir Sabre, and put his Mistress in great sorrow,
who yet knew nothing of his Undertaking, and therefore might conclude he had
forsaken her and proved false to his Vows. But whilst he was in this
perplexity, his Keepers perceiving from above that he had destroyed the
Dragons, advertized the King thereof, who, that he might prolong his Misery, in
that noisome place, and make him, as it were, dye a living Death, commanded that
every day he should have a Bowl of Bran and Water let down by Rope, with which,
and the flesh of Rats and Mice, which he caught in the Dungeon, he subsisted
for the space of seven years.

CHAP. VI.
How Sir Bevis killed his Keepers, and escaped from the Dungeon, where he had
been seven years, and after that the Grooms, and furnished himself with Horse
and Armor. How he killed a Knight and a Giant. Stole fair Josian from King
Iour, that had Married her, Conquered another Giant, and two Lions, and arrived
at Colen: And what there befell him.

SIR Bevis being thus dead, in the conceit of the World, and the Princess
Josian ignorant of what had befallen him, was given by her Father to understand
that he had left the Court privately, and was gene for England, where he had
married a Princess of great Renown, to whom he was formerly betrothed, and
there lived upon his Possessions, with an intention never to return; assuring
her, that a Merchant had lately brought him this News; upon the recital
whereof, the Royal Virgin wept abundantly, accusing him of Ingratitude and
Inconstancy, reviling the whole Sex for his sake, and vowing to live a Virgin,
unless Sir Bevis returned, and she found what had been related of him false:
however, her Father pressing her in this pensive and melancholy mood to comply
with King Bradmound's request, and become his Queen; and finding her altogether
averse to him, he pitched upon another, recommending him to her choice, viz.
Jour King of Mambrat, a powerful and wealthy Prince in those parts, and by
threats and commands, obliged her to join her hands with his, though not her
Heart; for although many Emperors, Kings and Potentates were at the Wedding,
which was celebrated with exceeding Joy and Pomp, she alone was found
Sorrowful, often retiring and weeping bitterly for the absence of Sir Bevis,
by which she injured her fair Eyes, and much impaired her Beauty; and her
Bedding, which is held the custom of those Countries, being deferred for a
month, she, in that time, procured of the wise Magicians of Egypt, then at her
Father's Court, such Spells and Enchantments, that being worn, they, by secret
power and operation, took away all desire in the King her Husband to bereave
her of her Virginity; as shall be further mentioned hereafter.

Bevis's Horse, Sword and Armor being in the possession of King Ermine, he
bestowed them upon his new Son-in-law, but Arundel, upon the first mounting of
King Jour, perceiving it was not his true Master, taking a Career over Hedges,
Ditches and Places of the like danger, threw him with such force, that the
fall, by the mighty bruise, much indammaged his Life; which so vexed the King,
that he caused him to be sent to his Castle and kept in Chains till he was
starved to Death; but fair Josian, for the sake of his Master, daily fed him
with her own hands, unknown to the King; and now began to mistrust, that there
was some Treachery in the Case, forasmuch as she could not imagine Sir Bevis
would leave a Sword, Armor and Horse, he so entirely delighted in, when he
might with the same case, as himself departed, have taken them with him: in
which doubt we leave her a while, and return to Sir Bevis.

Sir Bevis still languishing in the noisome Dungeon, every day continued
fervent Prayers to God, for the forgiveness of his Sins, and his deliverance
from that dismal Place wherein he was; when for the most part his Keepers, who
were Pagans, derided him with many blasphemies, telling him it was in vain to
expect deliverance, for none were able to deliver him out of their hands, and
there he might assure himself he should remain till he dyed. When so one day it
happened that Sir Bevis, to prevent the execrations of these Wretches against
the Savior of the World, resolved in silence to breath out his Heart-breathing
sorrow, so that they, hearing no noise, concluded him dead, and thereupon one
of them descended to see whether it was so or not, that they might take his
Body thence, and drag it through the City, in derision of his Christian
Profession, and so cast it in a Ditch, or on a Dunghill without the Walls, as
is usual with them in that case; but he no sooner came down by a Rope, ever Sir
Bevis seized on him, and clapping his strong hands about his Neck, made him
past crying out: at what time the other Keeper calling to know whether Sir
Bevis was dead or not, he himself answered in a feigned voice, assuring him he
was dead, desiring him withal, to come down, and assist him in helping up the
Body; the other Keeper believing this to be true, immediately descended, but
had scarcely reached the Ground when Sir Bevis with one blow of his Fist broke
his Neck in sunder; whereupon falling on his Knees, and giving thanks that he
had thus avenged himself upon these Blasphemers and thereby wrought his own
Liberty, he ascended by the Rope they had let down, and found it to be about
the time of midnight, yet were there lights in the Stables, where the Grooms
were dressing their Horses; and now resolving to mount and arm himself, he
broke open the Door upon them, and with a Bar, to prevent their Out-crys, laid
them in an everlasting sound: when taking one of the best Horses, with a Sword,
Spear and complete Armor, he mounted, and coming to the Gate where the Porter
waited, told him, that Sir Bevis was escaped, and the Court was in pursuit of
him, wherefore he must immediately open the Gate, which he, being ignorant of
what had passed in the Dungeon and Stable, did with little difficulty, and let
the Champion pass; but soon the Alarm was taken, and News brought to King
Bradmound, that Sir Bevis had escaped, and killed his Keepers and the Grooms,
whereat much enraged, he caused him to be pursued in all have, when Sir
Grandures a bold Knight, much relying upon his strength, mounted upon
Trunchsice, a swift horse, and overrunning all the rest, overtook him a
considerable distance from the City, and defied him to the Combat, with many
reproaches to which Sir Bevis replied, That if he overcame him, Famine more
befriended him than valor, yet both putting their Spears in their Rests, they
ran furiously against each other, so that Sir Grandures was tumbled to the
Ground, yet rising and drawing his Sword he came at Sir Bevis who did the like,
and after some blows were given and received, a full stroke, with redoubled
force, falling upon his Helm clove it, with his Head, in sunder; whereupon Sir
Bevis leaving him dead upon the ground, mounted Trunchsice, and passed on: but
being weak through hunger, and perceiving a great Troop in pursuit of him, even
at his Heels, dispairing to overcome so great a number, he took with his Horse,
an Arm of the Sea, and swam to the further shore, and by that means escaped,
none daring to venture after him.

Sir Bevis having thus escaped his Foes, began now to faint, through hunger;
and thereupon espying a Castle before him, and a beautiful Lady, leaning over
the Wall, he made up to it, and acquainted her with his necessities, entreating
her to supply him, with such Provision as she had, telling her he was a
Christian Knight, who was upon the search of Adventures, and that if it say in
his Power, he would require her kindness, but she hearing he was a Christian,
commanded him immediately to be gone, saying, That her Husband was a bloody
Pagan Giant, and that if he knew he was there, he would suddenly come out and
destroy him, as he bone many; but this nothing daunted Sir Bevis, who rep^yed
he had rather dye in Battle than through hunger, and therefore he was resolved
to Dine there that day: scarce had he ended these words but out came the Giant,
and stairing on him with a grim vissage, said, What art thou Fellow? and where
came thou by that Horse, which if I mistake not, is my Brother Grandeur 's,
whom thou have stole? bu however, I shall chastize thee for thus sawcily
approaching my Castle: and thereupon, ever Sir Bevis could well reply, and give
him an account, how he had gotten the Horse, he came at him with a h^g^ and
weighty Battle Ax, but missing him, he struck his Horse with such force that he
f^lled him to the Ground; but Sir Bevis leaping nimbly off, cha^g^d with such
Fury, that he made the Giant give Ground; what ^iring at a distance took his
Bow that h^ng at the Wall, and shot at him with a forked Arrow, which entered
his shoulder and greatly pained him, yet thereat being more enraged, he
followed him up so close, that with a forcible blow, between the Giants neck
and shoulders, where his Helmet was open, he struck off his head, and his body
thereupon falling to the ground made it tremble; at this the Lady screeched
out, and would have fled to the Woods; but Sir Bevis promising to do her no
harm, she was at last contented to stay, and set before him such provision as
the Castle afforded; and then setting free such Prisoners as he fo^nd there, he
departed to take a view of the Holy Land, where at Jerusalem, he was kindly
received by the Patriarch, and there he made a vow for the sake of fair Josian,
never to marry any but a spotless Virgin; and now considering it was too late
for him to go for England, to be Sir Sabres Champion: and of which enterprise
he had been defeated by the treachery of King Ermine, he resolved to go
disguised into Armenia, to know the cause why the King, who had so much
deserved of him, had so perfidiously dealt with him? but the rather to know
what was become of the sair Princess? the disappointing of whom more sensibly
grieved him, than all his other sufferings: and whilst he was musing on this
matter, a Knight overtook him, who had been of his former acquaintance, and
related to him all that had passed on these occasions, further informing him,
that Queen Josian though she was married against her will, still kept him in
remembrance, giving alms for his sake to a great number of Palmers, and
enquiring of every one what was become of him. This did not a little revive the
spirits of Sir Bevis, and put him upon a more earnest enquiry, especially where
he might have a sight of his fair Mistress, and being informed she kept her
Court in the Castle of Mambrat, he hasted thither.

Being arrived in the City and hearing the Queen gave alms to Palmers, he put
himself in such a weed, and leaving his horse and armor in his Inn, hasted to
the Castle gate, and there amongst the rest passed for a Palmer; but long he
had not staid there, before the Queen came with her Alms, the King and his
Train being then gone a hunting, and when she had distributed her bounty, and
gently enquired of every one, whether they had lately seen or heard of Sir
Bevis of Southampton, but not meeting with any such news as she wished, she
retired to her Closset, and in this manner bemoaned her self: Alas said she,
for the good Knight Sir Bevis* he is gone and I shall never see him more; how
could so brave a Knight be so much cruel, and unkind to a Virgin, that so
highly esteemed and adore him; sure the best of men could never be guilty of
the worst of crimes; it must surely then, be that some who envied our peace and
happyness has conspired by treason to separate us, though it cannot be in their
power to extinguish my love toward him; for a Queen as I am, I would willingly
be disrobed of my Royalty, to wander with that gallant Youth through Deserts or
Wildernesses, and think nothing too much to endure or suffer for his sake, whom
I so dearly love; But O hard fortune, I shall never see him more! This said,
she burst forth into a flood of tears; which Sir Bevis who had all this while
hearkened under the window noting, could not but let fall some tears to bear
hers company, and finding an opportunity to speak to Boniface her Page, he
desired him to acquaint the Queen, that he had a secret to impart to her, that
highly concerned her welfare; which being accordingly done, she ordered he
should attend her coming down, in the retiring room, expecting from this
Palmer, as most people usually do what they earnestly wish, some news of Sir
Bevis.

Long it was not before she came thither, when Sir Bevis after reverence in a
profound manner done, said, fair Queen, I hard you enquire this day for Bevis
of Southampton, but not being wi^ling to speak the knowledge I have of that
Knight in public, I have presumed upon this private audience. And does he
live, said the fair Queen, being almost extacied at the mention of his name: He
does, replied Sir Bevis, and for your sake, has undergone a thousand miseries,
in a seven years imprisonment in a dungeon, and run many other hazards, though
now all to no purpose, seeing you have for ever taken your self from him, by
being given into the arms of another; And by whose contrivance, said the Queen,
could he fall into such danger as you say? By the treachery of your Father,
replied Sir Bevis, who betrayed him to the power of King Bradmound, his mortal
enemy. Is it possible, said the Queen, then all is true, that my fears
suggests, and I am wretched; with that she fell into a sound, but Sir Bevis
taking her in his arms in the best wise comforted her, who thereupon reviving,
and knowing his voice, said, Ah and is it my Love, my life, my dear Bevis, and
does he live! and here she had fainted again with too much excess of Joy, had
he not held her up, so that coming to her self, and having recounted to each
other all that had happened, to cross their Loves: it was agreed between them,
upon her declaring her self to be a pure Virgin, that the King being absent, he
should take her thence to any land, where ever he pleased, and thereupon
ordered at his request, her Page to fetch his Horse Arundel (who hearing his
Masters voice had broke his chains) his Sword Morglay, and his Armor he left
in the City, and to prepare her Equipage instantly; which being all in a
readiness they mounted, and mounting the Page, who would accompany his Queen,
upon the Horse Sir Bevis left in the Inn, they with much joy and secrecy
departed the City; but far had not they gone, but they perceived the Country in
pursuit of them, upon notice the Queen was missing; whereupon Sir Bevis would
have turned back, to have fought the pursuers, whilst the Queen and her Page,
might have opportunity to escape; but she being as careful of his safety, as
her own, would not consent; but rather those to make what speed they could out
of the Territories of the King; and so succesful they were, that by passing
through Forests and By-ways, they lost the pursuers; but now night coming on,
and the Queen being weary, and no house near, they were obliged to take up
their lodging in a Rockey cave: But whilst Sir Bevis was gone in search of such
provision as that wild place afforded, a Lion and a Lyoness entered, it being it
seems the place of their repose, to defend them against whom, Boniface the
Queens Page drew his sword, and maintained a stout Combat, in hope Sir Bevis
might in the mean time come to his rescue; but he not doing it, and the other
proving too weak, was immediately devoured; but the Queen protected by her
Royalty, as the Daughter of a King, and her unspotted Virginity remained safe;
but no sooner Sir Bevis approached the Cave, but she cried out to him to sly
and save his life, giving him to understand the danger, and what else had
happened, but his dauntless courage could not be afraid, for resolutely
entering, as suspecting his fair Mistress in more danger than she was, he came
upon them with such fury, that after a long Combat, not without receiving
several gripes and wounds, he laid them dead at her feet; and by this he was
further confirmed, that she had preserved her Virginity, notwithstanding she
had been seven years a Bride, and thereupon enquired with intermixtures of
many tender kisses, by what means she had done it, who accordingly told him how
it happened: and so having refreshed themselves with some Venison he had
brought, which they roasted in the Cave, the fair Queen, such is the power of
love condescending to took it. The next morning, when the Sunbeams began to
dart from the East, they mounted and kept on their way; but as if fortune
conspired to cross them, they at the turning of a Forest, met a huge and
monstrous Giant, whom King Jour had sent out to travel all night in search of
them, who being satisfied he was right, by the description given, stradled
cross the way like a Collossus, and with a mighty club in his hand forbad their
passage further, saying he was not a little glad he had found them, that he
might carry them bound on his back to Mambrat, there to be punished by King
Jour as they deserved. But Sir Bevis nothing afraid of his stern vissage, that
might reasonaby have affrighted any man, told him his business lay another way,
and that if he did not instantly remove, he would cut his passage through him
with his sword, at which the Giant in disdain set up a roar, that all the
Forest trembled, and came at Sir Bevis, who the better to avoid the force of
the club, quitted his Horse, and nimbly traversing his ground, gave him many
wounds, to revenge which, whilst he overreached himself, thinking with a full
blow to dash Sir Bevis in pieces, he stumbled and fell, nor could he by reason
of his unweildiness, recover till Sir Bevis was upon him, and being about to
take off his head, he cried out for quarter, promising all his life after to be
his Servant, which at the entreaty of Queen Josian was granted, and Ascapart,
for so was the Giants name, sworen to be true to the Conqueror, and thereupon
they went to the next Port, where lay a ship ready to sail, but refusing to
take them in, Ascapart, having obtained leave of Sir Bevis, seized upon the
Vessel, and held it with a strong hand, in spite of sails, wind and oars, till
by force he entered and drove the Sailors out of it, then taking Sir Bevis and
the Queen in one arm, and his Horse in another, he carried them on board, his
strength being almost incredible, for as the story has it, he was thirty foot
in height and twelve in circumferance, so that mannaging by his sole strength
the sails and tackle he transported them to Colen, where Queen Josian was
baptized by the Bishop, and received into the Christian Communion, but Ascapart
stradling quite over the Fount, and the peoples heads, that were near it, would
not consent to it; but crying out, Ah Churl, will thou drench me, I am too big
to be drenched by thee, and so departed.

CHAP. VII.
How Sir Bevis fought with, and killed a dreadful Dragon at Colen, obtained
forces of the Bishop his Uncle, sailed for England to recover his heritage, and
by a wile got Armor and Horses of Sir Murdure, then taking part with Sir
Sabre, he sent the other defiance, etc.

SIR Bevis being come to Colen, and the fame of his valiant deeds and glorious
achievements, having reached that place before, he was highly welcomed, and
the people were overjoyed, for now they hoped by his prowess, to be delivered
from the plague of their Country, which had destroyed so many of them, and laid
many places wast, viz. a dreadful Dragon, who kept a Cave not far from the
City, and that night had poisoned a Knight, whom many of the Inhabitants held
invincible, and not to be conquered by mortal might; however at the cries and
entreaties of the Inhabitants, contrary to the knowledge of the Queen, who
would not have suffered him to have undertaken so dangerous an enterprise, Sir
Bevis and Ascapart went early in the morning to seek the Monster, and scarcely
had they approached his Cave, when putting out his head he gave such an
horrible yell, that Ascapart verily supposing it to be the Devil, would advance
no further, whereat Sir Bevis began to smile, saying, I thought you had not
feared a whole Army, and are afraid of a Monster? come take courage and you
shall only be a looker on, whilst I finish the work; and by this time the
hideous Monster being gotten out of his Cave, greedy of prey came at Sir Bevis,
lifting up his crest and casting fire and poison out of his mouth, his eyes
burning like two Beacons, horribly hissing with a triple sting, and a tail of
infinite length, against whom the Knight ran forcibly with his spear, but his
seals being harder than Brass, it burst in pieces and shivered in the Air;
whereupon he drew his trusty Sword, and laid at him furiously, but could by no
means wound him, when the Dragon with his tail giving him a stroke, beat him
from his Horse, and very much bruised him, having likewise with his tallants
rent his Armor; but Sir Bevis nothing dounted, avoiding as nimbly as he might,
the stroke and striking as he saw occasion; but in the end the Dragon casting
poison on him, and infecting the Air with his venomous breath, caused him a
little to faint, and retireing toward a Well, he perceived the Monster to make
a stop some paces from it, and not to advance further, which gave him a
breathing time; so that plainly perceiving, there was extraordinary virtue in
the well, by reason of a Saint-like Virgins washing in it, that kept off his
infectious enemy, he proceeded to drink some of the water, which he had no
sooner done, but he found his vigor renewed, and his strength as at first, so
that as often as he found himself annoyed with the poison, he retired thither
as to a sanctuary, and being refreshed went again to the Combat; so that the
Dragon being much bruised, and perceiving he could not overcome the Knight,
began to take wing, where espying a bare place, not covered with scales or
defense, Sir Bevis resolutly stepped in and sheathed his sword in his side,
following the thrust so forcible that it peirced his heart, when with a
horrible roar, as if a whole army of men had groaned out their last, he fell
dead at his feet; of which victory Sir Bevis being exceeding glad, raised the
scales of his neck, and cutting off his head, bore it into the City as in
triumph, being met without the wall by old and young, with songs and music,
stiling him their Deliverer, causing Bells to ring, and Bonfires to be made,
and as a perpetual memory of this Victory, placed the Head upon the highest
Tower in the City. Sir Bevis growing more and more in esteem with the Citizens
of Colen, and knowing that the Bishop of that City was his Fathers Brother, he
resolved to solicit him for Aid against Sir Murdure who kept his heritage, of
the Earldom of Southampton from him, and taking his opportunity, when they were
private together, he said, Sir, you know my Father, your Brother was unjustly
slain by the connivance of my Mother, and now the murderer detains my
Heritage; wherefore give Counsel, whether I shall atempt by force of Arms the
regaining of it or desist, and by your wisdom am I content be ruled, although I
know Sir Sabre my other Uncle is already contending for it. It Is true replied
the Bishop, and every year on a certain day they wage a mortal Battle, wherein
one or other of their party is slain: wherefore it is my opinion, that you
ought to contend for it your self, as being the true Heir to the Earl your
Father, and to further you in this matter, I promise to aid you with an hundred
men at my own charge.



Sir Bevis glad of the profer made him by the Bishop, went to Josian, and
acquainted her with this new undertaking, laying before her the necessity of
it, and withal told her he would leave her in that City sufficiently provided
for, till the danger was over, and then fetch her in pomp, to possess their
rightful heritage, and although she was unwilling to leave his company, and
could not part without tears, yet seeing it must be so she consented, and so
with a kind kiss for a time they bid a due to each other; for the men being
shipped Sir Bevis went aboard, and within a while sailing came to an anchor, in
a Port about two miles from Southampton, where Sir Bevis being destitute of
Armor to furnish his men, thought of a stratagem to obtain it in this manner:
viz. he sent a Knight to the Castle of Sir Murdure to inform him, that
understanding there was a great difference between him and another Knight named
Sir Sabre, and that a Battle was shortly to be fought between them, an Almain
Captain with a Band of resolute Soldiers, was come to offer his service,
provided he would furnish his men with Arms and Armor, that they might appear
according to their quality, or else being Soldiers of Fortune, they were
resolved to make the like offer to his Enemy, by whom they doubted not but to
be entertained.

Sir Murdure kindly accepted this profer, upon the condition proposed, and
entreated them to land, which accordingly they did, and Sir Bevis with his men
were highly treated, both by Sir Murdure and the Countess Sir Bevis's Mother,
who knew him not, for he had changed his name to that of Sir Gerard, ordering
his men to call him by no other; when as Sir Murdure thus began, Noble
Stranger, it may be you are ignorant of the cause that occasions this
difference between me and Sir Sabre, a hardy Knight whose residence is now in
the Isle of Wight, and this it is, so it happened, that Sir Guy being slain by
misfortune in a neighboring Forest, who was Earl of this Town, I married the
Lady his Countess my present Wife, and she having had one Son by the Earl named
Bevis, who proving extravagant and expensive when of age I bought his Heritage
of him, and he having consumed the money he received for it, left the Land and
has not since been heard of; notwithstanding this Sir Sabre who is his Uncle,
being of late grown rich and powerful lays claim to it, and with many inroads
and fierce Encounters disturbs and invades my possession, and now I have
informed you of the justness of my cause, I hope it will exault your Courages
to defend my right.

Sir Bevis having heard the foregoing relation and knowing it to be fabulous,
had much ado to contain himself, and refrain from killing the murderer of his
Father, and the injurer of his Honor, in his own Castle; but considering it
would be more generous, to do it in the field, he checked at this time his
anger, to wait a nobler opportunity, and so dissembling the matter, he renewed
his request for Armor, Horses, and Shipping, protesting, if he might have
them, to sail immediately to the Isle of Wight, and there put an end to the
contention, by making Sir Sabre his Prisoner, and bringing him bound to his
presence. At this Sir Murdure was well pleased, and ordered all things to be
provided according as had been desired, hastening them to the enterprise, who
being accordingly furnished with what they desired, set sail and landed in the
Island, at what time Sir Sabre being near the Shore, and perceiving Ships
putting men on land, supposed them Enemies, and thereupon sent for his forces
to oppose them; but being convinced of the contrary, upon Sir Bevis causing his
Fathers Banner to be displayed, well known to him, and by that being assured it
was his Nephew, he hasted to welcome him, and with much joy lead him to his
Castle, and there they made report to each other, of all that had befell them
since they parted; and thereupon Sir Bevis calling a Knight to him, and no
longer desirous to to dissemble who he was, or refrain laying claim to his
Heritage, sent him to Sir Murdure, to let him know how he had been mistaken and
imposed upon, and that he immediately expected a surrender of the Earldom; and
would notwithstanding punish him for treacherously killing his Father: when the
Messenger came with this message, Sir Murdure was at dinner with diverse
Friends, making great merriment, as not doubting by the help of his supposed
Friends, to be revenged on Sir Sabre his mortal Enemy; but upon the delivery of
the message, finding himself deceived in his expectation, he grew exceeding
wrath, and drawing his Daggar, being on the other side of the Tabe, he threw it
with great force at the Knight, but missing him, it struck into the breast of
his own Son, who was then waiting at the borad, whereupon he fell down dead,
and the other fled, relating all that he had said and seen, to Sir Bevis, who
gave him for this service forty pounds.

CHAP. VIII.
How Sir Bevis and Sir Murdure prepared for War. How Josian had like to have
been Ravished; and how she was rescued from the Flames, and brought together
with the Giant Ascapart, to the Isle of Weight: and what other matters happened.

SIR Bevis, as we said, being in the Isle of Wight, we must there leave him a
while, and return to Josian whom we left at Colen, and with her the Giant
Ascapart as her Guard, to prevent any danger that might befall her. So it fell
out, That Josian had not been long here, after the departure of Sir Bevis, but
Sir Miles an Earl of that Country, casting his Eyes upon her admirable Beauty,
fell desperately in love with her, and began in a passionate manner, to court
her to his pleasure, but she refusing his proffered Love with disdain, he
resolved if he could not have his Will of her fairly, to have it by force, and
in a manner told her his intent, to which she replied, Sir, although Sir Bevis
is absent, yet have I here with me Ascapart, that will not see me wronged: and
by this means, he having understood in whom she reposed her confidence,
resolved to get him out of the way, whilst he acted his wicked purpose, and so
feigning a Letter to him, in Sir Bevis's name, how that he must immediately
come to him, to the Castle in the Sea, standing a league from the Shore; the
unthinking Giant went, when he no sooner entered the Castle, but it was shut
upon him, by those that carried him, and the boat, as Sir Miles had agreed with
the Boatmen, immediately rowed back again; and then he made his fresh attempts
upon fair Josian, telling her what he had done with Ascapart, and now she had
nothing to hope in, but must yield to his pleasure or dye; whereupon she
secretly sent a trusty Messenger, to certify Sir Bevis of the danger she was
in, which required his speedy aid: and then to delay the false Knight, she told
him, if he would marry her, he should have his will of her, but if he otherways
attempted it, she would rather dye than suffer it to be done.

Sir Miles, as I said, being passionately in love with the fair Queen, stuck
not at any thing she proposed, so that he might enjoy her, and having told her
he would asuredly do it, and thereupon obtaining a kiss, the day was appointed,
to be the next, and thereupon he prepared all manner of sumptuous Cheer and
Music, inviting many Barrons, Knights, and Ladies to his wedding, and so
married they were early in the morning, and the day being spent in feasting;
when it grew night and Supper ended, fair Josian was led to her Bride-chamber,
and soon after, impatient of delay, came Sir Miles with many attendants, but
she entreated him for modesties sake to send away his Train, and she would be
his Chamberlain; so that at his command all departing, and they left together,
she finding now no other way to save her honor, made a slip-knot of her Girdle
and casting it over his Neck, strangled him, and afterward hung him upon a
beam. And his Barrons and Knights finding him not abroad in the Morning, as he
was wont, imputing it to his new Love Incounters with the fair Bride, every one
wishing himself in his place; some went to hunting, and others to the Church;
but coming home at noon, and yet not finding him out of his Chamber, they had
great marvel, insomuch that one of them went to see what was the matter, and
opening the door, said, Arise Earl Miles, for you have slept a great while,
wherefore I cannot but think your head aches, will you please to have a Candle?
Nay, replied Iosian, I will undertake his Head shall ache no more, for I have
unknit the wedding, and yonder you may see him hanging, my honor he shall
never destroy, though for what I have acted, you may do with me as you please.

The death of Sir Miles once known to his Friends, they made great sorrow for
it, and with much anger proceeded to burn the fair Josian at a stake, so that
the Fire being set in order, and kindled by the Sea side, Ascapart, who beheld
it from the Castle, imagining that Queen Josian his Mistress was in danger burst
in sunder the Iron gates, and entering a Fishers boat, just come into the Port,
he rowed himself to the place where the Fire was, and found it to be true, as
he had dread, for there he beheld the Queen in her shift, ready to be put into
the fire, and whilst he was devising how to rescue her, Sir Bevis came riding
up, and seeing Ascapart, said, Thief where has thou been? where has thou left
Josian my fair Queen, whom I gave thee in charge, that she is thus forced to
send for me to deliver her from danger? whereupon asking his pardon, he told
him all that had happened, and showed him in what danger the Queen stood, who
had before their coming been sacraficed in the Flames, had not the Priest been
long in shrieving her. This sight so enraged Sir Bevis, that bidding Ascapart
follow him, he broke through the throng, and with his Sword cut all in pieces
before him, in so much that the people fled amazed, crying on every hand for
mercy, whilst Ascapart on the other side, laid them on heaps with his Club,
felling and braining whole ranks at a blow, and having made great slaugther and
cleared the Coast, Josian being left alone, Sir Bevis caused her to cloth her
self, and mount behind him, and together with Ascapart they took shipping, and
sailed to the Isle of Wight, where they were lovingly receeived by Sir Sabre,
and his Knights. Josian returning great thanks to Heaven for her deliverance,
and there related to Sir Bevis all that had befell her, etc.

CHAP. IX.
How Sir Bevis and Sir Murdure mustered their Armies, and of the mortal Battle
fought between them, in which the latter was overthrown, and taken Prisoner.
How he was boiled alive, and how the Countess his Wife, broke her Neck: and how
Sir Bevis took possession of his Estate, etc.

SIR Bevis and Sir Sabre, resolving to pursue Sir Murdure to death, sent their
summons into all parts, to require their Friends to come to their Aid, sending,
the better to encourage them, gifts of Gold and Silver very liberally, so that
many Earls, Barrons, and Knights came slocking to their Standard, with their
Pages, and their Attendants, who according to their Degrees were listed, and
entered into the Service; of which Sir Murdure having notice, was exceedingly
fretted in his mind, and therefore consulted with the Countess his Wife, what
was best to be done for their safeties, who advised him to send to his Brother
the Emperor, and she would do the like to her Father the King of Scots, to let
them know their distress, and rerequire their speedy Aid, which she doubted not
to obtain, with many more Knights of Renown, in England and Wales, and then
like a Tempest falling upon Bevis, Sabre and their Fellows, you may soon put
them to the slight, wherefore, said she, in no manner let your Courage fall you.

This Council Sir Murdure immediately put in practice, nor did he fail therein;
for a great many came daily to him, and amongst the rest the King of Scots,
with five thousand choice Soldiers; and Sir Morris of Vain, sent by the Almain
Emperor, with four thousand men at Arms, he having three thousand under his
Banner before, whereupon, gathering them in one place, he said, Lordlings, you
that are come to my Aid, have no doubt heard of the strife between me and Sir
Sabre, and now another is entered into the Quarrel, to take part with him, one
Sir Bevis by name, threatening to slay me, and to take away my Land, and
Possessions, and for that intent, has brought with him a monsterous Giant,
whose grim visage may at first perhaps terrify some, but being well armed, and
more in number than they, I doubt not, but we shall so deal with them as to
make them repent their rash undertaking. This said, he commanded all the Host
to arm and go aboard the Ships he had prepared, resolving to assail Sir Bevis
and Sir Sabre, in the Isle of Wight, hoping, there by his sudden coming, to
surprise them at unawares, but scarce were they beginning to lan^, before Sir
Sabre from the Castle espied them, and informed Sir Bevis of their arrival,
telling him he had never seen so great a Host in those p^^ts; to which Sir
Bevis replied, that their member mattered not, though they were ten to one,
seeing they were in a wrong cause, and therefore resolving to give them battle;
he divided his Host, reducing three thousand under his own Banner and Loading,
and three thousand he put under the commmand of Sir Sabre, leaving Ascapart
with three thousand more to guard the Castle, and succor them if there should
be need; saying, that so many fresh men would stand him in great stead, when
the battle was at the hight, and so caused a march to be sounded; which Sir
Murdure understanding, encouraged his Men and set them in order, making of them
three Battles; the first he led himself, the second was commanded by the King
of Scots, and the third by Sir Morris of Vain, each consisting of ten thousand
men, which they had by the way, increased to the former number; and then both
Armies facing a while, and the Generals encouraging their Men, the bloody blast
was sounded, whereupon Sir Morris de Vain ran against Sir Sabre with great
fury, so that their Lances shivering they drew their Swords, and began a
dreaful fight, but after many wounds on either part, Sir Morris was beaten from
his Horse as dead, and there had been slain, had not his Men from all parts
pressed furiously to rescue him: whilst this was doing Sir Bevis pressed on,
killing many on either hand, till he broke through where the King of Scots
fought; who seeing him come in that desperate manner, prepared to receive him;
but after a hot dispute between them, the King was unhorsed, and his Helm burst
in sunder, whereupon crying out for succor, his Men from all parts thrust
desperately, between Sir Bevis and him, and were there a great number of them
slain, insomuch that the heaps of dead bodies, stoped the way of the Conqueror.

Soon after the King was beaten down, he retired out of the battle to refresh
himself, and having put on fresh Armor, and remounted he came again with great
fury to the Fight; so that great slaughter ensued, and Sir Bevis still ranging
through the Battle making horrible destruction wherever he came, advanced so
far that he broke into the press where Sir Murdure had slain and unhorsed many,
saying Traitor, Let those alone and turn thee hither, but Sir Murdure seeing it
was Sir Bevis, who had vowed his death, he used many endeavors to shun the
fight; but Sir Bevis pressing on, and thinking to give him a forcible blow,
thereby to dispatch him at once, he by swiftly turning his Horse avoided it,
yet the Sword falling on his Horse, clove his crupper in sunder, so that he
fell down dead, but Sir Murdure was remounted by his Men, and a while made
resistance, but finding himself to weak for his adversary, he retired within
the ranks of his Men, and left them to the fury of Sir Bevis who mounted on
Arundel his Steed, laid about him on every side, with his trusty Sword Morglay,
nor did his Horse fail with his heels and teeth to fight courageously, giving
to many their mortal wounds; so that the Plain whereon they fought, blshed with
blood, and was covered with dead bodies, so that the number of his Enemies was
lessened: and at the signal given Ascapart advanced with his men on foot, for
by reason of his monsterous size no Horse could bear him, and with his huge
Club overthrew whole Squadrons, in so much that he drove a thousand men before
him, like a flock of Sheep to the Seaside, who fearing a worser death, leaped
into the waves, and were most of them drowned; but a very few getting to the
Ships, that lay at Anchor in the Road; and then returning where his Men fought,
he broke through the main Battle of Scots, and carried all before him, making
lanes wherever he came, till he arrived where Sir Bevis was fighting, and had
done wonders.

Sir Bevis no sooner beheld Ascapart, but calling him to him, said, Mark well
the person that fights on younder Steed, and be sure you let him not escape our
hands, for that is Sir Murdure the causer of all this mischief; whereupon
Ascapart in all haste made thitherward, and when Sir Murdure would have fled
from him, he caught him in his Arms, Horse and Man, and bore him, in spite of
the resistance that was made, into the Castle; and now Sir Morris being slain
by Sir Sabre, and the King of Scots being no longer able to maintain the
Battle, the Soldiers fled on all parts; which the King perceiving and not
being able to restrain the Flight fled likewse, and getting into a Ship,
prepared for that purpose, he sailed away Westward to a strong Castle of his
in the Sea. And now Sir Murdure being in the Castle, he was condemned to be put
into a Cauldron of scalding Pitch and Brimstone, where he miserably perished;
and this he had as a punishment for the murder of Sir Guy Father to Sir Bevis
and Earl of Southampton; of which the Countess his Wife being informed, she
leaped in a desperate mood, from the Battlements of her Castle, and broke her
Neck.

CHAP. X.
How Sir Bevis was married to Queen Iosian, and the honors that were done him.
His Horse having killed King Edgars Son, he abjured the Land to save him, and
went to seek adventures in strange Countries; and what befell him on this
occasion.



BEing thus rid of of his mortal Enemies, Sir Bevis and his nobles Companions,
took leave of the Isle of Wight, and sailed to Southampton, where finding his
Mother dead, by the means aforesaid, he caused her notwithstanding, to be
honorably buried; and so took possession of his Castle, and Heritage, and
sending for the Bishop of Colen, and many other noble Personages, he was by the
said Bishop, married to his beloved Queen Josian, and never was Queen so
willing to be disrobed of her Royalty, nor Knight so pleased with a Queen; and
soon after going to London, to do homage to King Edgar for his Earldom, and
having told him his name, and by what right he claymed that Heritage, the King
made him Marshal of England, delivering the staff that his Father Sir Guy had
before him: so that returning home he was highly esteemed and honored by King,
Peers and Pesants spending his estate liberally and in giving Alms remembering
from his 7 years imprisonment what it was to suffer hunger.

Yet growing great in Offices and places of honorable trust, he at last
stirred up the envy of one Sir Brian of Cornwall against him, as having some of
the Offices bestowed upon him by the King; that were formerly his; so that
about Whitsontide when sundry Knights were coursing and raceing on their
gallant Steeds, forty pounds in gold was proposed for a three mile Course, on
the Horse that run best; when Sir Bevis being present and knowing none might
compare to Arundel, he undertook in honor of the day to ride with the rest,
and although two Knights having unexpectedly the start were got half a mile
before, Sir Bevis gave Arundel the reins, who flew forth like the wind, and
immediately overtook them, and passing by, was at the Races end before they
could imagine he was gotten two miles, which made the Kings Son so much in love
with the Horse for his goodness, and for whose sake, as the story says, Sir
Bevis built the Castle of Arundel, calling it after his Horses name, that he
desired at any rate to have him, but Sir Bevis required of him to ask any thing
else and he should freely have it, yet as for his Horse no Gold, nor Castles,
nor Towns, nor Favor could assure him to part with him, upon which the Prince
w^tching his opportunity, resolved to take him by force out of the stable, but
as he attempted to do it, Arundel knowing it was not his Master, lifted up his
Heels, and gave him such a blow on the Head that his brains slew out.

When King Edgard heard his own Son was slain, and the manner how, he was
exceeding wrath, and assembling his Council, proposed to them, that since Sir
Bevis his denying his Horse to his Son, had made him attempt what occasioned
his death, it was sit that he should dye for it a cruel death, urging that he
might be drawn to pieces with wild Horses; but his Council declared they could
pass no such sentence upon him, seeing he no hand in the death of the Prince.
But Sir Brian of Cornwall, resolving to do him a displeasure, starting up, said,
Though they could not indeed meddle with Sir Bevis for this matter, yet the
Horse ought to be slain; which was agreed on all hands: whereupon Sir Bevis
humbly besought the King, that rather than he should loose his Horse, he would
permit him to abjure the Land, which being granted, he surrendered up his
Offices and places of Honor, which was that which Sir Brian aimed at, and made
over his Lordships and Heritage to his Uncle Sir Sabre; and so with Josian Sir
Terre and Ascapart, he took his leave of England, and from this time Ascapart
ploted how he might bring it about to seize Josian, and carry her back to King
Jour, of which more hereafter.

CHAP. XI.
How Iosian was brought to bed of two Children in a Forest, and was carried
away by a Giant. How Sir Bevis disposed of the Children. How he justed, and won
a fair Lady for Sir Terre; and how Sir Sabre recovered Iosian and killed the
Giant.

SIR Bevis and his Company, being now again in a strange Land, and Josian by
this time great with Child, as they rid through a Forest, she fell in travel,
so that alighting they cut down boughs with their swords, and made her a Bower
for her convenience, paving it with Rushes and soft Leaves, and offered their
assistance to help her in that extremity, but she through modesty excusing it,
desired them to retire, and leave her to the protection of Heaven; so that
seting Ascapart as a sentinel at a distance, to watch that no rude person or
wild beast might approach, to annoy or disturb her, Sir Bevis and Sir Terry
went to seek for somewhat for her refreshment; during which space Ascapart,
when she was delivered of two Sons, took her on his Back in the woeful condition
she was in, in vain crying for help, her Lord being out of hearing, and hasted
through Woods and Forests over Hills, Rocks and Mountains toward Mambrat,
there to deliver her to King Jour her former Husband in hopes of a great reward
and honor; so that when Sir Bevis and Sir Terrey returned, they found only the
Children in the Bower, and perceiving Ascapart gone, they easily guessed at
what had befallen, and made great sorrow for this loss, but finding it no boot
to stay there Sir Bevis wrapped up the Children in a rich mantle their Mother
had left behind her, and passing on met a man, of whom they inquirid, if he saw
not a Giant carrying a Lady that way, who answered he did not; then said Sir
Bevis, what is your business? he replied, I am a Forrester, then will you, said
he, take home with you this Child, and cause it to be christened by the name
Guy, and here is ten marks in hand, and when you have kept it seven years,
inquire for one Bevis of Southampton, and bring it to him, and you shall have
store of Gold for so doing: The man upon these conditions, having gladly
received the Infant, Sir Bevis and Sir Terry passed on, and meeting with a
Fisherman, disposed of the other in the same sort, directing his name to be
Miles.

Long these Champions rid together, yet could they get no sight nor tidings of
Ascapart, who went through Woods and By-ways to prevent discovery, nor rested
they till they entered a fair Town, and there betook themselves to an Inn to
rest; but long they had not been there, er'e looking out at the Window, they
saw a gallant Train of Horsemen, exceedinly well mounted on Horses with rich
Trappings, and Heralds on every side displaying their Arms and Banners, which
made them enquire of their Host, the occasion of so great a concourse, who told
them that on the morrow there would be held a great Iusting in that Town, for a
fair Virgin, Daughter to the Duke, who being old and not expecting long to
live, for the honor he bears to Arms, has set her the prize, and with her, all
his Lands and Possessions after his death, of his valor who can win her, by
carrying the day from the rest of the Knights, Earls, Dukes and Barrons.

For this news, the English Champions gave him a Reward, and agreed between
themselves, to be ready to enter the List early in the morning; when in the
mean time Sir Bevis for the device on his Shield, prepared a Lion Rampant in a
Field Gules, and Sir Terry a Unicorn in a Field Argent, that they might the
better be known, and noted by the Lady, during the Conevat, whose name was
Elinor the Fair. No sooner had the Sun given light to the World, but the
Trumpets flourished round, and whon the Ladies had taken their places, the
Knights came forth to Just: when the Emperor of Almains Son advancing, Sir
Bevis met him so forcibly, that he bore both horse and man to the ground; uyon
which the Earl of Florence came against him, but Sir Bevis with his spear
struck him so hard, in the middle of his shield, that he made him fly from off
his horse two yards and upwards; when Duke Anthony resolving to revenge his
cause, advanced with great fury, bidding Sir Bevis turn to him, for he was
resolved to revenge the Duke of Florence's disgrace, so together they rod with
much fury, but the Duke was soon unhorsed, and laid upon the ground, having his
shoulder bone broke with the thrust: Sir Bevis having thus far proceeded, Sir
Terry advanced against the King of Hungary's Brother, and bore him from his
Horse, and did the like to the Earl Hamant, who came to second him, and so well
they dealt, that none was able to stand before them; so that the Judges of the
Field gave Sir Bevis the first plaee, and Sir Terrey the second in valor; and
being come to Court, the Lady met Sir Bevis, and taking him by the hand, said,
I am, Sir Knight, your own, you have fairly won me in the Field, and may wed me
when you please; Nay, Madam, said Sir Bevis, I have a Lady already, though at
present I have lost her, and am now in search of her, but my noble Friend is
destitute of a Wife, and to him I recommend your choice: To that, said she, I
agree if in seven years time you find your Wife, but if not, that then you
will swear to wed me, and so long or till you have found her, I will for your
sake continue a Virgin, this being agreed on, they left the Court in search of
fair Josian.

Sir Sabre being now at home, in possession of great Fortunes, happened on a
night to dream, that Sir Bevis was much distressed, through the means of
Ascapart the Giants treachery, and telling his dream to his Wife, she advised
him to go in search of his Nephew; and thereupon taking twelve Knights with him
in Palmers weeds, though under them they were well armed, he crossed the Seas
and having passed through many Lands, as he approached Mambra^, he espied the
Giant haling fair Josian, who cried out pitiously to him and his Companions for
help, as knowing that if she was delivered to first her Husband, he would put
her to death, and thereupon Sir Sabre and his Knights commanded him to let her
go, but he sternly refusing it, they assailed him on all sides; whereupon
quitting her bound as she was, and therefore incapable of flying away, he
betook himself to his Club, and laid at the Knights with great fury, but they
being nimble, still avoided his blows, and in the end having tired him, Sir
Sabre whilst the others maintained the sight, stepped in, and with his sword
run him through, so that he fell dead to the ground; where leaving him, he lead
Josian to the next Inn, and there with a certain ointment, discolored her fair
face that she might not be known, but having spent all their money and
provision, they went to require a supply, at a Castle where Sir Bevis and Sir
Terrey were lodged, when Sir Terrey coming to the gate knew his Father and lead
him in with great joy, nor was Sir Bevis a little glad when he heard Josian was
recovered; whereupon Sir Terrey proceeded as it had been agreed, to wed the
fair Elinor, which was done with great feasting, pomp, and splendour, and her
Father soon after dying, he possessed himself of all the Estate.

CHAP. XII.
How King Iour, making war upon King Ermin, was defeated, and taken Prisoner by
Sir Bevis. How he had the Kingdom of Armony delivered to his Son Guy, and again
subdueing King Iour, took Mambrat, with other things of note.

KING Jour, having a long time in vain expected his Wife, resolved to greive
for her no more, but to be revenged on her Father, and thereupon made war on
his Countries, of which Sir Bevis receiving inteelligence by a Palmer, gathered
a great Company, and leaving Sir Terrey with his new Wife, took with him Sir
Sabre, and his two Sons Guy and Miles, who were grown by this time to
perfection, resolving to assist his Father-in-Law, of whose coming King Ermine
was exceeding glad, and humbly beged his pardon, offering to make him amends,
for the injury he had done him, to be Christened with all his people, whereupon
Sir Bevis sent to England for Clergymen, who instantly came and performed that
good Office: Yet King Jour drawing near with twenty thousand Sarazens,
destroying the Country before him, Sir Bevis being made General of Armony,
raised an Army likewise to meet him, and defying each otherin a plain field, a
dreadful battle began; whereupon Sir Bevis and his Knights so laid about them,
that they overthrew and cut in pieces whole Ranks of men, and grew at length so
terrible, that where ever they came, the enemies fled before them, when coming
to King Jour he beat him from his Horse, and there had slain him, had not a
Troop of fresh men instantly come in to his Rescue, sacrificing their lives to
defend him, who no longer trusting to his forces, seeing the day was lost,
betook himself to flight, and was followed by such of his men, who escaped the
sword, yet Sir Bevis pursued so hard after him, upon his swift Horse Arundle,
that he overtook him, and made him his prisoner, having soon after for his
Ransom, twenty tuns of Gold, three hundred Bales of Silk, and as many white
Steeds, with three hundred Cups of Gold and Silver, making him at the same time
ever quit claim to the fair Josian, and to be in perpetual Amity with King
Ermine.

For this and other great services, King Ermine offered to give him his Crown;
and the Government of this Kingdom, but he refused it, yet accepted it for Guy
his eldest Son, who was solemnly crowned King of Armony, and the old King not
long after died; upon which King Jour fretted at his disgrace, resolved again
to invade the Country, and thereupon thinking Sir Bevis did these wonders,
through the strength of his Horse, he resolved to get him by fraud, and sent on
Robion a cunning fellow to steal him out of the stable, who charming his
keepers, as also the Horse with spells and sleeping drenches brought him away:
But scarcely had he reached Mambrat with him, before Sir Sabre espied him, and
leaping up behind him, felled him dead with the truncheon of a spear, but er'e
he could get away, the Sarrazens, that had beheld what was done, came running
and assailed him on every part, and although he valiantly defended himself-
they hardly put him to it, which Josian having perceived from the Turret of a
Castle, advertised Sir Bevis, who with other Knights hasted to his aid, and
slew the Sarrazens in great number, so that happy was he, that could first
recover the City. This made King Jour exceeding wrath, and immediately to send
to his Brother Bradwin to come to his succor, who was King of Surry, making at
the same time great sacrifices, offers and vows to Mahomet for his success; and
thereupon King Jour grown desperate, resolved to end the strife, by single
Combat with Sir Bevis, and advancing for that purpose toward Armony with
three thousand men, he desied him, telling him that having slain his Men,
bereaved him of his Wife, and done him other mischiefs, he would now try it out
with him to wreck his own revenge; and if it so fell out, that he slew him, he
would possess himself of the Land of Armony; but if himself was slain, Mambrat
should be delivered to Sir Bevis: These Conditions agreed on, and sworn to on
either part, they went into a little Island to fight the Combat, and there
drawing their Swords, they furiously laid at each other, the one animated by
despair, and the other by true valor; but after many wounds given and
received, Sir Bevis with a forcible blow, burst King Jour's Helmet in sunder,
cutting through his Shield, ^as he held it up to defend himself; so that he
brought him to the ground both horse and man: but the King nimbly got up again,
and calling upon Mahomet for succor, began the fight anew, at which Sir ^evis
alighted to be upon equal terms, and with another stroke felled him again; so
that now he had him at his mercey, whose life he notwithstanding spared, yet
sent him to a strong Castle, and doomd him a prisoner for his life, when taking
his Armor and Ensigns of Royalty, he went with a good Company of Soldiers to
Mambrat, where the Citizens supposing him to be their King, immediately opened
their Gates; so that entering with his men, he soon made himself Master of it,
putting all that resisted to the sword, and obliged the rest to abjure their
Mahumitisme causing himself there to be crowned, by which Queen Josian was
twice Queen of Mambrat.

CHAP. XIII.
How Sir Sabrey's Heritage being taken away, he came with Sir Bevis to recover
it; and how the later maintained a great Battle in London, wherein he killed
Sir Brian of Cornwel, his mortal Enemy; and how he was restored to the Kings
Favor, and Sir Sabre to his Land.

SIR Sabre being now with Sir Bevis, as they rod forth a hawking on a day, news
was brought him, that King Edgar had seized on his Inheritance by the advice of
Sir Brian of Cornwall his Steward, and turned out his Wife and Children, of
which he had no sooner notice, but he asked Sir Bevis leave to depart for
England; but he would not suffer him to go alone, promising to accompany him,
and his Son, with his Queen and his two Sons, and many courageous Knights, when
landing at Southampton, he raised a great power of his Friends, and marched
toward London, where the King was; then Sir Bevis leaving his Army at Putney,
went with twenty Knights only to wait upon the King, and having admittance to
his presence, after Reverence done, desired to know, Why Sir Sabre's Estate had
been seized? to whom the King replied, It was done at the instance of Sir Brian
his Stward, but however he had since bethought himself, and would soon restore
it; but Sir Brian being present, boldly started up and said, it ought not to be
done, saying moreover to Sir Bevis, that he wondered how he durst, being a
banished man, return, and that for his presumption he ought to be hanged, or
put to some other shameful death; to this Sir Bevis replied neither good nor
bad, but making his Reverence to the King, departed. But the revengeful Steward
not so satisfied, knowing where he inn'd with his Knights, caused the
City-Gates to be locked, and the Chains to be drawn cross the streets, and
raised a Cry at midnight, that every one who could bear Arms, should assault
Sir Bevis in his Lodging, to revenge the death of the Kings Son slain by his
Horse Arundel, of which treachery Sir Bevis having notier, ordered his Squire
to hasten his Sons to his aid with the Army, and thereupon mounting Arundel, he
met Sir Brian at the head of the people he had raised; and said to him, come on
now, you are an old Knight of War, and so they run upon each other, but Sir
Bevis missing with his Spear, Sir Brian run him quite through the Shield, and
clove it in sunder, which so much ang^ed him, that drawing his Sword Morglay,
he smote him with a down right stroke, and clove his Honnet and head in sunder,
and charging upon his men made a great slaughter of them, insomuch that the
streets ran with blood, and so passing on to Broad-street, he met diverse
Lumbards, that came to assail him, but soon scattered and dispersed them,
whilst his other Knights were not idle, but made a great slaughter and havoc
of the Multitude; yet finding themselves hard beser, they made toward Ludgate,
to possess themselves of it, but found it shut and gaurded, whereat Sir Bevis
commanded them to open it, and let him out, who refusing to do it, a great
fight was begun anew, and so well Sir Bevis behaved himself that he brought six
hundred men to the ground, without receiving a wound himself.

The news of Sir Bevis his danger coming to the ear of his Wife and Sons, the
former fell in a sound, but the two later raised and revived her, telling her
they would bring him speedy aid, resolving if they found him slain, to destroy
and lay wast the City, and so mounting, they led their Host by great marches,
and not only found their Father alive, but manfully defending himself, yet
exceeding weary with so great a toil and bloodshed, at what time more Citizens
came to the aid of their Fellows under the leading of a stout Lumbard and
strong, who charged Sir Bevis with great fury, but sped no better than Sir
Brian of Cornwall, for with the first stroke Sir Bevis gave him he severed his
head from his shoulders, and now Sir Sabre, Guy and Miles laying furiously
about them, the Citizens fled in great disorder, and shut themselves up, as
many as could, in their own Houses and in Bulwarks then built to defend the
Walls; and some fled to the King, who then kept his Court in the Tower,
whereupon Sir Bevis had the intire-possession of the City; yet would he not use
any violence to those that resisted him not, nor suffer his Sons, who in the
hear of their youthful blood purposed, to seek and fire the City, but
immediately causing a Retreat to be sounded, he withdrew his Forces and retired
to Southampton, where he took possession of his Estate, sending to the King to
excuse what had been done on his part with the manner how it fell out; so that
the fault being altogether laid upon Sir Brian, who was now dead, the King was
no ways offended with Sir Bevis, but confirmed him and Sir Sabre in their
Estates, honoring them with many Offices and Dignities, counting especially
their Friendship above all others.

CHAP. IVX.
How Sir Bevis being in peace, his Son Sir Guy was married to fair Lyndamira
the Kings Daughter. How Sir Bevis and his Queen returning to Mambrat found it
besieged, and how he relieved it; with other matters.

SIR Bevis and his Confederates, being now in peace and tranquillity, King Edgar
sent for them to his Court, upon a great Feast he made for his Nobles, and
entertained them with much splendour, and a Tilt and Tournament for their
fvrther Recreation being prepared, Guy and Miles Sir Bevis's two Sons
maintained it against all strangers or other Knights of the Court, and were so
highly succesful, that they unhorses all that came against them: Insomuch that
Sir Guy being then in silver Armor, with a fair Lady portrayed on his Shield,
the beautiful Lyndamira Daughter to the King, took such norice of his manly
form, proportion of Body and rare achievements beyond, in a manner, the
strength of man, that she fell desperately in love with him, of which the young
Knight being ignorant, and the Princess through excess of Modesty, not willing
to discover it to any, she fell sick and in a languishing condition, whereat
the King being greatly grieved, sent for his Physicians, from all parts of the
Land to cure her Malady, who soon found it proceeded from a cause beyond the
power of their Art; and informed the King, that distemper of the fair Princess,
proceeded from love, who tender of this his only Daughter, pressed her in all
Fatherly mildness to let him know the object that occasioned it, which at first
she began with modesty to refuse, or rather excuse. but the King being earnest
herein, she amidst sighs, blushes and much confusion, told him it was Sir Guy.

The King knowing the cause of his fair Lindamira's sickness, he made it his
business to apply the cure, and thereupon sent for Sir Guy, and in plain terms
told him what happiness was designed him, and how much his Daughter suffered
for his sake: The young Knight, though inwardly overjoyed at this news, being
no less in love than she, strove at first to excuse it, alleging he was
unworthy of so great an honor, yet in the end, submitted to be wholly disposed
off at the Kings pleasure, who caused them to be married to their great joy,
and mutual satisfaction, the wedding being kept with much pomp and splendour,
and graced with a concourse of the Nobility, where many noble seats of Arms
were done, and up sooner was the sports and Magnificences over, but the King to
render Sir Guy a sitter match for so beautiful a Princess, made him Earl of
Cornwall, and then suffered him to depart with her, to his Kingdom of Armony.

Queen Josian by this time, being desirous to return to Mambrat, as a place
more agreeable to her health, acquainted Sir Bevis with her intent, who
thereupon resolved to accompany her again, and leave to Sir Miles his younger
Son his Inheritance in England, hardly could King Edgar be persuaded to part
with them, however finding the Queen ill at ease he at length consented, and
dismissed them with many rich presents, exhorting sundry of the Nobility to
accompany them, which they accordingly did; and upon his Fathers departure,
gave to Sir Miles all his places, Offices and Titles of Honor, arriving at
Mambrat, they found the City strongly besieged by Amphi^on, a Cosen of the
King of Mambrat; but the Citizens had made a stout resistance, and killed
abundance of men in diverse santes they made, but being now quite wearied out,
were at a point to yield; whereupon Sir Bevis sent secretly into the City, to
acquaint them with his arrival, which put them into no small joy, and greatly
raised and inspired their drooping Courages, nor was it long, before he
gathered an Army in the Country, and sent for Soldiers into Armony, whereupon
more fully to signalize his Valor to such English Noblemen, as came with him,
that they might report what they had seen in their own Country, mounting upon
Arundel, and taking his Sword Morglay in his hand, he fell like a tempest upon
the Houst of the Infidels, beating down, and cutting in pieces all* that he
reached or came in his way, and such slaughter he ^^^de, that the gro^^d was
covered with blood, and the bodies of the slain, to be^^ whole ^hey Amph^^on
with the strongest of his men advanced, and cha^^ed upon Sir Bevis, who though
tired with sighting, yet encountre^ them all, and with a blow laid Amphiron
dead at his feet, by cleaving his Helmet and Head in sunder, whereupon his men
were so discouraged, that fearfully shrinking together, they at last betook
themselves to open flight, leaving their Camp and all its furniture, as a pity
to the Conqueror.

The siege removed, the Citizens opened their Gates, and came out with
Instruments of Music, Songs and great Joy to welcome Sir Bevis and his Train,
who entered the City in Triumph, and reestablished himself in the Throne of
Mambrat, where giving large Presents to the English Noblemen, he sent them
back, so many as would go into England; who came home full of the glorious
Actions and Achievements of Sir Bevis, speading yet wider his fame that had
already render him a most redoubted Champion amongst the Infidels: Insomuch
that Saracon, the great Soldian of Babylon, hearing of his prowess, and how by
new Conquests he daily enlarged his Dominions, began to doubt his Empire, for
the indignities of he had put upon Sir Bevis, and therefore consulting his
great Counselors it was agreed amongst them, that they should enterprise some
extraordinary matter to put a stop to the progress of his Arms.

CHAP. VXV.
How Sir Bevis overthrew the Soldi^n of Babylons Army, that came to dispossess
him of his Country; Killed Amphiron their General: And pursued them with great
slaughter to the City, etc.

SIR Bevis being settled in a Kingdom far from his Native Country, and being
well assured his Neighbors bore him no good will, having sworn his Subjects to
be true to him and his Successors, he proceeded to make wholesome Laws, the
better to assure their fidelity, oblieging them every where to forsake their
Idols and false worship, and to become Christians, but scarce had he brought
these things to pass, when news was brought him, that great preparations were
making to invade his Country, which made him not idle, but taking the advantage
of the little respire: ^ho^ gathered his Forces and mustered them to the number
of twenty thousand men, Horse and Foot, with which he marched to the F^on^^ers,
to stand upon his guard: when Amphiron whom the Soldian had made his General,
advanced by speedy marches, with an Army of two hundred thousand Turks and
Saracens, vowing the bloodiest revenge, that could be expressed or suffered by
man upon Sir Bevis, nor only for the disgrace he had (...) upon himself s^^^he
(...) he had given his Kins-man, but the disgrace he had put upon him, for
indeed though he was a monsterous Giant Sir Bevis had overthrown him in the
head of his Troops and gave him in^^^^y c^^el wounds, and had dispatched him,
had not his men desperately to save th^^^ Lord, thrown themselves between him
and death, whilst he made his escape.

Amphiron by this time doing arrived upon the Confine^s of Mambrat, with his
numerous ^^^ast, began in a terrible manner to wast all with fire and sword, so
that the miserable Inhabitants fled before them in a fearful manner, to stay
which inundation of the barbarous Enemy, Sir Bevis advanced with his Troops,
and falling with five hundred Horse only upon the sorerunners, consisting of
ten thousand men, he made of them such a terrible slaughter, that such as
escaped the sword leaped into the River for fear, and there were most of them
drowned not above an hundred escaping to test Amphiron the fatal news, who was
so enraged, that having charged them with Cowardice, he caused the chief of
them, or such as were Officers amongst them to be put to death, and so came
furiously on, where Sir Bevis had drawn up his whole Army, and now the Armies
being in sight of each other, though the Infidels with their numerous Host
covered the Country Sir Bevis nothing daunted, encouraged his Soldiers with
this short Oration: You see, Fellow Soldier, said he, and what is yet more
glorious, Fellow Christians, that this numerous Host of Infidels, that defy
the blessed name of our Lord, and whose Armies we have so often bafled and
defeated, are come up against us to destroy us, and take away the Land we so
quietly possess, and which by right of war and heritage is our own; wherefore
be valiant for the truth, and let us this day so well play the men, in showing
forth our utmost prowess, that hereafter our names may become so terrible to
them, that they may rather implore our Friendship, and become our Tributaries,
than dare to arm against us, and as for my part, my fear is so little, that I
doubt not, but this day we shall so deal, that few of them shall escape our
hands. This speech ended with shouts and acclamations of the Soldiers, he
commanded the Trumpets to sound the Charge; and Amphiron having on the other
hand encouraged his men, with great boasts and hopes of assured Victory, both
Armies joined with huge shouts and cries, so that for the horrible clashing of
Swords and Armor, the cries of the dying, and the shouts of the vanquishers,
the sound of Trumpets, and the noise of Drums, the Earth trembled, and the wild
beast in the Forests stood astonished, when Amphiron having in his hand a huge
Battle-Ax, came on in the front making lanes as he passed, so that that the
Christians seeing the destruction he made, fled on that part, of which Sir
Bevis had no sooner notice where he fought, and had broken the left Wing of the
Pagan Army, having died himself in the blood of a thousand he had slain, but
beating down all before him, he made thither, which Amphiron, perceiving by the
Banner that was born before him, which was a huge Cross enameld and inlayed
with Gold, but choosing a thousand of his best men, he gave them command to
enclose Sir Bevis on all parts, and that when they had done it, he himself
would either take him prisoner, or kill him on the place: These men speedily
drew off, to fulfill the pleasure of their General, who had promised them great
Rewards, if they performed it, and threatened them with certain death, if they
were found wanting in the fulfilling his commands to the utmost of their power:
Upon this, disperately resolved, whilst Sir Bevis was making a lane before him,
and paving his way with the bodies of the Infidels, whilst some presented
themselves before him to stop his approach, others fetching a little compass
enclosed him, and pressed on very furiously, by this means, they had separated
him from the body of his Army, which he however not regarding, though many of
his men were slain about him, with his Sword Morglay, made the Arms, Legs and
Heads of those that opposed him to fly, so that Amphiron was obliged to
hasten, when, to give him entrance, his men opened to the right and lest, and
he having in a great rage reproached Sir Bevis with the taking King Jours Queen
and Country from him, as also imprisoning him, he, before Sir Bevis could well
ward the blow, gave him such a stroke with his Battle-Ax, as made him almost
tumble from his Horse, but he soon recovering himself, returned it with such
fury, that his trusty Sword peirced Amphiron's Armor, and gave him a deep
wound in the Shoulder, so that renewing their strength, and either doing his
utmost, a mortal battle happened between them, but at length, Sir Bevis his men
supposing him to be in greater danger than he was, after an obstenate manner,
broke in, but ere they came to him, he had with a full stroke cleft Amphiron's
Head and Helmet, so that he fell dead at his Feet; which his men seeing, gave
back on all hands, and from a kind of a Retreat, finding themselves slain on
every side: and now Sir Miles coming in with five thousand freshmen, which he
had raised unknown to his Father, and beating down all before him, they fell
into a confused flight, so that being hotly pursued to the Walls of Babylon,
they were almost all of them slain, drowned, or taken Prisoners.

CHAP. XVI.
How Sir Bevis besieged Babylon, and how Sir Miles, with a party of Soldiers
in disguise, entering the City, was forced to betake himself to a Tower; and how
the Soldians Daughter fell in love with him; and how the City was taken.



UPon the defeat of this great Army, the City of Babylon was filled with the
lamentations and cries of such as had lost their Friends, and others that
feared the City would be sacked, for now the Christian Army approached,
spreading their Banners before the palace, which obliged the Soldian to
consult, what was best to be done for his safety; some advising him to send
Ambassadors with Presents, and offers of Peace to the Conqueror, and others to
stand it out, seeing he had a well fortified City, and many Friends; but so it
happened, that whilst they were thus wavering, that King Jour having, by
corrupting his keepers, made his escape, came in disguise to Babylon, earnestly
soliciting the Soldian to maintain a War to the utmost against his mortal
Enemy, whereupon the defense was resolved upon the Soldian committing to this
King the Charge and Guard of the City; so that many Assaults were given, and
many sore conflicts happened, in the sallying of the Besieged, but the City
being strongly walled and fortefied with Towers, enclosed on most parts with
the branches of the River Euphrates, it could not be easily approached, which
made Sir Bevis conclude how one way or other he might take it by Stratagem, and
after many consultations it was resolved, that diverse armed men, with Pilgrims
gowns over their Armor, the better to prevent suspicion, should enter the
City, and secure one of the Gates to let in the rest of the Army; but then some
difficulty arose, who should enterprise this dangerous undertaking, Sir Bevis
though he offered it, not being permitted by his Captains, and great
Commanders, to undertake so dangerous an Enterprise, but utterly persuaded from
it, forasmuch as upon his safety depended not only the preservation of the
Army, but the safety and conservation of the whole Affairs in those parts; and
although he vehemently pressed it, and desired nothing more, than to have the
honor of so great an undertaking, yet against all he could argue, the
entreaties and persuasions of his Friends prevailed; yet not altogether to
loose the glory, he so far prevailed, that Sir Miles his Son should attempt it,
when not to lose time, all things were prepared in a readiness, and they to the
number of two hundred, went to the City hy degrees, and in the night time
taking their opportunity, put the Warders to flight, killing many of them, and
possessing themselves of the principal Gate, but the Alarm being taken, they
every where cried to Arms, so that before Sir Bevis could well reach it with
his Army, Sir Miles and his men, after having maintained a furious and
obstenate fight with the whole power of the City, found themselves obliged to
retire to one of the Towers, which in the confusion was almost deserted of the
Soldiers that before guarded it, putting such as they found there to the
Sword, and fortefying themselves therein, during which time the Portcullises
being let down, and the Gate again strengthened, though Sir Bevis and his men
attempted to force the Gate and Wall, with battering Rams and other Engines, yet
by reason of their strength, and the stout defense the besieged made, they
could not effect it, which troubled Sir Bevis much, but more the fair Josian,
who by this time was come to the Camp, as concluding, that past all
peradventure, Sir Miles and his men were either taken Prisoners or slain.

During the sorrow the Christian Camp made for this supposed loss and
miscariage, the Soldian had strictly caused the Tower to be besieged, which
King Jour who had the conduct of this affair, pressed on with great vehemence,
and was frequently as obstinately repulled, when in the hight of this Action it
so happened, that the fair and beautiful Rosalinda Princess of Babylon, and
only Daughter to the Soldian, dreamed she saw Sir Miles, or the Imagined Idea
of that Heroic young Knight by her bedside, with whose feacures she was so
wonderfully taken, as also with his manly proportion and Martial looks, that
she could not forbear to fix her Eyes upon him, and demand what his request or
desire was, or what brought him thither, who returned for answer, that her
beauty alone had charmed him, and that although at present he was beset with
danger, yet no fear possessed him, no not twice the number of his Enemies, but
the fear of her frowns alone could shake his soul, upon which seeming to
disapear with a sigh and much discontent she awaked and was so affected with
the Vision, though she found it to be nothing else, that she could not blot it
out of her memory, but still fancied the manly shape before her Eyes, and so
far it wrought with her passion, and affection, that she became restless; when
standing one day to behold the Assault of the Tower, and perceiving a gallant
Youth armed at all points with a Cask of Gold adorned with a Plume of crimson
Feathers on his Head, she verily conceited him to be the same she had seen in
the Vision, and from that time, used her endeavors with her Father to offer
honorable conditions to those that were besieged in the Tower, telling him it
would be the only means to obliege the Commanders of the Christian Army to
raise the Siege, but finding him inflexible, and Love prompting her on, she
adventured with two Knights, whom her Bounty had made her Creatures, and two of
her Maids of Honor, under the favor of the night, to find admittance into the
Tower, so powerful is Love, that it takes the Diadems from Queens, and with
some difficulty obtained it; when being brought to Sir Miles, and she
perceiving him to be the very same her fancy had represented, she stood in a
manner transported, which the courteous Knight perceiving, and seeing so
excellent a beauty before him, fell at her feet, and with profound reverence
kissed her fair hand, who raising him said, Ah my Lord, why do you show this
respect to your Captive, who though a Princess is nevertheless constrained. (O
pardon my modesty, for this freedom, contrary to the rules of our Ser,) to beg
a savor, I hope, is in your power to give, and look not upon it, as the
effects of my presumption, but the effects of Love, and it is your Love I ask,
and for which I have not only undertaken this difficulty, but put my self into
the power of my Fathers Enemy, hazarding what ever the World may construe of my
reputation. At this the young Knight stood more and more amazed, telling her
that in the condition he was in, he was no ways able to render a return suitab
e to her greatness, much more to her affection, and thus they discoursed,
striving to out do each other in Generositie, the Princess offering not only to
turn Christian upon this consideration, but to sacrifice her life-to her
Fathers Indignation, if no less would satisfy him on his be half, and he
protested rather to loose his own life, than suffer her to run the least danger
or hazard, when in the mean time King Jour and the Captains under his command,
prepared to storm the Bulwarks of the Tower, being impatient to have a Foe both
within and without at one and the same time, so that having drawn thither a
great strength with Engines, Ropes and scaling Ladders with great eryes they
gave a furious onset, upon which the fair Rosalinda in hopes her presence might
stay the assayling Soldiers, whilst Sir Miles was setting his men in order,
she appeared upon the Walls, and exhorted them to retire, who although they
knew her, regarded not her voice at that time, but at the instigation of King
Jour, were the rather enraged, who suposed, they had taken the Princess
Prisoner, and kept her there, as a miserable Captive; so that breaking through
the outworks, and ascending by degrees, crying out to the Soldiers, that if
they intended to have any Quarter, or save their lives, they should instantly
deliver up Sir Miles, and the place pouring at the same time showers of Arrows,
one of which slightly wounded the fair Rosalinda in the shoulder, so that the
blood trickled down her snowy Breasts, which Sir Miles perceiving, and having
caused her to retire out of danger, committing her to the hands of her Maids
for cure, in a great fury he threw open the Gates, and with his Sword in his
hand cried to those that pressed on, Behold Miles, behold the man you seek is
here, to dare your vengance, and with that, leaping forward with an invincible
Courage, in spite of all the resistance they made, he covered the steps of the
ascent with the bodies of the slain, and being backed with those few Men he had
left, fought with unwearied Vigor and Courage, killing all that stood in his
way, when to prevent the slaughter, King Jour approached with dreadful
threatenings and imprecations to revenge the affronts the Father had done him,
upon the Son between whom began a mortal Battle, which concluded with the death
of the King, and that so disheartened the Soldiers, that they gave back, of
which the Soldian having notice, and that his beloved Daughter was in the hands
of his Enemy, he came thither with all his power, so that the fight grew
exceeding hot, which Sir Bevis, who was again advanced to the Walls, perceiving
by the cries, though he knew not of certainly that Sir Miles was alive, at a
venture resolved to hazard the utmost to enter the City, wherein he was so
successful, that passing the River at an unsuspected place, he with his
battering Rams beat down a part of the Wall, at which breach he entered and so
unexpectedly set upon the Soldian, that he overthrew his people by Squadrens,
cutting in pieces all that came in his way, whilst Sir Miles fighting on the
other side, drove them upon his Sword, which piteous plight, of his distresed
Citizens, the Soldian perceiving, and that all was in a likelihood to be lost,
he with the Troops of his Guards, and the trusty of his Followers, retired to
the palace leaving the rest to shift for themselves, who were miserably slain
and beaten down, till throwing away their Weapons, they fell on their Knees,
and beged mercy, whereupon, at the entreaty of the Princess, their lives were
spared.

CHAP. XVII.
How the Palace was besieged. How fair Rosalinda grew discontented, for her
disobedience to her Father. The Letter she sent him, and the Answer she
received. The grief Sir Miles conceived at her absence, and upon finding her
undertook to conclude a Peace.



ALthough Sir Bevis had entered and possessed himself of the City, yet the
Palace being strongly fortified with Ditches, Walls, Bastions and Rampires,
and in it above twelve thousand men, there being no way of easy access to it,
but by a Bridge, it caused him to girt it strictly with a close Siege, and
threw into it, Wildfire, Stones, and Arrows, which greatly indamaged the
besieged, however the Soldian, though summoned remained obstinate not being
willing to listen to any accord, but caused his men to sally in parties as he
saw occasion, in which many of them were cut off.

Whilst these things passed, the ardent Affections increased between Sir Miles
and the Princess Rosilinda, he using all manner of diligence and good carriage
to her to obliege her, who notwithstanding became sad through the callamity,
that threatened her Father and other Relations, as also for the great effusion
of blood that had happened in the City, and especially upon her occasion, and
finding no hopes of seeing her Father without a Reconciliation, she studied how
she might be instrumental in making a lasting Peace, and yet secure her self in
the possession of her Lover, whereupon with only one of her Maids appointed to
wait upon her, she retired from the noise and clamor of War, to a private
recess, and taking pen, ink and paaper, wrote the following Letter.

MOST Mighty Soldian, Emperor of Babylon, and my honored Father, How but with
Blushes and Confusion, can your disobedient Daughter, frame her self to write
unto you, who in a time of danger, has delivered her self into the hands of
your Enemies; But Dread Sir, when you shall know that what I have done,
proceeded from an extraordinary Affection, a Love surpassing the bounds of
Reason, and even of Duty it self: I hope Dread Sir, You will take compassion
upon a distressed Maid, involved in many afflictions, and out of the abundance
of tenderness and fatherly compassion, pass over this one disobedience in her,
who has ever made it her study to obey and Reverence you, and still is ready to
sacrifice her life to your displeasure, to expiate so great an offense, but
must lowly beg pardon, if she cannot forgo the powerful Affection, even in
death, which has chained her to so generous an Enemy, who wishes nothing more
than your safety and happiness; therefore, dearest Father, If the Tears or
Entreaties of your afflicted Daughter, may find any place in your Breast,
regard your own safety and the life and honor of her who but in the case of
Love, could have been guilty of an Act of Disobedience, and hearken to the
offer of Peace, that will shortly be proposed to you, in hopes this Letter may
work upon you in some measure to mittigate your displeasure, and dispose you to
embrace as Friends, those you now hold your Enemies; I remain,

Dread Sir, Your afflicted Daughter ROSALINDA.


This Letter she sent by her Maid, who by a private known way, got into the
City; when in the mean while she continued pensive, in expectation of the
event, but Sir Miles returning from beating the Soldians men, that had sallied,
into the Palace, died with blood and slaughter, and missing fair Rosalinda,
whom he had left in his Tent, he made strict enquiry after her, but none being
able to satisfy him herein, between Love and Anger, he stood for a while mute
not knowing what to do, or what to determine, one while he supposed this fair
Creature came as a Spy to betray him to her Fathers power, during his being
enclosed in the Castle, but then considering the hazard and danger she run,
upon enterprizing such a business, such low thoughts were dashed, and he
concluded that nothing but an extraordinary passion could obliege her to it,
blaming himself for having any such thought of so much innocence and goodness,
and thereupon sent through the City in search of her, but the Messengers
returning without any news, our young Knight concluded, she had secretly
withdrawn her self into the Palace, and upon second thoughts cast her self at
her Fathers feet, to implore his pardon for her Disobedience, and so bereft him
of all his hopes of happiness, whereupon he began to accuse Fortune, for
flattering him with so glorious a prospect of felicity, and then so suddenly
to cast a cloud or veil over it, and leave him in darkness and despair, and so
much the disturbance increased that his mind began to be in disorder.

Thus whilst Sir Miles was grieving for the fair Princess, the Maid returned,
having delivered the Letter that was given her in charge, with this answer from
the Soldian: That it could never before enter into his thoughts that a Daughter
of such tender regard could prove disobedient to her Father, who had so highly
cherished her, and prepared a Neighbor King to be her Husband, but since she
no more regarded her duty, nor honor than to desert him, and basely cast her
self into the Arms of his Enemy unsought, or perhaps altogether unwelcome, he
from that time utterly renounced her, nor did he any longer consider her as his
Daughter, but rather as one transformed into an unnatural Monster, to conspire
to destroy those that gave her life, under a pretense of Love, however her
persuasions to peace wrought so little on him, that he was resolved to continue
a War to the last extremity, not doubting but he should have powerful Aids come
to his Rescue, not being yet so low sunk by one misfortune, but he had yet
remaining many Friends. At this sharp reply, the fair Princess fell in a sound,
and when she was by the help of her Maid recovered, she very much bewailed and
lamented her hard fortune, that if she must be obedient, she must forgo her
love; and if she retained her love, she must remain disobedient: but whilst she
was in this agony, and in a manner straightened to know what she should determine,
Sir Miles who had searched all places for his fair Princess, hearing some body
sigh in that melancholy and lowly cell, where she sat to bewail her difficulty
between love and obedience, he entered, where to his great Joy he found her in
that disconsolate condition and tenderly embracing her with a transport of Joy,
demanded the cause why she had absented her self to put him into so much fear
and perplexity, who thereupon told him whatever had passed, entreating him to
use his utmost diligence to make a peace, and persuade his Father to offer
honorable terms, which he promised to do, when having kissed her fair hand, he
took his leave and hasted to the Army, where he found the Ditches filled up
with earth and faggots, the scaling ladders and wildfires with all other things
prepared for the Assault, and nothing wanting but the signal to be given,
whereupon he went to Sir Bevis, and implored him, that for his sake, the
palace might be summoned, and peace offered entreating, that himself might
make the proposals, which he doubted not but would be accepted, and prove such
as would of Enemies make them lasting Friends, which being put into his power
to do, he immediately sent a Trumpet with several Articles, which will be
mentioned in the next Chapter, giving the Soldian a days time to consider of
them.

CHAP. XVIII.
How a peace was concluded upon the Soldian, and his people becoming
Christians, and marrying his Daughter to Sir Miles with his Dominion as a Dower
after his decease. How Sir Bevis and his Queen died, and what was remarkable in
their pious end.

THe Soldian finding the City won, and himself with his Train confined to the
Palace, as many Citizens as could, having escaped the City, he thought it high
time to treat for peace, which for some time considering the Indignities that
had been put upon Sir Bevis would not be hearkened to, but Sir Miles at the
instance of the fair Princess, so prevailed with his Father, that after many
messages from one to the other, it was accorded that in the consideration the
Soldian and his people would become Christians and be baptized, and that he
would consent to give his Daughter in Marriage to Sir Miles, and they after his
decease to enjoy all his Dominions in the mean while to possess only the
Kingdom of Armony, and such Kingdoms as Sir Bevis should leave; the City of
Babylon should be resigned to him, and he and his People left quiet: At which
he for some time bogled, but upon notice his Daughter had turned Christian, and
resolved to marry Sir Miles, with or without his consent, he found himself
necessitated to comply, and thereupon all Hostilities being ceased,
Proclamation was made for such Citizens as were fled, to return, and an Act of
Oblivion passed for what had happened on all parts. Whilst every thing was
preparing in the most splendid manner for the Royal Nuptia^s, which were
performed in that great City with all the magnificence and splendour imaginable
many Neighboring Potentates both Kings and Queens attended with their Royal
Trains and Attendance continuing an extraordinary feast with melodious Music
and Perfumes that scented the whole City for the space of fourteen days; so
that nothing but Joy and Peace resounded in the Streets of Babylon. At the end
of which Sir Bevis and Queen Josian with their Train, taking leave of the
Soldian, retired to their Kingdom of Mambrat, as did Sir Miles and Rosalinda
his fair Princess to their Kingdom of Armony, where they flourished many years,
and were both loved and feared by all the Neighboring Princes, much enlarging
their Countries; and the Soldian being very aged, dying soon after the Marriage
left Babylon and all his other Dominions to his Daughter and Son-in-Law.

During these transactions, the Christians that inhabited the Holy Land were
grievously oppressed by the Infidels, who not only loaded them with grievous
Taxes, but took their Children from them, and forcibly obliged them to embrace
the Mahomitan Superstition, and frequently punishing such as refused a
compliance with exceeding rigor, so that many of them died under the torments
to which they were put, and by reason of this cruel usage, many of them growing
in a manner weary of their lives, they at last, upon notice of Sir Bevis his
great prowess and extraordinary success, sent to him Letters full of
lamentation, advertizing him, how they were made the scorn and Reproach of the
Enemies of Christianity humbly imploring him to rescue them out of the hands of
their Adversaries, who thereupon calling together his Friends, advised with
them what was to be done in so weighty an affair; who after mature
diliberation, told him, that since Heaven had so signally prospered his
undertakings, he should not neglect so good a work, as to succor and relieve
his distressed Fellow Christians, whereupon he raised an Army of forty thousand
men, and taking leave of his Queen, passed into ^ale^^ine, and there after a
bloody and obstinate fight, overthrew an Army of 200000 Turks and Sarazens, who
were gathered to oppose his passage; upon which bloody overthrow, most of the
Towns yielded at the first summons, and those that held out were obliged to do
it by compulsion; so that making himself entire Master of the Country, he
restored those places to the Christians, that had been forcibly taken from
them, and acted such prodigious wonders in Valor, that his name grew terrible
to the Infidels, who sued for Peace, and in order to obtain it, sent their
Ambassadors with great Presents, protesting not only to live peaceably with the
Christians, but to hold the Country tributary of him, which submission being
accepted, he le^t strong Garrisons in the most important places, and
constituting the Patriarch of Jerusalem to have the supreme Command under him,
he returned to his Kingdom with great Triumph and Applause.

By this time Sir Bevis grown in years, and having spent much time in War and B
oodshed, promoting what in him lay, the Christian Religion and delivering the
oppressed Christians from the Turks and Sarazens Tyrany, he betook himself and
his Queen to a Religious Life sending for Sir Guy to succeed him in his
Dominion, bequeathing all his possessions in England to Sir Terry, Son to Sir
Sabre now deceased; when falling sick with his Queen, he called his Sons before
him, and having established them in the possession of those Kingdoms he had
gained, he enjoined them on his blessing to carry his, and his Queens Body,
when they should happen to die, to Southampton, and there inter them in one
Tomb, which was accordingly observed, with great Solemnity and Magnificence,
their Epitaph being this:

The EPITAPH.
Valor and Beauty in this Marble lies,
The valiant, fair, the chaste, the good, the wise;
The matchless Bevis and his Queen lie here,
Whose worthy Fame the World has every where.
And thus, Reader, have I concluded the famous History of Sir Bevis of
Southampton, who for his worthy Exploits, and great Actions may be justly
ranked with the best Champions of Christendom.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and are to be sold by W. Thackeray at the Sign of the Angel
in Duck-Lane.
SIR John Hawkwood or the History of the Merchant-Taylors. Speedy Post with a
Packet of Letters. Tom a Lincoln, or the Red-Rose Knight. Palmerin of England
in three parts. The History of Montelion. The History of the Gentle Craft.
Albertus Magnus English. Dream of Devil and Dives. The Dutch Fortune Tellers.
The third Part of the Seven Champions. Jack of Newbery. Scoggin's Jests. Royal
Arbor. The Book of Knowledge of things unknown. Markham's faithful Farrier.
Markham's Method. Garland of Delight. Crown Garland. Robin Hood's Garland.
Mucedorus, a Play. Arcandam, or the Famous Astrologian. Sport and Pastime The
History of Ornatus and Artesia.
BOOKS Printed for, and are to be sold by J. Deacon at the Sign of the Angel in
Gilt-Spur-Street without Newgate.
THe Triumphant Weaver; or, The Art of Weaving, in Verse, in 4to. The Dutch
Fortune Tellers. The third Part of the Seven Champions. Markham's faithful
Farrier. Arcandam, or the famous Astrologian. Sport and Pastime. The History of
Ornatus and Artesia. The noble birth and adventures of Robin Hood. Wisdoms
Cabinet opened; or, The Seven Wise Masters of Rome, in 4to. The History of the
Seven Champions. Sir Bevis of Southampton. The Heavenly Passenger, or the
Pilgrim's Progress, in Verse. Hocus Pocus, or the Art of Juggling. The History
of Fortunatus. The life and death of Sheffery ap Morgan. The loyal Garland of
Mirth and Pastime; to which is added the Bell-man's loyal Verses. A Groatsworth
of Wit for a penny, or the interpretation of Dreams. The true Trial of
Understanding; Or, Wit newly revived: Being a Book of Excellent New Riddles.
Very pleasant and delightful to read. At the aforementioned places, any
Country-Chapmen or others, may be furnished with all sorts of small Books,
Broadsides and Ballads at very reasonable Rates.

