Concerning EPISCOPACY; The Former made by the Right Honorable, the late Lord
Viscount FALKLAND. And the Later by his Friend, Mr. William Chillingworth.

Published according to the Original Copies.

LONDON, Printed for William Nealand, Bookseller in Cambridge; and are to be
sold there, and at the Crown in Duck-Lane, 1660.

A SPEECH CONCERNING EPISCOPACY.
Mr. Speaker,
WHosoever desires this total change of our present Government, desires it
either out of a conceit that is unlawful, or inconvenient. To both these, I
shall say something. To the first, being able to make no such arguments to
prove it so my self, as I conceive likely to be made within the walls of so
wise a House, I can make no answer to them, till I hear them from some other;
which then (if they persuade me not) by the liberty of a Committee, I shall do.
But this in general. In the mean time, I shall say, that the ground of this
government of Episcopacy, being so ancient, and so general, so uncontradicted
in the first and best times, that our most laborious Antiquaries can find no
Nation, no City, no Church, nor Houses under any other; that our first
Ecclesiastical Authors tell us, that the Apostles not only allowed but
founded Bishops (so that the tradition for some Books of Scripture, which we
receive as Canonical, is both less ancient, less general, and less
uncontradicted,) I must ask leave to say, that though the Mystery of iniquity
began suddenly to work, yet it did not instantly prevail; it could not aim at
the end of the race, as soon is it was started; nor could Antichristianism in
so short a time have become so Catholic.

To the second, this I say, that in this Government there is no inconvenience
which might not be sufficiently remedied without destroying the whole; and
though we had not pared their Nails, or rather their Tongues, (I mean the
High Commission,) though we should neither give them the direction of strict
rules, nor the addition of choice Assiste^s (both which we may do, and suddenly
I hope we shall;) yet the fear sunk into them of this Parliament, and the
expectation of a Trienniall one, would be such banks to these rivers, that we
need fear their inundations no mo^e.

Next I say, that if some inconvenience did appear in this, yet since it may
also appear, that the change will breed greater, I desire those who are led to
change by inconveniences only, that they will suspend their opinions, till
they see what is to be laid in the other balance, which I will endeavor.

The inconveniences of the change are double, some that it should be yet done,
others, that it should be at all done. The first again, double, 1. Because we
have not done what we should do first; and 2. Because others have not done what
they should do first; That which we should do first, is, to agree of a
succeeding Form of Government, that every man, when he gives his Vote to the
destruction of this, may be sure that he destroy; not that, which he likes
better than that which shall succeed it. I conceive no man will at this time
give this Vote, who does not believe this Government to be the worst that can
possibly be devised; and for my part, if this be thus proposterously done, and
we left in this blind uncertainty (what shall become of us!) I shall not only
doubt all the inconveniences, which any Governmentment has, but which any
Government may have. This I insist on the rather, because if we should find
cause to wish for this back again, we could not have it, the means being
dispersed. To restore it again would be a miracle in State, like that of the
resurrection to Nature.

That which others should do first, is, to be gone. For if you will do this,
yet things standing as they do, no great cause appearing for so great a change,
I fear a great Army may be thought to be the cause. And I therefore desire (to
be sure that Newcastle may not be suspected to have any influence upon London,)
that this may not be done, till our Brethren be returned to their Patrimony.

We are now past the inconveniences in point of Time; I now proceed. And my
first inconvenience of this change, is, the inconvenience of change it self,
which is so great an inconvenience, when the Change is great and sudden, that
in such cases, when it is not necessary to change, it is necessary not to
change. To a person formerly intemperate, I have known the first prescription
of an excellent Physician, to forbear too good a diet for a good while. We have
lived long happily, and gloriously, under this Form of Government; Episcopacy
has very well agreed with the constitution of our Laws, with the disposition
of our People: how any other will do, I the less know, because I know not of
any other, of which so much as any other Monarchy has had any experience; they
all having (as I conceive) at least Superintendents for life: and the mere word
Bishop, I suppose, is no man's aim to destroy, nor no man's aim to defend.

Next, Sir, I am of opinion, that most men desire See the Collection of
Petitions for Episcopacy; printed for Will. Shears.
not this change, or else I am certain there has been very suddenly a great
change in men. Several Petitions indeed desire it, but knowing how concerned
and how united that party is, how few would be wanting to so good a work, even
those hands which value their number to others, are an argument of their
paucity to me. The numberless number of those of a different sense, appear not
so publiquekly and cry not so loud, being persons more quiet, as secure in the
goodness of their Laws, and the wisdom of their Lawmakers; And because men
petition for what they have not, and not for what they have, perhaps that the
Bishops may not know how many friends their Order has, lest they be encouraged
to abuse their authority, if they knew it to be so g^nerally approved. Now,
Sir, though we are trusted by those that sent us, in cases wherein their
opinions were unknown; yet truly if I knew the opinion of the major part of my
Town, I doubt whether it were the intention of those that trusted me, that I
should follow my own opinion against theirs. At least, let us stay till the
next Session, and consult more particularly with them about it.

Next, Sir, it will be the destruction of many estates, in which many, who may
be very innocent persons, are legally vested, and of many persons who
undoubtedly are innocent, whose dependances are upon those estates. The Apostle
says, he that provides not for his family, is worse then an Infidel, This
belongs in some analogy to us; and truly, Sir, we provide ill for our Family
(the Commonwealth) if we suffer a considerable part of it to be turned out of
doors. So that, for any care is taken by this Bill for new dwelling, (and I
will never consent they shall play an after-game, for all they have) either we
must see them starve in the streets before us, or (to avoid that) we must ship
them some-whither away, like the Moors out of Spain.

From the hurt of the Learned I come to that of Learning; an I desire you to
consider, whether, when all considerable maintenance shall be reduced to cure
of Souls, all studies, will not be reduced to those which are in order to
Preaching; the Arts and Languages, and even eminent skill in Controversies (to
which great leisure and great means is required) much neglected, and (to the
joy and gain of our common Adversary,) Syntagms, Postills, Catechisms,
Commentators, and Concordances, almost only bought, and the rest of Libraries
remain rather as of ornament, then as of use. I do not deny but for all this
want, the wit of some has attempted both, and the parts of some few have
served to discharge both, as those of Calvin, to advise about, and dispatch
more Temporal business into the bargain, than all our Privy-Councell; yet
such abilities are extremely rare, and very few will ever p^each ^^^ce a
Sunday, and be any match for Bellarmine. Nay I fear, Sir, that this will make
us to have fewer able even in Preaching it self, as it is separated from
general Learning, for I fear many whose parts, friends, and means, might make
them hope for better advancements in other courses, when these shall be taken
away from this, will be less ready to embrace it; and though it were to be
wished, that all men should only undertake those Embassages, with reference to
His Honor Whose Ambassadors they are; yet I doubt not but many, who have
entered into the Church by the Door, (or rather by the Window,) have done it
(after) great and sincere service; and better reasons have made them lab^ur in
the vineyard, than brought them thither at first: and though the mere love of
God ought to make us good, though there were no reward or punishment, yet it
would be very inconvenient to piety, that hope of Heaven and fear of Hell were
taken away.

The next inconvenience, I fear, is this; that if we should take away a
Government which has as much testimony of the first antiquity to have been
founded by the Apostles, as can be brought for some parts of Scripture to have
been written by them, lest this may avert some of our Church from us, and rivet
some of the Roman Church to her; and (is I remember) the Apostle commands us to
be careful, not to give scandal even to those that are without. Sir, It has
been said, that we have a better way to know Scripture than by Tradition; I
dispute not this, Sir, but I know that Tradition is the only argument to prove
Scripture to another, and the first to every man's self, being compared to the
Samaritan Woman's report, which made many first believe in Christ, though they
after believed him for himself. And I therefore would not have this so far
weakened to us, as to take away Episcopacy as unlawful, which is so far by
Tradition proved to be lawful.

The next inconvenience that I fear, is this: having observed those generally
who are against Bishops (I will not now speak of such as are among us, who by
being selected from the rest, are to be hoped to be freer then ordinary, from
vulgar passions) to have somewhat more animosity against those who are for
them, then vice versa; lest when they shall have prevaild against the Bishops,
they be so far encouraged against their partakers, and will so have discouraged
their adversaries, as in time to induce a necessity upon others, at least of
the Clergy, to believe them as unlawful as they themselves do, and to assent
to other of their opinions yet left at large. Which will be a way to deprive
us, I think, of not our worst, I am sure of our most learned Ministers; and to
send a greater Colonie to New England, then it has been said, this Bill will
recall from thence.

I come now from the incoveniences of taking away this Government, to the
inconveniences of that which shall succeed it: and to this I can speak but by
guess, and groping, because I have no light given me what that shall be; only
I hope I shall be excused for shooting at random, since you will set me up no
Butt to shoot at. The first, I fear the Scotch Government will either presently
be taken; or if any other succeed for a while, yet the unity and industry of
those of that opinion in this Nation, assisted by the counsel and friendship
of that, will shortly bring it in, if any less opposite Government to it be
here placed than that of Episcopacy. And indeed Sir, since any other Government
than theirs will by no means give any satisfaction to their desire of
uniformity; since all they who see not the dishonor and ill consequences of
it, will be unwilling to deny their Brethren what they esteem indifferent;
since our own Government being destroyed, we shall in all l^kelyhood be aptest
to receive that which is both next at hand and ready made: For these reasons I
look upon it as probable; and for the following ones, as inconvenient.

When some Bishops pretended to Iure divino (though nothing so likely to be
believed by the People, as those would be, nor consequently to hurt us by that
pretense) this was cried out upon as destructive to His Majesty's Supremacy,
who was to be confessed to be the Fountain of Jurisdiction in this Kingdom. Yet
to Iure divino the Scotch Ecclesiastical government pretends, To meet when
they please, to treat of what they please, to excommunicate whom they please,
even Parliaments themselves; so far are they from receiving either rules or
punishments from them. And for us to bring in any unlimited, any Independent
authority, the first is against the Liberty of the Subject, the second against
the Right and Privilege of Parliament; and both against the Protestation.

If it be said, that this unlimitednesse and independence is only in
Spiritual things; I answer first, that arbitrary Government being the worst of
Governments, and our Bodies being worse than our Souls, it will be strange to
set up that over the second, of which we were so impatient over the first.
Secondly, that M. Solicitor speaking about the Power of the Clergy, to make
Canons to bind; did excellently inform us; what a mighty influence Spiritual
power has upon Temporal affairs. So that if our Clergy had the one, they had
inclusively almost all the other. And to this I may add, (what all men may
see,) the vast Temporal power of the Pope allowed him by such who allow it him
only in ordine ad Spiritualia: for the Fable will tell you, if you make the
Lion judge (and the Clergy, assisted by the people, is Lion enough) it was a
wise fear of the Foxe's, lest he might call a knubb a horn. And sure, Sir, they
will in this case be Judges, not only of that which is Spiritual, but of what
it is that is so: and the people receiving instruction from no other, will take
the most Temporal matter to be Spiritual, if they tell them it is so.

The Apostolical Institution of Episcopacy; demonstrated by Mr. William
Chillingworth.
SECT. 1.
IF we abstract from Episcopal Government all accidentals, and consider only
what is essential and necessary to it; we shall find in it no more but this. An
appointment of one man of eminent sanctity and sufficiency to have the care of
all the Churches, within a certain Precinct or Diocese; and furnishing him
with authority (not absolute or arbitrary, but regulated and bounded by Laws,
and moderated by joining to him a convenient number of assistants) to the
intent that all the Churches under him may be provided of good and able
Pastors: and that both of Pastors and people, conformity to Laws, and
performance of their duties may be required, under penalties, not left to
discretion, but by Law appointed.

SECT. 2.
To this kind of Government I am not by any particular interest so devoted, as
to think it ought to be maintained, either in opposition to Apostolic
Institution; or to the much desired reformation of men's lives, and restoration
of Primitive discipline; or to any Law or Precept of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ: for that were to maintain a means contrary to the end; for obedience to
our Savior, is the end for which Church Government is appointed. But if it may
be demonstrated (or made much more probable than the contrary) as I verily
think it may: I. That it is not repugnant to the government settled in and for
the Church by the Apostles. II. That it is as comply^ble with the reformation
of any evil which we desire to reform either in Church or State, or the
introduction of any good which we desire to introduce, as any other kind of
Government: And III. That there is no Law, no Record of our Savior against it:
then I hope it will not be thought an unreasonable motion, if we humbly desire
those that are in authority, especially the High Court of Parliament, that in
may not be sacrificed to clamor, or over-borne by violence: and though (which
God forbid) the greater part of the multitude should cry, Crucify, Crucify;
yet our Governors would be so full of Justice and Courage, as not to give it
up, until they perfectly understand concerning Episcopacy it self, Quid mali
fecit.

SECT. 3.
I shall speak at this time only of the first of these three points: That
Episcopacy is not repugnant to the government settled in the Church for
perpetuity by the Apostles. Whereof I conceive this which follows is as clear a
demonstration, as any thing of this nature is capable of.

That this Government was received universally in the Church, either in the
Apostles time, or presently after, is so evident and unquestionable, that the
most learned adversaries of this Government do themselves confess it.

SECT. 4.
Petrus Molinaeus in his Book De munere pastorali, purposely written in defense
of the Presbyterial-government, acknowledges: That presently after the
Apostles times, or even in their time (as Ecclesiastical story witnesses) it
was ordained, That in every City one of the presbytery should be called a
Bishop, who should have pre-eminence over his Colleagues; to avoid confusion
which often times arises out of equality. And truly, this form of Government
all Chuches every where received.

SECT. 5.
Theodorus Beza in his Tract, De triplici Episcopaius genere, confesses in
effect the same thing. For having distinguished Episcopacy into three kinds,
Divine, Humane, and Satanical, and attributing to the second (which he calls
Humane, but we maintain and conceive to be Apostolical) not only a priority of
order, but a superiority of power, and authority over other Presbyters, bounded
yet by Laws and Canons provided against Tyranny: he clearly professes that of
this kind of Episcopacy, is to be understood whatsoever we read concerning the
authority of Bishops (or Presidents, as Justin Martyr calls them) in Ignatius,
and other more ancient Writers.

SECT. 6.
Certainly from To whom two others also from Geneva may be added: Daniel
Chami^rus (in Panstratia, tom. 2. lib. 10. cap. 6.. 24.) and Nicol. Vedelius
(Exercitat. 3. in epist. Ignatii ad Philadelph. cap. 14. and Exercit. 8. in
epist. ad Mariam, cap. 3.) which is fully also demonstated in D. Hammonds
dissertations against Blondel (which never were answered, and never will) by the
testimonies of those who wrote in the very next Age after the Apostles.
these two great defenders of the Presbytery, we should never have had this
free acknowledgement, (so prejudicial to their own pretense, and so
advantageous to their adversaries purpose) had not the evidence of clear and
undeniable truth en^orced them to it. It will not therefore be necessary, to
spend any time in confuting that uningenuous assertion of the anonymous Author
of the Catalogue of Testimonies, for the equality of Bishops and Presbyters,
who affirms, That their disparity began long after the Apostles times: But we
may safely take for granted that which these two learned: Adversaries have
confessed; and see, whether upon this foundation laid by them, we may not by
unanswerable reason raise this superstructure;

That seeing Episcopal Government is confessedly so Ancient and so Catholic,
it cannot with reason be denied to be Apostolic.

SECT. 7.
For so great a change, as between Presbyterial Government and Episcopal, could
not possibly have prevailed all the world over in a little time. Had Episcopal
Government been an aberration from (or a corruption of) the Government left in
the Churches by the Apostles, it had been very strange, that it should have
been received in any one Church so suddenly, or that it should have prevailed
in all for many Ages after. Variasse debuerat error Ecclesiarum: quod autem
apud omnes unum est, non est erratum, sed traditum. Had the Churches erred,
they would have varied: What therefore is one and the same amongst all, came
not sure by error, but tradition. Thus Tertullian argues very probably, from
the consent of the Churches of his time, not long after the Apostles, and that
in matter of opinion much more subject to unobserved alteration. But that in
the frame and substance of the necessary Government of the Church, a thing
always in use and practice, there should be so sudden a change as presently
after the Apostles times; and so universal, as received in all the Churches;
this is clearly impossible.

SECT. 8.
For what universal cause can be assigned or feigned of this universal
Apostasy? you will not imagine that the Apostles, all or any of them, made any
decree for this change, when they were living; or left order for it in any Will
or Testament, when they were dying. This were to grant the question; To wit,
that the Apostles, being to leave the Government of the Churches themselves,
and either seeing by experience, or foreseeing by the Spirit of God, the
distractions and disorders, which would arise from a multitude of equals,
substituted Episcopal Government instead of their own. General Counsels to
make a Law for a general change, for many ages there was none. There was no
Christian Emperor, no coercive power over the Church to enforce it. Or if
there had been any, we know no force was equal to the courage of the Christians
of those times. Their lives were then at command (for they had not then learnt
to fight for Christ) but their obedience to any thing against his Law was not
to be commanded (for they had perfectly learned to dye for him.) Therefore
there was no power then to command this change; or if there had been any, it
had been in vain.

SECT. 9.
What device then shall we study, or to what fountain shall we reduce this
strange pretended alteration? Can it enter into our hearts to think, that all
the Presbyters and other Christians then, being the Apostles Scholars, could
be generally ignorant of the Will of Christ, touching the necessity of a
Presbyterial Government? Or, dare we adventure to think them so strangely
wicked all the World over, as against knowledge and conscience to conspire
against it? Imagine the spirit of Diotrephes had entered into some, or a great
many of the Presbyters, and possessed them with an ambitious desire of a
forbidden superiority, was it possible they should attempt and archieve it once
without any opposition or contradiction? and besides that, the contag^on of
this ambition, should spread it self and prevail without stop or control, nay,
without any noise or notice taken of it, through all the Churches in the World;
all the watchmen in the mean time being so fast asleep, and all the dogs so
dumb, that not so much as one should open his mouth against it?

SECT. 10.
But let us suppose (though it be a horrible untruth) that the Presbyters and
people then, were not so good Christians as the Presbyterians are now; that
they were generally so negligent to retain the government of Christ's Church
commanded by Christ, which we now are so zealous to restore: yet certainly we
must not forget nor deny that they were men as we are. And if we look upon them
but as mere natural men, yet knowing by experience how hard a thing it is,
even for policy armed with power by many attempts and contrivances, and in a
long time, to gain upon the liberty of any one people; undoubtedly we shall
never entertain so wild an imagination, as that among all the Christian
Presbyteries in the World, neither conscience of duty, nor love of liberty, nor
averseness from pride and usurpation of others over them, should prevail so
much with any one, as to oppose this pretended universal invasion of the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the liberty of Christians.

SECT. 11.
When I shall see therefore all the Fables in the Metamorphosis acted and prove
stories; when I shall see all the Democracies and Aristocracies in the World
lie down and sleep, and awake into Monarchies: then will I begin to believe
that Presbyterial Government, having continued in the Church during the
Apostles times, should presently after (against the Apostles doctrine and the
will of Christ) be whirled about like a scene in a masque, and transformed into
Episcopacy. In the mean time, while these things remain thus incredible, and in
humane reason impossible; I hope I shall have leave to conclude thus;

Episcopal Government is acknowledged to have been universally received in the
Church, presently after the Apostles times.

Between the Apostles times and this presently after, there was not time enough
for, nor possibility of, so great an alteration.

And therefore there was no such alteration as is pretended. And therefore
Episcopacy, being confessed to be so Ancient and Catholic, must be granted
also to be Apostolic, Quod erat demonstrandum.

FINIS.

