AN ACCOUNT Of the Isle of JERSEY.

This may be Printed.

November. 28. 1693. EDWARD COOK.

AN ACCOUNT Of the Isle of JERSEY, The Greatest of those Islands that are now
the only Remainder of the ENGLISH DOMINIONS IN FRANCE. WITH A New and Accurate
MAP of the Island.

By PHILIP FALL, M. A. Rector of St. SAVIOR in the said Island, and Chaplain
in Ordinary to His Majesty.

At the Parliament holden at Westminster, the Wednesday next after the
Translation of St. Thomas the Martyr, An. 14. Edw. III.

Remembrances for the King, etc.

To keep the Sea, and to purvey for the Navy, and to defend the Isles of
JERESEY, and Guernezey.

Sir Robert Cotton's Abridgment of the Records in the Tower of London, fol. 29.
n. 28.

LONDON, Printed for John Newton, at the Three Pigeons, overagainst the
Inner-Temple-Gate, in Fleet Street, 1694.



TO THE KING,
SIR,
THe Design of this Book, humbly laid at YOUR MAJESTY's Feet, is to give some
Account of an Island, which, though subject to Your Royal Predecessors upwards of
Six hundred years, and seated in the Channel, is less known than some other of
YOUR MAJESTY's Dominions and Islands, that are latter Acquisitions, and removed
to a greater Distance. The Knowledge of Us may be of some Use to YOUR MAJESTY's
Service, and may minister to some of those Great Ends of Providence for which
God has raised You up, and which are one day to be wrought by Your Means.

Ever since our Ancient DUKES exchanged their Coronet for that Imperial Crown
which YOUR MAJESTY now wears, we have been noted for Our Fidelity to Our KINGS.
We Glory not in the Extent or Riches of Our Country, which cannot be brought
into Parallel with the meanest of those Provinces that constitute Your Great
Empire; but we Glory in Our Loyalty, which we have kept unblemished to this Day.

What profound Veneration then must we now have for a Matchless Pair of
Incomparable Princes whom God has given to these Nations in his Love?

That Heaven would preserve YOUR MAJESTY from the many Dangers to which You
daily expose Your Sacred Person, and crown with Success the Justice of Your
Arms, is the hearty Prayer of,

May it please YOUR MAJESTY, YOUR MAJESTY's Most humble and most faithful
Subject and Servant, Philip Fall.

THE PREFACE.
THE Island of JERSEY (with the Others adjacent) is of that Importance to
England, and the Loss of it would be attended with Consequences so prejudicial
to this Crown, that it is fit the Nation should understand the Interest it has
in the Preservation of that Place, which, of all other Their Majesty's
Territories, is, by its Vicinity to France, the most exposed to an Invasion
from thence. Therefore, I presume, it will not be so much wondered at that an
Account should be given of it now, as that none should have been given
heretofore.

The only thing that has appeared in Print concerning this Island, besides what
is found scattered in Cambden De Insulis Britannicis, p. 854.
and others Hollingshead's Description of Britain. p. 32. Speed' s Theater of
Great Brit. l. 1. Chapter 48. p. 94.
, is Dr. Heylin's Survey Survey of the Estate of the two Islands Guernzey, and
JERSEY with the Isles appending; according to their Polity and Forms of
Government both Ecclesiastical and Civil. By Peter Heylin D. D. London, 1656.
containing the Relation of a Voyage which he made to JERSEY and Guernzey, in
the Year 1628. We must own the Doctor's candid and ingenuous dealing in the
Report he gives of Us, though being a Stranger, and sojourning but Six days in
JERSEY, he could not so thoroughly acquaint himself with our Constitution: The
want of a due Knowledge whereof has led him into some Errors, not to mention
the greater Defects of that Work. For having written that Book only for the Use
of Archbishop Laud, then Bishop of London, and without any design of making it
Public (as appears in that it was not Printed till after the Archbishop's
Death, viz. Anno. 1656, almost Thirty years after it was written) it is evident
he aimed not so much at an Account of Us, as we are a Frontiere and a Garrison,
under which Notion we ought chiefly to be considered now, as to lay before that
great Prelate the State of Religion in these Islands, in Order to bring them to
a full Conformity to the Church of England: The Presbyterian Government being
then established in Three of them, Guernzey, Alderney, and Serck These Islands
have Conformed since.
. However, in the main, we have reason to be satisfied with his undertaking;
and to applaud our selves in the Character he gives of Us in relation to these
great Points, viz. Our constant Affection to the English Nation, our just
aversion to the French, our inviolable Fidelity to the Crown to which we are
United, and the great advantage these Islands are of to England for the
security of the Channel. These Islands, says he, Survey, p. 293.
are the only remainder of our Rights in Normandy, unto which Dukedom they did
once belong. Ever since they were annexed unto the English Crown, they have,
with great Testimony of Faith and Loyalty, continued in that Subjection. The
Sentence, or Arrest of Confiscation given by the Parliament of France against
King John, nor the surprizal of Normandy by the French Forces, could be no
persuasion unto them to change their Masters. Nay, when the French had twice
seized on them during the Reign of that unhappy Prince, and the State of
England was embroyled at home, the People valiantly made good their own, and
faithfully returned unto their first obedience. In aftertimes as any War grew
hot betwixt the English and the French, these Islands were principally aimed at
by the Enemy, and sometimes also were attempted by them, but with ill Success.
And certainly it could not but be an Eyesore to the French to have these
Islands within their Sight, and not within their Power; to see them at the
least in possession of their ancient Enemy the English, a Nation strong in
shipping, and likely by the opportunity of these Places to annoy their Trade.
For if we look upon them in their Situation, we shall find them seated
purposely for the Command and Empire of the Ocean. The Islands lying in the
chief Trade of all Shipping from the Eastern Parts unto the West, and in the
middle way between St. Malo's and the River Seine, the only Traffic of the
Normans, and Parisians. At this St. Malo's, as at a common Empory, do the
Merchants of Spain and Paris barter their Commodities; the Parisians making
both their passage and return by these Isles; which, if well aided by a small
Power from the King's Navy, would quickly bring that Inter-course to nothing.
An opportunity neglected by Our former Kings in their Attempts upon that
Nation, as not being then so powerful on the Seas as now they are, but likely
for the future to be husbanded to the best advantage, if the French hereafter
stir against Us. Sure I am that my Lord Danby conceived this Course of all
others to be the fittest for the impoverishing, if not undoing of the French;
and accordingly made Proposition by his Letters to the Council, that a Squadron
of Eight ships might be employed about these Islands for that purpose; an
Advice which had this Summer took effect, had not the Peace betwixt both Realms
been so suddenly concluded. And a little after speaking of the great
Privileges granted by the Kings of England to the Inhabitants of these
Islands, he adds Page 294.
These Privileges and Immunities, seconded of late days with the more
powerful Band of Religion, have been a Principal occasion of that Constancy
wherewith they have persisted faithfully in their Allegiance, and disclaimed
even the very name and thought of France. For howsoever the Language which they
speak is French, and that in their Original, they either were of Normandy, or
Bretagne, yet can they with no Patience endure to be accounted French, etc.
Thus far Dr. Heylin.

But a Native of these Islands being much fitter to give the World a full and
exact Account of them, than one that had but a Transient view of them, and that
wrote but on the Information of others, that Task was some years since
undertaken by Mr. Poingdestre a Gentleman of JERSEY lately Deceased, one of the
Jurats of the Royal Court of that Island, and one admirably accomplished for
such a Design. For besides that he was a Person of universal Learning, he came
to it with this peculiar advantage, that he had an accurate Insight into the
Laws, Customs, and Privileges of this Island, and had made such a Collection
of Antiquities relating thereunto, as well from Printed Books as from Original
Papers and Records, especially those of the Tower and Exchequer (to which he
had easy Access in the time of his Attendance on the Court during the Reign of
King Charles I.) that I believe few things worthy of Observation escaped his
Sedulity and Enquiry. The Book was long since ready for the Press, but has
never appeared otherwise than in private hands, for what reason I cannot
certainly tell. It was my good Fortune to procure a Transcript of it in the
time of the Author, who was my Neighbor and my singular good Friend; to which
his Son has since added a Supplement of other useful Manuscripts found among
his Father's Papers, with full Power to Publish them as my Own. But I am not so
vain as to Arrogate to my self the Praise due to another Man's Labors.
Therefore I do freely acknowledge that, in the present Work, I do but write
after that excellent Man's Copy; And though I allow my self the Liberty of
altering his Method, supplying his Omissions, and leaving out, or but slightly
glancing at some things which he more largely insisted on; and, in a word,
making such Changes in the whole, as that to any One that considers both, they
may appear to have been different Designs; yet still I must own that the
Foundation on which I build is His, and a great Part of the Materials employed
in this Work are His also.

I have likewise received some help from those imperfect Notes which Philip
Dumaresq Esquire, Seigneur of Samares, another of the Magistrates of JERSEY,
and a very ingenious and inquisitive Person, imparted to me some time before
his Decease. He had begun a Survey of this Island, and had made a good Progress
in it, but Death gave him not leave to finish it.

Let none despise this Work, because it Treats of a Country of so narrow an
Extent, and that makes so little noise in the World. For as the Power and
Wisdom of God are no less seen in the Production of the smallest Insects, than
of the more glorious Parts of the Creation, so his Providence is no less to be
admired in the Preservation of the smallest States, than of the greatest
Empires of the Universe. Indeed it must be a Matter of Astonishment to any
considering Man, that, in the space of almost Eight hundred years, wherein
strange Vicissitudes have happened in the most powerful Monarchies, scarce any
sensible Change has been felt in this Island; unless it be that of Religion,
which (God be thanked) we have no reason to be sorry for. But if ever the
mighty hand of God was seen in any thing, it is in that wonderful Deliverance
he has wrought for Us, throughout the Succession of so many Ages, from a
Formidable Enemy, that lies in a Manner contiguous to Us, and which, in that
long Period of Years, has neglected few Opportunities of increasing its
Dominions, and dilating on every side its Frontiers. Every one that reads this
knows I mean the French, to whom the slightest Pretense has been always Ground
enough to invade their Neighbors, and who could have wanted none such to
invade Us (oftener than they have done) had not the same God that stills the
Raging of the Sea, and bids it go thus far, and no farther, set a Bound to
their Usurpations and Encroachments on this Side. What vast Acquisitions have
they not made in those Eight Hundred Years? How many Battles have they fought!
And how many Victories have they won! They have reduced those goodly Provinces,
which were once part of the Ancient. Gaul, but had been erected into distinct
Soveraignties, which are now reunited to that Crown: As Bretagne, Provence,
Dauphine, Burgundy, Lorraine, and others. They have regained those which the
English with so much Glory, and at the Expense of so much Blood, had won from
them heretofore; or which were the old and undoubted Patrimony of our Kings; or
had been acquired by Alliances and Marriages with the Heiresses of those
Provinces, as Normandy, Poitou, Anjou, Maine, and Aquitaine. They have pierced
through the Pyrenees, and the Alps, and carried their Arms into the Bowels of
Italy. They have passed the Meuse and the Rhine, and made their Cannon to be
heard in Brussels, and Amsterdam. They have improved their Navigation to a
Degree, as strikes a Terror into other Nations; and they who once knew little
beyond their own Coasts, cover now the Ocean with Mighty Fleets, and have
enlarged their Empire beyond some of the remotest Seas. And yet these very Men
that used to be attended with such wonderful Success, have been always
defeated in their Attempts on this Island; as if that small and narrow Current,
that divides our Shore from their Continent, had, by some secret Order of
Heaven, been decreed to be a Stop to their Conquests, which, on all other
Sides, have forced the strongest Barrieres of Nature, and whose swift Progress,
neither Hills, nor Rivers, nor Seas have been able to obstruct. I think every
one that owns the Providence of God in the Care and Government of the World,
must acknowledge something Extraordinary in this, and must give him the Honor
and Glory of our Deliverance.

It Is indeed a singular Mercy of God, that, in all this time, we have not been
swallowed up by a Power that has oppressed so many States of Europe, and those
much more powerful, and at a greater Distance than We. For besides the Loss of
our Civil Liberties, and falling under a Yoke so uneasy to all that bear it,
what could we expect but the Loss also of what is infinitely more Valuable to
Us, viz. Our Holy Religion, and a deep Share in those horrid Persecutions that
have laid Wast a most flourishing Church, and have forced some Hundred
Thousands of innocent People to quit their Habitations, and seek in Foreign
Countries that Liberty of serving God according to their Consciences, which
they were not suffered to enjoy at home? Whereas by our remaining united to the
Crown of England, We live under a most easy and gentle Government: We are
subject to a most merciful Throne, from which we derive infinite Acts of Grace
and Favor, and to which we are never denied Access under our Pressures: We
enjoy the best Religion, and have Communion with the best Reformed Church in
the World.

May that Great God who presides over Human Affairs, and in whose Hands are the
Fates of Nations, continue these Blessings to Us, the Inhabitants of this Isle;
and may we ever walk worthy of them! May we, so long as the World endures,
remain united to that Crown, from which, under God, these Blessings flow to Us!
May Their Majesty's, by great and repeated Victories, soon reduce their Enemies
into a Necessity of Defending their own, instead of invading the Dominions and
Territories of others! And may the whole English Nation be excited into a
generous Compassion of those Dangers that surround Us, and be wrought into a
Belief that we cannot perish without, at least, a great Diminution of their
Glory!

The Reader may take a Character of that Great Man, mentioned in the Preface,
from the following Inscription engraven on a fair Monument set up for him in
the Parish Church of St. Savior, where he lies Interred.

D. O. M. S.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. A Short History of the Island. CHAP. II. Description of the Island.
CHAP. III. Military Government. CHAP. IV. Civil Jurisdiction. CHAP. V.
Religion. CHAP. VI. Convention of the Estates. CHAP. VII. Privileges.
A New and Accurat MAP of their MAJESTY'S Island of JERSEY. Drawn from the
Survey of Philip Dumaresq Esquire. Seigneur of Samares, by Tho: Lemprier Philomat.
The Arms and Seal of the Island and Bayliwick of JERSEY. Given by K. Edward I.
Anno Regi^^. Gules Three Leopards passant gardant ^r.



London Printed for John Newton at the 3 Pigeons ^veragainst the Inner Temple
Gate in Fleetstreet 1694.

AN ACCOUNT Of the Isle of JERSEY.
CHAP. I. A Short History of the Island.
WE have no certain Account when, or by whom, this Island was first Inhabited:
Which will not seem strange to any that considers the great Uncertainties of
Primitive Plantations. We want not our Legend, which may't perhaps deserve as
good Credit, as those whereon some of the Greatest Nations build their Fabulous
Original.

This seems to be more certain; That this Island was known, and in some esteem,
in the time of the Romans; as appears from the Emperor Antoninus his Itinerary
Itinerarium Provinciarum omnium Antonini Augusti. Paris. 1512. page 89. De Mari
Oceano Gallico and Britannico. In Mari Oceano quod Gallias and Britannias
interluit; Insulae Orcades, Insula Glota, -- Vecta, Riduna, Sarmia, ( ceu
Sarnia) CAESAREA, etc. (The three last are Alderney, Guernesey, and JERSEY.)
, where it is mentioned under the Name of CAESAREA, (though it is uncertain again
from which of the Caesar's it was so called) and as appears likewise from the
Remains of Roman Camps and Fortifications yet to be seen in this Island: One of
those Fortifications being by Ancient Tradition called to this Day, La petite
Caesaree, no doubt, because it was a Camp of one of the Caesar's.

The Modern Name of JERSEY, GERSEY, or GEARSEY, is thought to be but a
Corruption of that of CAESAREA Cambden de Insul. Britan. page 854.
: For ey in the the Language of those Northern Nations which overrun Europe
about a Thousand Years ago, signifies an Island, as in the word Angles-ey, (i.
e. the Isle of the Angles) And Jer, Ger, or Gear, is a Contraction of Caesar,
as in the Name of Cherburg, or Gerburg, an Ancient Town of Normandy, so called
from the Latin Caesaris-Burgum. JERS-EY is as if one should say, Caesar's
Island.

It was also some time known under the Name of AVGIA: For so it is called in
that Donation which Childebert King of France, who reigned from the Year 511 to
558, made of this, and the other Islands, to Sampson Archbishop of Dol in
Bretagne: Which Donation is found in the Life of that Bishop, an Ancient MSS
preserved in the Archives of Dol, and attested by Dargentre Hist. de Bretagne
Lib. I. Chapter XXVIII. p. 132. A cest Archevesque [viz. St. Sampson] Childebert
donna quelques Isles and Terres en Normandy, de Rimoul, Augian, Sargian, and
Vesargian, qui estoint Isles en la cost; Car je trouve tout cela aux Vielles
Lettres. [These Isles of Rimoul, Augian, Sargian, and Vesargian, are the same
that are now called Arm, JERSEY, Serk, and Guernezey.]
. And so likewise it is called in an old Fragment taken out of the Abbey of
Fontenelles in Normandy, mentioned by Du Monstier in his Neustria Pia De
Abbatia Fontanell. page 155. Ex Libro Miraculorum S. Wandregisilli Abbatu
Fontanellae.
, and extant in the third Tome of Andreas dn Chesne his Scripto res Coaetanei
Histor. Franc. In which Fragment, near as ancient as Charlemagne, it is said
concerning Geroaldus Abbot of Fontenelles, that, Is quadem Legatione fungebatur
jussu Caroli Augusti, in Insulam cui nomen est AVGIA, and est adjacens Pago
Constantino. i. e. That he was then discharging the Office and Function of
Imperial Legate, by Command of Charles the Great, in an Island whose name was
AUGIA, and is adjacent to the Town of Coutance [ in Normandy.] It Is very plain
that this AUGIA, where Geroaldus was sent, could be no other than JERSEY; which
lies directly opposite to, and within view of Coutance, and is usually known
and described in ancient Writers by that very Character. Thus Gregorius
Turonensis (speaking of JERSEY) calls it; Insulam Maris quod adjacet civitati
Constantinae Histor. Franc. Lib. 1. Cap. 18.
: Aymonius Monachus, calls it Insulam Maris, quae adjacet Constantiae De Gestis
Franc. Lib. 3. Cap. 26. page 99.
. Papirius Massonius, Insulam

Constantini Littoris Annal. Lib. I. p. 52.
and Gaguinus, Insulam Constantianae Dioecesis Hist. Franc. Lib. I. page 1. in
Chilperic.
. The Learned Mr. Poingdestre is of opinion that the Name of AUGIA is the
ancient Name of this Island, and that it was so called among the old Natives,
and Neighbors (the Lexobii and Armorici, who inhabited Normandy and Bretagne)
long before the Romans called it CAESAREA, and the Normans corruply after them
JERS-EY; and that this Name was also for some Ages after continued among them.
However that of CAESAREA, or JERS-EY, has in length of time quite prevailed,
and out-worn the other.

AUGIA has been the ancient Name of other Places. In Homer Iliad. Lib. II.
we find (...), i. e. The lovely AUGIA. It was a Town of the Locrians in
Greece. And to this day a part of Normandy is called Normannia Augiaca, i. e.
Le Pais d'Auge Robertus Coenalis de Re Gallic. Lib. II. Perioch 5. Ludovicus de
AUGIA, and Johannes de AUGIA, Abbates Cornevillae. Diaec. Rothomag. an. 1230.
and 1472. Neustria Pia, page 877.
.

This Island was, in Old Time, Parcel of the Province of Neustria (corruptly so
called for Westria, Westenrick, or West-France, because seated on the most
Western shore of the great Empire of the Franks, which extended from the Sea to
the Banks of the Danube; as the more Eastern part was called Austria,
Oostenrick, or East-France,) and with the rest of that great and rich Province
was given to Rollo and his Normans, Originally Danes and Norwegians, who from
their own Name called the said Province Normandy: Given (I say) by Charles IV,
surnamed the Simple, King of France, in the Year 912: From which time to this,
this Island never returned to that Crown, as the rest of that Province has
since done; though it was not added to the Crown of England till the Year 1066,
when William surnamed the Bastard, and the sixth Duke of Neustria, or Normandy,
from Rollo, invading England and Conquering it, transferred that Dukedom, and
with it this Island to the English Diadem. By which account it appears, that,
reckoning from this preset time 1693, it is not less than 781 years since this
Island was dismembered from the Crown of France, by the Donation of Charles the
Simple: that it has been 154 years under the Descendants of Rollo, while they
continued Dukes of Normandy only; and that it is 627 years since it is subject to
the Kings of England.

This gives the Inhabitants of this Island, the Preference in point of
Antiquity, to most others of Their Majesty's Subjects; Ireland not being
subdued till the Reign of Henry II, nor Wales reduced till that of Edward I,
nor Scotland united till the beginning of this last Century; to say nothing of
Foreign Plantations which are yet most of them of a later Date. I speak not
this to derogate from the Honor of Kingdoms and Principalities which do vastly
exceed Us in Expansion of Country, and have brought a far greater Addition of
Power to the English Empire; but to show Their Majesty's ancient and
indisputable Right over Us, together with that long and faithful Subjection
which our Fathers have paid to that Crown which Their Majesty's derive from a
Succession of so many Royal Progenitors.

We find but little in ancient History concerning this Island till the coming
of the Normans, who struck such Terror in all places where they passed, that in
the public Litany, after these words, From Plague, Pestilence, and Famine, was
added, and from the fury of the Normans, Good Lord, deliver us! By the
advantage of their Shipping they ransackt the Maritime Coasts of France,
burning and destroying all before them. They were Pagans, and therefore their
Fury fell more remarkably on Churches and Religious Houses, Persons and Things
consecrated to God E vita MSS. S. Viventii Episcopi, Tom. III. Hist. Gall.
Scriptor. Coaetan. page 435. Anno DCCCLXVIII. post Ludovicum ac caeteros
pr^potentes R^ges, regnante Carolo Juniore, supra modum grassatae sunt undique
Infestationes Paganorum: deficientibus tam Regum quam caeterorum nostorum
Principum ad repugnandum viribus. Ergo vulgari Plebe passim gladio and fame
percunte, igne pariter concremabantur hominum res and aedificia qu^que,
praecipueque Sanctorum loca, and Ecclesiae Universae; earum vero Ministri, id
eft, Clerici and Monachi crudelius damnabantur; Altaria funditus eversa
dehonestabantur, Sepulcra etiam Sanctorum absque Reverentia violabantur;
Siquidem haec Clades sicuti primitus it a acerbius in INSULIS seu Territoriis
Occidentalibus acmari contiguis desaeviit, etc.
. No place could be more open and exposed to their Incursions than this Island,
where they committed the same horrid Outrages they did elsewhere; leaving Us,
among others, this Monument of their Cruelty. There dwelt at that time in this
Island a Devout and Holy man, famous amongst Us to this day for the Austerity
of his Life, whose little solitary Cell* hewn out of the hard Rock is yet to be
seen in a small Islet close by Elizabeth Castle: His name Helerius, or Helier,
mistaken by some for St. Hilary Bishop of Poitiers, who was never here Cambd.
de Ins. Brit. p. 854. Sanctum Hilarium Pictaviensem Episcopum huc relegatum,
and Sepulturae traditum, ferunt.
. Him the Normans slew at their coming into this Island, adding thereby, to
other things which this Island Glories in, the honor of having given a Martyr
to the Church. For under that Name we find him Recorded in the Kalendary or
Martyrology of Coutance; in these words, XVII. Kalend. Aug. Constant. in
Normannia. Festum St. Helerii Martyris a Wandalis in GERSEIO Insula occisi. And
the Author of Neustria Pia speaks thus of him, and of the place of his
Martyrdom, In S. Helerio, Cap. I. page 712. Vid. etiam And^e^^ Saussayi.
Episcop. Tull. Martyrolog. Gallic. 16 Julii.
GERSEIUM, GERSOIUM, seu GRISOGIUM, vulgo GERSE* Insula est ad Mare oceanum,
Dioecesis Constantiensis; in quam S. Praetextatus Archi^piscopus Rothomagensis,
postea Martyr, relegatus est, an. 582. Illustrior autem haberi coepit ex quo S.
Helerius illic a Wandalis Martyrii palmam accepit; Nam in honorem hujusce
Inclyti Athletae Christi constructa est infignis Abbatia, a Domino Guillelmo
Hamonis, viro nobili and antiqui Stemmatis apud Neustrios Hero, in qua
Canonicos Regulares Ordinis S. Augustini posuit; ac tandem ipse excessit e vita
21 Novembris; cujus sic Meminit Obituarium Caesaris-Burgi, XI Calend. December.
Guillelmus Hamonis qui fundavit Abbatiam S. Helerii in GERSOIO. These Wandals
from whom St. Helier received the Crown of Martyrdom, were no other than
Normans, those Names being used promiscuously. But of this famous Abbey erected
to his Memory, there is not a stone left standing. It was built in the same
place where is now the lower Ward of Elizabeth Castle. So much as was left of
that ancient Building was pulled down An. 1691. to enlarge the Parade. From
this Holy man the chief Town in the Island is called St. Helier. His Martyrdom
must fall about the Year 857.

After that Rollo and his Normans were peaceably settled in Neustria, and in
these Islands, by Agreement with Charles the Simple, that wild Nation mixed it
self with the Old Inhabitants, grew Civilized, and embraced Christianity; and
this Island enjoyed great Tranquillity under the Government of those Dukes that
succeeded Rollo, and who fill up the whole space betwixt him and William the
Conqueror in the Order following.

ROLLO first Duke of Normandy, who at his Baptism took the Name of Robert.

WILLIAM Surnamed Longue Espee, from his long Sword, Son of Rollo.

RICHARD I. the Son of Longue Espee. Vid. Gulielm. Gemeticens. de Ducibus
Norman. Tho. de Walsingham Ypodigma Neustriae.


RICHARD II. Son of Richard I.

RICHARD III. Son of Richard II.

ROBERT Brother of Richard III. This Duke preserved Edward the Confessor from
the Fury of Canute the Dane who had invaded England, and slain Edmond Ironside
Brother of Edeward. He set out a powerful Fleet to restore him to his Kingdom;
but being long detained by contrary Winds at Guernezey Abrege de L'Histoire de
Normandy par un auteur Anonyme a Rouen, 1665. Chapter III. p. 106. WILLIAM the
CONQUEROR.
he was forced to return to Normandy, re infecta.

WILLIAM II. Bastard Son of Robert, Surnamed the CONQUEROR, from his Conquest
of England.

While the Conqueror lived, he kept England and Normandy as close linked
together as their Situation would permit; residing sometime in the one, and
sometime in the other. He died in Normandy, and lies buried at Caen, where I
have seen his Tomb. It Is but a low plain Altar Tomb that has nothing of
Magnificence in it. It stands in the middle of the Quire of the great Abbey
Founded by himself; and has two Inscriptions on it; one on each side; The first
expressing the Quality of his Person, and the Union of England and Normandy
under him Qui rexit rigidos Normannos atqu^ Britannos, etc.
: The other signifying how that Monument had been defaced by the Huguenots
during the heat and rage of the Civil Wars, and had been repaired by the Monks
An. 1642.

Duke ROBERT Son of the Conqueror.
After the Death of the Conqueror, England and Normandy were parted again;
England falling to the Lot of William Rufus second Son of the Conqueror, who in
the absence of ROBERT his elder Brother, seized the Crown, and kept it while
himself lived; Normandy, with these Islands, remaining in the Possession of
ROBERT, who made a shift to hold them during the Reign of his Brother Rufus.
There was a Pact of mutual Succession betwixt the two Brothers. But Rufus being
suddenly killed by the glance of an Arrow as he was hunting in the New Forest,
while Robert was with Godfrey of Bouillon and other Noble Adventurers fighting
against the Sarrazins for the recovery of the Holy Land, the Crown was again
seized by Henry Beauclerk, third Son of the Conqueror, and so Robert twice one
after the other excluded from the Succession of England by his younger
Brothers. Still nevertheless he kept possession of Normandy and of these
Islands. He was a brave, but unfortunate Prince. He won such Reputation in the
Holy War, that after the taking of Jerusalem, he was, by common Consent of all
the Princes in the Christian Army, chosen King of that newly conquered*
Kingdom: But having then the Crown of England in his eye, he declined that
honorable Offer; after which, it has been observed that he never prospered.
For at his return from the Holy Land, he found not only that Crown, which was
his by Right of Primogeniture, fast on the head of young Beauclerk, but himself
reduced to the necessity of defending Normandy against his Brother, who plainly
now endeavored to out him of all. The War grew hot betwixt them; in which the
Fortune of Henry prevailing, Duke Robert was taken, his eyes put out, and
himself imprisoned in Cardiff Castle, where he languished about Twenty six
years in great Misery, till with the extreme Indignities his Brother continued
even then to put upon him, his great Heart broke. The Body of this injured
Prince lies interred in the Cathedral Church of Gloucester, in as mean a Tomb as
that of his Father at Caen, for I have seen both.

Were Men allowed to search into the Counsels and Judgments of God, one would
be very apt to suspect, that the misfortune which, sometime after, befell King
Henry in the loss of his Children, shipwrack'd in their passage from Normandy
to England, was an effect of the Divine Vengeance and Indignation for his
Cruelty and Injustice to his Brother. The young Princes (the eldest of whom
bore the Title of Duke of Normandy Abrege de L'Hist. de Normand. Chapter IV. p. 130.
, and with it the weight and load of his Father's sin) were driven by the storm
among these Islands, and were cast away upon Casquet Chronique de Normandy par
Mesgissier. Chapter LII. p. 132.
, a dangerous Rock two Leagues West of Alderney, where they miserably perished.

HENRY I.
After the Reduction of Normandy, and of these Islands, by HENRY, he declared
them unalienable from the Crown of England Cambd. de Ins. Brit. p. 855.
Spectarunt olim hae Insulae ad Normanniam; sed cum Henricus Primus, Rex
Angliae, Robertum fratrem Anno Christi MCVIII. debellasset, Normanniam and has
Insulas Angliae Regne adjunxit.
: in which State they remained under the succeeding Reigns of,

STEPHEN.
STEPHEN of Blois, Grandson of the Conqueror by his Daughter Alice.

HENRY II.
HENRY II. Son of Maud the Empress, who was Daughter of Henry I.

RICHARD I.
RICHARD I, Surnamed Coeur de Lion, Son of Henry II.

King JOHN.
But under the unfortunate Administration of King JOHN, who was Brother of
Richard I, and succeeded him in the Kingdom, the Dukedom of Normandy (though not
these Islands) was lost on this occasion. Henry II had, among other Sons, these
Three following. (1.) Richard, to whom he left the Kingdom, and who died
without Legitimate issue. (2.) Jeffrey, who died in his Father's Lifetime,
leaving a Son called Arthur, Duke of Bretagne, in Right of his Mother: And,
(3.) John Count de Mortain in Normandy, afterward King. Upon Richard's Death,
the right of Succession devolved on Arthur, his Second Brother's Son: But John
stepped in betwixt him and the Crown; whereupon the young Prince applies himself
to Philip Augustus King of France, for Protection and Succor against his Uncle
that had stripped him of his Inheritance. The French, who have always found their
advantage in our Civil Distractions, and have accordingly always improved and
fomented them, were glad of the opportunity offered. A Quarrel was picked with
King John on the Prince's account, but so managed that it soon appeared that
persidious Nation pursued their own ends more than the Interest of the Prince
whose Title they had undertaken to defend: Which the Prince himself seeing,
reconciled himself once to his Uncle; but that held not long. To be short, the
poor Prince fell into the hands of the exasperated King, by whom he was shut up
close Prisoner in the Castle of Rouen in Normandy, and soon after was found
dead in the Castleditch; whether made away by the Jealousy of his Uncle, as
some suspect, or that himself not brooking so severe a Restraint, and
endeavoring to escape, perished in the Attempt, as is given out by others, is
uncertain.

Upon this, Philip Augustus, to embroil more and more the King's Affairs,
charge King John with the Murder of the Prince; and on pretense that he was
his Vassal for what he held in France, cites him before the Parliament of Paris
to answer the Accusation: Where, the King not thinking it consistent with his
Dignity or Safety to appear, was condemned as a Felon, and as such declared to
have lost and forfeited his Right to Normandy, and to all other Estates which
he held as Fiefs of that Crown; which were seized accordingly; an Army being
ready to execute the Summary Sentence; and the King's hands so full of other
business at home, that he was forced to sit still, and see those fair Provinces
torn from him, without being able to apply a suitable Remedy to so great an Evil.

The French having thus possessed themselves of Normandy, invaded these
Islands. Twice they entered them, and twice they were beaten out of them again
Rot. Placit. coram Johanne de Fressingfield, etc. Justiciar. Itiner. in Insul.
Anno 2. E. 2. Guillielmus Demareys qui sequiturpro domino Rege allegat quod
quidam Rex Franciae exhereditavit Dominum Johannem Regem Angliae de ducatu
Normanniae, and tum: idem Rex Franciae per du^s vices ejecerat praedictum
Dominum Johannem Regem, etc. de his Insulis, and illas occupaverat tanquam
annexas praedicto Ducatui. Et praedictus Dominus Johannes Rex vi armata per
binas vices reconquestavit has Insulas super ipsum Regem Franciae, and a
Secundo Conquesto suo ipse and posteri sui Reges Angliae Insulas istas
tenuerunt huc^sque, etc.
. The Inhabitants had under their Dukes contracted a great Aversion to the
French, and stood stoutly on their own Defense. The King himself looking on
them as the last Plank left of so great a Shipwreck, and that they would always
serve to show his Right to that Dukedom to which they had once belonged, and
might perhaps one time or other be a means to recover it, resolved to keep them
whatever they cost him; and accordingly hastened himself over hither, and was
twice in Person in JERSEY Rot. Edw. 2.
: Which he caused to be fortified; and gave special Order for the Custody and
Safeguard of the Castles Constitutiones and Provisiones constitutae per Dominum
Johannem Regem postquam Normannia alienata fuit, etc. in Turri Land. Artic.
XVIII. Statutum est pr^ Tuitione and Salvatione Insularum and Castrorum, and
maxim quia Insulae prop^ sunt, and juxta Potestatem Regis Franciae and aliorum
inimicorum nostrorum, quod omnes Portus Insularum been custodiantur; and
Custodes Portuum Dominus Rex constituere praecipit, ne damna sibi and sui^
eveniant.
and Ports which before lay too open to the Enemy.

To this King therefore we owe our Preservation. From him we have many
Excellent Laws and Privileges, which he granted us at his being here, and
which have been confirmed to us in aftertimes by his Successors, Kings and
Queens of England. Him, for that reason, we must consider as our special
Benefactor; and whatever ill things may be otherwise said of him, must in
Gratitude have a Veneration and an Esteem for his Memory.

HENRY III.
K. John died An. 1216. His Son HENRY III. was so plagued by his Rebellious
Barons, who had set up the Title of Prince Lewis of France, Son of Philip
Augustus, against his Father and Him, (which pretended Title of Lewis was in
right of his Wife, Daughter of the Queen of Castile, who was Sister of Richard
I. and K. John) that to compound the matter, he was forced to quit his Title to
Normandy, but never made any Cession of these Islands. On the contrary, he had
so tender a regard to their Safety, that he issued forth his Royal Mandate to
the Barons of the Cinque Ports Mandatum est Baronibus de Quinque Portibus, quod
si opus habuerit (Ricardus Gray Custos Insularum) and illud eis scire fecerit,
in ejus auxilium veniant, ita quod Dominus Rex eos, etc. T. Rege apud West. 16
die Maij An. Regni X.
, commanding them whenever these Islands were attacked, and upon Notice
thereof from the Warden or Governor, to hasten to their Succor. And the reason
the King gives for this extraordinary Care of them, is very remarkable: ita
quod Dominus Rex eos (viz. Insulanos) merito debet commendare, cum gratiarum
Action; i. e. for that the King, in Justice, owes them Commendation, and
thanks for their Loyalty, and good Service. In the 2d. Year of this King,
Philip de Aubigny Lord (or Governor) of these Islands, obtained a great Naval
Victory over the French, who were going over into England with Supplies to
Prince Lewis. Matt. Paris. Hist. Angl. in Hen. III. Page 286.


EDWARD I.
In the time of K. EDWARDI, Son of Henry III, the French, enraged to see
themselves Masters of the rest of Normandy, and not of these Islands, made a
fresh Assault on them, but with no better Success than before. There is still
to be seen in Ancient Records Claus. 23. E. 1. M. 6. Cedul. Brevia facta de
Petitionibus hominum GERES. and Gernes retornatis de Consilio in Autumpno. Un.
Regni Regis E. 23. Vid. Ryley's Placita Parliamentaria in Appendice, page 467,
etc.
the Provision that was made, by Order from the King, for the Widows and
Orphans of such of the Inhabitants as were slain in the Repulse they gave to
the Enemy, with Gratifications to others that had signalized themselves, or
sustained any considerable Loss on that Occasion. Which Gratifications were
among others, extended to some of the Clergy Ibid. Edwardus, etc. dilecto and
fideli suo, Henrico de Cobham Custodi Insular. de Gerneseye and GERESSEY, and
ejus Locum Tenenti, Salutem. Quia accepimus quod Ecclesia S. Elirij in Insula
de GERSEY vacat ad praesens per Mortem Nicholai de Ponte quondam Parsonae
ejusdem Ecclesiae, and nos Ranulphum filium Petri Maret Clericum, quia gravia
and diversa dampna sustinuit per Conflictum nuper habitum in praedicta Insula
inter Homines ejusdem Insula, and quosdam alienigenas inimicos nostros,
gratiose prosequi volentes, vobis mandamus quod eidem Ranulpho Ecclesiam --
prae aliis -- praeferatis -- T. Meipso apud Westminster. 29 die Augusti An. Regni
nostri 23.
who, in these Islands, have always been Examples to others of Zeal and
Affection to the English Government.

EDWARD II. EDW. III.
I shall pass over the Reign of EDWARD II, and come to that of EDWARD III,
wherein some things more memorable occurr concerning these Islands, in relation
to the French. No sooner did K. Edward III proclaim his Title to France, and
thereupon a War ensued betwixt him and Philip de Valois, but the French, to
make a Diversion, invaded these Islands again. Hugh Queriel Admiral of France,
made a Descent upon Guernezey, An. 1339, MSS.
laid siege to Castle Cornet, took it, and held it 3 Years. The Loss of that
Island did but minister an Occasion to the Inhabitants of JERSEY, to show their
Fidelity to the Crown of England. They raised a Contribution of 6400 Marks
(which was a great Sum in those Days for so small an Island,) for the Recovery
of Guernezey; and upon the Approach of the English Fleet (under command of
Reynold of Cobham, and Geffrey de Harcourt, who were sailing into Normandy with
Recruits for the King, and in their way were ordered to attempt the Reduction
of Guernezey) went out, joined the Fleet, and assisted the English in retaking
both the Island and Castle of Guernezey: Many JERSEY-Men of Note losing
honorably their Lives upon that Occasion; as the Seigneurs de Vinchelez, de
Matravers, des Augrez, de Garris, de La Hougue, Lempriere, and other Leaders
named for their special Service, besides private Adventurers.

Not long after Alain le Breton, a famous Sea rover, infested both Islands,
especially Guernezey; though rather in the way of Piracy, than of downright
Invasion. Of him it is that Guillelmus Brito an Ancient Poet, speaks in his
Philippidos Lib. VII. page 307.
.

Et qui rostratis Navibus secat aequor Alanus, Piratas secum assumat, quibus
utitur ipse Cum Grenesim rebus juvat expoliare. -- So many repeated Hostilities
of the French against these Islands had awakened the Parliament in England, and
had produced a Resolution still extant upon Record Sir Rob. Cotton's Abridgment
of the Records in the Tower of London, page 29.
to move the King to set out his Fleet and provide for the Defense of the Isles
of JERSEY and Guernezey.

Anno 1354, an Interview was agreed on betwixt K. Edward, and the King of
Navarre, who was then fallen off from the French; and the Place pitched upon by
both Kings for that Interview was the Isle of JERSEY Sir Robert Cotton ut sup.
page 90.
. Accordingly K. Edward sets out from the Thames toward JERSEY, with a Royal
Navy, but by contrary Winds was put back to Portsmouth; where understanding
that the King of Navarre had reconciled himself to the French, and declined the
Meeting, he sailed to Calais, and we lost the honor we should have received
from the Presence of those two Great Kings, and the Splendour of their Courts
amongst Us.

While the Victorious Edward pursued his Conquests, and dyed the Fields of
Cressy and Poitiers with the best Blood of France, these Islands were safe
under the Protection and Shade of his Laurels. But when, in the declining time
of that great King, and after the Death of his Son, the Noble Prince Edward,
commonly called the Black Prince, the Fortune of the English in France began to
forsake them, these Islands were exposed to greater Danger than before. In the
Year 1372. Evans, the pretended Prince of Wales, sailing from Barfleur in
Normandy, with a Fleet of French Ships, Landed in Guernezey Hollingshead ad
Annum 1372. page 407. Froissard. Tom. 1. Fu^illet 247. Histoire de Bertrand du
Guesclin, Connestable de France, par du Chastelet. L. 5.. 12. page 205.
, but finding greater Resistance from the Castle than he expected, gave over
the Design, and departed out of the Island. Four Years after, the two Admirals
of France and Castile, attacqued the same Island Chronique de Flandres,
anciennement composee par Autheur uncertain; mise en Lumiere par Denis Sauvage
de Fontenailles Historiographe du Roy Tres-Chrestien Henry II. a Lion MDLXII.
Chapter CIV. Page 217.
. The French ransomed it for a Sum of Money; but the Castillan returning,
carried away all he could. The Strength, and brave Defense of the Castle, being
still the Preservation of the Island, and a means to keep it in the Possession
of the English.

Nor was JERSEY less exposed to these Insults than Guernezey. Anno 1374, three
Years before K. Edward died, Bertrand du Guesclin Histoire de Bertrand du
Guesclin. L. 6.. 6. page 242. Dargentre. Histoire de Bretagne L. 7. Chap. 263.
page 597.
Constable of France, famous for his many Victories over the English in that
unlucky Turn of their Affairs in France, at the Head of an Army of above 10000
Men, wherein were the Duke of Bourbon, and the Flower of the French Chivalry,
passed suddenly from Bretagne into JERSEY, and encamped before Gouray Castle,
the same that is now called Mont-Orgueil, into which the Principal Persons of
the Island had retired upon landing of the French. The Siege lasted some
Months, and was carried on with great Bravery on both Sides; That Fortress
being as valiantly defended by those within, as it was vigorously assaulted by
those without. After many violent Attacks, the Constable withdrew, leaving many
of his best Men slain under the Walls. This was almost the only Place, which,
in that general Defection from the English, withstood the Arms of that
fortunate and renowned Commander.

There had been, before this, a Treaty; wherein the King had laid down his
Claim to Normandy; but being deeply sensible of the Importance of these
Islands, and much pleased with that constant Fidelity they had always expressed
to him, he caused an especial Clause to be inserted in the Treaty Tho.
Walsingham, Hist. Angl. ad An. 1360. seu 34. Edw. III. page 176. Rex vero
Angliae and Haeredes sui, omnes Insulas, patriis praedictis adjacentes,
tenebunt, una cum INSULIS quas tenet in praesenti.
that those Islands which he possessed on the Coast of France should remain his
as before.

RICH. II.
I find little Action relating to these Islands in the time of RICHARD II, Son
of the Black Prince; nor much in that of HENRY IV. HENRY IV.
This only excepted, viz. that Penhouet Dargentre Hist. de Bretagne L. X. Chapter
CCCXLIV. Page 794.
Admiral of Bretagne, having worsted the English in a Sea-sight, pursued his
advantage, and entered the Isles of JERSEY, and Guernezey, which he plundered,
but durst not sit down before the Castles. This happened An. 1404.

HENRY V.
HENRY V was no sooner on the Throne but he renewed the Claim to France, and
with much Glory recovered all that had been lost since the Death of the Black
Prince, with considerable Accessions. That brave and warlike King, knowing the
advantageous Situation of these Islands, made great use of them in the
Prosecution of the War. He added much to the beauty and strength of Gouray
Castle in JERSEY, Camb. de Insul. Brit. p. 854. Ad Ori^ntale latus qua
Constantiam Urbem ex adverso prospectat, praeruptae rupi Castrum affigitur
Munitissimum, elato nomine Mont-Orgueil, quod Plurimum Henrico V. Instauratori
debet.
gave it the proud Name of Mont-Orgueil which it bears this day; made it a
place of Arms, and one of his chief Magazines of War, and resolved, so far as
Art could do it, to render it impregnable.

This strong Castle fell nevertheless into the hands of the French, in the
latter end of the weak Reign of King HENRY VI. Chronique MSS. de L'Isle de
JERSEY. Chapter V. HENRY VI.
which happened thus. During the Contestation betwixt that unfortunate Prince
and Edward IV, for the Crown, a French NObleman, named Peter de Breze Count de
Maulevrier, raised Forces in France, and brought them with him into England, to
support the Title of Henry, against that of Edward. He had before contracted
with Queen Margaret, Wife of Henry, (who was a French Woman, and had called in
the Count to the Assistance of her Husband) that, in consideration of so
important a Service, the Islands of JERSEY, Guernezey, Alderney and Serk,
should be made over to him, to hold them for himself, and his Heirs for ever,
independently from the Crown of England. The Bargain being struck, the Count
sends one Surdeval to seize upon Mont-Orgueil Castle in JERSEY. The French
coming in the Night, got into the Castle by surprise, or (as others think) by
the connivence and Treachery of the English Commander, who being a creature of
the Queen, had secret Orders to deliver it up. The Count himself came some time
after into this Island; and though he showed all imaginable kindness to the
Inhabitants, inviting them by the offer of many large Grants and Privileges to
acknowledge him, and renounce their Allegiance to England, he could never
prevail on the Inclinations of a People who were enraged to see themselves sold
to the French, a Nation which they hated; insomuch that in about Six years
time, he could never make himself Master of above half the Island: Philip de
Carteret, Seigneur of S. Oven, maintaining the King of England's Authority in
the other half; during which time frequent Skirmishes happened betwixt both
Parties.

EDW. IV.
In this State things remained till the Death of Henry VI. and the quiet
Possession of the Throne by EDWARD IV. For then Sir Richard Harliston
Vice Admiral of England, coming to Guernezey with a Squadron of the King's
Ships, Philip de Carteret sent to him for Succor. They agreed that while the
English Fleet blockt up Mont-Orgueil Castle by Sea, the Islanders should
besiege it by Land. The Castle was reduced by Famine; and the French were once
more driven quite out of the Island. The Islanders got much Honor by this
Siege, and had thereupon a new Charter granted them, with special mention of
their good Service on this occasion, and the said good Service has ever since
been inserted in all our Charters to this Day, in perpetuam rei Memoriam.

So many ill Successes one after another, made the French lay aside for awhile
the thoughts of these Islands; so that we hear no more of them under EDW. V.
RICH. III. HENRY VII. HEN. VIII.
the Reigns of EDWARDV, RICHARDIII, HENRY VII, and HENRY VIII. But I must not
omit to mention the Coming of Henry VII. to JERSEY in this Interval. He was
then only Earl of Richmond, and fled from the Cruelty and Tyranny of Richard.
Whether out of Design, or forced by contrary Winds in his Passage into
Bretagne, he put into this Island, where he lay concealed till he found an
Opportunity to get over. Being a wise and discerning Prince, he observed some
Defects in our Constitution, which he amended when he came to the Crown,
enlarging our Charter, and enacting several Ordinances for the better
Government of this Island.

EDW. VI.
A War breaking out betwixt our King EDWARD VI, and Henry II. of France, the
French reassumed their former Thoughts of bringing these Islands under their
Subjection Hollingshead ad Annum 1549. page 1055. Histoire de Normand Chapter 7.
page 284.
, flattering themselves with greater hopes of Success than ever, from the
Minority of that King, and the Troubles with which his Government was then
perplexed. In the Year 1549, they set a Fleet out from St. Malo's (a Town, the
ill effects of whose neighborhood we have often resented) and seized on the
little Isle of Sark, which was then Un-inhabited, where they planted Colonies,
and built Forts. That Island is seated in the Middle and Center of the rest;
which made the French believe, that by securing that, they would with continual
Alarms and Incursions so harrass the others, that they would not long hold out
against them. They began with Guernezey, where they set upon a Fleet of English
Ships, which were at Anchor in the Road before the Town. Most of the Captains
and Officers were ashore asleep in their Beds; which gave the French some
advantage in the beginning of the Fight. But the whole Town being awakened with
the noise of the Canon, and the Ships soon manned, the Fight was maintained,
and the French repulsed. From thence they sailed to JERSEY, and landed at
Bouley-Bay in the North of the Island, but through the Courage and Bravery of
the Islanders, were beaten back to their Ships; many being killed and wounded
on both Sides.
Among the Slain on our side, was found a Popish Priest of this Island, whose
Love to the English Government and the Liberties of his Country, prevailing
above the Discontents which the Change of Religion that was made in that Reign
wrought on Men of his Order, made him appear that day in the foremost Ranks. An
Example to be recommended to those of that Persuasion in England, who out of an
unjust Aversion to the present Establishment would call in the French, and
subject their native Country to a Foreign Power. The poor JERSEY-Priest was
much the honester Man, and the better Patriot.

Q. MARY.
Queen MARY's Reign has been thought inglorious for the Loss of Calais, taken by
the French, after the English had possessed it above 200 Years. It was
nevertheless in the Time of this Queen, that the Isle of Sark was retaken from
the French; though I cannot say the Recovery of so small an Island countervails
the Loss of a Town, that was one of the Keys of France. The French Colony in
that Island was grown very thin; The solitariness of the Place, and the want of
Necessaries, but chiefly the ill Prospect of their Affairs, and their
Despondency of ever becoming Masters of the other Islands, causing many of them
to desert, and return into France; so that few able to bear Arms were left for
the Defense of the Place. And yet even those few were enough to have held it
against a whole Army. For the Land is so high, and unaccessible on all Sides,
and the Steps leading up so steep and narrow, that one Man armed only with
Stones, may't have kept out a Thousand. This Island notwithstanding was taken
by a small Company of Flemings, Subjects of K. Philip, (Husband of Q. Mary,)
who coming in the Night to one of those Paths, and finding it unguarded, went
up without Resistance, and took the French Prisoners. This is the Account which
we have of that surprise from a Manuscript History of JERSEY, written by an
Anonymous Author in the Year 1585 Chronique de l'Isle de JERSEY, MSS. Chapter XXXIV.
But Sir Walter Raleigh, who was sometime Governor of JERSEY, and (being a
sagacious and inquisitive Person) informed himself exactly of all the
Singularities of these Islands, gives a very different Relation of it. For he
says it was taken by a Stratagem, which he prefers to many of the Ancients.
The Island of Sark, says he, Hist. of the World, Part I, Book IV. Chapter II.. 18.
joining to Guernezey, and of that Government, was in Queen Mary's time, (he
should have said in King Edward the VIth's time) surprised by the French, and
could never have been recovered again by strong hand, having Cattle and Corn
enough upon the place to feed so many Men as will serve to defend it, and being
every way so inaccessible that it might be held against the Great Turk: Yet by
the industry of a Gentleman of the Netherlands it was in this sort regained. He
anchored in the Road with one Ship, and pretending the Death of his Merchant,
besought the French that they might bury their Merchant in hallowed ground, and
in the Chapel of that Isle; Offering a Present to the French of such
Commodities as they had aboard. Whereto (with condition that they should not
come ashore with any weapon, no not so much as with a Knife) the French
yielded. Then did the Flemings put a Coffin into their Boat, not filled with a
dead Carcass, but with Swords, Targets, and Harquebuzes. The French received
them at their Landing, and searching every of them so narrowly as they could
not hide a Penknife, gave them leave to draw their Coffin up the Rocks with
great difficulty. Some part of the French took the Flemish-boat, and rowed
aboard their Ship to fetch the Commodities promised, and what else they
pleased, but being entered, they were taken and bound. The Flemings on the
Land, when they had carried their Coffin into the Chapel, shut the door to
them, and taking their Weapons out of the Coffin set upon the French: They run
to the Cliff, and cry to their Companions aboard the Fleming to come to their
Succor. But finding the Boat charged with Flemings, yielded themselves, and
the Place. I have seen a Manuscript MSS. Ph. de Carteret Baronetti, Domini de
S. Oven, nuper de^uncti. S^rcenses Insulani, praed^ avidi, adulteriis pharis
and ignibus nautas and mercatores noctu ad Naufragium impellebant, ut eis
jactura Commodo cederet; quod cum aliis Riensibus quibusdam Anglis and
Winchelsensibus factum est; unde commoti ipsi, cum non possent palam ulcisci
injuriam, ^an^ dolo rem aggressi sunt. Finxerunt mortuum Dominum navis; rogant
Insulanis ut liceat eis in suo Sacello s^pelire; concesserunt, ea tamen Lege ut
comitarentur Corpus inermes. Rienses igitur Pheretrum implerunt arm^s and
ensibus; pro mortuo efferunt; Insulam and sacellum sunt ingressi; Pheretrum
aperiunt: incautos Sercenses invadunt, ob^runcant, Insulam vastant.
which confirms the taking of this Island by such a Stratagem, but the other
Circumstances of Time and Persons agree not with the foregoing Story.

Q* ELIZABETH.
From Queen Mary's time to this, the French never set foot in a hostile manner
on JERSEY ground. Queen ELIZABETH had scarce any War with France all the time
of her long and prosperous Reign. She had another Enemy to deal with, viz the
Spaniard: Whose aims at the universal Monarchy were defeated by the Felicities
of that Queen. But that incomparable Princess knowing that it is a great part of
Wisdom in the profoundest Peace to provide for War, had even at that time a
careful eye on the safety of these Islands. She begun that noble Castle in
JERSEY, which from her is to this day called Castle Elizabeth, but lived only
to finish that part of it which is above the Iron-gate, and is called the upper
Ward; the lower parts having been since added to that Fortification.

K. JAMES I.
King JAMES was a most pacifick Prince. He thought these Islands in no danger
while he lived, and therefore took the less care for the Military defense of
them. But it was he that settled Religion in JERSEY, and that brought Us to a
Conformity to the Church of England. A work doubtless more acceptable to God,
and for which his Name will be perpetuated amongst Us no less than if he had
environed this Island with a wall of Brass. A work of all others the most
congruous to his peaceable Reign. Thus when God resolved to have a Temple among
the Jews, he chose the peaceable Reign of Solomon, and not that of David, though
otherwise a most excellent Prince, because he had been a Man of Blood.

K. CHARL.
We are come to a Reign full of Troubles; that of King CHARLES I, numbered among
the Good, but unfortunate Princes: This Island had a deep share in the
Sufferings of her King. His early Match with a Daughter of France, could not
hinder a War from breaking out soon after betwixt the two Crowns. In the Year
1627. the King sent Forces under the command of the Duke of Buckingham for the
relief of Rochel. And though that Expedition proved unsuccessfull, yet the
Landing of an English Army in the Isle of Rhee, was so resented by the French,
that they resolved to revenge the Affront by a like Descent the Year following
on the Isles of JERSEY and Guernezey. Which design had been certainly executed,
had it not been timely discovered, and notice thereof given to the Council in
England. Whereupon the Earl of Danby (as Dr. Heylin Survey of the Estate of the
two Islands, Guernezey and JERSEY, page 182.
who attended him in the Voyage, informs us) was ordered to go over into these
Islands, and to provide for the Safety and Security of them. Which was done
accordingly. The Garrisons were reinforced; the Magazines were stored with all
manner of warlike Provisions; the People were exhorted to remember their
ancient Loyalty to the Crown of England, and all things were put into a posture
of Defense. But the French came not.

And to strengthen more and more the Isle of JERSEY against any Attempts that
might be made from France, new Fortifications were added to Elizabeth Castle;
which about that time became the Residence of the Governor. Then began to be
built that part of it called the lower Ward, which takes up the ground whereon
stood once the Church and Abbey of St. Helier: which work was carried on, and
finished in this Reign.

The Flame of an unnatural War being soon after kindled in the bowels of the
Kingdom, betwixt the King and his discontented Subjects, the Island of JERSEY
was secured for the King by Sir George de Carteret, who held it several years
against the whole power of the Rebels. It pleased God in his infinite Wisdom to
permit those wicked men to get the better of their King. They beat his Armies
out of the Field, and seized his Person. Yet even amidst all their
Prosperities, this little Island was still a Thorn and a Goad in their sides.
Ten or twelve small Frigates and Privateers were fitted out of JERSEY. These so
infested the Channel, that, not to mention the many Prizes they daily took from
them, and brought in here, and into St. Malo's, not an English ship could pass
the Channel without Convoy.
Which brought so great an Interruption to Trade, and Charge to the Nation, that
it was then understood of what Consequence the keeping of these Islands is to
England; and a Resolution was taken to spare no Cost for the Reduction of
JERSEY. This is an example which methinks should never be forgotten* and I
purposely insist thereon to show what a fatal Error it would be to suffer the
French to possess themselves of these Islands (seated as they are in the
Channel) where instead of their own shallow Bays and Creeks, they would find
good Roads and safe Harbors, if not for their greatest Fleets, at least for
their Pyracies.

While matters stood thus in England, Prince Charles (who was afterward King
Charles II) came to JERSEY, where he was received with a Joy equal to the
Honor we received from his Presence amongst Us; though even this was not without
a great mixture of Sorrow for the Detention of his Royal Father, who was then
close Prisoner in Hurst Castle, a most unhealthy place, seated on a Point of
Land that shoots far into the Sea, destitute of fresh water, and annoyed with
the Salt and stinking Vapors that arise out of the neighboring Marshes, and
for that very reason probably made choice of by the infamous Regicides to weary
the good King out of his Life, whom they were resolved one way or other to
remove out of the World. A Project was formed by some of our Loyal Islanders to
rescue the afflicted King out of his Captivity, and to bring him to JERSEY,
where the Prince then was. The King was privi^y acquainted with the Design, and
was pleased to Consent to his removal to JERSEY. But when the thing came to be
executed, it was unhappily defeated by the vigilance of his Majesty's Keepers,
or rather by an unsearchable Providence which had decreed to make of that best
of Kings the greatest Example of injured and oppressed Innocence that has been
in the World since our blessed Savior. It is nevertheless no small
satisfaction to Us, that, while too many others of his Majesty's Subjects
looked unconcerned on his unparalled Sufferings, we did our honest endeavors
for the Preservation of his sacred Life, so that at whosesoever door the Guilt
of that Blood may lie, we of this Island have, blessed be God, no otherwise
contributed to the shedding of it, than by our sins in general, which, added to
the heap of the sins of the Nation, drew down that heavy Judgment on Us all.

K. CHARL. ^^.
After the barbarous Murder of that blessed King, his Son, the undoubted Heir of
all his Dominions, was immediately Proclaimed, and his Title recognized in
JERSEY. His Majesty was pleased once again to make some residence amongst Us.
He came the Second time to JERSEY, attended by his Royal Brother the Duke of
York, and several of the Loyal Nobility that adhered to him in his Exile.
Neither must I omit a very singular Honor which his Majesty did our little
Island during his abode there. He himself took a Survey of it, and being well
skilled in the Mathematics, did with his own Royal hand draw a Map of it, so
accurately done, that, to this day, it is carefully preserved among a
Collection of other noble Curiosities of Art and Nature, in the Here Van
Adlershelm's famous Cabinet, at Leipsich in Germany Dr. Brown's Travels, p. 172.
, where it is seen by Travelers.

About this time Charles Fort was built, which is an Out-work to Elizabeth
Castle, that commands the entrance and approach to it on the Land-side

His Majesty being invited to a Treaty with the Scots, he left JERSEY again,
but so highly satisfied with those many Demonstrations of duty and affection,
which, in his greatest Distress, he had received from the Islanders, that,
while he lived, he was pleased to retain a grateful, and a generous Sense of
them.

The Treaty with the Scots went on successfully. The King was Crowned at
Scoone, Jan. 1. 1650, and soon after came into England at the head of a Royal
Army to dispute his Right with the Usurpers of his Kingdoms. The two Armies
encountered at Worcester Sept. 3. 1651; where it pleased God again to give the
Rebels such Success, that the King not only lost the day, but was forced to
abscond with great danger of his Person, till he found a passage into France,
where he Landed the 22d. of October following.

In the mean while, the Parliament in England was making great Preparations for
the Reduction of JERSEY; being strangely alarmed at the taking of so many of
their Vessels by the Privateers of this Island Whitlock's Memorials An. 1649.
Jan. 23. Letters that the Prince sent to Dunkirk for some Frigates for JERSEY;
that he gave Commissions to French Renegadoes to take Prizes of all English
Merchants, and to bring them to JERSEY. That they took a good Ship of Lime --
Anno 1650. Feb. 21. Letters that several Merchant men have been taken on the
Western Coast by the JERSEY Pirates. -- Febr. 26. Letters that two Dutchmen
laded with Salt, came to an Anchor within half a League of Dartmouth Castle.
That presently after two JERSEY Pirates came up with them, cut their Cables,
and carried them away. That the Castle shot at them, but could not reach them.
-- March 1. 1650. Letters of JERSEY Pirates very bold upon the Western Coast --
March 6. Letters of several Ships taken by the Pirates of JERSEY -- March 15.
Of the want of Frigates upon the Western Seas to keep in the Pirates of JERSEY.
-- March 17. Of the JERSEY Pirates taking several Merchant ships, and none of
the Parliament Frigates to help them. -- March 19. Letters of the Pyracies
committed by those of JERSEY. -- November. 30. Letters that the JERSEY Pirates
took two Dartmouth Ships, and three other Ships. -- Anno 1651. April 17.
Letters of the JERSEY Pirates taking two Barks laden in sight of Portland. --
April 21. Of more Prizes taken by the JERSEY Pirates, and of Captain Bennet's
fighting with two of them four hours -- July 14. That five English Vessels were
taken by Boats of JERSEY carrying four or five Guns apiece. -- July 18. Letters
of two Prizes taken by a JERSEY Frigate, of eight Guns, twenty four Oars, and
eighty Men; and that there were twelve of those Frigates belonging to JERSEY. --
August 7. Letters of much Damage done by the JERSEY Pirates. -- Sept. 27.
Letters of the JERSEY Pirates doing much mischief upon the Western Coast.
, who continued to annoy the Channel, and were grown so bold that they would
set upon English Ships in the very Harbors. A Fleet of about Eighty Sails,
increased afterward to a greater Number, was set out for that Expedition,
under command of Admiral Blake; while Major General Hains headed the Forces
designed for the Descent. The Fleet appeared in sight of the Island, October
20. 1651. and the same day came to an Anchor in St. Ouen's Bay. The Bay lies
open to a Westerly wind, which blows in so violently the greatest part of the
Year, and rolls in such a Sea, that it is very unsafe for Shipping. But the same
unaccountable Success that used to attend the Rebels in other places attended
them here. All the time they lay in this Bay, they had so smooth a Sea, that,
in the Memory of man, the like had not been known at that Season of the year.
Which was no small Discouragement to our People, who thought it in vain to
sight against men that seemed to have the very Winds and Seas to sight for
them. But that indeed which quite dispirited them, was the unhappy News they
received at that time of the King's defeat at Worcester, which came accompanied
with a Report, (though false) of his being taken in endeavoring to escape. This
brought such a Consternation amongst them, and so sunk their Courage, that
they, who at another time would have most gladly sacrificed their Lives to
promote his Majesty's Affairs, were ready to have laid down their Arms, had not
the extraordinary Conduct and Gallantry of their Governor, Sir George de
Carteret, brought them on to fight.

The first day, and the night following, nothing was attempted by the Enemy
Relation MSS. de la Prise de l' Isle and d^s Chasteaux de JERSEY, par les
Rebels d' Angleterre. Trouv^e parmy les Papiers de f^u Sire George de
Carteret.
. The next day, October. 21. early in the Morning, their Cannon began to play;
which was answered by several little Forts and Redoubts in the Bay, and by
twenty four Brass-Field-Pieces which attend the Militia upon occasion. Some of
the lesser Frigates drew so near the Shore that they made use of their
Small-shot, which was answered with equal Bravery by our Men, who wading into
the very water, fired briskly upon the Enemies, calling them Rebels, and
Traitors, and Murderers of their King. The Battery lasted Four hours, after
which the whole Fleet drew off, and went to St. Brelard's Bay (distant about a
League from that of S. Oven) where being all come to an Anchor, they sent back
a Squadron to St. Oven, the place where they were before, and sent others
toward St. Aubin's Bay, and toward St. Clement, and Grouville, meaning to
tire and distract our Troops by making a show as though they intended to Land in
all those different places at once; and accordingly several Companies were
detached to attend their Motion: The main Body of the Fleet lying still in St.
Brelard's Bay, together with the best part of the Camp to oppose their Landing.

October 22. (the same day on which the King Landed in France, though the good
News came not to Us till some weeks after) a little after Midnight, and by
Moonshine, the Enemies were observed to ship off in several flat bottomed
Boats, which they had brought for that Service, ten or twelve Battalions of
Foot, to the number of about 4000 Men (as was conjectured) in order to make a
Descent, which they attempted by break of day, under the covert of their Ships,
which drew as near the shore as the nature of the place would give them leave;
sparing neither Powder nor Shot on this occasion. But seeing themselves beaten
from two small Forts that had been raised in the Bay, and the Islanders drawn
up upon the Sands in a posture to receive them, they thought fit to retire to
their Ships, which forthwith weighed Anchor, and returned to St. Oven, leaving
only 19 men of War in St Brelard's Bay.

This obliged the Governor to follow them again to St. Oven, after he had
posted some Companies of the Militia, his own Company of Fuzeliers, and all the
Dragoons, to observe those that remained at St. Brelard. The Enemies being come
to St. Oven directed their Course Northwards, to L'Etack, the furthest Point of
that Bay, as if they had designed to Land there, whither they were accordingly
followed by the Islanders; but it soon appeared their Design was only to
harrass our Troops, for they suddenly tackt about, and steered to the opposite
Point, which Motion was likewise attended by our Forces on shore: The Enemies
playing all the while furiously with their Cannon, which was answered in the
same manner as the day before.

The Night coming on, it was thought necessary to send the Troops, which had
been now three Days and two Nights under their Arms, and had been extremely
fatigued by so many Marches and Counter-marches, and were also very much
incommoded by a small Rain that had not ceased to fall since they were in
Action, to refresh in the neighboring Villages: The noble and indefatigable
Governor, with a few Horse that attended him, not departing all the while from
the Shore. It must not be forgot, that the Enemies were that Day reinforced by
a Squadron of fresh Ships, which joined the Fleet a little before Night.

That fatal Night, which proved extraordinary Dark, and under the Favor of it,
the Enemies landed a Battalion; which, as soon as discovered, was with great
Bravery and Resolution charged by the Governor, and those few Horse that he had
about him. The Charge was bloody and desperate Whitlock's Memorials ad Annum
1651. Nov. 30. Letters that Col. Haines with his Forces anchored at JERSEY.
They were desperately charged by a Body of Horse. --
many of the Enemies being killed, and mortally wounded; but they poured on so
fast, that the Infantry that was dispersed about the Coast, had not time to
come up and second that small Body of Horse, which certainly did Wonders, by
the Confession of the very Enemies themselves; who have often said that such
another Charge would have made them retire, and perhaps give over their Design,
at least for that time. And it is probable they must have done so; For the next
Day such a Storm arose, that, had they not by a timely Reduction of the Island,
secured a Retreat into the Ports, a great Part of their Fleet must have
perished, and been dashed against the Rocks; nor could even that hinder one of
their biggest Frigates from being so lost, with all the Men in her.

The Enemies being landed marched up into the Island, where they committed
great Disorders, turning the Churches into Stables, abusing the Pulpits and
Communion-Tables in a manner not fit to be named. 'Twere needless to mention
the Sequestrations Whitlock ad An. 1651. Jan. 3. Ordered that the Commissioners
for compounding, do send over some to Sequester the Estates of those in JERSEY.
, Compositions for Estates, and other Vexations, which the Inhabitants of this
Island suffered at that time, since they were common to all that adhered to the
Royal Interest.

There was great rejoicing in England for the taking of JERSEY Id. ad An. 1651.
Nov. 3. The Parliament ordered that the Ministers of London and Westminster, do
on the 5th of November next, in their several Congregations, give thanks to God
for the gaining of JERSEY Island.
. The Parliament did once fear that the Islanders, in Despair, and rather than
own their Power, would give themselves up to the French. Or that the King urged
by his Necessities, would sell it to that Crown for a Sum of Money. It Is
certain that a Letter came about that time to the Men at Westminster Id. ad An.
1651. Letters that Jermyn and Greenvil were sent to Paris, to advise about
selling of JERSEY to the French.
, informing them that the late Earl of St. Albans, and Sir Richard Greenvil,
were actually at the French Court, treating about some such thing; And though it
proved a Mistake, it served to quicken the Resolutions of the Parliament, who
wisely considered, that if this Island with ten or twelve small Privateers, and
with none or little help from France, was able, merely by the Advantage and
Opportunity of its Situation, to obstruct the Trade and Commerce of the
Channel; how much more would it be able to do so, if, by falling into the Hands
of the French, it should become a Retreat to all the Corsairs of that Nation?

Though the Island was reduced, the Castles were not. Sir George de Carteret shut
himself up in that of Elizabeth, with several of the Gentry and Clergy, and the
Garrison, amounting in all to about 350 sighting Men. The Castle was besieged,
and several Batteries were raised on St. Helier's Hill, that did little
Execution besides beating down the Parapets, which were soon repaired. Then
came the News of his Majesty's safe Arrival in France; Whereupon Mr.
Poingdestre was dispatched to his Majesty, to acquaint him with the State of
the Garrison. In the mean while the Enemies seeing no great Effect of their
Cannon, caused a Battery of Mortars to be raised, and threw Bombs into the
Castle. One of which falling upon the Church, and breaking through two strong
Vaults, under which was laid a considerable Quantity of Powder, with other
Ammunitions and Stores, blew up the Church and the adjoining Buildings, burying
above Fourscore Persons of the Garrison under the Ruins thereof. This Accident
caused a great Consternation in the Garrison, and hastened the Reduction of the
Place. But before the Governor would hearken to a Treaty, he sent his Chaplain,
the Reverend Dr. Durel, late Dean of Windsor, (Mr. Poingdestre not being yet
returned) to the King, to know if he may't expect Succor, promising with a
very small Force, not only to keep the Castle, but to drive the Enemies quite
out of the Island. The King, after many fruitless Applications made to the
French Court, (which was then at Poitiers, and had begun by the Intrigues of
Cardinal Mazarin, to enter into a close Conjunction with the Powers in England)
sent back this Message to the Governor: That he was highly satisfied with his
Courage and Conduct in the Defense of the Island; Being convinced no man could
do more than he had done for his Service. That he was sorry the ill Posture of
his Affairs was such, that he could not promise him Relief: requiring him not
to throw away the Lives of so many brave Men, who may't be reserved for a
better Occasion: And, in short, to Capitulate, and Surrender on the best Terms
he could. Which was done accordingly some Weeks after, upon a very honorable
Composition; This being one of the last Garrisons that held for the King.

His Majesty being restored to his Crowns, was pleased to remember the Loyalty
and Services of his Subjects of JERSEY; and as he conferred many Marks of his
Royal Favor on Sir George de Carteret, so he ever expressed great Kindness to
the rest of the Inhabitants, whom he took into his particular Protection, among
whom reciprocally the Name of K. CHARLES is never mentioned to this Day, but
with singular Veneration and Honor. I shall only give one Instance of the Care
which that Prince took of our Safety. During the War betwixt France and this
Crown, which begun Anno 1665, he completed, and with great Expense finished the
Fortifications of Elizabeth Castle, causing the Green (that is betwixt the
lower Ward, and Charles Fort, where an Enemy may't have lodged himself in time
of a Siege) to be enclosed with Walls, and planted with Ordnance; there being
now no ground within half a Mile of the Castle, but what is taken into the
Fortification, or covered by the Sea at every half Flood; which has no doubt
brought a great Accession of Strength to the Place.

During the abovesaid War, one Vaucour Captain of Chauze (which is a small
Island possessed by the French, not far from JERSEY) was hanged in Guernezey,
by Sentence of the Court there, for endeavoring to surprise, and betray that
Island to the French.

K. JAMES II.
The Preservation of the Isle of JERSEY, in the late amazing Revolution, is,
under God, chiefly owing to the great Prudence and Resolution of our
Magistrates. There was then a Popish Commander, a Popish Priest, and many
Popish Soldiers, in Elizabeth Castle, Men that had Temptations and
Opportunities enough, in that Conjuncture, to have called in the French; and
indeed we were not without great Apprehensions of it. But matters were so
managed, that the Inhabitants were admitted to mount the Guard in the Castle by
equal Proportions with the Soldiers of the Garrison; which secured that strong
Fortress against any Design which that Party may't have had to deliver it up to
the Enemy. Nor must we pass under silence the signal Obligation we have to the
Right Honorable the Earl of Bath, who knowing the Danger we were in, did, upon
the Prince's Landing in the West, send his own Regiment to our Succor,
commanded by the Honorable Sir Bevil Granville his Lordship's Nephew, at whose
coming the Papists were disarmed, and the Island was secured for the Prince.

K. WILLIAM and Q. MARY.
And thus I have traced the History of this Island (so far as relates to my
present Design) through the Reigns of our former Kings, down to that of their
present Majesty's K. WILLIAM and Q. MARY; under whose auspicious Government, we
promise our selves the same Happiness and Security which we have enjoyed all
along under a long Series of so many Excellent Princes. His Majesty was pleased
with his own Royal Mouth to assure Us of his Care and Protection, when Mr.
Durel their Majesty's Advocate, together with the Author of these Sheets,
(introduced by the Right Honorable the Lord Jermyn, our Governor) had the
Honor to kiss his Majesty's hand, and to Present him, from the States of the
Island, the following Address Feb. 6. 1692. Gazet. No. 2844.


To the KING's and QUEEN's Most Excellent Majesty's.
The Humble Address of the States of Your Majesty's Island of JERSEY.
May it please Your Majesty's,
WE acknowledge Your Majesty's Great Goodness in giving Us Access to Your Royal
Throne, and leave to lay this Address at Your Sacred Feet. We are the
Representatives of a People, which, though distinguished from others of Your
Majesty's Subjects in Language and peculiar Customs, concurs with them in the
common Interest of Your Kingdoms, and yields to none in Zeal and Affection to
Your Majesty's Persons and Government. We are Your Majesty's Ancient Subjects;
The Remainder of that once goodly Patrimony which Your Renowned Progenitors had
on the Neighboring Continent; rescued from the unhappy Fate of the rest, by
that great care which Your Majesty's Predecessors, in all their Wars with
France, ever took for the Preservation of this important Place: extending upon
all Exigencies their Protection to Us; and constantly supplying Us with every
thing needful for Our Defense. Which, by the Blessing of God, has had that
Success, that though Our Situation exposes Us to a Formidable Enemy, who, in the
space of above Six Hundred years, has often projected to Invade Us, and has
sometimes actually attempted it, he has been as often repulsed. Insomuch that
after the Revolution of so many Ages, wherein whole Kingdoms have been torn
asunder and divided from each other, we have still, at this day, the Happiness
of remaining united, as at first, to the rest of Your Majesty's Dominions. We
humbly conceive this Island to be no less important to Your Majesty's now, than
when it it was thought so in the time of Your Royal Ancestors; since the known
Endeavors of the French, for some years, to increase their Naval Power, and
their late bold entering the Channel, and disputing with Your Majesty's the
Empire of the Sea, is a pregnant Proof how greatly it would prejudice the
Safety and Honor of Your Crown, should they become Masters of This and the
adjoining Islands. In this Conjuncture, we think it Our Duty to assure Your
Majesty's, that, with the Divine Assistance, we will defend this Place to the
utmost for Your Majesty's Service, and that We wish to live no longer than we
are Your Majesty's Subjects: Hoping Your Majesty's will believe, that, though Our
Tongues be French, Our Hearts and Swords are truly English. These two Last are
entirely Your Majesty's, and the First are employed in nothing more than in
celebrating Your Majesty's great Virtues, and just Praises; and in beseeching
Almighty God, who has so wonderfully placed You on the Throne, and who by so
many Miracles of his Providence has hitherto preserved You thereon, to
continue his powerful Protection over You; to go out with Your Fleets and
Armies; and to complete that Great Work for which he has so evidently designed
You; which is, to raise the Glory and Reputation of this Nation, to put a stop
to the boundless Ambition of the unjust Disturber of the Quiet of Christendom,
and to procure a safe and lasting Peace to Europe. We are,

May it please Your Majesty's, Your Majesty's most Faithful, and Most Loyal
Subjects, etc.

I cannot better conclude this Chapter than with some of those remarkable
Testimonies which our Kings have given of our Loyalty and Zeal for their
Service, in the many Charters by them granted to the Inhabitants of this
Island. I shall begin with that of Edward III, who had a particular kindness
for this Island, and (as was said before) made great use of it in his Wars with
France.

EDOARDUS Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, and Franciae, ac Dominus Hiberniae,
Omnibus ad quos Praesentes Litterae pervenerint, Salutem.
-- Sciatis -- quod Nos grata memoria recensentes, quam constanter, and
magnanimiter, dilecti and fideles Homines Insularum Nostrarum de JERESEY,
Guerneseye, Sark and Aureney, in Fidelitate nostra, and Progenitorum nostrorum
Regum Angliae, semper hactenus perstiterunt, and quanta, pro Salvatione
dictarum Insularum, and nostrorum Conservatione Jurium and Honoris ibidem,
sustinuerunt tam Pericula Corporum, quam suarum dispendia Facultatum, ac
proinde volentes ipsos favore prosequi gratioso, Concessimus, etc.

I shall next mention that of Edward IV, in whose time the Inhabitants did that
good Service in recovering Mont-Orgueil Castle from the French who had
surprised it.

EDOARDUS Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, and Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae,
Omnibus ad quos Praesentes Litterae pervenerint, Salutem.
Cum Nobilissimus Progenitor noster inclytae Memoriae Richardus quondam Rex
Angliae, and Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae, post Conquestam Secundus, per
Literas suas Patentes, datas apud Westmonasterium octavo die Julii, anno Regni
sui decimo octavo, in consideratione benigestus, and magnae Fidelitatis, quos
in Ligeis and Fidelibus suis Gentibus and Communitatibus Insularum suarum de
JERESEY, Guerneseye, Sark, and Aureney indies invenit, de gratia sua speciali
concessit pro se and haeredibus suis, quantum in eo fuit, eisdem Gentibus and
Communitatibus suis, quod ipsi and successores sui in perpetuum, forent liberi
and quieti, in Omnibus Civitatibus, villis Mercatoriis, and Portibus infra
Regnum nostrum Angliae, de omnimodis Theloniis, Exactionibus, Custumis, taliter
and eodem modo quo Fideles Ligei sui in sao Regno praedicto extiterunt: ita
tamen quoddictae Gentes and Communitates suae, and haeredes, and successores
sui praedicti, been and fideliter se gererent erga ipsum Progenitorem nostrum,
and haeredes and successores suos in perpetuum, prout in Literis illis before
continetur; Nos continuam Fidelitatem Gentis and Communitatis dictae Insulae de
JERESEY before intendentes, Literas praedictas, and omnia and singula in eis
contenta, quoad Gentem and Communitatem ejusdem Insulae de JERESEY, acceptamus,
approbamus, and eidem Genti and Communitati, haeredibus and successoribus suis,
per Praesentes ratificamus, and Confirmamus. Et ulterius Nos Memoriae
reducentes, quam valide, viriliter, and constanter, dictae Gens and Communitas
ejusdem Insulae de JERESEY nobis and Progenitoribus nostris perstiterunt, and
quanta Pericula and Perdita pro Salvatione ejusdem Insulae, and Reductione
Castri nostri de Mont-Orgueil sustinuerunt, de Vberiori gratia nostra
Concessimus, etc.

Queen Elizabeth's Charter begins thus.

ELIZABETH Dei Gratia, etc.

Quum Dilecti and Fideles Ligei and Subditi nostri, Ballivus and Jurati Insulae
nostrae de JERESEY, ac caeteri Incolae and Habitatores ipsius Insulae, infra
Ducatum nostrum Normanniae, and Predecessores eorum, a tempore cujus contrarii
Memoria hominum non existit, per speciales Chartas, Concessiones,
Confirmationes, and Amplissima Diplomata, illustrium Progenitorum ac
Antecessorum Nostrorum, tam Regum Angliae, quam Ducum Normanniae, ac aliorum,
quamplurimis Juribus, Jurisdictionibus, Privilegiis, Immunitatibus,
Libertatibus, and Franchisiis, libere, quiet and inviolabiliter usi, freti,
and gravisi fuerunt, tam infra Regnum nostrum Angliae, quam alibi infra Dominia
and Loca Ditioni nostrae subjecta, ultra citraque Mare, quorum open and
beneficio, Insulae praenominatae, ac Loca, Maritima praedicta, in fide,
obedientia, and servitio tam Nostri quam corundem Progenitorum nostrorum,
constanter, fideliter, and inculpate perstiterunt, and perseveraverunt,
liberaque Commercia cum Mercatoribus, and aliis Indigenis ac Alienigenis, tam
Pacis quam Belli Temporibus, habuerunt and exercuerunt, etc. Quae omnia and
singula cujus and quanti Momentisint and fuerunt ad Tutelam and Conservationem
Insularum and Locorum Maritimorum praedictorum, in Fide, and Obedientia Coronae
nostrae Angliae, Nos, ut aequum est, perpendentes: Neque non immemores quam
fortiter, and fideliter, Insularii praedicti, ac caeteri Incolae and
Habitatores ibidem, Nobis and Progenitoribus nostris inservierunt, quantaque
Detrimenta, Damna, and Pericula, tam pro assidua Tuitione ejusdem Insulae and
Loci, quam pro recuperatione and Defensione Castri nostri de Mont Orgueil infra
praedictam Insulam nostram de JERESEY, sustinuerunt, indiesque sustinent: non
sol^m ut Regia nostra Benevolentia, favor, and affectus erga praefatos
Insularios illustri aliquo nostrae Beneficentiae Testimonio, ac certis
indiciis, comprobetur; verum etiam ut ipsi, and eorum Posteri deinceps in
perpetuum, prout antea, solitam and debitam Obedientiam erga Nos, haeredes, and
successores nostros teneant and inviolabiliter observent, has Litteras nostras
Patentes, Magno Sigillo Angliae roboratas, in forma quae sequitur, illis
concedere dignati sumus. Sciatis, etc.

Here follows the Preamble of a Commission under the Great Seal, directed to
Sir Robert Gardener, and Dr. James Hussy, who were sent to JERSEY in the time
of King James I, with the Character of Commissioners Royal, upon an
extraordinary occasion.

JAMES by the Grace of God, King of England, etc.
To Our trusty and wellbeloved, Sir Robert Gardener Knight, and James Hussy
Doctor of the Civil Law and one of the Masters of Our Court of Chancery,
Greeting.
Whereas in Our Princely Care, and earnest desire for the Establishment and
maintenance of Justice, and for the security and wealth of our Subjects
generally in all Our Realms and Dominions, We have been very mindful of the
good Estate of Our loving Subjects, the Inhabitants of Our Isles of JERSEY, and
Guernezey, and other their Dependances, a Portion remaining as yet unto Us in
possession of Our ancient Dukedom of Normandy; and have been, and are the
rather moved thereunto, both for their entire and inviolate Fidelity born by
them toward Us, and Our Predecessors Kings and Queens of this Realm of
England, testified and declared by many their Worthy and acceptable Services
toward this Our said Crown, and also in respect of their Situation furthest
remote from the rest of Our said Dominions, and for that
cause needing Our special Care and Regard to be had of them, being thereby
exposed to danger of an Invasion or Incursion of Foreign Enemies: And whereas
We are informed, etc. For these Causes know therefore that We have nominated
You, to be Our Commissioners, etc.

I shall only add this notable Passage of that great Oracle of the English Law,
the Lord Chief Justice Coke: IV. Part of the Instit. Chapter LXX. page 286.
The Isles of JERSEY and Garnsey, did of ancient time belong to the Duchy of
Normandy; but when King Henry I. had overthrown his elder Brother Robert Duke
of Normandy, he did unite to the Kingdom of England perpetually the Duchy of
Normandy, together with these Isles: And albeit King John lost the Possession
of Normandy, and King Henry III. took Money for it, yet the Inhabitants of
these Isles with great Constancy remained, and so to this day do remain, true
and faithful to the Crown of England. AND THE POSSESION OF THESE ISLANDS (BEING
PARCEL OF THE DVTCHY OF NORMANDY) ARE A GOOD SEISIN FOR THE KING OF ENGLAND OF
THE WHOLE DVTCHY.

CHAP. II. Description of the Island.
Situation of JERSEY.
THE Island of JERSEY is seated in the Bay of St. Michael, betwixt Cap de la
Hague, and Cap Forhelles; the first in Normandy, the last in Bretagne: both
which Promontories may be seen from thence in a clear Day. The nearest Shore is
that of Normandy, to which the Cut is so short, that Churches and Houses may be
easily discerned from either Coast.

Latitude and Longitude.
It lies (according to Mr. Samar^s his new Survey) in 49 Degrees. and 25 Min. of
Northern Latitude, which I take to be right enough. But when he gives it but 11
Degrees. and 30 Min. of Longitude, I cannot conceive where he fixes his first
Meridian. For to say nothing of the Isles of Azores, or those of Cap Verd,
which are at a much greater Distance, if he takes it (with Sanson, and the
French Geographers) from the Isle of Fero, the most Western of the Canaries, it
must be a great deal more than he says, viz. 18 Degrees. at the least; Or if he
takes it even from Tenarif, which, according to the best and latest
Observations, is 18 Degrees. from London, still the Longitude of JERSEY cannot be
less than 15 Degrees. 30 Min. It seems to me to have near the same Longitude as
Bristol in England.

Dimension.
In Length it exceeds not 12 Miles: The Breadth, where it is broadest, is
betwixt 6 and 7.

Figure.
The Figure resembles somewhat an Oblong long Parallelogram; the longest Sides
whereof are the North and South, the narrowest are the East and West. The North
Side is a continued Hill, or ridge of Cliffs, which are sometimes 50 Fathoms
high from the Water, and render the Island generally unaccessible on that Side.
The South side is much lower, and in some Places level, as it were, with the
Sea.

I cannot better compare it than to a Wedge, or to a Triangle Right-angle; the
Basis whereof may be supposed to be the Sea; the Cathetus, those high and
craggy Cliffs which it has on the North; and the Hypothenusa, the Surface of
the Island, which declines and falls gently from North to South, according to
the following Diagram.

JERSEY.
diagram

It receives two great Benefits from this Situation. The First is that those
Rivulets (for I cannot call them Rivers) with which this Island abounds, do by
this means run further, and receive a greater Increase and Accession of Waters
(whereby they become strong enough to turn betwixt 30 and 40 Mills that supply
the whole Country) than they would do, should the Island rise in the middle,
and all the Streams by an equal Course descend on every side to the Sea. This
Consideration would be of no great Moment to a larger Country, but is of
unexpressible Use and Advantage to so small an Island. The Second Benefit which
we receive from this Situation, is, that by this Declivity of the Land from N
to S, the Beams of the Sun fall more directly and perpendicularly thereon, than
if either the Surface was level, and Parallel to the Sea, or, which is worse,
declined from S to N, as it does in Guernezey. For there, by an odd opposition
to JERSEY, the Land is high on the S, and low on the N, which causes, if I may
so speak, a double Obliquity; the one from the Position of the Sun it self,
especially in time of the Winter Solstice; the other from the Situation of the
Land; and is probably the Reason of the great Difference observed in the
Qualities of Soil and Air in both Islands.

GUERNEZEY.
diagram

Inequality of the Surface.
This Declivity of JERSEY is not a smooth and even Declivity, as some may't
think. The Surface is extremely broken, and unequal, rising and falling almost
perpetually. For as on the N, it is an entire Hill, with few and short Vales,
so on the S, SE, and SW, it is cut into sundry fruitful Valleys, narrow at the
Beginning, but growing wider as they draw still nearer and nearer to the Sea;
where they end in several Flats of good Meadows and Pastures. Mr. Poingdestre
thought that this Unevenness and Inequality of the Surface added much to the
Quantity and Proportion of the ground, and that the Island was so much the more
Capacious and Productive, by how much the more the Surface was expanded, rising
with the Hills, and descending with the Valleys. But herein I must take the
Liberty to depart from so great a Man. It being demonstrable that a Country
that is exactly level, will contain as many Houses and Inhabitants, will
produce as many Trees, Plants, etc. as another Country, whose Surface is as
uneven and unequal as can be, but whose Basis or Plane is equal to the other.
Therefore the true Dimension of any Country is not to be taken from those
Gibbosities that swell the Surface in one Place, or those Profundities that
depress it in another, but from the true Basis or Plane of that Country.

Nature of the soil.
The Nature of the Mould and Soil admits great Variety; which proceeds from this
Difference of higher and lower Grounds. The higher Grounds are gritty,
gravelly, and some stony and rocky, but others are Excellently good. The Lower
are deep, heavy, and rich. Those near the Sea are light and sandy, yet not
equally so in all Places. But generally there is little barren Ground in the
whole Island; almost none that is not capable of receiving some profitable
Culture, and recompensing, one way or other, the Pains of the Laboring
Husbandman.

We must except a large Tract of once Excellent Lands, in the West of the
Island, which within these 200 Years have been so overrun with Sands, that the
Island on that side bears the Image of a Desert. This is said to have
happened by Divine Vengeance Ex MSS. Philippi de Carteret, Domini de S. Oven,
etc.] In Insula JERSEY Solum fuit soecundissimum, quod Canvetos appellant, in
Parochi^ Sancti Brelardi. Nemo se satis divitem in Insula putabat nis^ illic
praedium haberet. Contigit Anno Dom. ^irciter 1495, quod quinque Hispaui^^
Naves illic fecerunt media hyeme naufragium, ad Festum Cath. Qu^tuor naves
aquis obrutae. Quinta ad Littus perjecta homines (prater unum) servat
incolumes. Reliqui omnes absorpti. Insulani diripuerunt earum sicus, vina,
merces, and bona: Nec potuerunt Monitoriis, etiam and Anathematibus, res
recuperare. Factum tandem, ultione Divina, ut Insula arena sive Sabulo, quod
erat ea part ab occidente in medio Maris, ventis perflata fuerit, and
universam illam Agrorum foecunditatem vastaverit. Nunc Canvetos vocant.
on the Owners of those Lands, for detaining the Goods of Strangers that had
been shipwrackt on that Coast, though enjoined by the highest Censures of the
Church to restore them. There must be from time to time such public Examples
of Divine Justice among Men, that the Inhabitants of the Earth may learn
Righteousness And yet, I confess, it may't be also the Effect of a Cause not
Preternatural: I mean of those high Westerly winds that blow here almost at all
Seasons of the Year, and which on this side of the Island, are daily seen to
drive the Sands from the Bottom to the Top of the highest Cliffs.

Fertility.
The Island produces all Manner of Trees, Shrubs, Fruits, Roots, Flowers, and
Herbs Medicinal, Aromatic, or Esculent, all Sort of Pulse and Corn as grows
in England, the latter indeed not in the same Quantity nor Perfection; Pulse
and Corn being generally here of a smaller Size. Since the great Improvement of
Cidar, there is so little Malt made in this Island, and consequently so little
Barley converted to that Use, that it serves to the poorer People to make Bread
of, which to the Eye appears indeed black and course, but is very wholesome and
nourishing, and not ungrateful to the Palate.

When Dr. Heylin came into this Island, he found the People more addicted to
Tillage and Husbandry, than to Manufactures, and Navigation: And accordingly in
his Cosmography Lib. I. page 197.
he says, That the Island is generally very fruitful of Corn, whereof the
Inhabitants have not only enough for themselves, but some Overplus to barter at
St. Malo's with the Spanish Merchants. The matter is much altered since the
Doctor was here. The People have changed their Inclination: And the Island does
not now produce that Quantity as is necessary for the Use of the Inhabitants,
who must be supplied from England, or France (in time of Peace) or from
Dantzick in Poland, to which Last they did very much resort of late, invited
thither by the Cheapness of the Market.

Decay of Tillage.
This Decay of Tillage amongst Us has sprung from a Coalition of such Causes as
these; As, (1) From the Improvement of Navigation, and Foreign Commerce, which
took away many hands which were before employed in working at the Ground, and
which brought us Corn from Outlandish Markets, cheaper than the Husbandman
could afford it at home. (2) From the increase of the Stocking-Manufacture,
which, to speak truth, has rendered the generality of our poorer People idle
and lazy, and has given them an aversion to Husbandry, as a more painful
Occupation. (3) From the conversion of the best Arable grounds into Gardens and
Orchards for the grows of Cidar, a Commodity with which we are now
over-stockt, while we want the more necessary Support of Life. Though it must be
confessed that since the present War, which has ruined our Trade, our People,
sensible of their Error, and pressed by the evident Necessity of the thing,
have applied themselves with more Industry to an Exercise which they had
neglected, and have begun to put their hands again to the Plough. So that we
may soon grow up to a condition of subsisting, if not wholly from our selves,
yet with a little help from England.

Enclosures.
I may't have named another great Obstruction to Tillage, but such a one as can
hardly now be removed. It Is the prodigious augmentation of Enclosures, Fences,
Hedgerows and Highways, which, though they add much to the Beauty, and perhaps
Strength of the Island, yet hold they no Proportion with the Bigness thereof,
and waste a great deal of good Land which may't be turned to better Account.
For I am of Opinion that these which I have mentioned, together with the
Gardens, Orchards, Situation, Avenues, and Issues of Houses, take up very near
one Third of the whole Island. One is not to imagine such Fences here as in
England, but great Bulwarks of Earth (for so I think I may properly call them)
raised with great Labor and Expense, from 6 to 8, and sometimes 10 Foot high,
with a Thickness and Solidity answerable to the Height, planted with Quick-sets
or Timber Trees, many of them faced with Stone to a competent Height, as you
see the outside of a Curtain or Rampart in a Fortification. And for such they
may't serve against a prevailing Enemy, to whom we may't dispute every Field.
But still I say, they are attended with this Inconvenience, that they are too
much multiplied, and take up too much Ground, in a Country where there is
already little enough in Proportion to the inhabitants.

These Enclosures are great Enemies to the Pleasure and Diversion of Gentlemen,
who cannot well hunt, especially on Horseback, but about the Seacoasts, where
a few of the worse Grounds remain open, or enclosed with low Fences.

Highways.
Having mentioned the many Highways as great wasters of the Ground, I shall add
that there are three Sorts of them in this Island. (1) Le Chemin du Roy, i. e.
The King's Highway, which is to be 12 Foot broad, besides 2 Foot more on each
Bank or Side, in all 16 Foot. (2) Le Chemin de 8 pieds, i. e. The 8 Foot way,
of 8 Foot in the middle, and 4 Foot by the sides, in all 12. (3) Le Chemin de 4
pieds, i. e. The 4 Foot way; like the Roman Actus, serving only for Carriages
on Horseback. Over all these there are, in every Tything, particular Officers
appointed to inspect them: And yearly about Midsummer, there is a Perambulation
of the Magistrates in one or more of the Parishes, to inquire in what Repair
these ways are kept, which is performed very solemnly. The Constable of the
Parish where the Perambulation is to be, takes with him 12 of the Principal Men
of his Parish, and meets the Judge attended by 3 or more of the Jurats on
Horseback: Before whom rides the Viscount, or Sheriff, with his Staff of
Office erected, one End thereof on the Pommel of his Saddle. In ancient times
it was cum Lancea, with a Lance. He keeps the middle of the way, the Constable
and his 12 Men walking on foot by his side; and when his Staff encountereth
with a Bough or Branch hanging on the way, the Owner of the hedge is Fined: But
if the fault be in the bottom of the way, not the Party bordering, but the
Overseers for that Tything are amerced.

Perquages.
We had anciently another way, and of very different Use, called Perquage, from
the word Pertica, because it was exactly 24 Foot broad, which is the measure of
a Perch. There were but XII of them in the whole Island, beginning one at every
Church, and from thence leading straight to the Sea. The Use of them was to
conduct those who for some Capital offense had taken Sanctuary in any of the
Churches, and had been forced to abjure the Island, according to an ancient
Custom practiced amongst Us in those days Petition in Parl. An. 30. E. 1. Vid.
Ryley's Placita Parliam. in Appendice, p. 602.
. Having abjured, they were conducted by the Churchmen along those Perquages
to the Sea, which Perquages were still a Sanctuary to them; for if they strayed
never so little, they lost the benefit of the Sanctuary, and were liable to the
Law. These Perquages may be ranked among the Singularities of this Island, but
the Reformation that abolished Sanctuaries, abolished these also.

Agriculture.
Our manner of Agriculture differs from that of England. I shall mention one
thing only which I thought singular to This, and the adjoining Islands, till I
found it used likewise in those of Feroe Description of the Isles of Feroe by
Lucas Jacobson Debes M. A. and Provost of the Churches there.
: Which is, that Nature having denied Us the benefit of Chalk, Lime, and Marl,
has supplied Us with what fully answers the end of them in Husbandry. It Is a
Sea-weed; but a Weed more valuable to Us than the choicest Plant that grows in
our Gardens. Vraic.
We call it Vraic; in ancient Records, Veriscum, and sometimes Wreccum; and it
grows on the Rocks about the Island. It Is gathered only at certain times
appointed by the Magistrate, and signified to the People by the public Crier
on a Market Day. There are two Seasons of cutting it: the one in Summer, the
other about the Vernal Equinox. The Summer Vraic, being first well dried by the
Sun on the Sea shore, serves for Fuel, and makes a hot glowing fire; but the
Ashes are a great improvement of the Soil, and are equivalent to a like
quantity of Lime. The Winter- Vraic being spread thin on the green Turf, and
after buried in the furrows by the Plough, it is incredible how with its fat
unctuous. Substance it ameliorates the ground, imbibing it self into it,
softning the Clod, and keeping the root of the Corn moist during the most
parching heats of Summer. In stormy weather, the Sea does often tear up from
the Rocks vast quantities of this Weed, and casts it on the Shore, where it is
carefully laid up by the glad Husbandman, there being particular Officers
appointed for the Distribution thereof to all, by certain fixed and adequate
Proportions.

Hedge-rows and Orchards.
The Genius of the Soil is naturally much inclined to Wood, and the humor of
the People suits with the Genius of their Soil. The whole Island, especially
the more inland Part, is so thick Planted, that to any that takes a Prospect of
it from some higher ground, it looks like an entire and continued Forest,
although that in walking through it, not a Wood, nor hardly a Coppice is to be
seen, but many Hedge-rows and Orchards. Nothing can be imagined more delightful
than the Face of this Island, when the Trees, which are set along the
Highways, and in the Avenues of Houses, are covered with Verdure, and the
Orchards are full of Blossoms. For as the one affords a pleasant shade, so the
other recreates the Eye, and perfumes the Air with a sweet Fragrancy. But still
it must be confessed that so much shade is prejudicial to the growth of Pasture
and Corn. Though we have much Wood we have but little good Timber. For almost all
our Trees are Pollards; which is not so much an effect of Choice, as of
necessity. The Husbandman being obliged to bring his Trees to a Standard, by
Lopping of those spreading and Luxuriant branches which, if let alone, would
cover his little Plots and Enclosures, and suffer nothing to grow under them.

Cidar.
The ordinary Drink of this Island is Cidar: an ancient Liquor, since we find it
mentioned both by Tertullian and St. Augustine. The former calls it succum ex
pomis vinosissimum. The other writing against the Manichees, who objected to
the Catholics that they were men addicted to Wine, whereas themselves
abstained wholly from the Use of it, he answers, not by denying the Objection,
but by telling those Heretics, That although they refused to drink Wine, they
would quaff very freely of another Liquor made of the Juice of Apples, far more
delicious than Wine, or any other Liquor whatsoever. From these Passages of
Tertullian, and St. Augustine, who were both Africanes, Cardinal Du Perron (who
by the way was born in JERSEY of Protestant Parents) thinks this Liquor was
first known in Africa Perroniana, sive excerpta ex ore Cardinalis Perronii.
Genev. 1661. in voce Cidre. page 56. and iterum page 205.
, and from thence passed into Spain, among the Biscainers, whose Northern
Situation and Icy Mountains were too cold for the tender Vine, and who
therefore improved this hardy Tree, that lives and grows under any Climate. The
Normans, who are almost the only People in France unacquainted with the Grape,
transplanted the Apple from Biscay into their Province, from whence we have it
in this Island.

I do not believe there is any Country in the World, which, on the same extent
of ground, produces so much Cidar as JERSEY. Mr. Samares his way of guessing at
the quantity of Cidar made in the whole Island, was, to allow one Vergee (which
is about half an English Acre) of Orchard to every house, which will amount to
3000 Vergees, that being near upon the number of Habitations in this Island:
Now, allowing two Tuns to a Vergee it will arise to 6000 Tuns, or 24000
Hogsheads; which is 500 Tuns, or 2000 Hogsheads for every Parish one with an
other.

It Is not to be imagined the Island should produce the same quantity every
Year. The years alternate. A good Year is usually succeeded by a bad one. But a
good Year commonly supplies Us for that, and the next ensuing, beyond use and
necessity, even to Excess and Debauchery. For this vast quantity of Cidar must
be wholly consumed among Our selves, little or none being exported abroad; though
it be the only product of the Island of which we have an Overplus to spare.

For a remedy to this Evil, there was an expedient once found by some of our
Merchants: which was to buy up this Supernumerary Cidar, and distill it into
Brandy, which they afterward sold into England. But the new Additional impost
laid upon those Liquors by Act of Parliament, has obstructed that Trade, which
served to take off from our hands a superfluous Commodity that ministers now
only to Drunkenness.

Many of our Orchards are planted after the manner of the famous Quincunx Quid
Quincunce speciosius, qui in quamcunque partem spectaveris rectus est?
Quintilian. Arbores pari intervallo sitae, recti or lines, and omnia perpulch^e
in Quincuncem directa. Cicero in Cat. Maj.
, and all of them in an Order that gives them a Beauty beyond what I have
observed in Gloucester or Herefordshire, where appears little Exactness in the
Position and mutual Aspect of the Trees. Nor is there better and larger, more
generous and vinous Fruit, than what grows in this Island; but we have it in
such Plenty, that it is not possible we should use the same nice Exactness in
gathering it, and improving afterward by Art such a Sea of Liquor as is drawn
out of it, which is used in other Parts, where there is less Fruit, and
consequently less Work required about it. But were the same method practiced
here as in England, viz to cull the choicest Fruit (whereas we mix all
confusedly together) and then ferment, rack and bottle our Cidar, I do not
doubt but a great deal of it might, for Taste and Color, dispute it with the so
much admired Redstrake. I have often drank some that was not at all inferior to
it.

About 140 years ago there was so little Cidar made in this Island, that the
Inhabitants were necessitated to apply themselves to Queen Mary then Reigning,
for leave to transport yearly out of England, among other Provisions, 500 Tuns
of Beer for their Use, Custom-free, besides 150 Tuns more for the Garrison,
which she granted in the First year of her Reign.

Mead, and Apiaries.
Our ancient Drink was Mead. For then this Island abounded with large and
numerous Apiaries, which thrived exceedingly but since the increase of Cidar,
they are much decayed; though to this day Honey made in this Island surpasses all
I have Tasted elsewhere.

Springs and Fountains.
Could Men be satisfied with the common Drink of Nature, Water I mean, no People
in the World are more liberally stored with that than we of this Island. It Is
in my Opinion the great Wonder of this Island, that whereas it is but as it were
a great Rock, standing in the midst of the Salt Sea, it abounds, beyond what is
seen in any other Country under Heaven, with fresh and excellent Springs, which
gush out of the hard Rock, and bubble up every where, running in a thousand
pretty Brooks and Streams among the Dales, till they lose themselves in that
great Receptacle of waters, the Ocean. There is hardly a house that has not
such a Spring or Brook near it. Such as have them not, though seated on the top
of the highest Hills or Cliffs, have Wells; and they ^eldom need to dig above
six or seven Fathoms ere they meet with most pure and wholesome water.

Mineral-water.
Nor do we want water for Physic no more than for common Use. We have a
Fountain of excellent Mineral water, in the Judgment of the Learned Dr.
Charleton, late President of the College of Physicians in London, now residing
in this Island, who has tried the water, and approved it.

Beef and Mutton.
Beef and Mutton here is of the smallest kind, but so tender and good, that I
have heard many English Gentlemen prefer it to that which is eaten in most
Parts of England; whereof I can imagine no other reason than the shortness of
our Grass, which has not that Rankness in it, which is peculiar to richer
Pastures. Those famous Sheep with six horns, three of each side, one whereof
bent forwards toward the Nose, another backwards toward the Neck, and the
third stood erected right upwards in the midst of the other two, mentioned by
Writers Cambd. de Ins. Brit. page 854. Terra satis Fertilis variis frugibus and
Gregibus abundat; oves habet multas, and ex eis plurimas quatuor (he should
have said Sex) Cornibus conspicuas.
as one of the Singularities of this Island, are become very rare. Horses we
have more than enough for the Use of the Cart and Plough; but not many good for
the Saddle. Such as they are, they are no doubt exceeding hardy and strong, and
will endure more Fatigue than those of a more generous Breed. I never heard of
any Mad-Dogs in this Island.

Game.
Our constant Game is only the Hare and Rabbit. There are neither Bucks, Stags,
Deer, Foxes, nor Wolves in this Island, which require larger and more spacious
Countries to range in.

Fowl.
Of Fowl we have Plenty enough of all sorts; whether Barn Fowl, Wild Fowl, or
Sea Fowl, whose different Species I need not enumerate. Here are to be seen the
famous Sorland Geese, whose Equivocal Generation from a rotten piece of Wood,
tossed long in the Sea, and impregnated with Nitre and Salt, is received by
many amongst Us for Truth. I have met with very credible Persons who have
assured me that they have often seen those Birds yet sticking to the Plank,
some no bigger than Mushrooms, and almost of that shape; others a little more
brought into form; others perfectly ^ledged, and just ready to fly. We call
them Bernacles, and they are only seen about the Sea, and in very cold Weather.
JERSEY-Partridge.
The JERSEY-Partridge with red Feet, Pheasant's Eyes, and Feathers of various
Colors, is one of the beautifullest Birds in Nature, and is usually sent alive
into England, to Persons of Quality, as a great Rarety; but the flesh is not
much better than that of the common gray English Partridge. The many Hedges in
this Island breed and afford shelter to an infinite Number of small Birds, who
chant it merrily all Spring and Summer-long, and delight the Traveller with
their pretty Melody. But the poor Husbandman pays dear for that Music, for
they are very destructive to his Corn and Fruit.

Fish.
Our Market is all the year long well stored with Excellent Fish, some common to
Us with England, other peculiar to this Place. For Shellfish, we have Oysters,
Lobsters, Crabs, etc. in great Plenty, and extraordinary Cheap. We have also
the Ormer, which is a Fish scarce known out of these Islands. Ormer (says Mr.
Poingdestre) is a Contraction of Oreille de Mer (Auris Marina) a Name given to
it because of its Form, which resembles the Ear of a Man. The Fish within the
Shell is a solid Lump of white Pulp, very sweet and luscious. The Shell in the
inside is of the Color of Mother of Pearl, and is used in carved Works. It has
no Under-shell like the Oyster, but the Fish clingeth to the Rock with the
Back, and the Shell covers the Belly. It Is only found at low Water-marks, in
great Spring-tides. For flat Fish we have infinite store of Rays, some with
Prickles, some without them; large Turbots, Soles, Flounders, and Plaise of 2
or 3 Sorts. For Scale-fish, we have Base, which come by Shoals so near the
Shore, that Cart-loads have been taken at a Draught, some a Yard long: Mullets,
both gray and red, the Last a firm and most delicious Fish. But the most
common, and to be had at all times, is a Fish we call Vrac, in shape and taste
very much like a Carp, and may be called the Sea-carp, with several others. For
coated Fish, such as are known amongst us by the Names of Haus, Rousses,
Roussets, etc. we have them in great Abundance, and they are bought by the
poorer People (for they are but a course Fish) or by those of the better sort
for Servants and Laborers, almost for nothing. But the Sea about JERSEY and
Guernezey, may be styled the Kingdom of Congers. They are found there at all
Seasons, and some of them have been known to weigh from 40 to 50 l. Otho de
Grandison, Lord (or Governor) of these Islands in the time of Edward I, and
Edward II, forced an Impost upon Congers and Mackarel taken about these
Islands, and salted for Transportation; and it amounted to 400 Livres Tournois
in one Year, at a Penny Tournois for every Conger above 10 l. weight, so
transported.

Did I intend a natural History of this Island I may't enlarge further on this
Argument, and mention diverse more taken hereabouts, and very rarely, if at all,
heard of in other Places; as that little Fish we call Lan^on, as much as to
say, a little Lance, (for it is somewhat like one) which has this property, that
it is never found in the Water, but in some moving Sand-bank, which is left dry
by the Sea at a low Ebb; and there it hides and buries it self pretty deep,
till the Sand being stirred with an Iron, it leaps up, and is taken by
handfulls; the Night also being best for this sport, for the Fish glitters when
it is on the Sand, and is easily seen in the Dark: Tingrels, armed with very
dangerous Teeth and Prickles: Another of a perfect blood Color, with a Head
and Throat almost as big as the rest of the Body; our Fishermen call it
Gronnard, from the grunting Noise it makes: The Sirene or Mermaid, so called,
because it is said to have Breasts and Teats like a Woman; but this not so
commonly seen as the others.

Having so constant a supply from the Sea, we may the better be without
Fresh Water Fish; whereof we have indeed no great Plenty, because we want great
Rivers. Ponds we have, and in those very good Carps. Excellent Carps.
There is a Pond especially in the West of the Island, belonging to the Seigneur
of St. Oven, where grows a Carp of so unusual a Largeness, and of so excellent
a Taste, as is scarce to be equaled in Europe. Some have been brought into
England, that were 3 Foot 4 Inches Long.

Toads.
The great Deformity of this Island, is that almost incredible Multitude of
Toads that swarm in it, and are chiefly seen in Summer, and in moist Weather.
Doubtless they are a hated sight, to a Stranger especially. I cannot certainly
say whether they are Venomous or not, having never made any Experiment thereof.
But this I can affirm, that, after the most diligent Inquiry, I could never
hear they do the least harm, though they lie in our best Water, and among our
best Fruit when it falls on the Ground. So far indeed from it, that it is a
received Opinion among our People, that those ugly Creatures suck in the
Impurities that are in the Elements, and thereby contribute to health: which
they prove by the contrary Example of Guernezey, which will not suffer a Toad
to live in it, and yet is thought not to be so healthy as JERSEY. Whether it be
so or no, still it must be confessed, that great is the Wisdom of God, to set
out the Beauty and Perfection of his other Works by such Deformities in Nature
as these. Lizards.
As for those pretty Lizards, which in a hot Summer-day, will come out, and sun
themselves on the side of a Bank, looking earnestly, and as 'twere with
pleasure upon a Man as he passes by, scarce flying but when they are pursued,
they are rather to be counted a Decoration and an Ornament, than a Deformity to
this Island. We receive a greater prejudice from Moles, which abound with Us,
to the great Detriment of Corn, but doubtless to the Benefit and Melioration of
Fruit Trees, by loosening and turning up the Earth about the Roots.

Temperature of the Air.
The Air is temperate, and the Island generally (praised be God) very healthy.
And it must be so Naturally, considering the Height and Declivity of the Land,
and (as a Consequence of that) the Rapidity of the Streams, together with those
salt and strong Breezes which blow almost continually from the Sea. The
Unsalubrity of any Country arising chiefly from a low Ground, and a stagnating
Air and Water. Hence Men are often seen to live to a great Age amongst us, if
by Excesses (which is the Fault of the better sort) or by ill Diet (which is
the Misfortune of the Poorer) they do not impair their Health, and shorten
their Lives. I cannot say we are wholly free of Distempers. The most usual with
us is the Ague in the Spring and Autumn; Neither is the Cold here so intense as
in other Places under the same Latitude: But we are more subject to Storms,
especially with a Westerly wind, which blows here the greatest part of the
Year, and against which we have no nearer shelter than the great Continent of
America, the next Land to us on that side.

Rocks and Tides.
That vast and amazing Chain of Rocks that invironeth on all sides this Island,
some above, some under Water, and the many strong Currents and Tides that run
betwixt these Rocks, render the Access to the Island very difficult and full of
hazard to those that are not well acquainted with the Coast. And doubtless the
Place is more beholding to Nature than Art for the strength of it. It Is very
probable that a great part of these Rocks was some time firm Ground, which the
Violence of the Sea has torn from the Shore, washing off the softer and looser
Earth, and leaving only what it could not dissolve. In the Parish of St. Oven,
the Sea has within these 350 Years swallowed up a very rich Vale, where to this
hour, at Low Water, the Marks of Buildings appear among the Rocks, and great
Stumps of Oaks are seen in the Sand after a Storm. The Records of the Exchequer
make mention of a People inhabiting this Tract. And the little Islet upon which
stands Elizabeth Castle, was joined to the Land about 1100 Years ago. The Tides
about these Islands differ from the rest of the Chanel, and are very
extraordinary. They receive their first Motion from the Mouth of the Chanel,
and as they go on, take different Impressions from the several Heads of Land,
and narrower Channels through which they pass. At the first flowing, they all
tend ESE, to the Bay of St. Michael, by reason of the flatness thereof. The Sea
flows and ebbs in that Bay ordinarily from 15 to 20 Miles, and fills it almost
in two Hours time. Then the Motion of the Tides is checked, and they are
conveyed Northwards along the Coast, and so in 12 Hours time quite round the
Island. The Currents succeed so one another, that there is no still Water here,
as in the Chanel, at low Ebb.

Bays.
The chief Bays and open Places in the Island are St. Oven, St. Brelard, St.
Aubin, Grouville, St. Catharine, Rosel, Bouley, besides other smaller Creeks
noted in the Map.

Division of the Island.
The whole Island is divided into 12 Parishes, which may be ranked in this
Order. Parishes.
on the N. I. Trinity II. St. John III. St. Mary.
on the W. IV. St. Oven V. St. Peter VI. St. Brelard, or Breverlard, for so I
find it called in Ancient Records, and not S. Brelad.
on the S. VII. St. Lawrence VIII. St. Helier IX. St. Savior.
on the E. X. St. Clement XI. Grouville XII. St. Martin.



These Parishes are subdivided again into Tythings, which we call Vintaines,
noted in the Map.

Towns. St. Helier.
The chief Town is St. Helier, a neat well built Town, seated near the Sea,
containing about a 1000 Inhabitants; who are for the most part Merchants,
Traders, and Artificers; The Gentry, and People of the best Fashion living
generally in the Country. It Is the ordinary Seat of Justice; and here is kept a
Market, in the Nature of a Fair, every Saturday, where Gentlemen meet for
Conversation, as well as for Business.

St. Aubin.
The next Town of Note is St. Aubin (or St. Albin) distant about three Miles
from the former, and standing in the same Bay. This is also much resorted to by
Merchants, by reason of the Port, which is the best in the Island. Here they
meet every Monday, about matters relating to Navigation and Foreign Trade. The
Mole or Peer begun there some Years ago, in imitation of that of Guernezey, is
a strong and massy Piece, and when finished, will be a great security to our
Shipping, which lay before too much open to a S, and SE Wind.

It were superfluous to enumerate other lesser Towns and Villages dispersed
through the Island; The whole being indeed so Populous, and full of
Habitations, that it more resembles a great Village, than an open and
champagne Country. Number of Inhabitants.
The Number of Inhabitants is betwixt 15 and 20 Thousand, reckoning, Men, Women,
and Children.

Buildings.
Buildings both Private and Public, are substantial and strong, for they are
all of Stone. The meaner sort are of the common Stone of the Island. Houses of
Gentlemen, and rich Merchants, are usually faced with smooth wrought Stone,
either fetched from Chauze (the small French Island mentioned before, which
also supplies St. Malo) or dug out of Mont-Mado, which is a rich
inexhaustible Quarry of Excellent Stone in the N. of the Island. The Chauze
Stone inclines to a Blue; the Mont-Mado to a reddish Gray, somewhat like the
common Porphyry: Either of them make a handsome show. These Buildings will last
2 or 3 Hundred Years, and would surpass what I have seen in other Countries,
were the Contrivance and Furniture within answerable to the Strength and Beauty
without. But our People value themselves more upon what is solid, and lasting,
than upon what is only ornamental: Of which this Reason may be given, that the
Tenure of Houses and Lands here, is not for Life, or a certain Term of Years
only, but in perpetuum. So that a Man being perfectly Master of what he
possesses, no wonder if he takes care that his Layings-out and Improvements be
made in such a way, as that they may not only last his own Time, but may pass
also to his Posterity, who are to enjoy the Tenement after him. The chief Seats
in the Island are the Manors of St. Oven, Samares, Trinity, etc.

Language.
The Language is French. All public Preaching and Pleading is in that Tongue;
and though I cannot say that we speak it with the same Purity and Elegancy which
they do in France, yet if it be considered what Jargon is used in some
Provinces of that Kingdom, as in Dauphine, Provence, Languedoc, Gascogne,
Bretagne, etc. one will the less wonder that a few uncouth Words and Phrases
should still be retained in This, and the neighboring Islands. So bad as it
is, 'twere in my opinion safer and more advisable for English Gentlemen to send
their Sons hither to learn the Language, though at the hazard of carrying back a
Barbarism or two, than to send them as they usually do into France, where they
are exposed to the Artifices of Men that lie in wait to deceive, and from
whence they seldom return but with Minds so alienated from the Customs, Laws;
and Religion of their Country, that the public Mischief which results
therefrom can never be compensated by a few fine Words which they bring home.
Though French be the common Language of the Island, there are few Gentlemen,
Merchants, or Principal Inhabitants, but speak English tolerably.

Trade and Manufactures.
Trade is the Life of an Island. And our People accordingly had before the War,
with good Success, applied themselves to the Improvement of it. They were
become owners of good Ships, with which they traded not only into England and
France, but likewise into Spain, Portugal, Holland, Norway, into the
Baltick-Sea, and into the English Plantations in America. But the Neighborhood
of St. Malo, that famous Retreat of French Corsaires, has ruined our
Navigation. The constant and standing Manufacture of this Island is that of
Stockings, though that be also brought down very low since the War. They are
wrought of English Wool, whereof a certain Quantity is by Concession of
Parliament allowed to be exported yearly, and manufactured in these Islands. I
have heard that 6000 (some say 10000) Pair have been weekly made in JERSEY,
which were bought up every Saturday at St. Helier by the Merchants, who
dispersed them afterward into all Parts of Europe. From England we are
supplied with all Kind of Mercery and Grocery-ware, Housholdstuff, fine
Iron-works, Leather, etc. for which we bring in ready Money, to a considerable
Value.

Estates.
Estates here cannot be great, since it is not easy for a Man, though never so
industrious, to enlarge his Patrimony in a Country so full of People, and where
Land is seldom worth less than 30 years Purchase. And the equal sharing of both
real and personal Estates betwixt Sons and Daughters (which in England is
called Gavelkind, and is the Ancient Use of this Island) destroys many a fair
Inheritance amongst Us, by mincing it into so many little Parcels, which, in
the next Generation, that is, perhaps 20 Years after, must be subdivided again
into lesser Portions, and so on, till an Estate is almost dwindled into
nothing. Real Estates here consist either in Lands or Rents, but generally the
latter, which are for the most part constituted thus: The Proprietor of a
Tenement lets it out to another, for so many Quarters of Wheat to be paid every
Michaelmas for ever Yearly. This is called a Rent; which may be paid in specie
from the said Term of Michaelmas till St. Lawrence's Day next following August.
10.
. After which, it must be paid in Money, according to a certain Rule or Standard
set by the Royal Court; which always meets upon that Day, and, from an Account
that is laid before it of the several Rates which Corn has been sold at in the
Market every Saturday throughout the Year, determines and fixes the Price of
the Rents that remain unpaid. And so the way of reckoning an Estate with us, is
not by Pounds, but by Quarters of Wheat. Therefore when it is asked what Estate
a Man has, the Question with us is not, How many Pounds (as in England) but
how many Quarters of Wheat he is worth yearly? The yearly value of a Quarter of
Wheat seldom exceeds 12 Livres, French Money current in this Island, which is
about 18 Shillings English. But in cheaper and more plentiful Years, it is
hardly worth 9 Livres, which is less than 14 Shillings. This makes Estates
variable and uncertain, since they must rise or fall according to the Price
that Corn bears each Year in the Market. Another way of creating a Rent is
this: A Man that has an Estate and wants Money, and cannot, or will not borrow
any, sells a Sum of Wheat upon himself, that is, he charge himself and his
Heirs for ever with the Annual Payment thereof. And these Rents have been so
multiplied, that it is thought there is more Wheat due on that account every
Year in this Island, than can grow upon the Island in two Years. All Bonds are
not Personal as in England, but real, and carry an express Hypotheca or
Mortgage upon the Estate both real and personal of the Debtor.

Families and Names.
In this Island are many very Ancient Families, not only among the Seigneurs,
and Gentlemen of the first Rank, but even among those of Inferior Quality,
several of whom can reckon a Descent, which in some other Countries very good
Gentlemen would be proud of. It appears by Names, and Ancient Records, that
most of the Families of this Island are come out of Normandy, or Bretagne; Though
from K. John's time downwards some are found of English Extraction.

Gentlemen that have Seigneuries or Fiefs in this Island, are usually called by
the Names of them. Thus Sir Charles de Carteret, Seigneur of St. Oen, is with
us called Monsieur de S. Oen, and so of others.

CHAP. III. Military Government.
Governor.
THE Chief Officer in this Island, He that more immediately represents the
King's Person, and that has the Precedence of all others, is the Governor.

While this Island was subject to the Kings of France of the First and Second
Race, the Governors were styled Comites and Duces, i. e. Counts, and Dukes.
Thus LOYESCON who commanded here in the time of Clothaire and Charibert, an.
560, is called Comes, a Count: as we learn from the Compilers of the Life of
St. Magloire, the Apostle of this Island Vid. infra Cap. V.
. And AMWARITH, who had the same Command about 200 Years after, viz. in the
time of Charlemagne, is called Dux, a Duke; as appears from that ancient
Fragment mentioned before Supra Cap. I.
, where it is said concerning Geroaldus Abbot of Fontenelles, that, is quadam
Legatione fungebatur in Insulam cui nomen est AVGIA (JERSEY) cui tempore illo
praefuit Dux nomine AMWARITH. Under the Dukes of Normandy, and the first
English Kings after the Conquest, the Government of all these Islands was
generally given to one Man; who was called sometimes Dominus, sometimes
Ballivus, sometimes Custos Insularum, i. e. Lord, Bailly, or Warden of the
Islands. But K. Henry VI. gave them, together with the Isle of Wight, to Henry
de Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick, with a very extraordinary Title, viz. with that
of KING, as is seen from an ancient MS. Chronicle of the Abbey of Tewkesbury,
mentioned by Mr. Seldom Mare Clausum, Lib. II. Cap. XIX. page 375.
, where this Passage is found. Obiit Dominus Henricus Nobilis Dux Warichiae,
and Primus Comes Angliae, Dominus le Dispenser, and de Abergevenny, REX de
Insulis Wight, and Gardsey and JARDSEY, Dominus quoque Castri Bristoliae cum
suis annexis, 3 Id. Junii, A. D. 1446. Anno Aetatis suae XXII. apud Castrum de
Hanleya, et sepultus est in medio Chori Theokesburiae. When these Islands were
separated, and particular Governors assigned to each of them, they were styled
Captains, and at last Governors, which Title was fixed by a special Ordinance
of Council June 15. 1618.

This Office has been anciently held by Persons of very great Note and
Eminency; and we can reckon among our Governors, the Sons and Brothers of some
of our Kings: As (1) John Earl of Mortain (afterward King) who had these
Islands given him in the Nature of an Appanage by K. Richard I his Brother: (2)
Prince Edward (afterward K. Edward I.) Son and Successor of Henry III, who
held them in the same Right in the time of his Father: (3.) John Duke of
Bedford; and (4.) Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, Brothers of Henry V.

I shall only give an Account of the Governors List of the Governors.
of JERSEY, from the time of Edward IV, ever since which time this Island has
always been a separate Government.

Edward IV.
Sir RICHARD HARLISTON, Vice Admiral of England, who assisted Philip de Carteret
in Edward V.
the Reduction of Mont Orgueil Castle, which had been seized by Richard III.
the French Vid. supra page 23.
, and had thereupon the Government given him for his good Service. He died in
Flanders.

Henry VII.
MATTHEW BAKER Esquire; Groom of the Bedchamber to K. Henry VII, ejected
afterward for Misdemeanors.

THOMAS OVERAY; lies buried in St. George's Chapel in Mont-Orgueil Castle,
then the Residence of the Governors.

Sir HUGH VAUGHAN; who was also at the same time Lieutenant of the Tower of
London, Captain of the King's Lifeguard, etc. Resigned the Government to --

Henry VIII.
Sir ANTHONY UGHTRED, whose Wife was nearly related to Q. Anne Bolein. He came
in by that interest, and lies interred in St. George's Chapel in Mont Orgueil.

Sr. ARTHVRD ARCY, who sold the Government to --

THOMAS Lord VAVX of Harrowdon; and he soon after to --

Sir EDWARD SEYMOVR, Viscount Beauchamp, afterward Duke of Somerset, and Lord
Protector.

Edward VI.
Sir HVGH PAWLET, Treasurer to K. Henry the 8th's Army at the Siege of Bologne,
Governor Q. Mary.
of Havre de Grace, an. 1563. that Town being then in Q. Elizab.
the hands of the English: Reputed one of the best, and most experienced
Captains of his Time: A zealous Promoter of the Reformation in this Island, of
which he was Governor about 24 Years: was succeeded by his Eldest Son --

Sir AMIAS PAWLET, Privy Councellor to Q. Elizabeth, Ambassador in France an.
1576, who had also for Successor --

Sir ANTHONY PAWLET, his Son; and he -- *

Sir WALTER RALEIGH, whose very Name is an honor to this Island. But the
unfortunate Gentleman held the Government not long, it being forfeited,
together with all his other Great Offices and Preferments, by his Attainder in
the First year of K. James I.

K. James I.
Sir JOHN PEYTON, Lieutenant of the Tower, etc.

Sir THOMAS JERMYN, who in his Lifetime did also obtain the Reversion of the
Government after him for his younger Son --

K. Charl. I.
HENRY JERMYN, created first Lord Jermyn, then Earl of St. Alban's, Knight of
the most Noble Order of the Garter, etc. To whom was afterward joined in the
same Patent, and with equal Authority --

Sir GEORGE DE CARTERET; who with so great Valor held the Island for the King
against the whole force of the Parliament in the late Civil Wars Supra page 31.
. After the Restoration in 1660, made Vice-Chamberlain, and one of the Lords of
the Privy Council; and lastly, created Baron Carteret of Hains in Bedfordshire.
After the said Restoration, the Earl of St. Alban's remained sole Governor; but
a War ensuing with France an. 1665, the Earl was allowed 1000 l. per annum out
of the Exchequer: And --

Sir THOMAS MORGAN, K. Charl. II.
that renowned and valiant Commander, was sent into this Island, and made
Governor by special Commission: After whose Decease the like Commission was
directed to --

Sir JOHN LANIER Slain at the Battle of Steinkirk, an. 1692.
, recalled upon the Earl* of St. Alban's Death, to make way for --

The Right Honorable THOMAS Lord JERMYN, Baron of St. Edmund's Bury, who
claimed the Government by virtue of a Grant to him formerly made by Letters
Patent under the Great Seal, in case he survived his Uncle, the said Earl of
St. Alban's. He holds it, as the Earl did* for Life.

This Office has been held sometimes Quamdiu Domino Regi placuerit Richardus
(...)ey, Custos In(...)arum, an. 10. (...)3. Hugo de (...)ncto Phile(...)to,
Custos de (...)RSEY, eod. anno. Wilhelmus de Sancto Johanne, Cust. Insular.
(...) 11. H. 3. Arnauldus de S. Amando, and Philippus de Carteret, (...)stodes
Insular. an. 16. H. 3. Philippus de Albimar, and Wilhel(...)s de S. Johanne,
Custod. Insular. cod. an. Johannes des Roches, (...)st. Insular. an. 2. E. 3.
Thomas Hampton, Cust. Insular. an. (...). E. 3.
; sometimes, Quamdiu se been gesserit Richardus Harliston, Capitaneus de JERS.
an. 17. (...)4. Hugo Vaughan, Capitan. de JERS. an. 17. H. 7.
; sometimes for a certain and determinate number of Years Tho(...)s de
Ferrariis, Cust. Insular. pro termino 6 annorum, An. 12. E. 3. (...)m iterum
Custos, etc. pro termino 5 annor. An. 17. E. 3. Johannes (...)nfan, Custos
Insular. pro termino 5 annor. and dim^d. An. 31. H. 6. (...)em iterum Cust.
etc. pro termino 10 annor. An. 36. H. 6.
; sometimes during Life Hugo (...)lvilegh, Cust. Insular. an. 50. E. 3.
Johannes Golafre, Cust. In(...)ar. an. 11. R. 2. Edmundus Comes Rutland, Cust.
Insular. an. 20. (...)2. Matthaeus Baker Cap. de JERS. an. 3. H. 7. Thomas
Ove(...), Cap. de JERS. an. 15. H. 7. Antonius Ughtred, Cap. de JERS. (...).
17. H. 8. Arthurus Darcy, Cap. de JERS. an. 25. H. 8. Tho(...)as Vaux Dominus
de Harrowdon, Cap. de JERS. an. 27. H. 8. (...)wardus Seymour Vice-comes
Beauchamp* Cap. de JERS. an. 28. (...)8. Hugo Pawlet, Cap. de JERS. an. 4. E.
6. Amias Pawlet, (...)p. de JERS. an. 13. Eliz. Antonius Pawlet, Cap. de JERS.
an... Eliz. Walterus Raleigh, Cap. de JERS. an. 43. Eliz. Johan(...)s Peyton*
and Thomas Jermyn, Gubernatores de JERS. an. 1. Jac. 1. (...)enricus Dominus
Jermyn, Gub. de JERS. an. 2. Car. 1. Georgius Carteret. id.
; sometimes during Life and five years beyond it Otto de Grandisono, Gust.
Insular. an. 5. E. 1.
; and at other times again, without Condition, or Limitation of time Edmundus
Rosse, Cust. Insular. an. 47. E. 3.
.

(...)venue of the (...)vernor.
For the support of this Dignity, the King allows the Governor his whole Revenue
in the Island; a small part thereof only deducted for Fees and Salaries to the
Officers of the Court. In ancient times this Revenue consisted of seven
Manors, which were the Patrimony of the Dukes of Normandy. These Manors were
by K. Henry II. let out in Fee-farm to several Tenants, at the rate of about
460 Livres Tournois yearly, which, with many other old Money-Rents (expressed
in the Extent, or Register of the King's Revenue, made an. 1331.) amounted to
more than 1000 Livres Tournois per annum. A Livre Tournois (Libra Turonensis)
being then worth as much as an English l. Sterling is now. This, together with
several Parcels of Lands and Meadows, Wheat-Rents, Escheats, Forfeitures,
Fines, Services, Wardships, Customs, and other Emoluments, not reckoned in
Money, made up a pretty Revenue for the King in so small an Island. But now the
Livre Tournois is fallen so low ( viz. 13. of them for one l. Sterling.) that the
said 1000. Livres Tournois are brought under the value of 100. l. Sterling. And
many Alienations have been made of the Revenue. It consists now chiefly in the
Tithes of Ten Parishes of the Island, which having been appropriated to several
Religious Houses in Normandy in time of Popery, were at the Reformation assumed
by the Crown: As also in several Quarters of Wheat-Rents, and other Profits
certain and casual, estimated all together at about 15000 Livres Tournois per
annum. Out of which Sum the aforementioned Deductions are made; the rest
belongs to the Governor; who has a peculiar Officer appointed by himself for
the Collection of the said Revenue, called Le Receveur du Roy, i. e. The Kings
Receiver.

Our Kings heretofore did use to dispose of this Revenue more thriftily than
they now do; laying on it the whole Charge of the Garrison; causing the
remainder to be accounted for in the Exchequer, and out of that allowing a
Proportion to the Governor, greater or less, as he could agree, or had an
Interest in the Prince's favor. Thus Johannes des Roches, who was Warden of
these Islands in the time of Edward III. had but 40. l. a year allowed him out
of the said Revenue In Memorand. Scaccarii de* An. 5. Regis Edw. 3. inter
Brevia, etc. -- Rex Thesaurariis and Baronibus suis de Scaccario, Salutem.
Mandamus vobis quod dilecto and fideli nostro Johanni des Roches nuper Custodi
Insularum nostrarum de JERESEY, Gerneseye, Serk, and Aureney, 40 Libras per
annum, pro Feodo suo, de tempore quo Custodiam Insularum earundem ex
Commissione nostra habuit, in Compoto suo ad Scaccariumpraedictum allocari
faciatis. T. meipso apud Westminster. 21. die Dec. An. Regni nostri 4.
. The more usual way was for the Governor to receive the whole Revenue, paying
a certain Sum yearly out of it into the Exchequer. Thus Thomas de Ferrariis,
and Thomas de Hampton, who succeeded Johannes des Roches, paid 500 Marks
yearly. The last that had it with these Deductions was Sir Thomas Jermyn,
Grandfather of the Lord Jermyn the now Governor, who paid 300 l. yearly to the
King. Nor was this without Exceptions: For Philip de Aubigny, Drogo de
Barentin, Otto de Grandison, etc. in the time of K. John, Henry III, Edward I,
etc. received and enjoyed the whole Revenue, as the Governors do now, sine
Computo. So did those Sons and Brothers of our Kings, mentioned before, who
seem to have had these Islands inpurum and absolutum Dominium. Therefore very
properly called Domini Insularum, Lords of the Islands.

Power of the Governor.
The Power of the Governors has likewise been greater or less as their
Commission has from time to time been either enlarged, or restrained. Anciently
the Governor here was a Person of a mixed Power. I mean that he had the
Administration of both the Civil and Military Authority: He was Judge, as well
as Governor: had the disposal of all places in Court, Church, or Garrison. Then
he was called Bailly An. 10. H. 3. Dominus Rex commisi^ Ricardo de Gray Insulas
de JERESEYE, and Gerneseye, cum aliis Insulis and Castris Domini Regis ibidem,
Custodiendas, etc. T. R. apud Westminster. etc. -- Et mandatum est Militibus, liberis
Hominibus, and omnibus aliis existentibus in eisdem Insulis, quod eidem
Richardo, tanquam BALLIVO Domini Regis, in omnibus ad praedictas Insula^
pertinentibus, intendentes sint and respondentes. In cujus, etc. T. ut sup.
Eodem an. Dominus Rex Commisit Hugoni de S. Phileberto Insulam de JERESEY cum
Castro ibidem, Custodiend. etc. -- Et mandatum est Militibus, etc. quod ei
tanquam BALLIVO Domini Regis, etc. T. R. apud Westminster. 12 die Febr. An. 11. H. 3.
Dominus Rex commisit Wilhelmo de S. Johanne Insulas de JERESEYE, and Gerneseye,
cum aliis Insulis and Castris suis ibidem, Custodiend. etc. T. R. apud Westminster.
etc. Et mandatum est Militibus, etc. quod eidem Wilhelmo tanquam BALLIVO Domini
Regis, etc. T. ut sup.
, which in the Gottish Tongue signifies Custos, i. e. a Warden, or Guardian.
For he was both Custos Terrae, and Custos Legum, Guardian of the Land, and
Guardian of the Laws. In process of time he reserved only the Exercise of the
Military and Commanding part to himself; transferring the Judicial to another,
who remained in possession of the Title of Bailly, while himself retained the
sense and meaning of the Word in the new Name of Custos or Warden which he
assumed. Thus, that Office which at first was but one, became two: Yet so as
that he who had the Judicial part (and was now called the Bailly) was still
dependant, and at the Nomination of the other. So were the other Ministers of
Justice. Vid. Spelman. Glossar. in voce Baillivus, page 68.
Which was a great obstruction to a free Administration of it, since the Court
must still be at the beck and devotion of him from whom it derived its Power.
K. John began, and K. Henry VII completed the Establishment of a Jurisdiction
in this Island independent from the Governor, taking away from him the
Nomination of the Bailly, Dean, King's Officers, and Viscount; And forbidding
him to interpose his Authority in Matters that were purely of the Cognizance of
the Civil or Ecclesiastical Tribunals. But though the Governor has no proper
Jurisdiction, yet in regard of his Dignity, his Presence is often required in
Court, and is in some sort necessary for the passing of some Acts there: viz.
Such as concern the King's Service, the Maintenance of the public Peace, the
Safety and good Government of the Island. He has the Court under his
Protection, being obliged to assist the Bailly and Jurats with his Authority in
the Execution of their Judgments. He has Power, with the Concurrence of two of
the Jurats, to arrest and imprison any Inhabitant upon vehement Suspicion of
Treason. No Inhabitant may go out of the Island, no Foreigner may come,
sojourn, or settle in it without his Knowledge and Privity. No Estates can be
held, nor any thing therein transacted, without his Consent; but this with some
restrictions, of which more hereafter. On the other side, at his Admission, and
before he can do any Act of Government, he must produce his Patent or
Commission in Court, and must swear to maintain the Liberties and Privileges
of the Island.

His more immediate Province is the Custody of Their Majesty's Castles, the
Command of the Garrison, and Militia of the Island: Which last he models, and
regulates at Pleasure.

Elizabeth Castle.
The Place of his Residence is Elizabeth Castle; called also the New Castle, in
distinction to Mont-Orgueil, which is the Old Castle. Sometimes again called
L'Islet Q. d. Insaletta.
, because seated in a small Island in St. Aubin's Bay, taking up the whole
Ground or Compass of that Island: Environed round on all sides by the Sea,
unless at Low Water, at which time there is access to it over the Sands,
especially over a Beach of Pebbles called the Bridge; but neither is this dry
above 6 Hours, sometimes not 5: Distant from the nearest Land 663 Geometrical
Paces: Well mounted with Ordnance, and stored with all necessary Provisions of
War: Begun An. 1552, in Consequence of an Order of Council of An. 1551,
injoyning the Bells of the Island (leaving only one in every Church) to be
sold, and the Money to be applied to the Building thereof: Impregnable by its
Situation, and on which (under God) depends the Safety of the whole Island.

Mont-Orgueil Castle.
I wish I could give the same account of Mont-Orgueil Castle, standing aloft on
a steep and craggy Promontory in the East of the Island, and as it were proudly
overlooking the neighboring Coast of France. But that Noble and Ancient
Castle, under whose Walls the French have so often dug their Graves, falls
daily to decay, through want of repair. It Is somewhat awed by a Hill, that lies
too near it on the Land-side.

f St. Aubin's Fort.
The Fort or Tower of St. Aubin, is o good use for the Defense of the Road, and
for the Security of our shipping, which lie safe in the Mole, or Peer, under
the Guns of the Place.

Grosnez Cast.
These are all the Fortresses in this Island, where the King keeps Garrison,
both in Peace and War; For though the Map mentions another Castle called Grosnez
in the West of the Island, it is no Garrison, but an old useless Fortification,
of which little remains, and noted now only for having been the retiring Place
of Philip de Carteret and his Party, when he stood out against the French in
the latter End of K. Henry VI.

Batteries, etc. about the Coast.
For the Security of the Coast against a Descent, the Inhabitants have lately in
such Places as are most exposed to that Danger, raised Redoubts and Batteries,
planted with good Cannon, which his Majesty at our humble Suit was pleased to
give us out of his own Stores for that Service. Every Parish has moreover two
or more small Brass Guns, with Officers, Gunners, and Pioneers, to attend them,
making in all a Train of betwixt 20 and 30 Pieces of Artillery, ready to march
where there is occasion.

Garrison.
The Garrison consists of a Battalion of the Right Honorable the Earl of
Monmouth's Regiment. The rest of his Lordship's Regiment Quarters in Guernezey.

Militia.
The Militia, or Train'd-bands, are formed into 4 Regiments of Infantry, and one
Troop of Horse, making in all about 3000 Men. They are all Firearms, Pikes
being of no use in this Island.

CHAP. IV. Civil Jurisdiction.
Bailly and Jurats.
WE have shown in the former Chapter how the Office of Bailly was separated from
that of Governor, which two Offices were formerly united in the same Person.
The Bailly (under the present Constitution) is an Officer of great Dignity
Baillivus apud Gallos Splendidus Magistratus est. Spelman. Glossar. page 68.
. He is the Head of Justice, and holds immediately by Patent from the King,
whom he represents in Court, where his Seat is raised above that of the
Governor. He can nevertheless act only in Conjunction with the Jurats, who are
Twelve in Number, of Royal Institution, but of Popular Election. For K. John
being in JERSEY, and finding Justice administered there in a manner Arbitrarily,
by one who had the Civil and Military Power in his hands, assisted only by
those we call Francs Tenans, and that only thrice a Year, and he not tied to
follow their Opinions neither, thought fit to establish such a Form of
Jurisdiction here, as was used in Gascogne, consisting of Twelve Men, who are
to be perpetual Assistants to the Bailly, and Eligible by the People. These he
called Coronatores Jurati, i. e. sworn Coroners; as may be seen from the
Charter of their Creation, Constitutiones Johannis Regis, Art. 1. Vid. insra
Cap. VII.
Instituit duodecim Coronatores Juratos, ad Placita, and Jura Spectantia ad
Coronam, Custodienda, etc. Coronator (says the Learned Sir Henry Spelman) apud
nos Coron^e Officialis pervetustus est, ad tuendam pacem and Dignitatem Regiam
in quovis Comitatu, populi Suffragiis Constitutus Glossar. in voce, page 192.
. In ancient Times (says my Lord Coke) it was an Office of great Estimation in
England, for none could have it under the Degree of a Knight IV Part of the
Institutes. Cap. LIX. page 271.
. These Twelve Magistrates in JERSEY are now known only by the Name of Jurats,
or Justiciaries, that of Coroners being wholly disused.

Election of the Jurats.
The Manner of choosing a Jurat in JERSEY is this. Upon a Vacancy the Court
issues out an Act or Writ of Election: fixing the Day, (which is always a
Sunday) and appointing one from their own Body to collect the Votes and
Suffrages of the People. The Act or Writ is delivered to the Minister, who
after Divine Service reads it from the Pulpit, setting out usually in a short
Speech the Duties and Obligations incumbent on those that aspire to that
Magistrature, and recommending to the People the Choice of such a one, whom for
his Knowledge and Abilities, his Integrity and Love to Justice, his Zeal for
the Established Religion and Government, and his Interest in the Assection of
his Country, they know to be of all others fittest for the Place. The People
give their Voices at the Church-door, as they go out, and he that has the
Majority throughout the Island, is declared duly Elected.

Without the Verdict and Opinion of these Twelve, the Bailly cannot pronounce.
In case of Inequality of Opinions he is bound to follow the Majority: But he
has the Choice betwixt Opinions equal in Number.

Officers of the Court.
Besides the Bailly and Jurats, there go to make up the Court several other
Officers; as the King's Procurator and Advocate, or the Attorney and
Solicitor; The Viscount, or Sheriff; The Gressier, or Clerk; Six Advocates, or
Sollicitors at the Bar; Two Denunciators, or Under-Sheriffs: And lastly, the
Usher, no sworn, but a necessary Officer to keep Order.

Power of the Court.
The Court thus composed, is a Royal Court, having Cognizance of all Pleas,
Real, Personal, Mixed or Criminal, arising within the Island, Treason only
excepted, and some other Casus nimis ardui Constit. Johannis Regis, Art. V.
Vid. infra Cap. VII.
, which are reserved to the King, and the Lords of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, to whom alone this Court is subordinate. Nor can the
Inhabitants of this Island be sued in any of the Courts of Westminster, for any
Matter or Cause arising (as is said before) within the same.

In the latter Days of K. Edward I, and throughout the weak Reign of Edward II,
a great Breach was made in the Jurisdiction of the Court, by the Itinerant
Judges sent over hither; who, as the Records of that Time do witness, so plied
the poor Inhabitants with Quo Warranto's, calling into Question not only
Public Grants and Privileges, but also Private Men's Titles and Properties,
remitting them for further Vexation to the King's Bench, that none was secure
of what he possessed. Which Troubles continued till the 5th Year of Edward III,
when, upon a Petition of both Islands, still to be seen in the Treasury at
Westminster Mich. 6. E. 3.
that horrid Justice was superseded, and the Jurisdiction of the Court, as
established by K. John, with other Public Franchises and Immunities, were
confirmed to us by a new and general Charter.

Appeals.
Appeals may be brought before the Council Board in Matters of Civil Property
above the Value of 300 Livres Tournois: But no Appeal is admitted in Matters of
less Value; nor in Interlocutories, nor in Criminal Causes, which are judged
here without Appeal.

I cannot but observe that the Case of Treason, excepted from the Cognizance of
the Bailly and Jurats, has scarce afforded an Example amongst Us for these 500
Years last past. Geoffrey Wallis (or Welsh) Seigneur of 8t. Germain, Handois,
and other Fiefs in this Island, was indeed slain in Barnet-Field, with the Earl
of Warwick his Master, fighting against Edward IV, for which his Estate was
seized into the King's hands. But it was afterward by Henry VII declared no
Felony, because done in Favor of Henry VI, (who was then still living) in a
doubtful Quarrel; and the Estate was adjudged and ordered to be restored to
John Fantleroy his next Heir. Sir Richard Harliston, who was Governor of, and
had an Estate in this Island, siding on the other hand, with the House of York,
in the Reign of K. Henry VII, deluded by the Artifices of the Lady Margaret,
and the Impostures of Perkin Warbeck, forfeited also both his Government and
Estate in this Island. But neither will this Example reach our Case.

Commissioners Royal.
Our Kings have used both in ancient and latter Days, and upon extraordinary
Occasions, to send over hither special Commissioners, authorized under the
Great Seal, who have always been Persons of Quality and Learning, as Doctors in
the Civil Law, Masters in Chancery, etc. whose coming suspends the Ordinary
Forms and Procedures of Justice. But First they must show their Commission in
Court, and have it there Enrolled: And then they can in no Case concerning
Life, Liberty, or Estate, determine any thing contrary to the Advice and
Opinion of the Jurats, who are to Sit, and Judge, and make conjunctive Records
Constit. Johan. Regis Art. V. and VII. Vid. infra Cap. VII.
of their Proceedings with them. My Lord Coke owns, that the King's Writ
runs not in these Islands. His Commission under the Great Seal does. But the
Commissioners must judge according to the Laws and Customs of these Isles IV.
Part of the Institut. Cap. LXX. page 286. Laws.
.

The Laws of this Island, which are to be the Rule and Measure of the Judgments
of the Court, differ in many things from those in England. The particulars are
too many to be instanced in. In general our Laws may be reduced under these
four Heads,

Custom of Normandy.
1. The Ancient Custom of Normandy, as it stood before the Alienation of that
Duchy in the time of K. John, and was contained in an old Book called in the
Rolls of the Itinerant Judges, La Sum de Mancel, or Mancel's Institutes. For
whatever Changes have since that time been introduced into the said Custom by
French Kings, or French Parliaments, they can be of no force here. This is to
us what the Statute Law is in England.

Local Usages.
2. Municipal and Local Usages, which are our Unwritten and Traditionary Law,
like the Common Law in England.

Orders of Council.
3. Constitutions and Ordinances made by our Kings, or their Commissioners Royal
at their being here; with such Regulations and Orders as are from time to time
Transmitted hither from the Council Board.

Precedents.
4. Precedents, and former Judgments recorded in the Rolls of the Court. These
last indeed cannot in strict and proper Sense be said to be Laws, wanting the
Royal Authority, without which nothing can be Law. Nevertheless great Regard is
had to them upon occasion. The same may be said of such Political and
Provisional Ordinances as are made by the Court, or the Assembly of the States;
like those made by other Bodies Corporate for the good Government of those
Societies.

No Act of Parliament can reach us, wherein we are not particularly named Lord
Coke IV. Part of the Institut. Cap. LXX. page 287.


It has been often wished that our Laws were collected, methodized, and
digested into a System or Code. A work that would be of very great Use, in
regard that not only all Causes and Suits within the Island, whether by the
ordinary Judges, or extraordinary Commissioners from England, but Appeals also
before the Council Board, are to be determined secundum Leges and Consuetudines
Insulae: which Laws and Customs not being so generally known, it is scarce
possible but Judgment must sometimes be given contrary to the same.

Causes are not brought into Court, or treated there confusedly. For though there
be but one Tribunal, and the Judges always the same Persons, yet because
matters are of more or less moment, or require different Methods of proceeding,
they have been distinguished into IV Classes or Courts.

Court of Inheritance.
The First is of those that respect the Property of Lands, and Inheritance.
These we decide in a more solemn Assembly called La Cour d'Heritage, i. e. The
Court of Inheritance: Which continues so many days as are necessary to
dispatch all Causes of that Nature. The first day is kept very Solemnly. For
then all the Jurats are bound to be present, and without seven of them at least
the Court cannot be kept that day, without absolute necessity, which is tied to
no Rule. The Governor, or his Lieutenant, uses to assist that day, and to
answer in the King's Name for such Fiefs as are in His Majesty's hands, and owe
Suit of Court. All Gentlemen, holding Fiefs from the Crown by that Service
called in Records Secta Curiae, are also to answer to their Names, or be Fined.
The Advocates renew their Oaths. The Provosts, and Sergeants, who are inferior
Officers belonging to the King's Revenue, are to declare all Escheats,
Forfeitures, and other Contingent Profits and Emoluments accrued to his
Majesty. There also Political Sanctions relating to Order and Government are
continued, or if need be abrogated, and new ones made. The Governor, in the
King's Name, or the Receiver by Command of the Governor, causes a solemn
Dinner to be prepared, where, besides the Court, those Gentlemen before
mentioned holding Fiefs from the Crown, have Right to Sit, and are therefore
said in the Extent and other Records, edere cum Rege ter in anno, i. e. to eat
with the King three times a Year, a Custom doubtless older than the Conquest.
It Is said Three times a year, because we have so many Terms, and this Court is
the opening of every Term. After the first day, the Court is continued every
Tuesday and Thursday following, till the end of each Term: Three Jurats always
assisting; the XII taking it by turns. Matters treated in this Court are
Partitions of Inheritance betwixt Coheirs, Differences betwixt Neighbors about
Bounds, new Disseisines, and Intrusion upon other Men's Lands, Challenges of
Propriety, Pre-emptions between Kindred, which we call Retraict Lignager,
(Retractus Consanguineorum and Jus Protimeseos) the Property of Rents due for
Lands let out in Fee-farm, which we call Rentes Foncieres, (Reditus Fundiarius)
and such like.

Court of Catel.
The Second Court is that of Catel, i. e. Chattels or movables. For though at
present few Causes purely Mobiliary be determined in this Court (as they were
before the Extraordinary Court was set up) nevertheless as in the Court of
Heritage Rents are demanded without Relation to Arrears, so in this Court they
are demanded principally with reference to those Arrears. But the principal
Business of this Court is the Adjudication of Decrees. Now a Decree with us is
this. When a man becomes unable to pay his Debts, he comes into Court, and
there publicly makes Cession of his Estate; which we call Renoncer, i. e. To
renounce. Whereupon all that have been concerned with him are by Three
Proclamations, and a Fourth Peremptory, cited to come in, and insert into a
List or Book, made for that purpose, their several Demands. Which done, they
are called in Order; That is to say, the last Creditor first, and so on
Retrograding. The last Creditor is asked whether he will substitute, or put
himself in the place of the Cessionary, and take the Estate, paying the Debts
that are of an older Date than his: Which if he Assents to, the Decree is at an
end, and he is put into Possession of the Estate. Such a one we call a Tenant.
If he says he will rather lose his Debt than take the Estate on condition to
satisfy the other Creditors, the Judge proceeds to him that stands next in
Order of Time, and so on, Retrograding still, and propounding the same Question
to all, till so many have Renounced or quitted, that the encumbred Estate being
sufficiently purged, some one be found, who may with little or no loss venture
to take the Estate, paying those Debts that remain Vnrenounced. This is our way
of sharing a broken Estate betwixt Creditors. And few of the Debts are
Chyrographal, i. e. upon Bond, in comparison of those that result from Arrears
of Rents; and Rents bought for Arrears of other Rents. Wherein we have a Custom
as old as it is injurious, viz. That Arrears of Rents shall have the same
Privilege as the Rent it self; and that a Rent bought in payment of Arrears of
a Rent-Fonciere, shall retain the Nature of those Arrears, and consequently of
the Rent of which they are Arrears. Which absurdities have been so long
followed that they have strangely entangled our Practice in Point of Decrees.
Criminal Causes.
Criminal Causes are also treated in this Court, and that usually on the first
day or opening of it: Where at Seven Jurats at least must be present, if the
Crime be Capital; before which Proclamation is made that Justice Royale, i. e.
The Pleas of the Crown shall be held that day; otherwise Three Jurats may
suffice to hold the ordinary Pleas of Catel.

The Court Extraordinary, or Billet.
The Third is the Extraordinary Court; called also le Billet, because all
Causes treatedtherein, are heard in Order, as they are set down in a Billet, or
scrowl, made for that purpose, and affixed to the Court-gate, to the end that
all Persons concerned may know when their attendance will be required in Court.
This Court was first brought in Subsidiarily, when Causes grew too numerous for
Catel, and is intended for the decision of Matters of less moment, as Arrears
of Rents not exceeding ten years, Arrests, Distrainings, and such like
Mobiliary things.

The Saturday Court.
The Fourth is the Saturday Court; which is also an Extraordinary and Subsidiary
Court, and properly but a Branch of the former. In Term-time it is appointed
principally for the King's Causes, and those of the Jurats, who are not tied to
the common Rule of Billet: Out of Term, for Causes of Brevity which admit no
delay, as Causes of Admiralty, Contracts betwixt Merchants, Breaches of the
Peace, and other daily Occurrences which require no Solemnity, but may be
dispatched de plano. And note that when Sentence has been pronounced at
Heritage or Catel by fewer than Five Jurats, or at the Extraordinary Courts by
less than Three, for Movables not under the value of 50 Livres Tournois, the
Party aggrieved may appeal before the Body of the Court, consisting of Seven
Jurats at the least.

Terms.
These Courts (except the Saturday Court which may be held upon any Emergency,
and at the pleasure of the Bailly and Jurats) are not held promiscuously at all
times and Seasons, but have their Terms as in other places. The first Term is
that of Michaelmas, which begins always the Thursday immediately before
Michaelmas day: but is interrupted during the Month of November that People may
attend Husbandry, which in JERSEY is much later than in England. In the
beginning of December the Term goes on, and so continues till Christmas-Eve,
where it ends. The Second begins the next Thursday after S. Maurus his day,
which is the 15th of January, and is very short, for it shuts up in the
beginning of February. The Third begins the next Thursday after St. George's
day, and continues till Midsummer, and then the long Vacation follows, in which
there is no pleading: unless some Causes, that could not be dispatched during
the Term, be put off to the first or second week in September, and so continue
till Michaelmas Term begins, if they cannot be ended sooner.

Cohue Royale.
The Judgment-Hall, or Place of Judicature, is called La Cohue Royale, and
stands in the Town of St. Helier. It Is a handsome Building, fronting the
Marketplace.

Note, That the Place of Bailly being lately become vacant by the never too
much lamented Death of Sir Philip de Carteret, Baronet, Seigneur of St. Oven,
the late Bailly, the States of the Island, during the vacancy, have according
to Custom chosen for Judge Delegate, Philip le Geyt Gent. who was before
Lieutenant Bailly, and who being a Person of great Integrity and exquisite
Parts and Learning, had discharged that Trust with general Satisfaction.

CHAP. V. Religion.
Pagan Altars.
THere are yet remaining in this Island some old Monuments of Paganisine. We
call them Pouquelays. They are great flat Stones of vast bigness and weight,
some Oval, some Quadrangular, raised three or four foot from the ground, and
supported by others of a less size. It Is evident both from their Figure, and
great quantities of Ashes found in the ground there abouts, that they were used
for Altars in those Times of Superstition. And their standing on Eminencies
near the Sea inclines me also to think that they were Dedicated to the
Divinities of the Ocean. At ten or twelve foot distance, there is a smaller
Stone set up on end, in manner of a Desk, where it is supposed the Priest
kneeled, and performed some Ceremonies, while the Sacrifice was burning on the
Altar.

Plantation of Christianity.
The Christian Religion was planted in this Island about the Year 565. Of which
we have this Account. St. Sampson the last Archbishop of Menevia (now called
St. David's) in Wales Girald. Cambr. Itinerar. Lib. II. Cap I. de Sede
Menevens. Dargentre. Hist. de Bretagne. Lib. I. Cap. XV. page 65. Andreae
Saussayi Martyrolog. Gallican. Men's. October. Pars Poster. sol. 774. Usserii
Primord f. 531. Capgrave in S. Sampson.
, being forced by the Invasion of the Saxons, or, as other write, by a
Pestilence raging in those Parts, to abandon his See, and retire into Armorica
or Bretagne, he was kindly received by Hoel II. King of that Country. In
favor of him the Sea of Dol, given him by the King, was made the Metropolis of
all Bretagne, and the Pope sent him the Archi-Episcopal Pall Some say he
brought the Pall from Menevia or St. David's with him into Bretagne.
, which Honor was transmitted to his Successors, Archbishops of Dol, and
enjoyed by them above 600 years. But the Territory of Dol being of small
Extent, JERSEY and the adjacent Isles on the Coast of Neustria Dargentre Lib.
I. Chapter XXVIII. page 132.
were added to that Diocese by Childebert Son of Clovis, King of France, to
whom they then belonged.

These Islands being thus become part of his Care, he applied his thoughts to
the Conversion of them to Christianity There is a Church in Guernesey dedicated
to his Memory, and that bears his Name to this day. St. Sampson.
, but lived not to effect it. He was succeeded in the Sea of Dol by St.
Magloire, a Britain also, his Kinsman and Companion in Exile, who resigning
soon after his Bishopric to St. Budic, one of his Disciples, came over himself
into these Islands, and landed in Sargia, now called Serk Petrus de Natalibus
Lib. IX. Cap CIII. Benedict. Gonon. vitae Patrum Occident. Lib. III. fol. 145.
Nova Leg. Angl. Land. 1516. De St. Maglorio Episcopo and Confessore. MSS: Mr.
Poingdestro.
, where he built a little Monastery, or College of Priests, which stood in
that Island about 800 years, viz. till the time of K. Edward III, there being
yet to be seen in the Remembrancers Office in the Exchequer, an account
mentioning a yearly Pension paid by the Crown to the Monks of this Convent,
under the Name of Conventus S. Maglorii in Insul. Sarg. From thence he sailed
to JERSEY, where by his powerful Preaching, his holy and exemplary living, and
the mighty Works which God wrought by him in the midst of Us, if the Writers of
his Life may be credited, he labored so successfully, that the Count or
Governor Loyescon, and all the Inhabitants, came over to the Faith. He died in
this Island, and was buried in a little Chapel erected to his Memory in the
Parish of St. Savior, hard by the Free School called from him to this day St.
Magloire, corruptly St. Manlier. About 250 years after, this Island being much
infested by the Danes and Normans, his Body, which after the manner of those
times was visited by Pilgrims from all Parts, was, by command of Neomenius King
of Bretagne, transported thither, and deposited in the little Priory of Lehon
Dargentre Hist. de Bretag. Lib. II. Chapter XLIV. page 166.
near Dinant, built for its Reception, where it rested 66 years. But the
Normans entering into Bretagne also, it was removed again, and translated to
Chartres, and at last to Paris Hugo Floriac. in Chronic. apud Du Chesne Tom. 3.
page 343.
, where it lies in the Royal Chapel of St. Bartholomew, now become an Abbey
under the Name of St. Barthelemi and Saint Magloire Paris Ancien and Nouveau;
par Monsieur le Maire. Tom. I. page 356.
. This was the Instrument which God was pleased to make use of to bring the
Inhabitants of this Isle to the knowledge of himself, who were before Gentiles
and Idolaters.

While St. Magloire was living, and doing the Work of an Evangelist amongst Us,
Pretextatus Archbishop of Rouen in Normandy, oppressed by the hatred and
Calumnies of Fredegund Wife of Chilperic King of France, was banished here into
JERSEY Gregor. Turon. Hist. Franc. Lib. I. Cap. XVIII. Aymon. Monach. de Gest.
Franc. Lib III. Cap. XXVI. page 99. Papyr. Masson. Annal. Lib. I. page 52.
Abrege de L'Historie de Normandy, Chapter II. page 33. Pretextat prive de son
Archevesche fut relegu^ en l'Isle de GERSEY, dans le Territoire de Constances.
. He associated himself to St. Magloire, and with great Zeal and Fervency
labored with him in Preaching the Gospel, and carrying on the work of God in
this Island. Being recalled from Banishment, and restored to his See, he was
sometime after murdered in his Church by Command of that cruel Woman; for which
he has been deservedly reputed a Martyr, according to the following Distych of
Orderic Uticensis Hist. Eccles. page 560.
.

Occubuit Martyr Pretextatus Fredegundis Reginae Monitu, pro Christi nomine
Jesu.

Foundation of Churches, etc.
What progress Christianity made in JERSEY appears from the Foundation of Twelve
Parish-Churches, (which have a Beauty and Solidity beyond what is usually seen
in ordinary Country Churches) A noble and stately Abbey, (that of S. Helier)
Four Priories, ( viz. Noirmont, S. Clement, Bonnenuit and de Leck) and above
twenty Chapels, of which the greater part are now in rubbish. Of those that
are left standing there are two of special Note. Chapelle des Pas.
The one is La Chapelle de Nostre Dame des Pas, so called from a pretended
Apparition of the blessed Virgin, and the impression of her Footsteps in the
Rock whereon the Chapel stands. La Hougue.
The other is la Hougue, so called from a high Artificial Hill on the top
whereof it is loftily seated. For Hougue in French is properly what the Latins
call Agger or Tumulus, i. e. a Mount of Turf or Earth, made with hands, and
raised more or less above the circumjacent Level. And those Aggeres or Tumuli
were in former days raised on the Bodies of Heroes and Great men slain in the
Wars; raised (I say) in the Field, and on the very place where they fell. And
such I take the Hougue in JERSEY to be The Old Tradition is, that a Gentleman
of Normandy MSS. Philippi de Carteret Baronet. etc.
coming into this Island, was there slain, and that his Wife caused this noble
Monument to be erected over him, carrying it up to that height purposely that
from her house in Normandy she might have a prospect of the Place where lay the
Ashes of him whose Memory was so dear to her even then when he was but cold
Earth. The Chapel on the top I guess to have been added for Masses to be said
therein for the Soul of the Deceased, according to the Superstition of those
days. And this I take to be the best account that can be given of this ancient
Chapel, and the Moles on which it is erected: which differs from that of Mr.
Poingdestre, who thinks this Eminency was raised at the time that the Danes and
other Northern Nations made their inroads into this Island, and was designed
for a Specula, or Watch-Hill, to discover them at Sea, and to give Notice of
their approach; and that the Chapel was built long after by one Mabon, who was
Dean of this Island about the Year 1520; Mabon indeed did cause the East end to
be new built, and a passage with a Repository under ground, and under the
Altar, to be made in imitation of the Holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem, where he had
sometimes been.

Reformation.
I shall pass over those dark Ages of Popery which too soon followed the
Planting of Christianity in this Island, and shall hasten to give some account
of the State of Religion here from the Reformation. The same Change of Religion
that was made in England, in the Reign of K. Edward VI, was made here also. The
English Liturgy was translated into French, and sent hither. In Q. Mary's time
the Mass was set up again, as it was in England. But through a singular Mercy
of God, the Persecution did not rage here, as it did there. While that Queen
made Bonfires of Protestants in England, Richard Averty a Popish Priest in this
Island, was hanged for Murder by Sentence of the Royal Court. He was a great
Enemy and Persecutor of the married Clergy, but himself at the same time kept a
Whore, who being brought to bed, he, to conceal his Shame, murdered the Infant,
unknown to the Mother; for which he was apprehended, and notwithstanding the
opposition of Pawlet the Popish Dean, who would have had him convened before
the Bishop of Coutance as his proper Judge, suffered as he deserved. This must
seem an Action of great Boldness and Resolution in the Court at that time, to
any that considers the Power and Interest of the Popish Clergy under that
Reign. It was not so in Guernesey. There such an Act of Cruelty was committed
as is not to be matched by any thing we meet with in ancient or modern
Martyrologies Fox. Acts and Monuments. ad Annum 1556. page 1763. etc.
A poor aged Widow, and her two Daughters, whereof one named Perrotine Massey
was the Wife of a Minister who was fled because of the Persecution, were
condemned to be burnt for Heresy. The Ministers Wife was big with Child. When
she came to suffer, her Belly burst through the violence of the Flame, and a
lovely Boy issued forth, who falling gently on the Fagots, tumbled off without
receiving any injury from the Fire. The Child was taken up, and carried to the
Dean and Magistrates, who sent it back, and ordered it to be thrown in with the
Mother. The cruel Command was obeyed, and the innocent Babe was baptized in
Fire.

Upon Q. Elizabeth's happy Inauguration, her first Care was the Settlement of
Religion. But in this Island we fell into the other extreme. It Is well known
what Persecutions the French Protestants suffered under the Reigns of Francis
I, Henry II, Francis II, Charles IX, and Henry III. The Neighborhood of this
Island invited great numbers of them, and among them some of their Ministers,
to take Sanctuary here; and their Example soon begot in the minds of too many
of our People a dislike of the English Reformation: wherein also they were too
much countenanced and encouraged by the Governor, who, whether out of
Inclination, or Affectation of Popularity, or (which I rather think) the hope
of adding to his Government the Revenue of the suppressed Deanery, favored that
Party. They possessed themselves of the Parish Church of St. Helier, where the
Sieur de la Ripaudiere, a French Minister, preached and gave the Sacrament
after the manner of Geneva: and soon after a solemn Deputation was made to the
Queen, for leave to have all the other Churches in the Island modeled after
that way. This the Queen denied; allowing them only that Church of which they
were possessed, and strictly Commanding that Form and Order of Service, which
was set forth within her Realm, to be continued in the Residue of the Parishes
of this Isle; as appears from the following Letter sent by the Council to the
Bailly and Jurats, bearing Date Aug. 7. 1565.

After our very hearty Commendations unto you; Whereas the Queen's Most
Excellent Majesty understands that the Isles of JARSEY and Guernezey have
anciently depended on the Diocese of Constance, and that there be certain
Churches in the same Diocese well Reformed, agreably throughout in Doctrine as
it is set forth in this Realm: Knowing therewith that you have a Minister, who,
ever since his Arrival in JARSEY, has used the like Order of Preaching and
Administration as in the said Reformed Churches, or as it is used in the French
Church at London; Her Majesty for diverse Respects and Considerations moving her
Highness, is well pleased to admit the same Order of Preaching and
Administration to be continued at St. Helier's, as has been hitherto
accustomed by the said Minister. Provided always that the Residue of the
Parishes in the said Isle shall diligently put apart all Superstitions used in
the said Diocese, and so continue there the Order of Service ordained and set
forth within this Realm, with the Injunctions necessary for that Purpose;
wherein you may not fail diligently to give your Aids and Assistance, as best
may serve for the Advancement of God's Glory. And so fare you well.

From Richmond the 7th Day of August, Anno 1565. [Signed] N. Bacon. R.
Leicester. R. Rogers. Will. Northampton. Gul. Clynton. Fr. Knolls. Will. Cecil.



Notwithstanding this Letter, all the other Churches in the Island soon
followed the Example of that of St. Helier, and the English Liturgy came to be
generally disused. This gave mighty Encouragement to the Puritans in England,
who hoped to draw great Advantages from it, and indeed grew very insolent upon
it. To improve the Opportunity, Cartwright and Snap, those Two great
Incendiaries of the English Church, were sent into these Islands. At whose
coming a Synod of the Ministers and Elders of JERSEY, Guernezey, Serk, and
Alderney, was Convened at the Town of St. Peter-Port in Guernezey, June 28,
1576. And there in Presence of both Governors, a Form of Classical Discipline
Police and Discipline Ecclesiastique, des Eglises Reformees es Isles de JERSEY
and de Guernezey, Serk, and Oriny, arrestees and conclues d'un commun accord
par Messieurs les Gouverneurs des dites Isles, and les Ministres and Anciens
Assembles au Synod tenu a Guernezey au nom de toutes les dites Eglises, le 28
jour du mois de Juin, L'An 1576. MSS.
digested into twenty Chapters, and each Chapter into several Articles, was
agreed on to be used from thenceforth in the four Islands: Which Discipline was
again confirmed in another Synod held at Guernezey the 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, and
17th Days of October, 1597.

It was a bold Step in the Governors not only to tolerate that unlawful
Assembly, but to countenance (as they did) all the Acts of it by their Presence
and their Signature. I call it an unlawful Assembly, because it met, and
enacted Laws Ecclesiastical, binding the Subject, without the Royal Authority;
throwing the Liturgy out of those Churches where by Express Command of the
Queen it had been enjoined to be continued, to make way for their Model, which
was only indulged to St. Helier in JERSEY, and to St. Peter-Port in Guernezey.
But the Governors got well by it, for by that means the Spoils of the poor
Deanries fell into their Hands.

Timely Application was made by that Party to K. James, at his coming to the
Crown; to whom it was falsely suggested that the Discipline had been permitted
and allowed by Q. Elizabeth: Whereupon a Letter under the Privy Seal, dated
Aug. 8. 1603. was easily obtained, confirming that pretended Permission, and
settling the Discipline in both Islands as it was alleged to have been in the
Days of that Queen. The Letter was as follows.

JAMES R.
JAMES by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, etc.
Unto all those whom these Presents shall concern, Greeting.
Whereas We Our Selves, and the Lords of Our Council, have been given to
understand, that it pleased God to put it into the Heart of the Late Queen, our
most dear Sister, to permit and allow unto the Isles of JARSEY and Guernezey,
parcel of our Duchy of Normandy, the Use of the Government of the Reformed
Churches in the said Duchy, whereof they have stood possessed until our coming
to this Crown: For this Cause we desiring to follow the Pious Example of our
said Sister in this behalf, as well for the Advancement of the Glory of
Almighty God, as for the Edification of his Church, do will and ordain, that
our said Isles shall quietly enjoy their said Liberty in the Use of the
Ecclesiastical Discipline there now Established; forbidding any one to give
them any trouble or impeachment as long as they contain themselves in our
Obedience, and attempt not any thing against the Pure and Sacred Word of God.

Given at our Palace at Hampton Court, the 8th Day of August, Anno Dom. 1603*
and of our Reign in England the First.

It Is plain the Grant in this Letter was void and null from the beginning,
being founded on an Allegation manifestly untrue, viz. that Q. Elizabeth had
given way to the Establishment of the Discipline throughout all the Churches in
these Islands; The contrary whereof appears from the very Words of the Letter
written by her Council. However, matters stood thus till a New Governor coming
to JERSEY, and clashing with the Colloquy about the Right of collating to
vacant Benefices, which both Sides laid equally claim to, He in the Right of
the King as the true Patron, They by Virtue of the Discipline which empowered
them to confer Orders and fill up vacant Livings with such only as had a Call
from themselves, the Altercation grew so high that it endangered the public
Peace, and many of the Principal Inhabitants became humble Suitors to His
Majesty to restore to them the Liturgy, and to settle among them a Form of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction suitable to that of the Church of England, with
regard to their ancient Customs and Privileges, to which they prayed His
Majesty at the same time not to derogate. The Address was well received at
Court. The Liturgy was restored, and the Office of Dean (which had been above
60 Years disused) was Revived, and conferred on the reverend Mr. David Bandinel
Grandfather to David Bandinel Seigneur of Bagot, now living, one of the Jurats
of the Royal Court. A Magistrate of great Ability and Reputation.
, one of the Ministers of the Island; The New Dean and Ministers were enjoined
to draw up a Body of Canons MSS. Phil. de Carteret. Baronet. etc.
to be approved by the King; which after several Corrections and Amendments
made therein by Archbishop Abbot, the Lord Keeper Williams, and the Learned
Andrews Bishop of Winchester (commissioned thereunto by the King) received the
Royal Assent June 30. in the 21st Year of His Majesty's Reign, and were
thereupon transmitted to JERSEY, to have there the Force of Laws in Matters
Ecclesiastical, as they have to this Day. A Copy of which Canons, collated with
the old French Original extant in our Records, is hereunto added for public
Satisfaction.

JAMES R.
JAMES by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.

To our right Trusty and well beloved Counselor the Reverend Father in God
Lancelot Bishop of Winton, and to our Trusty and well beloved Sir John Peyton
Knight Governor of our Isle of JARSEY, and to the Governor of the said Isle for
the time being; To the Bailiff and Jurats of the said Isle for the time being;
and to the Officers, Ministers, and Inhabitants of the said Isle for the time
being, To whom it shall or may appertain, Greeting. Whereas we held it fitting
heretofore upon the Admission of the now Dean of that Island unto his Place, in
the Interim (until we might be more fully informed what Laws, Canons, or
Constitutions were meet and fit to be made and established for the good
Government of the said Island in Causes Ecclesiastical appertaining to the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction) to command the said Bishop of Winton, Ordinary of
the said Island, to grant his Commission unto David Bandinel now Dean of the
said Island, to exercise the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction there according to
certain Instructions signed with our Royal Hand, to continue only until we
might establish such Constitutions, Rules, Canons, and Ordinances, as we
intended to settle for the regular Government of that our Island in all
Ecclesiastical Causes, conformed to the Ecclesiastical Government established
in our Realm of England, as near as conveniently might be: And whereas also to
that purpose our Pleasure was that the said Dean with what convenient Speed he
might, after such Authority given unto him as aforesaid, and after his Arrival
into that Island, and the public Notice given of his Admission unto the said
Office, should, together with the Ministers of that our Isle, consider of such
Canons and Constitutions as might be fitly accommodated to the Circumstances of
Time and Place, and the Persons whom they concern, and that the same should be
put into Order, and intimated to the Governor, Bailiff and Jurats of that our
Isle, that they might offer to us and to Our Council such Acceptions Exceptions.
, and give such Informations touching the same, as they should think good: And
whereas the said Dean and Ministers did conceive certain Canons and presented
the same unto Us on the one part, and on the other part the said Bailiff and
Jurats excepting against the same did send and depute Sir Philip de Carteret
Knight, Joshua de Carteret and Philip de Carteret Esquires, three of the Jurats
and Justices of Our said Isle: All which Parties appeared before Our right
Trusty and well beloved Counselors, the Most Reverend Father in God the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Right Reverend Father in God the Lord Bishop of
Lincoln Lord Keeper of Our great Seal of England, and the Right Reverend Father
in God the said Lord Bishop of Winton, to whom We gave Commission to examine
the same, who have accordingly heard the said Parties at large, read, examined,
corrected, and amended the said Canons, and have now made Report unto Us under
their Hands, that by a mutual Consent of the said Deputies and Dean of our
Island, they have reduced the said Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical into
such Order as in their Judgments may well fit the State of that Island: KNOW ye
therefore, that We out of Our Princely Care of the quiet and peaceable
Government of all Our Dominions, especially affecting the Peace of the Church,
and the Establishment of true Religion, and Ecclesiastical Discipline in one
uniform Order and Course throughout all Our Realms and Dominions, so happily
united under Us, as their supreme Governor on Earth, in all Causes as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil; having taken consideration of the said Canons and
Constitutions, thus drawn, perused, and allowed, as aforesaid, do by these
Presents, ratify, confirm, and approve thereof. AND further, We out of Our
Princely Power, and Regal Authority, do by these Presents signed with Our Royal
Hand, and sealed with Our Royal Signet, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, will
and command that the said Canons and Constitutions hereafter following, shall
from henceforth in all Points be duly observed in Our said Isle, for the
perpetual Government of the said Isle in Causes Ecclesiastical: unless the
same, or some Part or Parts thereof, upon further Experience and Trial thereof,
by the mutual Consent of the Lord Bishop of Winton for the Time being, the
Governor, Bailiffs and Jurats of the said Isle, and of the Dean and Ministers,
and other Our Officers of Our said Isle, for the time being, representing the
Body of Our said Isle, and by the Royal Authority of Us, Our Heirs, or
Successors, shall receive any Additions or Alterations, as Time and Occasion
shall justly require. And therefore We do further will and command the said
Right Reverend Father in God Lancelot now Lord Bishop of Winton, that he do
forthwith by his Commission under his Episcopal Seal, as Ordinary of that
Place, give Authority unto the said now Dean, to exercise Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction in Our said Isle, according to these Canons and Constitutions thus
made and established.


De la Souverainete du Roy.
PRemierement, selon le Devoir que nous devons a la Tres-Excellente Majeste du
Roy, il est Ordonne que le Doyen and Ministres ayans cure des Ames, seront
tenus un chascun de tout leur Pouvoir, Scavoir, and Cognoissance, d'enseigner,
mettre en Evidence, and desclarer purement, and sincerement, sans aucune
feintise ou dissimulation, and le plus souvent que fair se pourra, and que les
occasions s'en presenteront, que toute Puissance Foreign, estrangere, and
Vsurpee, pour autant qu' elle na aucun fondement en la Parole de Dieu, est
totalement, pour bonnes and justes Causes, ostee and abolie; and par consequent
que nulle sort d'Obeissance, ou Subjection, dedans les Royaumes and Dominions
de sa Majeste, n'est deue a aucune tell Puissance: Ains que la Puissance du
Roy dedans les Royaumes d'Angleterre, d'Ecosse and d'Irlande, and autres ses
Dominions and Contrees, est la plus haute Puissance sous Dieu, a laquelle
Toutes Persons, habitans and natifs dans icelles, doivent par la Loy de Dieu
toute Fidelite and Obeissance, avaunt and par dessus toute autre Puissance.

2. Quiconque affermera and maintiendra que la Majeste du Roy n'a la meme
Authorite en causes Ecclesiastiques, comme enter les Juiss ont eu les Rois
Religieux, and les Empereurs Chrestiens en l'Eglise Primitive; Ou quiconque
donnera aucun Empeschement, en quelque maniere que ce soit, a la Souverainete
du Roy esdites Causes; and quiconque affermera que l'Eglised' Angleterre, comme
elle est establie sous la Majeste du Roy, n'est une Vraie and Apostolic
Eglise, enseignant purement la Doctrine des Prophets and Apostres; Ou
quiconque impugnera le Gouvernement de la dite Eglise qui est par les
Archevesques, Evesques, and Doyens, l'affirmans estre de l'Ante-christ; quil
soit Excommunie ipso facto, and non restabli que par le Doyen en Cour Seante,
aprez sa Repentance and Revocation public de son erreur.

Du Service Divin.
3. Il est enjoint a toutes sorts de Persons de se sousmettre au Service
Divin contenu au Livre des Communes Prieres de l'Eglise d'Angleterre: and quant
aux Ministres, ils seront obliges d'Observer avec Vniformite la dite Liturgy,
sans Addition, ou Alteration; and ne souffrira on aucun Conventicule, on
Congregation, pour fair Sect apart, ou se distraire du Gouvernement
Ecclesiastique establi en l'Isle.

4. Le jour du Dimanche sera sanctify par Exercices de Prieres Publiques, and
ouye de la Parole de Dieu; sera un chascun tenu de s'y ranger a heure
convenable, and observer l'ordre and bienseance a ce requise; se rendans
attentifs a la Lecture and Predication, estans a genoux durant les Prieres, and
se tenans debout a la Confession de Foy, and doivent testifier leur
Consentement and Participation en disant Amen. Et partant durant aucune party
du Service Divin les Surveillans nepermettront aucune interruption ou
empeschement par Insolence ou devis d'aucune person soit au Temple ou
Cimetiere.

5. Il y aura Exercice Public en chacune Paroisse les Mecredys and Vendredys
Matin, par la Lecture des Communes Prieres.

6. Quand quelque Vrgente Occasion requerra de celebrer un Jeusne
Extraordinaire, le Doyen avec l'avis des Ministres en avertira le Gouverneur
and le Magistrate Civil, a ce que par leur Consentement and Authorite il soit
observe generalement, pour appaiser le Couroux and ire de Dieu par une vraye
and serieuse Repentance.

Du Baptesme.
7. Le Baptesme ser a administre en l'Eglise avec eau pure and commune, suivant
l'Institution de Jesus Christ, and sans limitation de jours; and null ne
differera de presenter son enfant au Baptesme plus outre que le prochain
Dimanche, ou Assemblee public, s'il se peut fair commodement; and ne pourra
aucun estre receu a y presenter enfant s'il ne Communique a la Saint Cene; Et
ne pourront les femmes seules estre Marraines.

De la Cene.
8. En chaque Eglise la Ste. Cene se celebrera quatre fois l'An, don't l'une
sera a Pasques, and l'autre a Noel; and chaque Ministre en l'Administration de
la Cene recevra premierement le Sacrament, and baillera le pain and le vin a un
chascun Communiquant, en usant les Mots de l'Institution.

9. Tous Peers and Maistres de Famille seront exhortes and enjoints de fair
instruire leurs enfans and Domestiques en la Cognoissance de leur salut, and
pour ce fair auront soin de les envoyer aux Catechismes ordinaires.

Du Marriage.
10. Aucun ne se Marriera contre les Degres qui sont prohibes par la Parole de
Dieu; selon qu'ils sont exprimes en la Table faite par l'Eglise d'Angleterre,
sur peine de Nullite and Censure.

11. Les Annonces se feront par trois Dimanches consecutifs aux Paroisses des
Parties, and sera obligee la Party de l'autre Paroisse ou le Marriage ne sera
Celebre d'apporter Attestation de la Publication de ses Annonces en sa
Paroisse. Neantmoins sur causes legitimes on pourra avoir License and
Dispensation des dites Annonces par l'authorite du Doyen, qui prendra
suffisante Caution de la Liberte des Parties.

12. Il ne se fera aucune Separation a Thoro and Mensa qu'a cause d'Adultere,
cruaute, and danger de Vie, duement prouves, and ce a l'Instance des Parties:
and pour l'Allouance de la femme durant la Separation, elle aura recours au
Bras seculier.

Des Ministres.
13. Null qui ne soit propre a enseigner, and capable de Prescher la Parole de
Dieu, ne sera admis en aucun Benefice de l'Isle; and qui n'ait receu
l'Imposition des Mains, and Ordination, selon la Form de l' Eglise
d'Angleterre.

14. Null, ne Doyen, ne Ministre, ne pourra occuper ensemble deux Benefices, si
non en temps deVacance; and seront les Originaires, ou Natifs de l'Isle,
preferes au Ministere.

15. Les Ministres au jour de Dimanche apres les Prieres publiques expliqueront
le Matin quelque Passage de l'Escriture saint, and Apres-midy traiteront les
Points de la Religion Chrestienne contenus au Catechism du livre des Communes
Prieres.

16. En leur Prieres ils Observeront les Titres qui appartiennent au Roy, le
recognoissans Souverain Gouverneur sous Christ en toutes Causes and sur toutes
persons, tant Ecclesiastiques que Civiles, Recommandans la Prosperity de sa
Person, Estat, and Posterite Royale.

17. Un chascun des Ministres advisera diligemment de demonstrer la bienseance
and gravite en habits qui conviennent a sa Charge, and qui preservent le
Respect deu a sa person; and seront aussy Circonspects en tout le Course de
leur vie de se preserver de tells Compagnies, Actions, and hantises de places,
qui leur puisse apporter blasme ou flestrisseure; and partant ne deshonoreront
leur Robe par Jeux, Tavernes, Vsures, Compagnies, and Occupations qui ne
Conviennent a leur Fonction; Ains s'estudieront a exceller par dessus les
autres en purete de vie, Gravite, and Virtue.

18. Ils auront soin que Registre soit guard des Baptesmes, Marriages, and
Enterrements; and seront obliges de Publier, au jour qui leur sera appointe,
les Ordonnances de la Cour, qui leur seront envoyees, signees and seelees du
Doyen, leur estans delivrees Quinze jours avaunt la Publication.

19. Les Ministres seront avertis en temps convenable pour assister aux
Enterremens qui se feront en leur Paroisses, and la observeront la Form
prescrite au livre des Communes Prieres; and null ne sera enterre dans le Temple
sans conge du Ministre, qui aura egard a la Qualite des Persons, ensemble a
ceux qui sont Bienfaiteurs a l'Eglise.

Du Doyen.
20. Le Doyen sera Ministre de la Parole de Dieu, estant Maistre aux Arts, ou
gradue au Droict Civil pour le moins; ayant les Dons pour exercer la dite
Charge, de bonne vie and Conversation, and bien affectionne and Zele a la
Religion and service de Dieu.

21. Le Doyen, aux Causes qui se traiteront en Court, demandera l'Advis and
Opinion des Ministres qui pour lors seront presents.

22. Il aura la cognoissance de toutes chooses qui concernent le Service de
Dieu, Predication de la Parole, Administration des Sacremens, Causes
Matrimoniales, examen and Censure de tous Papists, Recusans, Heretics,
Idolatres, and Shismatiques, Parjures en Causes Ecclesiastiques,
Blasphemateurs, ceux qui ont recours aux Sorciers, Incestueux, Adulteres,
Paillards, Tvrognes Ordinaires, and publics Profanateurs du Sabbat; comme aussy
la Profanation des Temples and Cimetieres, du Mespris and Offenses commises en
Court, ou contre aucuns des Officiers d'i celle en execution des Mandats de la
Court, des Divorces, and Separation a Thoro and Mensa; avec pouvoir de les
Censurer, and punir selon les Loix Ecclesiastiques, sans exclurre la Puissance
du Magistrate Civil au regard de la Punition Corporelle pour les dits Crimes.

23. Le Doyen accompagne de deux ou trois Ministeres visitera une fois en deux
Ans chaque Paroisse en sa person, and donnera Order quil y ait Presche le
jour de la Visitation, ou par soy meme, ou par quelquun par luy appointe; and
se fera ladite Visitation pour Ordonner que toutes Chooses appartenantes a
l'Eglise, au Service de Dieu, and Administration des Sacremens, soyent
pourveues par les Surveillans, and le Temple, Cimetiere, and Maison
Presbyteriale soyent entretenues and reparees: Et aussy recevra Information des
dits* Surveillans (ou fault a iceux a fair leur devoir) du Ministre, de toutes
Offenses and abus qui seront a reformeren aucun, soit Ministre, Officiers de
l'Eglise, ou autres de la Paroisse; and recevra ledit Doyen pour la dite
Visitation 40 sols de la Rent du Thresor a chaque fois.

24. En cas de Vacance d'aucun Benefice, soit par mort, ou autrement, le Doyen
donnera Order presentement que les Fruits d'iceluy Benefice soint Sequestres,
and que du provenu d'iceux la Cure soit supplee; and aussy que la Veuve ou
Heritiers du Deffunct re^oivent selon la Proportion du temps de son Service,
suivant a l'Vsage de l* Isle, saufce qui seroit necessaire a deduire pour les
Delapidations, sily en a; and donnera Term convenable a la Veuve du Deffunct
de se pourvoir de Domicile; and baillera ce qui sera de residu au prochain
Incumbant, auquel le Sequestrataire en rendra compte

25. Sur la mesme occasion de Vacance d'aucun Benefice, si dans six mois le
Governeur ne present aucun au Reverend Pere en Dieu l'Evesque de Winchestre,
ou en cas de vacance de ce Siege, au Tres Reverend Pere en Dieu l'Archevesque
de Canterbury, pour estre admis and Institue audit Benefice, alors le Doyen
certifiera du Temps de la Vacance aux dits Seigneurs Evesque ou Archevesque,
selon quil escherra, a ce qu'ils ordonnent pour la Collation du Benefice: and
lors qu' aucun leur sera Present, le Doyen donnera Attestation du Comport and
Suffisance de la Party, pour estre approuve par iceux, devant que d'estre
admis actuellement par le Doyen en Possession du dit Benefice.

26. Le Doyen aura l'Insinuation and Approbation des Testamens; lesquels seront
approuves sou^ le sceau de l'Office, and Enregistres; Aura aussy
l'Enregistrement des Inventaires des Biens Meubles des Pupilles, desquels il
gardera fidele Registre, pour en donner Copy toutes fois and quantes qu'il en
sera requis. Item, baillera Lettres d'Administration des biens des Intestats,
qui mourront sans hoirs de leur Chair, au prochain heritier.

27. Ceux qui seront saisis du Testament, soit Heritiers, Executeurs, ou
autres, seront obliges de l'exhiber and apporter au Doyen dans un Mois; fault
dequoy seront convenus en Court par Mandat, en payant doubles Coustages pour la
Compulsoire; and aura le dit Doyen pour les dits Testamens, Inventaires, and
Lettres d'Administration, tells Droicts qui sont Specifies en la Table sur ce
faite.

28. Toutes Legations Mobiliaires faites a l'Eglise, Ministres, Escoles, ou
Pauvres, seront de la Cognoissance du Doyen; Mais sur l'Opposition qui pourroit
estre faite de la validite du Testament, la Court Temporelle en determinera
enter les Parties.

29. Il appartient au Doyen de cognoistre de toute Substraction de Dixmes
affectees a l'Eglise, de quelque Espece qu'elles soyent, qui ont este payees au
Ministres, and don't ils ont jouy and sont en possession depuis Quarante ans;
and toute person convain cue de Substraction, fraud, ou Detention d'icelles
Dixmes, sera adjuge a Restitution, avec les frais and coustages de la party;
and pour la Conservation de tous and chascun les Droicts Beneficiaux, Dixmes,
Rentes, Terres, and Possessions, il y aura un Terrier fait par le Bailly and
Juretz, assistes du Doyen and Procureur du Roy.

30. Le Doyen aura Liberte de fair choix d'un Depute ou Commissaire, lequel
pourra excercer and suppleer la Charge and Office du Doyen entant que sa
Commission le portera, and don't y aura Act Authentic aux Rolls de la Court.

Des Surveillans, autrement dits Gardiens de l'Eglise.
31. Chasque semaine apres Pasques, le Ministre and les Paroissiens de chaque
Eglise choisiront deux Surveillans, gens discrets, and de bonne Conversation,
and des plus capables, scachans lire and escrire, s'il est possible. Que si les
dits Paroissiens ne peuvent accorder en l'Election, le Ministre aura pouvoir
d'en nommer un, and les Paroissiens l'autre, par la Majeure Voix d'iceux; and
seront puis apres Assermentes a la prochaine Court, and hien advertis de leur
Devoir.

32. Le Devoir d'i ceux sera de voir que les Temples and Cimetieres ne soint
profanes par aucuns Exercices ou Actions profanes, comme aussy de ne permettre
l'Entree du Temple a aucun Excommunie, duquel la Sentence a este Publiee en
leur Paroisse: Et seront soigneux de Presenter de temps en temps ceux qui
negligent les Exercices Publics du Service Divin, and l'Vsage des saints
Sacremens, and generalement tous Delicts qui sont de Cognoissance
Ecclesiastique; and bailleront les dites Presentations sous leur signs, and ne
pourront estre contraints de Presenter que deux fois par An.

33. Ils auront soin pareillement d'entretenir le Temple en bonne Reparation,
and les Cimetieres en bonne Closture; and de voir que toutes chooses
appartenantes a l'Eglise, a l'Administration de la parole and des Sacremens,
soyent pourveues and entretenues de temps en temps; comme sont la Bible de la
meilleure Translation and en plus grosses Lettres, le livre des Communes
Prieres tant pour le Ministre que pour le Clerc ou Cousteur de la Paroisse, un
livre de Parchemin pour Enregistrer les Baptesmes Marriages and Enterremens,
une Table convenable pour Administrer la Saint Cene, avec un Tapis pour mettre
sus durant le Service divin, des Fonds pour le Baptesme, Coupes, and Vaisseaux
dediezseulement a cet Usage, Nappes, Serviettes, avec un Coffre pour retirer
les dites Vtensiles, un Tronc pour les Aumosnes, un Tapis and Carreau pour la
Chair, and pourvoyront aussy le Pain and le Vin de la Cene. Item, verront que
les Bancs and Sieges soyent appropries pour la Commodite du Ministre and des
Paroissiens, and ce par l'advis and conseil de leur Ministre; and le tout des
Rentes and Revenus du Thresor de l'Eglise.

34. Les dits Surveillans seront obliges de garder un bon and loyal Compte dans
un Livre de leur Mises and Receptes, and de l'emploite ^qu'ils feront des
Deniers du Thresor; lequel sera banni de temps en temps selon la Coustume, and
ce enter les mains des dits Surveillans, and Procureurs de la Paroisse,
lesquels employront le dit Thresor pour les Chooses necessaires and convenables
a l'Eglise, ou Bien Public; se Gouvernans par l'Advis du Ministre and
Principaux de la Paroisse en toutes chooses Extraordinaires qui concernent la
dite Paroisse; and en cas d'Affaires Publiques, l'Assemblee des Estats leur
prescrira ce qui sera trouve expedient pour l'Vtilite Public: and devant
qu'estre descharges donneront Advertissement aux Paroissiens pour o^ir leur
Comptes la Semaine de Pasques, lesquelsseront Signs par le Ministre and
Principaux de la Paroisse: and si aucuns des dits Paroissiens, ou autres,
refusent de payer les Rentes qu'ils doivent audit Thresor, les dits Procureurs
and Surveillans, ou aucun d'iceux, les poursuivront par les voyes Ordinaires de
Justice: Mais cas advenant de Controverse aux dits Accomptes, ou abus qui
seroient a Reformer, le Doyen and Ministre de la Paroisse ou la dite
Controverse ou abus se trouvera, se joindront avec le Bailly and Jurets pour y
donner Order convenable.

35. Lesdits Surveillans durant le Service Divin au jour de Dimanche visiteront
les lieux suspects de Jeux and Dissolutions; and ayans le Connestable pour les
assister, visiteront pareillement les Tavernes and Maisons de Debauche.

36. Ils auront soin qu'il ny ait aucune Substraction. and recellement des
chooses appartenantes a l'Eglise; comme aussy ils se pourront saisir, and
poursuivre tous dons and Legates Mobilaires faits a l'Eglise and aux Pauvres,
selon les loix du Pais.

37. Il y aura deux Collecteurs des Ausmosnes des Pauvres en chasque Paroisse,
qui feront Office d'Assistans, and seront esleus comme les Surveillans; and
auront serment en Court pour sebien comporter en leur Charge: and rendront
compte de leur Administration deux fois l'An par devant le Ministre and
Paroissiens, s^avoir est a Pasques and a la St. Michel.

Des Clercs, ou Cousteurs.
38. Les Clercs ou Cousteurs des Paroisses seront choisis par le Ministre and
Principaux de la Paroisse, de l'age de XX ans pour le moins, de bonne vie and
Conversation, scachans lire posement, distinctement, and intelligiblement, and
escrire, and qui entendent aucunement le Chant des Pseaumes, s'il est possible.

39. Leur Charge est d'appeller le Peuple par le son de la Cloche au Service
Divin, and ou ye de la Parole de Dieu, a heure propre and convenable suivant
l'ordinaire; tenir le Temple ferme and net, comme aussy les Bancs and la
Chair; conserver les Livres and autres chooses appartenantes a l'Eglise don't
ils auront la Charge; pourvoir l'Eau pour le Baptesme, fair les Criees and
Denonciations qui leur seront enjointes par la Court, ou par le Ministre; and
auront leur Gages and Salaires par la Contribution des Paroissiens, soit en
bled, froment, ou Argent, selon l'Vsage du Pais.

Des Maistres d'Eschole.
40. Il y aura un Maistre d'Eschole en chasque Paroisse, choisi par le
Ministre, Surveillans, and Principaux d'icelle, and par apres present au Doyen
pour estre Authorize en cette Charge; and ne sera loisible a aucun de l'Exercer
sans y estre ainsy apelle: and les Ministres auront soin de les visiter, and
exhorter a fair leur Devoir.

41. Ils useront de toute laborieuse diligence a Instruire les Enfans a lire,
escrire, Prier Dieu, respondre au Catechism, les duiront aux bonnes Moeurs,
les conduiront au Presche, and Prieres Publiques, les y faisant comporter comme
il appartient.

De la Court.
42. La Court se tiendra une fois la Semaine au Lundy, and observera les mesmes
Terms de Vacations que la Court Civil.

43. A chasque seance, au Commencement d'icelle, les Noms des Assesseurs seront
Intitules, le jour, and le mois, and les Sentences leaves.

44. Apres Jugement and Sentence donnee du Principal, les Coustages des
Parties, and Substraction de salaire aux Officiers de la Court, se poursuivront
par les Consures Ecclesiastiques.

45. Il y aura deux Avocats de^ement assermentes a la Court, afin* que le
Peuple puisse agir formellement and Juridiquement, sans Confusion ou Surprise.
Et le Greffier aussy estant assermente enregistrer^ sidelement la Sentence qui
aura este prononcee, and baillera Copy des Acts a ceux qui le requerront.

46. Le Procureur du Roy, and en son Absence l'Avocat, pourront assister de
temps en temps a la Court, pour poursuivre la Censure and Punition de toutes
Causes de Crime and Scandale.

47. Pour executer les Citations and Semonces, le Doyen assermentera les
Cousteurs des Paroisses, and un Appariteur, lesquels donneront fidele Record de
leurs Exploits, en donnant Copy des Citations and Mandats Originels a ceux qui
le requerront, and en absence de la Party aux Domestiques; and les Causes de
la Comparence seront exprimees dedans lesdites Citations, and Mandats.

48. Si la Party ne se trouve point, soit en se cachant, ou autre Collusion,
la Citation sera affichee a l'huis du Temple Paroissial d'icelle, en cas qu'il
n'ayt aucun Domicile, and ce en jour de Dimanche.

49. S'il parvient aux oreilles du Doyen par Relation de gens de bien, que
quelqu' un vit notoirement *en quelque Scandale, il en pourra avertir le
Ministre and les Surveill^ns de la Paroisse, afin que s'en estant informs, ils
Presentent tells persons qui meritent d'estre punies ou Censurees.

50. La ou il constera de la fault commise par quelque Ministre, le Doyen,
apres Monition reiteree, procedera a la Reformation par l'avis and Consentement
de deux Ministres, jusqu'a Suspension and Sequestration; and en cas que ledit
Ministre demeure Refractaire, le Doyen procedera, par le Consentement de la
plus part des Ministres presents en l'Isle, jusqu'a Deprivation.

51. On ne fera point de Commutation pour Penitence sinon avec grande
Circonspection, ayant egard a la qualite des Persons, and Circonstances des
fautes; Et sera la Commutation enregistree es Acts de la Court, pour estre
employee aux Pauvres, and usages pi eux, and don't Accomptes seront rendus selon
ledit Registre.

52. Apres la premiere Defaute, la Noncomparence de ceux qui seront derechef
cites par Mandat sera reputee Contumace; and si estans cites par apres en
Peremptoire ils ne comparoissent, on pourra proceder a l'encontre d'eux a l'
Excommunication. Que si dans le prochain jour de Court la Party ne fait devoir
d'obtenir Absolution, on procedera a la Publication de la Sentence, and Mineure
Excommunication, laquelle sera delivree au Ministre de la Paroisse pour en
fair lecture a jour Solennel, and a l'o^ye de la plus part des Paroissiens
assembles; and lapartie persistant en son Endurcissement, on procedera a la
Majeure Excommunication, qui forclost le Pecheur a Sacris and Societate
Fidelium. Que si cette Censure ne sert pour l'induire a Obeissance, and se
ranger dans le Term de 40 jours, alors le Doyen parson Certificat authentic
donnera Avertissement au Bailly and Juretz de ladite Contumace, and les
requerra en Assistance de sa Jurisdiction de le fair saisir par les Officiers
Civils, pour le render Prisonnier en Detention Corporelle, jusqu'a ce quil se
soit submis, and oblige d'obtemperer a l'Ordonnance de l'Eglise; and devant
qu'estre Absous, sera tenu de payer les frais and Coustages de la poursuite de
la Cause.

53. En Causes de Paillardise, sur la Presentation des Surveillans, avec les
Probabilites, commun Bruit, Scandale, and Presumptions a ce requises, la party
sera sujette de subir le Serment de sa Purgation, ou autrement sera tenu pour
Convaincu.

54. En cas d'Adultere a l'Instance de Party, on y procedera meurement par
bonnes preuves and Informations, pour avoir Evidence du faict objecte; and le
sujet and Preuve du fait le requerant, on pourra conclurre jusqu'a Separation a
Thoro and Mensa.

55. La ou il y aura Calomnie ou Diffamation prouvee, on fera Recognoissance
des Injures selon l'Exigence du cas; pourveu que l'Action ne soit prescrite par
lapse de temps, d'un an entier; and pourveu que le sujet de l'Action soit de
Crimes Ecclesiastiques cy devant Specifies.

Des Appellations.
56. Les Appeaux en Causes Ecclesiastiques seront ouis and definis par le
Reverend Pere en Dieu l'Evesque de Winchestre* en person; and en cas de
Vacance de ce Siege, par le Tres Reverend Pere en Dieu l'Archvesque de
Canterbury en person.

57. Tout Appels interjettera dans Quinze jours apres Cognoissance de la
Sentence, and sera la party obligee de prendre and exhiber tout le Process, and
Acts du Registre, ou Rolls de la Court; and lesquels Acts aussy luy seront
delivres en form and temps convenable, authentiques sous le sceau de l'Office;
and sera l'Appellant sujet de le poursuivre dans an and jour, aut Sententiae
latae stare compellitur.

58. Il ne sera licite d'Appeller qu'apres Sentence Definitive de la Cause,
sinon pour ces deux egards; ou quand l'Interlocutoire est tell qu'elle met fin
a la Cause; ou quand ladite Interlocutoire estant obeie elle apporte tell Damage
irreparable a la party qu'il ne peut estre amend par Appel de la Definitive.

Of the King's Supremacy.
FIrst, according to the Duty we owe to the King's most Excellent Majesty, it
is ordained that the Dean and Ministers, having Cure of Souls, shall be obliged
to the utmost of their Power, Knowledge, and Learning, purely and sincerely,
without any Backwardness or Dissimulation, to teach, publish, and declare, as
often as they may, and as occasion shall offer it self, that all foreign,
strange and usurped Power, for as much as it has no ground in the Word of God,
is wholly for good and just Causes taken away, and abolished; and that
therefore no manner of Obedience or Subjection within His Majesty's Kingdoms
and Dominions is due unto any such Power: But that the King's Power within his
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and other his Dominions and
Countries, is the highest Power under God, to which all Persons, Natives and
Inhabitants within the same, do by God's Law owe Loyalty and Obedience, before
and above all other Power.

2. Whosoever shall affirm and maintain that the King's Majesty has not the
same Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical which Godly Kings had among the Jews,
and Christian Emperors in the Primitive Church; or shall in any manner of way
impeach or obstruct the King's Supremacy in the said Causes; Moreover,
whosoever shall affirm that the Church of England, as it is established under
the King's Majesty, is not a true and Apostolical Church, purely teaching the
Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles; or shall impugn the Government of the
said Church by Archbishops, Bishops, and Deans, affirming it to be
Antichristian; shall be ipso facto Excommunicated, and not restored but by the
Dean sitting in Court, after his Repentance, and public Recantation of his
Error.

Of Divine Service.
3. It is enjoined unto all sorts of Persons to submit to the Divine Service
contained in the Book of Common - Prayers of the Church of England: And for as
much as concerns the Ministers, they shall be obliged to observe with
Uniformity the said Liturgy, without Addition, or Alteration; And no
Conventicle or Congregation shall be suffered to make Sect apart, or withdraw
themselves from the Ecclesiastical Government established in the Island.

4. The Lord's Day shall be sanctified by the Exercises of public Prayer, and
hearing of God's word; whereat every one shall be bound to assist at a
convenient hour, and to observe the Order and Decency in that Case requisite;
being attentive at the reading and preaching of the Word, kneeling on their
Knees during the Prayers, and standing up at the Confession of Faith, and shall
also testify their Consent and Participation in saying Amen. And in pursuance
thereunto, during any part of Divine Service, the Church - Wardens shall not
suffer any interruption or hinderance to be made by the Insolence or Talk of
any person either in Church or Churchyard.

5. There shall be Public Exercise in every Parish on Wednesday and Friday
Mornings, by reading the Common Prayer.

6. When any urgent Occasion shall require an Extraordinary Fast to be
celebrated, the Dean with the advice of the Ministers shall give notice thereof
to the Governor and to the Civil Magistrate, to the end that by their Consent
and Authority, it may be generally observed, for the appeasing of the wrath and
indignation of God, by a true and serious Repentance.

Of Baptism.
7. Baptism shall be administered in the Church with fair and common water,
according to the Institution of Jesus Christ, and without Limitation of days;
nor shall any delay the bringing of his Child to Baptism longer than the next
Sunday, or public Assembly, if it may conveniently be done; and no one shall
be admitted to be a Godfather that does not participate to the Holy Communion;
Women alone ( viz. without the Presence of a Man to be Godfather) shall not be
admitted to be Godmothers.

Of the Lord's Supper.
8. The Lord's Supper shall be administered in every Church four times a Year,
whereof one shall be at Easter, and the other at Christmas; And every Minister
in the Administration of the said Supper, shall first receive the Sacrament
himself, and after distribute the Bread and Wine to each of the Communicants,
using the Words of the Institution.

9. All Fathers and Masters of Families shall be exhorted and enjoined to cause
their Children and Domestics to be instructed in the Knowledge of their
Salvation, and to this End shall take care to send them to the Ordinary
Catechizing.

Of Marriage.
10. None shall Marry contrary to the Degrees prohibited by the Word of God; as
they are expressed in the Table made by the Church of England, on pain of
Nullity and Censure.

11. The Banes shall be asked three Sundays successively in the Parish Churches
of both Parties, and the Party of the Parish where the Marriage shall not be
celebrated shall be obliged to bring Certificate of the Publication of his
Banes in his own Parish. Nevertheless in lawful Cases there may be License and
Dispensation of the said Banes given by the Authority of the Dean, who shall
take good Security of the Liberty of the Parties.

12. There shall be no Separation a Thoro and Mensa but in Case of Adultery,
Cruelty, and Danger of Life, duly proved, and this at the Instance of the
Parties: And as for the Maintenance of the Woman during the Separation, she
shall have recourse to the Secular Power.

Of Ministers.
13. None that is not fit to, Teach, nor able to Preach the Word of God, shall
be admitted to any Benefice within the Isle; or that has not received
Imposition of Hands, and been Ordained after the Form used in the Church of
England.

14. None, either Dean or Minister, shall hold two Benefices together, unless
in time of Vacancy; And the Originaries, or Natives of the Isle, shall be
preferred before others to the Ministry.

15. The Ministers every Sunday after the Public Morning Prayers shall expound
some Place of Holy Scripture, and in the Afternoon shall handle some of the
Points of the Christian Religion contained in the Catechism of the Book of
Common Prayers.

16. In their Prayers they shall observe the Titles due to the King,
acknowledging him Supreme Governor under Christ in all Causes and over all
Persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, recommending [ unto God] the
Prosperity of his Royal Person, Estate, and Posterity.

17. Every one of the Ministers shall be careful to show that Decency and
Gravity of Apparel which becomes his Profession, and may preserve the Respect
due to his Person; And they shall be very circumspect in the whole Course of
their Lives to keep themselves from such Company, Actions, and Haunts, as may
bring any blame or blemish upon them; nor shall they dishonor their Calling,
by Games, Taverns, Usuries, Trades or Occupations not befitting their Function;
but shall study to excel others in Purity of Life, Gravity, and Virtue.

18. They shall take care that a Register be kept of Christnings, Marriages,
and Burials; And shall be obliged to publish on the Day that shall be appointed
them, the Ordinances of the Court, which shall be sent to them signed and
sealed by the Dean, they being delivered to them fifteen Days before the
Publication.

19. The Ministers shall have notice in convenient time to assist at such
Burials as shall be in their Parishes, whereat they shall observe the Form
prescribed in the Book of Common - Prayers; And none shall be interred within
the Church without leave of the Minister, who shall have regard to the Quality
of the Persons, and withal to those that are Benefactors to the Church.

Of the Dean.
20. The Dean shall be a Minister of the Word of God, being a Master of Arts,
or Graduate in the Civil-Law, at the least; having Abilities to exercise the
said Office, Of good Life and Conversation, zealous, and well affected to
Religion, and the Service of God.

21. The Dean, in Causes which shall be handled in Court, shall demand the
Advice and Opinion of the Ministers who shall then be present.

22. He shall have the Cognizance of all Matters which concern the Service of
God, the Preaching of the Word, Administration of the Sacraments, Matrimonial
Causes, the Examination and Censure of all Papists, Recusants, Heretics,
Idolaters, and Schismatics, Persons perjured in Causes Ecclesiastical,
Blasphemers, such as have recourse to Wizzards, Incestuous Persons, Adulterers,
Fornicators, common Drunkards, and public Prophaners of the Lord's Day; as
also of the Profanation of Churches and Churchyards, Contempt and Offenses
committed in Court, or against any Officers thereof in the Execution of the
Mandats of the Court, Divorces, and Separation a Thoro and Mensa; with Power to
censure and punish them according to the Ecclesiastical Laws, without Prejudice
to the Power of the Civil Magistrate in regard of bodily Punishment for the
said Crimes.

23. The Dean accompanied by two or three Ministers shall once in two Years
Visit every Parish in person, and shall give order that there be a Sermon on
the Visitation-day, either by himself, or some other by him appointed; which
Visitation shall be made for the ordering that all things appertaining to the
Church, the Service of God, and the Administration of the Sacraments, be
provided by the Church - Wardens, and that the Church, Church - Yard, and
Parsonage-House, be maintained and repaired: And likewise shall receive
information from the said Church - Wardens, or (if they should fail in doing
their Duty) from the Minister, of all Offenses and Abuses which need to be
reformed, whether in the Minister, Officers of the Church, or others of the
Parish; And the said Dean for the said Visitation shall each time receive 40
Sols out of the Treasury of the Church.

24. In case of Vacancy of any Benefice, either by Death, or otherwise, the
Dean shall give present Order that the Profits of the said Benefice be
sequestered, and that out of the Revenue thereof the Cure be supplied; and also
that the Widow or Heirs of the Deceased be satisfied in proportion to the Time
of his Service, according to the Custom of the Isle, with such necessary
Deductions as must be made for Dilapidations, if there be any; and shall give
convenient Time to the Widow of the Deceased to provide her self of a Dwelling;
and shall dispose of the Residue to the next Incumbent, to whom the
Sequestrator shall be accountable.

25: In the same Case of Vacancy of any Benefice, if within six Months the
Governor does not Present some person to the Right Reverend Father in God the
Bishop of Winchester, or in the Vacancy of that See, to the most Reverend
Father in God the Archbishop of Canterbury, to be admitted and instituted to
the said Benefice, then the Dean shall give notice of the Time of the Vacancy
to the said Lords Bishop or Archbishop, as it shall happen, to the end they may
give Order for collating to the Benefice: And when any shall be Presented to
them, the Dean shall give Certificate of the behavior and Sufficiency of the
Party, to be approved by them, before he be actually admitted by the Dean into
Possession of the said Benefice.

26. The Dean shall have the Entry and Probate of Wills; which shall be
approved under the Seal of his Office, and Registered; He shall have also the
Registring of the Inventories of Goods Mobiliary belonging to Orphans, whereof
he shall keep a faithful Register, that he may give Copies of them whenever he
shall be required. Moreover, he shall give Letters of Administration of the
Goods of Intestates, dying without Heirs of their Body, to the next of Kindred.

27. They that have the Will in their Custody, whether they be Heirs,
Executors, or others, shall be obliged to exhibit and bring the same to the
Dean within one Month; in default whereof they shall be convened into Court by
Mandate, paying double Charges for the Compulsory; and the said Dean shall have
for the said Wills, Inventories, and Letters of Administration, such Fees as
are specified in the Table made for that purpose.

28. All Legacies Mobiliary made to the Church, Ministers, Schools, or Poor,
shall be of the Cognizance of the Dean; But upon any Opposition made concerning
the Validity of the Will, the Civil Court shall determine it betwixt the
Parties.

29. It appartains to the Dean to have Cognizance of all Substraction of Tithes
belonging to the Church, of what kind soever they be, which have been paid to
the Ministers, and which they have enjoyed and have been possessed of forty
Years; and every Person convicted of Substraction, Fraud, or Detention of the
said Tithes, shall be adjudged to make Restitution, and pay the Cost and
Charges of the Party; And for the preservation of all and singular the Rights,
Tithes, Rents, Lands and Possessions Beneficiary, there shall be a Terrice made
by the Bailly and Jurats, assisted by the Dean and King's Procurator.

30. The Dean shall have Power to make choice of a Deputy or Commmissary, who
shall execute and supply the Place and Office of the Dean so far as his
Commission shall extend, of which there shall be an Authentic Act in the Rolls
of the Court.

Of the Churchwardens.
31. Every Week next after Easter, the Minister and People of each Parish shall
choose two Churchwardens, discreet Men, of good Conversation and Capacity,
able to read and write, if possible. But if they cannot agree in the Election,
the Minister shall have Power to name one, and the Parishioners another, by the
Majority of Voices; which two shall be after sworn in the next Court, and there
well admonished of their Duty.

32. Their Duty shall be to see that the Churches and Churchyards be not
abused by any profane Exercises or Actions, as also not to suffer any
Excommunicated Person to come into the Church, after the Sentence has been
published in their Parish: And they shall be careful to Present from time to
time those that neglect the public Exercises of Divine Service, and the Use of
the Holy Sacraments, and generally all Delinquencies that are of Ecclesiastical
Cognizance; Which Presentations they shall exhibit under their Hands, nor shall
they be constrained to Present above twice a Year.

33. They shall have care moreover to keep the Church in good Repair, and the
Churchyards well fenced; and to see that all things appartaining to the
Church, the Administration of the Word and Sacraments, be provided and
maintained from time to time; such are, a Bible of the best Translation and
largest Character, the Book of Common Prayer both for the Minister and Clerk or
Sexton of the Parish, a Book of Parchment to Register the Christnings Marriages
and Burials, a decent Table to administer the Holy Supper, with a Carpet to
cover it during Divine Service, Fonts for Baptism, Cups and Vessels serving
only to that Use, Table - cloths, Napkins, with a Coffer wherein to keep the
said Utensils, a Trunk or Box for Alms, a Cloth and Cushion for the Pulpit, and
shall also provide the Bread and Wine for the Sacrament. Moreover, They shall
see that the Pews and Seats be well fitted for the Convenience of the Minister
and Parishioners, and that with the Advice and Council of their Minister; All
this, out of the Rents and Revenues of the Treasury of the Church.

34. The said Churchwardens shall be obliged to keep in a Book, a good and
faithful Account of their Disbursements and Receipts, and of the Use they shall
make of the Moneys of the Treasury; which shall be published ( in Order to be
let out to Farm) from time to time according to Custom, and that in the Name of
the said Churchwardens, and Procurators of the Parish; who shall employ the
said Treasury in things necessary and convenient for the Church, or the public
Occasions; Governing themselves by the Advice of the Minister and Chief of the
Parish in all things Extraordinary which concern the said Parish; And in case
of public Business, the Assembly of the States shall prescribe to them what
shall be found expedient for the common Good: And before they quit their
Charge, they shall give notice to the Parishioners that they may Audit their
Accounts in Easter-Week, which Accounts shall be signed by the Minister and
Chief of the Parish: And if any of the said Parishioners, or others, refuse to
pay the Rents they owe to the said Treasury, the said Procurators and
Churchwardens, or any of them, shall prosecute them by the ordinary Ways of
Justice: But in case of any Controversy about the said Accounts, or of any
Abuse to be reformed, The Dean and Minister of the Parish where the said
Controversy or Abuse shall be, shall, together with the Bailly and Jurats,
determine it as shall be found convenient.

35. The said Churchwardens during Divine Service on the Sunday shall search
Places suspected of Gaming, idle and riotous Practices; and having the
Constable to assist them, shall also search Taverns, and scandalous Houses.

36. They shall be careful that there be no withholding or concealing of
things appertaining to the Church; They may also seize into their Hands, or
prosecute the Delivery of all Donations and Legacies Mobiliary made to the
Church and Poor, according to the Laws of the Country.

37. There shall be Two Collectors of the Alms for the Poor in each Parish, who
shall also discharge the Place of Sidesmen, and shall be chosen as the
Churchwardens; and shall be sworn in Court to behave themselves well in their
Office: And shall give an Account of their Administration twice a Year, before
the Minister and Parishioners, Viz. at Easter, and at Miohaelmas.

Of the Clerks, or Sextons.
38. The Clerks or Sextons of the Parishes shall be chosen by the Minister and
Chief of the Parish, and shall be of the Age of XX Years at the least, of good
Life and Conversation, able to read fairly, distinctly, and intelligibly, and
to write also, and sitted somewhat for the singing of the Psalms, if it may be.

39. Their Charge is, by ringing of the Bell, to call the People to Divine
Service, and hearing of the Word of God, at a proper and convenient Hour,
according to Custom; To keep the Church shut, and clean, as also the Pews and
Pulpit; To preserve the Books, and other things belonging to the Church,
whereof they shall have the Custody; To provide Water for Baptism, and to make
such Proclamations and Denunciations as shall be enjoined them by the Court, or
by the Minister; and shall receive their Wages and Salaries by the Contribution
of the Parishioners, whether in Corn or Money, according to the Custom of the
Country.

Of Schoolmasters.
40. There shall be a Schoolmaster in every Parish, chosen by the Minister,
Churchwardens, and principal Persons thereof, and after presented to the Dean
to be licensed thereunto; And it shall not be lawful for any to exercise this
Charge, not being in this manner called unto it: The Ministers shall take care
to visit them, and exhort them to do their Duty.

41. They shall use all laborious Diligence to teach the Children to read, and
write, say their Prayers, answer to the Catechism, they shall form them to good
Manners, shall bring them to Sermon, and Common - Prayers, seeing them behave
themselves there as becomes.

Of the Court.
42. The Court shall be kept once a Week, on the Monday, and shall observe the
same Terms and Vacations as the Court Civil.

43. At every Session, in the beginning thereof, the Names of the Assessors
shall be enrolled, the Day, and the Month, and the Sentences perused.

44. After Judgment and Sentence given in the principal Matter, the Costs of
the Parties, and the Fees of the Officers of the Court, shall be awarded by the
Ecclesiastical Censures.

45. There shall be two Advocates (or Proctors) duly sworn to the Court, to the
end the People may proceed formally and juridically, without Confusion or
Surprise. And the Greffier (or Register) being also sworn shall faithfully
record the Sentence which shall be pronounced, and shall give Copy of the Acts
to such as shall require it.

46. The King's Procurator, and in his Absence the Advocate, may be present
from time to time in the Court, and there prosecute the Censure and Punishment
of all Causes of Crime and Scandal.

47. For executing or serving the Citations and Summons, the Dean shall swear
the Clerks of the Parishes, and an Apparitor, who shall give a faithful Report
of their Exploits, giving also Copies of the Original Citations and Mandats to
such as shall require them, or in the Absence of them to their Domestics; And
the Causes of the Appearance shall be expressed in the said Citations and
Mandats.

48. If the Party will not be found, as either concealing himself, or using
some other Collusion, the Citation shall be affixed, in case he has no settled
Habitation, on the Door of his Parish Church, and that upon a Lord's Day.

49. If it comes to the notice of the Dean by the Report of honest Men, that
any one lives notoriously in some Scandal, he may advertise the Minister and
Churchwardens of the Parish, to the end that informing themselves thereof,
they may Present such Persons as deserve to be punished or censured.

50. Upon good Proof of a Crime committed by any Minister, the Dean, after
repeated Admonitions, shall proceed to the Reformation of him, by the Advice
and Consent of two Ministers, even unto Suspension and Sequestration; And in
case the said Minister continues refractary, the Dean, by the Consent of the
greater Part of the Ministers present in the Island, shall proceed even to
Deprivation.

51. No Commutation shall be made for Penance but with great Circumspection,
having regard to the Quality of the Persons, and Circumstances of the Crimes;
And the Commutation shall be enrolled in the Acts of the Court, in order to be
employed upon the Poor and in Pious Uses, whereof account shall be given
according to the said Register.

52. After the first Default, the Nonappearance of such as shall be cited
again by Mandate shall be reputed Contumacy; And if being afterward
peremptorily cited they do not appear, they may be proceeded against by
Excommunication. If before the next Court-day the Party doesnot endeavor to
obtain Absolution, the Court shall proceed to the Publication of the Sentence,
and Minor Excommunication, which shall be delivered to the Minister of the
Parish to be read upon some solemn Day, and in the hearing of the greater part
of the Parishioners assembled; And the Party persisting in his Obstinacy, the
Court shall proceed to the Major Excommunication, which excludes the Sinner a
Sacris and Societate Fidelium. If this Censure cannot induce him to Obedience
and Submission within the Space of forty Days, then the Dean by his Authentic
Certificate shall give advice to the Bailly and Jurats of the said Contumacy,
and shall require them in Support of his Jurisdiction to cause him to be seized
by the Civil Officers, and constituted Prisoner, under Bodily Detention, till
such time as he has submitted, and obliged himself to obtemperate to the
Ordinance of the Church; And before he be absolved, he shall be bound to pay
the Costs and Charges of the Prosecution of the Suit.

53. In cases of Incontinency, upon Presentment of the Church - Wardens,
together with Probabilities, common Fame, Scandal, and Presumptions in this
Case requisite, the Party shall be subject to undergo Purgation upon Oath, or
otherwise shall be held as if he were convicted.

54. In Cases of Adultery at the Instance of either of the Parties, the
Proceedings shall go on maturely, by good Proofs and Informations, in order to
have Evidence of the Fact objected; And the Subject, and Proof of the Fact
requiring it, the Court may proceed to Separation a Thoro and Mensa.

55. Upon Proof of Calumny or Defamation, the Party guilty shall make
acknowledgment of the injury according to the Exigency of the Case; provided
the Suit be prosecuted before Lapse of Time, or that a Year be expired; and
provided that the Matter of the Suit be of Crimes Ecclesiastical before
specified.

Of Appeals.
56. Appeals in Causes Ecclesiastical shall be heard and determined by the
Reverend Father in God the Bishop of Winchester in Person; or in the Vacancy of
that See, by the most Reverend Father in God the Archbishop of Canterbury in
Person.

57. All Appeals shall be entered within fifteen Days after notice of the
Sentence, and the Party shall be obliged to take out and exhibit the whole
Process, and Acts of the Register or Rolls of the Court; which Acts shall also
be delivered to him in Form and Time convenient, authenticated under the Seal
of the Office; And the Appellant shall be bound to prosecute his Appeal within
a Year and a Day, aut Sententiae latae stare compellitur.

58. It shall not be lawful to appeal but after Sentence Definitive of the
Cause, unless in these two Cases; either when the Interlocutory is such as puts
an End to the Cause; or when the said Interlocutory being obeyed brings such
irreparable Damage to the Party that he cannot be relieved by Appeal from the
Sentence Definitive.

Here follows a Table of Fees, not thought necessary to be Englished.
Table des Droicts appartenants au Doyen and a ses Officiers pour toutes Causes
Ecclesiastiques.
POur l'Approbation des Testaments ou les Biens du Deffunct n'excederont la
Valeur de 50 l. Tournois, de claro, au Doyen o; au Greffier pour l'Escriture
and Enregistrement 5 s. Pour l'Approbation des Testaments au dessus de la
Valeur de 50 l. Tournois, au Doyen 20 s; au Greffier 10 s.

Pour Lettres d'Administration ou les Biens du Deffunct n'excederont la Valeur
de 50 l. Tournois, de claro, au Doyen o; au Greffier pour l'Escriture de ladite
Lettre, 5 s. Pour Lettres d'Administration au dessus de ladite Sum, au Doyen
30 s; au Greffier 10 s.

Pour Enregistrement des Inventoires des Biens des Pupilles la ou ledit
Inventoire ne se montera a 50 l. Tournois, au Doyen o; au Greffe pour ledit
Enregistrement 3 s. Pour Enregistrement des dits Inventoires excedants la Sum
de 50 l. Tournois, au Doyen 20 s; au Greffe 10 s.

Pour Copy authentic desdits Testaments, Lettres d'Administration, ou
Inventoires, au Doyen pour son Sceau 5 s. au Greffe 5 s. Pour le Compulsoire
des Testaments, au Doyen and Appariteur 10 s.

Pour Dispense des Bans de Marriage, au Doyen 30 s.

Four la Sequestration des Fruicts d'aucun Benefice, au Doyen 60 s. Pour
Induction des Ministres, au Doyen 30 s.

Pour les Mandats and Citations, au Doyen 2 s. au Greffe pour l Escriture
d'yceux, 1 s. a l'Appariteur pour executer les Citations ou Mandats, 2 s. 6 d.
au Cousteur pour les Citations qu'il fera dans sa Paroisse, 1 s.

Au Doyen pour l'Absolution de la Mineure Excommunication, 10 s. au Greffe 2 s.
a l'Appariteur 2 s. 6 d. Au Doyen pour l'Absolution de la grande
Excommunication, 20 s. au Greffier 5 s. a l'Appariteur 5 s.

Pour Causes enter Parties litigants, la Party succombante payera les Salaires
and Droicts des Officiers, and 3 s. par Act a la Party, and a chasque Tesmoin
produit en Court 3 s.

Aux Avocats de la Court pour chasque Cause qu'ils plaideront, 5 s. Au Greffe
pour chasque Act de Court, 1 s. Pour chasque premiere deffaute en Court, 1 s.
Pour la Contumace, 3 s.

Suivant ce que dessus, est Ordonne que le Doyen and ses Successeurs, ou aucuns
des Officiers qui sont a present, and seront par cy apres, ne pourront
directement ny indirectement lever, exiger, ou recevoir des Habitants de ladite
Isle autres Droicts and Salaires que ceux qui sont Specifies en la Table cy
dessus escripte. Plus outre est Ordonne que ce qui a este par cy devant exerce
and mis en execution en ladite Isle, en quelques Causes que ce soit, par Virtue
d'aucune Jurisdiction Ecclesiastique, demeurera pour abroge, pour ne pouvoir
estre tire en President par ledit Doyen ou aucuns de ses Successeurs a exercer
ou Executer en temps a venir, contre ou outre la Teneur desdits Canons a
present conceus and and Ordonnes; Mais que le tout soit rapporte and limite au
contenu desdits Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastiques. Comme aussy ne sera
done aucun empeschement par le Magistrate Civil de ladite Isle audit Doyen and
ses Successeurs, en l'Execution paisible de ladite Jurisdiction, au contenu
d'iceux Canons, comme n'estans prejudiciables aux Privileges, Loix, and
Coustumes de ladite Isle, auxquelles n'est entendu deroger.

Done sous nostre Signet (comme devant est dit) a nostre Palais de Greenwich,
le dernier jour de Juin, l'An de nostre Regne d'Angleterre, France, and
Irelande le XXIme. Et d'Escosse le LVIme.
PUrsuant to what is above said, it is ordained that neither the Dean, nor his
Successors, nor any of the Officers which are now, or shall hereafter be, shall
either directly or indirectly raise, exact, or receive from the Inhabitants of
the said Island, any other Fees or Salaries than those specified in the Table
above-written. Moreover it is ordained that what has been heretofore done or
put in Execution in the said Isle, in any Causes whatsoever, by virtue of any
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, shall remain abrogated, and shall not be drawn
into Precedent by the said Dean or any of his Successors, to exercise or
execute the same in time to come, contrary or beyond the Tenor of the said
Canons now conceived and ordained; But that all be referred to, and limited by
the Contents of the said Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical. As also that
there shall be no hindrance given by the Civil Magistrate in the said Island to
the said Dean and his Successors, in the peaceable Execution of the said
Jurisdiction, according to the Contents of the said Canons, as not being
prejudicial to the Privileges, Laws, and Customs of the said Isle, to which
it is not intended to Derogate.

Given under Our Signet (as before is said) at Our Palace at Greenwich, the
last Day of June, in the Year of Our Reign of England, France, and Ireland, the
XXIth. and of Scotland the LVIth. (Under Signed in the Original.) George Abbot
Archbishop of Canterbury.
G. Cant. John Williams Bishop of Lincoln, and Lord Keeper of the ^eat S^^l.
Jo. Lincoln, C. S. Lancelot Andrews Bishop of Winchester.
La. Winton.

Diocese.
These Islands were first in the Diocese of Dol in Bretagne, and so continued
from the time of St. Sampson Vid. Supra page 115, 116, etc.
, till the coming of the Danes or Normans into Neustria, who falling out with
the Bretons about the limits of their Territories, and a War ensuing thereupon
betwixt them, withdrew these Islands from the Obedience of the British Bishop,
and gave them a Bishop of their own, viz. that of Coutance in Normandy, the
lofty Towers of whose beautiful Cathedral (once our Mother Church) are seen
from JERSEY. To this Bishop these Islands remained subject even after the
Defection of Normandy, notwithstanding the frequent Wars betwixt the two
Crowns, until the Tenth Year of Queen Elizabeth. King John indeed having lost
Normandy had once in an angry Mood, designed to annex them to the Sea of Exeter
in England Rotul. Insular. in Scaccar.
, but did not. It was the Change of Religion in these Islands that took away
from the Popish Bishop of Coutance his Jurisdiction over them: For then they
were, by an Order of Council dated March 11th. 1568. transferred, and united to
the Diocese of Winton.

Robertus Cenalis, Bishop of Avranches in Normandy, imposes upon himself and
his Readers, when he says that these Islands were sometime under his
Predecessors, Bishops of Avranches. This certainly is a mistake; and must
proceed from some Papers, which belike he found in the Archives of that Church,
mentioning some Parcels of Tithes paid here in time past to the Bishops of his
See.

Dean.
The Bishops of Dol and Coutance, for the Exercise of their Authority, had, in
each Island of JERSEY and Guernezey, a Commissary or Surrogate, called Decanus,
the Dean: An Office of great Antiquity, since I find it mentioned in very old
Records Clous. 23. E. I. m. 6. Cedul. Edwardus, etc. Dilecto and Fideli suo,
Henrico de Cobham, Custodi Insular. de Gerneseye, and GERESSEY, Salutem. Quia
accepimus quod Decanus Insulae nostrae de Genereye praedictae, super aliquibus
quae spectant ad Jurisdictionem suam in eadem Insula per vos hactenus extitit
impeditus, quo minus ea^^ exercere possit ^t debet, Nolentes eidem Decano
injuriari in hac part, vobis Mandamus quod ipsum Decanum Jurisdict^n^ sua
p^^ifi^^ uti p^rmittatis, prout e^ uti debet, and hactenus uti consu^vit. It^
tamen quo^ nihil exerceat in praejudicium nostrae Regia Dignitatis. Nosque
super Causa Impedimenti praedicti per v^s eidem D^cano si^ illati, in proximo
Parliamento sub Sigillo vestro disti^^^^ and apert^ r^dd^tis certi^res. Test
Meipso apud Westminster. 26. di^ Augusti, Anno Regni ^ostri 23. Vid. Ryley's Placita
Parliamentaria in Appendic^ page 468.
, and have reason to believe it as ancient as Episcopacy, and consequently as
ancient as Christianity it self, in these Islands. To him those Bishops left
the Cognizance of all Matters of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, reserving only to
themselves Ordinations, Institutions, and Appeals. The same Power is vested in
the present Deans, with this limitation, that they are to govern themselves by
the Advice and Opinions of the rest of the Ministers, who are to be their
constant Assessors, much after the manner of those ancient Presbyteries, or
Councils of Priests, who sat with the Bishops in their Consistories, and
assisted them in giving Judgment in all Causes brought before them. An
excellent Government, and grounded on the Primitive Pattern.

When the Office of Dean was revived in JERSEY in the Reign of K. James I, a
Motion was made to give the said Dean the Power of a Bishop Suffragan within
the Island: Appeals being still reserved to the Right Reverend Father in God
the Lord Bishop of Winchester. I could never know why that Motion was rejected.
But we daily see the necessity of such a Power, particularly in Want of
Confirmation.
the want of Confirmation of Children after Baptism: That Apostolical
Institution being thereby become altogether unpracticable amongst Us. Nor have
we any way to supply that Defect but by taking great care (as we generally do)
to have Children brought to public Catechism, where, in the presence of God's
Church, they renew their Baptismal Vow, and taking upon themselves the
Obligations of Christianity, discharge their Sponsors of the Promise made for
them at their Baptism. Upon which, and not before, we admit them to the Holy
Communion.

Patronage of the Churches.
The Patronage of all the Churches here, in time of Popery, belonged to several
Great Abbots in Normandy, as to the Abbots of St. Sauveur le Vicomte,
Cherbourg, St. Michael, Blanch Land, etc. which Patronage, at the
Reformation, was vested in the King, who has since made Cession of it to the
Governor. It is he that presents now to all vacant Benefices in His Majesty's
Right. But the Deanery continues of Royal Nomination, and is held by Patent
under the Great Seal.

Impropriations.
These Great Norman Abbots had not only the Nomination, but the Tithes also, of
all the Parishes in this Island: A small Proportion, as the 3d, 7th, 8th, 9th,
or 10th Sheaf of the said Impropriated Tithes being reserved for those that
ministered at the Altar. These Impropriations, at the Dissolution of Monasteries
in England, instead of returning to the Church, were annexed to the Crown, and
are become part of the King's Revenue in the Island: Much the same Proportion
as before being still allotted to the Incumbents; together with the Novals or
Deserts, which are the Tithes of Lands that remained wast and untilled at the
Suppression of those Houses, but have been since converted into Arable.

Black-Book of Coutance.
The following Scheme drawn out of the Black-Book of Coutance (like that in the
Exchequer) will show what that Proportion was, and what the King enjoys now in
right of the dispossessed Abbots.

Vniversis praesentes Literas inspecturis, Officialis Constantiensis Salutem.
Notum facimus quod nos ad Requestam Religiosorum Virorum Abbatis and Conventus
Sancti Salvatoris Vicecomitis, visitavimus, legimus, and inspeximus, atque
visitari, legi, and inspici fecimus, quendam Librum in Domo seu Manerio
Episcopali Constantiensi existentem, vulgariter Librum Nigrum nuncupatum, in
quo vidimus and legimus nonnullas Clausulas, Ecclesias, and Beneficia Insulae
JERSEY, and de eis cum praefato Libro Nigro collationem fecimus diligenter.
Quarum quidam Clausularum Tenor sequitur de verbo ad verbum, and est talis.

Ecclesia Sancti Breverlardi.
Patronus, Abbas S. Salvatoris Vicecomitis, and percipit duas parts Garbarum,
and Rector sextam. Abatissa de Cadomo duodecimam Supp. ^x MSS. Gall.
. Abbatissa Vilmonasterii Villers Canivet. Diaces. Sagiens.
duodecimam. Rector item habet sex Virgas Eleemosynae. Et valet dicta Ecclesia
Annis communibus XXX Lib. Turonens.

Ecclesia Sancti Petri.
Patronus, Abbas S. Salvatoris Vicecom. Et percipit medietatem Garbarum.
Abbatissa Cadomensis quartam Garbam; and Abbatissa Vilmonasteriensis aliam
quartam (excepta MSS. Gall. Curvata.
carucata de Id. Nobretey.
Nobretez) Rector percipit novalia; and habet VIII Virgas Terrae Eleemosynae,
and valet XXX Lib. Turon.

Ecclesia de Trinitate.
Patronus, Abbas Caesaris-Burgi. Abbas S. Salvatoris percipit sextam Garbam;
Abbas Caesaris-Burgi tertiam, and liberam Decimam. Episcopus Auritanus The
Bishop of Avranches.
medietatem Garbarum. Rector percipit novalia, and habet VIII Virgas
Eleemosynae; and valet communibus Annis XXX Lib. Turon.

Ecclesia Beatae Mariae.
Patronus, Abbas Caesariensis. Abbas S. Salvatoris Vice-com. percipit sextam
Garbam. Abbatissa Cadomensis and Monasterii Suppl. ex MSS. Gall.
Villers quartam partem Decimae Garbarum. Rector percipit tertiam partem
Garbarum; and habet XVI Virgas Eleemosynae, and valet XXX Lib. Turon.

Ecclesia Sancti Johannis.
Patronus, Abbas S. Salvatoris Vicecom. and percipit totam Decimam, and
Ecclesia ibidem Prioratus ejusdem Monasterii. Et sunt ibi duae Virgae
Eleemosynae, and valet XXVIII Lib. Turon.

Ecclesia Sancti Audoeni.
Patronus, Abbas S. Michaelis in periculo Maris; and percipit ibi duas Garbas,
and IV Lib. Turon. Abbatissa Cadom. and Monasterii Villers duodecimam Garbam.
Abbas S. Salvatoris Vice-com. sextam Garbam. Rector habet IV Virgas
Eleemosynae, and valet XXX Lib. Turon.

Ecclesia Sancti Laurentii.
Patronus, Abbas de Blanca Landa; and percipit tertiam partem Decimae. Abbas S.
Salvatoris Vice-com. sextam. Episcopus Avranches.
Aurensis medietatem. Rector habet XVI Virgas Eleemosynae, and valet XXX Lib.
Turon.

Ecclesia Sancti Salvatoris.
Patronus, Archidiaconus Vallis Viris Vauvect.
in Ecclesia Constantiensi. Et est ibi Vicarius qui reddit Archidiacono
annuatim XX Lib. Turon. Dominus Episcopus Constantiensis percipit medietatem
Decimae; Archidiaconus tertiam; Abbas S. Salvatoris Vice-com. sextam. Et habet
Vicarius XXIV Virg. Eleemosynae.

Ecclesia Sancti Clementis.
Patronus, Abbas S. Salvatoris Vicecom. Rector percipit quartam and quintam
Garbam. Abbas S. Salvatoris Vice-com. Abbatissa Cadom. and Monasterii Villers,
residuum. Et ibi XXIV Virg. Eleemosynae, and valet XL Lib. Turon.

Ecclesia Sancti Martini Veteris.
Patronus, Abbas Caesariensis; and percipit ibi C. solid. de Pensione. Rector
percipit tertiam partem Decimae, and habet XXVI Virgas Eleemosynae. Abbas S.
Salvatoris Vice-com. sextam Garbam. Abbatissa Cadom. and Monasterii Villers
quartam partem; and valet LXX Lib. Turon.

Ecclesia de Grovilla.
Patronus, Abbas de Exaquio De l'Essay. Ord. Bened. in Diaces. Constant.
; percipit quartam Garbam. Abbas S. Salvatoris Vice-com. sextam. Abbatissa
Cadom. and Monasterii Villers, medietatem. Rector percipit nonam Partem, and
habet XII Virgas Eleemosynae. Et valet communibus Annis L. Lib. Turon.

Suppl. ex MSS. Gall.
[Ecclesia Sancti Helerii.
Patronus, Abbas S. Salvatoris Vicecom. and percipit medietatem Decimae; ex qua
medietate percipit Rector quintam Garbam. Abbatissa Cadom. and Monasterii
Villers, quartam partem. Rector habet.... Virgas Eleemosynae, and valet XL.
Lib. Turon.]

Quod autem vidimus and legimus hoc Testamur. In cujus rei Testimonium sigillum
magnum Curiae Episcopalis Constantiensis praesentibus duximus apponendum. Datum
Constantiae, A. D. 1461. 6ta Die Mensis Februarii.
Exemption from Firstfruits.
At present the best Revenue of the Clergy arises from the Improvement of
Fruit Trees and Cidar. But all Years are not equally productive, nor does Cidar
bear always the same Price, which renders the said Revenue very uncertain. By a
long and immemorial Prescription, the Clergy of this Island have enjoyed an
Exemption from payment of First Fruits, and Annates, or Tenths, to the King.
The impropriated Tithes of the Parish of St. Savior, by special Grant from the
Crown, have been annexed to the Deanery.

Church-Treasuries.
To each Church belongs a Fund, or Annual Revenue, of about 15 or 20 Quarters of
Wheat-Rent, given in ancient Times by Pious and Charitable Persons, for the
Support of those Fabrics, and other Sacred and Religious Uses: But it is now
more generally applied to the Public Necessities of the Island.

Free-Schools.
To supply the Church with able Men from among the Natives, there are two
Publick-Free-Latin and Greek Schools, set up almost in the two Extremities of
the Island, viz. St. Magloire (corruptly St. Manelier) and St. Anastase, or
Athanase, each of them being designed for the Instruction of the Youth of six
Parishes. Fellowships, etc. in Oxford.
We have also three Fellowships, and five Exhibitions or Scholarships, in
Oxford, belonging to JERSEY and Guernezey by Alternate Turns. The first Founded
by K. Charles I. of Blessed Memory, induced thereunto by Archbishop Laud, who
intended by those Encouragements to draw off our young Students from Foreign
Universities, whither they generally went before, and from whence they too
often returned with Minds very much prejudiced against the Church of England:
The last, the bountiful Gift of the Reverend Dr. Morley, our late honored
Diocesan.

CHAP. VI. Convention of the Estates.
THat common Observation, that in the Forms and Models of Government, a little
City differs not from a great one Aristot. Polit. l. 1. (...).
, is verified by the Constitution and Practice of this Island, where in a very
small State, one may see the Figure and Image of a great Empire. For here we
have our Conventus trium Ordinum, i. e. Our Convention, or Meeting, of the
three Orders or Estates of the Island, in imitation of those August Assemblies
known by that, or some other Name, in great Kingdoms and Monarchies. In a word,
this Convention is the shadow and resemblance of an English Parliament; being
composed of the Jurats, Members of the States.
or Court of Justice, as the First and noblest Body; the Dean and Clergy, as
the Second; and the XII High-Constables, as the Representatives of the Commons:
The King's Procurator, the Viscount; and the King's Advocate, though they
represent no Estate, being also admitted propter Dignitatem. Rules for their
sitting.
This Convention cannot be held but by Consent and Permission of the Governor,
or of his Deputy, who has a Negative Voice therein; as the Parliament cannot
meet but at the Pleasure of the King, nor pass any thing into Law without his
Royal Assent. The Bailly (or his Lieutenant) is the perpetual Prolocutor in
these Meetings, as the Speaker is in Parliament; and every Member Present has
Voice Deliberative. No Estates can be held without Seven of each Body, at the
least; nor can Foreigners preferred to Benefices be Members of this Convention,
unless naturalized; it not being thought safe to entrust Strangers with the
Secrets of the Island, till they have given good Proof of their Affection to
the Government they live under.

There has been some Dispute formerly about the Power claimed by the Governor
in calling these Assemblies, and influencing their Debates by his Negative
Voice. The result whereof was a Regulation of that Power by two Consecutive
Orders of Council, in the Reign of K. James I, to this Effect: Governor's
Negative Voice.


First Order, Anno 1618.
-- There shall be no Assembly of the States without the Consent of the
Governor, or, of his Lieutenant in his Absence. In which it is to be understood
that the Governor, or his Lieutenant in his Absence, have a Negative Voice; To
the end it may be provided, that no Ordinance may be agreed upon prejudicial to
his Majesty's Service, or the Interests of the People.

Second Order, Anno 1619. Modifying the former.
-- For the better Explanation of the Article concerning the Assembly of the
States, which was ordered not to be done without the Consent of the Governor,
or of his Lieutenant in his Absence, it is now finally Ordered, for Causes made
known unto Us, and for the avoiding of all future Question, that the foresaid
Article shall continue in Force: with this Qualification, That if the Bailly or
Justices shall require an Assembly of the States, the Governor shall not defer
it above fifteen days; Except he have such cause to the contrary, either in
respect of the Safety of the Island, or Our special Service otherwise, as he
will answer to Us, or the Lords of Our Council; whereof he shall give as
present Advice as possibly wind and weather may serve.

-- And concerning the Governor's Negative Voice in the making of Ordinances,
it is now also Ordered, that he shall not use his Negative Voice, but in such
Points as shall concern Our special Interest; the rather in regard that such
Acts as are made in their Assembly are but Provisional Ordinances, and have no
Power or Property of Laws until they be confirmed by Us.

Raising of Money.
The great Business of these Meetings is the raising of Money to supply public
Occasions. For as in England Money cannot he raised upon the Subject but by
Authority of Parliament, so here, it is a received Maxim, that no Levies can be
made upon the Inhabitants but by their own Consent, declared by their
Representatives assembled in Common Council. Nor have the States a Power of
themselves to Create new Subsidies or Imposts; but only, upon extraordinary
Emergencies, when the common Safety and Defense of the Island requires it, or
Application must be made to the King by Persons sent over at the public
Charge, to Levy what they judge sufficient for those Uses, by fixed and equal
Proportions, according to the ancient Rate. In these Assemblies, Accounts of
the public Revenue and Expenses are stated and Audited: Differences arising
about the Disposal and Administration of the Church-Treasuries, are examined
and determined: Deputies are appointed to represent Our Grievances, and
solicit Our Affairs at Court: good and wholesome Ordinances against Profaners
of the Lord's day, Blasphermers of God's holy Name, common Swearers and
Drunkards, and other riotous and disorderly Persons, are made, and enacted
under severe Penalties: And, in a word, all other Matters are transacted
therein, as are thought to conduce most to preserve the Honor and Reverence
that is due to God and to Holy Things; the Fidelity and Obedience we all owe to
their Majesty's, and those that Act in Subordination to their Authority; the
Peace and Tranquillity, the Welfare and Happiness, of the whole Island. And yet
it must be confessed, that most of these things are of the Competence and
Jurisdiction of the Court, but Our Magistrates think it Prudential to take the
Advice and Council of these Assemblies, considering wisely that their
Concurrence must add a Force and Vigor to these, and the like Sanctions.

Constables.
I must not forget to observe that the Constables, who make so considerable a
Body in these Assemblies, and are the true and proper Representatives of the
People, are Officers of better Account with us than they are in England. They
are generally Men of the best Qualifications in the respective Parishes for
which they serve; And the Office it self is so far above Contempt, that it is
sought and Ambitioned by those whose Birth and Abilities add at the same time a
Credit and a Reputation to it. The Office is Triennial, though some continue in
it much longer, and to those that discharge it with Honor, it is a step to the
Magistracy.

The following Scheme, with the Explanatory Table here underneath, will show
the manner of sitting in these Assemblies.

A The Governor, or his Deputy. B The Bailly, or his Lieutenant. C C C C, etc.
The XII Jurats. D D D D, etc. The Dean and Ministers. E Their Majesty's
Procurator. F Their Majesty's Advocate. G The Viscount. H H H H, etc. The XII
Constables. I The Gressier. K One of the Denunciators attending. L The Usher of
the Court. M The Table. N A large Silver gilt Mace carried before the Bailly
and Jurats. O The Vestibulum.
The States of the Isle of JERSEY.


CHAP. VII. Privileges.
Motives for our Privileges.
Few Places can boast of greater Privileges than this Island. The Reasons
alleged in the Preambles of Our Charters as the Motives inducing Our Kings to
grant Us these Privileges, are especially these Three 1. To reward Our
Loyalty, and Fidelity, to the Crown of England. We have merited these
Privileges by Our good Services. 2. To engage, Us to be Loyal and Faithful
still. We can have no Temptation, while we enjoy these Privileges, to change
Our Masters. 3. To make Our Condition easy and comfortable, which, under the
Circumstances and Disadvantages of Our Situation, would otherwise be most
intolerable. There would be no living in this Island (for English Subjects)
without great Freedoms and Immunities: Which few would envy, if they knew at
what price we purchase them.

Our want of Records beyond the Time of King John will not let Us know what
were Our Privileges under Our more ancient Dukes, and Kings, his Predecessors.
From him therefore we must date the Era of Our Liberties and Franchises; And
forasmuch as his Constitutions are the Ground and Foundation of all Our
Subsequent Charters, I shall set them down here at large, as they are found
among the Records K. John's Constitutions.
of that King's Reign in the Tower of London, under this Title,

Inquisitio facta de Servitiis, Consuetudinibus, and Libertatibus Insul. de
GERESE Rot. II. 3.
and Guernese, and Legibus Constitutis in Insulis per Dominum Johannem Regem,
per Sacramentum Roberti Blondel, Radulphi Burnel, etc. qui dicunt, etc. Then
follows,

Constitutiones, and Provisiones, Constitutae per Dominum Johannem Regem,
postquam Normannia alienata fuit.
Imprimis, Constituit Duodecim Coronatores Juratos, ad Placita, and Jura ad
Coronam spectantia, Custodienda.

II. Constituit etiam and concessit pro Securitate Insularium, quod Ballivus de
coetero per Visum Dictorum Coronatorum poterit Placitare absque Brevi de nova
Disseisina facta infra annum, de morte Antecessorum infra annum, de Dote
similiter infra Annum, de Feodo invadiato semper, de incumbreio Maritagii, etc.

III. Ii debent eligi de Indigenis Insularum, per Ministros Domini Regis, and
Optimates Patriae, scilicet post Mortem Vnius eorum, alter fide dignus, vel
alio casu legitimo, debet substitui.

IV. Electi debent jurare sine condition ad manutenendum and salvandum Jura
Domini Regis, and Patriotarum.

V. Ipsi Duodecim in qualibet Insula, in Absentia Justiciariorum Commissioners
Royal.
, and una cum Justiciariis cum ad Parts illas venerint, debent Judicare de
Omnibus Casibus in dicta Insula qualitercunque Emergentibus, exceptis Casibus
nimis Arduis, and siquis Legitime convictus fuerit a Fidelitate Domini Regis
tanquam Proditor recessisse, vel manus injecisse violentas in Ministros Domini
Regis modo debito Ossicium exercendo.

VI. Ipsi Duodecim debent Emendas sive Amerciamenta omnium praemissorum Taxare,
praedictis tamen Arduis Casibus exceptis, aut aliis Casibus in quibus secundum
Consuetudinem. Insularum mere spectat Redemptio pro Voluntate Domini Regis and
Curiae suae.

VII. Si Dominus Rex velit certiorari de Recordo Placiti coram Justiciariis and
ipsis Duodecim agitati, Justiciarii cum ipsis Duodecim debent Recordum facere;
and de Placitis agitatis coram Ballivo and ipsis Juratis in dictis Insulis,
ipsi debent Recordum facere conjunctim.

VIII. Item, Quod nullum Placitum infra quamlibet dictarum Insularum coram
quibuscunque Justiciariis inceptum, debet extra dictam Insulam adjornari, sed
ibidem omnino terminari.

IX. Insuper constituit quod nullus de libero Tenemento suo, quod per Annum and
diem pacifice Tenuerit, sine Brevi Domini Regis de Cancellaria de Tenente and
Tenemento faciente mentionem, respondere debeat, neque Teneatur. [This was
added to protect the Islanders against the Oppressions and Vexations of the
then Governors. This Article is now grown out of Use.]

X. Item, Quod nullus pro Felonia Damnatus extra Insulas praedictas,
haereditates suas infra Insulas forisfacere potest, quin haeredes sui eas
habeant.

XI. Item, Si quis forisfecerit, and abjuraverit Insulam, and postea Dominus
Rex pacem suam ei concesserit, and infra Annum and diem abjurationis revertatur
ad Insulam, de haereditate sua plenarie debet restitui.

XII. Item, Quod nullus debet imprisonari in Castro nisi in casu Criminali,
vitam vel membrum tangente, and hoc per Judicium Duodecim Coronatorum
Juratorum, sed in aliis liberis Prisonis ad hoc Deputatis.

XIII. Item, Quod Dominus Rex nullum Praepositum ibidem prohibere debeat, nisi
per Electionem Patriotarum. [This Article regards Guernezey only, where they
have a Provost. In JERSEY we have a Viscount; but these two Officers are much
the same.]

XIV. Item, Constitutum est quod Insulani non debeant coram Justiciariis ad
Assisas capiendas assignatis, seu alia Placita tenenda, respondere, antequam
Transcripta Commissionum eorundem sub Sigillis suis eis liberentur.

XV. Item, Quod Justiciarii per Commissionem Domini Regis ad Assisas capiendas
ibidem assignati, non debent tenere Placita in qualibet dictarum Insularum
ultra spatium trium Septimanarum.

XVI. Item, Quod ipsi Insulani coram dictis Justiciariis post Tempus praedictum
venire non tenentur.

XVII. Item, Quod ipsi non tenentur Domino Regi Homagium facere, donec ipse
Dominus Rex ad parts illas, seu infra Ducatum Normanniae venerit, aut aliquem
alium per Literas suas assignare voluerit in iisdem partibus, ad praedictum
Homagium, nomine suo, ibidem recipiendum.

XVIII. Item, Statutum est pro Tuitione and Salvatione Insularum and Castrorum,
and maxim quia Insulae prope sunt, and juxta Potestatem Regis Franciae, and
aliorum inimicorum suorum, quod omnes Portus Insularum been custodirentur; and
Custodes Portuum Dominus Rex constituere praecipit, ne Damna sibi and suis
eveniant.

There are some other Articles, which being also grown out of Use, I purposely
omit.

These Constitutions of K. John were afterward renewed by his Son Henry III,
in a Letter to Philip de Aubigny, Lord (or Governor) of these Islands, Anno
Regni 33 ^. By these Constitutions We have a Jurisdiction established among our
selves, and our Properties secured against vexatious Suits and Evocations into
England.

Charter of Edward III.
We have next the Charter of Edward III, which is only General, and Confirmative
of former Grants.

^^of Rich. II.
We have Two Charters of Richard II, The First General, and the same with that
of Edward III, both contained in an Inspeximus of Henry IV. The Second, more
Particular, exempting Us for ever from all manner of Taxes, Imposts, and
Customs, in all Cities, Market Towns, and Ports of England. Quodque ipsi (viz.
Insulani) and Successores sui in perpetuum, sint liberi and quieti in omnibus
Civitatibus, Villis Mercatoriis, and Portubus infra Regnum nostrum Angliae, de
Omnimodis Theloniis, Exactionibus, Custumis, taliter and eodem modo quo fideles
Ligei nostri in nostro Regno praedicto extiterunt.

^^of Edw. IV.
The Charter of Edward IV extends this Privilege to all Places within the
King's Dominions beyond the Seas. Concessimus eidem Genti and Communitati, quod
ipsi, Haeredes, and Successores sui, sint liberi and quieti in omnibus
Civitatibus, Burgis, Villis Mercatoriis, and aliis Villis, Portubus, and Locis
infra Regnum nostrum Angliae, and infra omnes Terras and Insulas nostras, citra
vel ultra Mare sit as vel situatas, de omnibus Theloniis, Custumis, Subsidiis,
etc. There is also a Clause in this Charter that confirms all Our Ancient
Rights, Liberties, and Franchises infra Insulam, i. e. within the Island;
whereby is meant (among other Things) an Exemption and Immunity from all Taxes
and Subsidies within the same; which Exemption is the Ancient Privilege of
this Island, and has been peaceably enjoyed by Us to this Day. Et etiam quod
dicta Gens and Communitas ejusdem Insulae de JERESEY, Haeredes, and Successores
sui, habeant and gaudeant omnia Jura, Libertates, and Franchisias sua, infra
eandem Insulam, etc.

^^of Hen. VII. Hen. VIII. Edw. VI. Q. Mary. Q. Eliz. etc.
It were too long to mention the following Charters and Grants of Henry VII,
Henry VIII, Edward VI, Q. Mary, Q. Elizabeth, and so down to our Time. In
general, by them all the foregoing Privileges are ratified, explained, and
enlarged with ample Additions; and We are made equal in point of Commerce, with
the rest of Their Majesty's English Subjects.

Notable Privilege.
I shall insist somewhat longer on a very singular Privilege, belonging to Us
in common with the other Islands of this Tract; which is, a Freedom and Liberty
of Trade in these Islands and the Seas adjacent, for Merchants of all Nations,
in Time of War, as well as in Time of Peace.

I shall first set down this Privilege in the Words of our Charters, and then
shall proceed to show what has been said of it by Writers, and what appears
thereof upon Practice.

-- See the Charters of Ed. IV. Henry VII. Henry VIII. Edward VI. Q. Elizabeth.
K. James I. K. Charles I. K. Chapter II. and K. James II.
Cumque nonnulla alia Privilegia, Jurisdictiones, Immunitates, Libertates, and
Franchis^ae, per praedictos Progenitores and Precedessores nostros, quondam
Reges Angliae, and Duces Normanniae, ac alios, praefatae Insulae Viz. de JERSEY.
indulta, donata, concessa, and confirmata fuerunt, ac a tempore cujus
contrarii Memoria hominum non existit, infra Insulam and Loca Maritima
praenominata inviolabiliter Vsitata and Observata fuerunt, de quibus unum est,
quod tempore Belli, omnium Nationum Mercatores, and alii, tam alienigeni quam
indigeni, tam hosts quam amici, libere, licite, and impune, queant, and
possint, dictam Insulam and Loca Maritima cum Navibus, Mercibus, and Bonis
suis, tam pro evitandis Tempestatibus, quam pro aliis licitis suis Negotiis
inibi peragendis, adire, accedere, commeare, and frequentare, and libera
Commercia, Negotiationes, ac rem Mercatoriam ibidem exercere, ac tuto and
secure commorari, inde recommeare, ac redire toties quoties, absque damno,
molestia, seu hostilitate quacunque, in rebus, mercibus, bonis, aut Corporibus
suis; idque non solum infra Insulam, Loca maritima praedicta, ac praecinctum
eorundem, verum etiam infra Spatia undique ab eisdem distantia usque ad visum
Hominis, id est, quatenus visus oculi posset assequi; Nos eandem Immunitatem,
Impunitatem, Libertatem, ac Privilegium, ac caetera omnia praemissa, ultimo
recitata, rata grataque habentes, ea pro Nobis, Haeredibus, and Successoribus
nostris, quantum in nobis est, praefatis Ballivo, and Juratis, ac caeteris
Incolis, Habitatoribus, Mercatoribus, and aliis, tam Hostibus quam Amicis, and
eorum cuilibet, per Praesentes indulgemus, and elargimur, Authoritate nostra
Regia renovamus, reiteramus, and Confirmamus, in tam amplis modo and forma
prout praedicti Incolae, and Habitatores Insulae praedictae, ac praedicti
Indigeni, and Alienigeni, Mercatores, and alii, per antea usi vel gavisi
fuerunt, vel uti aut gaudere debuerunt: Vniversis igitur and singulis
Magistratibus, Ministris, and subditis nostris, per Vniversum Regnum nostrum
Angliae, ac caetera Dominia, and Locos Ditioni nostroe subjecta, ubilibet
constitutis, per Praesentes denunciamus, ac firmiter injungendo praecipimus, ne
hanc nostram Donationem, Concessionem, and Confirmationem, seu aliquod in
eisdem expressum aut contentum, temerarie infringere, seu quovis modo violare,
praesumant. Et siquis ausu temerario contra fecerit, seu attemptaverit, Volumus
and decernimus, quantum in nobis est, quod restituat non solum ablata, aut
erepta, sed quod etiam pro Dampno, Interesse, and expensis, ad plenariam
recompensam and satisfactionem compellatur, per quaecunque Juris nostri
Remedia, severeque puniatur, ut Regiae nostrae Potestatis, ac Legum nostrarum
contemptor temerarius. --

This is such a Privilege as can hardly be paralleled in any Age.

Add now to this the concurring Testimony of Writers, Strangers as well as
English, who have treated of the Affairs of these Islands, and who all own and
assert this Privilege, in its full Extent and Latitude.

The Book Entitled Les Us and Coutumes de la Mer (i. e. The Uses and Customs
of the Sea) Published by Authority, and Printed at Rouen, An. 1671, speaking of
Prizes made against Laws agreed on by the Consent of Nations, and consequently
to be adjudged Null, says IIIme Party. Art. XXI.. 6. page 357. Dabondant si la
Prise a este faite en Lieu d'Azyle ou de Refuge, comme sont les Isles and mers
de GERZAY and Grenezay, en la Cost de Normandy, auquelles les Francois and
Anglois, pour quelque Guerre qu'il y ait enter les Deux Couronnes, ne doivent
insulter, ou courre l'un sur l'autre, tant and si loin que s'estend l'Aspect ou
la Veue desdites Isles.
that such are those that are made in Privileged Places [en lieu d'Azyle, ou
de Refuge] And such Places, he adds, are the Isles and Seas of GERSAY and
Grenezay on the Coast of Normandy, where the French and English, whatever War
may be betwixt the two Crowns, are not to insult, or prey upon each other; so
far as the said Islands can be discovered at Sea.

The Learned Mr. Cambden owns this Privilege, De Insul. Brit. page 855.
though by a mistake he applies it to Guernezey only. Veteris etenim Regum
Angliae Privilegio (says he) Perpetuae hic sunt quasi induciae, and Gallis
aliisque quamvis Bellum exardescat, ultro citroque huc sine periculo venire,
and Commercia secure exercere, licet.

That profound Antiquary, Mr. Seldom, in his Mare Clausum, mentions this
Privilege twice Lib. II. Cap. XIX. page 376. Et iterum Lib. II. Cap. XXII.
page 412, etc.
, and urges it as an Argument to prove his Hypothesis touching the King of
England's Dominion over the Narrow Seas: Neque enim facile conjectandum est,
undenam Originem habuerit Jus illud Induciarum singular ac perpetuum, quo
JERSEY.
CAESAREAE, Guernezey.
Sarn^ae, caeterarumque Insularum Normannico Littori praejacentium Incolae,
etiam in ipso Mari fruuntur, flagrante utcunque inter Circumvicinas Gentes
Bello, nisi ab Angliae Regum Dominio hoc Marino derivetur. -- This Learned Man
had taken great pains to search and inspect Our Charters among the Records in
the Tower, and remained satisfied of the Validity of this Privilege.

Dr. Heylin speaks thus of it Survey. Chapter 1. page 300.
, though by a Mistake common to him with Mr. Cambden, he thought this Privilege
belonged only to Guernezey. By an Ancient Privilege of the Kings of England,
there is with them in a Manner a continual Truce; and lawful it is both for
Frenchmen, and for others, how hot soever the War be followed in other Parts,
to repair hither without Danger, and here to Trade in all Security. A
Privilege founded upon a Bull of Pope Sixtus IV, the 10th. Year, as I
remember, of his Popedom; Edward IV then Reigning in England, and Lewis XI over
the French. By virtue of which Bull, all those stand ipso facto excommunicate,
which any way molest the Inhabitants of this Isle of Guernzey, or any which
resort unto their Island, either by Piracy, or any other Violence whatsoever. A
Bull first published in the City of Constance, unto whose Diocese these Islands
once belonged, afterward verified by the Parliament of Paris, and confirmed by
Our Kings of England till this Day. The Copy of this Bull I my self have seen,
and something also of the Practice of it on Record; by which it does appear,
that a Man of War of France having taken an English Ship, and therein some
Passengers and Goods of Guernezey, made Prize and Prisoners of the English, but
restored those of Guernezey to their Liberty, and to their Own.

The Bull of Sixtus IV is not the Ground and Foundation of this Privilege, (as
the Doctor misunderstandeth it.) But on the contrary the Privilege was the
Ground and Occasion of the Bull, as appears from the Bull it self. For K.
Edward IV being informed of a great many Infractions made to this Privilege,
by Pirates and others preying upon Merchants as they resorted to these Islands
purely on the Account of Trade, caused his Ambassadors at Rome to move the
Matter to the Pope, whose Censures were much regarded in those Days. And thus
the Bull was procured, and is indeed a Terrible One. The King commanded it to
be notified and published throughout his Dominions, strictly injoyning the
Observation of it to all his Subjects. And by Order of Lewis XI, and Charles
VIII, Kings of France, it was verified by the Parliament of Paris, and
proclaimed in a very solemn manner in all the Ports of Normandy, as it had been
before in those of Bretagne, a son de Trompe, i. e. with Sound of Trumpet, by
Francis II, the last Duke of that Country. We have it still extant in an
Inspeximus of K. Henry VIII, under the Great Seal of England, now in my
Custody. It Is a Piece of a very extraordinary Nature, and that shows better
than any thing I have seen the Style of the Court of Rome in those Days: But
it is somewhat too long to be inserted here.

It remains now that we show something of this Privilege upon Practice.

Anno 1523. A Ship of Guernezey being taken by a Privateer of Morlaix, during
the War betwixt Henry VIII of England, and Francis I of France, and carried
into Morlaix, was, by Order of the Count de Laval Governor of Bretagne,
released upon Plea of this Privilege MSS. (...) m^.
.

Anno 1524. A Prize made by one Pointy, and brought into JERSEY, because made
within the Precincts of the Island, and therefore contrary to this Privilege,
was, in an Assembly of the States, the Governor and the King's Commissioners
present, pronounced Tortionary, and Illegal, and Pointy adjudged to make
Restitution. Vid. Acts of the States.
.

Anno...... Sir Edward Seymour, Viscount Beauchamp, afterward Duke of
Somerset, and Lord Protector, being Governor of this Island, some English
Privateers came into the Port of St. Aubin, and finding there several French
Merchant Men that were come hither under the Security of this Privilege, would
have made Prize of them* but they were opposed by the Deputy Governor, who
Protected the Merchants, and raising the Militia forced the Privateers to
depart out of the Island Chronique MSS. de l'Isle* de GERSEY. Chap XXV.
.

Anno 1614. In a Plea before the Parliament of Bretagne, in behalf of Three
JERSEY-Merchants taken by the French, it was declared that these Islands had
the Privilege de rester neutres pendant les Guerres d'entre les deux Royaumes
This Plea is in Print.
.

Anno 1628. A Bark laden with Goods from St. Malo, and directed to one
Baillehache an Inhabitant of JERSEY, was in the Road set upon by one Barker,
Captain of an English Privateer. The Court ordered the Bark to be restored,
pursuant to this Privilege Vid. Acts of the Court.
.

Lastly, during the War of Rochel and the Isle of Rhee, the Hosiers of Paris
and Rouen had free Access to these Islands, and carried away many Bales of
Stockings, as those of Coutance have since done almost down to Our Time; Our
Ports being open to all that came to Trade with Us in a peaceable Way.

Thus much of Our Privileges. Of which I shall only add, that as they are
derived to Us from the Grace and Bounty of Our Kings, and require all the
Returns that we can make of an inviolable Fidelity to Their Crown and
Government, so we hope, by Their Majesty's Favor, and while we cannot be
justly charged with any thing contrary to Their Majesty's Service and Our Duty,
(and these Privileges seem not inconsistent with the same) to be continued and
maintained in the quiet Possession of them.

THE END.
(...)
ADVERTISEMENTS.
SERMON sur l'Hymme Angelique and Eucharistique (Luc. 2. 14. Gloire soit a Dieu
aux Cieux tres-hauts, and en Terre Paix, envers les hommes bonne volonte.)
Prononce dans l'Eglise de St. Sauveur en l'Isle de JERSEY, le 3 me. jour d'
Avril 1687, jour de Cene. Par PHILIPPE FALL, Maitre aux Arts es Universites d'
Oxfort and de Cambrige, etc.

A SERMON Preached at St. Helier in the Isle of JERSEY, before the GARRISON,
April 10. 1692. (Luke 3. 14. And the Soldiers likewise demanded of him saying,
And what shall we do? And he said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither
accuse any falsely, but be content with your Wages.) By PHILIP FALL M. A.
Rector of St. Savior in the said Island. Printed for John Newton, at the Three
Pigeons, over against the Inner-Temple-Gate, in Fleet Street, 1692.

Books Printed for, and sold by John Newton, at the Three Pigeons over against
the Inner Temple Gate in Fleetstreet.
1. THE History of the Campaign in the Spanish Netherlands, Anno Dom. 1693.
with an exact Draught of the several Attacks of the French Line, by the Duke of
Wertemberg with the Detachment under his Command, done upon Coper: By Edw.
D^auvergn^ M. A. Rector of St. Brelard in the Isle of Jersey, and Chaplain to
Their Majesty's Regiment of Scots-Guards.

2. A Charge given at the General Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the County
of Surry, holden at Darking, on Tuesday the 5th. day of April 1692. and in the
4th. Year of Their Majesty's Reign: By the Honorable Hugh Hare Esquire, one of
Their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for that County.

3. A Letter to Dr. South upon occasion of a late Book Entitled,
Animadversions upon Dr. Sherlock's Book in Vindication of the Trinity.

4. A Discourse of Natural and revealed Religion in several Essays: By Mr. Tim.
Nourse.

5. The Anatomy of the Earth, Dedicated to all Gentlemen Miners: By Tho.
Robinson Rector of Ousby in Cumberland:

ERRATA.
Page 9. lin. 11. for Edeward, r. Edward. page 30. in the Margin, lin. 4. for
K. CHARL. r. K. CHARL I. page 49. lin. 14. for, did not good Service. r. did
that good Service. page 62. in the Margin. Not. lin. 2. for, Insula arena sive
Sabulo quod erat, r. Insula arena five Sabuli qua erat. page 76. lin. 11. for
Lan on r. Lancon. page 141. in the French Column, lin. 10. for Sacrament, r.
Sacrament. page 183. in the Marginal Not. lin. 23. for Jurisdictionem, r.
Jurisdictionem. page 184. Margin* Not. lin. 4. for Jurisdictione r.
Jurisdictione.


