A FAMOUS CONFERENCE BETWEEN POPE CLEMENT the Xth. AND CARDINAL de Monte Alto,
Concerning the late Discovery of the MASS IN Holy Scripture, MADE By the
Worthy Father Patrick, An Excellent Engineer of the CHURCH of ROME in ENGLAND.

Latet anguis in herba.
Ridendo dicere verum quis Vetat.
LONDON, Printed by T. R. and N. T. for Moses Pit at the Angel in St: Paul's
Churchyard, 1674.

Honest Reader:
FAther PATRICK the Popes known Agent in England, and the rest of his Disguised
Brethren study Night and Day how to cheat poor Souls into a Belief and
Profession of that Religion that is destructive to the good of both Body and
Soul: Subtilty and Fraud as you may perceive in this Conference are not wanting
to this good Father in the prosecution of this evil Design. His Looks,
Carriage, and Speech proclaim him to be a Saint: I doubt not but some upon
whom he has prevailed to deny their Religion, and their God, Judge him to be no
less: But that their mistakes may better appear to our World, and that none may
be deceived with his fair Face, and Countenance, nor with that groundless
Affirmation, That the Mass is to be found in Holy Scripture, of which the
Papists make great use. This short Conference which presents you with nothing
but that which may be proved if Questioned, has been Written by a Sincere
Friend of the Protestant Religion.

A CONFERENCE Between a Noted CARDINAL of ROME, And the Present POPE, CLEMENT
the X: About a New Discovery of the Popish MASS in Holy Writ.
Most Holy Father,
You Will pardon my Curiosity that desires to know wherefore there appears upon
your Pontifical Face such extraordinary Expressions of joy. His Holiness
returned to the worthy Cardinal this answer; If my Face bears some testimonies
of my Inward satisfaction and joy, I have just cause for it, for I have even
now learnt a Discovery that has been made in my time that will render my Reign
most famous to all Posterity.

Pope Alexander the 6th: was over-joyed to see that in his days such a naked
and an excellent part of the World as is America, was found out; I have far
more reason to rejoice because that in my days things of greater concernment
that relate to Heaven and Happiness have been searched out, and happily
discovrred; the Holy Mass is found to be hid in a corner of holy Scripture. The
Mass in holy Scripture! quoth the Cardinal full of admiration, how can that
be? I know not how many have been enquiring for it there, and have turned over
every page to see whether they could spy any appearance of it in that place,
and as Obadiah said to Elijah concerning Ahab, There is no Nation or Kingdom
(whither my Lord has not sent to seek thee, and when they said he is not
there, he took an Oath of the Kingdom and Nation that they found thee not; thus
as I may say our holy men have dealt with the Scripture, and the Mass; there is
scarce a page or a Verse that has been diligently examined and enquired into,
and when our Holy and Religious Brethren have seen no shape of the Mass in
Scripture themselves, they have as it were taken an Oath from the Prophets and
Evangelists that they found it not: but all their study and enquiry has been
hitherto to so little purpose, so that they have at last freely confessed, that
the Mass is only to be found in our Old storehouse of rotten Traditions: It
maybe that these sacred Books were not yet near the time of their full
Delivery, or it may be that a wise and experienced Midwife was wanting till now
to help into the world the birth of this great mystery from holy Scripture;
doubtless this noted production was reserved for these happy and refined days;
but may it please your good Holiness to tell me who is that man, or rather who
is that Angel that has made this admirable discovery? It is replied, the Pope,
a secular Priest named Father Patrick, who is Invested with a rich Abbey, worth
five hundred pounds a year, situate in Burgundy, which I have granted unto him
in consideration of the notable services that he has rendered unto me amongst
the English Heretics: he has promised to proceed further, and is engaged by
my liberallity to be mindful of my Interest, and I am persuaded that there is
none so able to settle my Concerns in that Kingdom; for amongst the Ladies I
understand that he is in an high esteem, because of the excellency of his
Natural parts; he wants no Impudency to usher him into every place, and to
cause him to thrust himself into every business, and his nose into every matter.
He can also make use of pious frauds, and Religious Cheats in an excellent
manner, and with fair promises; gain many a good proselite. I am certain there
is never a famous and a noted Curtisan or Religious Votary in the Kingdom, but
he has by his subtilty drawn to me and my holy Church; Not to mention the
multitudes of Irish whom he has possessed with a blind resolution of obeying my
Orders, nor the simple English, that he has bewitched with the vain hopes of
future preferment, pleasure, happiness, and his Ptiestly favor; I must needs
acknowledge that he is a most admirable man to manage my Concerns with
Discretion; he is no less suctesful as appears by his late Initmation of
bringing to pass the total and entire conversion of men, able to bias all
things for me in that Kingdom, and to promote my long designed purpose: It is
true he has lost something of his good Reputation amongst the silly and
precise Puritans, the fantastic Protestants, by being too free of his person
in a public Baudy-house in Holland, and by visiting those of London too often,
and more then I have allowed him: but this reputation he makes good, and raises
again amongst the better sort of men, by helping them to a Whore in time of
need; These things I do approve of, I have granted the liberty of such actions
to all holy and Religious men of his Order, and to the rest of my Clergy,
Clergy, for I am of my predecessors good opinion, let St. Paul say what he
will, that the most regenerate and pious Christians as well as the men of the
world must and do burn with the flames of Lust, and Fornication, and may
sometimes taste a little of the forbidden Fruit: I would rather have him do so,
then commit Matrimony, because by this means he is very gracious with the
generallity of brave Fellows of the Time, and he may by this proceeding be
better able to do me service; for men commonly love the Religion that approves
and allows the fulfilling of our desires; but when these little Piccadillos,
Venial Sins, acts of his humanity should have disgraced him, and his name
amongst the sottish Vulgar that cannot understand how that the things, that I
permit and confirm by my example, become Virtuous when St: Peter whose
Successor I am should have said the contrary, and proclaimed them to be Vices.
He has done enough to deserve our esteem for ever, for he has found the Mass
in Holy Scripture. This discovery will do us a great deal of good, it will
confirm our indulgence, approve of our grants of liberty to sin; It will secure
and fortify our Monastrical Garrisons, and inspire into our noble Monks an
invincible courage; It will defeat and destroy all the enemies of our State and
Kingdom, 1 Cor. 3. 15. In a word, I am in hopes that this new and seasonable
discovery will furnish me with that by which I shall be able to maintain the
Authority of St. Peter's Keys in the World, to enlarge my vast Dominions, to
embellish the palaces of pleasure where Peter took his delight, and where I
have caused his name to be engraven as testimones that I have them from him to
increase my Guards that are not near so numerous as those that did wait upon
St. Peter when he went from place to place to publish the Gospel to maintain
his Triple Crown that In the Castle of St. Angelo and elsewhere St. Peter's
Name is engraven.
he has left me in possession. It is very well quoth the Cardinal if it be
true; but I am in doubt whether it be so, and that when the discovery be
examined, it will be found as vain and groundless as your Temporal power upon
those words, here are two Swords, or your Holinesses preeminency and
Infallibility upon that other Text, It shall lead you into all truth, for your
Holiness knows as you did lately avow, that unless your possession were
stronger, and more aparant than your Right, you should never obtain what you
now enjoy. Your Holiness is obliged to the Ignorance of the Times, and the
sharpness of your Sword for your Dignity, Infallibility and Papal power, and
not to any weak Text of holy Scripture. It is true answered the Pope, but this
discovery is not to be doubted of, and Father Patrick has convinced me by
sending to me a Bible turned into French by the Doctors of Lorrain printed at
Paris 1664. for in the 3 chapter verse 2. of Acts, these blessed words are to be
read of the Apostles saying Mass to the Lord; Although this Translation be in
French, it is no less useful to England, for that Nation naturally loves,
admires, and embraces whatsoever appears to them in a French garb and
countenance let it be never so rediculous. It is easy to put the words into
English as I understand Father Patrick has already done, and confirmed it by
the Translation of the English Jesuits of Rheims, who have done something
more, for they have very well mingled their holy Gloss with the obscure Text of
Scripture, so that we may with ease find in it all our Doctrines in express
words. Sure says the Cardinal, this Father Patrick has most excellent
Spectacles of an admirable temper, seeing they have made him perceive things
altogether Invisible, for I have often read that passage, but I must needs
confess my dullness, and the dimness of my sight, and my Ignorance. I could
never perceive any such thing, nor Imagine that the words could be so
Translated, for I find in the Greek Text (...), where I have always Imagined
that the Word (...) did signify to Minister, and serve: Now the service and
Ministry Intended is to be known only by the circumstances of the Discourse;
the Latin Translations do thus render the words, Ministrantibus illis Domino,
and the Version of Louvain in French, Eux servans en leur Ministere au
Seigneur, that is, they serving in their Ministry to the Lord: the very Sequel
of St. Lukes discourse discovers what he means by this service, and the
Ministration, for he speaks of certain persons, amongst whom were Barnabas, and
Paul, that whiles they were, (...), ministering unto the Lord, when they had
Fasted, the Holy Ghost warned them to separate from them Barnabas and Paul for
the work unto which he had called them; therefore he adds, when they had fasted
and prayed, they laid their hands upon them, and sent them away; where the
words when they had fasted and prayed, do sufficiently discover the end and
accomplishment of the Ministration attributed unto these men. From whence we
may easily conclude, that St. Luke understands by their prayer and fasting,
acts of Devotion, the accomplishmnt of what he had spoken of, when he tells of
these persons, that they were (...). The Syrian Translation and the Arabic do
discover the Evangelists meaning, for they have rendered these words, (...),
whilst they were praying; besides, we may consider the quality and employments
of these men concerned, St. Luke tells us that they were Prophets and Doctors;
It is therefore to be supposed that when he says that they were (...) and
Fasting, that they were employed about the Functions and Offices proper to
their Callings; that is, they did minister unto the Lord by prophesying and
teaching, and that afterward they did Fast and pray to obtain Gods blessing
upon their Labors and Teaching. I am certain Cajetan favors this
Interpretation, for he speaks thus upon this Text: The nature of their service
and ministry is not here mentioned, but because St. Luke names them Prophets
and Deacons* we are to understand that their Ministry was performed by
teaching, and preaching. Until this moment, may it please your Holiness, I was
of the opinion of Cajetan, that these words do represent the Apostles employed
about the duties of their Function, and that they did minister to the Lord by
teaching and preaching the word to the people, by administering the Sacraments,
and by other acts of piety and devotion. I beseech your Holiness to make me
understand more perfectly this discovery, and how this Reverend Priest has
found the Mass in these words, and wherefore he has given to them this
Interpretation: I cannot very well tell you replied the Pope. I don't much
trouble my self to understand the Scripture, nor to seek into the Original
Text: You know very well that these sacred books have no better nor more
Honorable place assigned them in our public Assemblies, but my footstool, for
I am above all Holy Scripture; I must not therefore so much abase my self and
my dignity to pry and search into it with too much curiosity, as if I were to
depend only upon that: but Il' tell you as I conceive, how he comes to make
this good Discovery: He is by profession one of my Priests, whose employment is
daily to Transubstantiate the Bread and the Wine into the Body and Blood of
Christ. By degrees he is become such an excellent Artist in the Mystery of
Transubstantiation, that he has found out an expedient how to Transubstantiate
also this and other passages of Holy Scripture, and change the words Ministering
unto the Lord, into these, saying Mass unto the Lord. I am very well pleased
with his Ingenuity, and no body must think this proceeding strange, for if he
has the power to transform, and cause a metamorphosis of solid substance, and
turn Bread and Wine into other things of so great a disparity as flesh, bones,
and blood; It is no wonder if Father Patrick, this Ingenious Priest, has also
transformed and changed one expression into another, if he can by his breath
alone make the glorious Body of Christ now ascended up into Heaven, to be found
in a few Crumbs of Bread, and a few drops of Wine. Why may not Patrick by the
same art cause the Holy Mass to be found also in a passage of holy Scripture
where it was never before. If he can so far command him who is named the Word
to come down from Heaven, as often as he pleases, he may with more ease
obliege him to speak what, and when he lists. In the Word (...) he has met
with a motive that has Incited him to this perform; this metamorphosis for he
has met with certain happy Spirits of the Primitive World, who have Informed
him that in the Council of Chalcedon this word (...) was Interpreted by saying
Mass; therefore the Council furnishes him with an excellent proof, upon which
he depends much, because in the Actr of this Council the Word (...) is
Translated by a Latin. Author facere-missas, perform Masses as Julian tells
us, who himself was of that Council; And because this word is so to be
understood in the deeds of this Council, therefore it has the same
signification by very good reason in the Acts of the Apostles. Don't you think
that this reasoning is right and good? I admire quoth the Cardinal the subtilty
of this Priest, but I am afraid that some damned Heretic will draw from this
kind of reasoning advantages against us, and as such kind of people do already
say, that we affirm of our Mass, that it is not what it appears to be, that
appears Bread, but that it is nothing less then Bread? so they will talk of
this passage Translated by Father Patrick, that it is not what it seems to be:
That in appearance the Mass is in the Translation, but in the Original there is
no shape of the Mass to be seen. They will also say that the arguing from the
Interpretation of the Word (...) found in the Acts of the Counsel of Chalcedon
is not just, nor reasonable, for a word may have a different signification in
Ages so much at a distance from one another, for that Counsel was held 400
years after the Apostles: besides these Heretics may say, that the word Missa,
Mass, that was then lately found out, has since in this Age changed its
signification; for it is with the Mass as with men, their Faces differ before
they come to an age of understanding, look upon a man in his Chilhood, and
consider him afterward in his old Age, and you shall searce know him, so it is
with this Name; If you look upon it in its first rise, and afterward take
notice of it in the glorious appearance that has been given to it in these
last Ages, and you will scarce believe them to be the same, you will find a
strange alteration: It may be said of the Mass as of Noah's Ark, and Theseus
Ship that it was the same, and yet not the same, for the letters, syllables,
and pronunciation is the same, but the use and signification is not the same;
then it did signify the dismission of the people, or the leave to depart out
of the Congregation granted to the Catechumenes who were dismissed after Sermon,
or to the Rest of the Faithful sent away after the Administration of the
Sacraments at the end of Divine Service; Then they did say, Facere missum
Catechumenis, or Facere missum fidelibus, that is to dismiss the Catechumenes,
or the Faithful: this word did then signify generally all the public Service
of God, at the end of which this dismission was thus performed, Missa est. So
that then they called the public Prayers of the Church the reading and
preaching of the Word of God, and the administration of the Sacraments by the
Name of Mass; these things Bellarmin* has confessed. Since the word is strangely
changed to signify the holy Sacrament of the Altar which is, now its ordinary
meaning, Some therefore may say, that in the Translation of the Counsel of
Chalcedon to express the word (...) it was never employed in the meaning that
Reveend Father Patrick employes it in the 3 chap. of the Acts; but doubtless
this excellent Abbot so well killed in Transmutation can solve all the
difficulties that may be made against him, and his Interpretation. But what
benefit does your Holiness imagine that we receive from this bold attempt of
Father Patrick? I conceive that he may have well increased: the glory of the
Mass by raising it upon such a noble Throne, and placing it to be seen upon the
Theater of Holy Scriptures. He does also by this means discover its profound
Antiquity, for it seems to be far more ancient than Christ and his holy
Apostles, for he may easily prove by this Word, that all the Priests under the
Law did say Mass very reverendly as well as the Briests under Luke 1. 23. the
Gospel; for St. Luke tells us that Zachary had accomplished (...), which we must
for the time to come Translate, The days of his saying Mass. And St Paul
represents Moses sprinking the blood upon (...) Heb: 9. 21. (...),
which we must also render thus, All the Vessels employed in saying Mass. In
the same place Heb. 10. 11
the Apostle tells us that every Priest did daily (...), that is according to
this good Translation Say Mass: and elsewhere he discovers how Christ does
continually say Mass in Heaven, for in the same Ep. to the Heb. he tells us,
that we have an high Priest that is seated at the right hand of the throne of
the Majesty of God in Heaven, (...), that means saying Mass in the Holy places.
I conceive that the Holy Angels are Christ's Deacons and Clarks in Heaven to
answer him, because in the same Epistle they are named (...): we are to
understand by these words, Spirits that say Mass. Your Holiness that has
communication with Heaven may know something more of these Heavenly matters:
Well replied the Pope, we have just cause to expect the speedy conversion of
all the Heretics, and if Father Patrick has boasted of having made many a
good Proselyte, and turned them from protestantisme to popery, although it was
then but a Lie, he may have said so by the spitit of prophecy, such kind of
deceits and falsehoods are to be considered and excused as so many pious frauds
designed to bring back to the profession of the truth the poor deluded
Heretics; for my part I conceive that he did foresee the conversion of all
those people that will now doubtless embrace my Faith and profession, for they
have often promised to come to Mass if we can but show them the Mass in Holy
Scripture. Now they must of necessity acknowledge it to be there, mauger all
their obstinacy, we may therefore hope to see whole troops of men return again
to the bosom of my Holy Church. If after so clear a convict on, and this
undeniable discovery there be any so obstinate as to shut their eyes, and
refuse to acknowledge the Mass, I will thunder against him from my Vatican, and
send him to Hell before his time: For my part I find quoth the Cardinal that he
has much obliged the Civil Magistrates and Princes in giving this meaning to
the word (...), for we must now look upon them as persons who have liberty to
say Mass, for St. Paul names them (...), that is according to this new
signification, Singers, or bablers of Masses unto God Now I think of it, all
our Roman Religion is mightily obliged to him, for he has shown us an
expedient how to confirm all the Doctrines of our Holy Church without much
difficulty, in placing them in express words in Holy Scripture. We may now seek
the passages that have any color of such Doctrines, and Translate them
according to this good model of Father Patrick, for example Christ Mat. 16. 18.
said to St. Peter in the Gospel, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will
build my Church; there we maintain that Christ has granted and established the
Popes Authority upon Peter, and his Successors. But because these words are not
so plain and clear for our purpose as we could well wish, why may not we make
it plainer, and Translate it in express words that may confute all the
Heretics in this manner, Thou art Pope, and upon this pope I will build my
Church. Your Fancy quoth the Pope is very good, and makes much for our purpose.
Doubtless all Christendom admires the wit and piety of this Ingenious Father,
and desires that he may be well rewarded for his worth and cunning; we shall
have our Court thronged with the Ambassadors of several Princes to sue for his
promotion and reward; for my part I am already very much inclined to grant to
Father Patrick my most special Favors, I do at present free him from the
troublesome Visit of purgatory after his Decease, and Decree that his Soul may
leap directly into Heaven without stop or hindrance: We have granted this
privilege to many that are not so deserving as this most Reverend Father, and
it is but reason that he should obtain this benefit from the Mass, seeing that
he has been so great a Friend to her. We commonly say Mass to free poor Souls
from the flames of purgatory, and to draw them into a more temperate and more
pleasant abode, why may not the Mass from which he has deserved a good Reward
hinder him from entering into this Incommodious burning? I will also reward him
in his lifetime, I will enoble his pate with a Cardinals Cap, I conceive his
head is bigg enough, and of a sise able to bear this Covering with a bon mien:
When his Holiness had uttered these words, he began to bethink himself, and
muse upon what he had said; well quoth he, rubbing and shaking his head, there
is something comes into my mind that damps all my affections, for Father
Patrick this subtle Wit that has found the Mass in Holy Writ, contrary to all
appearance, may also by chance find by his cunning and working fancy how to
make Father Patrick a Pope, and by this means pull me out of my seat, and
tumble me down of my Throne as an unlawful Pope. This apprehension sinks into
my mind do what I can, and spoils all the affection that I had conceived for
this Father, so that a small matter might cause me to undertake his
Destruction. As the Cardinal was opening his Lips to return an answer; in steps
a Gentleman of the popes Bedchamber to acquaint his Holiness that there were
without a crowd of persons that did most passionately entreat for audience of
his good Holiness. When the pope had commanded them to come in; e found them to
Be some of his Well-wisher that came to advertise him of a great Tumult that
had happened in the Vatican Church between two comely Ladies; the one named her
self Vulgata Latim, the other was named Madam Franca Versio of the City of
Louvain, two persons of very good account; as they were at their Devotions they
quarreled with that Fury, that they were ready to tear one another to pieces:
Madam Vulgata required the precedence, because she had been enobled by the
Council of Trent; and could show a very authentic patent for her Nobility; but
Madam Franca Versio could produce no such Antiquity, but pretended that she was
to have the precedence of the former; because she had been enobled, dignified,
and blessed with a most Divine Berne a She-beauty, esteemed and admired all
over the World as a Goddess, she being the only Mother that had bore in her
Womb such a Celestial production as the Goddess Missa: She resolved not to
yield an ace to her Sister Madam Vulgata Latina, but to dispute the preeminency
and the predency with her to the uttermost; and the rather, because she was
backed and assisted by all her Countrymen, who did not much favor Madam Latina,
because they understood not her speech. As soon as these persons had
represented the case to his Holiness, the door being open, in steps an old
Roman Lady my Lady Tradition, she was attired as the Gibeonites are represented
in holy Scripture when they came to make peace with the Children of Israel at
their entrance into the promised Land; her Gown was old and moth-eaten, her
shoes patcht with many old pieces, her face painted with many wrinkles, her
food was dry bread, and moldy biscuit, all her Garments did bespeak her to be
but a durty, nasty, loathsome, and old Joane; nevertheless she received the
Respects of all the company at her entrance, because she did look with a grave
countenance, and affect such marks and liveries of Antiquity and Age, although
she was but young, and of a late Birth, she accessed his Holiness without any
Ceremony, because she was very well known to him, and familiar with him, she
had tutered him, and did yet furnish him with very good directions. This Lady
Tradition with a grim and sad countenance soon burst forth into bitter
complaints against Father Patrick the French Abbot, and the Irish Priest for
having committed a most unjust robbery and rape, and debaucht and carried away
from her dwelling one of her best and most beautiful Guests my Lady Missa: she
represented to his Holiness that he had just cause to fear further Injuries and
wrongs from this Father, and that she was afraid lest he should also debauch
her other Guests, and persuade them to leave her desolate, and by that means
take away all her livelihood and being for without them she is not able to
subsist. As she was opening the Case, and accusing of Father Patrick, all her
Guests or Lodgers came into the Room together to make also their several
complaints, and assist their old Landlady in her accusation. The Marquess of
Purgatory with all his Attendants went foremost The Count Meritum, and Viscount
Free will with a long Train of Followers, filled the Room where his Holiness
was. These Noble Persons that I have named are all Officers of our mother the
Holy Church of Rome: The Marquess of Purgatory is the great Purveyor and
principal Cook, to him it belongs to see that the Pot may boil well, Count
Meritum is the great Treasurer of the Catholic Church; for he has in his
custody all the Riches and Treasures by which he intends to purchase the
Kingdom of Heaven. Viscount Free Will is the Fac-totum, or Governor of the
House, he is the Porter or Usher to introduce or shut out whom he pleases. He
is also the Steward and Controller of the mother Church for he disposes of all
at his pleasure. He is a capricious and humorsome Knave; nevertheless the
Catholic Church i^ very well pleased with his services, and cannot be
persuaded to leave him. As Soon as my Lord Marquess of Purgatory appeared, every
mothers son in the Room began to tremble for fear; for he was clothed with a
fiery Garb most terrible to the eye, out of his mouth burst forth flashes of
extraordinary fire, so that every one made room to him, and was afraid to come
near him; but when the spectators had well viewed him, they perceived that his
terrible Countenance had nothing of reality, and that this fire, and the
seeming flames were the effects only of their deluded imagination My Lord;
merit was clad in such a Garb, and appeared with such a pleasant mean, that he
was more able to move laughter than fear, for he seemed to be proud and
highminded: His Countenance, Behavior and Courage was much like that of a
French Coxcomb, or of a proud and stately Spaniard. He did blow and puff as a
man out of breath, and with Eyes full of contempt he did speak to every one;
Isa. 65. 1. Come not near me for I am more holy than thou: In his hand he held
a large Purse full of good Counters with which men do commonly reckon with God
Almighty to see how much he is in their debt. My Lord, Free Will appeared in
another Attire; and Behavior, not so ridiculous, but no less extravagant; for
his inconstancy and unsettled Courage did make him appear very simple; for he
stood now upon one ley then upon another. He had got a Switzers Garb and
Attire, of several Colors, to express the diversity and variableness of our
Free Will, but that which was most remarkable in his appearance was, that he
had got a Steeple upon his head that did bear a Cross, with a VVether-cock on
the top, to represent how that in the business of our Salvation signified by
the Cross. It was in his power to turn himself any ways. At first all these
Noble Lords were ready to enter into a cruel dispute, and quarrel, because they
all pretended to the privilege of speaking first, my Lord Marquess had a large
and wide mouth, as great as that of an Oven, and much heat to animate his
discourse; and therefore a greater advantage to speak first, than the rest: my
Lord, merit did produce his worth and excellency; and therefore that he
deserved to be the spokesman, my Lord Free Will alleged, that merit was
indebted to him for the advantages by which he pretended to the privilege of
speaking first; for there could be no merit without Free Will. To please 'um
all, the Pope commanded 'um to speak all together, and told 'um that he was
well able to understand all their discourses together: That although he
appeared but with one Head, he had got one that was worth many, for it was able
to bear three Crowns, That it were to do him wrong to fancy that he had less
ability than the Beast of the Revelations that had Seven Heads, and therefore
could understand the Speeches of seven persons: And that as he was the Head of
the Church, he must needs have this power of an Head to understand the
complaints, and feel the griefs of several members at once when they endure
pain, when the Pope had granted to them this permission, and leave to speak all
at once, every one began to declare their complaints to this effect: That
Father Patrick had done them all the greatest injury that could be, by
divorcing and carrying away the Mass their dear Companion from them: That they
had long lodged together peaceably, with much unity and love, at the Palace of
my Noble Lady, my Lady Traditio: That to part with their Companion, they could
as well part with Heart and Soul and therefore that they did reckon that Father
Patrick had done them a notable prejudice to place the Mass in Holy Scripture
without them: That they had as good reason to pretend to that Honor as well as
she, for there be some places of Holy Scripture that favor as much their
being, as that place does the Mass. The Marquis of Purgatory alleged a passage
of the first of Corinthians, where these words are to be found, 1 Cor. 3. 15.
VVh^ are saved as by fice, why said he may not one add to the translantion, by
the fire of Purgatory. Meritum brought forth a passage of the Revelations,
where the persons are mentioned, Rev. 3. 4. Whom God will cause to walk in
white Clothing, because they are worthy. He desired that one might render the
words, because they do merit it. My Lord Free will fancied that the passage of
Denteronomy made for him, where God told the Children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 36. 40.
That tbe Word was near them in their mouth, and in their Heart to do it:
wherefore said he may not we translate it, is in thy Free Will to do it:
Therefore every one of them did conclude that his Holiness must needs, if he
will deal impartially, do of two things one, either restore the Mass to its old
Lodging, and former Camerades, or grant to them to dwell with her under the
same Roof In the heat of the dispute they fell from reasons to threatenings
against his Holiness in case that they did not receive due satisfaction; for
the Marquis of Purgatory threatened to be even with his Holiness when his Soul
should enter into his Dominions, if he did not grant his desire and do Justice;
for he that frees others by his authority from burning in Purgatory, cannot
exempt himself from those Torments. Therefore he threatened to cast so much
Brimstone, and combustible matter into the scorching Flames, that he would
increase the heat in such a manner, that he should have first cause to repent.
Meritum threatened him, that if he did not do as he desired, that he would
forsake his person: So that without his assistance, he should be without means
of ever arriving to Heaven, or entering into that place of bliss. My Lord,
Free Will freely declared to him, that unless he obtained his Request, he should
fall into such fits of Melancholy, that he would leave the humane Society: So
that they might by that means, become Jansenists, that are near related the
Calvinists the Popes sworn Enemies. This last threatening did not much trouble
his Holiness, because he knew that the Viscounts Pate was full of Quicksilver
and Whimsey, therefore never settled in its resolutions. He knew also that he
would never do any thing in favor of the Calvinists, because they are an
envious Generation of men, that will not allow him his Titles of Honor, but have
often attempted to cut off his Head, and when they could not perform that, they
have reduced and condemed him to slavery and perpetual bondage; but the
threatenings of the rest terrified the poor Pope. As he was thinking what was
best to be done, he hears a little Bell coming in, and my Lady Mass in person
followed immediately after. This dainty Dame that never goes a foot, nor treads
upon the slimy ground, was carried by a Cardinal Priest. She can ride very well
on Horseback, for in the solemn processions at Rome she is commonly mounted
upon a white Horse; but in this occasion she could not make use of such a
carriage, for she was forced to come up stairs to the Pope; when all the
Assistants beheld my Lady Mass, they wondered wherefore she was come, they
began to look one upon another, to see which of the company was so sick as to
need my Lady to comfort him: the Priest that carried her soon satisfied them by
addressing himself to the Pope in my Ladies name in this manner; Great Vicar,
and Lieutenant of God, visible Head of the Universal Catholic Church, most
powerful God on Earth, I come to demand Justice of the Insolency, impudency,
and temerity of Father Patrick, who has basely ravished, and against my will
carried me away by plain force from my house and home, to cause me to dwell in
a strange place. I was very well satisfied in my old Lodgings in my Lady
Traditio's place; nothing was there wanting to my person or dignity, for my
Lady is very well provided with all necessaries, and is most complizant to all
her Guests. I confess that Holy Scripture is an Honorable dwelling indeed; but
this Fellow has appointed me there such an Incommodious Abode that I protest I
can stay there no longer, I am confined to this narrow Lease (...), where I am
so ill accomodated, that I am in danger to fall down at every moment, whereas
before I was seated upon a Throne at my pleasure, where I had elbow-room
enough. This Block-head has imagined that I should be here better placed, and
better able to convince all Heretics, whereas it is here that I am meekest,
and not able so much as to defend my self. I may say as David, when he took
upon him Saul's Armor to encounter with Goliath, I cannot walk with all this, for
I am not used to 'um. Thus I may say, that it is altogether Impossible that I
should make use of this passage to overcome the Heretics, because I am not
used to it: Besides, as I am there placed without Gods approbation, and
contrary to all reason, and since I am therefore there against my will, and
have as much reason to complain as Absalom when he was brought from Gessur to
Jerusalem, where he had not the liberty to see King David, Wherefore am I come
from Gessur? it was better for me to remain there still. Moreover, he has put
me there all naked, without my ornaments, without my Alba Girdle, S^ola Cope,
etc. and suchlike Vestments that became my dignity, whereas I had all this
attire in my former habitation: All such as shall see me here, will imagine
that I have a great delight to make my abode wherever the word (...) is to be
found, and therefore they will imagine such things as become not my quality and
grandeur; for example when St. Paul says to the Phillipians, chapter 2. V. 30.
(...), they will Infer from thence, That I am to be delivered, and offered up
by the Impure hands of Laymen, as well as by the holy Priests. Thus when St.
Paul says to the Romans, (...). Some may think that I am reduced and rankt
amongst impure and carnal things such as are given by men in Alms: This fellow
has also lodged me at a strange house and dwelling without the leave of the
Landlords and owners; for he has placed me in the Translation of the Doctors
of Louvain, who never thought to place me there, for they have Translated this
passage into words that don't discover any shadow of the Mass. I have also
reason to complain that I am there lodged in an unworthy manner, for he makes
me pass but for a Discourse, whereas I am in truth a glorious Sacrifice
offered to God for the benefit of the quick and the dead, for he represents me
in these words, They saying Mass unto the Lord, whereas he should have said,
They offering Mass up to the Lord; for these reasons I am become a scorn to the
Heretics, and a reproach and shame to the good Catholics. At Paris Reverend
Doctors of the Sorbonne do in no wise approve of this bold attempt, and will
scarce take notice of me in this corner; I do therefore desire that by your
Authority you will take me from this place, and lodge me where I was wont
before. And I did desire that you would inflict upon this Impudent Priest the
punishment that his audacity deserves. When my Lady Mass had ended her Speech,
the Pope that had been dis-satisfied with Patricks proceedings, soon granted
the Requests of all the Assistants: Therefore he returned this answer to my
Lady Missa, Great and Admirable Sacrament of the Altar, Divine Mass, I grant
that thou should return to thy former Abode; And I further Decree, that
Father Patrick shall make thee all just amends and satisfaction for thy
disgrace. I do also declare him to have forfeited his Offices and privileges,
and that he is become unworthy ever to say Mass again, or to enjoy any
Ecclesiastical Dignity; I do therefore enjoin him as a Penance, that he shall
Whip his Bomfiddle twice every day, that he shall never drink any thing but
Water whilst he lives, but not to reduce him to utter despair; I leave to his
choice to take Holy, or Common Water at his pleasure; and I allow him to make
use of an Whore when he has occasion.

Reader, Take heed of the Hypocrisy and Cunning of the Romish Emissaries. VALE.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. Line 2. for naked read noted, p. 4. l. 13. r. Intimation, p. 5. l. 25.
r. - Monastical, p. 7. l. 6. r. Lovvain, p. 11. l. 17. blot out this and; p.
23. r. Acts p. 16. l. 2. r. Maugre, p. 18. l. last r. he, p. 19 l. 4. r. Latin,
p. 22. l. 13. r, Meene, p. 23. l. 1. r. Leg.


