THE Golden Fleece: OR, Old ENGLAND Restored To its old Honest VOCATION.

By J. F. a Well-wisher to Industry.

Nil tam difficile est quod non Solertia vincat.

Licensed April 2. 1679.

LONDON: Printed for Langley Curtis on Ludgate Hill. 1679.

THE Golden Fleece: OR, OLD ENGLAND Restored to its old honest VOCATION.
IF Debauchery and Sloth be the Common Highway to Beggary, then it follows,
that Virtue and Industry is the true Road to Wealth and Plenty: For as by the
blessing of God the diligent hand makes rich, so divine Justice is vindicated,
in bringing the Sluggard to extreme Want. As it is with particular persons and
Families, Poverty brings them to Contempt, think it not strange if a Kingdom no
longer retains its Reputation, when once it is fallen into decay. And that it
may not be the Case of England, it becomes all good Subjects to find out
Expedients to prevent further Ruin, and to recover (if possible) our former
Greatness and Honor.

In order to this I shortly Propose,

I. THat an Act of Parliament might pass for Erecting Workhouses in every
County, more or less, answering the Capaciousness and Commodiousness of each
County for Manufacture.

II. That these Workhouses should be Erected by an equal Pound-rate set on the
Lands, Tithes, and Hereditaments in each County.

III. Where many Parishes join in setting up a Workhouse, Twelve pence per
pound may perfect Buildings, and provide Looms, Working-tools, etc. Where few
Parishes associate, Two shillings per pound will be expended, and perhaps to
more advantage than Twelve pence, where more Parishes unite: For if the Work be
well carried on, in few years the growing Charge of the Poor of each Parish
will be so lessened, that none will repent them of their first Charge. Thus the
first year will be spent in preparing Houses, etc. the second may require a
Contribution for the stock of Wool, Flax, Hemp, etc. which, with the Salaries
of Officers, and other incident Charges of the Society, may amount to Six pence
per pound where many, and Twelve pence where few Parishes unite.

IV. As to the Regulation of these Alms Workhouses, there must be several
Wards or Appartments, one to set on work sturdy Rogues and Vagrants, another to
employ poor male Children of all ages, from seven to one and twenty years;
another for poor Females from five to eighteen years old: Over the first a
Master of Correction, the next some expert Clothier; the third, some grave
Matron well skilled in Spinning, Knitting, Seampstry, etc. To prevent Frauds
and Neglects in these Governors, it may do well for every Parish to choose one
able person four times in every year, to meet and visit the said House, and
reform all Abuses, and exactly take the Accounts of the said Governors.

Hitherto I have only presented you with the dark side, and worst part, (I
mean the Charge) which most men will say, at this time when we are so
impoverished, is very unpleasant. I shall in the next place represent the great
Benefit, Profit, and Wealth, that may arise to this Kingdom from the speedy
building and careful continuance of these Operatories.

I. It will reclaim the multitude of sturdy Vagrants and idle Beggars, which
swarm in all parts of this Land, and serve for nothing but to provoke God by a
lewd Life, starve our innocent Poor by eating the bread of their Neighbors
Charity, and terrify the harmless Commonalty, who (as the poor Indians serve
the Devil) relieve them out of fear: By this means this numerous band of
Ruffians, ready upon any Tumult to disturb our Peace, may be reduced to a ready
Service of our King and Country.

II. It will take off the Charge of all indigent People in all parts of the
Land so timely, that they shall be enured with Work, before they be corrupted
with Idleness and Theft.

III. It will be a means to work out all our Wool, that now either rots, or is
stolen into France, or bought up by our Clothiers at so mean a rate, that no
Farmer can pay his Rent: And what has been only pretended to by the Clothier,
viz. the sole Manufacture of English, Irish, and Scottish Wool, may in few
years by the foresaid means be happily accomplished; and could we but once work
out all our Wool, we should force a Market in all parts of the World for them;
and not till then shall we be able to under-sell Fleming, French, etc. having
our Work done cheaper than they; our Manufacture being carried on not only by
Private Hands, but by a public Purse. The advantages this Nation has above
all other in the world, for the better and cheaper working up of Drapery, is so
well set forth by my worthy Friend Mr. Richard Haynes, that I shall forbear any
further mention of them.

IV. It will be a means to set up the Manufactory of Linen, many parts of this
Land being as capable to produce Flax and Hemp, as France is, which pours in
her Manufactures to us, but will receive none of our ours, but with such a load
of Customs, that renders it loss to our Merchants to deal with them. And had
there been no other Mischief attending us, than this unequal dealing of theirs,
our late Act for prohibiting of several Goods of their Growth and Manufacture,
may be well justified to the whole World.

Many are the Benefits that will flow from the aforesaid Proposals; as the
Increase of Navigation, Addition to his Majesty's Customs, Advance of
Merchandise and Merchants, in the true and genuine way of Trade, by Exporting
Goods of our Native Growth, and Importing Commodities which may fill our
Purses, or relieve our Necessities, viz. The Guinny Wedge, the Silver Bar, our
Spanish Bullen, the Naval preparations of the Sound, etc. in exchange for our
Cloth, Kersies, Flannels, Serges, etc. And I never expect to see England
flourish, till it return to this old way; and when once we gain the sole
Manufacture of our Wool, (I mean all of the three Kingdoms) then may we have
all the abovesaid Enrichments, for this our Golden Fleece.

Not that I would have it thought I abound so much in my own sense, and dote
upon my ex tempore Figment; but shall with all Humility and Joy receive the
help of more experienced Persons, to alter and add what shall best agree to
good Reason, in this design of Employing, and consequently Enriching the Three
Kingdoms: For whose Weal, as no man is less able to Act, so no person shall be
more willing to Pray, than

J. F.

FINIS.

