Fasti Gulielmi Tertii: OR, AN ACCOUNT OF THE Most Memorable Actions Transacted
during his Majesty's Life, both before and since his Accession to the Crown.

WITH The Days, Months, and Years wherein the same happened.

LONDON, Printed for John Barnes at the Crown in the Pall Mall, and sold by
Richard Baldwin near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. MDCXCVII.

engraved coat of arms for Alexander Grant STAND FAST

The Honble. Allexander Grantt, younger of that ilk.



To the Right Honorable ARNOLD EARL of Albemarle, Viscount Bury, and Baron of
Ashford, Master of his Majesty's Robes, etc.
My LORD,
DID this Book treat of any other Subject, I should begin with asking Your
Lordship's Pardon for the Liberty I take of prefixing your Name to it; but
since it is an Abridgment of the Actions of our August Monarch, I dare assure
my self that I need no Apology on that account: For what more acceptable thing
could one offer to your Lordship, whose Zeal and Affection to his Majesty can
hardly be paralleled?

I likewise think I may dispense with another usual Method of Dedications, and
therefore I shall not attempt your Lordship's Character, nor speak of your
Valor, Generosity, Civility, and innate Inclination to do Good to Mankind.
These and many other excellent Qualifications, are so conspicuous in your
Lordship, that those who know you, would take it ill from me to insist on a
Truth they are already convinced of. And for others who know your Lordship only
by Fame, they cannot but have a great Idea of your Merit, when they consider,
that the most Judicious, as well as the most Glorious Prince that ever wore a
Crown, finds you worthy of his Esteem and Confidence, of which the great Titles
of Honor he has lately conferred upon You, are a public Demonstration.

I beg your Lordship to excuse the Ambition of this Address, and to give me
leave to assure You that I am with a most profound Respect,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble, and most Obedient Servant.

The PREFACE.
THIS Book does not need a long Preface: The Title is sufficient to recommend
its Usefulness; and as to the Performance no body would take my word for it,
and therefore I submit it to the Judgment of the Reader.

The Design I owe to Father Coronelli, Cosmographer to the Republic of Venice;
but he being a Stranger, and having written upon false Memoirs, committed so
many Faults, that I have received very little Assistance from his little
Almanac, that was printed here in English in one single Sheet, which (by the
by) was worse than the Original.

Tho I have had better Memoirs, and do know many things I relate upon my own
Knowledge, I dare not presume to say, I have committed no Errors, but I hope
they are not material, and am more afraid of Omissions than Mistakes; but
whatever they be, I shall endeavor to mend them in a second Edition, and
therefore shall take it kindly if any body will impart to me their Remarks and
Corrections.

This Book, tho very small, contains not only the bare Heads of things from the
Year 1672. down to this time, but also a short yet exact Account of Battles and
Sieges, etc. and several Original Pieces at length, which being scattered in
loose Papers, I thought fit to collect in this Treatise.

I relate few Events before the Year 1672. on purpose to avoid mentioning the
Wars between England and Holland, in which so many Worthies of both Nations
perished, tho they were at War without being angry, that Quarrel being rather
the Ministers than the Peoples.

I have endeavored to do Justice to all Men; but if any thinks himself
wronged, I desire him to be persuaded that I have had no ill Design, and shall
always be ready to correct my self.

I have taken care to avoid that common Vice of the French Writers, who never
dare approach their King without a Censer in their Hands; and therefore I have
fairly related the Actions his Majesty has been concerned in, either successful
or not, without any Flattery, nay without giving him the Commendations his
Archievements require, being sensible that tho Heroes are ambitious to deserve
Praises, yet they cannot bear them.

I have taken notice of several great Events in which his Majesty was not
directly concerned, by reason of their being very memorable, and therefore fit
to be inserted here.

The Observation of the English and Roman Account will, I hope, prove very
useful; at least I am certain, that to find out those Dates has cost me a great
deal of Trouble.

ADVERTISEMENT.
LEST the Method of this Calendar should surprise any, the Reader must know
these two things.

1. That I begin the Year upon the 1st of January, tho I know it begins with us
only in March; and that because of the late horrid Conspiracy, I have followed
the Leap-Year, allowing 29 Days to February.

2. That in relating the Events contained in this Book, I don't follow the
Series of the Year's beginning in 1650, and so down to this time, but I only
observe the Series of the Days and Months; and therefore whatever thing has
been transacted in January, tho of this very Year, is here related before what
happens in February, without any respect to the Years set down in one of the
Columns.

Roman Account. English Account. Fasti Gulielmi Tertii: OR, An Account of the
most Memorable Actions of His Majesty WILLIAM III. King of Great Britain, etc.
January. December. 1. 1679 22. 1678 THE Ministers of Spain and Holland being in
Negotiation at Nimeguen, for restoring Mastricht to the King of Spain, the
Prince of Orange opposes it till he has received Satisfaction from that Crown
for his Pretensions. dit. 1689 1688 King James being sailed for France, the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal met at Westminster on the present juncture of
Affairs. 2. 1689 23. 1688 The Prince of Orange orders the French Ambassador to
leave England. 3. 1662 24. 1661 The Provinces of Overyssel and Zealand resolved
to bestow upon him the Place of Captain General, which their Pensionaries
acquainted him with; but hearing that very Day that his Mother was ill, he fell
sick himself. 4. 1689 25. 1688 The Peers of England present to the Prince of
Orange two Addresses; the first of Thanks for having undertaken to relieve the
Nation in time of Need, and to desire Him to accept the Government till Jan.
22. next: the second to issue out Letters to the Coroners, to choose Members for
the Convention to sit upon the said January 22. O. S. 5. 1671 26. 1671 The
Prince comes from Oxford and Windsor, where he was most nobly entertained by
King Charles II. and interposes His Mediation between His Majesty and the
States General; and on that Occasion gives extraordinary Proofs of his great
Genius, as well as of His Affection for the States. dit. 1689 1688 The Aldermen
and Citizens of London agree to the Lords Address for desiring the Prince of
Orange to take upon him the Government of the Nation. 6. 1689 27. 1688 A great
many Gentlemen who were Members of Parliament in K. Charles's Reign, met at
Westminster, by the Prince's Advice, and presented him an Address of Thanks for
rescuing the Nation, desiring him to take upon him the Government till January
22. and in the mean time to issue out Letters for the Meeting of a Convention,
and take into his Care the Condition of Ireland. 7. 1689 28. 1688 He issues out
his Letters for electing Members for the Convention. 8. 29. 9. 1689 30. 1688
The Prince puts out his Proclamation, authorizing Sheriffs, Justices of Peace,
etc. to act. 10. 1678 31. 1677 This Day a Treaty between England and Holland
was concluded at the Hague, in order to reestablish Peace in Christendom, and
oblige the French King to grant reasonable Terms to the Crown of Spain, etc.
January. 11. 1. 12. 2. 1689 The Prince of Orange publishes a Declaration for
the better collecting the Revenue. 13. 3. 1689 The Lord Dartmouth brings back
the English Fleet into the Downs. 14. 4. 15. 5. 1689 The Prince of Orange
publishes an Order for the regular Election of Convention Men. dit. 1691 King
William prorogues the English Parliament. 16. 6. 1691 His Majesty sets out for
Holland to confer with several Confederate Princes; but the Wind turning
contrary, he is forced to come back. 17. 7. 1672 The States General appoint
John de Wit, Mynheer Beverning, and Mynheer Fagel, to draw up the Commission of
Captain General. 18. 8. 1651 The States General meet to dispose of the Places
vacant by the Prince of Orange's Death. dit. 1689 The Prince puts out a
Proclamation at London for quartering of Soldiers. 19. 9. 1672 The Prince is
proclaimed Captain General of Holland and Westfrizeland. 20. 10. 1672 The
Prince sets out from the Hague to view the Fortresses of the States, and order
the Magistrates of the several Provinces. dit. 1689 The Scots Lords present an
Address to the Prince, to take the Government of their Kingdom upon him till
March next, and to issue out his Letters for calling the States of Scotland to
meet the 14th of the said Month. 21. 11. 22. 12. 1674 The States of Holland
increase the Household of his Royal Highness, and the Number of his Guards. 23.
13. 1673 The Prince presents the States with his tenth Part of all Prizes, to
be applied to the Defense of the Country. 24. 14. 1689 The Prince of Orange
being waited upon by the Scots Lords, tells them that he has given all
necessary Orders for the Security of their Kingdom. 25. 15. 1679 He returns to
the Hague, having visited the Fortifications of Naerden, and other Places in
the Provinces of Vtrecht and Holland. 26. 16. 1691 The King goes on board a
second time for Holland, attended by the Dukes of Norfolk and Ormond, the Earls
of Portland, Dorset, and Devonshire, the Bishop of London, and other Lords. 27.
17. 28. 18. 29. 19. 1675 The States of Vtrecht sent their Deputies to advise
the Prince to accept of the Sovereignty of Guelderland and Zutphen. 30. 20.
1691 His Majesty comes in sight of the Dutch Coasts with 12 Men of War and 7
Yatchs; but the Ships being unable to come nigh the Shore by reason of the Ice,
he takes a small Shalop to go on shore; wherein he continued for 18 Hours
together, in a dark Night, without view of Land, or his Fleet, exposed at once
to die for Hunger, to perish with Cold, to be drowned at every Stroke his small
Pinnace made against the Ice, and to be taken Prisoner by every Pirate. The
Danger his Majesty was exposed to, wholly dispirited his Attendants; and seeing
one of the Seamen who seemed to succumb under the Pressures of Cold, Weariness
and Fear, he rouzed him up with this Expression; What! do thou fear to die in
my Company? An Expression very like to that used by Caesar in the Sicilian
Strait, Quid times? Caesarem vehis, and Fortunam Caesaris: and which had the
same Effect, for the Seamen being thereby encouraged, surmounted all
Difficulties, and set his Majesty on Shore. 31. 21. 1691 He arrives at the
Hague incognito; where nevertheless he is received with extraordinary
Demonstrations of Joy. It was the first time he came thither since crowned King
of England, and the States designed him the most magnificent Reception these
last Ages have seen, but his Majesty declined it. dit. 1697 This Day his
Majesty was pleased to create the Honorable Arnold Joost Van Keppel an Earl,
Viscount, and Baron of this Kingdom, by the Title and Style of Earl of
Albemarle, Viscount Bury, and Baron of Ashford. The same Day his Majesty was
pleased to appoint the Lord Viscount Gallway one of the Lords Justices of
Ireland. February. 1. 22. 1689 The Convention of the States of England met at
Westminster; the Marquess of Hallifax was chosen Speaker by the Lords, and
Henry Powle Esquire; by the Commons. Both Houses desired the Prince to take on him
the Administration of the Government for a farther time, and ordered a
Thanksgiving day to be kept Jan. 31. Old Style, in London, and Feb. 14.
throughout England, for the Deliverance of the Nation. The Prince sent a Letter
to the House of Lords about settling the Government. 2. 23. 1674 The States of
Holland and West-Frizeland declare the Place of Governor, Captain General and
Admiral of their Provinces, possessed by his Highness, hereditary in his
Male-Posterity. The same Day the States of Zealand did the like, and also made
the Dignity of first Nobleman, bestowed upon his Highness, hereditary. He was a
few Days after complimented thereupon by K. Charles II's. Envoy. 3. 24. 4. 25.
1677 At the Request of the States General he goes to Gro^ingen, attended by
some of their Deputies, to compose the Divisions that were in that Town. 5. 26.
1679 This Day the Treaty of Peace between the Empire and France was signed at
Nimeguen. dit. 1691 His Majesty was obliged at the States Desires, and the
Peoples Importunities, to make a public Entry in^^ ^he Hague; which was
performed with all the Solemnity imaginable. 6. 27. 1691 He gives Audience to
several Princes and Deputies of the Cities of Holland. 7. 28. 1689 The House of
Commons resolves that K. James H. having endeavored to subvert the
Constitution of the Kingdom, by breaking the Original Contract between King and
People, and by the Advice o^ Jesuits and other wicked Persons, having violated
the Fundamental Laws, and withdrawn himself out of the Kingdom, has abdicated
the Government, and that the Throne is thereby become vacant. dit. 1691 His
Majesty assists at the Assembly of the States of Holland and Westfrizeland, of
the States General, and at the Council of State, where he receives
extraordinary Marks of Respect. dit. 1697 Sir John Fenwick Baronet, attainted
of High Treason, for conspiring against the King, and betraying his Country to
the French, was beheaded this Day on Tower Hill. 8. 29. 1689 The House of Lords
being in a great Debate on the State of the Nation, the following Question was
proposed, Whether a Regency with the Administration of Regal Power under the
Name and Style of King James the Second, during the Life of the said K. James,
be the best and safest way to preserve the Protestant Religion, and the Laws of
the Kingdom? Upon which the House divided, Contents 48, Non Contents 51.
February. 11. 1. 1661 Charles II. demands from the States some Papers which the
Princess of Orange his Sister had committed to his Care by her Will, till the
young Prince should come to Age; but the States refused it, as being themselves
Guardians to the Prince. This was the beginning or Pretense of a Breach between
them. 12. 2. 1651 The States General, the Provinces of Holland and Zealand, and
the Cities of Amsterdam, Delst, and Harlem, are desired to stand Godfathers to
the Prince of Orange. dit. 1689 The Convention forbids the keeping of the 6th
of February a Thanksgiving-Day, as it was before, it being the Day that K.
James was proclaimed. The same Day a prodigious number of People go to
Westminster, to desire the Convention to crown the Prince and Princess of
Orange. 13. 3. 1689 The Prince sends 12 Men of War for Holland to bring the
Princess into England. 14. 4. 15. 5. 1689 The Commons desire a Free Conference
with the Lords concerning the Abdication of King James II. and the Vacancy of
the Throne; which was long debated between the two Houses. 16. 6. 1691 The
Electors of Bavaria and Brandenburgh, the Duke of Zell, the Landgrave of Hesse
Cassel, the Marquess de Gasbanaga Governor of the Spanish Netherlands, and
several other Great Lords, come to the Hague to wait on his Majesty, and confer
together about the Affairs of the Alliance. Never was a more illustrious
Assembly, there being about 50 Princes or Generals of Armies, 14 English Lords,
above 30 Ambassadors, and a great number of Princesses, and other great Ladies.
17. 7. 1689 The Lords agree with the Commons, that King James has abdicated the
Government, and that the Throne is vacant. dit. 1676 The Elector of
Brandenburgh proposes to the Prince a Match between his Highness and the
Princess of Radzevill, nearly related to the Elector, who had a vast Fortune.
18. 8. 19. 9. 1674 This Day was concluded a Treaty of Peace at Westminster
between K. Charles II. and the States General of the United Netherlands. The
Marquess del Frezno Ambassador of the King of Spain, was Plenipotentiary for
the Dutch. 20. 10. 1675 The Prince being arrived at Arnhem, where the Nobility
and States of Guelderland were assembled, he went to their Assembly, and
returned to them his Thanks for the Offers they had made unto him of the
Sovereignty of those Provinces, with the Title of Duke of Guelderland, and
Count of Zutphen, for fear, as he was pleased to express himself, of
occasioning Mistrust, and lest his Enemies should accuse him of acting only for
his own private Interest. dit. 1675 The States of the said Province elected his
Highness their hereditary Governor, which he accepted. 21. 11. 1671 The
Duchess of York being brought to bed of a Girl, the Prince of Orange is
desired to stand her Godfather. 22. 12. 1689 The Princess of Orange lands at
Whitehall, being received by several Lords and Ladies, with the Acclamations of
the People, and all Demonstrations of Joy. 23. 13. 1689 The Lords and Commons
attend the Prince and Princess of Orange at the Banqueting House at Whitehall,
and offer them the Imperial Crown of England and Ireland, and all other
Dominions thereunto belonging; which being accepted, they were the same day
proclaimed in the Cities of London and Westminster with the usual Ceremonies,
by the Name of William and Mary. 24. 14. 1689 King William makes choice of his
Privy Council. dit. 1671 The Prince sets out from London for Holland, attended
by the Earl of Ossery. dit. 1672 He accepts the Dignity of Captain General of
the United Provinces. dit. 1689 King William puts out a Proclamation for the
collecting of the Public Revenue. 25. 15. 1672 He took the Oath before the
States General as Captain General. dit. 1696 A Company of Villains sent from
France, resolve to assassinate his Majesty in a narrow Lane near Turnham-Green,
as he should come from Hunting; but by the good Providence of God, his Majesty
did not go out this Day as he used to do. 26. 16. 27. 17. 1674 The Prince
having considerably increased his Army, obliges the French to abandon Nimeguen,
Zutphea, Arnhem, Till, and the Fort Schenck. 28. 18. 1689 King William made a
Speech to the Lords and Commons at Westminster, it being the first time that he
appeared as King in the House of Lords. March. 29. 19. 1. 20. 2. 21. He sent
back part of the Dutch Forces for Holland. 3. 22. 1689 King William issues out
a Proclamation, ordering the Irish Rebels to lay down their Arms by April next
following. dit. 1696 The King having notice of the Design of the Conspirators
against his Sacred Person, forbears to go a Hunting. They had resolved to
murder his Majesty in a narrow Lane at Turnham-Green, and were commanded by Sir
George Barclay, sent over by King James and the French King for that Villainous
Design. 4. 23. 1689 The King gives his Royal Assent to the Bill to declare the
Convention a Parliament, and for the Sitting of the same. 4. 23. 1696 Several
Warrants are issued out for apprehending a great many Villains, who had
conspired to assassinate the King the 15th Instant, and afterward the 22d.
About eleven of them were seized in the Morning, and brought to the Horse
Guard. dit. An Express arrived from the Duke of Wirtemberg, and brought Advice,
that the French had a great number of Transport Ships at Calais, with 14000 Men
ready to go on Board, and that King James was arrived at Calais on the 2d of
March New Style, or the 21st Febr. Old Style, and that they expected there a
great Blow in England. His Highness acquainted his Majesty that he had caused
thereupon several Battalions to draw near Ostend, to be ready to go on Board
upon any Occasion; and that the French gave out that He was very ill, some
others dead, and others that he had been killed ahunting. A great Council was
held at Kensington, where it was resolved that Admiral Russel should
immediately go on Board the Fleet, the Earl of Rummey to Dover, and raise the
Militia, and the Earl of Dorset in Sussex. 5. 24. 1696 An Express arrives from
the Elector of Bavaria with the Confirmation of the great Preparations the
French were making at Calais, and that King James was there. dit. The King goes
to the House of Lords, and the Commons being sent for up, his Majesty
acquainted his Parliament with the Danger his Person had been nearly exposed
to, as well as the Kingdom; that there was a Design of Assassinating his
Person, and at the same time the Enemies were to make an Invasion into this
Kingdom. That he had given all necessary Orders to disappoint their Design, and
recommended to them the Care of the Kingdom, and the Dispatching the Public
Business before them. Both Houses resolved upon a very Loyal Address, which was
presented the same Day to the King at Kensington; wherein they congratulate his
Majesty's Preservation, desire him to take a greater Care of his Person, and
^ssure him of their Zeal and Af^ection, and that they will dispatch all
Business before them. dit. 1696 The same Day was published a Proclamation for
apprehending James Duke of Berwick, Sir George Barclay, and many other
Conspirators; His Majesty having received Information upon Oath, that the
Persons abovenamed, have with diverse other traitorous Persons, entered into a
horrid and detestable Conspiracy to assassinate and murder his Person; and his
Majesty promises a thousand Pounds Reward for each of them. 6. 25. 1696 The
Commons enter into an Association for the Preservation of his Majesty's Person;
wherein they declare, That in case the King come to die by a violent Death,
which God forbid, they will revenge his Death upon all his Enemies both Foreign
and Domestic. The said Association was subscribed the same Day by the greatest
part of the Members. Admiral Russel goes on Board the Fleet in the Downs, to
sail toward Calais. 7. 26. 1679 The Prince makes a Defensive and Offensive
League between the States General, and the Elector of Brandenburgh. 8. 27. 1696
Admiral Russel sailed from the Downs for Calais, with the Fleet under his
Command. 9. 28. 1673 The Prince of Orange having drawn his Army from their
Winter Quarters, forces the French to quit Wezel, and other Places in the
Country of Cleves. dit. 1696 Admiral Russel appears off of Gravelin, the Ld.
Berkley before Calais, and Sir Cloudsly Shovel off of Bullogn; which put the
French into such a Consternation, that they began to raise Batteries to prevent
the Burning of the Transport Ships they had there to carry their Forces into
England, upon the Signal of the Assassination of King William. 10. 29. 1696
Several of the Conspirators were seized, and committed to Newgate. March. 11.
1. 1654 A Medal was coined in Holland, on the Reverse whereof was represented
the young Prince of Orange in Roman Habits, with a Crown of Laurel, and a Staff
of General in his Hand, standing before the Statue of Pallas in Arms, with a
Lance and a Shield, having her Eyes fixed on the Prince, and showing him a
Sun, in the middle of which appears the Name of Jehovah in Hebrew; and round
about the Medal are these Words, as the Motto of the Prince, Fear God. 12. 2.
1696 The French fearing the Burning of 13 Men of War of theirs that were come
out of Dunkirk, and lay off of that Place among the Sands, struck down their
Masts and Yards, and take out their Guns to hale them into the Harbor. 13. 3.
1656 The Prince of Orange goes to Leiden, and remains some Years in that
University, where he discovered his great Genius, and made an extraordinary
Progress in Learning. 14. 4. 1689 The King sends a Message to the Commons to
recommend to them the care of Ireland, the Fleet, and of reimbursing the Dutch;
and acquaint them, that his Majesty being sensible that the Tax, called
Hearth-Money, which was given to the Crown in King Charles the Second's Reign,
was very grievous to his Subjects, he consented to the Regulation of it, or to
the Taking of the same wholly away. 15. 5. 1657 The Picture of the young Prince
of Orange being shown to Oliver Cromwell, it was observed that the very Sight of
it made him tremble. 15. 5. 1689 The Commons present an Address to the King to
stand by him with their Lives and Fortunes, and thank his Majesty ^or his
Tenderness for his People, in offering to part with the Revenue of the
Hearth-Money. dit. 1695 The Funeral of the late Queen Mary of blessed Memory,
was solemnized this Day with great Magnificence. 16. 6. 1696 The Earl of
Athlone and Lieutenant General Cohorne, having drawn together a Body of Troops,
came before Givet, and bombarded the Town, and the Magazines the French had
gathered there, which they destroyed, and afterward retired without any Loss.
The Garrison of Dinant durst not come out, and contented themselves to fire with
their Cannon upon our Men. There were in the Magazine 4000 Rations of Forage.
17. 7. 1696 The Parliament having past a Bill for empowering his Majesty to
apprehend and detain such Persons as he shall find cause to suspect are
conspiring against his Royal Person and Government, his Majesty came to the
House of Lords, and gave his Royal Assent to the same, and several other Acts.
18. 8. 1660 Charles II. King of England, being attended in Holland by the
Deputies of the States, he told them how much concerned he was for the Princess
of Orange his Sister, and the Prince of Orange. dit. 1672 The States General
appoint 4000 Men for the Guard of the Prince, which were called the Troops of
the Household of the Prince of Orange. 19. 9. 1660 King Charles II. went to the
Assembly of the States General, and brought with him the young Prince, whom he
recommended to their Lordships. 20. 10. 1673 The Prince goes for Zealand to
conclude a Treaty of an Offensive and Defensive League with Spain, which was to
last till all the Towns taken by the French from the Dutch and the Spaniards,
should be restored to their Owners. 21. 11. 1696 Robert Charnock, Edward King,
and Thomas Keys, were this Day brought to their Trial at the Old Baily for High
Treason, in conspiring, and endeavoring to assassinate and murder his Majesty
King William. The Evidence against them was full and c^^ar; and it was clearly
proved that they had listed Men, provided Horses and Arms for that Purpose, and
had taken a View of the Ground where that bloody Tragedy was to be acted. The
Evidence deposed farther, That Sir George Barclay, one of the Conspirators, had
brought a Commission from France, written with King James's own Hand, to levy
War upon the Person of the Prince of Orange. 22. 12. 1696 The King issues out a
Proclamation for a Public Thanksgiving to the Almighty for the Discovery of
the Conspiracy. 23. 13. 24. 14 1689 This Day the Convention of Scotland met,
and chose Duke Hamilton for their President. They immediately summoned the Duke
of Gourdon to surrender the Castle of Edinburgh, who demanded some time to
consider of it. Then they read King William's Letter, and appointed a Committee
to draw up an Answer. A Letter from the late King James was brought to the
Assembly; but before they would read it, it was unanimously voted, that they
would continue sitting till the Government, Religion, Laws and Liberties, were
settled and established. They read afterward King James's Letter; which was so
unpleasing to them, that they committed the Gentleman who brought it to the
Custody of a Messenger at Arms. 25. 15. 1689 The Duke of Gourdon refusing to
surrender the Castle of Edinburgh, the Convention sent the Heralds with the
usual For malities, to command him to deliver the same, and upon his Resusal he
was proclaimed Rebel and Traitor. 26. 16. 1691 The French having invested Mons
on the 15th Instant, his Majesty King William having sent Prince Waldeck before
to assemble the Confederate Army at Brussels, set out from the Hague, after
having taken his Leave of the States General, followed by the Duke of Zell,
General Chanvet, and many other Princes. dit. 1689 King William and Queen Mary
were proclaimed in the Island of Jersey. 27. 17. 1673 The Prince of Orange gave
Audience to the Ambassadors of the Emperor and the King of Spain, and sent in
his Name the Sieur de Odyck to the Congress it Cologne, and opposes the
Suspension of Arms that was demanded, because an Express he had sent to the
Elector of Brandenburgh was not yet returned. 27. 17. 1689 The Convention of
Scotland publishes a Proclamation, requiring all Persons from the Age of 16 to
60, to be in a Readiness to take Arms, when they shall think fit to give
farther Directions. They approved what the Nobility and Gentry had done in
praying King William to take upon him the Government of their Kingdom. They
ordered some Arms and Gunpowder to be sent with all speed into Ireland for the
Assistance of the Protestants of that Kingdom. 28. 18. 1696 This Day Robert
Charnock, Edward King, and Thomas Keys, condemned the 11th Instant for
conspiring against his Majesty's Life, were drawn from Newgate to Tyburn in a
Hurdle. They said nothing to the Spectators, but each of them delivered a Paper
to the Sheriffs; wherein they own to have been concerned in the Assassination
of King William; which Charnock called, to attack the Prince of Orange and his
Guards. They were hanged, and afterward quartered, according to the Sentence
past upon them. 29. 19. 1680 The Prince set out from the Hague to take a View
of the Fortifications of Boisleduc, Berggopzoom, and other Frontier Places of
Brabant. 30. 20. 1689 His Majesty King William appoints the Lords Lieutenants
of the Counties of England, and fills all other Vacancies occasioned by the
late Revolution. 31. 21. 1696 The King sent a Message to the House of Lords to
acquaint them that he had received Information upon Oath, that the Earl of
Ailesbury was concerned in the Conspiracy against his Government; and his
Lordship was committed the same Day to the Tower for High Treason. dit. 1689
The Forces sent by King William into Scotland, arrive at Edinburgh, under the
Command of Major General Mackay. April. 1. 22. 1691 The King arrives at
Vilvord, and causes his Army to march cowards Hall, in order to attempt to
relieve the City of Mons besieged by the French. 2. 23. 1675 The Prince of
Orange falls sick of the small Pox; which caused a general Consternation
through all the United Netherlands, and in most Courts of Europe. dit. 1689 The
Convention of the States of Scotland signed this Day a Letter to King William,
and sent it by the Lord Ross; wherein they return their hearty Thanks to his
Majesty for the Danger he has exposed himself to for the Deliverance of their
Kingdom. They desire also his Majesty to continue his Care and Protection,
assuring that they will shortly fall upon such Resolutions, as may be
acceptable to him, and secure their Religion, Laws, and Liberty. dit. 1691 The
King took a Review of the Confederate Forces near Brussels, and marched to
Hall, having given fresh Orders for the Artillery to march with all speed. dit.
1696 This Day Sir John Friend was brought to his Trial for High Treason. The
Matters charged against him were, That he had received and accepted a
Commission from the late King James for raising a Regiment of Horse; that he
had appointed several Officers of his Regiment, had paid several Sums of Money
for the raising and listing of Men, was present at several Meetings and
Consultations with Charnock and others; where it was resolved to send Charnock
to France to invite the late King James to invade this Kingdom with a Body of
French Troops, and to join the late King James upon his Landing here, with 2000
Horse. That the said Sir John Friend knew of the said Invation, and had made
Preparations to join the French upon their Landing, and that he was acquainted
with the Intended Assassination of his Majesty. All which being fully and
clearly proved against him, he was found guilty of High Treason. 3. 24. 1674
The States General present the Prince with two Millions of Florins, in
Consideration of the Liberty obtained for the Dutch by his Highness, from
Charles II. for the Herring Fishery. dit. 1696 Sir William Parkins was this Day
tried at the Old Baily for High Treason, and was charged to have received and
accepted a Commission from the late King James for raising a Regiment of Horse;
that he had raised a Troop, consisting of old Soldiers, and had several old
Officers that would go Volunteers under him; was present at several Meetings
and Consultations with Charnock and others; where it was agreed to send
Charnock to France to invite King James to invade the Kingdom, etc. That he did
own to have seen and read a Commission written with K. James's own Hand for
Raising and Levying War on the Person of King William; that he was present at
several Meetings and Consultations with Sir George Barclay, Charnock and
others, for the Intended Assassination of his Majesty, consented thereto, and
undertook to provide sive Horses for that Design, and that a great quantity of
Arms were found buried in his Orchard in Warwickshire. The Evidence being very
full and clear against him, he was found guilty of High Treason, and received
Sentence of Death. 4. 25. 1693 The Right Honorable Sir John Summers Knight,
was made Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England. 4. 25. 1673 The Prince is
obliged to take a Journey into Zealand, to compose the Divisions that were in
that Province; which having ended to his Satisfaction, his Highness returns to
the Hague, and takes a View in his way of Flushing, L'Ecluse, Bergopzoom,
Ardemburg, Breda, and Boisleduc. 5. 26. 1689 The Convention of Scotland
appoints a Committee of their Body, composed of 8 Lords, 8 Knights, and 8
Burgesses, to settle the Government. The Convention of Scotland ordered that
the Militia of Horse and Foot of the whole Kingdom should be brought together,
and disposed into convenient Places to secure the Peace of the Country. dit.
1696 Four Conspirators against his Majesty's Person were this Day seized. 6.
27. 1689 The States of Scotland gave a Commission in their Name to Major
General Mackay, to be Commander in chief of their Forces; and to let the World
know, that they thought themselves the only Sovereigns of that Kingdom; and
that King James had no manner of Right to the Crown, they ordered the
Magistrates of Edinburgh to take the Oath of Fidelity to the Convention, which
was accordingly done in the Afternoon. 7. 28. 1677 The Prince of Orange knowing
the Extremities the Town of St. Omer was reduced to, came to Ipres; where
having joined his Army, it was resolved to march and relieve that Placo. 8. 29.
1691 The French carrying on the Siege of Mons with great Vigor, his Majesty
resolved to decamp from Hall, and endeavor to relieve it, tho his Artillery
was not yet come up to his Camp; but just as the Army was breaking up, News
came that the Place had capitulated. The French had only gained a Hornwork, and
there still remained two Half-Moons for them to take before they could come to
the Counterscarp of the Place; and in the Attack they had made the Day before
upon one of the Half-Moons, they were repulsed with great Loss: but the
Burghers being terrified by the French Bombs, and their Fears improved by the
Influence of their Priests, whom the French had bribed, they sent some Deputies
of their Body, with two Abbots, to the Governor, and pressed him to capitulate;
and upon his Refusal, they sent a Drum of their own upon the Walls, and beat a
Parley. Thus fell the important Place of Mons into the Hands of the French, by
the Cowardice of its Inhabitants, and the Treachery and Knavery of the Priests.
The French King having taken a View of the Town to see whether it was worth the
Price he had given for it, returned to Paris. 9. 30. 1677 The Prince of Orange
marches with his Army to the Relief of St. Omer; and having made a long March,
came in sight of the Guards of the French Army. dit. 1692 The Queen Dowager
designing, with his Majesty's Pleasure, to retire into Portugal, parted this
Day from Somerset House for Dover; where her Majesty embarked for Calais to
continue her Journey by Land. 10. 31. 1677 The Prince of Orange comes in sight
of the French Army, which he found very advantageously posted near Cassel,
having two Rivers and several Defiles before them. His Highness passed the
first River, notwithstanding the Opposition of the Enemies, and designed to
pass the other; but the Night coming on, it was thought fit to defer it till
the next Morning. April. 11. 1. 1677 His Highness attacks the French Army at
Cassel; which, besides the Advantage of this Post, was much superior in
Number: The Fight was very bloody and obstinate, but at last the Allies were
overpowered by the Number of the French, and forced to retire. Tho the Prince
was unfortunate in that Action, he gained a great Reputation; and his Enemies
owned, that he had given all the Proofs of a great General. He charged several
times at the head of the Battalions and Squadrons; and when he saw that it was
impossible to force the French, he made a glorious Retreat, and more orderly
than one would have expected. 12. 2. 1689 The Committee appointed by the States
of Scotland for settling the Government, made this Day their Report to the
Convention; which was agreed unto, and thereupon they passed the following Act:
The States of the Kingdom of Scotland find and declare, that King James VII.
being a professed Papist, did assume the Regal Power, and acted as King,
without ever taking the Oath required by Law; and has by the Advice of evil and
wicked Counselors, invaded the Fundamental Constitution of this Kingdom, and
altered it from a Legal and Limited Monarchy, to an Arbitrary and Despotick
Power, and has governed the same to the Subversion of the Protestant Religion,
and Violation of the Laws and Liberties of the Nation, inverting all the Ends
of the Government; whereby he has forefaulted the Right of the Crown, and the
Throne is become vacant. The Convention voted immediately after this, and
ordered that the said Committee for Settling the Government, should bring in an
Act for Settling the Crown on their Majesty's William and Mary King and Queen
of England; and an Instrument of Government to be offered them, with the Crown,
for the securing of the People from the Grievances which do affect them. 13. 3.
1696 This Day Mr. Paul Foley Speaker of the House of Commons, with the whole
House, attended the King, and presented the following Association. WHereas
there has been a horrid and detestable Conspiracy formed and carried on by
Papists, and other wicked and traitorous Persons, for Assassinating his
Majesty's Royal Person, in order to encourage an Invasion from France, to
subvert our Religion, Laws, and Liberties; We whose Names are hereunto
subscribed, do heartily, sincerely and solemnly, profess, testify and declare,
that His Present Majesty King William is Rightful and Lawful King of these
Realms: And we do mutually promise and engage to stand by, and assist each
other to the uttermost of our Power, in the Support and Defense of his
Majesty's most Sacred Person and Government, against the late King James, and
all his Adherents. And in case his Majesty come to any violent or untimely
Death, (which God forbid) we do hereby further freely and unanimously oblige
our selves to unite associate, and stand by each other in revenging the same
upon his Enemies, and their Adherents; and in supporting and defending the
Succession of the Crown, according to an Act of Parliament made in the First
Year of the Reign of King William and Queen Mary, entitled, An Act declaring
the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and settling the Succession of the
Crown. Mr. Speaker made at the same time a Request to his Majesty, that the
said Association, and all other Associations by the Commons of England, be
lodged among the Records in the Tower, to remain as a perpetual Memorial of
their Loyalty and Affection to his Majesty. The King was pleased to return the
following Answer. I Take this as a most convincing and most acceptable Evidence
of your Affection; and as you have freely Associated your Selves for our Common
Safety, I do heartily enter into the same Association, and will be always ready
with you and the rest of my good Subjects, to venture my Life against all who
shall endeavor to Subvert the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of England. Note;
That the Lords entered into an Association two Days after the Commons, which is
much the same as this, saving only, that their Lordships made not use of the
word Rightful; but they declare that the late King James, the Pretended P. of
Wales, nor any Body else, has any manner of Right to the Crown of, etc. dit.
1696 This Day Sir John Friend and Sir William Parkins, who were lately
convicted for High Treason at the Old Baily, were, according to the Sentence
pronounced against them, drawn on a Hurdle from Newgate to Tyburn, and there
hanged and quartered. Each delivered a Paper to the Sheriffs, and owned the
Crime they were condemned for, as they had done two Days before to a Committee
of the House of Commons, who went to Newgate to examine them. They were
attended by three Jacobite Parsons, who were so impudent as to give a full
Absolution at the Gallows to those Criminals, laying their Hands over their
Heads, tho they died impenitent of the horrid and hellish Crime they owned
themselves guilty of. 13. 3. 1696 The English Fleet having been several times
forced back from the French Coasts by contrary Winds, returned this Day before
Calais under the Command of Sir Cloudesly Shovel; who ordered Captain Benbow to
bombard the Town, which he did, throwing about 400 Shells into the Town; which
set it on Fire in three or four Places, and burnt several Ships in the Harbor.
The Enemy made a great Fire upon our Men, and yet we had but 3 killed, and 8
wounded. Our Admiral intended to begin afresh the next Morning, but he was
blown by a violent Storm into the Downs. This was done almost in sight of the
late King James; who, since the Discovery of the Conspiracy against King
William's Person Febr. 22. continued at Boulogn by Order of the French King, in
order to make some People believe, that their Intended Invasion of England was
not grounded upon the Assassination of his Majesty. 14. 4. 1675 The Prince of
Orange being recovered of a dangerous Distemper, the States of Holland send
their Deputies to congratulate his Highness upon the same, desire him to take a
greater Care of his Person, and to give them Leave to appoint a Day of
Thanksgiving for his Recovery. 15. 5. 1675 The Province of Guelderland desired
his Highness, since he would not accept the Sovereignty of their Province, to
take on him the Dignity of their Stadtholder and Governor, which they had
likewise settled upon his Male Posterity for ever; which his Highness consented
to. 16. 6. 1666 The States General of the Seven United Provinces take upon them
the Guardianship of the young Prince of Orange, and made choice of six Noblemen
to take care of his Education. This Proceeding of the States was very
acceptable to the People, who look upon the Princes of the Illustrious House of
Orange as their Tutelar Angels. 17. 7 169^ This Day a special Commission of
Oyer. and Terminer was opened in the King's Bench at Westminster; and the Jury
being sworn, they found a Bill of Indictment of High Treason, against Major
Lowick, Captain Knightley, Brigadeer Rookwood, and Cranburne, for imagining and
designing the Murder and Assassination of the King. After which the Grand Jury
made a Presentment to the Court, that... Collier, Shadrach Cook, and... Snett
Clerks, did take upon them to pronounce and give Absolution to Sir Will.
Parkins and Sir John Friend at the time of their Execution at Tyburn,
immediately before they had severally delivered a Paper to the Sheriff of
Middlesex; wherein they have severally endeavored to justify the Treasons for
which they were justly condemned and executed; and that they the said Collier,
Cook, and Snett, have thereby countenanced the same Treasons for which the said
Sir William Parkins and Sir John Friend have been executed, to the great
Encouragement of other Persons to commit the like Treasons, and to the Scandal
of the Church of England, established by Law, and to the Disturbance of the
Peace of the Kingdom; whereupon the Court ordered an Indictment to be preferred
against them for the same. 18. 8. 1696 Sadrach Cook and William Snett Clerks,
were this Day committed to Newgate for Suspicion of High Treason, and
Treasonable Practices. dit. 1691 His Majesty was pleased to create the Duke of
Zell Knight of the Garter, being then at the Hague; and as a Mark of particular
Kindness, he put the Garter about his Leg with his own Royal Hand, the Duke of
Norfolk assisting to buckle it. 19. 9. 1689 This Day the King came to the House
of Lords, and gave his Royal Assent to an Act for establishing the Coronation
Oath, to another for Naturalization of the most Noble Prince George of Denmark,
and settling his Precedence, and to another Act for Naturalizing Frederick
Count of Schomberg. 19. 9. 1696 His Grace the Duke of Ormond was this Day, by
his Majesty's Command, sworn one of the Lords of the Privy Council, and
accordingly took his Place at the Board. 20. 10. 1689 The King was pleased to
create his Royal Highness Prince George of Denmark and Norway, Baron of
Ockingham, Earl of Kendall, and Duke of Cumberland. 21. 11. 1689 This Day their
Majesty's William and Mary were crowned King and Queen of England, France and
Ireland, in Westminster-Abbey, by the Lord Bishop of London; which Ceremony was
performed with great Solemnity. The Medals of the Coronation had on the Face
the Effigies of the King and Queen; and on the Reverse, Jupiter darting his
Thunderbolt at Phaeton, with this Motto, Ne totus absumatur Orbis, To prevent
the Ruin of the World, or rather of the Liberties of Europe. dit. 1689 The
Committee of the States of Scotland for settling the Government, having made
their Report, and the Grievances and Instrument of Government being read, and
Histincty considered, the whole States, except some few that were absent, with
one Voice, declared King William and Queen Mary, King and Queen of Scotland, in
the same manner as was done in England; and immediately thereafter, the States,
assisted by the Lord Provost, and the rest of the new Magistrates and Council
of the City of Edinburgh in their Formalities, and attended by Lion King at
Arms, and the Heralds, Pursuivants and Trumpets, went from the Parliament House
to the Cross, and there with great Solemnity, Splendour, Acclamations and
Expressions o^ Joy, proclaimed their Majesty's King and Queen of Scotland; the
Duke of Hamilton, the Duke o^ Queensbury, the Marquess of Ath^^ and the
Marquess of Douglest and many other Peers being upon the Cross, with the Lord
Provost, and the Magistrates The Evening was conclude with Bonfires, etc. 21.
11. 1696 Seigniors Soranzo and Veni^^ Ambassadors Extraordinary o^ the
Republic of Venice to (...) Majesty King William, arrived (...) London. 22.
12. 1689 The House of Commons walked from Westminster to the Banqueting House,
where they attended their Majesty's to congratulate them upon their Coronation.
dit. 1688 The Prince goes to meet the Elector of Saxony at Loo, to confer with
him about his intended Expedition, and the Preparations the French were making
to invade Germany. 23. 13. 1689 The Convention of Scotland having proclaimed
and declared their Majesty's William and Mary King and Queen of Scotland, a
Proclamation was published this Day forbidding the Subjects of that Crown to
presume to own or acknowledge the late King James the Seventh for their King, or
obey, accept, or assist any Commissions that may be emitted from him, or any
ways to correspond with him; forbidding likewise to presume upon their highest
Peril, by Word, Writing, in Sermons, or any other manner of Way, to impugn or
disown the Royal Authority of William and Mary King and Queen of Scotland. 24.
14. 1674 The Prince of Orange arrived this Day at Vtrecht to compose some
Difference in the Town; where he was received with all imaginable Respect, the
Burghers appearing on that Occasion in Arms. His Highness thought fit to remove
the old Magistrates, and choose new ones; which was very acceptable to the
Inhabitants, and ended all the Troubles of that City. 25. 15. 1689 Admiral
Herbert, with the Fleet under his Command, appears before Kingsale; whereupon
Colonel Mackillicut Governor of the Place, prepared to retire, thinking that it
was the French Fleet; which pursuant to an Agreement between King James and the
French King, was coming to take Possession of that Town. 26. 16. 1696 This Day
being appointed for a General and Solemn Thanksgiving to Almighty God for his
great Goodness and Mercy in discovering and delivering his Majesty from the
late Horrid and Barbarous Conspiracy of Papists and other Traitorous Persons,
to Assassinate and Murder his Majesty's Sacred Person, and from an Invasion
intended by the French upon this Kingdom; whereby not only the Destruction of
his Majesty's Royal Person was plotted and intended, but also the total
Subversion of the Government, and of the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of this
Kingdom: the same was religiously observed in the Cities of London and
Westminster, with great Marks of Loyalty and Affection to his Majesty and his
Government; and at Night there were Illuminations, Bonfires, and other public
Rejoicings suitable to the Occasion. 27. 17. 1696 The King constituted the Right
Honorable Thomas Earl of Stamford Lord Lieutenant of the County of Devon, and
the Earl of Radnor Lord Lieutenant of the County of Cornwall. 28. 18. 1689 The
Right Honorable the Earl of Shrewsbury, Principal Secretary of State, was this
Day constituted Lord Lieutenant of the County of Worcester. dit. 1690 Sir
Cloudesly Shovel in his Majesty's Ship the Monk, the Monmouth Yacht, and a
Fireship, came to an Anchor in Dublin-Bay; and having discovered a Ship a Mile
within the Bar, Sir Cloudesly Shovel being on Board the Monmouth, went over the
Bar, with the Pinnace of the Man of War and a Ketch; whereupon the said Ship
removed a Mile higher, and ran a-ground within a Musket Shot of a French Man of
War of 12 Guns, and 2 or 3 English Ships that lay a-ground silled with
Soldiers, who sired briskly at Sir Cloudesly. However, the English attacked
her, and after some Dispute, having observed that Sir Cloudesly had made a
Signal for a Fireship, the Enemy ^^rsook their Ship, and get away in their
Boats. The English got her off, but in their return o^^ of their Boats run
aground; whereupon the late King James with his Guards, and many People, came
upon the Shore, but the English who stood in their Boats, made so vigorous a
Defense, that the Irish durst not come near them. The Ship that was taken was
called the Pelican, the biggest of two Scots Frigates the French had taken the
Year before, and carried 20 Guns. 29. 19. 1689 The Earl of Dundee having
absented himself from Edinburgh without Leave of the Convention, the States
sent 200 Horse after him, and ordered the Country People to seize him. The Duke
of Gourdon persisting in his Resolution of holding Edinburgh Castle for the
late King James, and Major General Mackay being ordered to besiege it, two
Batteries of Cannon and Mortars were raised this Day against it. The States
appoint also the Colonels of Six new Regiments raised in their Name. 30. 20.
1692 The Elector Palatine having remained two or three Days at Loo with his
Majesty, went away this Day for Dusseldorp, assuring the King that he would
give immediate Orders to his Troops to be in a Readiness to march whither, and
when his Majesty should command. May. ^. 21. 1696 This Day Ambrose Rookwood,
and Charles Cranburne, having been indicted for High Treason, for Conspiring to
Assassinate his Majesty, were brought to their Trials at the King's Bench Bar:
Each of them had a Copy of their Indictment, and two Counsel to plead for them.
The Evidence for the King was very clear and full, and it was plainly proved,
that the late K. James employed several Persons to act under Sir George Barclay
in the intended Assassination of his Majesty, and sent them over to England for
that Purpose. The Prisoners had nothing material to say in their own Defense,
and so the Jury found them guilty of High Treason. 2. 22. 1696 Robert Lowick,
indicted for High Treason for Conspiring to Assassinate his Majesty, was this
Day brought to his Trial at the King's Bench Bar; and the Matters charged
against him being fully proved, the Jury found him guilty of High Treason: and
^e, Rookwood and Cranburne, condemned the Day before, had the Judgment
pronounced against them, which is usual in Cases of High Treason. dit. 1691 The
King was pleased in Consideration of the many good and acceptable Services of
Mainhardt Count of Schomberg, and the late Duke of Schomberg his Father, to
create him Baron of Mullingar, Earl of Bangor, and Duke of Leinster, in the
Kingdom of Ireland. dit. 1673 The Prince of Orange set out from the Hague to
view all the Towns and Fortresses of Holland. 3. 23. 1695 This Day came Advice
that Captain Killegrew in the Plymouth and five other English Frigates being a
cruising in the Channel of Maltha, met with two French Men of War, viz. the
Trident of 64 Guns, and the Content of 54; Captain Killegrew engaged them alone
for a considerable time, and being joined by another Frigate, obliged the French
to surrender, and brought them to Messina. 4. 24. 1689 This Day the States of
Scotland named the Earl of Argyle, Sir James Montgomery of Skelmerley, and Sir
John Dalrymple, their Commissioners to go for England to offer the Crown of
Scotland to their Majesty's. 5. 25. 1689 Their Majesty's taking into their most
serious Consideration the deplorable Condition of the French Protestants,
issued out this Day the following Proclamation in their Behalf. William R.
WHereas it has pleased God Almighty to deliver the Realm of England, and the
Subjects thereof, from the Persecution lately threatening them for their
Religion, and from the Oppression and Destruction which the Subversion of their
Laws, and the Arbitrary Exercise of Power and Dominion over them had very near
introduced; We finding in our Subjects a true and just Sense thereof, and of
the Miseries and Oppressions the French Protestants lie under: for their
Relief, and to encourage them that shall be willing to transport themselves,
their Families and Estates into this our Kingdom, We do hereby declare, that
all French Protestants that shall seek their Refuge in, and transport
themselves into this our Kingdom, shall not only have our Royal Protection for
themselves, Families and Estates, within this our Realm, but we will also do
our Endeavor in all reasonable Ways and Means so to support, aid, and assist
them in their several and respective Trades and ways of Livelihood, as that
their living and being in this Realm may be comfortable and easy to them. The
same Day was published another Proclamation, prohibiting the Importation of all
sorts of Manufactures and Commodities whatsoever of the Growth, Production, or
Manufacture of France. dit. 1691 His Majesty was pleased to fill several vacant
Bishoprics and other Ecclesiastical Dignities; and the Learned Dr. John
Tillotso^, Dean of St. Paul's, was promoted to the Archbishopric of
Canterbury. dit. 1694 This Day the King came to the House of Lords, and having
given the Royal Assent to several Acts, made a gracious Speech to both Houses
of Parliament, and prorogued them to the 18th of September. The Right
Honorable Charles Earl of Shrewsbury, principal Secretary of State, was
elected Knight Companion of the most noble Order of the Garter, and in the
Evening was created Marquess and Duke of this Kingdom, by the Name and Style of
Marquess of Alton, and Duke of Shrewsbury. The same Day John Earl of Mulgrave
was created Marquess of Normanby, and Henry Herbert of Ribbesford in the County
of Worcester Esquire; Baron Herbert of Cherbury in the County of Salop. His Majesty
was also pleased ^o appoint the Right Honorable Edward Russel Esquire; Sir John
Lowther of Whitehaven, Henry Priestman, Robert Austen Esqs; Sir Robert Rich,
Sir George Rook, and Sir John Houblon, Commissioners for executing the Office
of Lord High Admiral of England and Ireland, and of the Dominions thereunto
belonging. 6. 26. 1669 Monsieur Zuilychem, first Minister of his Highness,
having appointed this Day to receive the Oath of Fidelity of the Inhabitants of
the Principality of Orange, the Parliament and all other Magistrates attending,
in the Moment they were reading a general Pardon of the Prince, a Crown was
formed in the ^ir, which sat upon the Chair of State, or Throne of the Prince.
This wonderful Phenomenon was seen by above 8000 Persons both Protestants and
Papists. Monsieur Zuilychem was so surprised that he writ the following Verses
the same Day. Dum stat Arausiacae confirmatura Coronae,
Antiquam Populi laeta Corona fidem:
Non dubie Coelo placuit, quod utrique Coronae,
Tertia de Coelo missa coronat opus.
dit. 1689 This Day the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament
assembled, presented an Address to the King in the Banqueting House at
Whitehall, for declaring the War against the French King, which is worthy to be
recorded to Posterity. WE your Majesty's most loyal and dutiful Subjects, the
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, most humbly lay before your
Majesty our earnest Desire, that your Majesty would be pleased to take into
your most serious Consideration the destructive Methods taken of late Years by
the French King against the Trade, Quiet, and Interest of this your Kingdom,
and particularly the present Invasion of the Kingdom of Ireland, and supporting
your Majesty's rebellious Subjects there. Not doubting in the least but that
through your Majesty's Wisdom the Alliances already made with such as may
hereafter be concluded on this occasion by your Majesty, may be effectual to
reduce the French King to such a Condition, that it may not be in his Power
hereafter to violate the Peace of Christendom, nor prejudice the Trade and
Prosperity of this your Majesty's Kingdom. To this end we most humbly beseech
your Majesty to rest assured upon this our solemn and hearty Promise and
Engagement, that when your Majesty shall think fit to enter into a War against
the French King, we will give your Majesty such Assistance in a Parliamentary
Way, as may enable your Majesty (under that Protection and Blessing God
Almighty has always afforded you) to support and go through with the same. To
this kind Address the King returned the following Answer. I Receive this
Address as a Mark of the Confidence you have in me, which I take very kindly,
and shall endeavor by all my Actions to confirm you in it. I assure you, that
my own Ambition shall never be an Argument to incline me to engage in a War
that may expose the Nation either to Danger or Expense. But in the present
case, I look upon the War so much already declared in effect by France against
England, that it is not so properly an Act of Choice, as an inevitable
Necessity in our own Defense. I shall only tell you, that as I have ventured my
Life, and all that is dear to me, to rescue this Nation from what it suffered,
I am ready still to do the same in order to the preserving it from all its
Enemies: and as I doubt not of such an Assistance from you as shall be suitable
to your Advice to me to declare War against a powerful Enemy; so you may rely
upon me, that no Part of that which you shall give for the carrying it on with
Success, shall be diverted by me to any other Use. dit. 1680 The States of
Zealand, and the Merchants concerned in the Trade of the East Indies, being in
Dissension about the Choice of a Director of the Company, referred the same to
the Prince of Orange, to name to that Dignity whom his Highness should think
fit. 7. 27. 1674 General Rabenhaut presented to his Highness seven Standards,
and several Colors taken by the Dutch Forces in an Engagement with the
Munsterians. dit. 1676 His Highness and the Duke of Villa Hermosa marched from
Mons with the Dutch and Spanish Forces to oblige the French to raise the Siege
of Bouchain, and came in sight of the French Army near Valenciennes. dit. 1696
The King came this Day to the House of Peers, and the Commons being sent for,
his Majesty gave the Royal Assent to several Acts; and having made a Speech to
both Houses, the Lord Keeper prorogued them to the 16th of June following: But
that Speech relating to the Proceedings of the Parliament after the Conspiracy
against his Majesty's Life, it is thought fit to insert it here, as a very
extraordinary Piece. My Lords and Gentlemen; YOU have shown so great Concern
for my Person, and Zeal for my Government, and have done so much for the
Preservation of the one, and for the strengthening of the other, by the good
Laws which have been made, and by the Supplies you have provided for the
several Occasions of this Year, that the late Designs of our Enemies are, by
the Blessing of God, like to have no other Effect than to let them see how
firmly we are united, and to give me this Occasion to acknowledge your Kindness,
and to assure you of all the Returns which a Prince can make to his People. My
Lords and Gentlemen; The Necessity of Affairs requiring my Absence out of the
Kingdom for some time, I do earnestly recommend to you, that in your several
Stations you will be assisting to those whom I shall leave to administer the
Government, and that you will be careful in preserving the public Peace of the
Kingdom. 8. 28. 1672 The French having besieged Muyden, one of the Keys of
Amsterdam; the Prince obliged them to raise the Siege, and to retire. dit. 1696
This Day their Excellencies Signior Soranzo and Signior Venier, Ambassadors
extraordinary from the Republic of Venice to his Majesty, made their public
Entry, having been received at Greenwich by the Earl of Radnor, and Sir Charles
Cotterel Master of the Ceremonies, accompanied by six Gentlemen of his
Majesty's Privy Chamber, and brought by Water in the King's Barge to the Tower:
They were complimented at their Landing by the Lord Lucas, Governor of the
same, and saluted with a Discharge of the Cannon, the Standard being displayed.
From thence their Excellencies were conducted in his Majesty's Coach, followed
by eight Coaches of their own, and many others with six Horses apiece, to the
Lady Portland's House in the Pall Mall, that was prepared for his Majesty's
Entertainment of them, where they received the Compliment of Welcome from the
King by the Lord Guildford, and from their Royal Highnesses the Prince and
Princess of Denmark by the Earl of Sandwich, and the Lord Fitzharding, Masters
of their Horse. They had a very numerous Retinue with very rich Liveries. 9.
29. 1696 Robert Lowick, Ambrose Rook-wood, and Charles Cranburn, lately
convicted of High Treason, for conspiring to assassinate the King, were this
Day executed at Tyburn. They owned the Crime they were condemned for. 10. 30.
1662 This Day was born that incomparable Princess the Lady Mary, Daughter to
James D. of York, our late Renowned Queen. dit. 1694 This Day his Majesty was
pleased to create the Marquess of Caermarthen Duke of Leeds, the Earl of
Bedford Duke of Bedford, the Earl of Devonshire Duke of Devonshire, the Earl of
Clare Duke of Newcastle, and the Viscount Newport Earl of Bradford. May 11. 1.
1689 Admiral Herbert having notice that the French Fleet was sailed toward
Ireland, steered his Course that way, and fought them in Bantry-Bay; and tho
the French had 28 Men of War, and 5 Fireships, and that the English had but 19,
yet the French Admiral finding the Place too hot, stood further into the Bay,
and left the Honor of the Day to the English. dit. 1691 Maj. Wood having
notice that the Rapparees were in great Bodies about Brittas in the Queen's
County in Ireland, he went out with 300 of my Lord George Hamilton's and
Colonel Lloyd's Foot, and 50 of Colonel Byerly's Horse, with which he first
killed near seventy Rapparees; and leaving part of his Men to secure several
Passes, he went three Miles further, beyond a Place called the Tougher of
Malahone, having with him one hundred and ten Foot, and thirty Horse; but
instead of the Rapparees, whom he only expected, he discovered about 800 Men of
the Irish Army divided into two Bodies: notwithstanding the great Inequality in
number, he encountered them, and after several Charges put them to the rout,
killing 150 on the Place, amongst whom were one Captain Schales, and two
Lieutenants. Major John Fitzpatrick who commanded the Party was taken Prisoner,
with 17 Officers more, 6 Sergeants, 16 Corporals, 2 Drummers, a Surgeon, and
80 private Sentinels. We lost in that brave Action but a Corporal and a
Trooper, with 2 Foot Soldiers, and Lieutenant Robinson wounded. dit. 1696
Signior Soranzo and Venier, Ambassadors Extraordinary from the State of Venice,
had their public Audience of the King with the following Ceremonies. The Earl
of Denbigh, and Sir Charles Cotterel Master of the Ceremonies, with 6 Gentlemen
of the Privy Chamber, received them at the House where they were entertained by
his Majesty's Appointment, and conducted in his Majesty's Coach, followed by
their own and a great many other Coaches with 6 Horses apiece, and attended
with a numerous Retinue, to the Audience of his Majesty in the Banqueting House
at Whitehall, with all the Ceremonies and Honors that are usual on the like
Occasions. About nine at Night they took their Leaves privately of the King at
Kensington; and his Majesty knighted Signior Soranzo, the eldest of the
Ambassadors, as has been practiced by his Majesty's Predecessors. There was a
great Council at Kensington, where the King declared his Intention of setting
out the next Day for Holland, and that he had appointed the Archbishop of
Canterbury, Sir John Summers Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, the Earl of
Pembroke Lord Privy Seal, the Duke of Devonshire Lord Steward of his Majesty's
Household, the Duke of Shrewsbury one of the Principal Secretaries of State, the
Earl of Dorset Lord Chamberlain of the Household, and the Lord Godolphin first
Commissioner of the Treasury, to be Lords Justices of England for the
Administration of the Government during his Majesty's Absence. His Majesty was
pleased to create Sir John Lowther of Lowther a Baron and Viscount of this
Kingdom, by the Title of Baron of Lowther, and Viscount Lonsdale. Sir John
Thompson was created at the same time Baron of Haversham in the County of
Bucks, and Sir Thomas Littleton was constituted one of the Lords of the
Treasury. 12. 2. 1691 His Majesty being resolved to command the Confederate
Army in Person this Summer, embarked this Day at Harwich for Holland, being
attended by a Squadron of Men of War under the Command of Rear Admiral Rook,
and the next Day landed at Oranje Polder. dit. 1688 The Prince designing to sit
out a Fleet for his Expedition into England, and the Consent of the Province of
Holland being necessary for it, his Highness acquainted their Deputies with it,
who unanimously consented thereunto, and told the Prince, that tho they did not
see the necessity of such an Equipment in time of Peace, yet they were
thoroughly satisfied, that his Highness would not put the States to so great a
Charge, unless it were absolutely necessary for their Safety. dit. 1696 His
Majesty left Kensington this Morning, intending to embark at Margate for
Holland. dit. 1692 Sir George Treby was sworn Lord Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas, and Sir John Summers Attorney General. 13. 3. 1695 The King came to the
House of Lords to give the Royal Assent to several Acts, and having made a
gracious Speech to both Houses, the Lord Keeper prorogued them to the 18th of
June. His Majesty declared in Council, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord
Keeper, the Earl of Pembrook, the Duke of Devonshire, the Duke of Shrewsbury,
the Earl of Dorset, and the Lord Godolphin, Lords Justices of England, for the
Administration of the Government during his Absence. The same Day his Majesty
was pleased to constitute the Right Honorable Sir William Trumball, formerly
Envoy extraordinary to the Court of France, and Ambassador to Constantinople,
one of his Majesty's principal Secretaties of State, who accordingly took the
usual Oaths in Council. 14. 4. 1692 Their Majesty's Fleet being fitted up with
an incredible Diligence by the Care and Application of Admiral Russell, the Men
of War sailed this Day from the Buoy of the Nore, to join the Dutch in the
Downs; and the same Day the Earl of Portland arrived from Holland with sive Men
of War and two Fireships, and brought an Account that the late King James had
drawn a Body of Forces at the Hogue to make a Descent upon England, but that
they were not embarked. 15. 5. 1692 The Kingdom being threatened with a powerful
Invasion from abroad, the late K. James, with near 20000 Men being ready to
embark at the Hogue, and Count Tourville being in the Channel with the French
Fleet to protect them, the Queen put out a Proclamation, requiring the
Attendance of both Houses of Parliament on the 24th of this Instant, and her
Majesty ordered all the Forces of the Kingdom to be drawn together at
Petersfield hear Portsmouth, under the Command of the Duke of Leinster. The
Lords Lieutenants of the Counties bordering on the Sea received also Directions
to raise the Militia, and all other imaginable Precautions were taken to
prevent the Design of the Enemy. The King being then abroad with the greatest
part of the Standing Forces, there appeared a great Consternation, but the
Queen revived the Spirits of the whole Nation by the great Courage and Prudence
she expressed in that nice Juncture. dit. 1696 The King went on board the
Elizabeth in Margate-Road, and sailed for Holland. 16. 6. 1695 The King
declared this Day, that he had thought fit to appoint Henry Lord Capel to be
Lord Deputy of Ireland. dit. 1694 The King embarked this Day at Margate for
Holland, being attended by 8 Dutch Men of War. 17. 7. 1689 The House of Commons
having desired his Majesty to take into Consideration the many Encroachments of
France upon Great Britain and our Neighbors, and to declare War against the
French King, assuring him that the House would support him to carry on the same
with Vigor, a Declaration of War was published this Day. And because the
French have had the Impudence to say, that we declared War against them without
any Cause, I think sit to transcribe the said Declaration. William R. IT having
pleased God Almighty to make us the happy Instruments of rescuing these Nations
from great and imminent Dangers, and to place us upon the Throne of these
Kingdoms, we think our selves obliged to endeavor, to the uttermost, to
promote the Welfare of our People, which can never be effectually secured but
by preventing the Miseries that threaten them from abroad. When we consider the
many unjust Methods the French King has of late Years taken to gratify his
Ambition, that he has not only invaded the Territories of the Emperor, and of
the Empire, now in Amity with us, laying waste whole Countries, and destroying
the Inhabitants by his Armies, but declared War against our Allies without any
Provocation, in manifest Violation of the Treaties confirmed by the Guaranty of
the Crown of England; We can do no less than join with our Allies in opposing
the Designs of the French King, as the Disturber of the Peace, and the Common
Enemy of the Christian World. And besides the Obligations we lay under by
Treaties with our Allies, which are a sufficient Justification of us for taking
up Arms at this time, since they have called upon us so to do; the many
Injuries done to us and to our Subjects, without any Reparation, by the French
King, are such that (however of late Years they were not taken notice of for
Reasons well known to the World, nevertheless) We will not pass them over
without a public and just Resentment of such Outrages. It is not long since
the French took Licenses from the English Governor of Newfound-land to fish in
the Seas upon that Coast, and paid a Tribute for such Licenses, as an
Acknowledgment of the sole Right of the Crown of England to that Island; and
yet of late the Encroachments of the French upon our said Island, and our
Subjects Trade and Fishery, have been more like the Invasions of an Enemy, than
becoming Friends, who enjoyed the Advantages of that Trade only by Permission.
But that the French King should invade our Charibbee Islands, and possess
himself of our Territories of the Province of New York and of Hudsons-Bay, in a
hostile manner seizing our Forts, burning our Subjects Houses, and enriching
his People with the Spoil of their Goods and Merchandises, detaining some of
our Subjects under the Hardship of Imprisonment, causing others to be
inhumanely killed, and driving the rest to Sea in a small Vessel, without Food
and Necessaries to support them, are Actions not becoming even an Enemy; and
yet he was so far from declaring himself so, that at that very time he was
negotiating here in England, by his Ministers, a Treaty of Neutrality and good
Correspondence in America. The Proceedings of the French King against our
Subjects in Europe are so notorious, that we shall not need to enlarge upon
them; his countenancing the Seizure of English Ships by French Privateers,
forbidding the Importation of great part of the Product and Manufactures of our
Kingdom, and imposing exorbitant Customs upon the rest, notwithstanding the
great Advantages he and the French Nation reap by their Commerce with England,
are sufficient Evidences of his Designs to destroy the Trade, and consequently
to ruin the Navigation, upon which the Wealth and Safety of this Nation very
much depend. The Right of the Flag inherent in the Crown of England, has been
disputed by his Orders, in violation of our Sovereignty of the Narrow Seas;
which in all Ages has been asserted by our Predecessors, and we are resolved to
maintain for the Honor of our Crown, and of the English Nation. But that which
most nearly touches us, is his unchristian Persecution of many of our English
Protestant Subjects in France, for Matters of Religion, contrary to the Law of
Nations, and express Treaties, forcing them to abjure their Religion by strange
and unusual Cruelties, and imprisoning some of the Masters and Seamen of our
Merchant-Ships, and condemning others to the Galleys, upon pretense of having
on board either some of his own miserable Protestant Subjects, or their
Effects. And lastly, as he has for some Years last past, endeavored by
Insinuations and Promises of Assistance, to overthrow the Government of
England; so now by open and violent Methods, and the actual Invasion of our
Kingdom of Ireland, in Support of our Subjects in Arms, and in Rebellion
against us, he is promoting the utter Extirpation of our good and loyal
Subjects in that our Kingdom. Being therefore thus necessitated to take up
Arms, and relying on the Help of Almighty God in our just Undertaking, we have
thought fit to declare, and do hereby declare War against the French King; and
that we will, in conjunction with our Allies, vigorously prosecute the same by
Sea and Land, (since he has so unrighteously begun it) being assured of the
hearty Concurrence and Assistance of our Subjects in Support of so good a
Cause: Hereby willing and requiring our General of our Forces, our
Commissioners for executing the Office of High-Admiral, our Lieutenants of our
several Counties, Governors of our Forts and Garrisons, and all other Officers
and Soldiers under them, to do and execute all Acts of Hostility in the
prosecution of this War against the French King, his Vassals and Subjects, and
to oppose their Attempts; willing and requiring all our Subjects to take notice
of the same, whom We henceforth strictly forbid to hold any Correspondence or
Communication with the said French King or his Subjects; and because there are
remaining in our Kingdoms many of the Subjects of the French King, We do
declare and give our Royal Word, that all such of the French Nation as shall
demean themselves dutifully toward us, and not correspond with our Enemies,
shall be safe in their Persons and Estates, and free from all Molestation and
Trouble of any kind. Given at Hampton Court, May the 7th, 1689. dit. 1694 The
King landed at the Hook of Holland over against the Brill, having left his
Convoy several Leagues at Sea. 18. 8. 1694 Their Majesty's created the Right
Honorable Henry Lord Viscount Sydney, (Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, and
Master General of the Ordnance) an Earl of this Kingdom, by the Name and Style
of Earl of R^mney in the County of Kent. dit. 1696 The King being arrived at
the Hague the Night before, went to the Assembly of the States of Holland, and
afterward to that of the States General, and made a short Speech in each of
them. His Majesty was the same Day complimented by the States upon his safe
Arrival, by the Council of State, and the Colleges of the Admiralty and foreign
Ambassadors. dit. 1692 Admiral Russell, with his Majesty's Fleet, passed this
Morning through the Downs, and being joined by Admiral Allemond, sailed to the
Westward in quest of Count Tourville. dit. 1695 William de Nassan, Seigneur de
Zuilestein, was created Baron of Enfield, Viscount Tunbridge, and Earl of
Roch^fort. The same Day the Lord Gray of Wark was created Viscount Glendale,
and Earl of Tankerville. 19. 9. 1691 Dr. Sharp Dean of Canterbury was this day
nominated Archbishop of York. dit. 1689 A Proclamation was published, at the
Request of the House of Commons, commanding all Papists to depart out of the
Cities of London and Westminster, and ten Miles adjacent. dit. 1692 A
Proclamation came out for apprehending the Earl of Scarfdale, the Earl of
Litchfield, the Lord Griffin, the Earl of Newburgh, the Earl of Middleton, the
Earl of Dunmore, and a great many disaffected Persons for conspiring to subvert
the Government. dit. 1695 The Duke of Schomberg, the Earl of Tankerville, and
Peregrine Bertie Esquire; were sworn of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council. 20. 10. 1692 This Day the Trained-Bands of the City of London
consisting of 6 Regiments, making about 10000 Men, were drawn up in Hide-park,
under the Command of the Lord Mayor, and received by the Queen, who was
extremely satisfied with the good Order they appeared in, and of the great Zeal
and Readiness which they expressed for their Majesty's Service, and their own
Security against the Designs of the French, who then threatened the Kingdom with
a Descent, their Fleet having appeared this Day off of Dartmouth. dit. 1694 The
Earl of Stamford, and Charles Mountague Esquire; one of the Commissioners of the
Treasury, and Chancellor of the Exchequer, were sworn this Day of their
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council. 21. 11. 1689 This Day being appointed
for the public Reception of the Commissioners, viz. the Earl of Argyle, Sir
James Montgomery of Skelmerly, and Sir John Dalrymple of Stair, younger; who
were sent by the Meeting of the States of Scotland with an Offer of the Crown
of that Kingdom to their Majesty's; they accordingly at three of the Clock met
at the Council Chamger, and from thence were conducted by Sir Charles Cotterel,
Master of the Ceremonies, attended by most of the Nobility and Gentry of that
Kingdom, who reside in and about London, to the Banqueting House, where the
King and Queen came, attended by many Persons of Quality, the Sword being
carried before them by the Lord Cardrosse. Their Majesty's being placed on the
Throne under a rich Canopy, the Commissioners presented a Letter from the
States to his Majesty; then the Instrument of the Government: Thirdly, a Paper,
containing the Grievances which they desired might be redressed. and lastly, an
Address to his Majesty, for turning the Meeting of the said Estates into a
Parliament. All which being signed by his Grace the Duke of Hamilton, as
President of the Meeting, and read to their Majesty's, the King returned to the
Commissioners the following Answer. WHEN I engaged in this Undertaking, I had a
particular Regard and Consideration for Scotland, and therefore I did emit a
Declaration in relation to that as well as to this Kingdom, which I intend to
make good and effectual to them. I take it very kindly that Scotland has
expressed so much Confidence in, and Affection to me; they shall find me
willing to assist them in every thing that concerns the Weal and Interest of
that Kingdom, by making what Laws shall be necessary for the Security of their
Religion, Property and Liberty, and to ease them of what may be justly grievous
to them. After which the Coronation Oath was tendered to their Majesty's, which
the Earl of Argyle spoke word by word, and the King and Queen repeated it
after, holding their right Hands up, after the manner of taking Oaths in
Scotland: but when the Earl came to this part of the said Oath, And we shall be
careful to root out all Heretics and Enemies of the true Worship of God, that
shall be convicted by the true Kirk of God, of the aforesaid Crimes, out of our
Lands and Empire of Scotland; the King declared that he did not mean by these
Words that he was under any Obligation to become a Persecutor. To which the
Commissioners, being authorized by the States of Scotland, made answer, That
neither the Meaning of the Oath, or the Law of Scotland, did import it, since
by the said Law no Man was to be persecuted for his private Opinion, and that
even obstinate and convicted Heretics were only to be denounced Re^els or
out-lawed, whereby their moveable Estates were consiscated. Whereupon the King
declared again, that he took the Oath in that Sense, and called for Witnesses,
the Commissioners and others present: and then their Majesty's signed the
Coronation Oath; and the Commissioners and several of the Scottish Nobility were
admitted to kiss their Majesty's Hands. 22. 12. 1689 His Majesty's Ship the
Nonsuch, of 36 Guns, commanded by Captain Roomcoyle, engaged this Day off of
Guernsey two French Men of War, one of 30 Guns, 120 Men, and the other of 16
Guns, 6 Pattereroes, and 120 Men. The Fight lasted above three Hours, and the
English Captain was killed, but Robert Sincock the Boatswain having taken upon
him the Command of the Ship, there being no Lieutenant on board, continued the
Engagement with such Bravery, that the two French Men of War were taken and
brought into Plymouth. 23. 13. 1696 This Day Peter Cook Esquire; Son to Sir Miles
Cook, was tried at the Old Baily for conspiring with Sir William Parkins, Sir
John Friend, Charnock, the Earl of Ailesbury, and several other Traitors, the
Subversion of the Government by a French Army. It was fully proved, that he was
at the Meeting wherein it was resolved to send Charnock into France, to propose
the sending over of an Army, and resolved to join them at their Landing:
whereupon the Jury ^ound him guilty; and he received Sentence of Death, as the
^aw directs in such Cases. dit. 1695 The King set sail from the Buoy of the
Nore for Holland, attended by a Squadron of Men of War, commanded by Sir
^^eorge Rook. 24. 14. 1690 The Garrison of Charlemont consisting of about 800
Men, having capitulated the 12th Instant, marched out this Day in the Presence
of the Duke of Schomberg. The same Day Colonel Woolsley took a strong Castle
called Ballingargy, with the Loss of 47 Men, and 43 wounded. dit. 1695 The King
landed at Oranje Polder, and arrived at the Hague, where he was received with
great Acclamations of Joy. 25. 15. 1689 This Day the King went on board the
Elizabeth at Portsmouth, where he was most splendidly entertained at Dinner by
Admiral Herbert. His Majesty was pleased to declare then his Royal Intention of
confirming the Title and Dignity of an Earl of this Kingdom upon the said
Admiral, and knighted Capt. John Ashby and Cloudesly Shovel: and to encourage
the Seamen, his Majesty was pleased to bestow upon such of them who were in the
late Engagement with the French at Bantry-Bay, a Donative of 10 Shillings a
Man. dit. 1692 The Fleet riding at St. Helens, waiting only for a favorable
Wind to go in quest of the French, Admiral Russell acquainted the Flag-Officers
and others, that he had received a Letter from the Queen, wherein her Majesty
was pleased to tell him, that she was informed that there was a false and
malicious Report spread abroad, that some of the Officers of the Fleet were
disaffected, and that she had ordered the Discharge of many of them from their
Employments; but that she was satisfied that this Report was raised by the
Enemies of the Government; and that she reposed so entire a Confidence in their
Fidelity and Zeal, that she was resolved not to displace any one of them.
Whereupon they made a very Loyal Address, which was immediately sent up, and
presented to the Queen by the Lords of the Admiralty. 26. 16. 1689 This Day the
King was pleased to create Frederick Count de Schomberg (late Marshall of
France) General of his Majesty's Forces, Master General of the Ordnance, and
one of the Privy Council, a Baron, Earl, Marquess, and Duke of the Kingdom of
England, by the Name and Title of Baron Teyes, Earl of Brentford, Marquess of
Harwich, and Duke of Schomberg. dit. 1692 A Proclamation was published this
Day, declaring that the Parliament which was to sit the 24th Instant, shall be
further prorogued to the 14th of June, their Sitting being not judged
necessary, because of our Fleet being then at Sea in a condition to oppose the
designed Descent of the French. At the same time a Declaration of the late King
James was dispersed both in London and the Country, containing a great many
fair Promises, and a general Pardon to his former Subjects, some few excepted,
and amongst others the poor Fisherman Hunt of Feversham, who there stopped King
James when he was going for France, 1688. dit. 1695 This Day the Parliament of
Scotland signed an Address of Condolence to the King upon the Death of that
incomparable Princess the late Queen Mary; a Loss, as they express it, that can
never be too much nor too long lamented. 27. 17. 1692 Admiral Russell sailed
this Morning from St. Helens with the English and Dutch Fleet under his
Command, in order to fight the French Fleet commanded by Count Tourville, which
had been for some Days in the Channel. The King having Advice that the French
King had caused Namur to be invested the 25th in the Morning, and the Marshall
de Luxemburgh was posted at Gemblours to cover the Siege; His Majesty de^amped
from Diogem with the Confederate Army, and marched toward Lovain to endeavor
to relieve the Place. 28. 18. 1658 A Painter who pretended to Prophecy, drew
the Prince of Orange's Picture with 3 Crowns upon his Head. The Picture is
still to be seen at the Hague. dit. 1689 A Proclamation was published this Day
for prohibiting the Importation or retailing of any Commodities of the Growth
or Manufacture of France. 29. 19. 1692 About three in the Morning the Scouts of
the English and Dutch Fleet commanded by Admiral Russell, made the Signal that
they discovered the Enemy about 7 Leagues off Cape Barfleur. The French who had
the Weather-gage bore down to the Allies, and engaged at some Distance about 11
a Clock. The Fight continued till half an Hour past five in the Evening; the
Britannia, on board which was Admiral Russel, and the Royal Sun, the Admiral of
France, being then within less than Musket Shot distance. The French finding
the Place too hot, towed away with all their Boats, and the English and Dutch
after them. About 6 there was a fresh Engagement between the Blew Squadron and
the French which lasted not long. It was, calm all the Night, and the French
took the Opportunity of a great Fog to tow away their Ships, and run away.
Three French Ships blew up in the Engagement. 30. 20. 1692 The English and
Dutch Fleet got sight again of the French Fleet, but they could never come up
with them nearer than a League, and all were forced to come to an Anchor. dit.
1690 The King came to the House of Lords, and gave the Royal Assent to an Act
for the Exercise of the Government by the Queen during his Majesty's Absence;
and to another for reversing the Judgment in a Quowarranto against the City of
London, and for restoring the said City to its ancient Rights and Privileges.
dit. 1696 Alexander Knightley, one of the Conspirators against his Majesty's
Person, was brought to the King's Bench Bar at Westminster, in order to be
tried for that horrid Crime; but the Prisoner delivered a Paper to the Court,
owning that he had been concerned both in the Design of assassinating the King,
and in the intended Invasion of the French, and begged the Court to intercede
with the King for a Pardon. 31. 21. 1692 A Conspiracy against the King's Person
was discovered in Flanders. That Design was carried on by one Chevalier de
Grandval, a Captain of Dragoons in the French Service, and one Dumort a
Walloon, who had last Year agreed together to kill the King, and for that
purpose went to Loo while his Majesty was there, but not meeting with an
opportunity they returned to Paris. They were again set on foot by the greatest
Men in the Court of France, as the Marquess de Barbezieux, etc. and encouraged
by King James, and the French King himself: and so they came again into
Flanders to put in execution that devilish Design; and the better to succeed,
they engaged one Leef^ale a Gentleman near Bosleduc, hoping to remain in those
Parts undiscovered; but the Providence of God brought that execrable Conspiracy
to Light, and Grandval was apprehended. The French King thought then to inslave
Europe, and to cut off with one stroke all the Hopes they had to preserve their
Liberties: for he was ready in Flanders upon the Death of his Majesty to invade
the Netherlands, and King James expected at the Hogue that satal Blow to make a
Descent in England. dit. Admiral Russ^l and Admiral All^mo^de continued this
Day to chase the scattered French Ships, whereof some run into the Race of
Aldernay, others run ashore at La Hogue, and the Admiral with two others, and
two Frigates in the Bay of Cherburg. June. 1. 22. 1692 Vice Admiral De La Val
having the Day before followed the French Admiral and some other Men of War
into Cherburg-Bay, ordered this Morning three Fireships to burn them, and went
himself in his Barge with all the Boats of his Ships to protect the Fireships,
because there was not Water enough for the Men of War. The French defended
their Ships for some time, but at last were forced to leave them. One of our
Fireships commanded by Captain Heath burnt the Royal Sun, Captain Greenway
burnt the Conquerant, and the Admirable was burnt by our Boats. We took a great
many Prisoners in that Action, and lost but very few Men. The Royal Sun Admiral
of the French Fleet carried 104 Guns, and was one of the richest Ships that
ever was built; insomuch that the French said that she was amongst the other
Ships what the Sun is amongst the other Planets. The Conquerant and the
Admirable were the seconds to the Admiral, the first carrying 80 Guns, and the
last 102, two Frigates, and three Ships of lesser Rank were burnt at the same
time. 2. 3. 1692 Admiral Russel having penned up in the Bay of La Hogue 15
French Ships, sent this Afternoon Vice Admiral Rook with several light Frigates
and Fireships, together with all the Boats of the Fleet, well armed, to burn
the said Ships. The Attempt was very dangerous and difficult, for it was
performed in sight of the French and Irish Army commanded by King James, who
caused several Batteries to be made to protect the Men of War: but such was the
Conduct and Resolution of our Men, that they took Possession of several of the
Enemies Ships, and beat the French with their own Guns from their Platforms on
the shore. They burnt six Men of War in the Evening, and had burnt the rest had
not the Night obliged them to retire till the next Morning. dit. 1690 The King
came to the House of Lords, and having given the Royal Assent to an Act for the
King and Queen's Majesty's most gracious general and free Pardon, both Houses
adjourned to the 7th of July. dit. 1693 An Act of Parliament was passed in
Scotland, making it Treason for any Scots man going to, or staying in France
after the 1st of August following, and making likewise Treason all
Correspondence and Commerce by Letters with France without the King's
Permission. 3. 24. 1689 This Day the King came to the House of Lords, and gave
^he Royal Assent to an Act for exempting their Majesty's Protestant Subjects
diffenting from the Church of England, from the Penalties of certain Laws. This
Act was the first Fruit of the late happy Revolution, and put an end to a very
unnatural Persecution, which one time or other could not but be fatal to Great
Britain. dit. 1692 Admiral Russel sent again this Morning Sir George Rook, with
the Long Boats of the Fleet to burn the rest of the Men of War that lay in La
Hogue Bay, and which they could not destroy the day before, by reason of the
Night coming on. They burnt six others, and a great many French Seamen perished
in the Flames. A French Ship of 56 Guns was also overset and utterly lost. The
French made a great Fire from their Batteries on the shore, but however did the
English little Damage. They burnt also 20 of the Enemies Transport Ships. 4.
25. 1690 The French Army commanded by Mousieur de Catinat being entered into
Piemont, and threatening Hostilities in case the Citadels of Turin and Verrue
were not immediately delivered up to them. The Duke of Savoy declared War this
Day against France, and sent to the Governor of Milan, the Swiss Cantons, the
Emperor, the King of England, and the States General, to acquaint them with the
Posture of his Affairs, and desire their Assistance. He set at liberty the
Vaudois, who had vigorously forced their way into their own Valleys through the
French and the Duke of Savoy's Forces, and ordered them to join with his Troops
to oppose their Common Enemy. dit. 1692 Admiral Russel having destroyed all the
French Ships in the Bay of La Hogue, sailed thence toward the Coasts of
England, having sent Sir John Ashby with many Fireships to destroy the French
Transport Ships at Havre de Grace, if he found it practicable. dit. 1692 This
Day Great Waradin surrendered to the Imperialists commanded by General Heusler.
5. 26. 1692 The Town of Namur surrendered this Day to the French King, the
Garrison retiring into the Castle. 6. 27. 1689 Messieurs Van Engellenburg, Van
Witsen, Van Odick, Van Citters, and Dickvelt, Ambassadors extraordinary from
the States General of the United Provinces to congratulate their Majesty's upon
their happy Accession to the Crown, made this Day their public Entry. They
were received at Greenwich by the Earl of Sussex, Sir Charles Cotterel Master
of the Ceremonies, and six Gentlemen of his Majesty's Privy Chamber, and
brought up the River in the King's Barges. At their Landing at the Tower the
Standard being displayed, they were complimented by the Lord Lucas Governor
thereof, and saluted with a Discharge of the Cannon. From thence being attended
by 16 Pages on Horseback, and 60 Footmen in splendid Liveries, they were
conducted in their Majesty's Coaches, followed by 6 very rich Coaches of their
own, and above 50 others belonging to the Nobility, with 6 Horses apiece, to
Cleveland-house at St. James's, appointed for their Entertainment, where their
Excellencies were complimented from the King by the Lord Cornwallis, from the
Queen by Sir Edward Villers, from the Queen Dowager by Mr. Sayers her
Vice-Chamberlain, from Prince George of Denmark by the Lord Cornbury, and from
the Princess by Lieutenant Colonel Sandys. dit. 1692 This Day being appointed
by Admiral Russel to give Thanks to Almighty God for the great Victory obtained
over the French, it was observed very religiously through the whole Fleet, and
all the Cannon discharged on that Occasion. Never was a Victory more complete
than this, nor so cheap an one, since the English and Dutch lost no Men of War,
only 3 Fireships that were spent. The French had blown up and burnt about 22
Men of War, several whereof were Ships of three Decks, amongst which were the
Royal Sun, Admiral of their Fleet, carrying 104 Guns; the Admirable, 102 Guns;
the Conquerant, 80 Guns; and the Admiral of the Blue carrying 90 Guns; besides
many smaller Vessels and Transport Ships. Our Commanders were the Right
Honorable Edward Russel Admiral of the Fleet, Sir John Ashby Admiral of the
Blue, Sir Ralph De La Val Vice Admiral of the Red, George Rook Esquire; Vice
Admiral of the Blue, Sir Cloudesly Shovel Rear Admiral of the Red, and....
Carter Esquire; Rear Admiral of the Blue, who behaved themselves with in
extraordinary Bravery and Prudence. Rear Admiral Carter who had been suspected
of Intelligence with the French, vindicated his Honor by his Blood. The Dutch
were commanded by Admiral Allemonde. 7. 28. 1691 The Marshall de Bouslers
having made a fruitless Attempt upon Liege, retired this Day with great
Precipitation upon the Approach of a Detachment of the King's Army which was
sent to relieve the Town. The French lost a great many Men, and their Bombs did
but little Damage. 8. 29. 1695 The King left Breda this Morning, and came to
his Camp at Aersele at 11 at Night. The Governor of Ghent met his Majesty half
a Mile without the City, where at his Entrance his Majesty was received by the
Burghers in Arms, and all the Magistrates walked before him with lighted
Flambeaus. The great Guns were several times discharged round the
Fortifications, and the like Ceremonies and Respects paid which are customary
at the Reception of the King of Spain. 9. 30. 1689 The Heers Van Engellenburg,
Van Witsen, Odyck, Citters, and Dickvelt, Ambassadors Extraordinary of the
States General of the United Netherlands, had their public Audience of their
Majesty's in the Banqueting House, with all the Ceremonies that are observed at
the public Audience of Ambassadors from Crowned Heads. dit. 1692 The Castle of
Namur being vigorously attacked by the French, the King advanced with his Army
to relieve it, and came upon the Mehaign, having beat the French from several
Posts which they had possessed to hinder his Passage. Bridges were immediately
made in order to pass the River and attack the French Army, which lay encamped
on the other side of the River, but there was such a Storm of Rain in the
Night, that this Morning the River overflowed its Banks, spoiled the Bridges,
and rendered the Passage impracticable. 10. 31. 1689 Major General Kirk with
the Forces under his Command set sail this Day from High-lake to relieve
Londonderry, which was closely besieged by the Irish Rebels, the late King
James commanding the Siege. dit. 1691 The most Reverend Father in God Dr. John
Tillotson Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, was consecrated this Day at St. Mary
le Bow in London. June. 11. 1. 1689 His Majesty was pleased to create Arthur
Herbert Esquire; Admiral of their Majesty's Fleet, Earl of Torrington, and Baron
Herbert of Torbay in the County of Devon. 12. 2. 13. 3. 14. 4. 1689 John
Ashburnham Esquire; was this Day created Baron Ashburnham of Ashburnham in the
County of Sussex. dit. 1690 His Majesty, accompanied by his Royal Highness the
Prince of Denmark, set out this Morning from Kensington on his Royal Voyage for
Ireland to command his Army in Person, and deliver that Kingdom from the
Oppression of the French. 15. 5. 1689 The Estates of Scotland met this Day, and
the Duke of Hamilton acquainted them that His Majesty had been pleased to
appoint him his Commissioner in the ensuing Parliament, and that he had
received Instructions from his Majesty to give his Consent to an Act for
turning the Estates into a Parliament; to such Laws as may redress the
particular Articles of Grievances; and also to any other Acts which they should
advise for the securing the Religion, Peace and Happiness of that Kingdom. An
Act was then passed, declaring that the three Estates now met together on this
5th Day of June, 1689. consisting of the Noblemen, Knights and Burgesses, are a
Lawful and Free Parliament to all Intents and Purposes whatsoever. And that it
shall be High Treason for any Person to disown, quarrel or impugn the Dignity
and Authority of the Parliament upon any Pretense whatever. dit. 1694 This Day
were installed in St. George's Chapel at Windsor, his Electoral Highness
Frederick the 3d, Marquess of Brandenburgh, Prince Elector and Great
Chamberlain of the sacred Roman Empire; his serene Highness George William Duke
of Brunswick and Lunenburgh, Prince of the said Empire, and his Grace Charles
Duke of Shrewsbury, Knights of the most noble Order of the Garter; the two
former by their Proxies, and his Grace in Person. 16. 6. 17. 7. 1691 The Army
commanded by General Ginkel in Ireland having disposed all things for opening
the Campagn, set down this Day before Ballymore, and beat the Irish within
their Fort. dit. 1692 The Rain and bad Weather hindering his Majesty from
passing the Mehaign to relieve Namur, the King marched this Day to Ramiliers,
to endeavor to pass the River there; but the French who had notice thereof
decamped at the same time, and took Possession of the Defiles through which his
Majesty designed to march. dit. 1695 The King having formed the Design of
besieging Namur, and seeing it was difficult to compass it unless he drew away
the French from the Meuse, resolved to attack Fort Knock to persuade them that
he really designed to force their Lines, and accordingly sent this day the Duke
of Wirtemberg with eight Battalions from his Camp at Becelaer to join the
Flying Camp under Major General Ellenberg at Dixmude, and attack Fort Knock,
before which he set down the same day. 18. 8. 1690 His Majesty arrived this day
at Chester, to embark for Ireland, and was received with extraordinary
Demonstrations of Joy. dit. 1691 The Fortress of Ballymore surrendered this Day
to General Ginkel, and the Garrison which consisted of 780 Men, besides 4
Field-Officers, 16 Captains, 14 Lieutenants, 12 Ensigns and Cornets, and 259
Rapparees well armed, were all made Prisoners of War. The English lost only 8
Men, and the Irish had above 150 killed. dit. 1692 The French made an Assault
this Day upon Fort William at Namur, and were repulsed with a great Loss, which
so much encouraged the Besieged, that the same Night they made a Salley with
900 Men, who beat the French from their Posts, filled their Trenches, and
killed 800 of them. dit. 1695 Sir Edward Ward his Majesty's late Attorney
General, was sworn this Day Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer. 19. 9. 1670 The
Prince of Orange went this Day from the Hague to see the Siege of Brunswick,
besieged by the Princes of the House of Lunenburgh. dit. 1695 The Duke of
Wirtemberg who set down before Fort Knock the 7th Instant, thinking fit to beat
the French from an Intrenchment which hindered our Approach, commanded Colonels
Tiffany and Maitland for that Service, which they performed with a great deal
of Bravery, tho the French had the Advantage of their Intrenchments, and were
protected by the Cannon of the Fort. dit. 1694 The English and Dutch Fleet
commanded by the Lord Berkley being come to an Anchor in Camaret-Bay on the 7th
Instant, a Council of War was held the next Day, where it was resolved that the
Land Forces should land to beat the French out of their Intrenchments, and that
the Marquess of Caermarthen should in the mean time batter a Fort and two
Batteries of the Enemy with seven Men of War to cover our Landing. The next Day
the Ships stood in accordingly, and General Talmash with the Landforces went
in the Well-Boats toward the Shore, where he landed in Person notwithstanding
the great Fire of the French; but having observed the Intrenchments of the
Enemy, and that it was impossible to force them, there being an Army more
numerous than his to oppose him, he ordered his Men to return on board their
several Ships. We lost about 500 Men in that warm Action, which tho
unsuccessful, is yet a noble Proof of the Courage of our Forces, who
notwithstanding the Certainty of the Danger, landed with an unparalled
Intrepidity. The General was shot in the Thigh. Several Soldiers and some
Officers remained in the Owze, and were made Prisoners. The French made a great
Fire from their Batteries on our Men of War both from their Cannon and Mortars,
but we lost not one Ship except a Dutch Frigate of 30 Guns, which was sunk by a
Bomb. dit. 1696 The King decamped this Day from Basse Wavre, and marched to
Corbais, whereupon Monsieur de Bouflers who had been three Weeks encamped at
Pieton and Gosseliers, where he had entrenched himself as if he had designed to
venture a Fight, broke up from the Place in great Confusion, and passed the
Sambre at Montigny, not thinking himself safe behind his Intrenchments,
notwithstanding the natural Strength of the Camp. 20. 10. 1691 His Majesty with
the Confederate Army under his Command encamped this Day at Bethlem, where he
was waited upon by Father Stapleton, an Irish Man, Rector of the University of
Louvain, with several Members of that University, who in a Latin Speech
complimented his Majesty upon his Coming into those Parts, and undertaking his
Expedition for the Good of Christendom. The Magistrates of Louvain made the
same Compliment to his Majesty, which they accompanied with a handsome Present
of Wine. dit. 1694 This Day a Holland-Mail brought an Edict given by the Duke
of Savoy, whereby his Royal Highness revokes his Edicts made in 1686, against
the Protestants of the Valleys of Piedmont, takes off all the Forfeitures and
Confiscations, and restores them to the free Exercise of their Religion, and
the Enjoyment of their ancient Rights and Privileges. This Edict is dated May
23, 1694. and in the Preamble the Recommendation of his Majesty of Great
Britain and the States General are mentioned, besides the Justice of the thing
in it self, as a great Inducement to the Duke of Savoy for giving such an Edict
in spite of the Opposition of the Monks and Priests who mustered all their
Forces to hinder it. 21. 11. 1690 This Day the King embarked at Highlake for
Ireland, being attended by 6 Men of War, commanded by Sir Cloudesly Shovel, 6
Yachts, and near 300 Transport Ships. dit. 1696 Sir John Fenwick one of the
Conspirators, was taken in Romney Marsh when he was ready to embark for France.
There was a Proclamation out against him with the Reward of 500 l. 22. 12. 1694
Lieutenant General Talmash, whose Wound was not thought dangerous, was brought
to Plymouth, where he died this Evening, justly lamented for his great Worth,
Courage and Zeal for their Majesty's Service and Government. He had gained a
great Reputation in Ireland, having behaved himself with an extraordinary
Prudence and Bravery at Athlone, Aghrim, and Lymerick: he commanded the English
Foot at the Battle of Landen, and having maintained his Ground as long as
possible, he made a very honorable Retreat, having kept, by his good Order, a
considerable Body of Men together. 23. 13. 1689 The Duke of Gourdon who had
hitherto defended the Castle of Edinburgh for K. James, seeing the Besiegers
had advanced their Trenches to the Ditch, beat a Parley, and surrendered the
Castle this Day to Sir John Lanier, commanding their Majesty's Forces, making
some Terms for the Garrison, but rendering himself entirely to his Majesty's
Discretion. 24. 14. 1690 His Majesty landed this Day about 3 a Clock at
Carickfergus, and from thence went by Land to Belfast, being met on the way by
the Duke of Schomberg, Prince of Wirtemberg, and other General Officers. The
same Evening landed also Prince George, the Duke of Ormond, the Earl of Oxford,
my Lord Scarborough, and other Lords and Gentlemen. dit. 1692 The King marched
again from Sombreff to Melle, to endeavor to relieve the Castle of Namur, or
oblige the French to fight; but they entrenched themselves in such a manner,
that it was not thought fit to attack them. Fort William surrendered this Day to
the French, and made a particular Capitulation, which is very extraordinary,
that Fort being but an Out-work of the Castle. Colonel Cohorn who had so long
and so bravely defended it, was then indisposed, and refused to sign the
Capitulation. 25. 15. 1690 His Majesty took this Day a Review of his Forces
encamped near Lisburn, which he found in a very good Condition, and declared
his Intention to march against the Enemy in a few Days after. He received very
graciously an Address of the Protestant Clergy of the Province of Vlster,
congratulating his safe Arrival, and assuring his Majesty of their Zeal,
Affection and Fidelity. 26. 16. 1691 General Ginkel sent this Day (...) strong
Detachment of Horse (...) Dragoons to take a View of Athlone, which Place he
designed to besiege. dit. The King came this Day with his Army to Gemblours,
whereupon the Marshall de Luxemburg decamped with great Precipitation from
Brain le Comte, and encamped at Estires, between Mons and Binch, behind a
Branch of the River Maine, for his greater Security. 27. 17. 1695 The King
seeing that the French had drawn all their Forces toward their Lines, thinking
that he designed to force them by the Attack of Fort Knock, sent Orders to the
Earl of Athlone, who was in Brabant, to march over the Sambre to invest Namur,
and ordered the Duke of Wirtembergh to withdraw from before Fort Knock, which
accordingly he did this Day. It Is certain that this Attack was but a Feint, to
facilitate the Siege of Namur, which Design was kept so secret, that even the
Duke of Wirtembergh knew nothing of it, and attacked the Place in good earnest.
Upon his decamping he was sensible of the Truth of it, and could not forbear to
complain very modestly to the King, who answered him, that he was sure of his
Zeal and Secrecy, and had a great Esteem for him, but that his Service required
that the General who commanded the Attack of that Fort should know nothing of
his real Design. 28. 18. 1695 The Army marched from Becelaer to Rouselaer, and
his Majesty brought up the Rear. This Motion being made in sight of the French
Lines, several Squadrons of the Enemy came out to fall upon the Rear, but the
Allies marched in so good Order, that they did not think fit to attack them.
29. 19. 1672 The Town of Dordrecht declared this Day the Prince of Orange their
Stadtholder, with all the Prerogatives enjoyed by his Ancestors. dit. 1691 His
Majesty's Army having decamped the Day before from Ballymore, came this Day
before Athlone, beating the Enemy from several Out-ditches to within the Walls
of the English Town, and our Men lodging themselves therein. General Ginkel and
other Chief Officers viewed the Place, and marked out a Battery, which begun to
play upon the Bastion. dit. 1695 The King having disposed all things for the
Siege of the important Place of Namur, left this Day his Army under the Command
of Prince Vaudemont, to observe the Marshall de Villeroy, and went to join the
Army of the Elector, which suddenly broke up from the Neighborhood of
Oudenarde, and marched toward the Meuse. 30. 20. 1691 The English Town of
Athlone was this Day taken by Storm at 5 a Clock in the Afternoon, and the
Irish who defended it were put to the Sword or drowned, except those that could
make their Escape over the Bridge into the other Part of the Town called the
Irish. dit. 1692 This Day the Castle of Namur surrendered to the French King by
Capitulation, Monsieur Luxemburgh having fortified his Camp at Masy in such a
manner that it was impossible for the Allies to relieve that Place. The Castle
made no Defense at all; and there was such a Suspicion of Treachery, that the
Elector of Bavaria confined Prince Brabancon, Governor thereof, to the Citadel
of Antwerp. July. 1. 21. 1690 This Day was fought a bloody Battle in the Plain
of Fleu^us, between the Dutch Forces commanded by Prince Waldeck, making about
25000 Men; and the French Army under the Command of the Marshall of
Luxemburgh, being 40000 strong. The Fight lasted above 6 Hours, and tho the
Dutch Foot was forsaken by their Horse, yet such was their Bravery, that the
French could never break 14 Regiments who retired to Nivelle. The Loss was
pretty equal on both sides, tho it is generally believed the French suffered
more than the Dutch; but they left the Field, and some of their Cannon, and so
the Honor of the Day fell to the French, but the Baggage was saved. dit. 1695
The Earl of Athlone invested Namur this Day, and secured the Passes and Defiles
between the Sambre and the Meuse, and on the Brabant, but had not Men enough to
invest it on the side of the Condross. 2. 22. 1689 His Majesty having
discovered by some intercepted Letters a Conspiracy in England against his
Government, to aid King James in his Design to bring the War upon this Kingdom,
thought fit to communicate these Papers to the City of London. They were read
in Common Council, who resolved thereupon to present a Loyal Address to their
Majesty's, which they did this Day at Whitehall. dit. 1690 His Majesty
accompanied by Prince George of Denmark arrived this Day at the Camp of
Loughbrisland, and sent Major General Scravenmoor with 500 Horse, and a
Detachment of Foot to observe the Army of ^he Rebels commanded by the abdicated
K. James and Count Lauzun, which came about Dundalk. dit. 1695 The Marshall de
Bousslers having marched from the Scheld toward the Meuse with an extraordinary
Diligence, got this Day into Namur by the Condross-side with 8 Regiments of
Dragoons; for the King had so rightly taken his Measures, that the Garrison of
Namur would have made but a very feeble Resistance, if the Earl of Athlone had
had the Convenience to pass the Meuse, and invest the Place on that side. The
Marshall de Bousslers having given the necessary Order for the Defense of that
Fortress, endeavored to get out, but our Men kept him in. 3. 23. 1672 The
States of Holland declared this Day his Highness the Prince of Orange
Stadtholder of their Province, as those of Zealand had done the Day before, and
appointed ten Deputies to offer that Dignity to the Prince, with all the
Prerogatives enjoyed by his Ancestors, and charged their Deputies to the States
General to propose that his Highness might be absolved of the Oath he was
forced to take in their Assembly, not to accept that Dignity, the Prince having
declared that unless the States did absolve him, he would never take upon him
the Exercise of that great Place. dit. 1690 His Majesty went himself this Day
with a Party of Horse four Miles beyond Newry to observe the Ground and the
Ways through which he had resolved to march to the Enemy. dit. 1691 The
Batteries begun this Day to play on the Irish Town of Athlone. dit. 1695 The
King sat down this Day before Namur, taking his Post on the side of Brabant,
and the Elector his between the Sambre and the Meuse. 4. 24. 1672 The Deputies
of the States of Holland and Westfrizeland waited upon the Prince of Orange to
offer him the Dignity of Stadtholder of their Provinces, whom his Highness
received very graciously, and assured them that he would be ready upon all
Occasions to venture his Life for the Glory of his Country, and asserting their
Liberties against their Enemies. 5. 25. 1695 His Majesty accompanied by the
Elector of Bavaria and other General Officers, viewed the Town of Namur, and
the Pioneers were commanded to work on the Lines of Circumvallation and
Contravallation. The Earl of Athlone with most of the Horse in the Army was
sent toward Fleurus, for the Convenience of Forage, and to cover the Camp. 6.
26. 1690 The King marched from Newry to Dundalk, to pursue the Irish and French
Army which was retired toward the River Boyne. 7. ^7. 1690 His Majesty
reviewed his Army near Dundalk, consisting of English, Dutch, Danes, Gernans
and French, making in all about 36000 Men, which he ^ound in a very good
Condition. The same Day a Party of ^ppinger's Dragoons bear one of ^he Irish
who encamped that ^ay near the Boyne. dit. The English and Dutch Fleet
^ommanded by the Earl of Tor^ington, came this Day in sight of the French
Fleet, on the ^oast of the Isle of Wight. 8. 28. 1672 The States General
annulled and made void the perpetual Edict the Enemies of the House of Nassau
had extorted from them, and declared the Prince of Orange Stadtholder of the
State, Captain General and Admiral of Holland, Zealand, and West-F^iezeland,
with all the Privileges, Honors, and Prerogatives enjoyed by his Ancestors.
This was so acceptable to the People, that they made Bonsires and all other
Demonstrations of Joy. dit. 1676 The Prince of Orange sat down before the
strong Town of Mastricht, which was vigorously attacked several Days; but the
Confederate Troops which were to join his Highness being not come, he was
forced to raise the Siege upon the Approach of the French Army commanded by the
Marshall de Schomberg. dit. 1690 The late King James hearing that his Majesty
was marching directly to fight him, passed this Day the River Boyne in great
Confusion, in hopes that he could stop there the English. 9. 29. 1692 A Medal
was coined representing the Victory obtained by Admiral Russel over the French,
and the sinking of the Royal Sun, with this Motto, Maturate fugam, Regique haec
dicito vestro, non illi Imperium Pelagi, to answer what the French boasted of
for the Advantage they got upon the Dutch in the Year 1690. for the Medals they
coined upon that occasion had this Inscription, Imperium Maris assertum Anglis
and Batavis una fugalis. 10. 30. 1672 His Highness received this Day his
Commission of Stadtholder, took the Oath before the States General, and his
Place in their Assembly. dit. 1690 His Majesty encamped this Morning near
Drogheda, and about Noon rode along the River Boyne to observe the Irish Army
posted on the other side of the River. His Majesty was accompanied by his Royal
Highness, the Dukes of Schomberg and Ormond, and many other Generals; whereupon
the Enemy having discovered who they were, planted two Pieces of 6 Pound Ball,
and fired upon the King. The second Ball that was fired passed so close to his
Majesty, as to take away a piece of his Coat, Wastcoat, and Shirt, raised the
Skin on the Blade of his right Shoulder, and drew a little Blood, but by the
Providence of God he had no other Hurt; and a Plaster being put on, his
Majesty continued on Horseback till 4 in the Afternoon. dit. The same Day the
Confederate Fleet and the French engaged off of Beachy upon the Coast of
Sussex, the Dutch Squadron leading the Van, consisting only of 22 Men of War,
which from 9 in the Morning till 9 in the Evening maintained the Fight alone
against the whole French Fleet, consisting of 84 Men of War; for the English,
except 3 or 4 Ships, could not come up to engage. The Dutch complained against
the Earl of Torrington, Admiral of the Fleet; and there was so much Suspicion
of his Conduct, that he was afterward tried super altum Mare by a Council of
War, whereof Sir Ralph De La Val was President; but his Lordship was cleared.
The Dutch lost several Ships, and Rear Admiral Van Dick, and Rear Admiral
Brackell, with some other Officers. dit. 1691 The strong Town of Athlone was
stormed this Day at 4 a Clock in the Afternoon, and taken with the Loss of
about 50 Men. But because no History, for ought I know, can parallel the
Bravery of this Action, it is thought fit to mention the manner of it. The Town
of Athlone is situated upon the River Shannon, which divides it into two Parts.
That situated on the left side of the River, in the Province of Connought, is
called the Irish Town: and besides its natural Strength, being defended on one
side by the Shannon, and on the other by a Morass, it is very well fortified,
and the Irish had spared nothing to make it as strong as possible. The other
called the English Town is in the Province of Leinster, but its Fortifications
were neglected, and the English took it by Storm on the 20th, without any great
Opposition. They had battered ever since the Irish Town, and had made
sufficient Breaches; but the Question was, how to storm the Place, for it was
not possible to pass the River above or below, because Monsieur St. Ruth,
General of the Irish Army, was encamped almost within Cannon-shot of the Town,
to oppose our Passage. It was proposed to raise the Siege, and pass the Shan^on
above the Town to fight the Irish; but this way was not thought proper nor
honorable, and it was resolved to storm the Place by the Riverside; and
accordingly this Day at 4 a Clock in the Afternoon our Men entered the River,
there being a Ford a little below a ruined Bridge which joined the two Towns.
They had Water to the Armpits, but however such was their Bravery, that they
forced the Enemy from their Intrenchments, and in less than an Hour made
themselves Masters of the Town, killing above 1000 of the Enemy, and taking 300
Prisoners, with Major General Maxwell the Governor. We lost in all about 50
Men, besides some wounded. All the Officers behaved themselves with an
extraordinary Bravery. When the Irish saw our Men entering the River, they sent
an Express to St. Ruth, to acquaint him with it; but he answered, that it was
impossible that the English should pretend to take a Town, and he so near with
an Army to succor it; but a second Express having brought Advice that our Men
were already Masters of some Intrenchments, he sent several Batallions and
Squadrons to relieve the Place; but such was the Diligence of the English, that
they had by that time lined all the Works on the side of Connought, and gave
such a Welcome to the Irish, that they retired in great haste, and brought to
St. Ruth the melancholy News of Athlone being taken in his sight. dit. 1689 The
Parliament of Scotland passed an Act to take away the Supremacy over
Ecclesiastical Affairs. July. 11. 1. 1690 His Majesty having observed the
Posture of the Irish and French Army, resolved to pass the Boyne in their
sight, and force them from that advantageous Post; and accordingly this Morning
Count Mainhart of Schomberg, General of the Horse, was sent to pass the River
about 3 Miles from Drogheda, while the rest of the Army should attempt to pass
the same over against King James's Army. The Attempt was very dangerous, for
the Enemy had spoiled the Fords, and cast Intrenchments to defend them; but our
Men behaved themselves with so much Courage and Prudence, that they beat the
Rebels out of their Posts, and put their whole Army to flight. The Enemies
Horse fought very well, and put some of our Batallions into Disorder, because
they had not time enough to form themselves, but the King having then passed
the River with some Squadrons of Horse, put the Enemy to flight, and pursued
them several Miles. The Duke of Schomberg passed the River with the first
Batallions, and was killed as he was drawing up the same in Order of Battle.
Count Mainbart forced also his Pass, and beat the Enemies Horse that was sent
to oppose him. The Enemies left their Baggage and Cannon behind them, with
several thousands dead upon the spot. We lost on our side near 1000 Men,
amongst whom were several inferior Officers, out not one of Note, except the
Great Duke of Schomberg, whose Loss was exceedingly lamented. Dr. Walker who
had so much contributed to the Defense of Londonderry, was killed also.
Colonel La Calliemotte, Son to the Marquess de Ravigny, died of the Wounds he
received: he was the first who passed the River. The King, accompanied by his
Royal Highness, exposed himself to all the Dangers, and revived by his Presence
the Courage of the Army, which seemed discouraged by the Death of the Duke of
Schomberg. King James run away as soon as the Engagement began, notwithstanding
what Count Lauzun General of the French, and other chief Officers, could tell
him to the contrary. Lieutenant General Hamilton, who commanded the Irish
Horse, was taken Prisoner. dit. 1695 The strong Citadel of Cazal and the Town
capitulated this Day, and it was agreed that all the Fortifications should be
razed. The Duke of Savoy commanded the Siege. My Lord Galloway General of his
Majesty's Forces gained there a great Reputation. 12. 2. 1690 The King sent
this Day Brigadeer La Meloniere to besiege Drogheda; but the Governor being
threatened to have no Quarter if he did not deliver up the Town before any Gun
was fired at it, consented to march away with his Garrison without Arms. The
same Day the late King James quitted Dublin, and posted away to Waterford, to
take Shipping for France. He was in such a Consternation that he left all
things in Confusion. He embarked the same. Night at Duncannor, having rod 65
Miles: the Duke of Berwick, the Lord Powis, and Mr. Fitz-James, were with him.
dit. 1695 The Lines of Circumvallation and Contravallation being finished, and
the Artillery arrived in the Camp, his Majesty caused the Trenches to be opened
this Day by Major General Fagel, against the Town of Namur. 13. 3. 1692 The
King sent the Duke of Ormond with 1000 Horse to secure Dublin, which he did
without any Opposition, all the Irish Papists having quiteed the Town the Day
before. 14. 4. 1695 The English and Dutch Fleet under the Command of my Lord
Berkley, anchored before St. Male, and our Bombing Vessels were ordered to
bombard the Batteries and Forts the Enemy had made on the Rock of Quince and
other Places to hinder our approaching the Town, which they performed with so
good a Success, that it was resolved to bombard St. Malo the next Day, and all
things were disposed in order thereto. 15. 5. 1695 This Morning at 4 a Clock
the Bombing Vessels, under the Command of Captain Benbow and Colonel Richards,
stood into St. Malo, notwithstanding the great Fire the French made upon us. We
continued bombarding the Place till 7 in the Evening, and set it on fire in
several Parts, having thrown above 900 Bombs. Our Frigates retired then without
any Loss, except of a Bombing Vessel, which we were obliged to burn, and of
about 50 Men. The same Day Monsieur de Villeroy, General of the French Army,
being reinforced by the Body of Troops commanded by Count Montal, making his
Army upwards of 90000 Men, advanced to Wonterghem on the River Lys, where
Prince Vaudemont with his Majesty's Army, consisting of 35000, was posted to
secure Ghent, Brages, and other Towns. That brave Prince being not surprised at
the great Number of the French, cast up some new Intrenchments, changed the
Disposition of his Army, and took all other Precautions to make the French
believe he was resolved to fight. This kept them in suspense, and they resolved
to send part of their Army to surround ours, but at 5 a Clock our Army decamped
and m^^ssed off toward Ghent with as much Order and Calmness as if there had
been no Enemy at all, without losing any Cannon, Men or Horse, tho in sight of
a great Army which was within Musket Shot of our Intrenchments when we left
them. Never was a more glorious Retreat; and Prince Vaudemont justly gained
there the Reputation of a great General. 16. 6. 1690 This Day his Majesty rode
in great Splendour to the Cathedral of Dublin, being received by the Lord Mayor
and Aldermen with all imaginable Respect. The People made all possible
Demonstrations of Joy to express the Sense they had of their happy Deliverance.
His Majesty rode about to see the Castle and the Town, and returned to his Camp
at Finglas. 17. 7. 1690 His Majesty put out a Proclamation at his Headquarters
at Finglas, promising his Free Pardon to all such of the Irish who would submit
to his Government and his Protection, both in relation to their Life and
Estates. dit. ^^93 The Duke of Wirtemberg who had been detached some Days ago
by his Majesty to make an Attempt upon the Lines of the French between the
Scheld and the Lys, attacked them this Day in four different Places, and forced
them, notwithstanding the vigorous Resistance Monsieur De La Valette made with
8000 Men. The Duke ordered immediately to demolish the Redoubts, and level the
Trenches, and sent abroad Parties toward Tournay, Menin, and other Places, to
raise Contributions. The Action was very warm, and a great many Men were killed
on both sides. 18. 8. 1695 This Day the King having resolved to attack the
Envelopes or Outworks on the Eminence of Bouge and Cocklet before the Town of
Namur, the Attack was carried on the Right by the English, commanded by Major
General Ramsey; and on the Left by the Dutch, under Major General Salis: That
Post being very advantageous, Monsieur de Boufflers sent 5000 Men of his best
Troops to defend it, but they were so vigorously attacked, that they were
forced to retire in such a Confusion that a great many were drowned. The Action
was so vigorous that the French thought our Men were either mad or drunk, for
indeed they did more than they were bid, and beat the Enemy-at once out of all
their Outworks, tho they had several Redoubts with Cannon. The French lost
above 1000 Men and a Field Officer; and we lost about 600. The King continued
all the while in the Trenches, and it was 4 a Clock in the Morning before he
returned to his Quarters. The French made a Salley the same Day upon the
Brandenburghers, between the Sambre and the Meuse, and were repulsed with great
Loss. This Day our Bombing Vessels destroyed the Town of Granville on the Coast
of Normandy. 19. 9. 1689 A Plot was discovered at Edinburgh carried on by the
Jacobites, who had resolved to fire that City, and destroy the States;
whereupon about 40 Persons were seized. 20. 10. 1676 His Highness was wounded
in the Arm in the Trenches at Mastricht. 21. 11. 1690 This Day the Lord Mayor
and Aldermen, with the Lieucenancy of London, attended her Majesty in Council,
where they declared the unanimous Resolution of the City to defend and preserve
their Majesty's and their Government with the ^^azard of their Lives, and to
the utmost of their Power. They represented to her Majesty, that the Regiments
of the Militia of the City making 9000 Men, were complete; that they had raised
6 Auxiliary Regiments, and had resolved by a voluntary Contribution to raise a
Regiment of Horse and 1000 Dragoo^s, desiring her Majesty to appoint Officers
to command them. The Queen gave them Thanks for their Zeal, but the French
Fleet which was then upon the Coast of Kent having sailed toward their own the
same Day, the Horse and Dragoons were not raised. 22. 12. 1691 This Day at 4 a
Clock in the Afternoon was fought the bloody Battle of Aghrim between the
English Forces commanded by General Ginkel, and the Irish Rebels commanded by
Monsieur de St. Ruth. The Irish had the Advantage of Numbers, and were so
strongly entrenched, that it seemed impossible to force their Camp, which took
up a Hill, the Approach whereof was defended by two great Bogs and the Castle
of Aghrim, from which the Enemy fired upon our Army. However those Difficulties
did not deter our Men, but they attacked the Irish with so much Vigor, that
they ran away, leaving 5000 Men upon the spot, their Arms, Cannon, Colors,
Tents and Baggage, and 500 Prisoners, besides 100 Officers. Their General St.
Ruth was killed in the Engagement: and we must do him this Justice to say, that
he alone found the Art to make the Irish fight, for they made a very noble
Defense. We had near 2000 Men killed and wounded in that vigorous Action. It Is
impossible to express the Bravery of the Troops that made up his Majesty's
Army, either English, French, Danes, Dutch, etc. or the Courage and Prudence of
the General Officers, who then gained an immortal Honor. Our Army was
commanded in chief by General Ginkel, who had under him the Duke of Wirtemberg
and Scravenmoore Lieutenant Generals; Mackay, Tetteau, La Forest, Ruvigny,
Talmash, Count Nassau and Holstaple Major Generals; and Villers, Bellasis, La
Melo^iere, Eppinger, Levison, Stewart, Prince of Hesse d'A^mstat, and Schack,
Brigadeers. The Irish were commanded in chief by Monsieur de St. Ruth, and
under him by D' Vsson, Thesse, and Sarsfield, Lieutenant Generals; Hamilton,
and Dorrington, etc. Major Generals: These two last were taken Prisoners. It Is
agreed on all hands, that had not the Night stopped our Victory, few of the
Irish would have escaped, tho they were 28000 strong: the English Army
contisted only of 17000 Men. dit. 1694 The English and Dutch Fleet commanded by
the Lord Berkley, came this day before Diepe, which they bombarded, and said
entirely in Ashes. 23. 13. 1672 His Highness the Prince of Orange advises the
States General to recall the Ambassadors they had sent to treat with the French
King and King Charles; and the said States having seriously considered of that
Matter, recalled them accordingly. 24. 14. 1690 The Queen issued out this Day a
Proclamation for apprehending the Earl of Litcisi^ld, Arlesbury, Castlemaine,
and the Lords Montgomery, Preston, and Bellasis, with several other disaffected
Persons, for aberting and adhering to their Majesty's Enemies. 25. 15. 1690 The
late King James returned this Day to St. Germains, to give the French King an
Account of his Defeat in Ireland, and of the Loss of his Interest in that
Kingdom. The Return of that Prince convinced the French Mob that the Prince of
Orange was not dead as they thought; for it is observable, that either the
Wound he received the Day before he passed the Boyne, or the Promises some
desperate Villains had made to murder his Majesty in the Battle, gave occasion
to a Report in France that he was dead, upon which the Magistrates of most
Towns of the Kingdom ordered, to the eternal Shame of the French Nation,
Bonfires to be made. 26. 16. 1694 This Day the English and Dutch Fleet
commanded by the Lord Berkley, bombarded Havre de Grace. 27. 17. 28. 18. 1695
Major General Ellenberg Governor of Dixmuyde surrendered this Day that Place to
the French by a shameful Capitulation; the Garrison which contisted of near 5000
Men being made Prisoners of War, tho there was no Breach made in that Place.
The Governor was tried afterward for the same, and received Sentence of
Death, which was put in execution. 29. 19. 1695 This Day the French Army
consisting of about 80000 Mea, under the Command of Marshall de Luxemburgh,
attacked the Confederate Army encamped near Landen, which was only 45000
strong, because of the great Detachments that had been made therefrom to cover
Liege and Mastricht, exposed to the Attempts of the Enemy, and for the
Expedition of the Duke of Wirtemberg against the French Lines. The King was
advised to retire the Day before; but his Army, tho inferior, being made up of
the finest Troops that ever were seen, his Majesty did not think fit to hearken
to that Advice, and ordered some Intrenchments to be cast up in the Night. The
French attacked the Allies at 9 a Clock in the Morning, with an extraordinary
Bravery, but were as bravely repulsed; and it was 4 in the Afternoon before
they had gained an Inch of Ground: but our Ammunition being spent by so long a
Fight, and some of the Horse of Hanover giving ground, the French possessed
themselves of our Intrenchments, where there was a most bloody Fight for some
time between our Horse and the French, the King charging himself at the Head of
the Squadrons; but at last being overpowered by the great Number of the Enemy,
they were obliged to retire, which they did in Confusion and Disorder, because
of a River that was behind our Army, in which many were drowned. The Enemy was
so tired, that they were glad to part with us. All the Confederate Troops,
except some Squadrons I have spoken of, behaved themselves to Admiration, and
especially the English; but the Regiment of Horse of Windham, and the French
Regiment of Gallway, distinguished themselves in a particular manner, who broke
three times the French Lifeguard and other Troops of the Household, which are
esteemed the best in the World. The Relation printed at Paris says, that his
Majesty fought at the Head of the Regiment of Gallway, and own that our Troops
made an extraordinary Defense. His Majesty received no other Harm than a small
Contusion in his Side by a Musket Shot. The Elector of Bavaria was also in the
hottest of the Action, as the meanest Soldier. This was as bloody a Battle as
any that has been fought these 50 Years; for the French in the Relation they
printed at Lisle, own to have lost above 16000 Men, but since it appears that
they lost very near 20000. As our Army was not so numerous as the French by
half, we lost not above 9000 Men, but a great many were taken Prisoners. We
lost no Baggage nor heavy Cannon, but only some Fieldpieces. We took 55
Standards and Colors, and 400 Prisoners, amongst whom was the Duke of Berwick
and 30 Officers. Count de Solmes General of the Dutch Foot died of his Wounds,
and the Duke of Ormond and Monsieur Scravenmoore were taken Prisoners, with
Monsieur Zuilesteyn, Count Broway, and several others. The French had 900
Officers killed and wounded: the Duke D'Vses, Monsieur Montchevreuil, Prince
Paul of Lorraine, and Sarsfield, Lieutenant Generals, were killed; and Prince
de Conti, the Marshall de Joyeuse, and the Duke of Rocheguyon, wounded. This
Victory cost the French so dear, that they owned that a second one like this
would have entirely ruined them. 30. 20. 1689 The Duke of Schomberg General of
their Majesty's Forces arrived this Day at Chester, in order to go over into
Ireland with an Army to relieve that Kingdom against the Tyranny and Invasion
of the French. His Grace was received by the Mayor and Aldermen in their
Scarlets, and the 24 Companies in their Gowns, with ringing of Bells, and all
other Demonstrations of Respect. dit. 1695 Brigadeer Offarel surrendered the
Town of Deinse to a Detachment of the French Army commanded by Monsieur De
Feuquieres. The Garrison was made Prisoners of War. The said Offarel was
afterward tried for that base Action, and broke with Infamy. 31. 21. 1691 The
strong Town of Gallway in Ireland surrendered this Day to the English Army
commanded by General Ginkel. There was a good Garrison in the Place, and the
French Lieutenant General D'Vsson, with many other Officers of that Nation,
were retired into the Town, but did not think fit to defend it. August. 1. 22.
1689 The Act for abolishing Episcopacy in Scotland was this Day touched with
the Scepter by the Duke of Hamilton their Majesty's High Commissioner. 2. 23.
1689 Don Pedro-de-Ronquillo, Ambassador Extraordinary from the King of Spain,
made this Day his Entry in the usual manner, and had in the Afternoon his
public Audience of their Majesty's in the Banqueting House, to whom he
presented a Letter from his Master, congratulating their happy Accession to the
Crown. 3. 24. 1689 Her Royal Highness Princess Ann of Denmark was brought to
bed at 4 a Clock in the Morning of a Son in the Palace of Hampton Court. dit.
1690 The Town of Waterford in Ireland surrendered this Day to his Majesty. dit.
1692 This Day his Majesty attacked the French Army encamped at Enghien and
Steenkirk, under the Command of Monsieur Luxemburgh. The Attack was begun by
the Duke of Wirtemberg, who fell upon the Enemy with so much Vigor, that he
beat them from Hedge to Hedge, and drove them beyond one of their Batteries of 7
Pieces of Cannon, of which we remained in possession for above half an Hour;
but the French being relieved with fresh Men, our Troops were forced to retire,
and the French remained in the Possession of their Camp. The Troops that
engaged behaved themselves with an extraordinary Bravery; and the French do own
that if they had been relieved and supported as they ought to have been, and as
it was ordered, they had been for^^d to ^eave their Camp in Confusion and
Disorder: but this was the Fault of some body or other; one of the Generals of
the Foot was violently suspected, because he ordered the Forces to halt, and
this was the Occasion of the Loss of the Day. I don't presume to determine it,
but sure I am that by the Treachery or Ignorance of some body, the best
contrived as well as the most glorious Design was spoiled. We had near six
thousand Men killed and wounded. Lieutenant General Mackay, Sir John Lanier
also Lieutenant General, Sir Robert Douglass, the Earl of Angus, Colonel
Hodges, and my Lord Mountjoy, were killed upon the spot, or died of their
Wounds. The French Officers of Note that were slain in that Action were the
Prince de Turenne, the Marquess of Bellesonds, and the Marquess de Tilladet,
Lieutenant Generals; the Chevalier d' Estrades, Colonel Paulier a Switzer, the
Marquess de Fimarcon, and several others, with a great many wounded. The
Honorable Mr. Keppell Master of the Robes, and Adjutant General to his
Majesty, distinguished himself in that occasion, and received a Cut in his
Check and Shoulder, but killed with his own Hand the Frenchman who had wounded
him. 4. 25. 1695 The Town of Namur surrendered this Day to his Majesty, and the
Garrison retired into the Castle, according to the Capitulation which was signed
by Count Guiscard and the Elector of Bavaria. dit. 1696 An Express from my Lord
Berkley brought Advice, that he had detached a Squadron of his Majesty's Ships
with the Bombing Vessels, under the Command of Captain M^es, to bombard St.
Martin in the Isle of The, and Les Sables D'olonne, which they had performed
some Days ago, having laid those two Towns in a heap of Rubbish. 5. 26. 1690
The French Fleet consisting of 82 Men of War, and several Galleys, came this
Day into Torbay; and having landed about 1000 Men, they burnt the little Town
of Tingmouth, and two or three Fishing-boats in the Harbor; after which they
retired in great Precipitation upon the Approach of the Lord Lansdown with the
Militia of the County. This is the only Advantage they made of their so much
boasted Victory, for they sailed the same Evening toward their own Coasts.
They had expected that many would have declared for the late King James, but
they were much mistaken, for the People expressed every where an extraordinary
Affection for their Majesty's. The Courage the Queen expressed in that nice
Juncture cannot be enough admired, nor sufficiently praised. dit. 1690 The
strong Fort of Duncannon that commands the River of Waterford, surrendered this
Day to his Majesty. 6. 27. 1690 His Highness the Duke of Gloucester was
christened this Day it Hampton Court by the Lord Bishop of London, and named
William, the King and the Earl of Dorset being Godfathers, and the Marchioness
of Hallifax Godmother. 7. 28. 1690 There was a bloody Rencounter this Day
between Major General Mackay commanding in chief his Majesty's Forces in
Scotland, and the Scots Rebels commanded by the Lord Dundee and Colonel Cannon.
The Fight was very furious for some time, but some of the King's Forces giving
ground, the rest were forced to retire, which they did in good Order. Dundee
himself charged the Regiment of the Earl of Leven, who tho newly raised,
maintained their Ground with an extraordinary Bravery. The Lord Dundee was
killed in the Action. 8. 29. 1694 The French having taken Gironne, Roses, and
several other Places in Catalonia, and making Preparation to besiege Barcelona
both by Sea and Land, the King of Spain applied himself to his Majesty, and let
him know that he was unable to protect that Town, or the rest of his Kingdom,
unless his Majesty was pleased to send his Fleet to his Assistance. The Demand
was not acceptable to many, because it was very well known that the Spaniards
were not able to supply our Fleet with Necessaries; but such was the Generosity
of his Majesty, that he made choice of Admiral Russel to command his Fleet in
the Straits. He sailed accordingly, and the News of his Departure being brought
into Catalonia, the French Fleet were so frighted, that they sailed from the
Bay of Barcelona with what Haste they could, and retired into Toulon. The
French Army did not think fit then to attack Barcelona, where Admiral Russel
arrived this Day, being received with all the Marks of Respect and Gratitude.
The Inhabitants made Bonfires, styled him their Deliverer, and many caused his
Name to be engraven on their Doors. It Is observable that the French Fleet run
away upon a false Report, for Admiral Russel was not yet near the Straits when
they retired, which certainly cannot be ascribed but to the terrible
Apprehension they had to have to deal with a Man who so roughly used them two
Years before at the Hogue. Thus Catalonia and Spain were preserved by his
Majesty. 9. 30. 1689 King James having sent Major General Mackarty with 6000
Men to reduce the Inniskilling-men, who had generously taken up Arms in Defense
of their Religion and Liberties, and they having notice, it was resolved to go
and fight the Irish before they came near this Town. They marched accordingly
to a Place called Newton-Butler, where they found the Irish advantageously
posted on an Eminence, with some Pieces of Cannon, having two Bogs before them,
insomuch that there was no coming at them but by two narrow Ways. However
Colonel Woolsley who commanded the Inniskilling-men, charged them so vigorously
that they were entirely routed, and their General taken Prisoner. Our Men were
but 1200 Foot and 800 Horse and Dragoons, and the Irish were 6000. The Irish
lost near 3000 Men, and the Inniskilling-men not above 20, and 50 wounded,
which seems incredible; and it must be confessed that tho there was a great
deal owing to their Valor, yet much more to the Providence of God. The Account
of the Actions of that People, and especially since they were commanded by
Colonel Woolsley, deserves every Man's Perusal. 10. 31. 1689 The Irish Rebels
raised this Day the Siege of Londonderry, before which they sat down the 19th
of April last. King James, the Duke of Berwick, and the greatest Officers, came
to press on the Siege of that Place, which was not fortified at all, or very
little. The Garrison consisted of the Inhabitants and other Protestants who had
fled thither to avoid the cruel Usage of the Irish: and Colonel Lundy, whom
they had chosen their Governor, had so little opinion of the Defense they
could make, that in the Month of April he told Colonel Cunningham and Colonel
Richards, who were sent from England to relieve the Town, that they could not
hold out a Week, and advised them to return without exposing their Men, and
quitted the Place himself; yet such was the Bravery of those Inhabitants, that
they defended their Town against the whole Power of the Irish, tho pinched by a
hard Famine which destroyed six thousand Persons. The Irish threw 591 Bombs
into the Place, lost a great Number of Men, and were forced to raise the Siege,
the Town being relieved the Day before by Major General Kirk. The Siege of this
Place will make it famous in History, and our Posterity will admire the brave
Defense the Inhabitants made, especially if they consider that Mr. Walker a
Minister, and one Mr. Baker, who had never bore Arms before, were chosen
Governors. dit. 1678 This Day was concluded and signed the Treaty of Peace
between the States of Holland and France at Nimeguen, whereby the French
restored Mastricht, the only Place they were then in possession of, the Prince
of Orange having beat them from all the other Places they had taken belonging
to the States General. His Highness was very sorry for that Peace, knowing that
it was neither safe nor honorable. August. 11. 1. 1674 This Day was fought the
bloody Battle of Seness between the Confederate Army commanded by his Highness
the Prince of Orange and the French, under the Command of the Prince de Conde.
The French attacked the Rear of the Allies, consisting of the Spanish Troops,
whom they defeated without any great Opposition; and had they (...)tented
themselves with that Advantage, no body could have denied them the Glory of the
Day; but the Prince de Conde flattering himself with the Hopes of an entire
Victory, attacked the Body of the Allies commanded by the Prince of Orange,
where he met with an extraordinary Resistance, which gave time to the Germans
who had the Vanguard, to come to their Assistance, and there was a most
desperate Fight which lasted from the Morning till the Moon's setting parted
both Armies. The Allies remained in the Field, and the French retired. Both
claimed the Victory, but certainly there is no better Mark of it than to remain
in the Field of Battle. The Loss the French sustained is almost incredible, and
it was this melancholic Consideration that obliged the French King to say,
that he should be very sorry to buy another Victory at such a rate. The Troops
of the French King's Household were almost all cut to pieces, and they lost two
Standards. The first Regiment of Horse of France called the Cornette Blanch
lost also their white Standard. The French took many Standards and Colors in
the beginning of the Battle, as also many Prisoners, and they claimed the
Honor of the Day only upon that Account. This was the first Battle the Prince
of Orange fought, in which he showed such Prudence, Conduct and Bravery
together, that the Great Prince de Conde, who was a very good Judge in these
Matters, could not forbear doing him Justice, and said, that he fought twenty
Princes of Orange that Day; for, says he, he was every where, he showed the
Experience of an Old General, and the Bravery of a Soldier: The only Fault I
think he was guilty of, was exposing his Person too much. In short, I have
Reason to believe, that this young Prince will equal if not exceed the
Williams, Maurices, and Henry's, his glorious and renowned Ancestors. Count de
Souches General of the Germans, who behaved himself with an extraordinary
Bravery in that Action, expresses himself in these Words in his Letter to the
States General: The Event of this Battle is turned to the Glory of his Highness
the Prince of Orange, who has shown on this occasion the Prudence of an old
Captain, the Valor of Caesar, and the Intrepidity of Marius. This I say without
Flattery; and if I have any ways contributed toward the gaining of this
Victory, I have but followed the Example of his Highness. dit. 1675 The Allies
having besieged Tryers, and the Marshall de Crequy being advanced with his
Army to relieve the Town, it was resolved to leave a Body in the Trenches, and
go to fight the French, and accordingly they passed this Day the River of Saar
in sight of the French, whom they attacked with so much Vigor and Bravery,
that they were entirely routed, leaving all their Cannon behind them, with 74
Colors and Standards, 200 Wagons laden with Ammunition, and their Baggage,
3000 Men killed upon the spot, and 2000 Prisoners. Never was a more general
Rout, the General run away into Tryers, and the rest of the Army made shift to
save themselves wherever they could. The Duke of Zell, and his Brother the
Bishop of Osnabrug now Elector of Hanover, had the chief Command: the old Duke
of Lorain came time enough to share in the Honor of the Day; and the Conduct
of the Marquess de Grana, and of the Duke of Holstein Ploen, deserves to be
particularly commended. dit. 1689 General Mackay defeated part of the Scots
Rebels. dit. 1695 The English Fleet under the Command of the Lord Berkley,
attempted this Day the bombarding of Dunkirk, but the Enemy having secured the
Ricebank and wooden Forts with Piles, Booms, Chains and floating Pontons
mounted with Cannon, the Machine Vessels invented by Mr. Meesters could not
come near enough to have the intended Effect, and so the Fleet retired without
any other Loss but of a Dutch Frigate, which in turning out ran aground, and was
fired by the Enemy. 12. 2. 1667 The Prince of Orange is admitted into the
Council of State of Holland as the first Nobleman. dit. 1689 This Day at 4 in
the Afternoon died Pope Innocent XI, justly lamented by all the Papists except
the French, who hated him mortally because he opposed their Encroachments and
Invasions. They styled him the Protestant Pope, and accused him to have been
concerned in the late happy Revolution, and to have a blind Deference for the
Prince of Orange, as, they say, it appeared in the Elections of the Elector of
Cologn and Bishop of Liege, in which his Holiness did nothing but what the
Prince of Orange inspired him with. These are the very Words of a Pamphlet
printed at Paris; but however it be, it is certain that this was the first Loss
the League sustained, and that he had a great Esteem for his Majesty, which
will not seem strange to such who will consider that Odescalchi was a Man of
Honor, and had been a Soldier before he wore the Triple Crown. He was the
chief Promoter of the Alliance concluded between the Sea of Rome, the Emperor,
the King of Poland, and the Republic of Venice, against the Turks in the Year
1684. 13. 3. 1692 Bartholomew Lanier Sieur de Grandval Knight of Maltha, born
at Liniere in Picardy, was this Day hanged, drawn and quartered in the midst of
his Majesty's Army encamped at Hall near Brussels, for having conspired to
assassinate the King, with one Dumont and a Dutchman called Leevendael. The
first discovered the Business to the Duke of Zell, and the second to his
Brother in Holland. They were confronted as Witnesses of the Fact, which
Grandval himself confessed and owned. The Design of assassinating his Majesty
had been encouraged by the Marquess de Louvoys in the Year 1690; and these
Assassines missing of their Design that Campaign, and Monsieur Louvoys dying
some time after, it was laid by. Barbezieux however finding that Project in his
Father's Paper, would not let it fall, but sent for Grandval, who accordingly
entered into a new Negotiation with Dumont, by Letters, who was then at
Hanover, and took with him a third Associate called Leevendael, who was then at
Paris. They met near Boisleduc, and came to the Army to put in execution their
barbarous Design, where Grandval was seized and tried the 11th Instant N. S. in
a Council of War, consisting of Scravenmoor, Sir John Lanier, Talmash and
Mackay Lieutenant Generals, the Marquess la Forest, de Weed, Noyelles and
Zobell Major Generals, Churchill and Ramsey Brigadeers, the Earl of Athlone
General of the Dutch Horse being President. It did not appear that they were
encouraged to that villainous Action immediately by the French King himself, but
the Circumstances are more than a Presumption of his being privy to it, for it
is not likely that Louvoys and Barbezieux would have framed such a Project
without acquainting their Master with it; and if the French King had not been
concerned in it, would he not himself have punished the barbarous Villains upon
whom that horrid Fact was proved? Grandval writ a Letter to one Mademoiselle
Jure at Paris, wherein he desired her to wait upon the Archbishop of Rheims,
Lonvoys's Brother, and to tell him he had obeyed the Marquess of Barbezieux's
Order, to the Expense of his Life. By the Evidence of Dumont and Leevendael it
appears as clear as the Sun, that the late King James had encouraged that
Villainy by Promises he made himself without Mediators. Colonel Parker was
concerned in that Conspiracy as well as in the last. There was a Book printed
here, wherein it was proved that both the French King and K. James were privy
to that horrid Design; but a certain great Man, who was then at the Helm of the
Government, would not suffer it to be published. 14. 4. 1678 The French having
besieged Mons, his Highness the Prince of Orange marched with the Confederate
Army to relieve the Place. The Duke of Luxemburgh General of the French Army
having notice of the March of the Allies, possessed himself of several Passes
and Posts about the Place, which he fortified in such a manner, that he writ to
the Marshall d' Estrades then at Nimeguen, that he was so posted, that if he
had but ten thousand Men, and the Prince forty, yet he was sure he could not be
forced, whereas he took his Army to be stronger than that of the Allies.
However the Prince attacked the French with such a Bravery, that after a bloody
and obstinate Fight he beat them from those strong Posts. The Night prevented
the End of the Action, during which the French retired toward Mons in great
Confusion, leaving a great many wounded in the Field of Battle. The next
Morning the Prince designed to pursue them, and oblige them to fight or to
raise the Blockade of Mons, but he was prevented by the Advice he received from
the States of the Peace being signed between them and France on the 11th
Instant. The French who could not deny or conceal their Defeat, sought for vain
and frivolous Excuses, and complained against the Prince, whom they accused of
Violation of the public Faith in attacking their Army after he knew the Peace
was signed. This was the Language of the Paris Gazetteer, and other mercenary
Fellows like him; but the Men of Honor that were in the French Army did not
entertain such Thoughts; and any impartial Man who will but cast his Eyes on
the Conduct and Character of his Majesty, will never suspect him to have been
guilty of the Charge the French laid upon him. It Is true the States had sent an
Express with a Packet to the Prince the Day the Battle was fought, but it was
intercepted and concealed by the Marquess de Grana, who being averse to the
Peace, thought that the Gain of a Victory might change the Face of the Affairs
of Christendom, and contribute to the Continuation of the War, which he knew
his Highness did wish, because he did wisely foresee that the Peace of Nimeguen
was but an Artifice of the French King to break the Confederacy, and then put
into execution the Project he had formed of the Universal Monarchy. His
Highness did Wonders in the Action, and being in the midst of the Enemy, a
French Officer was going to shoot him with a Pistol, but was prevented by
Monsieur Dauverquerque, who shot the Frenchman dead. A great Officer of the
French Army who was in the Engagement was so charmed with the Conduct and
Courage of the Prince, that he said, that he esteemed this the only Heroic
Action that had been done in the whole Course or Progress of the War. The
English Forces behaved themselves to Admiration, and the Earl of Ossery who
commanded them gave extraordinary Proofs both of his Prudence and Valor. The
Duke of Monmouth arrived in the Camp two Hours before the Engagement, and
accompanied his Highness every where. 5. 5. 1678 The Prince having signified to
the Marshall de Luxemburgh the Advices he had received that Morning of the
Peace being concluded at Nimeguen, that General desired to see the Prince,
which was agreed to, and they met in the Field at the Head of their chief
Officers, where all passed with the Civilities that became the Occasion, and
with great Curiosity of the French to see and crowd about a young Prince who
had made so much Noise in the World, and had the Day before given Life and
Vigor to such a desperate Action, as all Men esteemed this Battle of St.
Denis. It Is observable that Monsieur de Luxemburgh, tho a Duke, Peer, and
Marshall of France, and General of the French Army, showed such a Respect for
his Highness, that he never put on his Hat while he was with him, and that
seeing the Count d' Auvergne Brother to the Duke de Bouillon, who claims the
Title of Prince, covering himself, he sent him back to his Post to teach him
better Manners. He made a short but very fine Speech to the Prince, and parted
with the greatest Marks of Respect that could have been expected. dit. 1692 The
Confederate Army commanded by the Duke of Savoy, the Marquess de Leganez, Count
Caprara, and Duke of Schomberg, having forced their Way into Dauphine, taken
Guillestre and several other Passes, obliged the Garrison of Ambrun to surrender
that Place this Day, and by an Article of the Capitulation it was agreed that
no Officer or Soldier except the Marquess de Larray and three more, should
serve during the Campaign. As soon as the Place was delivered, the Duke of
Schomberg caused Monsieur du Bourdieu, Minister of the French Church of the
Savoy, and then his Chaplain, to preach in the Town; and all the new Converts,
Inhabitants thereof, and of the Neighborhood, assisted at the Divine Service
with an incredible Joy; which shows how little Reason the Papists have to
boast of the pretended Conversion performed by their booted Missionaries. 16.
6. 17. 7. 1695 The King pressing very hard the Castle of Namur, and the French
daring not attack our Lines to oblige his Majesty to raise the Siege, they
thought to compass their Design at an easier rate; and accordingly the
Marshall de Villeroy having reinforced his Army with the Garrisons of the
Frontier Places, marched the 13th Instant N. S. to Anderlecht near Brussels to
bombard the Place, expecting that the King would immediately leave Namur to
relieve Brussels. Prince Vaudemont who observed his Motions arrived at the same
time in the Place, and disposed his Army as he thought fit, to hinder the
French from attacking the Town otherwise than by their Bombs. The Elector of
Bavaria came also to the Place to give the necessary Orders to quench the Fire,
and prevent the Disorders that might happen on such an occasion. The same Day
between twelve and one of the Clock the Marshall de Villeroy having made all
the Preparations for executing his Design, sent an impertinent Letter by a
Trumpet to the Prince de Bergues, Governor of Brussels, wherein he said, that
his Master being full of Goodness toward his Subjects, had sent him to bombard
Brussels, as a Means to put a stop to the bombarding of his Maritime Places by
the Fleet of the Prince of Orange; that it was with Reluctance that he was
necessitated to make use of Reprisals; and therefore if he could be assured
that his Seaports should be no more bombarded, he would forbear bombarding
Brussels, desiring to know in what part of the Town the Electoress of Bavaria
was, being forbid to fire there; giving time for an Answer till 5 a Clock in
the Evening. The Governor having communicated that Message to the Elector of
Bavaria, he returned an Answer to this purpose, That he could not give a direct
Answer to the Declaration he had sent him concerning the bombarding of
Brussels, and the Reason alleged for it, since it regarded the King of Great
Britain, who was before the Castle of Namur, but that if he would give a longer
time, his Electoral Highness would procure an Answer in 24 Hours, and that the
Electoress was in the King's Palace. As the Message of Villeroy was only to
throw the Odium of that Bombardment upon his Majesty, and for no other purpose,
since he knew very well that the Elector of Bavaria, and less still the
Governor of Brussels, could not promise what he demanded, the French begun to
throw their Bombs, and fire their red hot Bullets at 5 a Clock, and continued
till the 15th N. S. at 9 in the Morning, and destroyed most of the lower Town,
but could not reach the Magazines; and this Day their Army retired toward
Enghien. The Paris Gazetteer wrote a very impudent Manifesto, wherein he
endeavored to insinuate that the English were the first who put in practice
that barbarous way of destroying Towns, out his Lies had not the Success he
expected, for the bombarding of Genoa in time of Peace several Years before
this War, and the horrid Ravages committed by them in the Palatinate, Piemont,
and other Parts, were too fresh in the Memory of Men, to be effaced by that
mercenary Pen. The Electoress of Bavaria was so frighted, that she miscarried
of a Boy, to the unspeakable Grief of the Elector. Few People were killed in
the Town, but the French lost a pretty many. 18. 8. 1690 This Day was fought a
Battle between the Duke of Savoy and Monsieur Catinat at Staffarde, which
lasted eight Hours, but the Duke of Savoy was forced to retire as orderly as he
could toward Carmagnole, leaving to the French the Field of Battle, and 3 or 4
Pieces of Cannon. His Baggage was saved, and the Loss was pretty equal on both
sides; and much about the same time the Vaudois defeated the French, and beat
them out of their Valleys. 19. 9. 1678 The States General taking into their
Consideration the great Service Monsieur D'auverquerque had done in preserving
the Person of his Highness the Prince of Orange, and killing a French Officer
who was ready to shoot his Highness in the Battle of St. Denis, resolved to
return him their Thanks for that important Service, and assure him that they
would give him effectual Marks of their Gratitude, and in the mean time
presented him with a golden hilted Sword, and a fine Case of Pistols adorned
also with Gold. dit. 1690 The King sat down this Day before Lymerick. The Irish
who had a very numerous Garrison, came out in a body to defend the Approaches,
but were beaten in with a great Loss. We took that Day Cromwell's Fort, and the
Old Chapel, two very advantageous Posts very near the Town. His Majesty and
his Royal Highness were in great Danger. dit. 1691 This Day was fought the
bloody Battle of Salankemen between the Imperial Army commanded by Prince Lewis
of Baden and the Turks under the Command of the Grand Vizier. The Battle was
very doubtful for some time, but at last it pleased God to bless the Christians
with an entire Victory. The Turks lost 13000 Men upon the spot, 158 Pieces of
Cannon and Mortars, all their Baggage, a great Number of Standards and Colors,
and several thousand Prisoners. The Turks were twice as numerous as the
Christians, and were besides strongly entrenched. The Christians lost about
5000 Men. The Auxiliary Troops of Brandenburgh behaved themselves to
Admiration. The Emperor was so pleased with the Conduct of Prince Lewis of
Baden, that he declared him his Lieutenant General, with all the Prerogatives
enjoyed before by the Duke of Lorain. 20. 10. 1672 This Day the Court of
Justice of Holland passed Sentence upon Cornelius de Wit Great Baily of Putten,
Burgomaster of Dordrecht, and Brother to the famous John de Wit, Pensionary of
Holland, for having conspired the Death of his Highness the Prince of Orange.
There was but one Evidence against him, viz. a Surgeon, who positively
declared that the said Cornelius de Wit had promised him 30000 Flori^s, besides
a great Preferment, in case he did poison his Highness, or put him to Death by
any other Means whatsoever. The Evidence being not sufficient to condemn him to
Death, the Court deprived the said de Wit of all his Places, and banished him
for ever out of the Provinces of Holland and West-Frizeland. 21. 11. 1695
Colonel Sellwin and the Lord George Hamilton were this Day made Brigadeers
General of Foot in consideration of their good Services, and especially in the
Siege of Namur, which the King pressed very hard at this time. 22. 12. 1672
John de Wit and Cornelius de Wit his Brother, were this Day massacred by the
Inhabitants of the Hague, who accused them of having betrayed their Country to
the French. Cornelius de Wit was banished, and his Brother by an imprudent
Vanity went in his Coach to the Prison to carry him away, as in Triumph, which
so much incensed the Mob, that they tore them to pieces. dit. 1689 This Morning
his Grace the Duke of Schombergh, with their Majesty's Forces set sail for
Ireland, to reduce that Kingdom. Many have wondered that he was sent no sooner,
but it is likely that the Government expected the Event of the Insurrection of
the Rebels in Scotland, headed by Dundee. dit. 1691 The King having pursued the
French Army commanded by the Marshall de Luxemburgh very near Philippeville,
where they entrenched themselves in Woods behind Rivers and Defiles; his
Majesty seeing the Impossibility of forcing them to fight, caused the
Fortifications of Beaumont, which the Enemy had quitted upon our Approach, to
be blown up in sight of the French Army, which durst not come out of their
Intrenchments: after which the King retired toward Gerpines and St. Gerard.
23. 13. 1672 The Prince of Orange having notice of the Misfortune of Messieurs
de Wit, who had been the Day before massacred, gave Orders to inquire who were
the Promoters of that Action, in order to be punished. This Generosity of the
Prince was mightily commended, especially of such who knew that that Family had
been without any Cause his greatest Enemies. John de Wit was an extraordinary
Man, and understood the Affairs of Europe as well as any Man; yet his
Obstinacy, in relation to the Prince, brought his Country to the very brink of
its Ruin, and was the Occasion of his tragical Death. dit. School The Duke of
Schomberg, General of their Majesty's Forces, landed with the Army this Day in
Bangor-Bay near Carrickfergus. 24. 14. 1672 The Prince of Orange with a
Detachment of his Army beat the French from several Posts about Worden, and
pursued them to the Gates of Vtrecht. dit. 1694 The Queen put out a
Proclamation for apprehending Colonel Parker, who being committed to the Tower
for High Treason, found Means to make his Escape. 25. 15. 1689 The Dutch Army
commanded by Prince Waldeck being encamped near Walcourt, had this Day a bloody
Rencounter with the French, who thought to have surprised our Army, while a
good part of it were gone to forage. The French attacked the Town of Walcourt,
which covered the Pass to the Dutch Camp, but the Prince of Waldeck had put so
many Men in it, that they could never take it, tho it was almost open, and that
the Attack lasted six Hours. The English behaved themselves with a great
Bravery. The French lost in that Action near 2000 Men, and amongst them the
Marquess de St. Gelais Marshall de Camp, and Count d' Artagnan, with 27
Officers of the Guards. The Allies did not lose above 60 Men; and had the
Nature of the Ground permitted our Men to follow the Enemy, they had entirely
defeated the French Army, which retired in great Confusion. 26. 16. 1689 A
Party was sent this Day by the Duke of Schomberg toward Belfast, which the
Irish quitted upon their Approach. dit. 1695 The English Fleet commanded by my
Lord Berkley anchored this Day before Calais, and next Morning the Bombing
Vessels stood as near the Shore as possible, and bombarded the Town till 6 in
the Evening. They set it on fire in several Places, and their Magazine in the
Rice-Bank was blown up. The French came out with their Long Boats and Half
Galleys, but were repulsed with great Loss. 27. 17. 1672 The Bishops of Liege
and Munster raised this Day the Siege of Groninguen, before which Place they
had set down the 20th ultimo, with their own Forces, and a Detachment of the
French. The Place was vigorously attacked, and it was the first time the Bombs
were made use of, that is, since they were brought to a kind of Perfection. The
Bishops hd 4600 Men killed on the spot, and above 5000 Deserters, and left 5
Cannons behind. Monsieur Charles Rabenhaut was Governor of the Town, and the
Duke of Holstein Commander of the Garrison. dit. The States of Holland and
Westfrizeland gave this Day Authority to the Prince to change those Magistrates
of the Towns of their Province as (...) should think fit, without any (...) or
Restriction Whereupon most of the Magistrates of the said Provinces were (...)
out upon the Complai^^^ brought to hi^ Highness of their being disaffected to
the Public Good. dit. 1690 The Trenches were opened before Limerick. dit. 1692
A Detachment of the Garrison of Namur, commanded by the Prince d' Enrichmo^t,
the Marquess d' Hocquincourt, and the Marquess d' Ecos, was this Day defeated
by a Detachment of the Allies, belonging to the Garrison at Huy. The Dispute was
very sharp, and the French had above 300 Men killed, and 356 taken Prisoners,
amongst whom were 30 Officers, besides the chief Officers who commanded the
Detachment. 28. 18. 29. 19. 1689 The Ottoman Forces were this Day entirely
routed by the Imperialists, commanded by Prince Lewis of Baden, on the River
Morava in Servia. They had 15000 killed and wounded, and lost a great number of
Standards and Colors, with the Horse's Tail, 105 Pieces of Cannon, and their
Baggage. The Christians lost about 2000 Men. dit. 1690 This Day his Majesty was
going from his Quarters to Cromwell's Fort, to direct the Batteries against the
Town of Lymerick; and just as his Horse was entering a Gap, the Divine
Providence directed a Gentleman to stop his Majesty to speak with him, and in
that Moment there struck a twenty four Pounder in that very Gap, which would
have certainly killed him, but did him no harm at all, except that it struck
the Dust all about him. dit. 1692 The Confederate Army under the Command of the
Duke of Savoy, took this Day Possession of the Town of Gap in Dauphine. 30. 20.
1672 The French attempting to relieve Worden, were beat back by his Highness.
dit. The French were forced to raise the Blockade of Mastricht. dit. 1690 The
King caused a Redoubt at Lymerick to be attacked, which our Men took after a
short Resistance; and the Enemy having made a Sally with 2000 Men to retake it,
they were beat back with great Loss. dit. 1695 This Day was made a general
Assault upon the Castle of Namur and Fort Cohorn. The English Granadeers
supported by 4 Regiments, viz. Coulthrop's, Frederick Hamilton's, Mackay's, and
Buchan's, were appointed to attack the Breach of Terra-nova, under the Command
of my Lord Cutts; Count Rivera with the Spaniards and Bavarians to attack Fort
William or Cohorn on the side next Terra-nova; Major General la Cave with the
Brandenburghers to storm Fort William on the other side; and Major General
Swerin with the Dutch was appointed to attack the Castle. The Signal being
given, all the Forces advanced with an unparalled Intrepidity. The English
forced their way through the Breach, and notwithstanding the Resistance of the
Enemy, and the great fire they made upon our Men, they gained the top of the
same; but finding the French strongly entrenched beyond it, and the Nature of
the Ground not permitting our Men to advance in any Front, they were forced to
retire. Count Rivera was killed upon approaching Fort Cohorn, but nevertheless
the Bavarians lodged themselves upon the Saliant Angle of the Counterscarp, in
which they maintained themselves by the Assistance of my Lord Cutts, who came
timely to their Relief. The Action was very hot, and a Battery which the Enemy
had within their Pallisadoes much gauled our Men; whereupon my Lord Cutts
ordered a Lieutenant of Mackay's Regiment with 30 Men to pass the Pallisadoes,
and attack that Battery, which he performed with an extraordinary Bravery,
turning 7 of their Cannon against them, and securing some of their Mines. Major
Generals la Cave and Swerin forced the French from the Post they attacked, and
made each a good Lodgment on the same, which they perfected that Night and the
next Day; and in the mean time our Batteries continued to play upon Terra-nova,
to make that Attack more practicable. This Action was very vigorous, and it is
granted, that had the English Granadeers been timely supported, they would have
carried the Post of Terra-nova. The Allies had near 2000 killed and wounded,
and the French near as many. 31. 21. 1689 The Town of Carickfergus was besieged
this Day by their Majesty's Forces commanded by the Duke of Schomberg.
September 1. 22. 1695 Our Batteries having enlarged our Breaches, his Majesty
returned before the Castle of Namur from his Camp at Masy, where he was gone
the Day of the General Storm to observe the French Army, which was advanced to
relieve the Place, and durst not attempt to attack the King's Army, tho they
were 100000 strong; but he met upon the way an Adjuran^ of the Elector of
Bavaria, who was sent to acquaint his Majesty that the French seeing our
Preparations for a second Assault, and fearing to be put to the Sword, had beat
a Parley. His Majesty being arrived at the Cloister of Salsines, Hostages were
immediately exchanged, and Propositions brought from the Castle. They demanded
to have ten Days to expect Relief, and several other things, which were denied
them; and their Propositions, with the Elector of Bavaria's Answer, were sent
back to the Castle the same Evening; and his Majesty returned to his Camp to
observe Monsieur de Villeroy, who was encamped at Bonef. 2. 23. 1695 This
Morning the Capitulation was signed by the Elector of Bavaria, Monsieur de
Boufflers and Count Guiscard, whereby Fort William, La Casotte, and some other
Works were immediately delivered up to our Forces, and it was agreed that the
Garrison should march out three Days after, viz. the 5th, through the Breach,
with all the usual Marks of Honor, with 6 Pieces of Cannon and 2 Mortars. dit.
Monsieur de Villeroy who was advanced to Boness with his Army in order to
relieve Namur, retired this Day in great Precipitation, having notice of the
surrendering of the Place. 3. 24. 1695 The Confederate Fleet under the Command
of Admiral Russel having appeared before Toulon, the French were in great
Consternation for their Ships, and the whole Coast in a great Alarm; but just
as the Allies were preparing to make an Attempt upon that Place, there arose
this Day a violent Storm, which carried them away from the Coast. 4. 25. 1691
The Town of Lymerick, was invested by his Majesty's Army commanded by General
Ginkel, and our Men possessed themselves the same Day of Ireton and Cromwell's
Forts, with the Loss only of three or four Men. dit. 1692 The Lord Viscount
Sidney made his Entry into Dublin, and was sworn Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. 5.
26. 1675 The Town of Triers surrendered this Day to the Allies. The Marshall de
Crequi who had defended that Place since his Defeat the 11th ultimo, would
never capitulate, and was delivered up Prisoner to the Allies, with such
Officers who refused to sign the Capitulation, whereby it was agreed that the
Garrison should not bear Arms against the Confederates till after three Months.
The Officers were allowed to march out with their Arms and Baggage, but the
Horse, Dragoons, and Foot, were allowed to march out only with their Swords,
leaving their other Arms and Horses behind them. The English who were in the
Place gained a great Reputation; but as they made a most desperate Defense, a
great many of them were killed. dit. 1695 This Morning being the time appointed
for the marching out of the French Garrison of Namur, 30 Battalions were drawn
up in two Lines from the Breach of Terra-nova, down to the Meuse, to the Way
that leads to Givet; and about 10 a Clock the said Garrison came out through the
Breach; Monsieur de Boufflers and Count Guiscard riding at the Head of their
Men Sword in band, with which they saluted his Majesty and the Elector of
Bavaria. Monsieur Dickvelt who knew the said Marshall accosted him, and rid
with him to the top of the Hill, and told him that the King of England had so
much Reason to be displeased that the French King should detain the Garrisons of
Deinse and Dixmude Prisoners against the express Word of the Cartel, that he
was obliged by that open Injustice to secure his Person till he had received
Satisfaction upon that Article; and immediately Monsieur de L' Estang Brigadeer
of the King's Forces arrested him with a Detachment of the Life-Guards. The
Marshall was very much incensed at first with that Proceeding, alleging the
public Faith of the Capitulation, wherein he was expressly mentioned, and said
that his Master would revenge that Affront to the utmost of his Power. To which
Monsieur Dickvelt replied, that as to his Threats the time of using such
Language was over; that the King of England was obliged to it, since the French
King had no Regard to Capitulations and Agreements; that this was no Disrespect
in particular to his Person, seeing his Majesty might have detained the whole
Garrison, whereas he had contented himself with his Person: and then to show him
the Esteem he had for him, he was ordered to offer him his Liberty if he would
pass his Word for the sending back of the Garrisons of Deinse and Dixmude, or
return himself Prisoner within a Fortnight. The Marshall having answered that
it was more than he could promise, he was carried Prisoner into the Town, and
treated with the Honor and Respect due to a Marshall of France, a Captain,
Lieutenant and Ensign mounting the Guard upon his Quarters with Colors. The
Garrison conducted by Count Guiscard continued their March toward Givet, (being
conducted by 2000 Dragoons) consisting of 5442 Men. Thus the important Place of
Namur was surrendered to his Majesty in sight of an Army of above 100000 Men
commanded by the most experienced Generals of France, and in which were most of
the Princes of the Blood, who, it seems, came within sight of that Fortress
only to be the Spectators and Witnesses of the Capitulation. The French had
made that Place so strong, that they had the Confidence to cause this
Inscription to be engraven on the Gates, Reddi ^sed Vinci non potest, as if
they had defied all the World to take it: And when the News came to Paris of
the Allies having besieged that Place, and that Monsieur de Boufflers was in it
with about 16000 Men, it is said the French King laughed at that Account, and
said, it was but a Feint, and that the Prince of Orange was too sensible a Man
to be guilty of such a Folly: but the Event did show that there is no Place
impregnable when attacked by brave Troops, animated by the Presence of so great
a General as his Majesty. When the French took it, they coined a Medal with his
Motto, Amat victoria testes, which we may easily retort upon them, for we had
for Witnesses the whole Power of France. The Allies lost about 9000 Men, but
the Loss of the French was at least as great, since out of 16000 Men there
marched out not 6000, besides about 2000 who were sick, or were sent upon the
Capitulation of the Town to Dinant. One thing we must observe more, is, that
tho the French were so numerous in the Place, and commanded by so fiery a Man as
Monsieur de Boufflers, yet they never regained any Post they were beaten off;
and ever since the Attack of the Envelope in the beginning of the Siege they
seemed to be afraid of our Troops. The Allies found in the Place 69 Pieces of
Cannon, 4 Mortars, and 4 Hautwitzers with the Arms of France, 281 thousand
Weight of Gunpowder, 50 great Bombs of 500 Weight each, 2000 ordinary Bombs,
1000 lesser Bombs, 750 Grenades of 24 Pound Weight, 40000 ordinary Grenades
fixed, 150 Barrels of Cannon-Ball, Saltpeter and Brimstone 15 Tun, and 800
spare Muskets, besides several other Pieces of Cannon which were in few Days
after found buried in the Ground. The Landgrave of Hesse Castle who was come
from the Rhine with his own Forces, and a Detachment of Prince Lewis of Baden's
Army, continued in his Majesty's Camp till the Place was surrendered, and the
French retired. I have been somewhat long in this Account, but the Reader will
excuse me, because of the Importance of the Action, one of the most glorious
that ever was performed. 6. 27. 1689 The Garrison of Carickfergus surrendered
this Day to the Duke of Schomberg, and marched out to the Number of 2500 Men.
dit. 1689 The Allies stormed this Day the Counter scarp of M^ntz, under the
Command of the Duke of Lorain. dit. 1690 This Day the King ordered an Attack to
be made on the Counterscarp of Lymerick, which our Granadeers gained with a
great deal of Bravery, together with a Fort the Enemy had under the Walls; but
instead of lodging themselves as they were ordered to do, and to go no further,
they mounted the Breach, following the Irish that fled that way, and most of
them were actually in the Town; but the Regiments that were to second the
Granadeers stopping at the Counterscarp, (according to Orders) the Irish
rallied themselves, beat back our Men, who were forced to retire into the
Trenches. We had in that Action 44 Officers wounded, and 15 killed. Some
pretend that this Attack was mysterious, and that the Town had been easily
taken, had it not been prevented by some self-interested Persons, whose
Interest it was to continue the War in that Country; but whatever it be, I
leave it to the Reader's Inquiry, it being out of my way at this time,
according to the Rules I have prescribed to my self. 7. 28. 1672 The Prince of
Orange went from Loo to the Frontiers of Germany, to confer with several German
Princes, and there he laid the Foundation of that great Alliance that appeared
soon after against France. 8. 29. 1688 King James being frightened with the
great Preparations the States were making, commanded the Marquess d'Albeville
his Ambassador to present a Memorial concerning the same, which he did this
Day, the Substance whereof is, that his Majesty of Great Britain taking a just
Umbrage of the great Preparations the States were making by Sea, especially in
a Season that it is usual to disarm a Fleet, he was commanded to demand what
those Preparations were designed for; hoping that in consideration of his being
their ancient Ally and Confederate, they will not refuse to give him that
Satisfaction, on which the Tranquillity of Europe does depend. dit. 1689 This
Day the Town of Mentz surrendered to the Allies commanded by the Duke of Lorain,
the French Garrison which at the beginning of the Siege consisted of 10000 Men
of their best Troops, being reduced to about 6000: the Electors of Saxony and
Bavaria, the Duke of Hanover, and the Landgrave of Hesse Cassel, were present
at that Siege. dit. 1689 Mr. Walker late Governor of London derry waited this
Day on their Majesty's at Hampton Court, with an humble Address of the
Governors, Officers, Clergy, and other Gentlemen in the City and Garrison of
Londonderry, and was very kindly received, and presented with ^ive thousand
Pounds. His Majesty was pleased to assure him, that this should not at all
l^ssen the Kindness he intended to show to him and to his Family, and that he
would likewise have a particular Care of the ^est of the Officers and other
Gentlemen who had so well behaved themselves in the Defense of Londonderry. 9.
30. 1688 Count d' Avaux Ambassador of the French King to the States of Holland,
being also netled at the Preparations of the States, presented this Day a
Memorial, to know whom those Preparations were designed against, adding at the
same time, that as the King his Master had sufficient Reasons to be persuaded
that they were against the King of England, he was commanded to declare to
their States, that his Majesty was under certain Obligations by Alliance and
Friendship, not only to succor that Prince, but also to take the first Act of
Hostility committed against him as an open Breach with him, leaving the States
to reflect on the dangerous Consequences of their Design. This Memorial
discovered the secret Alliance betwixt King James and the French King, which
was kept so secret. The same Day he delivered another Memorial concerning the
Affairs of Cologn, and declared that his Master was resolved to maintain the
Interest of the Cardinal de Furstemberg. 10. 31. 1690 This Day his Majesty
thought fit to withdraw his Forces from before Limerick by reason of the great
Rains that fell at that time, which would not permit our Men to be in the
Trenches. The Town was reduced to the last Extremities; and had the Weather
been fair but few Days longer than it was, it had certainly been taken. dit.
1691 His Majesty presented this Day Prince Vaudemont with 40000 Florins, and
his Palace at Brussels. dit. 1696 This Day was published at Paris the separate
Peace made betwixt the French King and the Duke of Savoy, in July last. That
Prince, who owned to have been used like a Slave by France, and to have been
set at liberty by the Allies, forsook their Interest to join with their
Enemies. By the Treaty concluded with him the French have restored to him all
their Conquest in Savoy, Nisse, and Villa Franca, and the Town of Pignerol
demolished, keeping the Citadel in their Hands till a General Peace is
concluded. The French King has given him besides four Millions of Livers to
defray his Charges. A Marriage was also agreed between the Duke of Burgundy and
the Princess of Piemont, without any Portion, as a Condition of the Treaty, and
she was immediately sent into France to be brought up there at the King's
Charge till she comes to Age of being married. This separate Peace of the Duke
of Savoy was very dishonorable to him in the Opinion of all such Persons as
think Princes ought to be grateful and tied by their Treaties as well as the
rest of Mankind. September 11. 1. 1653 The young Prince of Orange was brought
to the Hague, where the People in whose Memory the great Services of his
Ancestors were still fresh, desired the Magistrates to give them the Standard
and Colors of that Family to receive his Highness, and declared that if they
were denied, they would take them by Force. 12. 2. 1682 The French King being
offended that the Town of Orange should receive the French Protestants that
left their Country to avoid the Persecution, or at least taking this for a
Pretense, ordered the Intendant of Provence, and the Marquess de Montanegues
his Lieutenant General, to march toward that Place with a Detachment of Foot
and Horse; and being come near it, they sent Order to the Magistrates to pull
down the Walls of their Town, and to send back all the Children born Subjects
of the French King, and to receive none for the future. The Magistrates
answered, that they were Subjects of his Highness the Prince of Orange, and
received Orders from no body else; and that therefore they desired time to give
him notice thereof; but instead of being satisfied with that reasonable Answer,
the said Montanegues entered the Town the 15th of August last with his Troops,
pulled down the Walls, and continued therein 8 Days at Discretion, committing
all manner of Disorders and Ravages, and extorting great Sums from the
Inhabitants. The States General being acquainted with these violent
Proceedings, contrary to the Treaty of Nimeguen, ordered their Ambassadors at
Paris to complain to the French Court, and demand Satisfaction and Reparation;
and at the same time commanded their Ministers in England to acquaint King
Charles with it. The French King gave answer by his Ministers, that he had
reason for the doing of what had been done; and as to the Money extorted from
the Inhabitants, he said it was done without Orders, and therefore had ordered
to make a Restitution thereof. This Answer being not acceptable to the States,
who saw thereby that the French King pretended to the Sovereignty of that
Principality, whenas it belonged to his Highness, appointed this Day Monsieur
Heynsius Pensionary of Delf for their Envoy Extraordinary to Paris, to demand
that Satisfaction should be given to the Prince and to his Subjects. King
Charles who was concerned in that Affair as Guarantee of the Treaty of
Nimeguen, and because of the Prince being so near related to him, ordered the
Lord Preston his Envoy at the Court of France, to present a Memorial thereupon:
but I could never hear that France made any Reparation either to the Prince or
to his Subjects. dit. 1688 The States of Holland replied to the Marquess d'
Albeville's Memorial, that they had armed in Imitation of his Britannick
Majesty, and other Princes, and that they had thereby given no just Cause of
Offense by arming when all other Princes were in Motion, and that they were
long since fully convinced of the Alliance which the King his Master had made
with France, and which had been mentioned to them by Monsieur le Comte d' Avaux
in his Memorial. 13. 3. 1673 The strong Fortress of Naerden surrendered this Day
to the Prince, after a Siege of 4 Days. The Garrison marched out with the usual
Marks of Honor, and 2 Pieces of Cannon, to the Number of 2600 Foot, two Troops
of Horse, and about 500 sick. His Highness exposed himself very much in the
Attacks, and obliged the French to pay to the Inhabitants what was due to them.
14. 4. 1674 The Prince of Orange having refreshed his Army for some time after
the Battle of Seneff, sat down this Day before Oudenarde. 15. 5. 1690 Our Army
being retired in good Order from before Limerick, his Majesty left it under the
Command of Count Solmes; and having appointed the Lord Viscount Sidney and
Thomas Coningsby Esquire; to be Lords Justices of Ireland, he embarked this
Afternoon at Duncannon-Fort with his Royal Highness, and landed the next Day in
King's Road not far from Bristol. 16. 6. 1673 The Prince of Orange received a
Letter from the Emperor, wherein his Imperial Majesty gave him the Title of
Royal Highness: the Queen of Spain did also the like; but tho the Prince had a
better Claim to it than the Duke of Savoy, being descended from an Emperor of
Germany, and Grandson to Henry the IVth King of France, and to Charles I. King
of England, he never, for ought I know, assumed it, but contented himself with
the bare Title of Highness, which no body could deny him. 17. 7. 1676 The Town
of Philipsburgh surrendered this Day to the Allies, and the French marched out
to the Number of 2000 Men. dit. 1689 The Duke of Schomberg having secured
Carickfergus, resolved to march directly toward Dublin, and came this Day to
Newry, which the Irish quitted the Day before, tho it was such a Pass that
General Rozen, who commanded in Ireland for the French King, said, that with
10000 Men he would stop there 100000. They burnt the Place, which so incensed
the Duke, that he sent a Trumpet to the Irish to let them know, that if they
burnt any more Towns, he would give no Quarter to those of their Army who
should fall into his Power. 18. 8. 1692 This Day about 2 in the Afternoon
happened in this City an Earthquake, which lasted about a Minute: It was felt
in most Parts of England, and in Flanders. The King being encamped at Gramen,
was then at Dinner in an old decayed House, which shaking very much, his
Majesty was obliged to rise from Table, and go out of the House. We received no
Damage by that Earthquake neither in the City nor in the Country. 19. 9. 20.
10. 1688 The late King James having formed the Design to subvert the Laws of
England, together with the Protestant Religion, and being sensible that a
Protestant Army was not very fit for that Service, resolved to fill it with
Irish Men, as devoted entirely to his Service; and accordingly ordered the Duke
of Berwick to put into his Regiment 30 Gentlemen of that Nation, but his
Lieutenant Colonel Beaumont, the Captains Paston, Simon Park, Thomas Orme,
Will. Cook, and John Post, generously refused to comply with their Colonel's
Desire, at which the Court was so enraged, that they were tried in a
Court Martial, and cashiered this Day. dit. 1688 The Prince set out for Minden
to confer with the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburgh, the Landgrave of Hesse
Cassel, and the Princes of the House of Lunenburgh. It was there that in
Offensive and Defensive League between those Princes was concluded, and then
was laid the Foundation of that great Alliance which appeared soon after, and
whereby England and the Liberties of Europe have been preserved. As that Affair
required a great Secrecy, none of the Ministers of those Princes were
acquainted with it: and to avoid the Disorder and Slowness that commonly attend
the Confederate Armies when they are commanded by several Generals of an equal
Dignity, the chief Command of the Troops of those Princes was conferred without
any Competition on his Highness the Prince of Orange, and they gave Order to
their respective Forces and Generals to be ready to march at his first Orders.
It was observed that that Day was the most stormy and rainy Day that had been
seen for many Years past; and some time after one of the Courtiers of the
Elector of Brandenburgh complaining in his Presence of the Fatigues, and of the
bad Weather he met with that Day, the Elector inrerrupted him and said, that it
was the finest Day for Europe that ever shone. dit. 1690 His Majesty returned
this Evening to Kensington from Ireland, and was received with all possible
Demonstration of Joy. The Streets of London were filled with Bonfires, the
Houses illuminated, and the People omitted nothing that might testify the
extraordinary Joy they had of his Majesty's safe Return. dit. 1691 The
Marshall de Luxemburgh having notice that the King had left the Confederate
Army under the Command of Prince Waldeck, and that the said Army was marching
from Leuze to Cambron, thought it a favorable Opportunity to attack them, and
accordingly parted from his Camp with 40 Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons, in
which were the Troops of the Household, with a Design to charge our Rear. There
happened this Morning (...) pretty thick Fog, which was the Reason that his
March was not discovered: and about Noon, just as our Rear was passing a little
River and Defile near la Catoire, the French charged them with such a Vigor,
that some Squadrons were put into Disorder; but being supported by the Foot,
who in the mean time had lined the Hedges, they maintained their Post till they
were reinforced by some other Troops who had already passed the Desile, and
after a sharp Dispute repulsed the Enemy. Prince Waldeck caused the Army to
stand in Battalia till 4 in the Afternoon, and then continued his March to
Cambron. The Action was vigorous on both Sides, and about 1000 Men in all lost
their Lives in that brush. The French took some Prisoners, and the Allies did
the like, and amongst them a Major of the Life-Guards. We lost also 7
Standards, and took 5 of theirs, 2 of which did belong to the 2 Troops of
Guards du Corpse, commanded by the Duke of Lorges and Duke of Noailles. The
young Prince of Anhalt, and Count Benthem, were killed on our side; and Count
Maulevrier, Count Mouthrun, Lieutenant Generals, Count de Forghes and Count
Mortagne were killed on the side of the French, and a great many Persons of
Note in both Armies were wounded. dit. 1695 His Majesty having left the Command
of the Army to the Elector of Bavaria, arrived this Day at Loo; and the
Marshall de Boufflers having given his Parole that the Garrisons of Deinse and
Dixmude should be released as soon as he should come to Dinant, his Majesty
gave him leave to depart; and accordingly he set out from Mastricht, where he
was Prisoner, the 17th Instant N. S. 21. 11. 1673 The States sent Monsieur
Fagel to compliment his Highness on the taking of Naerden. dit. 1674 The Prince
of Conde knowing the Extremities Oudenarde was reduced to, marched to relieve
it, and came in sight of the Allies the 20th, who resolved to attack them the
next Day. The Prince of Orange called a Council of War, wherein he proposed to
march directly to the French, and fall upon them while they were fatigued of a
long March; but Count de Souches General of the Germans did not assist at the
Council of War, and the next Day quitted the Trenches, and passed the Scheld,
leaving some Pieces of his Cannon, and the Town open to the French. The Prince
having notice thereof, sent a Detachment to bring back his Cannon, which he
sent by Water to Ghent, with his Baggage, and was forced to raise the Siege,
and follow the Imperialists and Spaniards, who had also left the Army. His
Highness complained to the Courts of Vienna and Madrid against these
Proceedings of the Germans and Spaniards, who would not fight tho they had so
fair an Opportunity. 22. 12. 1680 His Highness the Prince of Orange arrived at
Zell, being met out of Town by the Duke of Lunenburgh himself with 22 Coaches
and 6 Horses apiece. The Regiment of Guards, and a Regiment of Dragoons were
drawn up in two Lines, and at his Entrance into the Town the great Guns were
discharged round about the Ramparts. 23. 13. 1688 The Prince came back to the
Hague from his Journey to Minden, and gave all necessary Orders to prepare
every thing toward the execution of the Design agreed upon with the Princes he
had conferred with. 24. 14. 1680 The Prince came to Han^ver, where he was
received with all Marks of Respect, being met some Miles out of the Town by the
Duke, the Garrison being in Arms, and the Guns round about the Fortifications
discharged. 25. 15. 1668 His Highness was declared Chief of the Nobility of
Zeland, and President of the States of that Province. 26. 16. 1672 The States
General gave this Day an Edict, whereby they conferred upon his Highness the
Power to pardon such Criminals as he should think fit. dit. 1691 This Day part
of our Army before Limerick passed the Shannon in sight of a Detachment of the
Irish, who endeavored to oppose them, but were beaten back. The same Day the
Irish Garrison of Slego (having surrendered the Place the Day before to the Earl
of Granard and Baldarick O Donnel) marched out to the Number of 600 Men,
leaving behind them 16 Pieces of Cannon, and 30 Barrels of Powder. 27. 17. 1694
The Castle of Huy surrendered this Day to the Confederate Troops commanded by
the Duke of Holstein Ploen Velt Marshall of the Armies of the States General,
after 5 Days Attack. 28. 18. 1672 A desperate Fellow had the Impudence to let
his Highness know, that if he would encourage him, and promise a Reward, he
would kill the French King his greatest Enemy: but that Offer was rejected with
Horror, and had the Prince discovered the Author, he would have punished him.
Note, that some time after the same Offer was made to the Prince, who sent
immediately Monsieur Dickvelt to Count d' Avaux, to acquaint him with it, and
where that Villain was to be found: yet that Generosity had so little Effect
upon Lewis XIV. that he has often since that time plotted against his Majesty's
Life, and protected and preferred the Villains who undertook to assassinate
him. 29. 19. 30. 20. 1688 King James being afraid of the Preparations in
Holland, had some time before summoned a Parliament to meet at Westminster; and
this Day a Proclamation was issued out, whereby he declared that it was his
Royal Purpose to endeavor a Legal Establishment of an Universal Liberty of
Conscience for all his Subjects, and that he was resolved inviolably to
preserve the Church of England by such a Confirmation of the several Acts of
Uniformity, that they should never be altered by any other Ways than by
repealing the several Clauses which inflect Penalties upon Persons not promoted
or to be promoted to any Ecclesiastical Benefices or Promotions within the
Meaning of the said Acts, for using and exercising their Religion, contrary to
the Tenor and Purport of the said Acts of Uniformity. He declared also that for
the further securing the said Church and the Protestant Religion, he was
willing that the Roman Catholics should remain incapable to be Members of the
House of Commons. October. 1. 21. 1660 The States General resolved that the
young Prince of Orange should be brought to the Hague to be there educated at
their own Charges, and assigned for that Purpose a yearly Pension of 20000
Florins. It was resolved also that he should be a Member of the Council of
State when he should come to 16 Years of Age. dit. 1690 The English Fleet
having on board several thousand Men under the Command of the Earl of
Marlborough, came this Day to an Anchor before Cork Harbor. 2. 22. 1673 The
Prince received a Letter of the Queen of Spain, wherein in she gave him the
Title of Royal Highness, and offered him the Order of the Golden Fleece. dit.
1691 This Day General Ginket passed the Shannon with 10 Regiments of Foot, and
a Detachment of Foot and Dragoons, and marched to Thomonds Isle, and caused the
Works that covered Thomond's Bridge to be attacked, which our Men performed with
such a Bravery, that they did not only beat the Enemy out of them, but pursued
them to the Draw-Bridg; whereupon the French Governor of Limerick fearing the
English should enter the Town with the Irish, durst not let the Draw-Bridg down
to receive them, and thereby left them exposed to our Men, who killed above 600
of them; and a great many who threw themselves into the River, to avoid the
Sword of the English, were drowned. 3. 23. 1679 Don Emanuel de Lira, Ambassador
Extraordinary to the States General, having demanded the Restitution of
Mastricht, by virtue of a Clause mentioned in the Treaty of Alliance between
Spain and Holland, 1673. and not being satisfied with the Answer given by the
States; they answered this Day a second Memorial of that Minister, and declared
in express Terms, that they could not restore that Place till his Highness the
Prince of Orange had received Satisfaction of the Crown of Spain, and was paid
off all the Arrears due to him, according as it had been agreed betwixt the
States and his Catholic Majesty at the Treaty of Munster. dit. 1690 The
English Fleet entered this Day into the Harbor of Cork, notwithstanding the
fire the Enemy made from their Batteries; and our Forces landed at a Place
called the Passage. 4. 24. 1693 This Day was fought a bloody Battle at
Marsaglia in Piemont, between the Confederate Troops commanded by the Duke of
Savoy, and the French under the Command of Monsieur Catinat. The Fight was very
obstinate, but at last the Allies were obliged to leave the Field of Battle,
and 10 or 12 Pieces of Cannon to the Enemy. His Grace Charles Duke of
Schomberg, General of his Majesty's Forces, who fought with his ordinary
Bravery on foot at the Head of his Regiment, received a dangerous Wound in the
Thigh, and was taken Prisoner, but sent back immediately to Turin upon his
Parole. His Valet de Chamber, who accompanied him, saved his Life to the
Expense of his own; which Zeal and Fidelity deserves to be admired, especially
in this Age. 5. 25. 1689 The Ambassadors of the States of Holland had this Day
their Public Audience of Leave of their Majesty's, with all the Ceremonies
that are observed at the public Audiences of Ambassadors from Crowned Heads.
6. 26. 1688 The French King having invaded the Palatinate and the Empire
without any Provocation or Declaration of War, the Dauphin arrived this Day
before Philipsburgh, which had been before invested by the French. dit. 1696
His Majesty came to Kensington from his Campagn in Flanders, having landed at
Margate this Morning at 1 a Clock. 7. 27. 1691 The Garrison of Limerick having
demanded to capitulate, the Governor sent Articles to General Ginkel, who
rejected them, and sent them 12 Articles, and let them know, that he would
grant no others, ordering immediately a new Battery to be raised. dit. 1696 The
Neutrality for Italy was signed this Day by Count Mansfeld in the Name of the
Emperor, the Marquess de Leganez for the King of Spain, and the Marquess de St.
Thomas for the Duke of Savoy, by which it is agreed, that there shall be a
Suspension of Arms in Italy till a General Peace; that the Siege of Valence,
which was besieged ever since the 17th ultimo by the Duke of Savoy, should be
immediately raised, and that the Allies should march out of Italy, 300000
Pistols being paid them in lieu of Winter Quarters. The Conduct of the Duke of
Savoy can hardly be paralleled in History, for he was the greatest part of this
Summer at the Head of the Allies, and toward the latter end of it we have seen
him Generalissimo of the French, invading the Country of the Allies, who had so
generously defended his against the Tyranny of the French. 8. 28. 1688 King
James having certain Advice that the Preparations made in Holland were designed
against him, issued out this Day a Proclamation, whereby he declared that tho
he had notice some time before of the intended Invasion of the Dutch, yet he
had always declined any Foreign Succors, relying upon the true and ancient
Courage, Faith and Allegiance of his People, with whom he had often ventured
his Life for the Honor of this Nation, and in whose Defense he was resolved to
live and die. He recalled also the Writs issued out for the Election of the
Members of Parliament, which was to meet in November following. dit. 1690 The
Earl of Marlborough being reinforced by the Duke of Wirtemberg, and a
Detachment of the Grand Army, carried on the Siege of Cork with so much Vigor,
that the Garrison was obliged to capitulate, having Reason to fear they should
be put to the Sword, our Men having posted themselves very near the Wall. They
demanded the usual Terms of Capitulations, but were denied, and the General
sent them word that he would allow them no other Conditions than to be
Prisoners of War, which they submitted to, and accordingly delivered the Fort
to the English. The Garisom was near 5000 strong. The Duke of Grafton, with the
Lord O Brian, Colonel Granville, Captain Cornwall, Captain Neville, and several
other Sea-Officers, went to the Attack as Volunteers, and behaved themselves
with an extraordinary Bravery; but the Duke received a morcal Wound, of which
he died some Days after, justly lamented for his great Valor. 9. 29. 1674 The
Germans having resused to fight the French at Oudenarde, and thereby
disappointed the Designs of the Prince of Orange, his Highness left Flanders,
and came this Day before Grave with 2000 Horse, to press the Siege of that
important Place, which was carried on by General Rabenhaut. dit. 1690 The Irish
quitted the Town of Kingsale upon the Approach of a Detachment of the English
sent by the Earl of Marlborough from Cork. dit. 1691 This Day the Town of
Carmagnole in Piemont surrendered to the Confederate Army commanded by the
Elector of Bavaria and the Duke of Savoy. dit. 1693 The Peace of the Lower
Saxony being in great Danger of being disturbed by the Death of the Duke of
Saxe Law^nburg, because of the several Pretenders to that Succession, his
Majesty of Great Britain, the King of Sweden, the States of Holland, and the
Elector of Brandenburgh, interposed their Mediation betwixt the King of Denmark
and the House of Lunenburg; and this Day a Treaty was signed at Hamburgh,
whereby the Danes withdrew their Army from before Ratzeburgh, which they had
already besieged; and the Princes of Lunenburgh obliged themselves to raze the
Fortifications of that Place, which had given a great Umbrage to the King of
Denmark. 10. 30. 1688 His Highness the Prince of Orange gave this Day his
Declaration at the Hague, containing the Reasons inducing him to appear in Arms
in England, for preserving the Protestant Religion, the Laws and Liberties of
the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland. This Declaration sets forth
King James's most notorious Breaches of the Original Contract between the King
and the People, and of his Coronation Oath; the Invitation made to his Highness
by many of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, to come to their
Relief, and the Prince's Intention to join with the People of England, and
oblige the King to call a Free Parliament to redress those intolerable
Grievances, and inquire into the Legitimacy of the Prince of Wales, which, as
his Highness says, was suspected by the greatest part of the Nation. October.
11. 1. 1690 The Earl of Marlborough sat down this Day before Kingsale. 12. 2.
1688 King James being very sensible that his Arbitrary Government had alienated
from him the Hearts of his Subjects, thought there was no better way to
disappoint the Designs of the Prince of Orange than to redress the Grievances
of the Nation, and in order thereto sent this Day for the Lord Mayor, Aldermen,
and Sheriffs of London to Whitehall, where he told them, that out of his
Concern for the Peace and Welfare of the City, and as a Mark of the great
Confidence he had in them at a time when the Kingdom was threatened with an
Invasion, he had resolved to restore to them their ancient Charter and
Privileges, and to put them into the same Condition they were in at the Time of
the Judgment pronounced against them upon the Quo warranto. The same Day a
General Pardon was published, in which about 17 Persons were excepted. dit.
1689 The Town of Bon surrendered this Day to the Confederate Army commanded by
the Elector of Brandenburgh, the French having lost therein about 3000 Men.
dit. 1690 The two Houses of Parliament met this Day at Westminster, where his
Majesty made a most gracious Speech on the Transactions of the last Campaign,
and the necessity of increasing our Preparations for the next. dit. The Old
Fort of Kingsale was this Day stormed and taken by the English. 13. 3. 1688
This Day the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishops of London, Winchester,
S. Asaph, Ely, Chichester, Rochester, Bath and Wells, and Peterborough, all in
a body waited upon the King, where they humbly advised him to put the
Management of the Government in the several Counties into the Hands of such
Persons as were qualified for it; to annul the High Commission for
Ecclesiastical Affairs; to restore the President and Fellows of Magdalen
College in Oxford; and that no Person unqualified by Law be preferred to any
Place in Church or State; to set aside all Licenses or Faculties already
granted, whereby the Papists pretended to be enabled to teach public Schools;
to desist from the Exercise of the Dispensing Power; to inhibit the four
foreign Bishops, who styled themselves Vicars Apostolical, from further
invading the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction vested in the Bishops of the Church of
England; to fill the vacant Bishoprics both in England and Ireland, and
especially the Archiepiscopal Chair of York, with Men of Learning and Piety; to
supersede all further Prosecutions of Quo Warranto's against Corporations, and
to restore to those Corporations their Charters and Privileges, as he had done
to the City of London; to call a Free Parliament to secure the Church of
England, the Liberties and Properties of all his Subjects, and procure a due
Liberty of Conscience; and Lastly, that his Majesty would suffer his Bishops to
offer him such Motives and Arguments as may persuade him to return to the
Communion of the Church of England, in which he was baptized. The Papists were
enraged at these good Advices, and the King was not pleased with such a
Representation, which set too freely before him his illegal and arbitrary
Proceedings. dit. 1689 The Right Reverend Edward Stillingfleet Bishop of
Worcester, Simon Patrick Bishop of Chichester, and Gilbert Ironside Bishop of
Bristol, were this Day consecrated in the Chapel of Fulham by the Bishops of
London, St. Asaph, and Rochester. dit. 1691 The strong Town of Limerick
surrendered this Day to his Majesty's Forces, and at the same time the Irish
made a General Capitulation for their whole Nation that was still in Arms,
whereby they were promised all the Liberty as was consistent with the Laws of
Ireland; and such as were not willing to stay were allowed to go to France.
Thus ended the Wars of Ireland, and the famous Campaign of 1691. the most
glorious that was ever performed by a little Army, which in about four Months
time took three strong Places; for besides many Forts, Castles, and small
Towns, we gained a great Victory, without reckoning the frequent Rencounters
that happened, in which they always got the Advantage, tho in small Numbers. 14.
4. 1678 The French having restored to the Dutch the Town of Mastricht, the
States General desired the Prince of Orange to name for Magistrates such
Persons as he should think fit. 15. 5. 1688 The Foreign Advices having
convinced King James that the Preparations of the Prince of Orange were
designed against him, declared this Day in Council that he had thought fit to
dissolve the Commission for Causes Ecclesiastical, etc. and gave Directions to
the Lord Chancellor of England to cause the same to be forthwith done. This did
not however satisfy the People, for the said Commission was not declared
illegal, nor any Promise made that it should never be renewed; and every one
took this Proceeding of the Court not as an Effect of the King's Justice, but
of the fear he was in of the Prince of Orange. dit. 1690 The House of Lords
presented an Address to the King to congratulate his Majesty's Victories in
Ireland, and desire him not to expose his Person so much. The Commons did the
like; and both Houses presented another Address to the Queen, to thank her
Majesty for her prudent Administration during the King's Absence, and in so
nice a Juncture as her Majesty had found her self in, whilst a powerful Enemy
lorded it upon our Coasts, and threatened the Kingdom with an Invasion. dit.
1692 This Day we received the surprising Advice that the ^^ke of Savoy had
quitted the 16th ultimo the Town of Ambrun, having blown up the Fortifications,
and returned with his Forces toward his own Country. France was never in such
an Alarm as they were then, the Confederate Army being in their Country, and
they having no Strength to oppose them; the Inhabitants of Lions and Grenoble
were removing their Effects, and no body doubted but the Allies would improve
that fair Opportunity, however they contented themselves with the taking of
Ambrun and Gap, and raising some Contributions, and then retired. It Is true the
Duke of Savoy fell so sick of the Small Pox at Gap, that his Life was thought
in danger, and some have believed that his Distemper disappointed all the
Designs of that Army; but others who have more narrowly inquired into that
Affair, do think that the Corruption and Treachery of the Duke's Council was
the true Remora that stopped our Forces, and that the Small Pox came very
seasonably to him as a Varnish over the Infidelity of that Court. 16. 6. 1688
This Day King James was pleased to restore actually to the City of London all
their ancient Franchises and Privileges as fully as they enjoyed them before
the late Judgment upon the Quo Warranto. The Lord Chancellor did them the
Honor to bring down the Instrument of Restitution and Confirmation under the
Great Seal of England, and Sir John Chapman was thereby constituted Lord Mayor
till the usual time of the Election. 17. 7. 1692 This Day the Electoral College
at Ratisbonne resolved by Plurality of Voices to declare the Duke of Hanover
one of the Princes Electors of the Empire, notwithstanding the Opposition of
the College of the Princes of Germany. The Emperor had invested him first with
the Dignity for the great Service of the House of Lunenburgh, both to the
Empire, and to the common Cause against the French. 18. 8. 1685 This Day passed
the Great Seal the French King's Edict for annulling the famous Edict of Nantz,
the Observation of which had been so solemnly sworn by the French King himself.
This was the last Blow given to the French Protestant Churches, which a
barbarous Persecution of 25 Years had not been able to overcome. All the
remaining Churches were razed to the Ground, the Ministers banished upon pain
of the Galleys, and the rest without any regard to Sex, Age, Quality or
Services, were with an unparalled piece of Inhumanity delivered up to the
Mercy of Priests and Soldiers, who burnt some alive, stuck others with Pins
all over their Bodies, hanged others in Smoke, and in short used such
Barbarities, that Posterity will hardly believe so much Cruelty could ever have
been harbored in the Hearts of Men. Many were forced to succumb by those
violent Shocks, and turn Papists; and others fled away, and are now dispersed
all over the Face of the Earth in a most lamentable Condition, worthy of the
Commiseration of all Christian and Generous Souls. The French King found
himself in a favorable Juncture to compass that barbarous Design: The late K.
James, a Bigot to the Romish Church, was then upon the English Throne, and
could not but be charmed with the Destruction of the Protestants. The Emperor,
who perhaps would have espoused their Party by a Principle of Politics, was
imbroiled in a War with the Turks. The Lutheran Princes looked upon that bloody
Tragedy with Indifferency; and the States General, the Switzers, the Elector of
Brandenburgh, and the Landgrave of Hesse Cassel, who alone durst express some
public Marks of their pitying the Misfortunes of their Brethren, were not able
to cope alone with so powerful an Enemy as the French King; but they opened
their Arms to receive those who fled away, whom they relieved with an
extraordinary Charity. The Prince of Orange seemed more concerned than all the
rest at the Ruin of those Churches, but being not able to prevent it, he
desired the States to settle a Fund for the Ministers and Officers who should
retire into their Country, which was accordingly done. He was no sooner come to
the English Throne but he invited as many of that Nation as would come, and has
been a constant Father to them, and recommended them very often to his
Parliament. I must do also the Refugees Justice, and own that they have served
him very faithfully. I must not forget neither to take notice of the
Extraordinary Kindness the French Protestants received from the English, tho in
a Popish Reign; and one may boldly say, that never so great a Sum of Money was
raised upon account of Charity as was then. I had forgot almost to give an
Instance of the French King's Sincerity in the Preamble of the Edict for
annulling that of Nantz, wherein he tells us that his Grandfather Henry IV. had
given only that Edict with a Design to reconcile the Protestants to the Romish
Church, and that it had been his Design ever since his coming to the Throne;
from whence it follows that when he swore the Observation of it, he made a
false Oath, tho it would be very well for him if he had not used himself to it
sit^^e. It Is observable that the Papists could not find a Pretense to use the
Protestants as they did, and gave no other Reason for it but their Zeal for
their Religion. One thing I Will observe more, that tho above 500000 Witnesses
attested the bloody Persecutions that had been committed in France, the Bishop
of Meaux and some other brazen Faces have had the Impudence to deny it. 19. 9.
1677 His Highness the Prince of Orange, attended by 4 English and several Dutch
Men of War, having sailed the Day before from Helvoetsluce, landed this Day at
Harwich with a great Retinue, where he was received and complimented by the
Duke of Albemarle, and Sir Charles Cotterel Master of the Ceremonies, from
whence he went immediately to New Market to meet the King and the Duke of York
there, by whom he was received with extraordinary Marks of Respect and
Kindness. 20. 10. 1695 His Majesty having settled the State of the War in
Holland for the Year 1696. and conferred with the Elector of Brandenburgh, and
some other Princes, landed this Day at Margate, being attended in his Passage
by a Squadron of Men of War under the Command of Sir Cloudesly Shovel. 21. 11.
1692 His Majesty returned this Evening from Flanders to the Hague, where he was
gone back upon Advice that the French were marching to Charleroy; but the
Marshall de Boufflers having notice thereof, did not think fit to sit down
before that Place, and contented himself to throw some few Bombs into it, which
did very little Damage. dit. 1695 His Majesty arrived here this Evening from
Holland, being received with the usual Acclamations of his People. The same
Night a Council was called at Kensington, wherein he was pleased to order a
Proclamation to be issued for dissolving the Parliament, and calling another,
to be held at Westminster on Friday the 22d of November next. The same Day Sir
George Rook, with a Squadron of Men of War, and a great Fleet of Merchant
Ships, sailed from St. Helens for the Straits, to take upon him the Command of
the Confederate Fleet, Admiral Russel having desired to be recalled. 22. 12.
1672 The Prince of Orange having several Days followed the Duke de Duras, made
a Feint to besiege Tongeren, to draw him to a Battle, and accordingly sat down
this Day before that Place. 23. 13. 1677 The Prince of Orange arrived here this
Day from New Market with the King and the Duke of York, and was welcomed with
the loud Acclamations of the People. 24. 14. 1688 His Highness the Prince of
Orange having Advice that upon the Noise of his Preparations King James had
begun to retract some of his Arbitrary Proceedings, and made void some of his
unjust Decrees by a due Sense of his own Guilt and Distrust of his own Forces;
and that the Subverters of the Laws of England had given out that his Highness
came to conquer and enslave the Nation; his Highness thought fit to put out an
Additional Declaration to confute those Insinuations of his Enemies, and show
how little King James's Word was to be credited. 25. 15. 1688 The pretended
Prince of Wales was baptized this Day in the Chapel of St. James's, and named
James Francis Edward, the Nuncio standing his Godfather for the Pope, and the
Queen Dowager his Godmother. 26. 16. 1674 The strong Town of Grave surrendered
this Day to his Highness the Prince of Orange, in which were found 450 Pieces
of Cannon, and an incredible Quantity of Ammunition. The Garrison marched out
the next Day to the ^umber of 4000 Men, besides a great many wounded. dit. 1688
King James having declared on the 12th Instant his Resolution to preserve the
Church of England in all its Rights and Immunities, and signified his Pleasure
to the Bishop of Winchester as Visitor of St. Mary Magdalen College in Oxford,
to settle that Society regularly, his Lordship went down accordingly, and was
received with great Joy by the University, and caused a Citation to be fixed on
the College-Gates, recalling the former Fellows. But as this Affection of King
James to the Church of England proceeded only from the Fears he had of the
Prince of Orange, he countermanded the Bishop upon the false News that was
spread in Town that the Fleet of the Prince had been so disabled in a Storm,
that they would never be able to put to Sea till the next Spring. 27. 17. 1688
King James put out a Proclamation this Day for restoring Corporations to their
ancient Charters, Liberties, Rights and Franchises. dit. 1690 The New Fort of
Kingsale having capitulated the 15th, the Garrison marched out this Day to the
number of 1100 Men, and were conducted to Limerick. Thus in less than a Month's
time we took two important Places, and which the Enemy had the greater Interest
to defend, because of their lying so conveniently to receive Supplies from
France. dit. 1693 We had Advice that Charles Duke of Schomberg died at Turin
the 17th Instant of his Wounds in the late Battle of Marsaglia, justly lamented
for his personal Merits, great Conduct and Valor. He had been bred up a
Soldier from his Cradle, yet he never was spoiled by the poisonous Air they
commonly breath in the Field, but was a noble Proof that Sobriety, Chastity,
Moderation and Religion can sympathize with the fiercest Courage. 28. 18. 1692
His Majesty landed this Day at Yarmouth in the Afternoon, having had a very bad
Passage, during which several French Privateers came pretty near the Yatch
wherein his Majesty was, the Weather being so stormy that the Men of War
commanded by Sir Cloudesly Shovel could hardly keep together. 29. 19. 1688 The
Prince of Orange having disposed all things toward his Expedition to England,
and sent Prince Waldeck with a Detachment of the Dutch Forces to join the
Brandenburghers and other Allies to secure Colog^ and the Country of Juliers,
caused the rest of his Army to go on board; and having taken his Leave of the
States General, the States of Holland and West-Frizeland, and of her Royal
Highness the Princess, went himself this Day on board of a Frigate of 36 Guns in
the middle of the Line, attended by the Marshall de Schomberg, the People
crouding the Shore to wish him a prosperous Expedition. dit. 1688 The Fortress
of Philipsburgh surrendered this Day to the Dauphin after a Siege of 4 Weeks,
and afterward the French took Spire, Worms, Manheim, Frankendall, Heidelberg,
and other Places of the Palatinate, which they destroyed with Fire and Sword,
committing Cruelties hitherto unknown among the Christians. This was done
before any Declaration of War was published, and yet the French have had the
Impudence to accuse the States General to have begun the War. It is to be
observed also, that ^t that very time they were committing those Barbarities
they exclaimed against the Emperor, and pretended that what they did was only
to establish a lasting Peace. dit. 1691 The King landed this Morning at Margate
from Holland, being attended in his Passage by Sir Cloudesly Shovel, and this
Evening came to Kensington, being received with all imaginable Demonstrations
of Joy. 30. 20. 1688 His Highness the Prince of Orange sailed this Day from the
Flatts near the Brill with his whole Fleet, consisting of 52 Men of War, and
about 640 Transport Ships and Tenders. The Men of War were divided into 3
Squadrons: Admiral Herbert had the Van, and Admiral Evertzen the Rear, the
Prince being in the middle of the Line with Admiral B^stians. The Wind was very
favorable at first, but about 12 a Clock at Night it turned to Westward with
such a Violence that the whole Fleet was obliged to put into Helvoetsluce,
Goree, and other Places. The Storm lasted about 12 Hours, and was so terrible
that People thought that at least the half of the Fleet would be lost, yet by
the Providence of God there was but one Fly-boat with about 50 Horses that
perished, and all the Men were saved. It Is true that a great many Horses died
in the Storm. The News of that Accident being brought over, caused an
extraordinary Joy at Court, where the Priests boasted very much of the
Assistance they expected from the Virgin Mary, and the rest of the Saints, who
had been so earnestly supplicated to confound that Heretical Fleet of the
Prince. dit. 1692 His Majesty returned this Evening to Kensington from Holland,
having past through the City amidst the Acclamations of the People, and a
continued Illumination in the Houses, Bonfires, and other Demonstrations of
Joy. 31. 21. November. 1. 22. 1677 This Day his Majesty King Charles II.
acquainted his Privy Council with the Resolution he had taken to marry the Lady
Mary his Niece with the Prince of Orange, which Resolution was mightily
approved by the Council, who thanked his Majesty and the Duke of York, and
complimented the Princess and the Prince upon that Account. The same Day his
Highness dispatched a Gentleman for Holland with a Letter for the States
General, and another for the States of Holland, to acquaint them that he had
demanded the Princess of the King and the Duke of York, and wanted only their
Approbation. The News of that Marriage being spread in the City, the People
expressed an extraordinary Demonstration of Joy, as if they had foreseen the
great Advantages the English Nation was to receive some time after therefrom.
dit. 1688 King James being sensible that the whole Nation was persuaded that
the Prince of Wales was but a supposititious Prince, whom the Priests had
imposed upon the Nation, in order to carry on their Designs to destroy the
Protestant Religion, thought fit to call his Privy Council this Day, and
desired the Queen Dowager, and such of the Peers both Spiritual and Temporal,
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, and other Lords and Ladies that were
present at the Queen's Labor, to declare upon Oath what they knew of the Birth
of the Prince of Wales. They appeared accordingly, and declared what they knew,
which amounred only to this, that they were on the 10th of Ja^^ at St. James's
Palace, when the Queen was delivered; that they heard her Majesty groaning,
crying, and the like; but none of them except the Midwife deposed that that
Child was come from the Queen's Body, even not the Physicians themselves. These
Depositions being so lame, did but increase the Suspicion that there was a
Cheat in the case, and the King's Council were so sensible that they would have
the same effect, that tho an Account of them was promised in the Gazette, they
did not think fit to be as good as their Word. It Is true we have no positive
Proof that the Prince of Wales is a Bastard, but there are so many
Circumstances and Presumptions against his Legitimacy, that one must own one of
these two things, either that he is a supposed Prince, or at least that King
James designed to make all the World believe it, since the Princess of Orange
and the Princess of Denmark were not invited to be present, as they were to be,
nor any body for them; the Bishops were put in the Tower some Days before, and
for those sew Pretestant Lords and Ladies who were called to St. James's, they
were introduced by the King in such a manner that none of them could see
whether or no the Child was born of the Queen. King James could not but foresee
that the Legitimacy of his Son would be questioned, and therefore to remove
that Pretense, it was enough to desire the Princess to be there, with some
Protestant Lords and Ladies appointed by the Princess of Orange, and expose all
things to their Sight and Feeling; but since this was neglected, one cannot but
believe that there was a soul Design to impose a Popish Successor upon the
Nation. This pretended Prince was born, as they say, on Sunday the 10th of
June, Old Style, 1688. 2. 23. 1689 The Parliament after a short Prorogation met
again this Day, and his Majesty was pleased to refer them to what he had said
to both Houses the 19th Instant, in relation to the Affairs of Ireland. The
same Day a great Number of Lords and Gentlemen of that Kingdom met at
Bow-Church in Cheapside to render Thanks to Almighty God for the Deliverance of
the bloody Massacre the Irish made of the Protestants in the Year 1641, which
began upon this Day. 3. 24. 1673 This Day the Prince of Orange with his Army
joined the Imperial Forces commanded by Count Montecuculi between A^dernacht
and Bonn. 4. 25. 1684 The Chamber de Metz, so famous for their unjust
Judgments, deprived his Highness the Prince of Orange of the Lands, Manors and
Lordships he had in the French King's Dominions. 5. 26. 1674 This Day there was
a Rencounter between a Detachment of the Troops of the Duke of Lorain, and the
French Arrierban or Nobility commanded by the Marquess de Sable, consisting of
700 Gentlemen, in which ^he latter were all killed or taken Prisoners except
17. The General himself was taken. The Lorains were but 700 commanded by
Monsieur Dupuy. dit. 1688 King James being acquainted that many made it their
business by Writing, Printing or Speaking, to defame his^ Government with false
and seditious News and Reports to create in his Subjects and universal Jealousy
and Discontent, and that in Coffee-Houses and other Places People took the
Liberty to censure the Proceedings of State, by speaking evil of things they
understood not, published this Day his Proclamation, forbidding the spreading
of false News, and declaring that those who should hear seditious Reports and
Reflections against him and his Ministers, and should not reveal it, should be
likewise prosecuted with the ^tmost Severity. This Proclamation rather
increased the Aversion Men had then for the Government, and there were very few
who did not presently reflect on Father Petre, then one of the Privy Council,
as fitter to be hanged than reverenced. 6. 27. 1688 The Earl of Sunderland,
President of King James's Privy Council, and principal Secretary of State, was
turned this Day out of all his Places, and the Lord Preston made Secretary in
his room. The Change surprised all Men, and it was given out that his Lordship
had lost out of his Scritore the Original League concluded between the French
King and K. James, for the Extirpation of the Protestant Religion here, and the
establishing Popery and Arbitrary Government, and that the same had been
carried over to the Prince of Orange; but my Lord Sunderland in his Letter to a
Friend in London that came out some time after, viz. March 23, 1689. says, that
he never heard of such a League, but tells us the Jesuits exasperated King
James against him, because he opposed the Prosecution of the seven Bishops who
were put in June last into the Tower for refusing to read in their Churches the
King's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience; because ^^e advised the King to
restore ^he Corporations, annul the Ecclesiastical Court, call a Free
Parliament, and redress all other Grievances. He tells us also that he
dissuaded King James from calling a Parliament in Ireland, which was designed
to alter the Acts of Settlement. I must not forget to mention two pieces of
Service more to the Nation performed by his Lordship, which was the refusing of
the French Succors that were offered to King James, which my Lord Sunderland
opposed to Death, and his hindering the securing the Chief of the disaffected
Nobility and Gentry, which was proposed to the Court as a certain way to break
all the Prince's Measures. 7. 28. 1677 His Highness having joined the Imperial
Army, held the 4th Instant a Council of War, wherein it was resolved to besiege
Bon, and accordingly his Highness took his Quarters this Day before that
Fortress, which was invested the Day before. 8. 29. 1689 This Day Sir Thomas
Pilkington being continued Mayor of the City of London, was according to Custom
sworn before the Barons of the Exchequer at Westminster, whither he went by
Water, accompanied by the Aldermen and the several Companies of the City in
their respective Barges adorned with Flags and Streamers. Their Majesty's and
their Royal Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Denmark, and the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament, having been pleased to accept of an humble
Invitation from the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, to dine in the
City this Day; their Majesty's attended by his Royal Highness, all the great
Officers of the Court, and a numerous Train of Nobility and Gentry in their
Coaches, went to Guild Hall, the Militia of London and Westminster making a
Lane for them, the Balconies all along their Passage being richly hung with
Tapistry, and filled with Spectators, and the People in great Crowds expressing
their Joy with loud and continued Acclamations The Royal City-Regiment of
Volunteer Horse, richly accoutred, under the Command of the Earl of Monmouth,
attended their Majesty's from Whitehall to Guildhall, where they were
entertained with the Grandeur and Magnificence suitable to so august and
extraordinary a Presence. Christopher Lethieullier, John Houblon, Esquire;
Sheriffs, Edward Clark, and Francis Child, Aldermen, received the Honor of
Knighthood on this occasion. Their Majesty's returned in the Evening with the
same Ceremonies amidst the Acclamation of their People, Bonsires, and
Illuminations. 9. 30. 1688 King James having received Advice the Day before
that the Damage the Fleet of the Prince of Orange had received in the Storm
which forced him back to Helvoetsluce, had been magnified on purpose to delude
him, and that the Prince would sail in few Days, sent fresh Orders to his Fleet
to put to Sea; and suspecting that the Prince would land in the North, because
of the great many disaffected Lords that were gone that way, he sent thither a
greater Number of his Forces, which was looked upon as a new Instance of the
Weakness of the Council of that Prince in sending his Forces to one of the
Extremities of the Kingdom, before he knew that his Enemy should not land in
the other. 10. 31. 1688 King James having read in the Prince's Declaration that
his Highness was most earnestly invited hither by diverse of the Lords both
Spiritual and Temporal, and by many Gentlemen and others, his Majesty sent for
some of the Bishops, and required of them a Paper under their Hands in
abhorrence of the Prince of Orange's intended Invasion, which was designed to
be tacked to a Proclamation which came out two Days after, forbidding the
reading of his Highness's Declaration upon severe Penalties: but the Bishops of
Canterbury, London, Peterborough and Rochester, who were only sent for, refused
to do it, at which the Jesuited Party were so violently enraged, that if we may
believe the Bishop of Rochester, King James was advised to imprison the said
Bishops, and extort that Truth from them by Violence. November. 11. 1. 1677
This Day the States General met about the Letter sent them by his Highness to
desire their Approbation for his Marriage with the Princess Mary, and came to
this Resolution, that the Here Stangerlant, who had brought the said Letter,
should be immediately dispatched back with their Act of Approbation; that the
Here Van Odick, and the Here Van Beuningen their Ambassadors in England, should
congratulate their Highnesses in their Name, and present their Letters to the
King, Duke of York, and Princesses; that their Plenipotentiaries at Nimeguen
should forthwith acquaint the Congress with that Marriage; that the like should
be done to the Foreign Ministers at the Hague; and that their Ambassadors
should be ordered to notify the same in the Courts where they resided, with the
Ceremonies suitable to that great Occasion; that a Present should be made to the
Captain of the English Frigate who had brought over the Here Stangerlant, and
that all the Bells at the Hague should be immediately rung, to proclaim that
important and acceptable News. dit. 1688 The Prince having repaired the Damage
his Fleet had sustained in the late Storm, resolved to improve the Opportunity
of the Easterly Wind, and accordingly having dined with the English, Dutch,
Scots and French Lords attending his Person, went this Day on board the Frigate
called the Brille about 4 in the Afternoon, and immediately after, the Signal
was given for the Ships to weigh their Anchors, so that the whole Fleet was
under Sail before Night, divided into three Squadrons as before. 12. 2. 1673
This Day the City of Bonne surrendered to the Confederate Army commanded by the
Prince of Orange and Count Montecuculi. As this Expedition was the Preservation
of Holland, I think the Reader should not take it ill that I enlarge a little
upon it. The Prince having taken Naerdlen, as we have mentioned before, in
spite of all Resistance and Opposition from either the French or the Season,
did however (wisely foreseeing that the recovering of all the Towns the States
had lost, would take up too much time) resolve like another young Scipio to
save his Country by abandoning it; and therefore having left part of his Forces
to defend the chief Posts or Passages in Holland, marched with the rest into
Germany, and having joined part of the Confederate Troops, besieged Bonne,
which had been put into the Hands of France at the beginning of the War. The
Boldness of this Action amazed all Men, but the Success extolled the Prudence
as well as the Bravery of it. Bonne was forced to surrender this Day, and
thereby his Highness opened a Passage for the German Forces over the Rhine, and
so into Flanders. The French who did not expect such a thing, were so amazed
that they thought it was high time for them to think of defending their own
Country; and in order to it they abandoned all their Conquests in Holland,
retaining only Grave and Mastricht, so that we may truly say, that in retaking
Bonne the Prince retook also Woerden, Hardewick, the Fortress of Crevecoeur,
Bommel, Vtrecht, Elburg, Camps, Hattem, Steenwick, and all other Places, on
the Conquest whereof the French boasted so much; tho it may be said without any
Partiality, that they quitted them faster than they had taken them. I must not
forget to remark by the by, that the Cruelties and Barbarities the French
committed at Bodengrave, Swamerdam, Tongr^^, and other Places, exceed all the
Inhumanities of the old Goths and Normans. dit. 1690 The Sieur de la Tour,
Counselor of State to his Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy, and his Envoy
Extraordinary to cheir Majesty's, had this Day his public Audience of the King
and Queen to congratulate their Accession to the Throne, and made the following
Speech to his Majesty, which I purposely insert here to show the Generosity of
the King toward him, and the Ingratitude of that Prince in forsaking
afterward the Party of his Deliverer. Sir, His Royal Highness my Master does
by me congratulate your sacred Majesty's glorious Accession to the Crown, which
was due to your Birth, deserved by your Virtue, and is maintained by your
Valor. Providence had designed it for your sacred Head for the Accomplishment
of his eternal Decrees, which after a long Patience do always tend to raise up
chosen Souls to repress Violence, and protect Justice. The wonderful Beginnings
of your Reign are most certain Presages of the Blessings which Heaven prepares
for the Uprightness of your Intentions, which have no other Aim than to restore
this flourishing Kingdom to its primitive Grandeur, and break the Chains which
Europe is near expiring under. This magnanimous Design, worthy of the Hero of
our Age, silled his Royal Highness at first with inexpressible Joy, but he was
constrained to conceal it in the Secret of his Heart; and if at last he has
been free to own it, he is obliged to the very Name of your Majesty for it,
since that alone has made him conceive some Hopes of Liberty after so many
Years of Servitude.

My Words, and the Treaty which I have signed at the Hague with your Majesty's
Ministers, do but weakly express the Passion which my Master has to unite
himself by the most inviolable Ties to your Service. The Honor, Sir, which he
has to be related to you, has formed the first Knots of this Union: the
infinite Respect which he has for your sacred Person has knit them faster, and
the generous Protection which you are pleased to grant him, will doubtless make
them indissolvable. These are the sincere Sentiments of his Royal Highness, to
which I dare not add any thing of my own; for how ardent soever my Zeal may be,
and how profound the Veneration which I bear to your glorious Achievements, I
think I cannot better express either than by a Silence full of Admiration.

13. 3. 1688 This Evening an Express ar^ived from Dover with Advice that the
Durch Fleet had been ^^iscovered that Morning between 10 and 11, about half
^^eas over, between Dover and Calais, steering a Channel Course to the
Westward. A Fly^boat of that Fleet which had 4 Companies of Foot of Colonel
Babington's Regiment, was taken by Captain A^lmer, Commander of the Swallow.
dit. 1688 Whilst the Bishops in England were so vigorously asserting the
Protestant Religion, the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, the Bishops of
Scotland were sacrificing both of them to the Arbitrary Power of King James, as
one may see by the following Letter which they subscribed this Day at
Edinburgh. May it please your most sacred Majesty: WE prostrate our selves to
pay our devote Thanks and Adoration to the Sovereign Majesty of Heaven and
Earth, for preserving your sacred Life and Person, so often exposed to the
greatest Hazards, and as often delivered, and you miraculously prosper'd with
Glory and Victory in Defense of the Rights and Honor of your Majesty's August
Brother, and of these Kingdoms; and that by his merciful Goodness the raging of
the Sea, and Madness of unreasonable Men, have been stilled and calmed; and
your Majesty, as the Darling of Heaven, peaceably seated on the Throne of your
Royal Ancestors, whose long, illustrious, and unparalled Line is the greatest
Glory of this your ancient Kingdom. We pay our most humble Gratitude to your
Majesty for the repeated Assurances of your Royal Protection to our National
Church and Religion as the Laws have established them, which are very suitable
to the gracious Countenance, Encouragement and Protection your Majesty was
pleased to afford to our Church and Order, whilst we were happy in your
Presence amongst us. We magnify the Divine Mercy in blessing your Majesty with
a Son, and us with a Prince, whom we pray Heaven may bless and preserve to sway
your Royal Scepters after you, and that he may inherit with your Dominions the
Illustrious and Heroic Virtues of his august and most serene Parents. We are
amazed to hear of the Danger of an Invasion from Holland, which excites our
Prayers for an universal Repentance to all Orders of Men, that God may yet
spare his People, preserve your Royal Person, and prevent the Effusion of
Christian Blood, and to give such Success to your Majesty's Arms, that all who
invade your Majesty's just and undoubted Rights, and disturb or interrupt the
Peace of your Realms, may be disappointed and clothed with Shame, so that on
your Royal Head the Crown may still flourish. As by the Grace of God we shall
preserve in our selves a firm and unshaken Loyalty, so we shall be careful and
zealous to promote in all your Subjects an intrepid and steadfast Allegiance to
your Majesty as an essential part of their Religion and of the Glory of our
Holy Profession, not doubting but that God in his great Mercy, who has so often
preserved and delivered your Majesty, will still preserve and deliver you by
giving you the Hearts of your Subjects, and the Necks of your Enemies. So pray
we, who in all Humility are your Majesty's most humble, most faithful, and most
obedient Subjects and Servants. Signed by the Archbishops of St. Andrews and
Glasgow, and the Bishops of Edinburgh, Galloway, Aberdeen, Dunkel, Brech^^,
Orkney, Murray, Ross, D^^^blane, and of the Isles. Dated Edinburgh, November 3.
1688. This florid Letter was immediately published in the Gazette, but instead
of having upon the People the Effect the Court expected, they were exasperated
against those Prelates, and looked upon them as Papists, for they did not think
that any Protestants would have made use of the Expressions contained in their
Letter, in relation to King James and to the Prince of Orange. This Declaration
of the Bishops of Scotland was not perhaps one of the least Reasons that
induced the Convention of the States of that Kingdom to vote that Episcopacy
was dangerous to the Safety of Scotland, and therefore abolished it. 14. 4.
165^ This Day was born his Illustrious Highness William Henry ^^rince of
Orange, and now by the Grace of God, and the Choice of the People, King of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, Assertor of the
Liberty of Europe, Stadtholder, Captain General, and Admiral of the Forces of
the States General, the Darling of the World, and the Terror of his Enemies, to
whom God grant a long and prosperous Life. He was born a few Days after his
Father's Death, of her Royal Highness the Princess Mary, Daughter to Charles I.
King of Great Britain. The States of Holland and Zealand, and the Cities of
Delf, Leyden and Amsterdam, were his Godsathers. dit. 1677 The Prince of Orange
having received the Approbation of the States General for his Marriage, was
married this Day to the Princess Mary, to the great Satisfaction of the People,
who expressed on that Occasion the great Respect they had for those two
incomparable Persons. dit. 1692 The Parliament met this Day at Westminster. 15.
5. 1688 The Prince of Orange arrived this Day with his Fleet in Torbay, being
led by the Hand of Heaven, and called by the Voice of the People, and landed in
Person with Marshall de Schomberg and his Army to relieve Great Britain
against the Tyranny of King James. It Is observable that it being a hazy foggy
Morning, the Fleet overshot Torbay, where the Prince intended to land, but
about nine of the Clock the Wind changed W. S. W. without which it was
impossible for the Fleet to come into Torbay. This Change of Wind was observed
by every Body, as an extraordinary Effect of the Divine Providence; for as
Bishop Burnet has very well observed, the Wind immediately chopp'd into another
Corner, as soon as it had executed his Commission. 16. 6. 1688 This Day King
James put out a kind of Manifesto against the Declaration of the Prince of
Orange, wherein he calls the Expedition of his Highness an unchristian and
unnatural Undertaking, and then endeavors to insinuate that the Prince had no
other Design than to usurp his Crown and Royal Authority; and to prove it he
brings as his chief Argument, that the Prince questions the Legitimacy of the
Prince of Wales his Son and Heir apparent, tho, says he, by the Providence of
God there were present at his Birth so many Witnesses of unquestionable Credit,
as if it seemed to have been the particular Care of Heaven purposely to
disappoint so wicked and unparalled an Attempt. He promises afterward to
call a Free Parliament as soon as his Kingdom should be delivered from
Foreigners. This Declaration had no other Effect upon the People than to
confirm them that King James would never call such a Parliament, for seeing he
refused to do it in that Juncture, they could not persuade themselves that he
would do it at another time when he should have no Enemy to fear. I don't know
who was the first Inventer of this fine Expression of unnatural Invasion, but
it was then the daily Language of King James's Gazetteer. I think however it
came originally from Scotland, for the first time I find it used, it is in the
Account given by the Gazette, October 22. of the Affairs of Scotland. dit. 1693
His Majesty was pleased to declare this Day in Council, that he had appointed
the Right Honorable Edward Russel Esquire; to be Admiral of their Majesty's Fleet.
17. 7. 1688 King James knowing that his Enemies spread every where that the
Prince of Orange had brought a very great Army with him, and being sensible
that such a Rumor discouraged his Friends, the London Gazette published this
Day an exact List of the Forces of the Prince, amounting to 14352 Men; and by
that List it appeared that the Prince had 65 Men of War, 10 ^ireships, and 560
Transport Ships. dit. 1693 The Parliament met this Day at Westminster, where
his Majesty made a most gracious Speech to both Houses, on the bad Success of
the last Campagn, and especially in relation to the Battle of Landen, and the
Miscarriage of the Smyrna Fleet. He said that the first was occasioned by the
great Number of our Enemies; and as to the last his Majesty was pleased to say,
that it had brought a great Disgrace upon the Nation, and that he had resented
it extremely. 18. 8. 1688 The Prince of Orange, accompanied by Marshall de
Schomberg, Count Solmes, Count Nassau, Monsieur Benting, the Earls of
Shrewsbery, Macclesfield, and Argyle, and the Lord Mordant, Wiltshire, Colonel
Sidney, and other great Men, made this Day a very splendid Entry into Exeter
with his Army, the People much rejoicing at it, looking upon him as their
Deliverer from Popery and Slavery. The Bishop and the Dean, to the great
Amazement of all Protestants, left the Town, and the Bishop came to London to
receive King James's Command, who thereupon preferred him to the Archbishopric
of York. dit. 1691 This Day Signior Haim Toledano, Envoy Extraordinary from the
Emperor of Fez and Morocco, had his public Audience of their Majesty's. 19. 9.
1688 Dr. Burnet was sent to the Cathedral of Exeter to order the Priest and
Vicars not to pray for the pretended Pr. of Wales; and the same Day his
Highness went to the said Cathedral, and was present at the singing Te Deum,
after which his Declaration was publicly read to the People; but I must
observe that the Ministers rushed out of the Church by a very surprising piece
of Policy. dit. 1689 The Duke of Schomberg decamped this Day from Dundalk,
where he had remained for above two Months, encamped in sight of the Irish Army
twice as numerous as his. Never a General found himself in harder
Circumstances, for he had at once to fight against Men, Hunger, want of all
Necessaries, Rain, and a raging Distemper, and yet King James never durst
attack him. We lost a great many brave Officers by Mortality, and about 6000
Men either upon the spot, or after they were come to their Winter Quarters.
This bad Success gave occasion to many Suspicions which I don't think fit to
relate, tho they make part of the History of that Campagn. 20. 10. 1688 King
James upon the first Advice that the Prince was landed in the West, and not in
the North as he expected, sent immediately Orders to his Forces to march that
way, and appointed their Rendezvouze at Salisbury; but because they committed
great Insolences in their March, an Order was published this Day, commanding
the Forces to observe an exact Discipline. 21. 11. 22. 12. 1688 This Day the
Lord Lovelace was stopped at Cirencester by the Militia, as he was going to
join the Prince of Orange with several Gentlemen. His Lordship made a very
vigorous Resistance, in which several were killed. dit. The Lord Cornbury,
Colonel of the Royal Regiment of Dragoons, marched this Day with two other
Regiments of Horse from Salisbury, and went over to the Prince with a great
many Troopers and Officers. The London-Gazette gave a very different Account of
this Business, and concluded that most of those Troopers and Officers were
returned, which did sufficiently show how firm they were in their Fidelity to
the King: but a few Days after every body was convinced that it was a notorious
Lie. dit. 1694 The Parliament met this Day at Westminster, where his Majesty
made a most gracious Speech to both Houses. 23. 13. 24. 14. 25. 15. 1688 A
great many Gentlemen came to join the Prince at Exeter, tho King James, to keep
up his Party, ordered his Gazetteer to publish, that none of the Gentry, but
only some of the Rabble listed themselves under him. Those Lords and Gentlemen
who were with the Prince entered into an Association, whereby they engaged to
Almighty God, to his Highness, and to one another, to stand firm to the Cause
they had espoused, and never to depart from it until our Religion, Laws and
Liberties were so far secured in a Free Parliament, that we should be no more
in danger of falling under Popery and Slavery. 26. 16. 1688 My Lord Delamere,
the Earls of Devonshire, Stamford, and Danby, and the Lord Lumley, with several
other associated Lords and Gentlemen having a fair Opportunity to declare
themselves, the Troops of King James being marched to their Rendezvouze at
Salisbury, the Lord Delamere came this Day to Manchester with about fifty
Troopers, where he made the following Speech to the People. THE Occasion of
this is to give you my Thoughts upon the present Conjuncture, which concerns
not only you, but every Protestant and freeborn Man of England, I are
confident, that wishes well to the Protestant Religion and his Country; and I
am persuaded that every Man of you thinks both in danger, and now to lie at
stake. I am also persuaded that every Man of you will rejoice to see Religion
and Property settled; if so, then I am not mistaken in my Conjectures
concerning you. Can you ever hope for a better Occasion to root out Popery and
Slavery than by joining with the Prince of Orange, whose Proposals contain and
speak the Desires of every Man that loves his Religion and Liberty? And in
saying this I will invite you to nothing but what I will do my self, and I will
not desire any of you to go any further than I will more my self; neither will
I put you upon any Danger when I will not take share in it. I propose this to
you, not as you are my Tenants, but as my Friends, and as you are English Men.
No Man can love Fighting for its own sake, nor find any Pleasure in Danger; and
you may imagine I would be very glad to spend the rest of my Days in Peace,
having had so great a share in Troubles: But as I see all lies at stake, I am
to choose whether I will be a Slave and a Papist, or a Protestant and a Free
Man; and therefore the Case being thus, I shall think my self false to my
Country if I sit still at this time. I am of Opinion, that when the Nation is
delivered, it must be by Force, or by Miracle: it would be too great a
Presumption to expect the latter, and therefore our Deliverance must be by
Force, and I hope this is the time for it. A Prize is now put into our Hands;
and if it miscarry by want of Assistance, our Blood is upon our own Heads: For
he that is passive at this time, may very well expect that God will mock when
the Fear of Affliction comes upon him, which he thought to avoid by being
indifferent. If the King prevails, farewell Liberty of Conscience, which has
hitherto been allowed, not for the sake of Protestants, but in order to settle
Popery. You may see what to expect if he gets the better; and he has lately
given you of this Town a Taste of the Method whereby he will maintain his Army.
And you may see of what so^^ of People he intends his Army to consist; and if
you have not a mind to serve such Masters, then stand not by and see your
Countrymen perish when they are endeavoring to defend you. I promise this on
my Word of Honor to every Tenant that goes along with me, that if he fall, I
will make his Lease as good to his Family as it was when he went from home. The
thing then which I desire, and your Country does expect from you, is this, that
every Man that has a tolerable Horse, or can procure one, will meet me on
Boden-Downs to Morrow, where I rendezvouze; but if any of you is rendered unable
by reason of Age, or any other just Excuse, then that he would mount a fitter
Person, and put five Pounds in his Pocket. Those that have not, nor cannot
procure a Horse, let them stay at home and assist with their Purses, and send
it to me with a Particular of every Man's Contribution. I impose on no Man, but
let him lay his Hand on his Heart, and consider what he is willing to give to
recover his Religion and Liberty; and to such I promise, and to all that go
along with me, that if we prevail, I will be as industrious to have him
recompensed for his Charge and Hazard, as I will be to seek it for my self.
This Advice I give to all that stay behind, that when you hear the Papists have
committed any Outrage, or any Rising, that you will get together; for it is
better to meet the Danger than expect it. I have no more to say, but that I am
willing to lose my Life in the Cause, if God see it good, for I never was
unwilling to die for my Religion and Country. This excellent Speech I mention
because of the Effect it had on the People, for a great Number of Men repaired
the next Day to my Lord Delamere on Boden-Downs, and followed his Lordship. 27.
17. 1688 The Archbishop of Canterbury, with 12 Temporal, and 6 other Spiritual
Lords, waited this Day upon King James with an humble Petition, beseeching his
Majesty to call a Free Parliament with all speed for redressing the Grievances
of the Nation, and in the mean time to use all possible Means to prevent the
Effusion of Christian Blood. The King answered them, that what they asked of
him, he did most passionately desire, and promised them upon the Faith of a
King, that he would call such a Parliament as soon as the Prince had quitted
England, pretending that otherwise it was impossible that a Parliament should
be free in all its Circumstances. This Answer was not satisfactory to the
People, who discovered thereby an invincible Aversion in King James to a Free
Parliament; and as to his Promise, he had broke his Word too often to be
trusted, and therefore every one concluded that there was no other way left but
to join with the Prince to obtain what Justice ought to have obliged King James
to do. dit. 1688 The same Day in the Afternoon the King left the City, and with
his Royal Highness Prince George of Denmark went to Windsor, and the next day
toward Salisbury, where his Army was arrived under the Command of the Earl of
Feversham. He appointed the Privy Council to meet in his Absence for the
Dispatch of all Affairs, as Occasion should require. 28. 18. 29. 19. 1688 King
James arrived at Salisbury, being met about a Mile from the Town by the Earl of
Feversham General of his Forces, the Duke of Berwick, Sir John Fenwick, and
other Officers. 30. 20. 1688 This Day happened a Rencounter at Wincannon
between a Party of the Prince's Army, consisting of about 30 Men of Mackay's
Regiment, commanded by Lieutenant Cambell, and a Party of 50 Dragoons and
Granadeers, and 70 Horse of King James's, commanded by Colonel Sarsfield; where
notwithstanding the Inequality of the Numbers the former fought with that
desperate Bravery that it struck a Terror into the Minds of King James's Army.
Sarsfield retired in great Precipitation, hearing from a Miller's Man that the
Dutch were near him. I would not have mentioned this trifling thing were it not
the first Action between the two Armies. December. 1. 21. 1688 The English
Fleet commanded by the Lord Dartmouth, which was sailed to the Westward to
observe the Dutch Fleet, was this Day forced back to Spithead by very
tempestuous Weather. 2. 22. 1688 This Day King James put out a Proclamation of
Pardon for such of his Subjects who had taken up Arms against him, and joined
with the Prince of Orange in a most unnatural Invasion; but this Pardon was
regarded by no body, and slighted by such whom he had a mind to recall. The
Reader may observe here that unnatural Invasion was the constant Expression
they made use of to signify his Highness's Design. dit. The same Day the
Nobility, Gentry and Commonalty of the Northern Counties of England being
assembled in Arms at Nottingham, made a Declaration to inform their Protestant
Fellow. Subjects of the Grounds of their Undertaking, wherein they declare that
the very Fundamentals of our Religion, Liberties and Properties, are about to
be routed by the King's Jesuitical Privy Council: as was too apparent, 1. By
the King's dispensing with all the established Laws at his Pleasure. 2. By
displacing all Officers out of all Offices of Trust and Advantage, and placing
others in their room that are known Papists, deservedly made incapable by the
established Laws of the Land. 3. By destroying the Charters of most
Corporations. 4. By discouraging all Persons that are not Papists, and
preferring such as turn to Popery. 5. By displacing all honest and
conscientious Judges, unless they would, contrary to their Conscience, declare
that to be Law which was merely Arbitrary. 6. By branding all Men with the Name
of Rebels that offered but to justify the Laws in a legal Course against the
Arbitrary Proceedings of the King, or any of his corrupt Ministers. 7. By
burdening the Nation with an Army to maintain the Violation of the Rights of
the Subjects, and by discountenancing the established Religion. 8. By
forbidding the Subjects the Benefit of petitioning, and construing them
Libellers, so rendering the Laws a Nose of Wax, to serve their Arbitrary Ends.
They conclude afterward, that not being willing to deliver their Posterity
over to such a Condition of Popery and Slavery, as the aforesaid Oppressions do
inevitably threaten, they will to the utmost of their Power oppose the same by
joining with the Prince of Orange, whom God Almighty had sent to rescue the
Nation from the aforesaid Oppressions. And to prevent their being branded with
the Name of Rebels, they declare they own it Rebellion to resist a King that
governs by Law, but that he was always accounted a Tyrant that made his Will
the Law; and to resist such an one they justly esteem no Rebellion, but a
necessary Defense. dit. 1688 The Prince of Orange having sufficiently refreshed
his Army at Exeter, decamped this Day, and marched toward Salisbury, where K.
James lay with all his Forces. dit. 1688 This Day was published at Paris the
Declaration of War of the French King against the Dutch, wherein the French
King alleges no other Reason but that the Dutch opposed Cardinal Furstemberg's
Election to the Archbishopric of Cologn, whom he was resolved to maintain.
dit. 1694 This Day died at his Palace at Lambeth the most Reverend Father in
God Dr. John Tillotson Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, in the 65th Year of his
Age: He was promoted to that Metropolitan See in May, 1691. and as his
Learning, Piety, and other eminent Qualities gained him a general Esteem, so
they made his Death very much and justly lamented. 3. 23. 1695 The Parliament
having met the Day before, according to his Majesty's Writs of Summons, and his
Majesty being come to the House of Peers with the usual Ceremonies, and the
Commons being sent for up, the Lord Keeper signified to them his Majesty's
Pleasure, that they should forthwith proceed to the Choice of a Speaker; after
which the Commons being returned to their House, they made choice of Paul Foley
Esquire; (Speaker in the last Parliament) whom they presented this Day to his
Majesty in the House of Lords. He made a short Speech to the King, and told his
Majesty that the Commons had made choice of him, tho there were many Persons
amongst them fitter for that important Place: and then my Lord Keeper told him
by the King's Command, that the repeated Choice of the Commons was a sufficient
Argument of his Ability, Capacity and Fidelity, and that therefore his Majesty
approved their Choice. After which his Majesty made a gracious Speech to both
Houses, wherein he took a particular notice of the Affection of his People, by
their Behavior during his Absence, and at his Return; commended the Zeal and
Affection of the last Parliament, the Bravery of the English Troops at Namur;
and recommended to them to provide a Supply for carrying on the War, for
supplying the Deficiencies of Parliamentary Funds, for the Civil List, and to
relieve the French Protestants who suffer for their Religion; concluding by
recommending unto them to remedy the ill State of the (...), and to form some
good (...) for the Encouragement and Increase of Seamen. 4. 24. 1688 This Day
his Royal Highness Prince George of Denmark went away from Salisbury to join
the Prince of Orange. He left a Letter behind him, containing the Reasons of
his going away, but that chiefly insisted upon was the Danger the Protestant
Religion was exposed to. The Lord Churchill went also with the Prince, which
surprised all the World, for every body thought that noble Lord entirely
devoted to King James's Interest: he left also a Letter behind him, which
deserves to be carefully considered, and especially these Lines. [Heaven knows
with what Partiality my dutiful Opinion of your Majesty has hitherto
represented those unhappy Designs, which inconsiderate and self-interested Men
have framed against your Majesty's true Interest and the Protestant Religion;
but as I can no longer join with such, to give a Pretense by Conquest to bring
them to effect, so I will always with the Hazard of my Life preserve your
Person.] I could wish for the sake of the Reader I was able to explain that
Expression which doubtless contains a Mystery known to very few, except to such
who were deeply engaged in the Cabal of those times. The Dukes of Graston and
Ormond went also to the Prince much about the same time, but they thought the
Case was so plain, that there was no need of leaving any Papers behind them to
justify their Conduct. 5. 25. 1688 The going off of the Prince of Denmark
having struck King James with Terror and Affliction, and his Army being in
great Disorder, he became so full of Fear and Suspicion, that upon a false
Alarm being made by Design or Accident of the Approach of the Prince of Orange,
his Majesty and the whole Army left Salisbury this Day, the Army retiring
toward Reading, and the King ^aking his way toward London. The King came to
the Marketplace at Salisbury, and the Mayor and Citizens being sent for, he
told them that he would spend his Blood for his Subjects, and was resolved to
maintain the Protestant Religion; but he had no sooner ended his Speech but he
fell to bleeding at his Nostrils, and so violently, that his Blood could not be
stopped any manner of way. This Accident, tho natural enough, especially in the
Juncture that Prince found himself at that time, was looked upon as a bad Omen,
and improved to his Disadvantage. dit. The News of Prince George's having left
the King being come to Whitehall, caused a great Consternation there, and the
Princess being suspected to have the same Design, some Yeomen of the Guards
were set in her Apartments; but her Highness deceived their Vigilance, and that
Night made her Escape in Disguise with the Ladies Churchill and Berkley, being
attended by the Bishop of London and the Earl of Dorset. Her Highness went into
the North, where the associated Lords had made a considerable Progress. The
Absence of the Princess caused a great Complaint, and they were forced to print
the Letter she had left for the Queen, containing the Reason of her retiring,
for fear of being cut to pieces by the King's own Guards, upon a Surmise that
the Papists had made away that beloved Princess. dit. 1691 His Majesty was
pleased to nominate this Day Dr. Thomas Tenison to the Bishopric of Lincoln.
6. 26. 1688 King James returned this Evening to Whitehall from Salisbury. 7.
27. 1^8^ Sir Edward Hales, whom King James had appointed Lieutenant of the
Tower, having during the King's Absence planted several Mertar-pieces on the
Walls toward the City, to keep the Citizens in awe, they were so enraged
against him, that the King did not think himself safe at Whitehall as long as
Sir Edward Hales had the Command of the Tower, and therefore to appease the
City he turned out Sir Edward, and put in his room Colonel Bevil Skeleton a
Protestant. 8. 28. 1675 The Prince having brought back his Army from the
Country of Cologn, after the taking of Bo^n, and possessed himself ^n his way
of several strong Castles and little Towns, left his Army on the Meuse, and
returned this Day to the Hague, where he was received with all possible Marks
of Respect and Demonstrations of Joy. The States complimented his Highness on
his successful Expedition, whereby their Country was delivered from the French,
who had been forced to abandon in less than a Month's time all their Conquests
in the United Provinces, except Grave and Mastricht. Several Medals were then
coined to perpetuate the Memory of that great and glorious Expedition. dit.
1688 King James seeing the general Defection of his Subjects, and that the
associated Lords had taken York, Plymouth, and a great many other considerable
Towns, and that the Nation as well as the Prince declared every where for a
Free Parliament, which he could not now refuse, because of his Army refusing to
sight to establish Popery, he ordered this Day in the Privy Council the Lord
Chancellor to issue out Writs for the sitting of a Parliament on the 15th of
January following; but it was then too late, for the Nation, having observed
that the Court had refused that just Demand as long as ever they could, was now
in such a Ferment, that what the Court did or said was very little regarded. 9.
29. 1688 The Prince of Orange being advanced to Sherborn-Castle, was joined
there this Day by the Prince of Denmark and the other Lords with him. dit. 1677
His Highness the Prince of Orange knowing how necessary his Presence was at the
Hague, took his leave of the King and the Duke of York, and embarked at Margate
with her Royal Highness his Wife on the 7th Instant, and this Day landed in
Holland at Ter Heyde, from whence they went to Honsl^erdick. 10. 30. 1688 This
Day came out King James's Proclamation for the speedy calling of a Parliament,
as the best and most proper Means (as he says) to establish a lasting Peace in
the Kingdom. This Parliament was to sit upon the 15th of January next; and the
King declared by this Proclamation that all his Subjects should have free
Liberty to elect, and that all the Peers, and such who should be chosen Members
of the House of Commons, should have full Liberty and Freedom to serve and sit
in Parliament, notwithstanding they had taken up Arms, or committed any Act of
Hostility, having for that purpose directed a General Pardon to pass the Great
Seal. The King concludes with these remarkable Words, And for the reconciling
all public Breaches, and obliterating the very Memory of all past
Miscarriages, we do hereby exhort and kindly admonish our Subjects to dispose
themselves to elect such Persons for their Representatives in Parliament, as
may not be biassed by Prejudice or Passion, but qualified with Parts,
Experience, and Prudence proper for this Conjuncture. December. 11. 1. 1688
This Day the Duke of Norfolk came to Norwich, attended with a great Number of
Gentlemen, where they delared for a Free Parliament, and the Protection of the
Protestant Religion. dit. The same Day the Account, of King James's Resolution
to call a Parliament being gone to the Fleet, my Lord Dartmouth called the
Captains of the Fleet-together on board the Resolution, wherein they resolved
upon an Address of Thanks to his Majesty, concluding with these Words,
Beseeching Almighty God to give your Majesty all imaginable Happiness and
Prosperity, and to grant that such Counsels and Resolutions may be promoted as
conduce to your Majesty's Honor and Safety, and tend to the Peace and
Settlement of this Realm, both in Church and State, according to the
established Laws of the Kingdom. This Address was signed by the Lord Dartmouth,
the Lord Berkley, Sir Roger Strickland, and 38 other Commanders. King James was
very much surprised at this Address, and perceived, but too late, how mistaken
he had been to have believed that his Fleet would fight for the Establishment
of Popery, and the Destruction of the Protestant Religion, and the Laws of
their Country. 12. 2. 1676 The Prince comes back from Zealand to the Hague,
having been in great Danger because of the Ice. 13. 3. 14. 4. 1677 This Day the
Prince and Princess of Orange made a magnificent Entry into the Hague, the
Burghers being in Arms, the Guns discharged several times, and the Evening was
concluded with Fireworks, Bonfires, etc. The Bridge was adorned with green
Festoons, under which was the following Inscription: Vxori and Batavis vivat
Nassovius Hector,
Auriaco and Patriae vivat Britannica Princeps.
Before the Townhouse there was a Triumphal Arch with this Inscription: A
VrIaCi hIs ThaLaMIs BataVIs Dos RegIa PaX. And in the Hoogstra there was
another with these Words: Ingredere Auspiciis Batavis felicibus Aulam. 15. 5.
1673 His Highness returned this Day to his Army in Brabant to intercept the
Marshall de Luxemburgh, who was returning to France with the Spoils of the
Cities they had conquered in Holland. The Prince did his utmost to draw the
French to a Battle, but they declined it, and entrenched themselves under the
Cannon of Mastricht, where they remained till his Highness was obliged by the
hard Weather to send his Troops into their Winter Quarters to refresh
themselves of the Fatigues they had suffered in their Expedition in Germary,
and the taking of Bonn. 16. 6. 1689 Colonel John Cutts was this Day created a
Baron of the Kingdom of Ireland, by the Title of Baron Cutts of Gowra^, in
consideration of his faithful Services and zealous Affection to their Majesty's
and Government. dit. 1688 The Popish Party grew so contemptible in London, that
an Hue and Cry after Father Peter's was this Day publicly cried and sold in the
Streets of London and Westminster, tho King James was still at Whitehall. dit.
1693 His Majesty having been pleased upon the Death of the Duke of Schomberg to
appoint the Lord Viscount Gallway to command his Forces in Piemont in quality
of Lieutenant General, and to give him likewise the Character of his Envoy
Extraordinary to the Duke of Savoy, his Lordship set out this Day for Holland,
in order to continue his Journey to Turin by Land. 17. 7. 1677 The Prince went
this Day to the Assembly of the States General to return them his Thanks for
their Approbation and Consent to his Marriage, and to acquaint them with what
he had negotiated in England, in relation to the Peace with France. The same
Day his Highness went to the Council of State, and approved the State of the
War for the next Campagn. dit. 1688 This Day a supposed Declaration of the
Prince of Orange was publicly cried and sold in the Streets, which put the
Papists under an unexpressible Consternation, for therein was contained this
threatening Expression; We do declare that all Papists who shall be found in
open Arms, or with Arms in their Houses, or about their Persons, or in any
Office or Employment Civil or Military, upon any Pretense whatsoever, contrary
to the known Laws of the Land, shall be treated by Us and our Forces not as
Soldiers and Gentlemen, but as Robbers, Free-booters, and Banditti, and shall
therefore be entirely delivered up to the Discretion of our Soldiers. The
Magistrates were likewise commanded to disarm the Papists, and put the Laws in
execution against them. This Declaration was dated, S^erborn-Castle, November
28. Signed Will. Henry Prince of Orange, etc. This was the boldest Attempt that
ever was made by a private Person; and if I had been able to learn his Name, I
would have inserted it here, because of the great Service this Declaration did
to the Nation: for the Papists not knowing that it was forged, were so
terrified, that many laid down their Commissions, and threw away their Arms.
King James himself was startled at it, and it is believed that this hastened his
Resolution to leave the Kingdom. 18. 8. 1688 This Day King James's Army retired
in great haste from Reading upon a false Alarm that the Dutch were near that
Place: but as they endeavored to regain that Post the next Day, a Party of the
Prince attacked them, and slew about 50 Dragoons, tho they were more numerous
than the Dutch. dit. King James seeing that all the Nation declared for a Free
Parliament, and that the Prince and his Party were already Masters of the most
important Places, was prevailed upon to try the last Remedy, and to send
Commissioners to treat with the Prince of Orange. He made choice of the
Marquess of Hallifax, the Earl of Nottingham, and the Lord Godolphin, whom he
thought the fittest Men to manage the Treaty, who having obtained leave of the
Prince to come to him at Hungerford, presented this Day the following Proposals
to his Highness. Sir; THE King commanded us to acquaint you, that He observes
all the Differences and Causes of Complaint alleged by your Highness seem to
be referred to a Free Parliament. His Majesty, as he has already declared, was
resolved before this to call one, but thought that in the present State of
Affairs it was advisable to defer it till things were more composed; yet
seeing that his People still continue to desire it, he has put forth his
Proclamation in order to it, and has issued forth his Writs for the calling of
it. And to prevent any Cause of Interruption in it, he will consent to every
thing that can be reasonably required for the Security of all those that come
to it. His Majesty has therefore sent us to attend your Highness, for the
adjusting of all Matters that shall be agreed to be necessary to the Freedom of
Elections, and the Security of Sitting, and is ready to enter immediately into
a Treaty in order to it. His Majesty proposes that in the mean time the
respective Armies may be retained within such Limits, and at such Distance from
London, as may prevent the Apprehensions that the Parliament may be in any kind
disturbed, being desirous that the Meeting may be no longer delayed than it
must be by the usual and necessary Forms. Signed Hallifax, Nottingham,
Godolphin. Hungerford, the 8th of December, 1688. dit. 1688 The pretended
Prince of Wales was brought back this Evening from Portsmouth, where he had
been sent to be carried into France, under Convoy of some Men of War; but the
Lord Dartmouth positively refused to obey the King's Command in that point.
This shows how little Sincerity there was in King James's Offers, for at the
same time his Commissioners were negotiating a Treaty with the Prince, he was
meditating his Retreat into France. dit. 1694 His Majesty was pleased to
nominate the Right Reverend Father in God Dr. Thomas Tenison, Lord Bishop of
Lincoln, to be Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. 19. 9. 1688 His Highness having
examined King James's Proposals, returned this Day the following Answer.
WHereas on the 8th of December 1688. at Hungerford, a Paper signed by the
Marquess of Hallifax, the Earl of Nottingham, and the Lord Godolphin,
Commissioners sent unto us from his Majesty, was delivered to us, We with the
Advice of the Lords and Gentlemen assembled with us, have in answer made this
following Proposal: 1. That all Papists and such Persons as are not qualified
by Law, be disarmed, disbanded, and removed from all Employments Civil and
Military. 2. That all Proclamations that reflect upon us, or any that have come
to us, or declared for us, be recalled; and that if any Persons for having
assisted us have been committed, that they be forthwith set at liberty. 3. That
for the Security and Safety of the City of London, the Custody and Government
of the Tower be immediately put into the Hands of the said City. 4. That if his
Majesty should think fit to be in London during the sitting of the Parliament,
that We may be there also with an equal number of our Guards; and if his
Majesty shall be pleased to be in any Place from London, whatever Distance he
thinks fit, that We may be at the same Distance; and that the respective Armies
do remove from London forty Miles, and that no more foreign Forces be brought
into the Kingdom. 5. That for the Security of the City of London, and their
Trade, Tilbury-Fort be put into the Hands of the City. 6. That a sufficient
part of the Public Revenue be assigned us for the Support and Maintenance of
our Troops until the sitting of a Free Parliament. 7. That to prevent the
Landing of the French or other foreign Troops, Portsmouth may be put into such
Hands as by his Majesty and Us shall be agreed on. Given at Littlecot, December
9, 1688. If the Jesuit who has written the History of the Revolution of England
had transcribed this Answer, he would not have imposed on his Readers, that the
Proposals of the Prince were so hard as not to be accepted, and that his
Highness deferred several Days to return an Answer to the King's Commissioners,
since this was delivered to them the next Day. King James expressed himself
thus on this Occasion, That the Proposals of the Prince were fairer than he
could or did expect. 20. 10. 1672 This Day the strong Fortress of Coeverden
was, retaken by a Stratagem of General Rabenhaut with the Loss of about 50 Men.
The Garrison consisted of near 800 Men, provided with all Necessaries, and yet
they were forced in less than 2 Hours time to surrender Prisoners. This Place
had been taken from the Dutch by the Bishop of Munster, who had made therein a
prodigious Magazine for the Invasion of Groninguen and Frizeland, and he
thought it impregnable, because it had formerly maintained a Siege of 31 Weeks.
dit. 1688 This Morning between three and four of the Clock the Queen, the
pretended Prince of Wales, with Count Lauzun, and several other Persons,
crossed the Water at Lambeth in three Coaches, each of six Horses, and with a
strong Guard went to Greenwich, where her Majesty embarked for France, having
engaged the King by Oath to follow her, and not to trust himself in the Hands
of his Parliament. She carried away the Great Seal of England with her, but as
she crossed the Thames it fell into the Water, and was since found out by a
Fisherman. The Romantic Account the Author of the Revolutions of England gives
of the Queen's Evasion, is, I think, a very good Remedy for such as are
troubled with the Spleen. The same Day in the Evening King James ordered all
those Writs for the sitting of the Parliament that were not sent out, to be
burnt, and a Caveat to be entered against the making use of those that were sent
down; and at the same time sent Orders to the Earl of Feversham to disband his
Army. The same Evening he sent for the Lord Mayor and the Sheriffs of London to
White Hall, where he acquainted them that he had thought fit to send the Queen
and his Son away; but that he was resolved to stay with them, laying a strict
Charge upon them to take care of the City, and to keep it in Peace. The King
went afterward to the Council, where there was a very long Debate, who were to
meet again the next Morning: but King James had resolved beforehand to follow
the Queen; and all that he had done this Day was only to conceal his Design,
for he went away that Night. 21. 11. 1688 This Morning about three a Clock King
James left Whitehall, and went down the River to go over to France. The same
Day the Earl of Feversham received the following Letter from King James. Things
being come to that Extremity, that I have been forced to send away the Queen
and my Son the Prince of Wales, that they might not fall into the Enemies
Hands, which they must have done if they had stayed, I am obliged to do the
same thing, in hopes it will please God out of his infinite Mercy to this
unhappy Nation, to touch their Hearts with true Loyalty and Honor. If I could
have relied on all my Troops, I might not have been put to the Extremity I am
now in, and would at least have had one Blow for it. But tho I know there are
many brave Men amongst you, both Officers and Soldiers, yet you know that both
you and several of the General Officers and Soldiers, and Men of the Army,
told me it was no ways advisable for me to venture my self at their Head, or
to think to fight the Prince of Orange with them. And now there remains only
for me to thank you and all those, both Officers and Soldiers, who have stuck
to me, and been truly Loyal. I hope you will still retain the same Fidelity to
me; and tho I do not expect you should expose your selves by resisting a
Foreign Army, and a poisoned Nation, yet I hope your former Principles are so
inrooted in you, that you will keep your selves free from Associations, and
such pernicious things. Time presses, so I can add no more. James Rex. Those
who had seen the Proposals the Prince of Orange had made, were very much
surprised at the Expressions of this Letter, and concluded that King James did
never design to give any Satisfaction to his People; for if he had, he would
certainly have staid here, since he was in no danger of his Person. Many who
were still for him left his Party, because of an unlucky Expression of his
Letter, which implied, by a very natural Innuendo, that it being not advisable
for him to fight the Prince of Orange with the English Army, he was going to
France to bring over some Troops, at the Head of whom he might venture his
Person. The Earl of Feversham having received this Letter, disbanded the Army
under his Command, and immediately sent a Letter to the Prince of Orange to
acquaint him therewith. dit. The News of the King being gone, was very
surprising, tho many were of Opinion that he would not stay very long after the
Queen and his Beloved Father Peter's, who was reported to be gone also with the
Pretended Prince of Wales: and thereupon the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in
and about the Cities of London and Westminster, met at Guild Hall, where they
sent for the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and made the following Declaration. We
doubt not but the World believes that in this great and dangerous Conjuncture
We are heartily and zealously concerned for the Protestant Religion, the Laws
of the Land, and the Liberties and Properties of the Subject. And we did
reasonably hope that the King having issued his Proclamation and Writs for a
Free Parliament, we might have rested secure under the Expectation of that
Meeting: but his Majesty having withdrawn himself, and as we apprehend in order
to his Departure out of this Kingdom, by the pernicious Counsels of Persons ill
affected to our Nation and Religion, we cannot without being wanting in our
Duty be silent under those Calamities wherein the Popish Counsels, which so
long prevailed, have miserably involved these Realms. We do therefore
unanimously resolve to apply our selves to his Highness the Prince of Orange,
who with so great Kindness to these Kingdoms, so vast Expense, and so much
Hazard to his own Person, has undertaken, by endeavoring to procure a Free
Parliament, to rescue us, with as little Effusion as possible of Christian
Blood, from the imminent Dangers of Popery and Slavery. And we do hereby
declare that we will with our utmost Endeavors assist his Highness in the
obtaining such a Parliament with all speed, wherein our Laws, our Liberties and
Properties may be secured, the Church of England in particular, with a due
Liberty to Protestant Dissenters, and in general the Protestant Religion and
Interest over the whole World may be supported and encouraged, to the Glory of
God, the Happiness of the established Government in these Kingdoms, and the
Advantage of all Princes and States in Christendom, that may be herein
concerned. In the mean time we will endeavor to preserve as much as in us lies
the Peace and Security of these great and populous Cities of London and
Westminster, and the Parts adjacent, by taking care to disarm all Papists, and
secure all Jesuits and Romish Priests who are in or about the same. And if
there be any thing more to be performed by Us for promoting his Highness's
generous Intentions for the public Good, we shall be ready to do it as
occasion shall require. Signed W. Cant. Tho. Ebor. Pembrook, Dorset, Mulgrave,
Thanet, Carlisle, Craven, Ailesbury, Burlington, Sussex, Berkley, Rochester,
Newport, Weymouth, P. Winchester, W. Asaph, Frantis Ely, Tho. Rossen. Tho.
Petriburg, P. Wharton, North and Gray, Chandos, Montague, Th. Jermyn, Vaughan,
Carbery, Culpeper, Crew, Osulston. Then the Governor of the Tower was
summoned, who delivered the Keys, but the Lord Mayor had not Courage enough to
take them, as it was his Duty, and therefore the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury
took them, and put them into the Hands of the Lord Lucas, who was thereupon
constituted Governor of the Tower. Their Lordships desired the Earl of
Pembrook, the Lord Viscount Weymouth, the Bishop of Ely, and the Lord Culpeper,
forthwith to attend the Prince of Orange with the said Declaration, and
acquaint his Highness with what they had farther done at that Meeting. dit. The
Lieutenancy of the City of London met the same Day, and agreed upon an Address
to be presented to the Prince of Orange, to thank his Highness for his generous
Expedition, and desire him to repair to the City with all convenient speed.
They sent immediately Sir Robert Clayton, Sir William Russell, Sir Bazil
Firebrace, and Charles Duncomb Esquire; to present the said Address. The Lord
Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of the City of London agreed also upon an Address
much to the same purpose, which was also sent to the Prince. 22. 12. 1688 King
James having embarked for France on board a Smack commanded by one Captain
Saunders, was forced for Shelter to take into East Swale, the Eastern Part of
the Isle of Sheppy, in order to take in Ballast: but the Fishermen of Feversham
in Kent discovered that Ship, and suspecting that some Jesuits might be on
board to make their Escape into France, they boarded the Smack: Sir Edward
Hales, who was with the King, and Mr. Labadie, offered to make some Resistance,
but the Fishermen, who presently knew him, told them, they were dead Men if
they did not submit, which they did. They were carried to Feversham, where the
King was known, and treated with Civility. There have been many Stories made
concerning the pretended Affronts he received there, but I know from the
Fishermen themselves, and especially from poor Hunt, whom King James excepted
afterward in his Declaration of Indemnity, that no Violence was offered to his
Person, excepting only his Money, Watch, and the like taken from him, but that
as he came down from the Smack into the Boat he hurt himself in the Face. It Is
true they gave him some ill Language, and called him Priest, Jesuit, Father
Peter's, and the like; but they were not so much mistaken as some may think, for
I believe I could demonstrate that that Prince was admitted into a Monkish
Order, tho I must confess it was not that of the Jesuits. The King's
withdrawing put the Mob into such a Ferment that they got together in
incredible Numbers, and pulled down all the Chapels, or Mass-houses as they
called them, not respecting the Character of the Spanish Ambassador, whose
House was plundered. They brought the Materials of those Buildings into
Lincoln's Inn fields and other Places, of which they made great Bonfires. The
Number of the Mob frighted not only the Roman Catholics, but also all
considering Men who did reflect on the Time, and the Rage of the People; but I
must do Justice to our Mob, that they were very moderate, for after they had
pulled down those Chapels, they returned home without offering any Violence to
any private House, or any Person. The same Day the Lord Jesseries, late Lord
Chancellor of England, was taken in Disguise at Wapping, as he endeavored to
go on board a foreign Ship to make his Escape. The Mob carried him before the
Lord Mayor, who sent him to the Tower, which was confirmed by the Peers
assembled at the Council Chamger at White Hall. dit. 1696 The French King being
unable to carry on the War for a longer time, and foreseeing his Ruin, unless
prevented by a Peace, sent about the beginning of the last Campagn into Holland
one Monsieur Caill^re as his Agent, to confer with the Deputies of the States,
and make some Overtures for entering into a Negotiation for a General Peace: In
which he succeeded so far, that the French King, and most of the Allies, having
named their Plenipotentiaries, his Majesty was pleased this Day to name the
Right Honorable the Earl of Pembrook Lord Privy Seal, and formerly Ambassador
into Holland, the Lord Viscount Villiers, now his Majesty's Plenipotentiary at
the Congress at the Hague, and Sir Joseph Williamson, formerly Plenipotentiary
at the Treaty of Cologn, and Secretary of State under King Charles II. during
the Treaty of Nimeguen, his Plenipotentiaries for the Treaty of a General
Peace. 23. 13. 1688 This Morning about three of the Clock there was a dreadful
Alarm that the Irish in a desperate Rage were approaching the City, putting
Men, Women and Children to the Sword as they came along: whereupon the Citizens
all rose in Arms, placing Lights in their Windows from the top to the bottom,
and the Trainbands were assembled, and there was nothing but Shooting and
beating of Drums all the Night long. Part of the Trainbands advanced toward
Hide-Park to stop the Irish there; but notwithstanding several Men came from
time to time on Horseback, reporting that the Irish were already advanced to
Kensington, and other Places, yet it was a groundless Alarm, and it spread it
self the same Night the whole Length and Breadth of the Kingdom of England; and
all that were able to bear Arms appeared at their several Places for the
Defense of their Lives, Religion, Laws and Liberties, and resolving to destroy
all the Irish and Papists in case any Injury was offered them; but as that
Report was altogether imaginary, no body suffered thereby. This is one of the
most unaccountable things that ever I heard of, and certainly it is impossible
that Chance alone could be the Occasion of it; and therefore many have
suspected that this was a Contrivance of the Great Duke of Schomberg, to try
thereby how the People were affected. I know but one Instance that may be
paralleled with this, which happened about 8 Months after in France, and
perhaps in imitation of this: for in the same Night the whole Country, from
Bourdeaux to the Gates of Orleans, were in Arms upon a false Alarm that the
Prince of Orange was there with the Huguenots, destroying all the Country with
Fire and Sword, insomuch that the Parliament of Guienne sitting then at La
R^ole, met about 12 a Clock at Night to give Orders for the Security of that
Place. 24. 14. 1688 The four Lords sent by the Peers, with four Aldermen, and
four Deputies of the Lieutenancy of London, waited on his Highness the Prince
of Orange at Henly, with the Addresses resolved upon at Guildhall on the 11th
Instant. The same Day the Lords assembled at Whitehall sent the Lords
Feversham, Ailesbury, Yarmouth and Middleton to Feversham, to entreat King
James to return to Whitehall; and ordered his Guards to go down to see him safe
on board any Ship he should choose, if he persisted in his Resolution to go out
of the Nation. This Proceeding of the Lords was looked upon as too hasty; for
many thought that after having addressed the Prince of Orange in the manner as
they had done, it was reasonable to ask his Highness's Consent before they had
invited K. James to return to Whitehall, or called a greater Assembly of the
Peers than that Day met. The same Day as the Duke of Graston was marching through
the Strand at the Head of a Regiment of Foot, an Irish Trooper came riding up
to him; but being beaten back by the Soldiers, he drew his Pistol to shoot the
Duke, but was himself shot dead upon the spor. 25. 15. 1688 King James being
invited back to London, arrived this Day at Rochester in order to his Return to
Whitehall. The same Day the Prince of Orange entered Windsor, and there he
received Advice of King James's being seized at Feversham, and that the Peers
had desired him to return to Whitehall. The Lords and Gentlemen with his
Highness, were called to give their Advice in this nice Juncture. Some, and
especially a certain Nobleman, (now a great Friend and Promoter of the late
King's Interest) advised the Prince to secure King James, and put him into the
Tower: but his Highness rejected that Proposal, for which, says the Author of
the Revolutions of England, (tho a Jesuit) History will do him Justice, and
commend his Generosity. It was at last resolved that the Prince should
immediately dispatch Monsieur Zulestein to the King, to desire him for the
great Quiet and Tranquillity of the City to continue at Rochester. 26. 16. 1688
Monsieur Zulestein having missed King James upon the Road, his late Majesty
returned about 5 in the Eyening to Whitehall, attended by his Guards. A Set of
Boys and Irish followed him through the City, making some Huzza's, while the
rest of the People silently looked on. The King sent immediately the Earl of
Feversham to the Prince to invite him to St. James's with what number of Forces
he should think fit. Monsieur Zulestein arrived a few Hours after, and
delivered the Prince's Letter to the King. The Privy Council met the same Day,
where the King was pleased to direct the Lord Lieutenants, Justices of Peace,
and other Magistrates, to prevent the Continuation of the Outrages that had
been lately committed by pulling down and defacing Houses, etc. Popish Chapels
were not mentioned in express Terms in this Order, but as no other Houses had
been pulled down, People could not forbear to take notice of the great Zeal
King James had for the Popish Party, since the first Act of Sovereignty he did
after his Return was in their Favor, as if he had a mind to convince the World
that he was come back only to serve them. The same Day the Earl of Feversham
arrived at Windsor with King James's Letter to the Prince, and was committed by
his Highness, with the Advice of the Peers, for having, says the French Author
of the Revolution, disbanded the Army without disarming the Irish or other
Soldiers, and whereby the Nation was exposed to a great Danger. Others say,
that it was for having entered the Prince's Quarters without leave; but
whatever it be, King James seemed very much concerned at it. The Earl was a few
Days after set at liberty at the Request of the Queen Dowager. 27. 17. 1688 The
Presence of the Prince being necessary in London, and it being not safe neither
for the Prince nor King James to be at the same time in the Town, the Peers
advised his Highness not to accept the King's Invitation to St. James's, but to
let the King know, that it was convenient he should remove to Ham near
Richmond, where he should be attended by his own Guards; and the Marquess of
Hallifax, the Earl of Shrewsbury, and the Lord Delamere were charged with the
Message. In the mean time Count Solmes was sent with the Foot Guards to take
Possession of the Posts about Whitehall; but the Ways being very bad, it was
ten at Night before they could come up; and the English Guards then on Duty
being unwilling to dislodge, it was 12 at Night before the said Lords could
deliver their Message. At last the Guards being ordered to submit, the Earl of
Middleton Secretary of State was desired to acquaint the King, that they had a
Message to be delivered to his Majesty, which was of so great Importance, that
they desired to be immediately introduced to the King, which being done, they
made an Apology for coming at so unseasonable a time, (for he was in bed) and
delivered their Order in Writing; and the King having read it, said he would
comply with it. The Lords thereupon desired that he would remove so early as to
be at Ham by Noon, to prevent meeting the Prince in his way to London, where he
was to come the same Day. The King complied with that also, and asked whether
he might not appoint his own Servants: whereupon the Lords told him that the
Prince left it entirely to him to give order in that as he pleased, and took
their leave of him; but they were hardly gone as far as the Privy Chamber when
the King sent for them again, and told them he had forgot to acquaint them with
his Resolution before the Message came, to send the Lord Godolphin the next
Morning to the Prince, to propose to him his going back to Rochester, and that
he would rather return to that Place than go to any other. The Lords told him
they would acquaint the Prince with it, and doubted not but his Answer would be
to his Satisfaction, and so parted. 28. 18. 1688 The Prince who was advanced to
Sion-house, having Advice of King James's Demand of going to Rochester, agreed
to it; whereupon the King left Whitehall this Morning, and went to Gravesend in
his own Barge, attended by the Earl of Arran, and some few others. dit. The
same Day about three in the Afternoon his Highness the Prince of Orange,
attended by the Marshall de Schomberg, and a great number of Nobility and
Gentry, came to St. James's Palace. It is not possible to express the
Demonstrations of Joy in the People, who notwithstanding the great Dirt and
Rain crowded the Road from St. James's to Hammersmith in such a manner that the
Prince's Coach had much ado to pass. All Men, Women and Children wore
Orange-colour Ribbons, and Oranges on the top of their Swords and Sticks. The
Evening was concluded with Bonfires, Illuminations, ringing of Bells, etc. And
as this was the happiest Day that ever shone for England, never so universal
Rejoicings were seen at London. dit. 1692 Count Guiscard who had besieged Huy
was forced to retire this Day with Precipitation, upon the Approach of the
Confederate Troops, tho the Marquess de Boufflers was advanced to cover the
Siege of that Place. 29. 19. 1688 Their Royal Highnesses the Prince and
Princess of Denmark returned to Town. The same Day the Lord Mayor, Court of
Aldermen, and the Common Council of the City, resolved upon an Address to
congratulate the Prince of Orange's happy Arrival. 30. 20. 1688 The Prince of
Orange having appointed this Day to receive the Address of the City, they were
introduced, and Sir George Treby their Recorder made the following Speech. May
it please your Highness; THE Lord Mayor being disabled by Sickness, your
Highness is attended by the Aldermen and Commons of the Capital City of this
Kingdom, deputed to congratulate your Highness upon this great and glorious
Occasion; in which laboring for Words, we cannot but come short in Expression.
Reviewing our late Danger, we remember our Church and State overrun by Popery
and Arbitrary Power, and brought to the point of Destruction by the Conduct of
Men that were our true Invaders, that brake the sacred Fences of our Laws, and
which was worse, the very Constitution of the Legislature; so that there was no
Remedy left but the last. The only Person, under Heaven, that could apply this
Remedy, was your Highness. You are of a Nation, whose Alliance in all times has
been agreeable and prosperous to us. You are of a Family most illustrious,
Benefactors to Mankind. To have the Title of Sovereign Prince, Stadtholder, and
to have worn the Imperial Crown, are among their lesser Dignities. They have
long enjoyed a Dignity singular and transcendent, viz. to be Champions of
Almighty God, sent forth in several Ages to vindicate his Cause against the
greatest Oppressions. To this Divine Commission our Nobles, our Gentry, and
among them our brave English Soldiers, rendered themselves and their Arms upon
your appearing. Great Sir; When we look back to the last Month, and contemplate
the Swiftness and Fullness of our present Deliverance, astonished, we think it
miraculous. Your Highness, led by the Hand of Heaven, and called by the Voice
of the People, has preserved our dearest Interests. The Protestant Religion,
which is Primitive Christianity, restored. Our Laws, which are our ancient
Title to our Lives, Liberties and Estates, and without which this World were a
Wilderness. But what Retribution can we make to your Highness? Our Thoughts are
full charged with Gratitude. Your Highness has a lasting Monument in the
Hearts, in the Prayers, in the Praises of all good Men amongst us: and late
Posterity will celebrate your ever-glorious Name, till Time shall be no more.
31. 21. 1688 The Prince of Orange put out this Day his Order, requiring all
Persons to re-deliver to the Soldiers, or bring to the Officers of the
Ordinance the Arms that had been embezled upon the late irregular disbanding of
the Forces. The same Day Quarters were assigned to the English, Scots and Irish
Forces, to which they were commanded to repair with all speed. January. 1. 22.
1692 The French Army commanded by Count de Tallard set down before Rhinseldt
the 6th Instant O. S. which Place they attacked with a great Fury; but the
Besieged made so brave a Defense, that the Landgrave of Hesse Cassell had a
sufficient time to assemble an Army. He marched in order to fight them, but the
French having been beaten from an advantageous Post the Day before, raised the
Siege this Day, and retired with Shame, and the Loss of near 4000 Men. 2. 23.
1688 This Morning about one or two of the Clock King James privately withdrew
himself from Rochester, and went over into France. His Majesty left behind him
a Paper writ with his own Hand, containing his Reasons for withdrawing himself,
which by his Order was published, and is as follows. The World cannot wonder at
my withdrawing my sell now this second time. I might have expected somewhat
better Usage after what I writ to the Prince of Orange by my Lord Feversh^^^,
and the Instructions I gave him; but instead of an Answer, such as I might have
hoped for, what was I to expect after the Usage I received by the making the
said Earl a Prisoner, against the Practice and Laws of Nations; the sending his
own Guards at eleven at Night to take Possession of the Posts at Whitehall,
without advertising me in the least manner of it; the sending to me at one of
the Clock at Midnight, when I was in Bed, a kind of Order by three Lords, to be
gone out of my Palace before twelve that same Morning? After all this, how
could I hope to be safe, so long as I was in the Power of one who had not only
done this to me, and invaded my Kingdoms, without any just Occasion given him
for it, but that did by his first Declaration lay the greatest Aspersion on me
that Malice could invent, in that Clause of it which concerns my Son. I appeal
to all that know me, nay even to himself, that in their Consciences, neither he
nor they can believe me in the least capable of so unnatural a Villainy, nor of
so little common Sense to be imposed on in a thing of such a nature as that.
What had I then to expect from one, who by all Arts has taken such Pains to
make me appear as black as Hell to my own People, as well as to all the World
besides? What Effect that has had at home all Mankind has seen, by so general a
Defection in my Army, as well as in the Nation among all sorts of People. I was
born free, and desire to continue so; and tho I have ventured my Life very
frankly on several Occasions for the Good and Honor of my Country, and am as
free to do it again, (and which I hope^ shall yet do, as old as I am, to redeem
it from the Slavery it is like to fall under) yet I think it not convenient to
expose my self to be secured, as not to be at liberty to effect it; and so for
that Reason to withdraw, but so as to be within Call whenever the Nation's
Eyes shall be opened, so as to see how they have been imposed upon by the
specious Pretenses of Religion and Property. I hope it will please God to touch
their Hearts, ont of his infinite Mercy, and to make them sensible of the ill
Condition they are in, and bring them to such a Temper that a legal Parliament
may be called; and that amongst other things which may be necessary to be done,
they will agree to Liberty of Conscience for all Protestant Dissenters, and
that those of my own Persuasion may be so far considered, and have such share
of it as they may live peaceably and quietly, as English Men and Christians
ought to do, and not to be obliged to transplant themselves, which would be
very grievous, especially to such as love their Country. And I appeal to all
who are considering Men, and have had Experience, whether any thing can make
this Nation so great and flourishing as Liberty of Conscience. Some of our
Neighbors dread it. I could add much more to confirm what I have faid, but now
is not the proper time. Rochester, December 22. 1688. Thus did James the Second
voluntarily abdicate the Imperial Crown of Great Britain, and left the People
in a full Right to fill the vacant Throne as they pleased: A Prince who might
have reigned with as much Glory as any of his Ancestors, and only unfortunate
in this, that he was not sensible of his own Felicity. He was proclaimed King
of England February the 6th, 1684/5. and came to the Crown with the Reputation
of a Prince who kept his Word and Promises, ^ut he soon after forfeited that
good Reputation by his many Violations of the most sacred Laws, the Observation
of which he so solemnly swore at his Coronation. The blind Zeal he had for
propagating his Religion led him into those fatal Mistakes, which at last
tumbled him down from his Throne, and alienated from him the Hearts of his
Subjects, in such a manner that he did not think safe to venture himself at the
Head of 15 Regiments of Horse, 5 of Dragoons, and 4 Troops of Life-Guards, and
27 Regiments of Foot, of the finest Troops that ever were seen, against 14000
Men, which was all the Prince brought over with him. He was blamed for having
withdrawn himself, and not agreeing with the Prince's Proposals, to refer all
things to the Determination of a Free Parliament; but Providence, who had
resolved to place a better Prince on the English Throne, struck King James with
a Pannick Fear, so that he abandoned his Crown without striking a Blow in the
Defense of it. This Revolution will be one of the most surprising Events that
History will record to our Posterity, who are like to suspect the Sincerity of
the Historians, when they will read that this great Work was compassed in less
than 50 Days. Having thus brought this Account of the Revolution to King James
's withdrawing himself into France, I refer the rest of the Transactions of
this Month to the first Pages of this Book, as in a more proper Place, because
of the Difference of our Style. dit. 1696 Sir John Fenwick, concerned in the
intended Invasion of the French in April last, and taken as he was going to
imbark for France, was some time ago arraigned at the Old Baily for High
Treason, and was accordingly to be tried, but he found Means to have his Trial
put off upon account of a great Discovery he pretended to make, and in order
thereto gave Informations against several Noble Persons as Betrayers of the
King's Counsels. His Majesty being then in Flanders, the Papers were sent to
him, and in the mean time Sir John Fenwick's Friends corrupted one Cardell
Goodman, who was one of the two Evidences against him, and sent him over to
France. His Majesty being returned, and being sensible that Sir John Fenwick
had given those Informations with no other Design than to get time to take away
the Evidence, sent those Papers to the Commons, who having examined Sir John
Fenwick thereupon, and found that he had not been sincere with his Majesty,
voted his Information false, malicious, scandalous and groundless, and tending
to create Jealousies between the King and his Subjects, and ordered that a Bill
to attaint him of High Treason should be brought in, which was done
accordingly, and passed few Days after, and sent to the Lords, who after a long
Debate on this Subject, passed the same this Day. Note, His Majesty gave the
Royal Assent to that Act on Monday, January 11, 1696/7. 3. 24. 4. 25. 1694 The
Marshall Duke of Luxemburgh died this Morning at Paris in the 68th Year of his
Age. 5. 26. This Day his Majesty was pleased to constitute the Right Honorable
Henry Lord Viscount Sidney, one of his principal Secretaries of State, who
accordingly took the usual Oath at the Council Board. 6. 27. 7. 28. 1694 This
Morning about one of the Clock died at Kensington our late most Gracious
Sovereign Lady Queen Mary, after seven Days Sickness, of the Small Pox, leaving
his Majesty under an inexpressible Grief and Affliction, the whole Kingdom, and
Europe in general, under the deepest and most sensible Sorrow for the Loss of a
Princess of so much Piety, Clemency, Goodness and other great and exemplary
Virtues. It were too great a Presumption in me to attempt the Character of that
Incomparable Princess, it is a Subject above my reach; I shall therefore
content my self to say, that her Majesty was endowed with all the Virtues of
her Sex, without the least Mixture of their Imperfections. She was born on the
30th of May, 1662. 8. 29. 30. 10. 31. 1693 This Evening his Highness Prince
Lewis of Baden arrived at Gravesend, being sent by the Emperor to confer with
his Majesty about the Preparations for the next Campagn. The next Morning Sir
Charles Cotterel, Master of the Ceremonies, went thither by his Majesty's
Command to compliment his Highness, and to conduct him to Town. In the
Afternoon he came up the River in the King's Barge, being saluted by the Great
Guns from the Tower, and from the Ships, as he passed by, and was conducted to
the Apartment prepared for him at Whitehall, and in the Evening wa^ted upon his
Majesty at Kensington. He was entertained all the while he continued in England
at the King's Charge, and received all the Respect due to his Birth and great
Merit. dit. 1694 The House of Lords went this Day in a Body to Kensington, and
presented to the King the following Address. WE your Majesty's most Dutiful and
Loyal Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled, do
with inexpressible Grief humbly assure your Majesty of the deep Sense we have
of the Loss your Majesty and the whole Kingdom does sustain by the Death of
that excellent Princess our Sovereign Lady the Queen, most humbly beseeching
your Majesty, that you would not indulge your Grief upon this sad Occasion, to
the Prejudice of the Health of your Royal Person, in whose Preservation not
only the Welfare of your own Subjects, but of all Christendom is so nearly
concerned. We further beg leave upon this sad Occasion humbly to renew to your
Majesty the hearty and sincere Assurances of our utmost Assistance against all
your Enemies both at home and abroad, and of all other Demonstrations of the
greatest Duty and Affection that can possibly be paid by the most faithful
Subjects. The King returned them this Answer. I Heartily thank you for your
Kindness to me, but much more for the Sense you show of our great Loss, which
is above what I can express. The House of Commons went likewise in a Body to
Kensington, and presented to his Majesty the Address which follows. Most
gracious and dread Sovereign; WE your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal
Subjects, the Commons in Parliament assembled, being deeply sensible of the
great Misfortune which has befallen your Majesty and this Kingdom, by the Death
of our most gracious Queen, do with unspeakable Grief of Heart humbly beg leave
to condole the irreparable Loss of that most excellent Princess, the best of
Women, to enumerate whose Virtues were to aggravate our Sorrow. We cannot at
the same time but bless God for the Preservation of your Majesty to us, on
whose Life the Welfare and Happiness of this Kingdom, and the Liberties of
Europe, do in so great a measure depend; hereby beseeching your Majesty so to
moderate your Grief under this Affliction, as not to prejudice or endanger your
Health; and that your Majesty would please to take such further Care of your
Royal Person, that we may all enjoy the Blessing of your Majesty's long Life
and happy Reign. We do also look upon it as a Duty we owe to your Majesty, to
our selves, and to those we represent, to take this Occasion of assuring your
Majesty, that we your faithful Commons will always, to the utmost of our Power,
stand by, support and defend your Majesty, and your Government, against all
your Enemies both at home and abroad. His Majesty was pleased (...) make this
gracious Answer. Gentlemen; I Take very kindly your Care of Me and the Public,
especially at this time, when I am able to think of nothing but our great Loss.

FINIS.

