Truth Ascended, OR, The Anointed and Sealed of God defended.

IN AN ANSWER Written by Richard Farnsworth, AS A TESTIMONY AGAINST A
Conterfeit Commission

And all Injustice and false Judgment done and pronounced under pretense of
the same.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1663.

Truth ascended, or the Anointed and sealed of God defended, etc.
Lodowick Muggleton,
THough thou pretend to be the chosen Witness of the Spirit, and the last that
ever shall speak by Commission from God; and to be the chief Judge in the World
ordained of God to give sentence upon men and women spiritual and eternal, and
what shall become of them after death; and say, That in obedience to thy
Commission thou have already cursed and damned many hundreds of people both
body and soul from the presence of God; elect men and Angels to Eternity; and
pretend'st to go by as certain Rule (in so doing) as the Judges of the Land do
when they give Judgment according to Law; and say, That no infinite Spirit
of Christ, nor any God can; or shall be able to deliver from thy sentence and
curse, etc. as appears in a Sheet of paper; dated Aug. 10. 1662. written by
thee in answer to Edward Bourns to Dorothy Carter; and also four sheets dated
November. 3. 1662. written by thee, and directed to Thomas Highfield in
Nottingham, for Samuel Hooton and W. S.

I am bold (on the behalf of the Lord) once again to bear my Testimony against
thee, and against thy pretended Commission, and the Doctrine thereof, and shall
make it appear, that it ought not to be entertained by any man or woman upon
earth, because it is contrary to truth, and that thy judgment ought by all to
be reversed, undone, and made void, because it is contrary to truth; and that
thy judgment ought by all to be reversed, undone and made void, because it is
erroneous and false; for thou art no chosen Witness of the Spirit of Truth,
neither have thou received any Commission from Christ, to whom all the Prophets
gave witness, as hereafter appears.

1. That there were chosen Witnesses of Christ to whom all the Prophets gave
witness, is certainly true, Acts 10.38, 39, 40, 41. Acts 5.31 32. Acts 1.8.

2. That they had a Commission from Christ, to whom all the Prophets gave
witness; or, that he Commanded them to preach to the people, is as true, Acts
10.42. But that thou either art, or do so, I do deny.

3. They who were chosen Witnesses of Christ (whom God the Father anointed,
sealed and sent) and had a Commission from the Spirit and Power of Christ, to
whom all the Prophets gave witness, in testifying on the behalf of Christ;
their Testimony stands as an evidence against thy pretended Commission, and the
Doctrine thereof (because they say (on the behalf of Christ) that he commanded
them to preach to the people, and to testify to them, that it is he which was
ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead, Acts 10.42. To him give all
the Prophets witness, that through his Name whosoever believes in him, shall
receive remission of sins, Acts 10.43. But thou do not so by thy pretended
Commission, and the Doctrine thereof, who instead of preaching to the people,
and testifying to them, that Christ is chief Judge ordained of God to judge the
quick and the dead, thou would dis-throne him to set up thy self in his
stead; whereby it appears, That thou art not a chosen Witness of the Spirit of
Truth, and that thy pretended Commission is a counterfeit thing, by which thou
presumes to give judgment contrary to Truth, which makes it evident, That thy
doctrine and judgment is false, and being so, it ought not to be entertained
or received by any, but to be denied, and against testified by all that love
the Lord Jesus.

4. By their Commission they were to preach to the people, and by the same
Commission, and the Doctrine thereof, they were to testify to them, that
Christ was ordained of God to be the Judge both of quick and dead; but thou art
not Christ to whom all the Prophets gave witness; therefore it is evident, that
thou art not chief Judge ordained of God to judge the quick and the dead;
though thou presume to say, that the dead after death shall never see any other
God or Judge, but the remembrance of that sentence which you the pretended
Witnesses of the Spirit did pass upon them in this life, which is a false
Doctrine, and contrary to the Doctrine of Truth left upon record in Scripture,
where it is said, That the Father has given authority to the Son to execute
judgment, and all that are in the grave shall hear his voice, and shall come
forth, they that have done good unto the resurrection of Life, and they that
have done evil unto the resurrection of damnation; as it is written John 5.26,
27, 28, 29. and Christ shall give judgment upon them, Matthew. 25.31, 32, 33,
34.41.46.

And as thou would exclude Christ from that great office and work, and assume
it to thy self, so thou would exclude his Officers, and deny him of them, to
set up thy self alone in their places and stead, because thou falsely says, No
man knows the Scriptures but thy self; and that no man can truly interpret the
Scriptures but thy self; and that none ought to officiate the Office of a
Minister, Messenger or Ambassador of Christ, but such as are appointed by John
Reeves and thy self; which assertions or doctrines of thine are false, and not
true; for this I say, That the only knowledge and right of interpreting
Scriptures, belongs not to thy self, but to the Lord Jesus and his blessed
Spirit, who is the true Judge, and has power to open men's understandings, and
can give them the true knowledge, and right understanding of Scriptures, Luke
24 32. and 24.45.

And the Gospel is preached with the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven, as it is
written 1 Pet. 1.11, 12. and the holy Ghost has a true power and right
Authority (without John Reeves and thy self) to make overseers over the Flock
of God, to feed the Church of God which he has purchased with his own blood,
Acts 20.28. and to appoint Ministers, Messengers or Ambassadors of Christ, and
to call to the work of the Ministry, Acts 13.2 4. And they who by the Holy
Ghost are called to the Work of the Ministry, may with the Holy Ghost sent down
from Heaven, preach the Gospel without the appointment of John Reeves and thy
self. Take notice of that; for as every man has received the gift, even so
minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of
God; if any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God; if any man
minister, let him do it as of the ability which God gives, that God in all
things may be glorified through Jesus Christ, as it is written and left upon
Record in Scripture, 1 Pet. 4 10, 11.

5. The chosen Witnesses of Christ who had a Commission from his blessed
Spirit, they were anointed, 2 Cor. 1.21. and sealed of God, 2 Cor. 1.22. but so
art not thou; therefore thou art nothing like unto them; and they who are
anointed and seal d of God as such were, they may be Ministers, Messengers and
Ambassadors of Christ now, without the appointment of John Reeves and thy self;
neither art thou at all owned by the Doctrine of their commission, (to do as
thou do, and pretendest to do under pretense of thy pretended commission) it
takes no notice of thee, and such as thou art, to appoint to so great and
glorious a Work, though thou presume in thy imaginations to be greater then
either Prophets of God, or Apostles of Christ, yet thou never approved thy self
to be a Messenger, Minister or Ambassador of Christ, as they do and did, who
are and were anointed, sealed and sent of God as aforesaid.

6. For the Ambassadors who had a commission to preach, and were anointed and
sealed of God, 2 Cor. 1.21, 22. and had the Ministration of reconciliation
given unto them, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. a glorious Ministration, 2 Cor. 3.8, 9,
10, 11. which is the Ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.5 6. their
sufficiency was (not of any, like John Reeves and thy self, but) of God, who
made them (and has the same power now, without John Reeves and thy self, to
make) able Ministers of the New Testament, they approved themselves as the
Ministers of God (not by reviling, cursing and damning, but on the contrary) in
much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in
imprisonments, in labors, in watchings, in fastings, by pureness, by
knowledge, by long-suffering, by kindness, by the holy Ghost, by love
unfeigned, by the Word of truth, and by the power of God; See 2 Cor. 6.4, 5, 6,
7, 8 9, 10. And the Messengers of Christ, whose sufficiency is (not of John
Reeves and thy self, but) of God, who (by virtue of his blessed power and
spirit) are made able Ministers of the New Testament, and are spiritually
anointed and sealed of God, they stand approved to God, as the Ministers of
God, according to Gospel Order, and the dispensation of the Gospel, which is
the Ministration of the Spirit; but thou have not so approved thy self, who
fled from Chesterfield to Bakwell for fear of a few stripes, or a whipping,
when the same was but threatened against thee for thy false Judgment and
Doctrine in reviling, cursing and damning; whereby it is evident, that thou art
nothing like an Ambassador of Christ, and very unfit to appoint to that work,
and that thy pretended Commission, and the greatness of thy pretended power is
nothing worth: Take notice of that.

7. The Ambassadors of Christ who were anointed and sealed of God, and had the
Ministration of Reconciliation given unto them, that glorious Ministration of
the Spirit, wherein they approved themselves as the Ministers of God (which
thou have not done) they were so far from reviling, cursing and damning, and
rejoicing therein, as thou do, that they forgave in the person of Christ, 2
Cor. 2.10. and by manifestation of the Truth, commended themselves to every
man's conscience in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4.1, 2. but thou do not so, who
art so full of reviling, cursing and damning; whereby it is apparent, that thy
pretended Commission, Power and Doctrine thereof, is nothing like unto theirs;
though thou falsely say, it is as true and of a more higher nature then theirs
was in their time; thou have lied therein, and have born a false Testimony,
which makes it evident, that thou art no chosen Witness of the Spirit of Truth.

8. The Ambassadors of Christ who were anointed and sealed of God, and had the
glorious Ministration of the Spirit given unto them, by virtue of their
commission of the Spirit, and the doctrine thereof, they commanded for to prove
all things, and hold fast that which is good; and to try the spirits whether
they be of God; because many false Prophets are gone out into the World, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. 1 John 4.1. to the end that they might not entertain the Doctrine
of any false Prophet, nor bid such God spead as abide not in the doctrine of
Christ, lest they become partakers of their evil-deed, 2 John 9.10, 11. but by
the Doctrine of thy pretended commission thou denies that, viz proving of
doctrines, and trying of spirits, saying, That neither the Light of Christ
within, nor no man upon earth can, or ought to judge of the Doctrine, because
(thou say) that neither the Light within, nor no man upon Earth can, or ought
to judge of the Doctrine of a Prophet, who has a Commission from God; and
say, That there neither is, nor ever shall be any such Prophet but thy self
whilst the World does endure; which is a false assertion or doctrine of thine,
but hereby it is manifest, that thou art against trying of spirits, and proving
of Doctrines, and so art against the reception thereof, because Judgment in
point of Doctrine, is in order to the reception of Doctrine. And for want of
judgment in that respect, they may be deceived, who take doctrines upon trust
without judging and trying thereof, and how should spirits be tried, and
doctrines be proved? or how should the Doctrine of Truth be performed, which
commands to try and prove them, if none can or ought (as thou falsely say) to
judge of the same: Whereby it appears that thou art not the chosen Witness of
the Spirit of Truth, and that thy doctrine is contrary to the doctrine of
truth, and ought not to be received by any man upon earth; and it is evident
thereby, that thy pretended commission is a counterfeit thing, invented to
beguile and deceive withal, and not at all owned by the commission and doctrine
of the Ambassadors of the Lord Jesus, who were and are anointed and sealed of
God.

9. The Ambassadors of Christ, and chosen Witnesses of the Spirit, who were
anointed and sealed of God, they were workers together with God, 2 Cor. 6.1.
and did pray in Christ's stead, 2 Cor. 5.20. but thou do not so, who instead
thereof, goes about reviling, cursing and damning the beloved people of God,
who preach from the Scriptures and Light within, and by virtue of the power
which they have received of God, Devils are cast out, and (as thou say) much
good is done by them, who ought not to be reviled and cursed by thee as they
are; whereby it appears that thou art no chosen Witness of the Spirit of
Truth, nor an Ambassador of Christ, neither art thou anointed and sealed, or
sent of God to go about reviling, cursing and damning the beloved people of
God, as thou do; for they who were the chosen Witnesses of the Spirit, and
Ambassadors of Christ, did not so; but thou have exceeded Balaam in that, who
refused to curse those whom God had blessed. And the Ambassadors of Christ,
anointed, sealed and sent of God, they approved themselves as the chosen
Witnesses of the Spirit, anointed and sealed of God, who being defamed, did
entreat; and being persecuted, did suffer it, and not flee, as thou did, for
fear of a whipping threatened against thee for thy mis-behaviour in reviling,
cursing and damning; the chosen Witnesses of the Spirit anointed and sealed of
God, did not so, but being reviled, did bless, and by the Doctrine of their
Commission, said, Bless, and curse not, 1 Cor. 4.12. Romans 12.14. whereby it is
evident, that thou art not a chosen Witness of the Spirit of Truth, neither
art thou anointed and sealed, or sent by the God of Truth; thy pretended
Commission, and the doctrine thereof, and Judgment performed thereby, is
erroneous and false, which is Antichristian; and it is no railing to tell thee
the same, and reprove thee and thy deceit.

10. The true Witnesses of the Spirit, and Ambassadors of Christ, by the Father
of mercies and God of all comfort, they were comforted themselves in all their
tribulations, that they might be able to comfort them that were in any trouble,
by the comfort wherewith they themselves were comforted of God, 2 Cor. 1 3, 4.
but so art not thou by thy reviling, cursing and damning them who are blessed,
beloved and justified of God, wherein thou have exceeded Balaam as aforesaid,
whereby it appears, that thou art nothing like an Ambassador of Christ, or the
chosen Witnesses of the Spirit who were anointed and sealed of God; neither is
there the like Truth, Power, Virtue and Consolation in the doctrine of thy
pretended commission that were in theirs. Thou have grievously lied in saying,
That the Doctrine of thy Commission is as true, and of a more higher nature
then the Prophets and Apostles was in their time; but have made no such proof
of thy sayings or Doctrine as they did of theirs; But thou art reprehended, and
the truth and power of the Commission and Doctrine of the anointed and sealed
of God is defended; and the truth of the Gospel is over and above all thy
errors, lies and false judgment ascended.

By all which has been said, it remains true, 1. That thou art no chosen
Witness of the Spirit of Truth. 2. That thou art not the chief Judge in the
World ordained of God to judge the quick and the dead. 3. That God may (without
John Reeves and thy self) make able Ministers of the New Testament. 4. That
they who are made able Ministers of the New Testament, whose sufficiency is not
of self, but of God, they may officiate the Offices of Ministers, Messengers,
or Ambassadors of Christ, without the appointment of John Reeves and thy self,
who has nothing to do to appoint to so great and glorious Work. 5. That thou
art not anointed, sealed and sent of God to revile, curse and damn the beloved
people of God. 6. That thou art no Ambassador of Christ to whom all the
Prophets gave witness. 7. That thou have received no Commission from the God of
Truth to pass the sentence of eternal death and damnation upon the souls and
bodies of men. 8. That the only knowledge and right of interpreting Scripture,
belongs not to thee. 9. That thy Judgment and Doctrine is erroneous and false.
And 10thly, That thy Judgment and Doctrine ought not to be entertained by any,
but to be reversed and denied by all that love the Lord Jesus.

And whereas thou say, Thou art the chief Judge in the World, and in passing
the Sentence of eternal death and damnation upon the souls and bodies of men,
say, Thou goes by as certain a Rule as the Judges of the Land do when they
give Judgment according to Law; I say, Thou have lied therein, and have born a
false testimony in that respect as well as the rest, as hereafter is evident.

First, Because thou art both Judge, Accuser and Witness thy self, and do
condemn and give Judgment at thy will and pleasure, contrary to Truth, having
no certain known Laws either of God or the Land, as a rule of direction to
guide and lead thee in the ways of right Justice, to give Judgment upon the
bodies of men and women, nor cannot manifest a commission to put any known Laws
in execution upon them; thou goes not by so certain a Rule (in so doing) as the
Judges of the Land do when they give judgment according to Law; for they
neither are, nor pretend to be both Judges, Accusers and Witnesses; neither do
they go without certain outward known Laws as a rule of direction to guide and
lead them to give Judgment accordingly; and they can produce a commission
whereby they are empowered to put the same in execution; but so can not thou:
Whereby it is evident, that thou have not cognizance or lawful authority to
pass the sentence of death upon the bodies of men and women: Therefore thou art
no true and competent Judge in that matter; take notice of that.

2. Thou goes not by so certain a Rule when thou presumes to pass the sentence
of death and damnation upon the souls and bodies of men, as the Judges of the
Land do when they give judgment according to Law; for Cook upon the
confirmation of the Charters of the Liberties of England, says, This Clause is
worthy to be written in Letters of Gold, viz.

That our Justices, Sheriffs, Mayors and other Ministers which under us have
the Laws of the Land to guide them, shall allow the said Charters in all their
points which shall come before them in Judgment; and here it is to be
observed, That the Laws are the Judges Guides and Leaders, according to that
old Rule, Lex est exercitus Judicum; viz. The Law is the Judges Army.
Tutissimus Doctor. Viz. The safest Teacher. Or, Lex est optimus Judicis
Synagogus; viz. Their best Synagogue. And, Lex est tutissimus Cassis; viz.
Their safest fortress.

There is an old Legal word (says he) called Guidagium, viz. Guidage, which
signifies an Office of guiding Travelers through dangerous and unknown ways:
Here it appears, that the Laws of the Realm has this office to guide the
Judges in all causes that come before them in the ways of right Justice, who
never yet mis-guided any man that certainly knew them, and truly followed them.
Cook part 2. Inst. fol. 566.

Whereby it is apparent, That the Judges of the Land have certain outward known
Laws as a Rule of direction to guide and lead them to Judgment, when they give
it according to Law; but thon (Lodowick) have no certain outward known Laws
either of God or the Land, as a Rule of direction to guide thee in the ways of
right Justice, and to lead thee to give judgment upon the bodies of men
accordingly; whereby it is evident, thou have nothing to do to pass the
sentence of death and damnation upon them: And the souls in the Fathers hands
thou have nothing to do withal, neither do thou go by so certain a Rule to
give judgment upon the bodies of men, as the Judges of the Land do when they
give judgment according to Law. Mind how thou art confuted and taken with a
lie in thy mouth. Behold how the pretended most knowing and wisest of men is
taken in his own craftiness! Let no man deceive himself, for the wisdom of this
World is foolishness with God; for it is written, He takes the wise in their
own craftiness; and again, The Lord knows the thoughts of tht wise, that they
are vain; 1 Cor. 3 18, 19, 20. Thou art snared with the words of thy mouth;
thou art taken with the words of thy mouth, Prove. 6 2. The wicked is snared by
the transgression of his lips, Prove. 12.13. and so art thou; take notice of
that.

3. Thou goes not by so certain a Rule to give judgment and sentence of death
and damnation upon the souls and bodies of men, as the Judges of the Land do
when they give judgment according to Law; for by the Law (which is a Rule of
direction to them) it is enacted, That no man from thenceforth shall be
attached by any accusation, nor fore-adjudged of Life nor Limb, etc. against
the form of the great Charter, and the Law of the Land, 5 Edw. 3.25 Edw. 3.
Cook, part 2. Inst. fol. 48.

But thou Lodowick fore-judges the souls and bodies of men from the presence of
God, elect men and Angels to Eternity, contrary to the Law of God, and the Law
of the Land; whereby it appears that thou goes by no Legal Rule, neither
according to the Law of the Land, nor the Law of God; for thou say, That the
sentence and curse which thou pronouncest upon the souls and bodies of men, is
not from the Scriptures, or Light within, then not according to the Law of God,
and as before is proved, it is quite contrary to the Law of the Land.

What then is thy Rule of direction to give judgment upon the souls and bodies
of men, seeing thou pretends to be the chief Judge in the World, and gives not
thy judgment and sentence according to the Law of God? Produce us thy Law and
commission if thou can, now thou art put to it, for thou neither goes by the
Law of God either without or within, nor by so certain a Rule as the Judges of
the Land do when they give judgment according to Law; therefore thou goes not
according to the Law of the Land, and it is evident, That thou goes not
according to the Law of God as aforesaid.

Seeing then, that the Judges of the Land have certain outward known Laws, as a
rule of direction to guide and lead them to give judgment upon the bodies of
men, and an outward commission to empower them to put the same in execution;
and thou pretends to be a Judge to pass the sentence of death upon men and
women, and pretends (in so doing) to go by as certain a Rule as the Judges of
the Land do when they give judgment according to Law, and have no certain known
Laws either of God or the Land, as thy rule of direction to guide and lead thee
in the ways of right justice, to give judgment upon them, nor can manifest no
true commission to put any known Law in execution.

It remains certainly true, That thou art no competent Judge to pass the
sentence of death upon men and women; thy pretended Authority is but an usurped
thing, whereby thou would destroy and oppress them; and it is said; That
every oppression against Law by color of any usurped Authority, is a kind of
destruction; and it is the worst oppression that is done by color of office,
Cook 2. par. Inst. fol. 48. And thy proceedings are no better then oppression
against Law both of God and the Land, and is done by color of Office under
pretense of chief Judge, and in obedience to thy pretended Commission:
Therefore the acts of injustice done by thee in condemning the souls and bodies
of men as aforesaid, is oppression against Law, and the worst kind of
destruction.

And if injustice be so hateful a thing in the eye of the Law, that it deserves
to have judgment (in a high measure) turned backward upon it, especially when
it is done by color of office, to make the parties offending, examples to
others, that Justice may also turn back into its course; how much more hateful
a thing is iujustice then in the eye of the Lord, especially when it is done by
color of Office? Does it not deserve to have his just and righteous judgment
(in a high measure) turned backward upon it, to make the parties offending,
examples to others, that they may fear to do the like, and that his Justice may
stand and remain in its course; but we are sure that the judgment of God is
according to truth against them which commit such things, Romans 2.1, 2. And by
the Law of God it is declared, That if a false witness do but rise up against a
man to testify against him that which is wrong, then both the men between whom
the controversy is, shall stand before the Lord and before the Judge that
shall be in those days, and the Judge (as his duty is shall make diligent
inquisition (to find out the truth or falsehood of the evidence) and behold, if
the Witness be (found out to be) a false Witness, and has testified falsely
against his brother, then shall ye do unto him as he had thought to have done
unto his brother, so shall thou put away the evil from among you; and those
which remain, shall hear, and fear, and shall henceforth commit no more any
such evil among you; thine eye shall not pity, but life shall go for life, eye
for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, Deuteronomy. 19.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
or the like judgment was to be executed on a false Witness, that had been due
to the nature of the offense of him that he was an evidence against, if his
Testimony given in evidence against him had been true; whereby God has
signified his high displeasure against injustice done by color of office; for
if a false evidence had been taken for truth, and the judgment grounded upon
the evidence, it had been false judgment, as thine is; and false judgment is
not owned by the Law of God, who commands to execute true judgment, and to
show mercy and compassion every man to his brother, Zech. 7.9. Mic. 6.8. and
forbids to wrest judgment, Exodus 23.6. saying also by way of command, Thou
shall not raise a false report, put not thine hand with the wicked to be an
unrighteous Witness, Exo. 23.1. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil,
neither shall thou speak in a cause to decline after many, to wrest judgment,
Exo. 23.2. Keep thee far from a false matter, the innocent and righteous slay
thou not, for I will not justify the wicked, Exo. 23.7. Likewise see Moses
charge to the Judges, Deuteronomy. 1.16, 17. they were commanded to judge the people
with just judgment, Deuteronomy. 16.18. they were forbidden to wrest judgment, and
were not to pervert the words of the righteous, Deuteronomy. 16.19. And that which is
altogether just, they were commanded to follow, Deuteronomy. 16.20. But thou do not
so.

1. Consider then, that thou have not only done injustice both in the eye of
the Law, and of the Lord, but also thou have done the same by color of office:
First, in the eye of the Law thou have done it, because thou presumes to pass
the sentence of Death upon the bodies of men and women, as a pretended Judge,
and have no certain outward known Laws as a rule of Direction to guide thee in
the ways of right Justice to give judgment upon them, nor can produce no
commission to put any known Law in execution, or empower thee so to do; and are
therefore no competent Judge in that matter. And secondly, injustice in the eye
of the Lord thou have done, and also by color of office under pretense of
chief Judge in the world, and by a pretended commission of the Spirit,
pretended to be received from a God without thee, that spoke (thou say) by
voice of words to the hearing of the ear.

2. Consider the nature of thy offense, how far it extends it self, and that
is, to pass the sentence of eternal death and damnation both upon the bodies
and souls of men and women, and that to Eternity.

3. Consider, that thy injustice done by color of office, deserves to have a
punishment proportionable to the offense; and can the offense in the eye of the
Lord be any less then sin against the Holy Ghost, because thou have pretended
to do it in the Name of the Holy Ghost, and so would make the holy Ghost the
Author of thy offense, which it is not?

And seeing thou art guilty of sin against the holy Ghost, there is a
punishment already proportioned for such an offense; and also thou art
punishable by the Law of the Land for presuming under pretense of a commission,
and as a Judge, to pass the sentence of death upon the bodies of men and women,
and pretends to go by as certain a rule in so doing, as the Judges of the Land
do when they give Judgment according to Law; which thou have no cognizance or
right unto, neither have thou done so, as before I have proved; and I had not
meddled with the outward Laws of the Land, but that I have such a pretended
chief Judge to deal with, to show him his folly and injustice done by color of
office, as I have done thee, which thou Lodowick may for ever be ashamed of
for presumptuously doing as thou have done, who have also erred in thy
judgment, and have given it contrary to truth, and against the Law of the
Land: And it is said, That if any Judgment be given contrary to the points of
the great Charter, it shall be undone, and holden for naught, 25 Ed. 1, 2. and
by a Statute made Anno 25. Ed. 3. it is declared, That if any thing be done
against the Law, it shall be redressed and holden for none, as thine is, and is
therefore reversed, undone, and holden for naught, Take notice of that.

And whereas thou say, That in obedience to thy Commission thou have already
cursed and damned many hundreds of people both soul and body to eternity: I
say, the greater is thy presumption and sin, who have no Right nor Authority to
do the same; thy judgment is contrary to truth, and is against the Law of God,
and the Law of the Land, and is therefore reversed and holden for none, as
aforesaid.

Whereas thou say, That no infinite spirit of Christ, nor any God can, or
shall be able to deliver from thy sentence and curse: I say, That is false, or
no less then blasphemy, and there is a punishment due to the nature of the
offense: Thou have hereby denied Christ as he is the Advocate with the Father,
and the propitiation for the sins of the whole World, 1 John 2.1, 2. What a
miserable condition art thou in! And how great is thy sin of presumption and
folly!

Would thou have the great King of Heaven, the Lord who is a great God, and a
King above all Gods, Psalm. 95.3. and Christ Jesus, who is the Prince of the
Kings of the Earth, Rev. 1.5. to commit their whole power solely to thee, who
may abuse it, as thou have done, under pretense of a Commission, and reserve no
power in the Eternal Godhead to pardon offenses committed against them, and
preserve and save poor penitent offenders by showing mercy unto them, and
forgiving of them? And would thou have no power reserved in the Eternal
Godhead to correct and punish thee, and such as thou art, for abusing the Power
and People of God, as thou have done? Would thou make the Eternal Power and
Godhead inferior to the Kings of the Earth? Do not they reserve a pardoning and
punishing power in themselves, besides what they give to their Judges by their
commission?

But notwithstanding thy pretended Commission, false Judgment and Doctrine,
This I affirm on the behalf of the Lord, and the Eternal Godhead, That there
is a pardoning and a punishing power in them reserved, beyond thy pretended
Commission.

First, as to the pardoning power, it is declared by them that were sent of the
Lord God and his Spirit, saying, Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the
unrighteous his thoughts, and let him return to the Lord, and he will have
mercy upon him; and to our God, and he will abundantly pardon. Seeing it is so,
it remains certainly true, that there is a pardoning power reserved, and
remains in the Eternal Godhead; and it also remains true, That the unrighteous
and wicked upon the forsaking of their evil thoughts and wicked ways, and
returning to the Lord according to his requirings, are objects of mercy, and
pardonable as aforesaid, which is contrary to thy false doctrine and judgment.

Secondly, As to the pardoning power, that remains in the Godhead, is
manifested in Christ, whom God the Father has exalted with his right hand to
be a Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness
of sins; and we are his Witnesses of these things, and so is the Holy Ghost
whom God has given to them that obey him, Acts 5.31, 32.

Thirdly, Christ Jesus who is the chief Judge ordained of God to judge the
quick and the dead, Acts 10.40, 41, 42. he has manifested the pardoning power
that remains with the Godhead, by showing of mercy, and forgiving offenses.
The Scribes and the Pharisees sought an occasion against him (because he was
merciful and forgave sins) and they took a woman-sinner, and brought her to
Christ, and set her in the midst; First, They brought her before Christ, and
set her as an offender before the Judge. Secondly, They accused her unto him of
the act of Adultery, John 8.1, 2, 3, 4. Thirdly, They pleaded both Law and Fact
to make their case good, and to have shut up Christ's mercy and compassion
against her, to have moved him to give judgment upon her, who it is like thought
he could not otherwise have done, if he owned Moses Law; and if he had denied
it, then they would had an occasion against him, which they sought for: They
pleaded Fact, saying, Master, This woman was taken in Adultery, in the very
act, Joh. 8.4. Then they pleaded Law, saying, Now Moses in the Law commanded
that such should be stoned, Joh. 8.5. But what say thou? This they said,
tempting of him, that they might have to accuse him, John 8.6. And they
continued asking of him, John 8.7. showing how earnest they were to have had an
accusation against him; they tempted him for that very end, and to see if he
would deny putting Moses Law in execution upon that woman which they had taken
in Adultery, and brought before him to accuse unto him.

But Jesus himself, who was chief Judge ordained of God, and had power or
authority given him to execute judgment, John 5.22, 27. he did neither accuse
the offender, nor countenance those bloody accusers that brought her before
him, though they pleaded both Law and Fact unto him, as aforesaid, who teaches
by his example in that case, That it is not the duty of a Court to accuse any,
though a known offender, nor to countenance bloody accusers, but rather to
mollify their rigor, as Christ did in the same case, who in great wisdom
answered their question, and said unto them, He that is without sin among you,
let him first cast a stone at her, Joh. 8.7. (or put Moses Law in execution
upon her) but those accusers were none of them without sin, because they sinned
in tempting of Christ, and the Witness of God in their own conscience testified
the same unto them, whereby they were convicted, and thereupon went out one by
one, beginning at the eldest, even unto the last; and Jesus was left alone, and
the woman standing in the midst, John 8. ver. 9.

First, By which wise answer of his, he put a stop to their cruelty against the
offender, and thereby he delivered her from their cruelty, and took her into
his mercy, who knew better how to deal with her, then they would have had him.

Secondly, He by that gracious wise answer unto them, put a stop to their
subtilty, and crossed their intent which they had in their minds in their
temptation against him.

Thirdly, He has showed by that wise answer unto them, That criminal persons
are no competent Judges to condemn others for that which themselves are guilty
of.

4. He also by that wise answer unto them, preserved himself out of their
snare, for he thereby owned Moses Law in its time and place, which if he had
then denied, they thought to have had an occasion against him, or whereof to
have accused him, and having preserved himself out of their snare, and taken
the woman sinner out of their cruelty, into his mercy, as aforesaid; He then as
a gracious and merciful Judge looked upon her with an eye of compassion,
saying, Woman, where are all those thine accusers? Has no man condemned thee,
Joh. 8.10. She answered and said, No man, Lord. And Jesus to manifest his
mercy, and the pardoning power which remained with the Godhead, he said,
Neither do I condemn thee; go, and sin no more, Joh. 8.10, 11.

And as a merciful Judge he forgave her that offense, and set her free, and
gave her commend to abstain from sin for the time to come, saying, Go, and sin
no more; as much as to say, let mercy held forth in forgiving thy offense that
is past, engage thy heart against sin, and unto God for the time to come.

But though thou Lodowick pretend to be the chief Judge in the World, thy
example, doctrine and practice teaches quite contrary to the doctrine and
example of Christ, whereby it appears, and is plainly made manifest, That thou
art not ordained chief Judge in his stead.

First, Thy Example, Doctrine and Practice teaches to be both Judge, Accuser
and Witness, contrary to the Law of God, and the Law of the Land.

Secondly, To condemn at a distance without any due course of Law, or orderly
proceedings, before thou have the parties and their Accusers face to face
before thee, to hear what they can say.

Thirdly, To condemn at will and pleasure, contrary to any known Law either of
God or the Land.

4. It teaches not the preservation of any known Law, but rather the
destruction of all known Laws both of God and the land.

5. Thy example, doctrine and practice teaches to condemn the bodies of men
and women without any known law either of God or the land, as a rule of
direction to guide and lead in the ways of right Justice, to give judgment
upon them accordingly.

Lastly, Thou teach thereby, That if judgment or sentence be given,
pronounced, or past, though never so contrary to truth, it ought not to be
redressed or reversed, undone and holden for nothing; which is quite contrary
to the law of the land: And we are sure that the judgment of God is according
to truth, Romans 2.2. but thine is not so; whereby it is evident, that it is not
the judgment of God.

It appears and is evident, first, That thou art an unlawful Judge, because
thou presumes to pass the sentence of death upon the bodies of men and women
without cognizance or lawful Authority so to do.

2. That thou art a foolish unwise Judge, because thou passest the sentence of
death upon the bodies of men and woman at a distance from thee, without having
them and their answers face to face before thee.

Thirdly, That thou art an unjust Judge, because thou passest the sentence of
death upon the bodies of men and women contrary to truth, without any known
laws either of God or the Land, as a Rule of direction to guide and lead thee
in the ways of right justice, to give judgment upon them accordingly.

4. That thou art a cruel unmerciful Judge, because if thy sentence be once
pronounced and past (though it be never so erroneous and false) thou would
have it impossible for any God to reverse and undo the same, or to deliver
therefrom.

Seeing that it is so, it remains certainly true, That thou art no true and
competent Judge, neither ordained of God nor man to pass the sentence of death
upon the bodies of men and women; and it remains as true, That the souls in the
Father's hand thou have nothing to do withal.

First, Because Christ gives to them eternal life, and they shall never
perish, John 10.28.

Secondly, Because no man is able to pluck them out of the Father's hand, as it
is written John 10.29.

And thirdly, Because the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against them.

Likewise it remains true, That thou art not the chosen Witness of the Spirit
of Truth, and that thou have not received thy pretended Commission from the God
of Truth, to do as thou have done, and pretendest to do by color thereof.

First, Because thou denies Almighty God himself.

Secondly, Because thou denies Christ Jesus of his Offices.

Thirdly, Because thou denies him of his Officers, as Messengers, Ministers or
Ambassadors.

Fourthly, Because thou denies the holy Scriptures.

Fifthly, Because thou have lied against God and Christ, and have born a false
Testimony of them, and of the true Prophets of God, and Apostles of Christ.

1. As to the first, That thou denies Almighty God himself, is evident by thy
own Doctrine, because thou say, That the dead after death shall never see any
other God or Judge but the remembrance of that Sentence which you the pretended
Witnesses of the Spirit did pass upon them in this life; which is quite
contrary to the doctrine of Christ, and the Scriptures of truth, John 5.26, 27,
28, 29. Mat. 25.31, 32, 33, 34; 41. 2 Pet. 2.9.

2. And as to the second, that thou deniest Christ of his offices, is evident
against thee by thy own doctrine in three particulars. First, Thou deniest
Christ as chief Judge ordained of God, to set up thy self in his stead; because
thou say, Thou art ordained chief Judge in the world to give sentence upon
men and women spiritual and eternal, and what shall become of them after death,
contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, and the Scriptures of truth, Mat. 25 31,
32. etc. Ioh. 5.26, 27, 28, 29, 30. Acts 10.42 and 17.31. 2 Timothy 4 1 1 Pet.
4.5. and as before is proved. Secondly, Thou deniest Christ as he is the
Savior of men, and the Author of eternal salvation to all that obey him; in
whom eternal life is to be had, because thou accounts that there is no eternal
life to be had but in the faith of thy doctrine, saying, There is no eternal
life to be had but in the faith of the doctrine or declaration of a Prophet who
has a Commission from God; and says, There neither is, nor ever shall be any
such Prophet but thy self whilst the world endures. In answer to the which I
say, That the holy Scriptures which were spoken and declared from the movings
of the Holy Ghost in the holy men of God, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21. were better doctrine
and declaration of Prophets of God then thine, who had a better commission or
authority from God then ever thou had. And concerning their declaration,
Christ said to the Jews, Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have
eternal life, and they are they which testify of me, and ye will not come to
me that ye might have life, John 5.39, 40. And Christ said to his Disciples, I
am the way, and the truth, and the life; no man comes unto the Father but by
me, Ioh. 14.6. And the Ambassador of Christ has declared and said, That the
wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ
our Lord, as it is written Romans 6.22 23. (then not in the faith of thy
doctrine.) And Christ does give unto his sheep eternal life, and they shall
never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of his hand, Ioh 10.27, 28.
And the Messengers of Christ have declared and said, This is the record that
God has given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son, 1 Ioh. 5.11.
(then not in the faith of thy doctrine.) He that has the Son, has life
eternal, though he deny thy doctrine; and he that has not the Son, has not
life eternal, though he may have faith in thy doctrine.

By what has been said, it is evident, and remains certainly true:

1. That Christ Jesus is the Savior of men, and the Author of eternal
salvation to all that obey him. Acts 5.31, 32. Heb. 7 25 Heb. 5.9. and is able
to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him.

2. That he is the way to the Father, without which no man can come unto him,
John 146

3. That the gift of God is eternal life, which Christ does give unto his sheep
that they may never perish, Romans 6.23. John 10.27, 28.

4. That eternal life is not in the faith of thy doctrine or declaration, but
in Christ the Son, according to the Record that God has given, For he that
has the Son, has life, and he that has not the Son, has not life, as it is
written 1 John 5.11, 12.

Thirdly, Thou deniest Christ as he is the Advocate with the Father, and the
propitiation for the sins of the whole World, because thou say, That no
infinite Spirit of Christ, nor any God can, or shall be able to deliver from
thy sentence and curse; which is contrary to truth, and the holy Scripture,
where it is said, My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye
sin not; and if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only,
but also for the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2.1, 2. Wherefore he is able
also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them; as it is written, Heb. 7.25.

3. And as to the third, That thou deniest Christ of his officers, is evident
by thy own doctrine, because thou falsely say, That no man ought to officiate
the Office of a Minister, Messenger of Ambassador of Christ, but such as are
appointed by John Reeves and thy self; contrary to the Scriptures, 1 Pet. 4 10,
11 1 Pet. 1.10, 11 12. Acts 13.2.4. Acts 20 28. Acts 10, 19, 20, 21. Acts
11.12, 21. Acts 10.42, 43 2 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3 4, 5, 6, 2 Cor. 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7. and as before I have proved.

4. And as to the fourth, That thou deniest the holy Scriptures, I prove
against thee by thy own doctrine; first, because thou say, That the words
which Christ said to his Disciples, Bless, and curse not, concerns not thee nor
any man upon earth at this day; contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, where it is
said, Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and
teach men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven; but
whosoever shall do and teach them, he shall be called great in the Kingdom of
Heaven, Matt. 5.17, 18, 19. and one jot or tittle shall in no wise pass till
all be fulfilled.

Secondly, Thou deniest the holy Scriptures, because thou say, The dead after
death shall never see any other God or Judge but the remembrance of that
sentence which you the pretended Witnesses of the Spirit did pass upon them in
this life; contrary to the Scriptures, as before I have proved.

Thirdly, Thou deniest the holy Scriptures, because thou say, Thou art chief
Judge ordained of God to give sentence upon men and women spiritual and
eternal, and what shall become of them after death; contrary to the Scriptures,
and as before I have proved.

Fourthly, Thou deniest the Scriptures, because thou say, That no man ought
to officiate the Office of a Minister, Messenger or Ambassador of Christ, but
such as are appointed by John Reeves and thy self; contrary to the Scriptures,
and as before I have proved.

Lastly, Thou deniest the Scriptures, because thou accounts them, but the dead
Letter of other men's words, whose Light thou judge to be but dark in
comparison of that Light which comes by thy pretended Commission; contrary to
the Scriptures, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21, 1 John 1.5.7 2 Cor. 4 6, 7. 1 Pet. 1.10, 11,
12.

5. And as to the fifth, That thou have lied against God, and against Christ,
and born a false Testimony of them, and of the holy Prophets of God, and
Apostles of Christ, is evident by what has already been said, and also further
appears that it is so; because it is certainly true, That the holy Scriptures
were spoken forth from God himself, and also from Christ Jesus our Lord; and
likewise according to the movings of the holy Ghost in the holy men of God,
both Prophets and Apostles: And it is as true, that their Light who spoke forth
the Scriptures, were not dark in comparison of that Light which comes by thy
pretended Commission: Therefore it is evident and certainly true, That thou
have lied against them, and born a false Testimony of them, as aforesaid.

For God is Light, and in him is no darkness at all, 1 John 1.5. How then can
thy pretended Light of thy pretended Commission, be greater then God the
Fountain of Light? I say, it is not. Therefore it is evident, That thou have
lied against God, accounting that he who is the Fountain of Light, is but dark
in comparison of that Light which comes by thy pretended Commission.

Christ has declared himself to be the Light of the World, John 8.12. and he
is the true Light which lights every man that comes into the world, Ioh.
1.9. but thou art not that Light, neither art thou like unto it: And in
accounting Christ who is the true Light, as aforesaid, to be but dark in
comparison of thine, thou have lied against him.

And David declared and said, the Lord was his Light; Ps. 27.1. and he spoke
forth Scriptures: And to them that spoke forth Scriptures as the words and true
sayings of God from the mouth of the Lord, he was, and is an everlasting Light
and glory, according to his promise, Isa. 60.19, 20. but so art not thou;
therefore thou have lied and born a false Testimony, saying, That their Light
who spoke forth the Scriptures, was but dark in comparison of thine; behold
what a false Witness thou art; take notice how thou art confuted.

And whereas thou say, That after thy sentence is past upon the Speakers,
they shall never grow more to any great experience, neither shall they have
those Visions and Revelations and Revelations from that Light within them, as
they had before; but shall rather wither and decline. It seems thou accounts
that they have great experience, and both Visions and Revelations from the
Light within, until thy (false) sentence be past upon them; and seeing it is
so, I say, thy sentence cannot hinder the same, nor their growth into great
experience of truth, neither at all cause them to wither or decline therefrom;
thy testimony is false in that respect, as well as it is against God and
Christ, and as aforesaid.

And whereas in thy imagination thou have accused the Quakers to be of the
nature and seed of the Serpent, and by thy presumption have given judgment
accordingly; yet notwithstanding to signify that liars and false Witnesses
stand in need of a good memory lest they contradict themselves, and confute
their evidence; for want of which thou have contradicted thy self, and by thy
self-confutation have cleared the Quakers from thy false accusation and
judgment grounded thereupon, by saying the Quakers do preach from the
Scriptures and Light within, and that Devils are cast out, and much good is
done by them; and I say, such are not of the nature and seed of the Serpent;
thou have by thy own confutation cleared them therefrom, as before in a former
Writing I have proved.

And to conclude, I do affirm, That there is a punishing power reserved in the
Eternal Godhead, and does therewith remain to punish the rebellious, obstinate
and presumptuous, such as thou art, or as may be read Heb. 10.26, 27, 28, 29,
30, 31. 2 Pet. 2.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Jude 5.6. For we know him that has said,
Vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense, says the Lord, Heb. 10.30. For
God will ease himself of his Enemies (such as thou art) and he will be avenged
of his Adversaries, as it is written. And seeing vengeance is the Lords, I
leave it to him to repay thee according to the nature of thy offenses, or as
his in justice he is pleased to do.

Concerning the two Witnesses, etc.
Lodowick,
IF John Reeves and thy self were joint Commissioners, and had your pretended
Commission (not severally asunder, but) jointly together, has not the death of
John Reeves made void thy pretended Commission to all intents, constructions
and purposes whatsoever? Or, if John Reeves and thy self did pretend to be the
two Witnesses spoken of Rev. 113. and to have the power given to them; has not
the death of John Reeves made it evident against you, to be none of them,
because it is said concerning those two Witnesses Rev. 11. That until they had
finished their testimony, if any man would hurt them, fire should proceed out
of their mouth, and devour their Enemies: And when they should have finished
their testimony, the Beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit should make
war against them, and should overcome them, and kill them, Rev. 11.7. And it is
said concerning them, that their dead bodies should lie in the street of the
great City, and they of the people, and kindreds, and nations should see their
dead bodies three days and a half, and should not suffer their dead bodies to
be put in graves, Rev. 11.8, 9. but it was not so with John Reeves; whereby it
is evident, That he was not one of them Witnesses.

Likewise it is said concerning those two Witnesses, That after three days and
a half the Spirit of Life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their
feet, and great fear fell upon them which saw them, Rev. 11.11. But it was not
so with John Reeves, that the Spirit of Life entered into him, to cause him to
stand upon his feet after he had been dead three days and a half, neither did
any see him so, after he was dead, to cause great fear to fall upon them;
whereby it is manifest, That John Reeves was not one of those Witnesses.

Moreover it is said of those two Witnesses, That they ascended up to Heaven in
a Cloud (but so did not John Reeves) and their Enemies beheld them, Rev. 11.12.
and the same hour there was a great Earthquake, and the tenth part of the City
fell; and in the Earthquake were slain of men seven thousand, and the reninant
were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of Heaven. Rev. 11.13.

And as it is evident, That John Reeves was not one of those Witnesses spoken
of Rev. 11.3. by what has been said, and as aforementioned, meant and
intended; so likewise it is evident, That thou Lodowick art not the other of
them two Witnesses, because it is said of them, (that in order to the finishing
of their Testimony) They should prophecy a thousand two hundred and threescore
days clothed in sackcloth, Rev. 11.3. But when did thou so? And it is said
concerning them, That if any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their
mouth, and devoureth their enemies; and if any man will hurt them, he must in
that manner be killed, Rev. 11.5. These have power to shut heaven, that it rain
not in the days of their Prophecy; and have power over waters, to turn them
into blood, Rev. 11.6. But when did thou prophecy a thousand two hundred and
threescore days in sack cloth? And when did fire proceed out of thy mouth to
kill any? And when did thou shut up the heavens that it did not rain during
the time of thy pretended prophecy? Or when did thou turn the waters into
blood, whereby it might have been made manifest, that thou had been one of
them, who could manifest no such thing by thy pretended Commission, and the
greatness of thy pretended power? Whereby it is manifest that thou art not one
of those Witnesses.

And seeing thou pretends a new Commission which is not owned by the
Scriptures, or by the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and say, Thou have
received power since to the contrary; (to vindicate thy cursing and damning:)
When was the new Covenant and Ministry of the Gospel changed? Or how can thou
make it appear by the Scriptures, that it is not so, seeing thou pretends a
contrary Commission to what the Scriptures or the Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles do own. And it is said concerning Christ and the new Covenant, that he
has obtained a more excellent Ministry (then that of the old Covenant) by how
much also he is the Mediator of a better Covenant, which was established upon
better promises, Heb. 8.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. And because he continues for
ever, he has an unchangeable Priesthood (or Ministry) wherefore he is able to
save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, because he ever lives to
make intercession for them, as it is written Heb. 7.24, 25.

And if none ought to officiate the office of a Minister, Messenger or
Ambassador of Christ, but such as are appointed by John Reeves and thy self (as
thou say) would not thou have the Ministry changed now during thy life? and
would not thou have the Ministry of the Gospel to cease and dye at thy death,
because thou say, Thou art the last that ever shall speak by Commission from
God; and that the Lord will never choose any more after thee whilst the world
does endure.

And it is evident, That thou would have such a Ministry as the Scriptures no
where own, and quite contrary to the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and
not at all owned by the New Covenant and Ministry of the Gospel.

1. Because those who are appointed by John Reeves and thy self to officiate
the office of a Minister, Messenger, or Ambassador of Christ, are such as are
not chosen of God to that Work.

2. Those that are appointed by John Reeves and thy self to the Work of the
Ministry, are such as have no commission from God to empower them to officiate
the office of a Minister, Messenger or Ambassador of Christ, and are therefore
very unfit for so great and glorious a Work.

3. They are such as are never like to have any Commission from God to empower
them to the Work of the Ministry, whilst the World does endure, and that
according to thy own doctrine.

4. They are such as know not the Scriptures, neither can they truly interpret
the Scriptures, and that according to thy own sayings:

Because (for proof thereof.) thou say, That thou art the chosen Witness of
the Spirit, and the last that ever shall speak by Commission from God: Then not
those that are appointed by John Reeves and thy self, they neither have, nor
are not like to have any commission from God to empower them to the work of the
Ministry; thou have excluded them from that by thy pretended commission, and
the Doctrine thereof. Take notice of that.

And thou say, That God will never choose any more after thee whilst the world
does endure: If so, then God will never choose those that are appointed by John
Reeves and thy self: Therefore they are no fit Ministers, Messengers or
Ambassadors of Christ that are appointed by John Reeves and thy self: First,
Because they are not chosen of God to that Work, nor ever like to be whilst the
World does endure Secondly, Because they have no commission from God to empower
them to so great and glorious a Work. And thirdly, Because (according to thy
doctrine) they are never like to have any commission from God to empower them
(whilst the World does endure) to officiate the office of Ministers, Messengers
or Ambassadors of Christ; and there is no need for them to officiate the office
aforesaid, after the end of the world. Mind how thou art confuted.

And thou say, No man knows the Scriptures but thy self, nor no man can truly
interpret the Scriptures but thy self; if so, then not those that are appointed
by John Reeves and thee to the Work of the Ministry, if none ought to officiate
the office of a Minister, Messenger or Ambassador of Christ, but such as are
appointed by John Reeves and thy self: And seeing that those whom you appoint,
are not fit for that Work, thou have as much as in thee lies, excluded all the
Ministers, Messengers and Ambassadors of Christ from the work of the Ministry;
take notice of that. And all may behold thy presumption and folly, and how thou
art confuted, ensnared, and taken in thy own craftiness; at which thou may
blush, and for evermore be ashamed of. Silence deceit and Deceiver; let truth
stop thy mouth, and all such, Tit. 1.11.

By what has been said, it is evident, and remains certainly true; 1. That
John Reeves and Lodowick Muggleton are not the two Witnesses spoken of Rev.
11.3. neither are they in any thing like unto them 2. That the New Covenant
which Christ Jesus is the Mediator of is established upon better promises then
the old Covenant was. 3. That That the Ministry of the Gospel is a more
excellent Ministry. 4. That the Priesthood of Christ, or the Ministry of the
Gospel is an unchangeable Priesthood or Ministry. 5 That Christ the Saints High
Priest, and Mediator of the New Covenant, is able to save them to the uttermost
that come unto God by him, because he ever lives to make intercession for
them. 6. That none who are appointed by John Reeves and Lodowick Muggleton,
ought to officiate the office of a Minister, Messenger or Ambassador of Christ,
because all who are appointed by John Reeves and Lodowick Muggleton, to the
Work of the Ministry, are very unfit for so great and glorious a work. 7. That
the deceit ought to be silent; or, that the Deceiver and thou Lodowick ought to
let Truth stop thy mouth, like a false Prophet as thou art, whose mouths must
be stopped, according to Tit. 1.11.

Postscript: Or, Concerning Error, etc.
IF none know the Scriptures but thy self; then not those that are appointed by
John Reeves and thee to the work of the Ministry. And as Christ said to the
Sadduces when they came to ask him whose Wife she might be in the resurrection
which seven brethren had had to wife, because they all had her; in answer
thereunto he said, Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God,
Matthew. 22.23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29.

So say I to thee, That those who are appointed by John Reeves and thee to the
work of the Ministry, they err not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God,
because thou say, No man knows the Scriptures but thy self: Therefore
inasmuch as they err not knowing the Scriptures, they must needs err in their
expositions, meanings, pretended preachings and interpretation of Scriptures;
so that their pretended preaching of Scriptures is error. 2. Their meanings and
conceivings of the Scriptures is error. 3. Their expositions and pretended
interpretations of Scriptures is error. And inasmuch as they err, not knowing
the Scriptures, they also err not knowing the power of God from whence the holy
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3.16. And so their whole work
about your pretended Ministry, is no better then error, and must needs
therefore be very unprofitable, and not fit to be owned.

Lodowick,
IN thy pretended Answer (bearing date May 8.1663.) to a Letter of mine to
thee, entitled, False judgment reversed, and against testified; thou say,
Thou shall first commend me for setting my name to it. And secondly, For
setting down thy words so truly and punctually, that it makes thy Commission
and Authority to shine the more bright and clear.

In answer thereunto I say, It may appear unto all that hears of the same, That
I have not perverted or wronged thy words or writings; and also, That thou owns
thy sayings, and have not repented of thy errors and blasphemies, but still
persists therein, and rejoiceth in the same; and therefore all to whom this may
come to be heard, seen and read, may take notice what thou art, and be aware of
thee and thy deceit.

Thou say, That thou art as true an Ambassador of God, and Judge of men's
spiritual estate, as any ever was since the Creation of the world, and thou
only say it, but leaves it as proofless as the rest; but I do deny it,
therefore prove it if thou can. And whereas thou say, If you Quakers and
others can satisfy your selves. that there never was any man commissionated of
God to bless and curse, then you shall all escape that curse that I have
pronounced upon so many hundreds, and I only shall suffer for cursing others
without a Commission from God. I say in answer unto thee, What is all this to
the purpose? Admit that we grant that God did commissionate under the Law to
bless and to curse, what is that to thee? must it necessarily follow, that thou
art so commissionated? We are satisfied by the Lord, and assured to the
contrary; and we know that we shall escape that curse which thou have
pronounced, and are satisfied, That thou shall suffer for cursing so many
hundreds without a Commission from God, as thou have done.

And whereas thou say, That thy Commission is no pretended thing, but as true
as Moses, the Prophets and Apostles Commission was: I do deny it, prove that if
thou can; or else let it be granted for true, That thou have taken upon thee
to lie in the Name of the Lord, and that thy pretended Commission is but a
counterfeit thing, as doubtless it is; and therefore thou may expect a
punishment proportionable to thy offense.

And whereas thou say, That no man can come to the assurance of the favor of
God now in these days, but in believing that God gave this power unto John
Reeves and thy self: As first, That thou have power given over all other Gods
and infinite Spirits what soever. 2. That thou have the pardoning power and the
damning power. 3. That thou have the keys of Heaven and of Hell; and that none
can get into Heaven except thou open the gates. 4. That thou have power to
remit their sins who receive thy doctrine, and to retain and bind their sins
more close upon their consciences for their despising or not receiving of thy
doctrine. 5. That thou have power to bless and curse men and women to eternity.
6. That it is not the Light of Christ within, nor the Scriptures, no nor God
without, that shall deliver from under thy sentence and curse. 7. That thou art
single in doctrine, knowledge, judgment and power, above all men either
Prophets or Apostles since the beginning of the world, or that shall ever be
hereafter whilst the world does endure. 8. That thou art the only Judge of the
two seeds now in these last days. 9. That there is no true Minister, Messenger
nor Ambassador of God in the World at this day but thy self; neither shall
there be any sent of God after thee to the worlds end. 10. That God will have
men and women justified and condemned no other way but by man like themselves.
And 11. This power (say thou) has God given unto me, and in this regard I am
the only and alone Judge what shall become of men and women after death;
neither shall those that are damned by me, see any other God or judge but me. I
say, if these be not errors, lies and blasphemy; what is? Let God and his
people by the Spirit of his Son sent into their hearts, judge in this case,
whereby it may appear what spirit thou art of, and what thy pretended
Commission is made up of, even of pride, presumption, lies, errors, false
judgment, delusion and blasphemy, as is apparent.

And through the assistance of God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, I hope
I shall ever be ready to testify for the Lord, and against thy deceit whilst I
have breath, as thereunto moved and directed by the Lord. And though thou say,
That a God without thee spoke to thee by voice of words to the hearing of the
ear, when he gave thy pretended Commission unto thee; yet thou say, That no
person condemned by thee, can make his appeal unto God neither by himself, nor
by any other; and why? thy reason is, Because (say thou) God is not in this
world at all.

I say, if it be true, That none can make their appeal to God, neither by
themselves, nor by the Lord Jesus, that are condemned by thee, because (thou
say) God is not in this World at all; where was he then when thou received
thy pretended Commission, seeing thou say thou received it from a God without
thee, that spoke by voice of words to the hearing of the ear? Or, is it not a
fiction on imagination of thy brain that thou have received, and art so
confident in? and therefore a strong delusion. And whereas thou say, That
because I am not under the sentence of thy Commission by verbal words or
writing, thou shall give answer unto my Letter; for (say thou) I never give
answer in writing to any one that is under the sentence of my Commission. I
say, That Is a ready way to shuffle off a sound answer, or pass by with a lame
Reply, or passing false judgment at a distance, instead of vindicating and
making good what thou art charged withal; and it seems to the end that thou
may slip off, and leave thy matter as proofless as before, thou sends me a
Bill of Excommunication or Execration, and passes sentence to exclude thy self
from writing any more in answer unto me: A shuffling trick of deceit indeed.
But this I am bold in the Lord to test^fie unto thee, That thy judgment is
false and erroneous, both as to matter and manner, and is a sign and token of a
false Judge that never was sent of the Lord; for who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods Elect, seeing it is God that justifies? And it is apparent that
thou art a false Judge, because thou condemns God's Elect under pretense of
judging the Serpents Seed. Thou art a Deceiver indeed, and I am bold to tell
thee of it, and do testify against thee; and thy judgment I value not, it is
but like ashes under the soles of my feet, and will never trouble me, because
it proceeds from an Antichristian spirit, and will never be laid to my charge
by the Lord. Therefore silence Deceiver, and give over thy deceit; for what I
have said in vindication of the Truth, and in opposition to thy deceit, shall
stand over thee in the sight of God and his people that are guided by the
Spirit of his Son sent into their hearts. And truly I admire that Dorothy
Carter, or any that are sober and conscientious people, should not abhor thy
delusion and wicked abomination; for assuredly it is not of God, but of the
Devil; and this is my faithful Testimony concerning the same, and I am not
ashamed to own it under my Name.

R. Farnsworth.

THE END.

