THE Last Testimony OF That faithful Servant of the Lord, and Minister of Jesus
Christ, RICHARD FARNWORTH. Whereunto is Prefixed A brief Testimony concerning
his Life Death, and Travels, etc. To which is added A few words of Exhortation
unto those that believe in the Light of the Lamb.

Published for the Consolation of the household of Faith; and for the stopping
of that mouth which is opened in Blasphemy against God, his Tabernacle and them
that dwell in Heaven.

By a Companion of those who hold the Word of God, and Testimony of Jesus
Christ, and suffer for the same: JOSIAH COLE.

Then I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write; The dead which dye in
the Lord are fully blessed, even so says the Spirit, for they rest from their
labors, and their works follow them, Rev. 14.13 London, Printed in the Year,
1667.

A Brief Testimony concerning the Life and Death OF That faithful Servant of
the Lord, and Minister of Jesus Christ, Richard Farnworth, etc.
FOrasmuch as it has pleased God Almighty (after the long night of woeful gross
Darkness, Apostasy and Ignorance, which has been over the Nations, amongst
those who have had a Profession of Christianity) again to make known and
manifest, the true, new, and living way which leads unto Life Eternal, even by
and through the Revelation and Operation of his Eternal Power, and Word of
Life, in the hearts of a Remnant, whom (in this our day) he first reached unto
and visited, and raised up to be Witnesses thereof; that by them it might be
born Testimony unto, amongst those who were strangers to it, and that thirsted
after it, that so thereby they also might receive the manifestation and
knowledge thereof, for want of which many perish, and are strangers to the way
of Life; having only (at best) a Form of godlyness without the Power: In which
dead Forms, or outside empty Professions, some are at ease and rest, as though
they were in the true Heaven that should never pass away, and some are at rest
and at ease without any profession, living in all uncleanness; unrighteousness,
and abomination; and some cannot find rest in either. The faithful and true
Witness of God being awakned in their Hearts and Consciences, which takes the
false peace from them, and lets them see the emptiness of all outside
professions, which are without Life and Power, and also the abominations, and
vanities of the world, and makes sin exceeding sinful to them: And by this true
and faithful Witness are desires, and breathings, and pantings begotten in
their hearts after the knowledge of God and Christ, after fellowships and
acquaintance with the Father and the Son* which desire cannot be satisfied
without the knowledge and enjoyment of the presence of the Lord, and of the
light of his countenance. And for this cause many run to and fro, and wander
like Sheep gone astray from the true Sheepherds fold, and are wearying
themselves upon the barren Mountains, in vain looking thereunto for Salvation,
and seeking the living amongst the dead, and so spend their labor for that
which does not satisfy. And in these several states and conditions aforesaid,
the whole Christian world lies, who are not turned to the Light and Spirit of
Jesus in themselves; and true rest and salvation cannot be found by them, until
they return to the Light and Power of the Spirit of God in their own hearts,
which is that whereby a dislike of sin is begotten in them, and also desires
after Life and Salvation; and freedom from sin is thereby begotten; and that is
it alone which can answer every desire, which is begotten by its self. Well,

But when it pleased the Lord to reveal the Son of his Love, and to make known
his eternal Power (in these latter days) for the rending of the Vail of
darkness that had long been over the heart, by which he caused the Light to
shine out of darkness, which gives the knowledge of his own glory; he did not
then give the knowledge and manifestation thereof unto all People, but he chose
certain Witnesses, whom he raised up to declare of the manifestation of this
Power, and to preach the Word of Life nigh, in the heart and in mouth; and he
furnished them with Armor of Righteousness, and with all spiritual weapons;
which were mighty through him, to break down the strong holds of Iniquity, and
the spiritual wickednesses that were in the high places; and empowered them as
Instruments in his hand to turn many from darkness to the Light, that the
Salvation of God they might come to see; and the Work of God greatly prospered
in their hands; and multitudes were brought to the acknowledgment of the Truth,
to the saving of their Souls: and though they met with great opposition, and
persecutions; by the Emissaries of Satan, even in all Quarters where they
came; yet that was not prevalent to hinder the prosperity of that Work
whereunto they were called of God, but it still prospered, and does still
prosper, to the spreading of the unchangeable Truth abroad, even as is seen at
this day.

And of this number whom God Almighty at the first raised up by his Power for
this Work aforesaid, the late deceased Richard Farnworth was one, concerning
whom the chief occasion of this my present writing is; that so a Testimony
concerning him, and of what the Lord did by, and through him, may remain upon
Record for Generations to come; and that this present Generation of the Just,
may see and hear his last Testimony, which proceeded from his own mouth a
little before his departure out of the body; and I doubt not, but thereby the
Consolation and spiritual Comfort of the Household of Faith will be added unto.

And, for these Causes, I could not well rest satisfied in my spirit without
taking in hand to publish these things; though I well know that there are many
living Witnesses that knew the Life, Labors, and Travels of the said R. F. who
are the Seal of his Ministry: And also the many Writings of his own, which
remain upon Record, will speak forth to those, who are of a true Spiritual
understanding, what he was; yet notwithstanding all these things were in my
mind, and diverse of other Considerations, which occasioned me to defer the
publication hereof so long as till now; yet being I could not be so clear in my
duty toward God and my Brother, in neglecting to give forth this my Testimony
concerning him, and in suffering so precious a Testimony, as his last was,
wholly to be put in oblivion, I have with freeness and cheerfulness of heart
undertaken it.

And when it pleased God to manifest his Eternal Power in the heart of the
aforesaid R. F. it is well known unto many how effectually it wrought in him;
insomuch, that although he was (before) a man of great abilities, and parts,
and knowledge, accounted of among men, even excelling many of his equals; yet
he was content and willing, in obedience to the Power of God, to become a Fool
to the World, and to be stripped and emptied of his own wisdom and knowledge,
(which stood in the state fallen from God and his Power) and to suffer the loss
of all worldly reputation and favor, and the pleasures and delights thereof,
that he might win Christ Jesus, and be found his Servant, clothed with the
Righteousness of Faith, preferring the simplicity that is in Christ, beyond all
worldly wisdom and honor whatsoever; and his Sufferings for the sake of
Christ, beyond all worldly reputation; and so great was the change that was
wrought in him, that he became a wonder amongst many; and the Word of God and
his Power was great and mighty in him, and through him; in which he was sent
forth by the Lord (who had manifested himself unto him) to preach the
Everlasting Gospel to the poor, and to declare of that great Power of God, of
which he was made a Witness, and of the Effects of its operation; and so
powerful was his Message and Testimony, that many were begotten into a firm
belief thereof; and believing the Report, were turned from Darkness to the
Light of Jesus, with which they were enlightened, and from Satan's power unto
the Power of God, which wrought mightily in their hearts, to the changing of
their minds and affections from things that are below, toward things that are
above all that is fading and corruptible, and to the bringing of Life and
Immortality to light in them: And although they were attended with many foul
temptations, because of their obedience to the Truth and Light of the Spirit of
Grace, and brought in many distresses in their passage from Death unto Life,
yet was he so experienced in the Depths and Subtilties of Satan, and also in
the Dealings and Goodness of God in such conditions and estates, that he had
obtained the tongue of the Learned, and could (as often times he did) speak words
in Season, to the strengthening of the weak, and refreshing of the weary; and to
the reviving of that which was near ready to faint: So that he was in the Lords
hand, even as a father to the fatherless, and as eyes to the blind, and feet to
the lame; and the eye that truly saw him, blessed him; and the ear that heard
him, gave witness unto him: for through the Power of God which enabled him, he
delivered the poor and the needy, and built up many (that believed) in their
most precious Faith, and confirmed them therein: And went about from place to
place, through the Land of his Nativity, turning many from Darkness to Light,
and confirming the Churches, and doing good: And his Service was very great for
the Lord in his day; for he was so furnished with Heavenly Wisdom and
Understanding through the Grace of God; and also so seasoned thereby, that his
Patience, Meekness, and Humility exceeded many: And although God had so endued
him with heavenly Virtues and Abilities exceeding many, yet was he not pufft up
therewith, neither sought to exercise lordship over those that were weaker, and
younger then himself, but gave place unto any that had the least Gift of God,
to exercise; so that through the Spirit of Meekness and Humility, with which he
was adorned, he was exceeding lovely and beautiful, and the hearts and souls
of many were affected therewith, who in simplicity thirsted after
Righteousness, and such waited for him, as for the Rain, upon whom his Doctrine
so dropped: Yet nevertheless he was terrible to the Worker of Iniquity, and the
Sword of his mouth was very sharp, for the Word of God was therein; and when he
had to do with any who opposed the Truth and Way of Life and Salvation, which
we profess and walk in (as oft-times he had) his VVeapon was very sharp to
them, and they were not able to resist the Wisdom of the Spirit by which he
spoke; for thereby he confounded their wisdom, and broke their weapons in
pieces; so that they were often ready to Blaspheme God, because of the plague
that it was to them; and a Conqueror he was over the* Beast and false Prophet,
against whom he made War in Righteousness, in and through the Power of the
Lamb, in whose Spirit he has finished his Testimony and Course in the Faith.

And as the Enemies of the Truth of God were many, and in diverse shapes, that
this valiant Soldier of the Lamb had to encounter withal, so he was always
furnished with Armor and Weapons, fit for the Work and Service in which he
was exercised, by which he was enabled to encounter with, and Conquer all: But
at last, that his Armor and Weapons might be proved to be sufficient to
encounter with the Enemy of Truth, in all kind of Appearances and
Transformations, it was his lot with me, and diverse others of the Servants of
the Lord, to be engaged against the Enemy of Truth, who had transformed himself
into the likeness of an Angel of Light, and under a seeming pretense of
appearing on the behalf of God and his Cause, etc. and against Formality and
Traditions, etc. begun strongly to oppose the Truth of God, and the Ministry
thereof in and through his Servants and Messengers (who have approved
themselves as the Ministers of God, and as his Ambassadors) and to cry against
our Assemblies and manner of Worship, and our Exercise therein, (as only
Formal;) in which we have always found the glorious Presence, Power and
Majesty of the Lord amongst us, refreshing, comforting and strengthening of us,
even acording as our hearts and souls can or could desire; so that we were
engaged to justify the Lord, in opposition to that gainsaying spirit of
delusion, by which many were beguiled and led away after Satan, to their hurt:
And in our Testimony for the Lord, and against that self-separating gainsaying
spirit, the Power of the Lord did greatly accompany and assist us, and was as
greatly with us, as in any service that he had called us unto; The sincere and
upright in heart (who have kept their first Love, and their first Faith) are
Witnesses of it; and how in Love we labored for the restoration of those who
were beguiled through the craft of the Enemy; and for the preservation of those
who hitherto have escaped his snare, that is well known to many witnesses. But
if none were sensible of it, the Lord he knows, and is witness, that in
sincerity of heart (in the Name of the Lord) toward God and his People we were
exercised; and in our labor and travel for them, the Blessings of the Lord and
his Peace, and the comfort of his Spirit, did possess and fill our hearts
beyond the understanding of the world, although many, toward whom we were so
in love exercised, could not believe, but some withstood our Testimony, and
kicked against it in their hearts, and resisted the Counsel of God against
themselves, to the grief and sorrow of our hearts.

Therefore it pleased the Lord, in Love, Mercy and good Will to his Servant, my
dear Brother, R. F. that his Travels, Burdens, and grievous Sufferings might be
put to an end; and that our testimony for the Lord might be sealed with the
Life of his Servant against that Antichristian intruding Spirit of Opposition,
which labored to intrude its self into the Church, to sit as Ruler and Judge
there. I say, for these causes, and for none contrary hereunto, it pleased God
to visit my dear Brother, R. F. and to take him out of the Body; at which, I
perceive, some who are ignorant of what the Lord intended thereby have
rejoiced: But let such know, that they have made a wrong application of the
dealing of the Lord therein; by which they have hardened themselves, instead of
being humbled through that which was ordered of God for their humiliation and
good; and if possible that such may yet see, and turn to the flock of the
Companions of Christ: And also that the flocks who are (and have remained) in
the true Fold may be refreshed thereby, I shall here insert the Last Testimony
of the aforesaid R.F. which was given by him, a very short space before his
departure out of the body, in the presence of several good Friends; at which
time in the name, strength, and power of God, he was moved to sit up in his
Bed, and spoke (concerning the Love of God and concerning our Testimony,
against the aforesaid antichristian, intruding, factious spirit) with as much
strength, power and freeness of spirit, as at any time he had done in the time
of his outward health. Whose words were as follows.

Friends, God has been mightily with me, and has stood by me at this time,
and his power and presence has accompanied me all along, though some think
that I am under a Cloud for something; but God has appeared for the owning of
our Testimony, and has broken in upon me as a flood, and I am filled with his
Love, more than I am able to express; and God is really appeared for us. If God
himself had come down and spoken as a man, he could not have spoke more clearer
to us than he has done, by the many Testimonies from Heaven in his People
concerning this thing. Therefore I beseech you Friends, here of this City of
London, (live or dye) be you faithful to your Testimony which God has
committed to you, and as it arises in your hearts, be faithful to the Lord
therein. After which he was silent for a little season, and then his mouth was
again opened in the Name and Power of the Lord, even as before, and he spoke
very preciously unto Friends concerning the things before mentioned, testifying
of the greatness of the Love and Power of God, of which he was made partaker,
and which he then felt; and of the preciousness of the Truth, which he had with
us born witness of; and exhorted them to faithfulness and stedfastness therein,
and to singleness, that nothing might be suffered to creep in of another
nature, to intermix therewith, saying, No Lincy-woolcy Garment must be worn,
etc. with much more to that effect, which cannot be remembered. And having thus
given his last Testimony, as a Seal unto all the former Testimonies which he
had given for the Lord, and on his behalf, in about two or three hours time
after, being filled with the Peace and Love of God beyond declaring, (as
himself signified) he departed this Life, even like a Lamb, and slept with his
Fathers and Brethren, and is entered into everlasting rest with the Lord.

And this may serve also as a sufficient Testimony, to stop the mouths of all
who vaunt themselves in his death, as though he had been taken away in Judgment
and Displeasure of the Lord, because of his appearing on the behalf of God
against that antichristian spirit of opposition, which contends against our
Meetings, and Preaching, and the manner of our exercise in the Worship of God,
as Formal, etc. And let such know, that if his being removed prove a Judgment
unto any, it will be to them, who rejected the Mercies of God by him tendered to
them, and have thereby hardened themselves against the Lord and his Servants,
and have made a wrong application of the dealings of the Lord with his Servant,
even as those who know not the purpose of God therein; and so have showed
themselves not to be the Friends of God, as Abraham was, from whom God did not
hide the thing that he intended; but let such yet repent, if a place can be
found for them.

And so let all my dear friends every where, who believe in the Light of Jesus,
and who have tasted of the Love, Goodness, and Power of God, dwell in the sense
and feeling of his Love and Power, and let nothing divert or turn aside the
minds of any from persevering in that pure holy way of Life, which they are
called to walk in, and in which the daily renewings of the peace and good will
of God is witnessed; neither let any be slack or remiss, in performing that
ancient, godly, Christian practice of Assembling your selves together in the
Name and Fear of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know the exceeding benefit and
advantage that ye have received thereby, because of the Lords Appearance
amongst us, who, acording to his Promise has not failed us unto this day; but
his Name and Power has been great amongst us, and still is, opening the
mysteries of his Kingdom, and revealing of the virtue of his Life in our hearts
and souls, by his own Spirit, to our great refreshment and comfort; so that we
have not at any time been sent empty away, who have in sincerity thirsted after
him, and in faithfulness waited for his appearance; which is sufficient to
encourage all to persevere in that godly practice of meeting together with all
integrity, without wavering. And forasmuch as our assembling together at this
day, is the great thing that the Enemy of Truth strikes at in all his
Instruments of all kinds, in which he appears against us; it behooves all to
stand and be faithful therein; that the Cause of God may not be betrayed by
any, through their declining from that godly Practice and duty, that the enemy
may not be encouraged thereby to vaunt against the remnant that are faithful,
to oppose them therein also; but rather, through your faithfulness and
stability, the enemy may be discouraged in his enterprises, and put to flight,
that you may be Conquerours over him, and may tread Satan under foot, and may
reign with the Lamb for ever.

And my Friends, consider the faithfulness of many of the Servants of the Lord,
who loved not their lives unto death, who are gone before, who preached and
made known the Truth and way of Life to you, how they labored and traveled
amongst you, in the name and strength of the Lord, to beget you unto God, and
to build you up in the most precious Faith; and how they exhorted you time
after time to that godly practice, of Assembling together, and how they gave
Example and President therein as well as Exhortation thereunto. Nay, have not
diverse of them laid down their Lives (not counting them dear to them) for that
very Practice of Assembling together? Yea, certainly they have so; some in
Prisons, and some otherwise. Oh therefore, my Friends, this Duty of Assembling
together, ought not to be flighted; nay, has not the present Liberty that we
do enjoy, in our meeting together, cost the Lives of many? was it not with the
blood of many (of them that bore the same Testimony which we bare) that this
present Liberty has been purchased? and ought not this Liberty then to be
prized, and made a right Use of? I am jealous with a godly Jealousy, that all
who are concerned, do not rightly weigh, ponder, and consider these things; but
I desire all to consider it, and let not that Testimony fall (by the neglience
of any) which has been sealed with the Lives of so many of Gods Servants and
Messengers, whose Knowledge and Understanding in the Way and Mysteries of God,
was not inferior unto any that are left behind, and yet they cheerfully
offered up their All for that Testimonies sake. Therefore, my Friends, he
diligent and faithful to the Lord, walking in his Covenant of Light, which will
be a true Guide unto you, and an Instructor, and will keep your Desires fresh
toward the Lord, and your Love one toward another; so that you will be
constrained to Come together, and to wait together upon the Lord, to receive
refreshment from his presence, which you will see and feel in the midst of
you, as your hearts are kept in his Fear; and enter not into consultation with
flesh and blood, nor into reasonings which will say, Thou need not go to
Meetings, because thy Teacher is present in all places, and so will draw thee
into negligence of meeting with the Children of Light; for if thou give heed
unto such reasonings, thou will soon find, thy Love will wax cold toward the
People of God, and thou will lose the sense of the Teachings of the Lord, who
is present in all places; for although he be in all places present, yet has he
ordained and appointed, that his People should Assemble themselves together to
wait upon him, and to worship him, and has given the promise of his Presence
unto such that do so. But if any draw back from answering his requirings, his
soul will have no pleasure in them: and such will dye as to God, and will
become as dry and withered branches, and their Love will decay, and wax cold,
and they will not have a sight, nor a sense of the Omnipresence of the Lord,
nor of his Teachings, though they may talk of it, as multitudes do at this day,
who are altogether strangers thereunto, further than by hearsay. And therefore
once more I say unto you all, Be faithful to the Lord in your several measures
and stations, where the Lord has set you, and be diligent in that godly
Practice of Assembling your selves together, in which a Testimony for the Lord
is born, which many have laid down their Lives for, and let none make their
blood of no effect, by slighting Meetings; the present Liberty for which has
been purchased through the shedding their blood, but let all meet together, and
being met, wait upon the Lord in faithfulness, that you may feel the Springs
and Fountain of Life opened amongst you, and in the midst of you, that you
may be refreshed and strengthened, and may grow, and be enabled to encounter
with your souls Enemy in all his appearances, and may put him to flight, and
may tread Satan under foot, and reign as Kings on Earth, and as Conquerours, to
the praise of his Name (who has called you, that he may take delight to dwell
amongst you, and to do you good) who over all is worthy, God blessed for
evermore.

J. C.

THE END

