THE Spirit of GOD SPEAKING IN THE TEMPLE OF GOD. OR Gods Spiritual Teachings
in his People puts flesh to silence, that the Spirit of Christ may speak in the
Church, etc.

Written by Richard Farnworth.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1663.

To the Christian Reader.
READER,
THis is to signify and certify unto thee (as thy heart and understanding may
by kept open by the principle of God in thee) that the Lord is now teaching his
people according to his promise, and they that are unacquainted with the
spiritual Teachings of God, seems to stumble or be offended at the spiritual
way and work of God, as I have found by experience now of late in my Travels,
being led forth in a spiritual power and love of God, to visit the Flock and
Family of God, in the several Counties of this Nation, as Nottingham-shire,
Leicester, Warwick, Worcester and Gloucestershire, etc. Amongst which Flock and
Family of God, I have met with much of the love and kindness of God, and the
Lord is pleased to honor the Assemblies of his Saints with his inward
spiritual presence. And the Lord by his Spiritual Teachings in his people puts
flesh (in them) to silence, that the Spirit of Christ may speak in the
Churches, and that the true Spiritual Christians may serve God the Father in
newness of the spirit, that being dead wherein they were held, Romans 7.5, 6. At
which some old formal professors seems to be offended, which was one cause of
my writing this little ensuing Treatise, as a means to remove that
stumbling block or pretended ground of an offense, viz. The meeting of the
People of God, to wait upon God, and sit together in outward silence, until the
Lord move upon the hearts and souls of any, that are at his own disposings, to
speak unto others according to the motions and directions of the Spirit of the
Lord; Because I have proved (as at Tewxbury it was required) and that by the
Scriptures, How that Silence in Meetings became the People of God in the days
of old, until the Lord spoke to his servant, to speak as from the mouth of the
Lord to the people, Ezekiel. 3.14, 15, 16, 17. and as hereafter in this ensuing
Treatise more fully appears, etc.

The Spirit of God speaking in the Temple of God, etc.
THe Lord God Almighty, who is absolute in himself, and has the Right of
Teaching and Ruling by his Spirit, in the hearts and souls of men he is
performing his promises concerning the new Covenant, that is to say, I will put
my Laws into their minds, and write them in their hearts, and I will be to them
a God, and they shall be my people; And they shall not teach every man his
brother and every man his neighbor, saying know the Lord, for all shall know
me from the least to the greatest, according to Heb. 8.8, 9, 10, 11. whereby it
is evident that it is the work and Act of God in his own Right and Authority by
virtue of the Eternal power and god head, upon the performances of his promises
as aforesaid; First to put his Laws into the minds of men. Secondly, to write
his Laws in the hearts of men, that they may know them, and be in subjection to
the Lord, who has right to command them, and also punish them for their
contempt or neglect of performing their obedience as a manifestation of their
subjection to his Authority, who ought to be obeyed in all things he requires,
because his Commands are Just and Righteous, amd the Right of his Authority is
undoubtedly true and unquestionable by any; therefore he ought to be obeyed by
all that know his Commands and Requirings, for which End he has written his
Holy Spiritual Laws in their hearts, and they are the people of God that are in
Covenant with God, and truly obedient and subject to the inward Spiritual Laws
and Power of God written and made manifest in their hearts and inward parts by
the Holy Spirit of God, and they that are subject to the Spiritual Laws and
Power of God, they are led by the Spirit of God, and are therefore declared the
Children of God, Romans 8.14, 15, 16. And because they are led by the Spirit of
God, Gal. 5.18. And do walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5.16. They do deny the works of
the flesh, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. And because the People of God are led by and do
walk in the Way of the Spirit of God, they have access unto God, Ephesians. 2.18,
19, 20, 21, 22. And do appear in and bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit of
God by which they are led, Gal. 5.22, 23. And such do crucify the flesh with
the affections and lusts, and they that have crucified the flesh with
affections and lusts, they have put on the Lord Jesus Christ, Gal. 5.24. and do
live in the Spirit, and walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5.25. and they are not
therefore desirous of vain glory, nor of provoking and envying one another,
Gal. 5 26. But they that are taught of God, and are led by the Spirit of God,
and are therefore the beloved People of God, they are provoked and envied by
them that are desirous of vain glory; for they that are after the flesh do mind
the things of the flesh, but they that are after the Spirit do mind the things
of the Spirit, Romans 8.5. And the fleshly birth ever did and still does oppose
and persecute the Spiritual Birth, Gal. 4.19, 20. They that are unacquainted
with the Spiritual Teachings of God, and are unacquainted with the Way and Work
of the Spirit of God, are very apt to speak evil of the Spiritual Way and
People of God, who Walk and Act by the Rule of the New Creature, which is the
Holy Spirit of God given to them according to the Will of God, Gal. 4.6. And as
the Lord is the Teacher of his People by his Spirit, he teaches them to wait
upon him in silence from the fleshly Birth, and to let the Spirit of God speak
unto them that wait upon God that they may speak unto others on the behalf of
the Lord, as the Spirit gives utterance; For holy men of God in the days of
old spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, and when the holy Ghost did not
move in them to speak, they sat together in silence, and were not hasty to
utter a word before the Lord, but waited to receive the Word from the Lord, and
because they stood in the Counsel of God, they were profitable to the People of
God.

1. That holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost is true and
proved by the Scripture, 2 Pet, 1.21. but had they been here now, and done so,
some would be ready to mock them, and say they will not speak but sit silent
until the Spirit move them; But take heed whoever thou art of making a mock and
scoff at the Way and Work of the holy Spirit of God, least in making a scoff at
the holy Ghost thou become guilty of sinning that sin against the holy Ghost,
which is not to be forgiven, neither in this world nor that which is to come, 2
Pet. 3.34. Jude 17.18, 19. Mat. 12.32.

2. That silence in the meetings became them in the days of old, until the
Lord spoke to his Servant to speak as from the mouth of the Lord to the people
which he was sent unto by the Command of the Lord is apparent and evident by
the Scripture, Ezekiel. 3.14.15, 16, 17. For first the Lord commanded the Prophet
Ezekiel to go to the people at Telabib that dwelt by the River of Chebar,
Therefore he was sent of the Lord unto them, and did not run before he was
sent, whereby it is evident that he was the true Messenger of God. Secondly,
The Prophet Ezekiel went unto them in obedience to the command of the Lord, as
a manifestation of his subjection to the Commander, who had a Right to send him
unto them. Thirdly, When the Prophet came there, he sat where they sat, and
remained there amongst them seven days, (in silence, or) before the Word of
the Lord came unto him. And Fourthly, At the end of seven days the Word of the
Lord came unto him saying, Son of man I have made thee a Watchman unto the
house of Israel, therefore hear the Word from my mouth, and give them warning
from me; Whereby it is evident, That if the Messenger of God do sit in silence
with the people until he receive the Word from the Lord to speak it unto them
as from the mouth of the Lord, it is not without scripture example.

But the false Prophets they refused to stand in the Counsel of the Lord, to
hear the words from the Lord to speak them unto the people, that they might
have been profitable unto them, in turning of them from the evil of their ways
and of their doings, yet they could prophecy and speak their own words rather
then be silent therefrom, and wait upon God to receive the words from him; Yea
rather then they would be silent from their own wills, and cease from their own
words, they would prophecy lies and the deceit of their own hearts, see Jer.
23. 24, 25, 26, 27. and rather then they would be silent and wait for the
Teachings of God, they would play the part of Thieves, and steal the words from
their neighbors; but the Lord was and is against such, and they shall not
profit the people at all faith the Lord, Jer. 23.30, 31, 32.

Whereby it is Evident, That they who pretend a Teaching Office amongst the
people, and say they are sent of the Lord, if they do not cease from the
deceit of their own hearts and ways, in silence from their own wills and
imaginations, and stand in the Counsel of God to perceive and hear his words
from the Spiritual Mouth of the Lord, they shall not profit the people at all,
nor turn them from the evil of their ways and doings, Jer. 23.17, 18, 19, etc.
And the Lord has commanded the people not to hearken to the words of them who
speak a vision of their own hearts, and not from the Spirit or Mouth of the
Lord; And it is the duty of the people to be obedient to the Command of the
Lord, and not hearken to them for Teaching that are not taught to wait upon
God, to hear and speak from the Spirit or Mouth of the Lord, Jerem. 23.16.

The true Prophets or Messengers of God sent by the Command of the Lord, stood
in the Counsel of God, and rather chused to fit with the people in silence,
until he received the Word from the Mouth or Spirit of the Lord, then to be
hasty to utter a Word before the Lord; but the False Prophets who ran but never
were sent of the Lord, rather then they would wait in the Counsel of God to
have flesh kept silent, and wait for the Teachings of God, to receive the Word
from the Lord, they would be speaking lies, and steal the words from others, or
speak a vision of their own hearts and the deceit thereof, though it was
unprofitable to the people, but the Lord was and is against such, and requires
the people that they hearken not to them, Jer. 23.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.

3. That as in the old Covenant or days of old holy men of God spoke as they
were moved by the holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 21. and so received the words from the
Mouth or Spirit of the Lord to speak unto others. So likewise in the new
Covenant the Ministers of Christ they spoke as the Spirit gave them utterance,
Acts 2.4. And learned to be silent from self, that the Spirit of the Father
might speak in them and through them, for said Christ It is not you that speak,
but the Spirit of the Father that speaks in you, Mat. 10.20. Luke 21.14, 15.
And who has directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being his Counselor has
taught him, with whom took he Counsel, and who instructed him? Isa. 40.13, 14.
And who art thou that would do it, or be offended at the way and work of his
Spirit. The Ministers of Christ in the dispensation of the Gospel which is the
Ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 4.8, etc. They were so taught to deny
themselves, that they confessed they were not sufficient of themselves to think
any thing as of themselves, but their sufficiency was of God (and so is ours)
who made them (as he does us and others) able Ministers of the New Testament,
not of the letter but of the Spirit; For if the ministration of condemnation be
Glory, much more does the ministration of Righteousness exceed in Glory; but we
all with open face beholding, as in a glass, the Glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the
Lord, according to that of the Apostle to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3, 4,
5, etc.

And being Taught of God we are at the disposings of God, and it is our duty to
wait upon God, to Worship the Father in Spirit and Truth, because the Father
seeks and requires such to worship him, John 6.45, 46. as are sought and
taught of him, John 4.23, 24. Joh. 6.45. And as every man has received the
gift, even so minister the same one to another as good Stewards of the manifold
grace of God, 1 Pet. 4.10. whereby it is evident that Preaching is a gift of
God; And it is as evident by the Scripture that every one may Preach or speak
on the behalf of God, who have received that gift of God; And they that have it
not given of God are not required unto it by the Lord, neither are such to do
it as are forbidden by the Lord, Psalm 50.16, 17, 18, etc.

If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God; if any man minister,
let him do it as of the ability which God gives, that God in all things may be
glorified through Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 4.11. And as preaching or ministering on
the behalf of God is a gift Received of God, so the Ministers of God are to
Minister as of the ability given and received of the Lord as aforesaid, that is
by a Spiritual Power to reach the witness of God, and to the refreshment and
comfort of the People of God; For we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ in
them that are saved and in them that perish, to the one we are a savor of
death unto death, and to the other a savor of life unto life, as it is
written, 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. And who is sufficient for these things? For we are
not as many which corrupt the Word of God, but as of sincerity, but as of God,
in the sight of God speak we in Christ, 2 Cor. 2.17. not handling the Word of
God deceitfully, but by manifestation of the Truth, commending our selves to
every man's Conscience in the sight of God, according to the Scriptures, 2 Cor.
3. 2 Cor. 4, 1, 2.2 Cor. 1.3, 4, 5.

By what has been said it is evident and does appear, First,

That the Lord God Almighty has a Teaching Office by his light and Spirit in
the hearts and souls of the sons of men.

2. That the People of God in the New Covenant or Gospel dispensation, are
under the administration or Teachings of the light and Spirit of God.

3. That they are the beloved people and true worshippers of God, that are in
Covenant with God, and under the Administration and Teachings of the light and
Spirit of God, who walk in dutiful obedience and subjection thereunto.

4. That the beloved people of God who are truly obedient and subject to the
inward spiritual Laws and power of God are led and guided by the holy Spirit of
God.

5. That because they are led and guided by the Spirit of God, and are the
Children of God, they do deny the way and works of the flesh, and do walk in
the Spirit, and have access unto God, and they do appear in, and bring forth
the fruits of the Spirit of God by which they are led.

6. That because they have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts
thereof, and have put on the Lord Jesus Christ, they are not desirous of vain
glory, nor of provoking and envying one another, but do live in the Spirit, and
walk in the Spirit, which is the Rule of the new Creature sent into their
hearts, or given unto them according to the will of God.

7. That they who are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh, and do
oppose and persecute them that are entered into, and are born after the Spirit;
For the fleshly birth ever did and still does oppose and persecute the
Spiritual birth, as it is evident.

8. That such as are born after the flesh, and unacquainted with the Spiritual
Laws and Teachings of God, they are unacquainted with the new Birth, and know
not the way and work of the Spirit of God therefore do they speak evil of the
Spiritual way and people of God, who walk and act by the Rule of the new
Creature, which is the holy Spirit of God given unto them according to the will
of God as before said.

9. That they who are under the Administration and Teachings of the light and
Spirit of God, they are taught to wait upon God in silence from the fleshly
birth, and to let the Spirit of God speak unto them that are born after the
Spirit, and do truly wait upon God, that they may speak unto others oh the
behalf of God as the Spirit gives utterance, according to the movings and
directions of God.

10. That holy men of God both in the old and new Covenant spoke (on the behalf
of the Lord) as they were moved by the holy ghost, and as the Spirit gave them
utterance; So that the holy Ghost was the moving cause of their speaking on the
Lords behalf, and the Spirit of God did guide them to speak and to be silent,
according to the mind and will of the Lord; And therefore when the holy Ghost
did not move them to speak, or when the Spirit of God did not give them
utterance, but drew them into an inward retiredness, to wait upon an Eternal
presence, they knew right well when to speak and keep silence, and to stand in
the Counsel of God, whether in speech or in silence, is agreeable to the mind
of the Lord, and very profitable to the people of God, as well now as in the
days of old, which is consistent with the Truth, and according to the
Scriptures, being agreeable with the Spirit of God that moved in the holy men
of God and gave them utterance to speak forth the Scriptures to the people,
according to the will of God; So that both in the old and new Covenant Silence
became the people of God, when they were not moved and directed by the Spirit
of God (in them) to speak unto others on the behalf of the Lord, who has the
Right of Teaching and Ruling by his light and Spirit in the hearts and souls of
his people as aforesaid.

11. That the true Prophets and Messengers of God in the days of old, who were
sent by the Lord God and his spirit, and stood in the Counsel of God, they
rather chused to meet and sit with the people in silence until they received
the word from the mouth or spirit of the Lord, then to be hasty to utter a word
before the Lord; And they that do so now, being ordered and disposed of by the
holy spirit of God, it is agreeable to the mind of the spirit of the Lord, and
according to the practice of the holy men of God in the days of old, who were
ordered and disposed of by the Lord, as the Lords people now are and ought to
be hereafter; For who has more right to order in and dispose of the hearts and
souls of men then the Lord, who requires the hearts to be given unto him, for
thither the Lord sends the spirit of his Son, Gal. 4.6. that the heart may be
prepared and fit for the Lord; For the end of the Commandment is Charity out of
a pure heart, and of Faith unfeigned, according to 1 Timothy 1.5. and as the
hearts of men are disposed of and ordered by the spirit for the Lord: we know
that the preparations of the heart in man, and the answer of the Tongue is from
the Lord, according to Prove. 16.1. It is therefore agreeable to the scriptures
and the duty of the people of God to wait upon the Lord, that they may know the
preparations of their hearts, and the answer of the Tongue to be from the Lord;
And they that speak in meetings amongst the people of God, or Minister on the
behalf of the Lord ought to know the Lord preparing their hearts for his
service, and giving them utterance, that they may speak as they are prepared
and fitted by the Lord; And people had better be silent, then speak on the
behalf of the Lord, until they be prepared by the Lord, that they may speak as
they are moved by the holy Ghost, and as the spirit gives them utterance, that
it may appear and be evident unto them and others, that they are guided by the
spirit of God to reach the witness of God, and be a refreshment to the souls
of the people of God.

And because that Almighty God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ does put his
holy spiritual Laws into the minds of his people, and write them in their
hearts, he is spiritually present in the mind and heart of a man, when he puts
his Laws in their minds, and writes them in their hearts, to give them the
knowledge of himself, that they may know it their duty to be obedient and
subject unto him, by walking answerable to the knowledge given of God, who has
a Teaching Office and Ruling Authority within them.

And where or in whom God has entered the hearts with his Power, the spiritual
Power of God is known to be a heart-opening Power, and the Lord is spiritually
present to open the heart and prepare it for himself; It is therefore the duty
of the People of God whose hearts are opened by the spiritual Power of God, to
wait upon God, that they may know the Lord spiritually Teaching and
strengthening the heart, first teaching the heart to deny sin, And secondly,
strengthening the heart and soul against the same; And those hearts and souls
that must deny sin, are most strengthened by the Lord to stand against Satan,
and the preparations of such hearts in men, and the answer of the Tongue is
from the Lord, and therefore agreeable to the mind of the Lord, and profitable
to themselves, and to others as they speak unto them (on the behalf of the
Lord) according to the preparations and directions of the spirit and Power of
God in them; Therefore let none be hasty to utter a Word before the Lord that
flesh may be silent, for the Right of speaking and ministering on the behalf of
the Lord belongs not to the flesh, but to the spirit; Therefore he that has an
ear to hear, is enjoined and required by the Lord in the dispensation of the
Gospel, to hear what the spirit says unto the Churches.

Seeing that such as have an ear to hear are enjoined and required by the Lord
in the dispensation of the Gospel, to hear what the spirit says unto the
Churches. It is apparent and evident by the Scriptures, that the Spirit of God
is of Counsel with the Church of God, and has a Right of Teaching in, and
speaking unto the Churches, and he is to be heard and obeyed in what he
requires. For as Flesh is to be silent and has no right to Teach or speak in
the Churches, It is the duty of all true Christians to distinguish betwixt
Flesh and Spirit, that they may deny the Flesh and obey the Spirit; For the
Flesh profits nothing, Therefore fleshly speaking is an unprofitable Action,
and is altogether useless in point of Salvation and Worship of God; It is the
Spirit that quickens, and is appointed by the Father and the Son to be a
guide to the People of God, both to speak and act on the behalf of the Lord,
and because the Spirit of God is given for a guide to the People of God, he
ought by them in all things to be obeyed and followed, that thereby they may be
led into all Truth; And as the Spirit of God is given for a guide to the People
of God, to guide them into all Truth, so in order to the enjoyment of Truth the
People of God are guided by the Spirit of God out of sin and
self-righteousnesse, and also out of all deceivablenesse of unrighteousness,
and whatsoever stands in opposition to a souls enjoyment of Truth; for the
Spirit of Truth which is the saints guide, is as able to guide out of all sin,
and whatsoever stands in opposition to Truth, as to guide the saints and true
believers into all Truth. And they that are led by the spirit of God they do
not daily Err and go astray from the ways of God, but they who daily Err and
go astray from the ways of God, do refuse to be led and guided by the spirit
of God; and they who refuse to be led and guided by the spirit of God must
needs be subject to Err and go astray from the ways of God; and how should
they guide others out of Error, who themselves are subject unto and daily live
in Error; do not they Err in Doctrine, Principle and Practice that forsake the
spirit of God daily to Err and go astray from the ways of God as aforesaid?
And though flesh must be silent, and not take upon it a Teaching Office in the
Church of Christ, yet the spirit of God may speak in the Temple of God, For it
has a Teaching Office in the Temple of God, and a true Right to Teach and
speak in the new Covenant and Gospel Dispensation; And the bodies of men and
women subjected unto and guided by the Spirit of God are the Temple of God;
Therefore the spirit of God may speak in and through them; And as the Lord is
the Teacher of his People he may be the speaker in them and through them, And
they are his Vessels or Temples for the holy Ghost to dwell in, and he may
make use of them, and speak in them and through them, according to his own good
will and pleasure; And the People of God are at the disposings of God, whether
in speech or in silence, and he is worthy to be obeyed and have the
preeminence, and the praises that is due to the glory of his grace.

Written the 2d. m. 1663
The End.

