Fast and Loose. OR, THE ARMIES FIGGARIES: BEING SOME ANIMADVERSIONS Upon their
late DECLARATION. 1659.

When there was no King in Israel, every man did what seemed good in his own
eyes.

Printed in the Year, 1659.

FAST and LOOSE OR THE ARMIES FIGGARIES etc.
THe present state of these Nations are in no circumstance so bad as in this,
that according to all humane judgment they are in no likelihood of being
better; so that unless the providence of God shall interpose by an high hand,
we are in danger of suffering shipwreck: he is a stranger in Israel that knows
not the sad distractions, fightings, pillages, and other inconveniences which
attend civil War; in what abundance they have been poured out upon us, and yet
we are as far from enjoying any of those privileges or freedoms, for which we
pretended to begin the quarrel as at first, nay it has been our portion to
meet with such instruments, who as the Apostle says, have outdone those who
have condemned, and when oppertunity has been put into their hands not
returning us again into the ways of peace and safety, have miserably,
deceitfully, and basely brought us to wade in blood afresh, and tread the steps
of confusion: when I seriously consider the protestations, declarations, oaths,
and engagements of this present Army; and those men whom they lately dissolved
have run through, their deportment and behavior, so little squaring with what
they have professed; I cannot but say with a sad heart, that those who chiefly
cried out for our Libertyes, were the greatest infringers of them, and those
who all along have had nothing in their mouths but God, the provi-of God, the
advancement of Religion, and the like, have in their actings plainly
demonstrated a high contempt of religion, yea and of God himself, whose name
they have so often called to the witness of a lie, as if they believe not him
when he says, I will not hold him guiltless that takes my name in vain.

I shall look back to the beginning of all our present woes, of which a
breviate shall suffice, in regard others have bestowed their pains largely that
way; so then not to trouble you with remembrance of the Covenant which was
manifestly broken, by so many of the long Parliament as were suffered to sit
till the Kings death; and many other things of like nature: I shall only here
give notice that the Army refused to disband though commanded by that power
which raised them, and after that took engagement to be true to the
Commonwealth without single person or house of Lords, yet in a while were a
means of setting up Oliver Cromwell to govern as a single person, by the name of
Protector; to him they address themselves as in a high manner, as the
deliverer of these Nations from ruin, etc. he was indeed a man of great parts,
and as long as we continue such a discontented people as we are, it is pity we
should want such a government, if he may not be admitted, toward whom is bent
the general wishes and desires of the people. Richard succeeded Oliver in the
Protectorship, a man of good disposition, but bad fortune, I cannot think him a
fool, though he was outwitted, having so many cunning hucksters to deal with;
all of them ambitious of rule, and were so much the more desirous to fly an
high pitch, because their rise was taken from a low ground; at the entrance of
his reign, addresses and salutations came in abundance from all parts of the
Nation, especially from the Army, and seemed to have as much respect as if he
had been born King of England, he caused a Parliament to be chosen, the choice
was very free, and certainly the Major part of Members chosen, were men wholly
resolved for the good of their particular Counties, and for the Nation in
general; but they began too soon to think of calling those to an account, who
had fingred the public money, and cheated the State of great sums, for some of
those being great ones, wrought so powerfully under hand with the Army, that
partly by cunning, partly by threats, they cause the Protector to sign a
Warrant for their dissolution, otherwise they would have done it without him;
pretending to provide for tender consciences of the godly, when indeed it was
to save the necks and purses of the wicked: that which gave the Army a motive
hereunto, was because this Parliament had a purpose of securing the Nation by
Militia and trained bands, as in former times, and so to disband this Army
being a very great burden: yet the Officers of the Army at this turn knew not
well what course to steer, but after some debate called the long Parliament to
sit again, and now being not well content with these neither as not acting to
their satisfaction, they thought good to send them home each man to his
habitation, and to justify this action of theirs, have put forth a Declaration,
upon which you may be pleased to take some few Animadversions only upon a few
of the principal heads.

In the first, second and third pages, they say that their care was great how
to settle this Commonwealth, and that therefore they delivered the power and
trust of these Nations into the hands of these men.

I cannot but call to mind how often the Army declared, and this last rump of a
Parliament voted the supreme power in the people, and upon that very account
cut off the King, under a pretense that he acted contrary to the trust reposed
in him by the people, yet now the Soldiers have the power and trust of these
Nations, observe, they can have no power but from the people; from whom they
never yet legally had any, and therefore they could make no delivery of it to
the Parliament, but such as one thief makes to another, and surely neither of
them can be said to keep our Liberties in any sense but against carnal law,
reason, and the will of those to whom it does belong; it is certain the Army
looked upon them as men that would in all particulars comply with their
unsatiable desires, and it is thought they would had the quarrel not been about
sovereignty and durance, for they like their Masters would be everlasting,
having no liking to return form places of such vast profit as they enjoy to sit
still and get nothing, especially if there should be a returning from whence
they came, some from a Colonel to a Cobbler: but enough of that.

Page four, five, six, We understand many learned men are of opinion, that
these men were wholly dissolved from being a Parliament, by their late
interruption especially by the peoples choosing a new: yet being desirous like
drowning men to lay hold of every twig, or any thing that had but the
appearance of civil authority, though fit to call them together again, we
desired an Act of Indemnity, which came forth imperfect, we desired a General
which also was not granted to our mind, and we were all forced to receive
Commissions there.

They say the Parliament was dissolved before; if so, by what Law can any
company of Rascals make them whole, or capable of acting as a Parliament? nay,
the King could not properly make a Parliament without the Peoples choice, how
much less can these do it, who have no power, no authority, but force and
fraud? so that they must needs be no less then Usurpers and Tyrants in the
highest degree, and one of the greatest plagues that ever befell the English;
and we may hope, that when we are sufficiently humbled for all our impieties
and provocations with which we have offended God, he may destroy those Locusts
from amongst us: But further, if no Parliament, what benefit could they expect
to receive by any Act of Indemnity which was to be, or might have been made by
them? therefore it seems, in this sense, they were willing to lay hold upon
every twig, and to embrace any thing that had but an appearance of Authority,
more then appearance it must not be; a true real authority legally deducted
can be at no more agreement with them then light with darkness, true English
hate and scorn to do such drudgery for them as these Gown-men have done, yet
all will not please 'em; and why should the people be thus deluded or baffled with
more; this day the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England to be maintained
against all Opposers, the next day an appearance of Authority, a Kickshaw, or
the Armies Puppets.

One would think the receiving Commissions at their hands had been obligation
enough; but where the Sword is rampant nothing can resist, especially when
those that use it know no conscience but their pay.

In some other following pages they declare what injury was offered to Lambert,
and some other Officers of the Army by voting them out of Commission for
nothing; for say they, If he had offended, why not called to answer for
himself?

Me thinks in this Declaration, and some late actions of theirs, they speak
aloud, that they will rule; it were well, that they had put off their Visors
sooner, and appeared in their colors as at this day, and have cloak'd all
their villainy under Religious pretenses; for by that means they have the Lords
offerings to stink in the nostrils of the people: and have rendered themselves
guilty of notorious dissimulations, Rebellions and perjuries, exceeding any
parallel even among the Heathen: this last charge has as little of truth or
reason as any the rest; for this Army did acknowledge those men a Parliament in
their Declaration of the 6. of May last, and by receiving Commissions
immediately from them, did acknowledge that they were the supreme Authority of
the Nation (at least to them) now there can be no injury where there is no
right; the Parliament did not legally, nor upon any account whatsoever owe to
Lambert or the rest such and such places, but were at their free liberty to
choose whom they thought most fit and convenient; and upon that account, though
they did own him to day, and reject him to morrow, though for no crime, yet
had he no wrong: for if I, or any man, take a Servant, I injure no man whom I
take not, because the liberty of choosing is of right my own; but then wrong is
done, when a servant is put upon me whom I desire not (for some reasons) to
employ any longer; and you may be sure that Bottomless John (as Oliver used to
call him) was not turned out of Commission for nothing.

They declare further, that the Parliament made an Act, that no person or
persons whatsoever should raise money without consent of the People in
Parliament; and therefore do declare all their Acts and Orders since the tenth
of October, null and void.

I wish some Conjurer, Astrologer, or some of our hair-brained Prophets were
able to let us know what is the extent of these men's minds; it is incerted in
most of their Proposals toward a settlement; and has been laid down as one
thing chiefly fought for: What this pretended Parliament have done in this
case, they have both one and the other declared it to be right and just; viz.
that no money ought to be raised without the Peoples consent in Parliament: but
indeed that is most right that best suits with the Armies exigencies, the
government which they exercise being wholly arbitrary and Tyrannical, though
they have oft-times abused the people with specious pretenses, the better to
cloak their treasonable practices; for when it comes to the touchstone, what
they profess to build, they demolish, and intend nothing less then what they
speak: But we may not think there is so much as the least show of reason that
the Army should declare Acts and Ordinances of Parliament void, yet not all
their last Acts, but only some few which crossed the humors and designs of
these Gamesters: this, O England is one of thy privileges, that those bands,
ties, and obligations which have been binding universally, are cut asunder by
that Sword which was drawn for thy defense, and a Viper bred in thine own
bowels will lay thine honor in the dust, and make thee a laughing stock to all
the Nations round about.

Let it be considered that Acts and Orders of Parliament once past cannot be
made void by all the Armies, I mean, not legally; but to the present business,
these persons were (as is noted before) sufficiently acknowledged a Parliament
by the Soldiers, and therefore it must be treason to act after such a rate as
this: but if we suppose as they affirm at the beginning of their Declaration,
that they are only an appearance of Authority; I say, if this be admitted, that
they were no Parliament, because of their interruption, what baseness was it
in the Army to obtrude them upon the People as a Parliament; besides, if they
were not, then is the Army disbanded, for they have no Commissions but what was
granted from them, which are in no wise valid, they having no power to give or
bestow any such thing; and whosoever act by virtue of such pretended
Commissions are guilty of all the blood they shed, and of the highest Treasons
against the welfare of the Nation; for they might as well have called to
Westminster such as are now made Preachers, some from the Loom, and others from
the Cobblers Stall.

Lastly, they declare that their earnest desire is to assure a liberty to all
the free born People of these Nations, as men, as Christians, to maintain a
painful Gospel-preaching Ministry, by a less vexatious way than Tithes, that
they have no aim to set up an arbitrary or millitary government; but have
provided that the civil and executive part of Government shall be lodged in a
Committee of safety, and they obliged in a short time to prepare a form of
Government comporting with a Free State, without King or House of Lords, and to
regulate the Law.

I could never be satisfied with my best observation, why p Free State, or the
government of these Nations as a Commonwealth, should be cried up as a thing
so much tending to our peace and liberty; we have all along been accustomed to
Monarchy, all our Laws, Customs, and Constitutions are framed accordingly; and
questionless (all things considered) there can be no other reason given for it
but this, that a Commonwealth is so opposite to the minds of the major part,
that it necessarily requires an Army to uphold it, which indeed is the only way
to continue the profits, Authorities, and greatness of the Officers, and make
the Army to survive the everlasting Parliament: whereas if the Peoples
Representatives were suffered to be freely chosen, and to act without force put
upon them; or he admitted whose undoubted right it is, a general tranquillity
would ensue, and every man might sit down under his own Vine with safety.

The liberty of the People is so manifestly trampled upon, that it is no small
wonder these men dare use the word; the saying of Samuel, if it be inverted,
may serve as a good character of these men, read them thus: Whose Ox have I
not taken? or whese Ass have I not taken? and to whom have I not done wrong?

The removing of Tithes, and regulation of the Laws, are things easier to be
spoken of then effected, to be sure not to be bettered by these great
Pretenders: Who ever knew Thieves help true men to their purses, unless when
they were empty? but these fair promises must be as a Net spread to take all
sorts of fish, to please as well the Anabaptist as the Presbyter; the one with
hopes of overthrowing Tithes; the other with confidence of a bountiful
stipend: The Law and Lawyers are like to suffer deeply at this turn; and no
wonder, for these men know full well what a severe censure the Law would pass
upon their irregularities; how sadly it would disperse and divide that
monstrous body between Tiburn and Tower Hill: But if our grave Senators in
former times have by long experience found our Laws to be most fit, what can
we expect from such Reformers as these, but that as Tinkers in mending one hole
they should make ten?

To conclude, Oliver Cromwels Tyranny was but as a few heat-drops, if compared
to those floods and showers of Calamity poured upon us by these insatiate and
blood-thirsty Wretches, enough to arm the hand of every man against them: and
truly we hope they will in Gods due time meet with their reward; and as they
have exercised an arbitrary power, contrary to all Law, they may be cut off
without any formality of Law. In a word, they have destroyed the King and his
posterity, and now contend who shall be chief.

The Lion Lamb they slew, and now begin
(The Lord be praised) to quarrel for his Skin.

FINIS.

