A Loving SALUTATION With Several Seasonable Exhortations Contained in two
General Epistles Sent unto all The Saints and Persecuted People of God in the
household of Faith to be red among them before they be banished as Bondmen and
Bond-women out of the Land of their nativity for their Religion and
Righteousness sake.

Blessed are ye when Men revile you and persecute you and say all manner of
evil against you falsely for my name sake, Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for
great is your reward in Heaven, for so persecuted they the Prophets that were
before you. Matthew 5.11, 12. They wandered in Sheep Skins and Goat Skins in
Deserts, in Mountains, in Dens, and Caves, and Holes of the Earth, for their
God has prepared for them a City. Heb. 11. Printed in the Year, 1665.

A Loving Salutation, etc.
Dear Friends,
WHom I dearly love, and not I only, but the Lord also, whose love is largely
manifested unto you, and whose Fatherly care is over you all, dwell together in
a spiritual communion, that ye may be partakers of the Tree of Life, and feed
of the hidden Manna come down from Heaven, as you sit together at the Table of
the Lord; who are admitted as well as invited to come unto him, who eases the
weary hearted, and overcharged in Spirit by giving of his strength unto them to
ease them that are both weary and heavy laden; for in him the weary find rest,
peace and ease, who are returned out of the way and spirit of the World, and
are entered into, and entertained of God, who fills the hungry Soul with good
things, when he sends the Rich (wise self conceited ones) empty away, and
lets them not taste of his Eternal virtue and sweetness, it was David that
tasted of the virtue and sweetness of God, who was of the Seed of Faith, when
his heart was fixed upon God then it indicted that which was good, and meditated
upon the Law of God, who tasted of the switness of the Eternal Word and power
of God, and David had received a spirit of Faith or power of believing whereby
he gave Testimony to the Truth, and bore witness for God, for he said I
believed, and therefore I spoke, and the David's of God or true Israelites after
the Spirit, have declared of the goodness of God, which they have tasted of;
who had tasted how good and gracious the Lord was, as now he is unto us, who
are of the Seed of Election, and in their Declarations they related unto David,
and said of him, I believed and therefore I spoke, and concerning themselves
who were of the Seed of Faith, they said, we having received the same Spirit of
Faith as David did receive of the Law, we believe, and therefore we speak or
bare witness for God, and it was given them on the behalf of Christ Jesus, not
only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his Names sake, and so its now
given to us, the true Spiritual Israelites who are of the Seed of Abraham which
is the Seed of Faith, who have received the Spirit of Faith, or power of
believing to carry us forth to give Testimony to the Truth, and speak on the
behalf of the Lord, not only to believe on Christ Jesus, but also to suffer for
Righteousness sake, and as none can believe to Salvation, but they who are of
the seed of Faith, which is the seed of Election, to whom the Spirit of Faith
is given, so none can stand in a trying time, to endure to the end in every
trial that attends them under a suffering condition, but them to whom eternal
life is given, for its given to them that suffer, to whom the spirit of Faith
is given, so that the seed of faith is attended with sufferings, for the seed
of Faith is that which does the will of God with delight, and therefore God
grants unto it the desire of its heart, and it endures for ever, because they
who are of the seed of faith are they that do the will of God, power is given
unto them to do, or to suffer according to his good will and pleasure, and they
are known to be of the seed of Faith, and Christ's true and loving friends,
because they abide in his Spirit, love one another and obey his commands, and
because they who are of the seed of Election, which is the seed ^f Faith, do
receive the spirit of faith to believe on Christ, and be obedient unto him,
therefore are they attended with a suffering condition, and such are the sheep
of Christ who are of the seed of faith, and he gives to them eternal life
which is a mark of Christ set upon his sheep, or character that they shall
never perish. Oh my dear Friends who are of the seed of Abraham after the
Spirit, you have received the spirit of Faith, which God gives to them that are
of that seed, and because they are true Believers you are true subjects unto
Christ, and because you cannot deny the faith of Gods elect, which purges and
purifieth your hearts, nor withhold your obedience, but do love the truth, and
give your obedience to the spirit and power of Christ Jesus. Therefore you are
hated without a cause, and persecuted by the Spirit of the World, because your
Mother is not Jerusalem from beneath, but Jerusalem from above, which is the
mother of us all that are of the seed of Election, which is the seed that is
appointed and ordained of God to inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; to you its
given to know the mysteryes of the Kingdom, but to others in Parables, that
hearing they might hear and not understand, and seeing they might see and not
perceive, least at any time they be converted and healed. So though many hear
the everlasting Gospel preached, yet the seed of Faith are the receivers
thereof into a good ground and right understanding, and those Divine Mysteries
or glorious Truths are made plain unto them, which others understand not, to
whom the gift of understanding is not given, who are Sons of the Bondwoman, and
live after the flesh, to whom the Divine Truths are as Parables, and though
they may see what a great work of Reformation is wrought in the Nation, yet
they perceive not the mind of the Lord, nor receive not the people of God in
whom that work is wrought, but reject them, and cast them out, as it was then,
so it is now; he that was born of the flesh, persecuted him that was born after
the Spirit, whereby it is evident that the Regenerate are not persecutors, nor
ever were such in any age that we read of, but they were and are persecuted,
and that by the degenerate and such as live after the flesh who daily err and
go astray from the ways of God, and are persecutors of them who are born of
water and the spirit, who live a new life in Christ Jesus. Therefore all you
that live in the spirit, walk in the Spirit, and be not desirous of vain glory,
for the glory of the World is but vain glory, and why should it be desired, or
at all sought after by them that are entered into the Spirit of God, which is a
Spirit of an exceeding and eternal weight of glory far exceeding that of the
World, and provoke not one another, except to love and good works, nor envy one
another, but be all at peace amongst yourselves, and with all Men as much as in
you lies, and let the peace of God rule in your hearts, and let the word of
God dwell plentifully in you, and the God of peace and love will be with you,
and will delight to do you good, because you are of the Seed of Faith, and have
received the Spirit of Faith, you are received into Covenant with God, and have
tasted of the milk of the Word, which is the virtue of God. Therefore as
Newborn Babes or Regenerate, and Children of God desire the sincere milk of
the Word, which is the virtue and sweetness of God, that ye may grow thereby,
seeing you have tasted how good and gracious the Lord God is, who has opened
your understandings and poured forth of his Spirit upon you, and shed abroad
his Heavenly overcoming love in your hearts. Oh therefore love the Lord above
all, and love your Neighbor as your self, for love is the fulfiling of the
Law, and love thinks no evil to any Man. Owe therefore nothing to any Man but
love. All dear friends dwell in the love of God, then you will not only love
one another but enemies also, for the love of God extends to enemies, he
loved us before we loved him, yea he loved us whilst we were enemies to him,
he so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son into the World, that
whosoever believes in him might not perish but have everlasting Life, the Love
of God was the moving cause of sending his Son Christ Jesus into the World, the
coming of the Son of God into the World was the manifestation of the Fathers
Love, or to manifest the Love of God unto the World, and they who received
Christ Jesus, as him whom the Father sent for salvation, they manifested their
Love unto God by believing in him, and being obedient to his heavenly Doctrine,
and as many as received him, to them he gave power to become the Sons of God,
so that the receivers of Christ are the true believers, who believe to
salvation, and are empowered by the Eternal power of God regenerated and born
of God, and are the Children and Heirs of God, and these are of the seed of
Faith, who have received power of God, and by Faith do come unto God; and also
by Faith do offer an acceptable Sacrifice, which is well pleasing to God, for
he that comes unto God must believe: So that there is no coming unto God
without Faith, without Faith it is imposible to please God, so that the insidel
and unbeliever cannot please God, or approath unto him, though such pretend to
be worshipped of him. Abel was of the seed of Faith, having received the Spirit
of Faith, or power of believing, he did by virtue of his Faith offer a more
acceptable and excellent Sacrifice then Cain: Cain was of a wicked
blood-thirsty nature, and yet he had a kind of religion, and would have been
accepted, but God did not accept of his offering, because he was in evil doing:
For (said the Lord unto him) if thou had done well thou had been accepted,
but because thou have don evil, sin lies at the door, and the Apostle said in
his time, take heed least there be a Cain amongst you: Oh my Friends take heed
that the Nature and Spirit of Cain (which is the Nature and Spirit of the
wicked one) be not entered or entertained in any that make mention of the Name
of the Lord in a way of separation from the world, for where there is a Cain,
there will be a Sacrifice, but neither prepared, nor accepted of God, for that
Nature and Spirit of Cain which is the false birth, will presume to be a
worshipper, but may be known to be a false worshipper as well as a false birth,
because it is Sacrifice is rejected and not accepted of the Lord: Therefore take
heed, least there be a Cain amongst you, for when that intrudes into that which
is not admitted into by the Lord, but is discovered and rejected of God, then
it turns into hatred against the seed of Faith, which is of God, because God
accepts the offering of the seed of Faith, and rejects the offering of the
wicked principle and Spirit, then that would destroy the other, because it is
works are righteous which is of the seed of Election, and the works of that is
wicked which is of the seed of reprobation, and God sets a mark upon the wicked
bloodthirsty one, that he may take vengeance upon it, for vengeance is mine
says the Lord, and I will repay it: Therefore as ye are acquainted with God,
both in his merits and in the way of his judgments, and knows what the
mercies of the Lord are unto, and what the judgments of God are against, and
his wrath is revealed unto; for they that know the terrors of the Lord, cannot
but in pity and great compassion beseech others that they would be reconciled
unto God, and you that are of the seed of Faith, are not only come but also
reconciled unto God, and are in the Covenant of Grace, and are anointed and
sealed of God, and such are appointed to be Heirs of salvation; and because
they are so God has laid hold upon their Hearts by his eternal Spirit, and
makes them clear unto him, who has so evidently appeared and made known both
himself and the way of salvation unto them: Oh my dear Friends the Lord is with
you in your sufferings, and does give you the Testimony of his Love unto you,
for your refreshment, and of his Power, for your strength and encouragement: So
to him I commit and commend you who knows how to order and dispose of you, both
for his praise and your preservation, and in the Peace and Love of God I
remain with you, and am

Your Friend and Brother in a Spiritual Communion and Heavenly relation. R. F.
Written the 17th of the third month, 1665.
Dear Friends,
In the unchangeable truth of the Everlasting God, who have heard the immediate
voice from the excellent Glory, whereby you were called out of darkness, and
turned to the true Light, who are become followers of the chief Shepherd in the
flocks foot steps, and whose faith stands in the power of an endless life.

I who am your Brother Companion, and fellow traveller through tribulations, a
partaker of the like precious Faith, do wish an increase of Grace, Mercy, and
Peace, with all other Heavenly virtues, and Spiritual blessings to all the
solemn Assemblies of the Saints, and to all the Lords Prisoners, and persecuted
people, even every particular family and friend in the household of Faith, to
whom these is sent as a Salutation, and visible manifestation of my unfeigned
love; for I am moved, and constrained in this day of my confinement to write
unto you, seeing I cannot verbally declare what is in my heart concerning the
great Salvation which has been spoken of among you, and has appeared unto
you, that as a worker together with you by way of remembrance, I may be
instrumental to stir up your pure minds in these perilous times, and to provoke
you to persevere in that persuasion that comes of God, and in the practice of
Christianity now when persecution arises because of the Word.

Dear Friends, despise not the day of small things, neither say, ye in your
hearts that the Lord delays his coming, for the Son of God is come, who has
given you an understanding to know the invisible things of him who is the
Creator of all things, and he has sown among you that seed which is blessed,
and greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the world, and the Light
has shined in your hearts to give unto you the knowledge of the Glory of God,
in the face of Jesus Christ. Wherefore Friends, you that have by the Light of
the glorious Gospel, received the knowledge of the only true God, glorify him
as God, walk as becomes Saints, let your Conversation be as becomes the
Gospel, worship God in the Spirit, and in the truth, speak often one to another
as the Spirit gives you utterance, and as you are instructed by the Inspiration
of the Almighty, and forsake not the Assembling of your selves together, as the
manner of some is, whose love waxes cold, whose folly is made manifest, and
who goes out from us, because they are not of us, with whom the Lord is
displeased, and by whom the hands of evil doers are strengthed, and the mouths
of gainsayers opened, who waits for an occasion to speak evil of that way in
which we worship the only true God of our Fathers, according to the practice of
our Predecessors, stand fast therefore in the liberty where Jesus Christ has
made you free, and grieve not the holy Spirit of promise, by which you are
sealed unto the day of Redemption, and wait to be inwardly refreshed, and
abundantly satisfied in the true sense and feeling of your invisible Union,
with the Spirits of just Men made perfect, and with the Saints in Light, whose
Names God has written in his Book of Remembrance, and who are numbered among
his Jewels, against whom no Weapon that is formed can prosper, nor no
Enchantment can prevail, and Friends, fear not the frowns of them that afflict
you, for he that commands the Winds sets bounds to the Sea, saying hitherto
shall thou pass and no farther, and he can restrain the wrath and fury of
mortal Man in a moment, and turn their hearts as Rivers of Water, that his
Saints and Servants may dwell in safety from him that puffs at them, for a
Sparrow cannot fall to the ground without your Heavenly Fathers permission, and
surely the least among you is of much more vallue then many sparrows; Oh
therefore faint not in the day of adversity, nor fear none of the things that
you must suffer for truth and Righteousness sake, but rejoice rather in as much
as you are made partakers of Christ's sufferings, who for the joy that was set
before him endured the Cross, and despised the shame, whose reproaches are
greater riches then the treasures of the Kingdoms of this World, and the
pleasure of sin which is but for a season.

And dear Friends forget not the wonders which the right hand of the Lord has
brought to pass in order to your deliverance out of the Land of Egypt, and the
works which he has wrought for you since the day of your Infancy in the
Immortal life, and his tender mercies from time to time, toward you his little
flock; has not he divided the Waters of the Sea, and prepared you a high way
through the Wilderness, and how ha^h he carried you in his arms, and upholden
you by the right hand of his Righteousness, when you were young and tender, and
under many temptations, and trials of cruel mockings, when you had no certain
abiding place, nor no City to dwell in, when you were set as signs and wonders
among your Kinsfolks, and former familiers, and could not follow the multitude
to do evil, nor ran with the World into excess of riot as formerly. How has he
fed you with the Milk of the Word, and refreshed your Souls with the water of
Life, from the Wells of Salvation; how has he drawn you as with the cords of a
man, and brought you into his Banqueting house, where his banner over you is
love, where the light of his Candle has shined on your heads, and his secret
upon your Tabernacle. Has not he spread his skirts over you, and put beautiful
Garments on you, and chosen you out of the World, and entered into a Covenant
with you, that you may serve God acceptably in your Generation as a people
saved by him, and chosen to publish his Name to the Nations, who is perfecting
his praise out of the mouths of Babes, that no flesh may glory in his Presence:
Oh how has the Spirit of the Father spoken through many of you, who are the
weak things of the World in the defense and vindication of truth when called
before Rulers, and judgment seats, where you have been called to confess Christ
before Men, and to contend for the faith once delivered to the Saints; and how
often have you seen the arm of the Lord revealed, and his hand stretched out
for your deliverance out of the dark Dungeons, Dens, Caves, and nasty holes of
the earth, unto which you have been exposed for your Religion and Righteousness
sake, in the day of your Pilgrimage upon the Earth.

Let these experimental Confiderations confirm your confidence, and strengthen
your faith and patience, and provoke you to perseverance in that persuasion
which comes of God. And dearly beloved, being compassed about with so great a
Cloud of witnesses that in former ages, and in these last days have sustained
great sufferings for the name of Christ, think it not strange concerning the
fiery trials and persecutions which you do, or may endure, as if some strange
accident or new thing had happened in your days for the trial of your faith,
patience, and principles, is very precious, and all these things are working
for you a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory then either eye has
seen, or ear has heard, or has ever entered into the heart of Man to
conceive, for we know that all things shall work together for good to them that
love the Lord Jesus in sincerity and truth; And Friends, let none think worse
of the way in which we worship the only true God of our Fathers, because wicked
Men desires not the knowledge of it, for truth is as precious as ever, and the
eye of the Lord is over his People in all their Trials, and he is with them in
all their Tribulations, and in all their afflictions he is afflicted, and
whosoever touches them touches the Apple of his Eye, and his Ear is
attentive to the Cry of the Poor, the sighs of the needy, and the groans of
the Prisoners, and the supplication of the souls under the Alter has entered
within the veil, and the Cry of the Oppressed is come before the God of the
whole Earth, who will not always keep silence and suffer the rod of the wicked
to lie upon the lot of the righteous, for it is a righteous thing with the Lord
to recompense Tribulation to the Troublers and Persecuters of his People, and
to you that are troubled, rest and peace, and refreshment, and everlasting
consolation, when he comes to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired of
all them that know him, and let not the Trial of cruel mocking, spoiling of
goods, bonds, nor banishment fright you, for the Lord whom you serve is God of
the whole Earth, and the Angel of his Presence which is with you to guide you
and preserve you in the Land of your nativity, will be with you in the vast
howling Wilderness, and in the Islands afar of, to direct your steps, and to
administer unto all you who are heirs of eternal salvation such necessary
accomodations as is convenient and suitable at all seasons, for he feeds the
Ravens and cloatheth the Lillies and takes care for Oxen, and opens Springs in
the Desert where the wild Asses quench their thirst, and will he not much more
manifest his Fatherly care, and kindness unto you who are his peculiar
treasure, and of more value then the Cattle upon a thousand Hills.

So Friends manifest your mindfulness o^ (...) Eternal Inheritance by your
faithfulness to the Lord in your ^^^blick Testimony, whether it be by doing, or
suffering, that wh^^ ^our Testimony is finished an entrance may be administered
unto you, into that Eternal Inheritance which fades not away.

Thomas Salthouse.
White-Lyon Prison Southwark. the 3d. Month 1665.
THE END.

