AN EXPEDIENT FOR THE KING: OR King Charles his Peace Offering, Sacrificed at
the ALTAR of PEACE, For a safe and well-grounded Peace, the welfare and
happiness of all in general, and every subject in particular, of this His
Kingdom of ENGLAND.

Behold! all ye that pass by, stand still, and see the wonderful Salvation of
the LORD, which he has wrought for the people of this Kingdom, by his servant
KING CHARLES.

Blessed are the Peacemakers for they shall be called the children of God.

Ask of the King, and he shall give you Not Stones, For Bread: Nor Scorpions,
For Fish.

Studied and Published for the honor of the King, and his Posterity and the
Universal happiness of the whole Kingdom of England.

BY RICHARD FARRAR, Esquire

Printed in the Year, MDCXLVIII.

TO The Kings most excellent Majesty.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
IT is the saying of Solomon (the penman of the Holy Ghost, and the wisest
King that ever was) Prove. 21. 1. The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as
the rivers of water; he turns it whithersoever he pleases: I, a poor
despicable man, (despicable because poor) do presume, out of my sincere loyal
affection, and duty to Your Majesty, and my earnest desire for the re-uniting
of You with Your Parliament and Subjects of this Kingdom, to offer, or rather
to sacrifice, my weak Conceptions to Your gracious Acceptance or Refusal. Sir,
We are all in an Egyptian darkness, be You but pleased to cause the Sunshine
of your Mercy and Goodness to break out upon Your poor Subjects of this
Kingdom, and there is great hope we may soon be delivered from this fearful
Confusion whereinto we are fallen. For my own part, I believe, Your Majesty's not
being conscious of the misery Your poor Subjects are in (in regard of the
unkingly restraint You are for the present unhappily under) is the cause You
cannot be so zealous, as otherwise you would, to redress it; and that your want
of knowledge of the present conjuncture of Affairs is that which renders Your
People so infinitely miserable, that they are ready every minute to precipitate
themselves into the Gulf of Despair. It is said of Almighty God, There is mercy
with him that he may be feared, and his mercy is over (or above) all his works:
And I believe (without least flattery I speak it) that there is abundance of
Mercy and Bowels of Compassion with You, toward Your poor Subjects, that You
may be both loved and feared; and that Your Mercy will shower it self down to
the amazement and reproach of those that seem not to believe it: Did I say,
Your Mercy, yea and Your Justice also, even against Your self, in the voluntary
clouding of Your own Princely Royalty; and that Prince, who shadows his own
Glory (merely for the good of his Subjects) is a rare Pattern: And the first
giver of so great an (unexampled) Example, must needs render himself glorious
to all Posterity.

Sir, in the first place, I presume (with boldness enough I confess, yet will I
not flatter you so much as to say, I beg Your Majesty's pardon for it) to
remember you, that Self-Denial is the only way to happiness, Temporal (here,)
Eternal (hereafter:) and had it been but a little practiced on all hands (by
the three Estates of Parliament) at the beginning or budding forth of these
unhappy differences, (although Malice it self cannot but say, that Your Majesty
acted Your part, and the very Lepers of Samaria shall one day rise up in
Judgment against some and say, that that was a day of good tidings, and they
ungratefully held their Peace, In Your abolishing of Monopolies, putting down
the Star Chamber, disannulling the High Commission Court, outing of Bishops
from the House of Peers, Regulating the Council Table, granting of Triennial
Parliaments, and continuing of This, not to be dissolved without the consent of
both Houses;) Your Majesty and Your People had not felt Gods heavy hand, as You
and They have done for these seven years past, and yet do: but for me to
presume to tell Your Majesty what Self-Denial is, were a most unpardonable
offense: And, yet, for Your Majesty to believe that this Peace Offering, which
You sacrifice to the good and happiness of Your People (in this sad condition
Your Majesty is in, and the most miserable one They are plunged into) can be
happily begun without Self-Denial (on Your part first, and then all the Peoples
part also) is (so far as I can apprehend in Reason and Religion) altogether
unpossible: and by the sequel of my discourse I doubt not but to make good the
Truth of it at the Full.

Sir, look into Your own heart, and see whether informer times You were not
more Your own (or others who abused you then Your Subjects universally: The
word Proprium is of a near relation, and I doubt whether it sits not as close
to the hearts of Kings as of Subjects, which your Majesty well knows is not
compatible with Self-Denial. Sir, You are a great Monarch (true) yet You are
but a Steward (nomine and re) a Steward of the great House of the
Commonwealth; and one day it shall be said to You, as to the Steward in the
Gospel, ( Read Rationem) Give an Account of thy Stewardship; And the Accounts
of Kings are of a vast extent. Sir, You are a Sheepherd also, a Sheepherd of a
great Flock, (our Savior calls himself a Sheepherd, the great Sheepherd of
Israel,) and he tells you, a good Sheepherd will dye for his Sheep; he did so:
And S. Paul, Phil. 2. 5. speaking of our Savior Christ, and there deducing him
from all eternity to time, has these words; Let this mind be in you, which was
also in Christ Jesus: Who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to
be equal with God: But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the
form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men: And being found in
fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the Cross: Wherefore God highly exalted him, etc. And shall I doubt
Your Majesty will imitate our blessed Savior in all you can? I doubt it not:
He prayed for his persecutors, (and taught us so to do); He forgave his enemies
that crucified him even upon the Cross [Father, forgive them, they know not
what they do]; nay he dyed for them, [who dyed, says the Apostle, for the sins
of the whole world:] You are not desired (Sir) to dye out of the world, or to
part with Your Soul, by a Sequestration of it from your body, (for then we were
miserable): Let the greatest curse, that ever fell on the head of any man, fall
on that head that has but such a wish or thought in his heart. All you have to
do or suffer, is but to part with a syllable or two, from one single word, a
few letters cut off from that Monster, as the People call it (although there
has been held out to them, for a long time, a more Prodigious one,)
PREROGATIVE, a little paring off some superfluous part of it, will prove Balm
from Gilead, to heal the whole Nation of the most Epidemical disease that ever
yet seized this poor dying Kingdom. Sir, I shall not need to court you, to what
you are so willing, nor to enforce this argument, had I never so much
Elocution, as God knows (and Your Majesty does find) I have none: I wish Your
Majesty's People were all of my belief, concerning Your Mercy and Justice* I
flatter not, (I wish the flattery of a Prince were high Treason, and so
punished,) and may my soul never enter into rest, if I believe not that Your
Majesty will grant more (if more with Reason and Religion may be desired) then
I have too too audaciously presumed to press in my following Propositions.

Sir, It was said in the beginning of this Parliament, (by M. Pym, if I mistake
not) that the Parliament would make You a glorious King, and who knows whether
your Majesty, when you were in the head of Your Army at Edg Hill, (or else
where) had not some hopes to make Your self a glorious King? And I have been
told, that this Army would have persuaded You, when time was, that they (also)
would make You a glorious King.

Sir, You have failed in Your hopes, They in their promises; and who knows
whether, what Your Majesty hoped and sought for, and They promised and
performed not, may not yet be done another and a better way, if (at least) You
will be pleased to take him for your guide (who has hitherto so miraculously
preserved you, and I hope ever will.) I say (Sir) taking God for Your guide all
may be made good, and may (yet) be brought to pass by Your self, not by
fighting any more to the hazard of Your Royal Person, and the Persons of your
Princely Issue, and of Your Nobility, and the destruction of Your loving
Subjects; but by extending and really performing of those two God-like Acts, of
Mercy and Justice, without partiality, to all Your People. And this is Via
Regia indeed, and well becoming the Majesty of King Charles.

And now, Sir, behold how wonderful the ways of God are, (contrary to the ways
of men) past finding out till himself discover them: You have long layen under
the Cross, (restraint to a King is a great Cross, were there no more in it,)
You are not free (I dare not say you are a Captive) and yet Your Person (with
the power that God has given You over Your self, and the Grace he has endued
you with to serve him must suddenly come forth to the redemption of Your
Subjects out of their Captivity, (Captives in their native Country under their
fellow Subjects) or they are lost* lost for ever.

In this Abyss of Exigency, no Expedient can be found to save Your People but
the presence of Your sacred Person, armed with Mercy and Justice (Mercy and
Justice to your People, and Justice against Your self) nor could You so easily
do it (as I believe) had not God thus fitted, prepared, and quallified You by
the Cross; whereby You have obtained a fellow-feeling of the miseries of Your
Subjects: David said of himself, It was well for me that I was afflicted.

Great Sir, Let Your Engagements and Promises to Your People, for the time to
come, (in Your perfecting of this blessed Peace) be like the Laws of the Medes
and Persians, irrevocable.

And so God shall bless You and Your Posterity for ever: So much of good
toward his People, so much of honor to himself no King ever had in his Power
to act, as Your Majesty now has, by the saving of the effusion of so much
innocent blood, and perhaps the Kingdom from utter ruin. God, I doubt not, will
give Your Majesty a heart to make a right use of it.

And now, Sir, I will presume to set down what Acts of Grace You were pleased
to pass this Parliament in Anno. 1640, etc.

First, Your Majesty put down Monopolies.

Secondly, You put down the Star Chamber.

Thirdly, You disannulled the High Commission Court.

Fourthly, You consented to the outing of Bishops from the House of Peers.

Fifthly, You Regulated the Council Table.

Sixthly, you granted the Trieniall Parliament.

Seventhly, You condescended to the continuation of this, until dissolved by
the consent of both Houses, etc.

This was the Peace Offering Your Majesty then sacrificed for the good of your
People.

May it please Your Majesty, as a second Peace Offering to your People, to
grant these following Propositions.
1. THat you will not break any Privilege of Parliament; and therefore it were
fit that the particular Privileges were set down, that so the King may not
entrench upon them in the least.

2. That your Majesty will not diminish or entrench upon the liberty of the
Subject, but hold your self strictly to the Laws of the Land.

3. That your Majesty will not extend your Prerogative in the least beyond the
due bounds granted to your Predecessors, or to the prejudice of the Persons of
your Subjects, or the known Laws of the Land: To which end you desire the
particulars and extent of it to be set down, and agreed upon, that so you may
the better perform it.

4. That you will grant nothing to any Person out of your Revenue, and this for
your Posterities sake; that so by your own good husbandry, you may be the
better enabled to reward those you desire.

5. That you will answer no Petition, for matter of profit, to any Petitioner;
but first that you will refer it to two Judges of the Law, to certify you the
legallity of it; and that no Subject (or the Crown) be any way prejudiced by
it; and if your Majesty be abused in it, the Judge to be highly punished, and if
he dye before the discovery, his estate to satisfy it to the Crown.

6. That your Majesty will protect the person of no Subject for debt, but only
your menial servants, and yet not his Goods or Estates neither, but all things,
except his person, to be liable to the Law.

7. That your Majesty will give no protection to any person for above 6.
months; but not for-their Goods or Estates at all.

8. That your Majesty will demolish all Forts and Castles the Parliament shall
desire within the Kingdom of England.

9. That your Majesty engage your self, That if you shall assist any foreign
Prince, you shall do it out of your own purse and power, not constraining any
Subject, or pressing them any way, but what they shall willingly do of their
own accord.

10. That your Majesty will levy nothing by Tax, or any way, contrary to the
known Laws of the Kingdom, but what shall be ordained by Act of Parliament.

11. That your Majesty will confirm the Charter of London, and all Corporations
in the Kingdom that shall desire it, not prejudicial to the Universal good of
the Kingdom.

12. That your Majesty will sit one day every Term [if you be in the Town] in
every Court of Justice, at Westminster, and then to hear the Causes of poor men
only, and to lay your severe Charge, that the Poor, the Widow, and the
Fatherless have speedy Justice.

13. That your Majesty will pass an Act, That any Judge that shall be found
guilty of Bribery, shall die for it, and his skin to be hanged over the Court
for ever.

14. That your Majesty will appoint a Judge in every Court, called the poor man's
Judge, a man esteemed to be an upright man, and your Majesty to allow him 200.
l. per annum.

15. That your Majesty will appoint in each Court two Lawyers for the poor, who
sue in forma pauperis, and your Majesty to allow them 50. l. per annum, each
Lawyer.

16. An Act, That every fifth Cause that shall be heard in any Court, shall be
the poor man's Cause, and called on by the Judge for the poor man, that sues in
forma Pauperis, and the party that is overthrown by the poor man shall have a
fine set upon him for vexing the poor man; and if that the poor man be found a
litigious fellow and malicious, he shall be punished as shall be thought fit.

17. That your Majesty enact a severe Law against Adultery, and a high fine and
punishment for whoredom.

18. That your Majesty cause some order, way or means, by Act or otherwise, for
a speedy ending of all suits against those wicked Dilemmaes of the Law, which
are the ruin of thousands, and only the enriching of the Lawyers.

19. That the Commons in the Country, in every Parish, be sold, and the poor
allowed it; for many are so poor, they can make no use of the Common.

20. That your Majesty cause all Acts for the benefit of the Poor, to be put in
execution, never more need, never more poor: And upon complaint made to your
Majesty, your Majesty to redress it.

21. The Excise to be settled for the payment and satisfaction of all Interests,
which it will abundantly do, in some years, if it be farmed out, and ordered as
in Holland; [the particulars too large to express here] and no bread,
smal-beer, flesh or fish, to have any Excise set on them, but to be highly
advanced on Tobacco, Wines, Sugar, Spices, and all outlandish commodities, Gold
and Silverlace, etc.

22. That Your Majesty promote the setting on foot the great and most necessary
Trade of Fishing, as shall be thought best, by Corporation or otherwise by free
Trade for all men; the employment of People, breeding up of Mariners, etc. it
cannot be imagined how much the Kingdom would be the better for it; often
thought on, never set on foot.

23. An Act to be passed for the supply of all Poor, young and old, amongst
whom how many thousands of maimed soldiers, and people made miserably poor by
these Wars, on both sides; all to be taken care for in a way, or means, which
shall be expressed; for the effecting of which the Kingdom shall be at as
little Charge as now they are, and ever have been: and this shall be plainly
manifested when occasion shall be too large to express here; which will be to
the glory of God, the education of young Children, the maintenance of old
decrepid people, and a provision for all and every poor man, woman or child in
the Kingdom, though bedrid, blind, or lame; so as this course well observed,
the reshall not be a Beggar in the Kingdom of England: -- A pious Work.

24. That Your Majesty pass a stricter Act, then ever, for the putting down of
Alehouses, through the whole Kingdom: one for ten that now is in and about this
City, were too much; so numerous they are, that almost every third house in the
Suburbs is an Alehouse, Victualing-house, Cooks house, or a Chandler that sells
Bear and Ale, which ought to be regulated in a strict manner; so highly is God
dishonored by it, the poorer sort undone, and so many thousand idle lustly
fellows, and young wenches and boys bred up in that way, and the most part of
the money gotten by deocit of measure.

25. That your Majesty pass an Act, that those that are not able to satisfy
their Debts, their bodies not to be kept in prison, giving all they have to
their Creditors (if less may not serve,) for if this be not done, besides the
numberless number of men that now lie and starve in prisons, how many thousands
(yea more) who have lived well, and yet merely by these Wars on both sides are
utterly undone, not able to pay any thing? Shall they lie in a prison, and
theirs starve or beg? If this Law be rightly enacted, no man shall deceive or
cozen not one of twenty shall break, or be Bankrupts; or if they do, they shall
gain nothing by it; nor shall any man (as many do) live in prison and not pay
his Debts, if he be able, but his estate shall be sold: This Act, rightly
ordered, is of a great benefit to the State, and ought to be done in Reason and
Religion.

26. That all Fees of Lawyers and Physicians, Atturneys, Chirurgions, and all
Fees of all Courts of Justice, be brought to a fit rate: It is a shame, yea and
a sin, that a Physician and a Lawyer should have such great Fees.

27. That the Estates of all Subjects be liable to their Debts, none excepted:
this is rational and religious.

28. An Act, that none of Your Majesty's Servants be chosen of the House of
Commons, nor no servant of a Lord, who takes wages of him.

29. An Act, that no Lord or Person of Honor, or other, shall write his
Letters, or use any indirect means to procure any man to be a Member of the
House of Commons, but folly left to the Country; and if it shall be proved that
any Member has so tampered, by money or friends, upon discovery to be turned
out of the House.

30. That all the Kings Forests and Chases be so ordered, that the Poor suffer
not, but that the King rather suffer himself for the good of the Poor.

31. That your Majesty's Ear shall always be open to hear any complaint, and to
punish it, against any Officer that you have placed in Court, City, Country,
etc.

32. That Your Majesty pass an Act, that henceforth Balletting boxes be used in
both Houses as in the State of Venice,) the benefit great, the dispatch sudden;
and little partiality will be then expressed, but every man will do as his
conscience informs him, without Fear, or for Favor.

33. An Act about Gaming, some most severe Act, for it is the Ruin of the
Nobility, Gentry and of the City: It is not hard to prescribe a way to abolish
it, so as that no man shall be prejudiced in his Estate; and if any shall break
that Law, to be highly punished, to bear no office in this Kingdom: this may
seem but of a small consequence, but it is upon due examination of a great
consequence; as the State shall approve, so a further discovery may be made,
with the remedies and limits of Gaming.

34. An Act for the calling in, and nulling of all his Majesty's Declarations
against both Houses of Parliament, or any other person that has offended or
seemed to offend the King; as also a calling in, and nulling of all such as the
two Houses have set forth against the King, or his Friends, as shall be agreed
on in the Treaty.

35. That all things passed by the Seal, made by the Parliament, be set into a
right order, yet so as the Honor of the King Majesty be not touched upon to
posterity: This is a weighty matter, and requires the gravest and wisest heads
in the Kingdom to settle; and yet it must of necessity be so, in regard of
after-questions, I leave it to the Treaty.

36. That during the Treaty (which doubtless, if the People come with equal
hearts to Peace, as the King does upon these Resolutions,) his Majesty will
take such order, that none of his Party shall come within so many miles of the
Court: or who so does, shall be by his especial license, and knowledge given to
the Parliament, and his Majesty to answer for them, for the not disturbing the
Peace of the Treaty.

If your Majesty shall be pleased to add or diminish (as you are free;) This is
far from being by me intended other, then to show the heads of so many
necessary things, for the good of the People, which I conceive your Majesty
might confer upon your people according to Reason and Religion.

After these voluntary Offers of Your Majesty to Your People, or what You shall
please to add, me seems it is very necessary for Your Majesty to make these
Demands, and what other You shall be pleased.
1. TO be settled in all your Revenues.

2. To be invested in all your Customs.

3. The Tunnage and Poundage, formerly given to your Ancestors, and your self,
to be continued, in liew whereof your Majesty will maintain the narrow Seas from
Pirates, as the Custom was.

4. That the bestowing of all Honors and Offices, throughout the Kingdom, by
Sea and Land; all that were formerly your Right, and never heretofore
questioned in any Parliament since your Reign, be in your Majesty; and your
Majesty to place and displace all persons that are in Office under you, either
by Sea or Land, none excepted.

5. That the Court of Wards be again settled and regulated, if need be, or, if
in the Treaty it be agreed otherwise, then to give 150000l. per annum, in liew
of it.

6. The titles of Honor, of what kind soever, your Majesty has conferred on
any person since the beginning of this Parliament, not to be disputed, but held
good, for the Honor of your Majesty.

7. The naming of all Officers of Ireland, in the War for Ireland, if it be a
War, to rest in your Majesty.

8. That all your Majesty's friends, who have any way adhered to you in these
Wars, or otherwise, to possess all their Estates, and no man to lose any part
of it, though given away or disposed by Ordinance of Parliament.

9. That the Officers of your Majesty's Army, and all the Soldiers Arrears be
satisfied.

10. That the Public Faith be satisfied.

11. That the disbursements for Ireland, made by the City, be satisfied to them.

12. That if your Majesty find a way or means of your own, not contrary to the
Laws, nor opposing the Subject, whereby you can in 7 or 8 years redeem the
Bishops Lands, and pay the interest, that the Lands be returned into Your
Majesty's hands, having first satisfied the Debt and Interest paid for them.

13. That for the Queens Majesty, care be taken for the settling of her Rights
and Joyntures, and for the exercise of her Religion, as it ought in Honor and
Reason.

14. That the Militia stand as it formerly did, before the beginning of these
troubles, (without disputing,) and, if it be thought fit, to strengthen it in
the hands of the Sheriffs, more for the Peoples safety, then advantage of the
King.

Peroratio.
SIR,
ALL the world now sees that you are the Center of Peace. I therefore the most
humble and most unworthy of all your Majesty's Servants and Subjects, having a
long time, from my very soul, grieved the sad condition of your sacred Person,
your Royal Consort, and most Princely and Numerous Issue, the sad and
languishing Estate of your Majesty's three Kingdoms, the horrid and daily
bloodshed of your poor Subjects, perpetrated by their own hands, after some
earnest prayers to Almighty God (from whom alone comes every good and perfect
gift) to enable me some way to express to your Majesty and the Kingdom,
something which might, at least, point out the way to a happy Peace, and a
perfect and right understanding between you and your People. It has pleased
God of his infinite goodness and mercy, after some months study, to open unto
me this door or entrance, at least for your Majesty, if you are so pleased, to
pass through into the Temple of Peace; which Temple is only in your Majesty's
power to build, and in the power of no mortal man besides: your sacred Majesty
must take the pains to lay the first and the last stone in this building; your
self must begin and perfect this great work: It is you alone that have found
the Art of Oblivion, as well as you have the power to give an A^t of the
highest Oblivion, that was ever read of in the Annals of any Monarch
whatsoever. Your Majesty's many Declarations to both Houses of Parliament, and
to your three Kingdoms, have so deeply seized my soul with belief, that I am
confident, your Majesty will not refuse to do or ofter any thing to your
People, in your power, that may conduce to a safe and well-grounded Peace, so
as that you are not in the least prejudiced in what you are so great a Master
of, Reason, and so great a Servant to, Religion; and for this poor Talent which
God has vouchsafed me, and which I here, with my self, most humbly prostrate
at your Majesty's Feet. I hope you will not find, that in the least, I have
been so presumptuous or proved my self such a Traitor to your Reason or
Religion, as to have offered any violence, in the least degree, to either of
them; If your Majesty, in the perusal, shall find it so, I know, as an Angel of
God, so is my Lord the King to discern good and bad. Therefore Thy Lord, Thy
God, shall be with thee, and so shall he for ever pray, who is

Your Majesty's Most humble and obedient Subject and Servant Richard Farrar.

THE KINGS COVENANT With His PEOPLE.
JC. R. Do here in the presence of the blessed Trinity [God the Father, God the
Son, and God the Holy Ghost,] profess to all the world, without any
Equivocation or mental Reservation, that I now do, and for ever will forget and
forgive all kinds of offenses against me, either in word or deed, committed by
any of my Subjects of England, and contained in the Act of Oblivion; and this
of my own free will and desire, I do, that all my People may see and behold the
Candor of my Heart: and I do here bury in the grave of Oblivion, all things
contained in the Act of Oblivion, in my soul not desiring to remember it, and
vowing never to revenge it. So help me God, and the Contents of this holy Book:
and this I confirm by the taking of the Sacrament.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT. The
humble Petition of Richard Farrar, Esquire
Shows,
THat (as an addition to his former Expedient, for the Peace and Safety of the
Kingdom) he is very confident (by the mercy and goodness of God) he can express
something more unto His Majesty so convincing in Reason and Religion, whereby
there may be a sudden and unhoped for happy settlement of the Kingdom; and that
(in a way unanswerably Rational and Religious,) for the satisfaction of all
Interests (whatsoever,) and of all men, (not wilfully and wickedly opposite to
Peace,) who have any spark of Reason or Religion left in their hearts.

Your Petitioner does, therefore, most humbly pray, that he may have free
liberty from both Houses of Parliament (upon the score of his own abundant
folly) to go to the Isle of Wight, and there to present His Majesty, in
writing, with such particulars as your Petitioner has long since conceived and
prepared, for the sudden and happy settling of the Peace of this unhappy
Kingdom; (without further shedding of innocent blood; which hourly cries up to
Heaven for vengeance on all hands:) your Petitioner being more confident then
formerly (if possible it may be) that he is capable (by the mercy of God, who
he believes has enabled him for this Expedient,) to answer any objection,
whatsoever, that His Majesty shall be pleased to alleadg in opposition to what
your Petitioner shall propound to him for a safe and wellgrounded Peace.

And the whole Kingdom, with your Petitioner, shall, as in duty they are bound,
daily pray, etc.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
MY Lords of the House of Peers, and you the Members of the Honorable House of
Commons, the Representative Body of the Kingdom of England, since I have taken
the boldness (as a Subject and Servant to His Majesty) to signify to him what
I conceive his duty to be in the settling, or toward the settling, of a safe and
well grounded Peace; Give me leave, I humbly pray, to say thus much, at least,
that the welfare and happiness of every Member of both Houses, as of the whole
Kingdom, lies at the stake, either for good or ill, according as God shall move
your hearts in the tender and speedy care of the Peace of this Kingdom: and
this Peace you can neither well begin, nor happily end, but by following the
example of His Majesty, ( Regis ad Exemplum, etc.) in taking out and practicing
a true Self-Denial, of any the least private Interest of your own, either of
Honor, Profit, or Revenge; making it subordinate to the public good and
welfare of the Kingdom, your Nurse and Mother, who expects a speedy account of
you; at the present, she being wounded all over, from head to foot, weltring in
her blood, ready to give up the ghost; as God does likewise look for a strict
account, and will do to all Eternity, of your true and faithful performance of
your duty, for the instant Peace and quiet of the Kingdom: To this purpose you
were chosen, for that end was your Call by God and Man, and nothing else, but
that, ought to have been, from the beginning to the end, your care and study
day and night; but how you have performed this trust in your Endeavors, (and
eight years sitting) and what success has been, let the world, not I, Judge:
This I am too sure of; the neglect of many in attending their duty at the
Houses, in the beginning, as if they had not been called to any such purpose,
as to wait there daily,) the divisions amongst the Members of both Houses, from
the first sitting to this present time; and the absenting of others (or worse,
the breaking out of the pale of Parliament, which ought on no terms to have
been done,) has been no small cause of the Miseries of this unhappy Kingdom,
who has been still every way wounded by her own unnatural Children: Then,
after that the great Eruptions, the differences of opinions in Church and
State, the setting on foot of Self-Interests of several persons, and those not
mean ones, neglecting the Peace of the Kingdom, as if it might have been had
with whistling for, or at a beck; all these put together, were no small
addition to our common Calamities: Add to this, the Reproach cast upon
Sovereignty, the promulgation of contentions and strifes, the prosecution of it
to a War, and so an engaging of the whole Kingdom on both sides, in it; the
taking of a Covenant, not of love I fear, to the extirpation of that
Church Government, that had been so long settled by so many Acts of former
Parliaments, and the inducing of a new Government, more different in name then
in essence, and truly, if rightly examined, scarcely differing much in either,
at least, not worthy the making of such bloody differences as have been about
it, and all this without any good success to the Kingdom, or content to many of
your own particular Members, who have varyed, many of them, even from the
Covenant they once took, for what ends or Interests I know not. I cannot forget
to put you in mind, or remember you also, the several Design, of the Army, and
the Grandies thereof, under the Earl of Essex, though they were put to a
nonplus in it; nor of the backwardness to make Peace, when it might have been,
nor of those whose Counsels modelled the new Army, which yet for all their
successes, (successes, I confess, many great, and high,) had they made right
use of them for the settlement of the King and Kingdom as they might, as they
ought to have done; who yet not 18. months since, when the Army was at
Newmarket, it was a question, whether they should have been an Army, or no
Army, kept a foot, or disbanded: Nor can I omit their rise again, if not upon
the head, yet at least upon the shoulders, both of King, Parliament, City, and
Kingdom; what Designs on all sides, and to what ends, or how the poor Kingdom
has been shaken with this long, and yet terrible Earthquake, through
Self-Interests and Divisions, I press not, but this I must say, If Designs were
well meant, and for the good of the Kingdom, (as I hope they were) there was no
blessing went along with them, for they have not so well succeeded, as was by
some hoped, and by all wished for: And then those yet unhappy Votes, of no
Addresses to nor from His Majesty; which I fear God Almighty is not well
pleased with, or rather highly offended at. God never denied Addresses to him
from the greatest Sinner (had he come with true repentance:) to Cain himself,
God says, If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? etc. and how amazed
would the soul of any man be, (unless he were feared up by a total hardness of
heart,) if God should from Heaven tell him, Pray not to me, come not to me with
your Addresses, I will not hear you, I will shut my ears, and be deaf to your
Prayers! But we all know the contrary of God: At what time soever the wicked
man forsakes his wickedness, etc. and who knows whether the scales may not
turn, [Let not him boast that puts on his armor, etc.] And then if Addresses
were sought and refused; and that the King should say, Did you not hate me, and
expel me out of my Fathers house? How is that you come to me now in the time
of your Tribulation; as Jephta did to the men of Gilead,) might not this seem
to be a just Reproach? or as God in the same Book, Go to the Gods whom you have
served: Remember what Solomon says, The Wrath of a King is as Messengers of
Death; but a wise man will pacify it: And in another place, The Kings Weath is
as the roaring of a Lion, but his Favor as the dew upon the grass. For your
own sakes; for this bleeding Kingdoms sake, proceed to a sudden Personal Treaty
with His Majesty: God treats with his greatest Enemies; nay he invites them
continually, hourly, and minutely in their consciences, and cries, Return, O
Shulamite, Return, Return* And again, How often would I, and ye would not, O yet,
if in this thy day, etc.

The sum of all is, (and let it never be sum'd up) what is past (for actions
cannot be recalled,) such offenses or sins against God or man, may be repented,
not repealed; but a wilful continuance in such horrid and bloody wars, as these
are, and not to seek and endeavor Peace by all fair means in the world, would
prove but a sad story to this age, and to posterity. I hope better things on
your part; and my poor aim is, that all things amiss between King and
Parliament (for who can free himself from guilt?) be from henceforth forgotten,
forgiven, and amended on all sides, and that by a true and perfect (not
counterfeit) Love and Union; to which end I published my poor Expedient for
Peace and Safety, in Print, (and I would to God it had an Impression on all
those who are opposite to Peace, if there be any such;) which although for the
present it be laid aside, (as not worthy a thought) must and shall (if ever a
Peace conclude it, and the all-devouring Sword consume us not totally) be made
use of. Let the Honorable Houses look, in Reason and Religion, what they can
expect more from the King then he does, if he will do them, as I am confident
he will, in these Propositions preceding: can you demand more for the good of
the Subject, he will do it; he that will do so much, will refuse nothing in
Reason and Religion, and beyond these I know these Honorable Houses will not
demand; the honor, and restoring of the King, how many of your selves have
fought for, and for the safety of the Kingdom, Privileges of Parliament, and
liberty of the Subject, all have professed, vowed it, covenanted it, sworn it;
hold to that, the work is done, (the King doing his part, (as doubtless he
will, and I take it for granted,) turn the Tables, (as the Proverb is) and let
the Kings Game be yours, yours his, and then in Gods Name, act according to
Reason and Religion: Remember the Golden Rule, [Whatsoever you would that men
should do unto you, do that unto them:] and I am confident the King shall be
glorious, your selves and the Kingdom happy; and for me, poor wretch, I know
you will censure no worse of me, then that I am an earnest desirer and hunter
after Peace, and the public good, and so he will live and die, who is

My Lords, Yours, and the most humble Servant of the KINGDOM, Richard Farrar.

TO THE SYNOD OR THE Assembly of Divines AT WESTMINSTER; AND To all the Clergy
of the Kingdom of ENGLAND.
SInce I have presumed to speak to his Majesty, the two Honorable Houses of
Parliament, and the Army, why should I spare to say something to you, O you
sons of Levi! You that take liberty to tell all men of their fanlts, why should
not you be told of your own? Sure I am you have as much need (if not more) to
be put in mind of Self-Denial, as any profession whatever; and it had been
happy for this poor unhappy Kingdom, if you, who profess your selves our
shepherds, had practiced it a little better then you have hitherto done: The
Account that you of the Clergy of this Kingdom (for I exempt neither side) are
to give to God Almighty at the great day, will, I fear, lie heavy on you: For,
sure I am, had you been (what you would have the world esteem you) the
Ambassadors of Jesus Christ, and his Ministers, you would never have added so
much oil to this slame, as you have done; but on the contrary, you would have
brought the cold water of patience, humility, love and meekness (on all hands)
to have quenced it: And this our Savior (and your Master, as you call him)
taught you, and all the world: How the Clergy of this Kingdom behaved
themselves toward God and the Kingdom, in their duty to both, before the
beginning of this Parliament, I leave to God and the world to judge; but how
unanswerably, diametrically contrary to the example and precepts of our
Savior, you have demeaned your selves, both in the Pulpit, and in the Press,
since these unhappy differences between the King and Parliament; and how great
Incendiaries and fomenters you have been, needs no witness to testify: Had the
Clergy on the Kings part, and the Clergy on the Parliaments part, plainly and
truly (without fear or flattery) told both of them the danger and the
devillishness of a War, both for soul and body, the wickedness and unlawfulness
of it (on both sides,) and persuaded them both, to love, meekness, and
forbearing one another, told the King his own, and the Parliament theirs, and
yet nothing but truth neither (according to the Word of God;) I doubt whether
it had ever come to a War at all; I am sure they would never have been so
forward on either side, as they were; The truth is, (I speak to the hearts of
all honest men) the Clergy on both sides (had they been of the mind of Christ
and his Apostles) should have preached against it, printed against it; and if
that would not have served the turn, should have denied both King and People
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; (for with what consciences could either side
give or take it, in the fury and rage of Blood and War, wherein they were
hourly engaged: (I understand it not:) And if that would not have prevailed,
they should not have afforded the Word, nor their Prayers in Public, if they
had continued still to persist in Bloody Designs and Self-Interests: and had
you of the Clergy proceeded thus far, you had done but your duty to God, the
King, and the People; and I am confident both sides would have stood at a gaze,
and not have been so forward, as they were, perhaps not at all proceeded to
pass through such a Sea of blood, as they have done: and how many of both sides
have perished in that red Sea, from this world at the best, (I judge not of the
next!) But was this course taken by you (or if by some, for I tax not all) yet
I never heard of any; O no, woe is me, in stead of imitating our Savior in
these three particulars, which all good Christians must imitate him in, in his
Life, in his Love, and in his Doctrine, (all of them imitated strictly by the
Apostles.)

I say, in all these three, the Clergy (generally to our view) have opposed our
Savior Christ in a strange manner.

First, in his Life, that was poverty and contempt, all along, from the Cradle
to the Cross; Yours as full of Glory, Jollity, and Honor, as you can advance
it. Secondly, in his Love; he was all Love, he preached it, he practiced it; My
Peace I leave with you: That was Christ's Legacy; How well have you disposed of
it? or what executors are you of this his last Will and Testament? He abrogates
the old Law in that particular, where it was said of old, An eye for an eye,
and a tooth for a tooth etc. But I say unto you, it shall be so no more: You
shall love your enemies, etc. And behold I bring you a new Commandment, that
you love one another. This was spoken to all the world of Believers; much more
to you, who profess to be the Ambassadors of Christ, as you do: You take Texts
out of the Old Testament in opposition to Christ, [Curse ye Merosh,] and you
encourage to fight, and cry, The Cause is good, it is Gods; (I speak to both
sides,) yea and you conjure the people to fight in the name of the Lord, tell
them they are Martyrs, they cannot miss Heaven, if they dye for the Cause;
(such Martyrdom God deliver me from:) The Conscience, not the Cause, makes a
Martyr; and if that be not purged by the blood of Christ, in true Faith and
Repentance, though a man suffers Martyrdom for Christ, he is no Martyr: He whom
God calls to be a Martyr, he fits him first, and makes him a Martyr to the
world, in crucifying the lusts of it and sure, men that fight for power, though
Kings, or Subjects for Privileges and Liberty, are not so well seasoned with
Self-Denial, as is requisite to make a Martyr: And for the Doctrine of Christ,
it was humility, Learn of me, for I am humble and meek: OGod! have you of the
Clergy practiced this humility and meekness? Nay, have you not boldly, to the
world, expressed the contrary in most of your conversations? Had there been a
Palsy in your tongues, (your tongues set on fire from hell, as the Apostle
speaks) and in your hands, this Kingdom had been happy: Ye take too much upon
you, ye sons of Levi; Did I say you do? You ever did, and you will do, till the
time come that Malachi the Prophet speaks of, (I hope) nearer at hand then you
believe; were you true Prophets, you would tremble at the Text, and by the
Spirit of Prophecy discern the time: Malachi 3. 3. He shall sit as a refiner,
and purifier of Silver; and he shall purify the sons of Levi: And doubtless,
that is not the Reformation that you pretend to; you do but take up the Stone,
and turn the other side. It is you that have put us all in a flame: your Tribe
has done, and does it all the world over: Is there any evil in a Kingdom, or
rather this great evil in this Kingdom, and have not you done it? You have
either done it, or had the greatest share in doing it, or not hindered it when
you might; you seek your own, and not the things of God, God forgive you: why
do you not imitate Saint Paul? Be ye f^llowers of me, as I am of Christ; if he
had erred that way, (which he could hardly do) yet he forbids to follow it; and
must we follow you, when you command things contrary to Christ? But great is
your Diana, and you voice her high up; she is (for all your roaring) but an
Idol, she cannot stand, she is falling, she is falling. Our Savior says, He
that is greatest amongst you, shall be the least; and he that is least among
you in the Clergy, would be greater then the Civil Magistrate, if he could: Oh
the ambition of the Priesthood! (Read the Prophets of old against the Priests:
and is not the Priesthood of these times worse? compare them together.) What
Aaron before Moses? it was not so of old: Nor will God ever have it so, where
his Spirit governs. The Luciferian Pride, Ambition, and Covetousness of the
Clergy, is not the least quarrel God has with this Nation; what will you say,
or answer, When God comes to make inquisition for blood? where is the Vrim and
Thummim, (in Aarons breast plate it was) purity of Doctrine and Integrity of
Life? I fear, it is not to be found in your hearts, in your Doctrine, nor Life.
Open your eyes, the time is yet, Repent and amend: Great would be the joy in
Heaven for such sinners, more then for any; and great would your glory be here*
and hereafter. Return, O Shulamite, return, return, and be not ashamed to do
it: Your example, on all hands, I am persuaded, (if sincere) would strongly
build us up in a better way: A worse then you have taught us, and a worse then
we are in, out of hell, is not. If the Apostle say, Contention, strife, debate,
is carnal, earthly, divellish; What is Plundering, Murdering, Ravishing,
Robbing, and Confounding? How can a man of God appear in a Pulpit, and not
Preach, and speak against it, pray against it, print against it? and lo, you
have done the contrary: Shall I praise you? I praise you not. God forgive you,
with my soul I beg it.

To conclude, for Gods sake, inform me, I am a poor weak man, What warrant in
Religion to Fast for strife, and to give thanks for Victories, and shedding
blood? both sides, King and Parliament have done it: God have mercy on them for
it. How can you approve of it, ye sons of Levi? Look into your Consciences,
(those Glasses which will not, cannot flatter;) and say, How comes this to
pass? Where are you? O God, That I a poor ignorant man am forced to tell you,
and the world this! Amend, and that suddenly, Preach love, and practice it;
Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing; or as
the sin now lies at your door, and the whole Kingdom, it is to be feared, will
curse you for it: so a heavy, and sad, unexpected punishment here, and
hereafter, must happen to you, without Repentance; which God grant, and is
heartily prayed by

Richard Farrar.

To the Right Honorable Thomas Lord Fairfax, Captain General of all the Forces
Of the PARLIAMENT, And to the Lieutenant General, and to all the Commanders and
Officers, and every Soldier in the Army.
NExt to His Majesty, the two Honorable Houses of Parliament, and the Clergy; I
presume to make my address to you, The sons of Mars; I would I could say. The
sons of Peace. That which I aim at in this my Discourse, (with a peaceful mind,
God knows, not wishing ill to any man, but desiring to have peace with all men)
is, to persuade you (in whose hand the power of the Sword is) that you would
remember you are Englishmen; that we have one Common Mother, (the Kingdom
wherein we live) whose bowels are daily ripped up by this bloody unnatural War.
When the Soldiers, in the New Testament, demanded of John, What shall we do? he
said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely; and be
content with your Wages: If any Soldier now, high or low, Commander or Officer,
should demand of me what he should do, I should first answer him as S. John
did: but in regard you are Christians (which those Soldiers were not, nor Jews
neither, but Romans) I shall take the boldness to say much more then S. John
did there to those Soldiers, and yet no more then our Savior left in Command.
For your Pay, to begin there, God forbid you should not have it at the full,
and that quickly; You have ventured hard for it, body and soul: My former
Expedient for Peace and Safety, expresses my desire in that; As for Liberty of
tender Consciences, I wrote it not out of Fear or for Flattery; but what I did,
and do, believe, ought to be: But I must profess I am infinitely afflicted to
see the high calamity (like to be greater) which by a most bloody intestine War
this poor Kingdom groans under; and fain I would find an Expedient for it, at
least I would spend my poor talent, to make some stop of this great issue of
blood: And therefore I take this boldness to speak to your Excellency (the
General,) and all subordinate Officers of this great Army of the Parliament,
(not leaving out all those, who have been, and now are in Arms against you,)
for my discourse is to all; but my chief aim and hopes are in you: for I am
persuaded it is in your power, next to the King, under God, to procure a sudden
Peace, (if you will have it the right way, who dare oppose it?) and so suddenly
to still the raging and furious fire of this most unnatural War. If you will
but practice that lesson (which I have dictated to his Majesty, the two
honorable Houses, and the Clergy) of Self-Denial, how examplary will ye be to
all posterity! and how well will it become you, in the midst of all your
strength and power, to decline it? I mean not to lay all down instantly, and
let your enemies (who, God knows, I believe, are far from desiring peace
theright way) cut your throats or subject your selves to them: it were folly in
you to trust them, and wickedness in me so to counsel you; but you to begin
first (though more powerful) and to desire Peace, and endeavor it: If therefore
you will begin as I said] with Self-Denial of all Self-Interests, be it honor,
or profit, or what ever it be, Peace, I think, may be easily obtained: Why do
we fight, kill, and ruin one another? Are not we brethren? May not Treaties
end it better then the Sword? Remember, I pray you, what Abner said to Joab,
Shall the Sword devour for ever? Know thou not that it will be bitterness in
the end? And God says, He will not pardon innocent blood; and I am sure, there
can be no War where many Innocents [yea those that know not the right hand from
the left] do not suffer: God will not be answered by your saying, It is the
inevitable fate that accompanies War, it cannot be avoided: The question will
then be, Who bid you go to War? S. John bid you, Do violence to no man: and
Christ he comes but a very little after the Baptist with Forgive your enemies,
Away, says he, with an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, etc. (that is,
wrong for wrong:) Bless them that curse you etc. And surely it were the best
Christian Courtship to appease all differences by Peace: The blood-thirsty man,
says the Scripture, shall not live out half his days: and if he do grow old in
blood here (as few do) yet shall he never see the Lord in the Land of the
living, unless he get it with a hearty repentance; and what hope can he have
that dies in a battle, killing, and killed? whose soul in the instant of
separation, is wrapped and enveloped with rage, revenge, blood, horrot, and
height of fury against his opposite; (as the body, for the most part, at the
same time, is environed with dreadful sounds, howlings and shriekings, with
fire and smoke, the very Emblem of Hell it self.) And what says our Savior:
As the Tree falls, so it lies: I would to God, every soldier would think of
this hourly, and believe it ever: Suppose, I pray you: A common drunkard (whose
practice it is daily so to be, dies drunk, by a fall or other accident, as we
have had many such fearful examples;) do, or can you in any charity hope well
of such a soul? shall he be received into the everlasting joys? the like of
Adultery or fornication (I speak of a common adulterer and fornicator) whose
God is his lust, who dies in the arms of his Dalilah* can you hope well of him?
I am sure it is a high presumption so to speak: sure I am his case is Fearful,
and by the Rule of Scripture we may be hold to judge no happiness could arrive
that soul so dying. The Case is the same with those that daily fight battles
(nay, who long for it if but a little retarded;) if war be unlawful, (I
dispute it not, I take it for granted:) and I am sure by the new Testament
utterly condemned: Now, if so, he that dies killing, and killed (as I said
before;) what a most miserable condition is that soul in? for their works, good
or bad* follow them, says the scripture: do they so? in what a state then is
that soul in dogged and clogged with such deeds of darkness before, at, and
after the expansion of it? what time is there of repentance, when the outward
man is in such a Confusion and horror? for battles afford not many quiet and
calm slumbers. Sure I am, he that is lives by the mercy of God most strictly,
and with S. Paul mortifies himself, and dies daily to the world; yet such a
soul works out it is salvation with Fear and Trembling, and finds it (not too)
scarce well prepared for its separation. Judge then ye Men of war. E. Contra.
Remember for Gods sake, for your souls sake, what our Savior says, Matthew. 24.
48. But if that evil servant shall say in his heart, my lord delayeth his
coming, and shall begin to smite his fellow servants etc. The Lord of that
servant shall come in a day that he looks not for him, and in an hour that he
is not aware of, and shall cut him assunder, and appoint him his portion with
Hypocrites; there shall be weeping, and gnashing of Teeth. Our Savior
denonneeth all this woe, but for smiting of a fellow servant: what would he
have said, of Plundering, Murdering, Ravishing, utterly ruining the poor, the
Fatherless, and the widows? This is violence in a high degree: and how Guilty
the Soldiers of this land, (on both sides King and Parliament) have been in
all this seven years war, I leave to God to judge; and those to lament it, who
have seen and felt it. I know will the common question shall we stand still,
and have our Throats cut? I say not so. I know offenses must come: [Christ
says it] but he likewise says, woe be to them by whom offenses do come: And
the Apostle says, have Peace with all men, if it be possible; he does not for
all that add, but if you cannot have Peace Peacefully, fight, kill, etc. O no,
he could not preach such a doctrine: how easy were it to spend sheets of paper
to prove this by very texts of Scripture, viz. the unlawfulness and
wickedness of war: [yet I am no Anabaptist:] Are the works of war from the
Principles of light and love, if so, well and good, happy your souls; if not,
and there be self-interest in it, Pride, Malice, Rage, Revenge, Ill yea ill
indeed is it with your souls without Repentance; [and no man repents who
forsakes not the evil way^^] I am sure those works come out of the Principle
of Fire and darkness, out of Hell it self. And such a people, such a God.
says the Psalmist. His servants ye are whom ye obey: with the froward thou art
Froward, and with the holy thou art holy, says the Psalmist, speaking of God:
God still. But God in his Excellency is Love: for God, says the Apostle, is
Love: and for certain the Children of God are the sons of Peace. My Peace I
leave with you, was our Saviors Legacy: To conclude, no man, I say, no Man
must do evil that good may come of it: and I am sure, our war for these eight
years has done no good in Church or state; [though God knows best where a True
Church is, and we poor subjects can at the present scarce discern where the
state is, involved on all hands with mysteries and ruins:] And for any man, be
he Emperor or King, State or Republic, I am confident the sin as great, yea
greater then great in the eyes of God, to begin a War: and if the hearts of
such were searched (as God can, does, and will.) it would be found, it is
Self-Interest, let them plead and say what they will; and to fight for Religion,
for Reformation, be they who they will, they have no true Christian Religion in
them: Religion, by all Kings, since Christ's time, has been made but the
stalking horse, to catch up their other ends in the world: Without holiness no
man shall see God: Is there holiness in War? be not deceived, God will not be
mocked. Let the Soldier therefore lay by all Self-Interest; in your
Declarations you have professed it, and seek the Peace of the Kingdom, the
settling of the King in his just Rights, Him and his Children, the Parliament in
their Privileges, the Subject in their true Liberties from Tyrannical
Government, and Arbitrary too; You have promised it, do it; and the King, I
believe, is ready to perform his part: but do it by Love, by Peace; and God
shall bless you, and you shall find rest to your souls: but if you proceed to
do it by blood, on that you will have a Peace of your own moulding: I pray
remember your own words, p. 4. nothing more abhorring to you then a new flame
of War: I fear, that will not discover the practice of Self-Denial to be yet
embraced of you; and had you all your desires for this world, (as I am
confident the Soldiers profession, Kings and Subjects, have rarely, or never
obtained their hopes, the reason is, the blood that is by them spilt, which God
abhors:) Look upon the King of Swede, see his end, killed in a Battle, by one of
his own side, it is thought; and see yet how his people fare, and what rest
have they, or when are they like to have any?) Yet what shall it profit a man,
says Christ, (believe him ye men of War) to win the whole world (that's more
then a Kingdom) and lose his own soul? I speak to all who adore and dote on
that Heathen God, Mars (War,) rightly interpreted according to the Dialect of
the Holy Ghost, by the Apostles, in diverse places, the very Devil himself. Now
the works of the flesh, says S. Paul, Gal. 5. 19. are manifest, which are
these, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry,
Witcheraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies,
Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revelings, and such like; of the which I tell
you now, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things
shall not wherit the Kingdom of God. But the Fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy,
Peace, Longsuffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance,
against such there is no Law. And they that are Christ's, have crucified the
flesh with the affections and lusts: If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk
in the Spirit: Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another,
envying one another.

You have held out Reformation in Church and State, take heed of Deformation in
both, or rather utter ruin of all: where is your Commission to proceed in
blood? Learn of me, (says Christ) for I am humble and meek: Is there meekness
in War? He that takes up the sword, shall perish with the sword, (says
Christ.) I know well, he once asked his Disciples for a sword; he was answered,
there were two; he said it was enough, and perhaps thought it too much; he did
not bid them use it, nor did he ever make use of it, or command it, but the
contrary. You are Subjects, as well as I am; remember you are so: and you are
(or were) Servants also to the Parliament, who employed you. Act both parts
according to Reason and Religion, and then this bleeding Kingdom shall ow no
small share of its happiness to you; but if you fail to do it, assure your
selves the end cannot be good: Love is the fulfilling of the Law. Now the God
of Peace, and the Peace of God which passes all understanding, keep your
hearts and minds in the Fear and Love of God, etc. So prays he, (that believes
no man should dare to say the Lords Prayer, Forgive us our trespasses, as we
forgive them that trespass against us, if he wash his hands in the blood of
another, by War.) Who is,

My Lord, Your Excellencies most humble Servant Richard Farrar.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Major, The Right Worshipful the Aldermen, the
Worshipful the Common Counsel, and every Freeman of the City of LONDON.
THis great M^tropolis of yours, lifts not up her head so high, but that
[having so boldly adventured upon the Clemency of his Sacred Majesty, the
patience of the two Honorable houses of Parliament, the Freedom of my speech to
the Clergy, the high priests, Scribes and Pharisees of this Kingdom; and the
hazard of distasting the Army: An Army, and such an Army, as has made your
proud walls shake at the very sight of it, and for ought I know, or you eith^r,
the earthquake (...) yet past] I may presume to cry aloud in your gates, and
to proclaim in your streets, that if any city in the Christian world, had need
to be summoned to Self-denial; It is this great city: whose Inhabitants were
grown so proud with prosperity, that they said in their hearts (...) least,
(and too much expressed it in their words and actions) a Babylon did, Revel. 18.
7. She said in her heart. I sit a Queen, I am no widow, and shall see no
sorrow, therefore shall her (...). etc. And did not you, eight or ten years
since, sit as a Queen, in your bed of State and rest? but lo, Almighty God
brought war into your gates, and the sword into your Stately Palaces: and your
young men felt it: you made but a sport of it at the first, you courted the
sons of Mars, and you discovered all your wealth unto them (as Hezekiah did to
those that were sent from Babylon, read the place, the 20. Chapter of the
second of Kings, beginning at the 1^. verse, until the 20. I pray God, it have
no allusion in time to your city;) and now after seven years Apprenticeship,
are you not weary? would you not be made free? Remember those days of peace,
when every man did eat of his own vine, and sat under his own fig tree: did
you make good use of it? no: you grew wanton with ease, and proud with folly,
and therefore God sent war amongst you: your hearts were always various from
the ways of God, and therefore God suffered you to be diversely minded, to make
way for your destruction; and now at last, for your wickedness, has suffered
the spirit of giddiness and divisions, to be even in the midst of your city,
yea in every corner of it; and it is just with you: for you were so far from
Self-denial, that you denied your selves nothing you had a mind to; (I pass
by the excess of pride in apparel, like Princes rather then Apprentises; and
for Gluttony and Luxury, the world could not match you: I say nothing of your
Epicurisme every way, with your neglect of the poor that daily begged at your
doors.) I speak not this to all: I am confident, God has a Remnant in this
City, who serve him most faithfully, and who are not only free from those
sins, but daily lament them in others; who stand in the Gap; and for whose sake
this City has stood so long, and does yet stand: Great has been your Diana
of profit, and you have sacrificed so long at her shryne, out of hope or fear;
that if God open not your eyes, and that you suddenly repent, your destruction
is at hand: Go into Self-denial, or you shall have no peace: lay aside all
private and self-interests, that of the Public Faith, disbursements for
Ireland Bishops Lands, Excise, Custom house etc. and repent; nor upbraid your
for wardnesse at the first to help on the work, had it been holy and pious: The
end shows plain [now] and it did long since appear, you did it for your own
ends; it was fear or hope of profit put you on, not the Zeal of Gods Glory, the
Honor of the King, or the good of the kingdom: [I speak not this to all, but to
the most; and chiefly to those, whose private interests, engage them, now, so
hotly in the progress of a war; that the whole Kingdom is in hazard of utter
Ruin:] look into your own hearts, and say, how true or false I speak: if true,
make good use of it, that is, repent and amend; and that not with cast down
looks, but humble hearts: You petition for Peace, it is well, (so you did once
for War, God forgive you,) but do you desire and pray, that God will give you
Peaceful minds one toward the other? Do you endevor it? Have you not (like the
rest of the world) Peace in your mouths, War in your hearts? I wish I could
forget, that not many years since, you cried one day, Hosanna and Crucifig the
next:) If so, you cannot (...); deceive not your selves, nor be you deceived by
others, that misguide you: pray to God to open your eyes, you are blind, (your
wealth blinds you) you cannot see where your safety lies: Not in your selves,
not in your strength, (that is already proved,) not in your wealth, you do but
hoord it up for others, unless God give you open and repentant hearts; your
safety lies in your Self-Denial, and in your suffering, not your doing; away
with all warlike and bloody designs, you will be lost here, and for ever, by
them; add not to your former evils, blood to blood; there is no ill so great
which you are not guilty of; you have done like the rest of the Kingdom, or
rather you were their example: You have sought your own, and not the things of
God; nay, you have fought for them more then once. And now it is just with God,
to leave you a prey to your enemies. Yet let me tell you, your greatest enemies
are not only within your walls, but within your own breasts: It is your
Treachery to God, and to some body else, has betrayed you to hourly fears: You
look down to the earth, you grovel there; lift up your heads, lift up your
hands too, but chiefly lift up your hearts to God, from whom alone must come
your salvation. Do all you can for Peace, in a godly way, not by plots and
strife: We must not do ill, that good may come of it: This City has a great
account to give, when God shall make inquisition for blood. There is no worldly
Counsel, mere worldly, can do you good: God alone must do it, by turning your
hearts to him, and to your lawful King, and in your love to your fellow
Subjects; but add no more blood to blood. The Militia of good consciences, is
better and safer for you, then al your Arms, or the Army, if it were yours; in
the day of Trouble you will find it so: If there be any means or power in you,
by Prayers to God, Petitions to men, or the opening of your purses in a
peaceful way, to procure Peace; forbear not to do it. Sero sapient Thryges. Do
it, and that quickly, for Gods sake, for the Kings sake, for your own sake, for
the whole Kingdoms sake, delay not to do it; and believe me, it is better to
give willingly, what you may spare, then to have all you have taken from you:
who can give you a better hope? No man can say, who will be the Victor (if
Peace end it not:) You see a Foreign Nation come in already; and perhaps many
of you laugh at it in your sleeve, and rejoice in it: Alas poor abused souls!
Do you think you shall not be the Spoil, who ever is the Conqueror? Be not so
sottish: There is no party in Arms already, or like to come into Arms,
belonging to these three Kingdoms, but has just cause to upbraid and reproach
you; and will certainly ruin you at the last.

Nulla Fides, Pictasque viris qui castra sequuntur,
Said the wise Poet, and a good Christian knows it to be true; Buy Peace at any
rate (but not with a drop of blood, take heed of that:) But first get internal
Peace (else never hope for external) and then you are in the way to eternal
Peace: And thus he prays you may do (who was the Son of a Citizen of the best
rank and quality, and bred up amongst you) and heartily wishes, and would
endevor, to his power, for the Peace and welfare of this honorable City; to
whom he professes himself (though no Freeman of it) a Servant in a peaceful
way, and ever will be, whilst he is

Richard Farrar.

THE COVENANT OF THE PEOPLE OF ENGLAND One with another.
I A. B. Do here in the presence of the blessed Trinity [God the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost] profess to all the world, and that without any Equivocation or
mental Reservation; that I now do, and for ever will, forget and forgive all
kinds of offenses against me, either in word or deed, and committed by any of
my Fellow Subjects of England, and contained in the Act of Oblivion, from Anno.
1648. to this present day; and this of my own free will and desire I do, that
all my fellow-Subiects may see and behold the Candor of my Heart; and I do here
bury in the grave of Oblivion all things contained in the Act of Oblivion not
desiring to remember it, and vow never to revenge it. So help me God, and the
Contents of this holy Book: and this I confirm by taking the Sacrament.

TO THE Whole Kingdom OF ENGLAND, And to every particular Subject therein.
IN order to the Peace of this Kingdom. I published my first Expedient, for the
Peace and Safety of all the People of England: I refer my self to the world, to
judge, whether better security can be had or hoped for, then is contained in
that Expedient; and in His Majesty's Covenant set down in this Book: I have
(you see) finished a second Expedient for the King: But I desire the whole
Kingdom not to mistake me, (at least, all that shall read it,) as if I, in the
least, intendded that either the Offers which I have set down, from the King to
his People, or his Demands from them, should strictly be insisted on in this
great work. [Ear be such a presumptuous thought from my heart.] No, they are
only heads of a few, (such as in my poor apprehension might usher in more from
His Majesty, as doubtless, he will offer and perform all that he can for the
good of his People,) and otherwise I intended them not. It will appear to the
whole Kingdom, that His Majesty begins with Self-Denial: Read his second
Peace Offering, [and pass not over the first, which he offered to you all,
1640.] And Faithfully believe, that for the good of his People, he will, yet,
deny himself more then ever any King did: In the name of God try him; but still
remember, he is your King; and forget not that saying of Solomon, Fear God, and
honor the King; and give unto Casar that which belongs unto Caesar, and Caesar
will give you more, rather then less, then belongs unto you. If the whole
Nation, now, will but imitate the King, and begin with Self-Denial, (without
which there can be no Peace, no Religion;) How happy shall both Prince and
People be! If you are not so minded, (chiefly those who sit at the helm,) do
you hope for Peace by a bloody War? Let no man tell me, Peace is the end of
War: Be not deceived, my beloved Countrymen, if you keep your old hearts, of
Self-Interests, and proceed on to a new War, you will find the greatest
destruction that ever Nation did: For, as there is no Peace to the wicked,
says my God, so there is no holiness, but hellishness in War. The Apostle tells
you, whence strife and contention proceeds, from below, says he; and do you
expect a blessing upon War and blood, from above? That any man should dare to
blaspheme God so highly, to pray to God to prosper him in his bloody
undertakings, (daub it over with what specious pretense of Privilege or Liberty
you can;) what does that man less, then pray to God to bless the actions of the
Devil within him? Blasphemy worthy the tearing of garments, and for which God
will (amongst other sins) sorely visit this Nation.

The King must, if he will prosper, begin with Self-Denial, (and that to some
purpose too;) so must the two Honorable Houses of Parliament; the Clergy should
begin to all the Kingdom, they have most need, (I will not say they are the
most backward;) The Army, great as it is, is under the power of the Lord of
Hosts; and (as they have long since in their Declarations promised it) God he
expects Self-Denial from them; if not, he will one day deny their entrance into
the Eternal Tabernacles of Rest, prepared for those only that deny themselves:
Those blessed Mansions are not to be purchased, but by storming of them with
Self-Denial: Our Savior says, The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and
the violent take it by force; (I hope no man thinks Christ meant by force of
arms, by killing, plundering and ruining the bodies and souls of men, women and
children;) sure it was meant, by the violence of the good Spirit of God, moving
in the hearts of his peaceful Children, the earnestness of whose souls is such,
in resisting and opposing the deeds of darkness, and the fiery darts of the
Devil, which is in them, in the old Adam, that they have a daily storming,
combat and strife, with all violence within themselves, to dispossess the old
Adam of his strong hold, and then the Kingdom of Heaven so much is it can be in
this life is gotten and obtained; for he that gets it not here, shall never
possess it hereafter; as the tree falls so it shall lie.

The City also must go into Self-denial, my discourse to them tells them no
lesss; And lastly, you the whole Kingdom (under whom the four last are
comprehended) must likewise go into Self-denial: For all of you in General (I
exempt not my self) have and do abound with all sorts of sins, yea with the
greatest sins, and particularly that of Bloody a fearful and a crying sin;
which how you will answer, when God shall come to make inquisition for Blood; I
know not: how will you answer it, you blood, Subjects of this bleeding Nation,
who joy and delight in Blood and Revenge, who regard not the cries and the
Tears of those poor Innocents, which your swords make Widows and Orphans?
whose cries (yet) ascend up into heaven, and must (without sudden repentance)
bring done a most unheard of judgment upon this Nation. For you the Subjects
of this land (who are not Soldiers,) are equally guilty, in your willing
Contribution to bothsides: and how many of you are ruined by your own party, to
whom you gave assistance? And it is just with God, it should so be: A Land so
defiled with Blood, that professed such purity of Christianity, and has
practiced on all hands, the most horrid and barbarous Acts that ever were read
of. The Father against the Son, the Son against the Father, etc. And do you
expect Peace; by going on in Blood? b^leeve no Minister, that preaches War,
lawful: (Read my Epistle to the Clergy;) when they preach such stuff, that is
some of the leaven which those Scribes and Pharisees mingle with their other
good Doctrine, and so spoil the whole Lump.

Alas! did they not mix some good things with the bad, who would come near
them? Christ taught the contrary, viz. Love one another, (by suffering, never
came ill, but much ill by resisting) believe Christ and follow his precepts and
example: he that teaches you other, is an Antichrist. This Kingdom is highly
guilty of all the sins, that all the Prophets denounced judgments against in
the old Testament, Israel, Judah, or any other Nation. I shall not need to name
them: Prove: 6. 17. God hates hands that shed innocent blood. Isa. 59. 7. Their
feet run to evil and they make haste to shed innocent Blood, their thoughts are
thoughts of iniquity, wasting and destruction are in their paths, the way of
peace they know not, etc. read on to the end of the 15. verse: and behold, the
Prophet speaks what we with our eyes have seen, and do see daily acted by
Authority, on both sides, in this miserable Land: And now, as if that it were
not enough that the Land has been made drunk with our Blood (and God knows,
how much innocent.) The other Element of Water, the Sea, that must be died of a
bloody Color [Preparations on all hands:] And for that sin of oppression of
the poor and innocent, never the like that has been on both sides within these
seven years, and yet is. In a word the cry of the sins of this Kingdom is gone
up to Heaven, like that of Sodom and Gomorrah, and without sudden repentance,
we must expect the like plagues: had there not been, and were there not still,
some righteous Lots amongst us, sure we had been destroyed long since; and when
those righteous Souls dye away or depart, Gods wrath will suddenly rain done
upon us, (without Repentance) to our utter Confusion: Repent therefore and that
suddenly, and (as I said before) go into Self-denial: be quiet, let no man
force you to fight on either side, (much lesss be forward to go your selves, as
too many have done, and paid dear for it.] Pray, but fight not, fight against
your lusts and worldly corruptions, against all self-interests whatsoever
(that is Self-denial) and then all will be well: the Peacefull-minded, their
prayers, with the Widows and Orphans, if they prevail not with God to turn the
hearts of the wicked, shall at one time or other, prove of such strength, that
like the Angel that destroyed the host of Sennacherib in one night, so shall
Gods Judgments find, hunt out, and destroy the wicked out of the land, who
hate the Children of Peace [and laugh at them;] for the Children of God, are
the Sons of Peace.

What would you have? would you have a King, a good King, and the best of
Kings? and would you have Peace? Behold, he brings you the Olive Branch of
Peace by his Self-denial: he denies, or will deny himself, for your good, as
never King did: [were the best of you a King, it would not be found an easy
thing; you are Subjects, and yet you cannot part with your petty private
Interests, Molehills to the Mountains of those of a King:] Look upon the Kings
Picture of Mercy and Love, in my first Expedient, and upon his Covenant in this
tract: you are equally fafe with himself. [A better safety then the Militia,]
Look every Subject into his own heart, for I write to all,] and deny himself
but half as much for a Subject, as the King for a King; and I dare say, we
shall have Peace, a blessed and a happy Peace, a Pious Peace, [away with a
Politic Peace, it will never hold*]* we shall have a Confident Peace on all
sides; away with a Jealous Peace, a distrusted Peace. Think of no Peace but
what comes by the security of Self-Denial, on all hands: it is above all your
Militia's, and casts down all Malice: If no Peace must be, till the fearful
hearts and guilty consciences of all men be satisfied, then we must never look
for Peace. In what a condition are you then in* O ye Inhabitants of this Land!
I write unto you all: Consider of it. And let those men be branded to all
posterity, who will take or receive no security, but what is beyond all history
or example, [as this truly is] nay beyond all reason, and thereby render
themselves the progeny of Cain himself* I say once more, Consider of it.

To conclude, if speaking truth to his Majesty, to the Parliament no lie, to
the Synod orthodox Divinity, to the Army what Christ himself preached: to the
City, what their own Consciences know to be true; and to [you] all the Subjects
of the whole Kingdom of England (I except none) what you are, most of you,
highly guilty of, even by the very Word of God; I say, if This be Treason, I am
a Traitor, a Traitor against all, and let me suffer for it; but let my Trial be
at the Judgment Seat of Love, at the Bar of the New Testament, my Savior my
Judge, the Apostles my Jury, and then proceed, I fear not: You have all of you
(King, Priests and People) pursued your own ends, your Self-Interests, and you
must cast away your Babylonish garment and wedg of gold; or God, who can do it,
will spue you all out, and give this Land to a more deserving People; [Not the
Scots or Irish; alas! their Graves must be dug before your Funeral be fully
solemnized,] or perhaps to some of your poor innocent babes, who are not old,
like you, in sins and iniquities; they may perhaps partake of that blessed
Peace, you would, but cannot have, so long as you wilfully resist God in your
abominable sins of Malice, Envy, Revenge, Hatred, Blood-thirstiness,
Covetousness, and that which is the Center of all, and contains all the
mischief that is, Self-Interest: the only venom that has of late years
poisoned this goodly and once flourishing Kingdom.

Christ denied himself, who should not? The King denies himself, and you will
not. Oh beloved Countrymen (I speak to the whole Kingdom, I wish every Ear
heard me,) look your selves in this glass that I have here presented you with:
it is not of so pure a crystal as it might have been made, but it will show
you plainly the ugliness of your painted holiness, and rotten-heartedness to
God, your King and Fellow Subjects: that so by a true Repentance [forsaking the
evil and doing the good] you may come to a sight of your grievous sins, of Gods
infinite Mercy, of your Kings abundant Love, and your own future happiness,
which is uncessantly prayed for at the hand of God, by

The greatest Sinner of you all, yet ready to sacrifice himself for a safe and
welgrounded PEACE, Richard Farrar.

Errata. Page 6. line 7. read fought for sought. Page 29. l. 36. read that
lives.

FINIS.

