

FRUIT-WALLS IMPROVED, By Inclining them TO THE HORIZON: OR, A WAY TO BUILD
WALLS FOR FRUIT TREES; Whereby they may receive more Sun Shine, and Heat, than
ordinary. By a Member of the Royal Society.

LONDON: Printed by R. Everingham; and are to be sold by John Tailor, at the
Sign of the Ship, in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCXCIX.

Imprimatur

Liber cui Titulus, Fruit-Walls Improved, by inclining them to the Horizon.

John Hoskyns, V. P. R. S.
August 31. School.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE MARQUESS OF TAVISTOCK.
MY LORD,
WHile Your Lordship fits Your Self, in Your Travels, to follow the Footsteps
of so many glorious Ancestors, I prepare for You, in the Culture of Fruits, a
Diversion to those great Occupations, which Your Birth will hereafter bring
upon Your Lordship. I was walking with Your Lordship, when I first thought of
this Way, to make our Gardens yield better Fruits. Besides, My Lord, I cannot
forget what other Titles you have, to look upon this as a domestic Production.

I shall think my self happy, if I can add something to the Innocent Pleasures
of many Nations; especially this; for which, as well as most of the
Neighboring Countries, what I have to propose seems to be of most Use.

However, My Lord, I shall be satisfied, if, by thus endeavoring to become
useful to Your Lordship, I express my most sincere Gratitude, for all the
Obligations I have to Your Illustrious Family.

I am with all manner of Respect,

My LORD, Your Lordship's Most humble, most obedient, and most obliged Servant,
N. F. D.

The PREFACE.
THE Reader may, perhaps, think it strange to find, in this Discourse, a
mixture of Gardening and Geometry; these having had hitherto but little
communication with each other. But such is the wonderful extent of
Mathematics, that very few Arts can be named, but what may be, by a due
Application of them, in a great measure improved. At least I hope Experience
will make this plain, in the very case we have under consideration.

I might have published only that part of this Discourse, which could be
understood by every body; or else have placed the Mathematical part, wholly by
it self. But it was hard to separate them, without an injury to both. And I
thought it better, that whoever dos not care, for what relates to Geometry,
should be desired, from hence, to read only what the Table, or Margin, will
show him to be most for his use.

And, lest the nicest Reader should have yet any occasion to complain, and
think it too great a trouble, for him to choose what he may read, and what he
may pass over, I have all along set, in the Margin, some Commas, over against
such places, as any one, not skilled in the Mathematics, may freely avoid. I
must however except the two or three first Sheets, which were already Printed,
before I thought of this Distinction. The remaining Discourse, tho some few
Words in it may not be understood, by such as are unacquainted with the common
Terms of ordinary Arts, will, I hope, neither prove tedious, nor offensive, to
any Lovers, of Gardening; even Ladies themselves not excepted. Where I have
used a double row of Commas, I desire to have no other Readers, but such as
have studied, to a great degree, either Natural Philosophy, or Mathematics, or
both.

It was requisite that this Theory should not appear, without its
Demonstration; that so the Curious might know the Ground, it is built upon; and
satisfy the rest of the World, that here is no design laid, to impose upon
them; but, on the contrary, such hopes offered, of an extraordinary Success, in
raising good and early Fruits, unless the Seasons be too much wanting, as
amount almost to an entire certainty. Neither could the Directions, that were
to be given, be fitly expressed, without borrowing from Geometry, and some
other Mathematical Sciences, their proper Language.

I have endeavored to be as short, as I possibly could: and there are some
places, where, if one reads fast, he will hardly conceive the whole extent of
the Discourse. Such are, for instance, the places, where I speak of Remedies
against Winds. That very brevity, for which discerning Men are used to express
so great an Esteem, will make a second reading pleasanter, less troublesome, and
more profitable, whenever it will be necessary: and will help to find easily,
and within a little compass, the Directions useful to Practice.

As to the Style, I am sorry to find so very few Words, and not one Sentence,
to have been altered, by such, as were at the trouble to peruse my Manuscript.
But the Example of the Illustrious Monsieur Hugens, who published in French his
Theories of Light and Gravity, tho he was no perfect Master of that Language,
makes me hope that any faults, in the Style, will be forgiven me, especially by
English Men; who, of all Nations, have least to reproach me withal, that I
should offer to write this Treatise in English. If it be well received, perhaps
a second Edition may be more accurately penned.

Most Countries may reap some Advantage, by the Theory, which I shall propose:
but especially such, as have more than 45 Degrees Latitude. This comprehends,
in our Europe, all England, Scotland, and Ireland; most part of France;
Holland, Flanders, Germany, Switzerland; the North part of Italy; Hungary,
Sclavonia, Transylvania, Moldavia etc; Poland, Denmark, Sweden, Muscovy; and
several other Countries of less note: but with some difference. Of these
Countries, such, as lie more to the South, may expect to have, with our Walls,
some excellent Figs, and Grapes, etc. with some of the Fruits of hotter
Climates. But as one goes more Northwards, tho here and there some new Sorts of
Fruits be met withal, yet fewer and fewer good Fruits will, by degrees, be
left, especially of those Kinds that require a great deal of Heat; till at last
most Fruits, by the help of Sloping Walls, will only show better their Shape
and Bigness, and perhaps something of their Flavor, without ever coming to a
perfect maturity. For I do not doubt but that, even in those unhappy Climates,
the natural Productions, which they have, will be much mended, by our Inclining
Walls. Southwards of 45 Degrees Latitude, I can no more reckon, in the North
Hemisphere, whole Countries, as concerned in this Discourse; but only some
particular places, upon Hills and Mountains; or else some peculiar sorts of
Fruits; of which some may be made forwarder, without any prejudice from the
Increase of Heat; and others may be transported, from hotter Countries: Or
lastly, some peculiar Expositions; which being yet too cold, as, for instance,
the North Expositions, may be helped, as much, as one pleases, by duly
inclining their Walls.

As our Theory is not restrained to Europe, nor to Countries on this side the
Equinoctial Line; so it is not proper only to Men of great Estates: but whoever
is able to have a Wall, about his Garden, may, in some proportion, enjoy the
Advantage, that arises from it. It Is true I have principally considered how
large Gardens, for Fruit, might be made useful, handsome, and stately. And this
being the hardest part, and including all the Directions, necessary to those,
that can be but at a small Expense, what I had more to say, in reference to
them, was the less considerable. No body therefore ought to complain, that I
forgot his Case.

It is not just that we should lay open those rich Presents, which the Author
of Nature offers us, without expressing a due Sense of His Magnificence and
Greatness. Who can avoid admiring that Supreme and Infinite Wisdom, which makes
every where such an immense variety, of most graceful and excellent
Productions, to cover the whole Face of the Earth, and to spring out of the
very Ground? From thence it is that, notwithstanding their different
Proprieties, they all draw wonderfully their Life, and the Spirit that animates
them; to the Amazement of any, that considers this surprising Operation.

THE TABLE.
IDEA of Sloping Walls for Fruit. Page 1 Defects of perpendicular South Walls.
p. 2 Perpendicular South Walls, East Walls and West-Walls compared together.
ibid. Perpendicular Walls compared with Sloping Walls. p. 4 The same done in a
particular Example for the Equinox: p. 5 And for the Summer Solstice. p. 6 The
result of which shows the great advantage of Sloping Walls. ibid. What
Countries they are best for. ibid. A good Culture is necessary for them to have
their full effect. p. 7 An instance from Experience of the usefulness of
Sloping Walls. ibid. How Sloping Walls may be built with little charge. p. 9
And how far the Roofs of Houses might serve instead of Sloping Walls. p. 10 The
advantage of their having no Foundation. p. 11 Rule for determining the
quantity of the Inclination of Sloping South Walls. p. 12 Of Sloping Walls in
very hot Countries. p. 14 A Table giving the Limits of the Elevation of South
Walls in temperate Countries. p. 15 It is difficult to determine those Limits
in very hot Countries. p. 16. The Use of the Table. p. 17 Vines are commonly
planted upon a rising Ground well exposed. ibid. A Hill well exposed cut into
Terrasses, with Sloping Walls for Fruit. p. 18. Something like this done in
China, but for another reason. p. 19 A considerable Declivity to the South, in
a large Garden, may be turned to much advantage. p. 20. A perpendicular Wall in
no Country so hot, as a Sloping Wall, proper to the Place and Exposition. p.
21. The North Exposition is made tolerable by a Sloping Wall. ibid. Use of
Sloping Walls for having Fruits, Melons etc, early and thoroughly ripe. p. 22
Walls of Bricks are best in England. p. 23 Of Walls of Slate, or of any dark
colored Stone, whether natural or painted. p. 23 Sloping Walls not to be
clogged with any Shade, except perhaps in Winter, or when the Sun is very low.
p. 24 Sloping Walls may ascend obliquely upon a Hill; and the use of making
them so. ibid. Many Slopes in several Gardens are ready made, and fit for
Sloping Walls. ibid. The goodness of a Wall proved owing in a great measure to
the Exposition. p. 25 The Author's design in commending this Theory. ibid. The
advantage for Vegetation of a close and warm Air, and of small and narrow
Gardens. p. 26 How to make some Terrasses, running from East to West, so that
the Air between be extremely warm: p. 28 And that they be not exposed to Winds.
p. 29 Terrasses to be made higher when they are far asunder. p. 30 Roofs may be
used instead of Terrasses. p. 31 Of Plants of hotter Countries. ibid. Of Orange
Trees. ibid. Of some Objections against Sloping Walls. ibid. Sloping South
Walls exposed to the mischiefs of latter Frosts, unless prevented. p. 32 Of
Remedies against an early Vegetation and Winds. ibid. Sloping Walls are exposed
to one sort of White Frosts. p. 33 They are much exposed to Hail. p. 34 Of the
Trees growing obliquely to the Ground. ibid. Of the dampness that may be
objected against Sloping Walls. p. 35 Of their being exposed to Mice, and Ants,
etc. p. 36 Of all other Objections against them. ibid. Calculation showing for
an Example the proportion of Heat, at the Solstice, in the Latitude of 52, upon
a perpendicular Wall, and a Sloping smooth South Wall, passing through the Pole.
p. 38. The Ground and Method of this Calculation. ibid. The result of it. p. 42
Other Examples to the same purpose for the Latitude of 51: ibid. And 45
Degrees. p. 43 Sloping Walls are more necessary in colder Countries; but the
Increase of Heat, they give, is greater, in warmer Climates. ibid. Sloping
South Wall passing through the Pole less hot, in the Solstice, than the South Wall
passing through the lower point of the Polar Circle. p. 44 A more accurate Method
of comparing the Sun's Heat, upon two plane Walls, in any Situation. p. 45 This
Method depends upon the Quadrature, and Center of Gravity, of the Line of Sines
and its Segments: ibid. And is general: p. 48 And in some few Cases capable of
a very easy Approximation; ibid. Notwithstanding the Effects of the Air. p. 49
A Corollary for finding the Heat of the Sun, upon a Plane parallel to the
Horizon. ibid. A Table showing the Sun's Heat upon a Plane, for each Degree of
the Sun's Elevation upon it. ibid. The Use of the Table. p. 51 The Diminution
of Heat occasioned by the Air is considerable; ibid. But hardly to be found by
Meditation; and why. ibid. A Method for finding it by some Experiments, with a
Burning Speculum. ibid. A Table giving the Length of a Beam of Light in the
Air, supposing the Height of the Atmosphere given etc. p. 52 How to find, in an
Air of an uniform Density, the Diminution of Heat, for the several Altitudes of
the Sun. p. 54 Of Movable Walls, in order to receive the Light of the Sun
almost perpendicularly for the whole Day. p. 56 Description of an Engine for
that purpose. ibid. Advantage of Movable Walls against Storms and Winds. p. 59
Their use for early Fruits. ibid. Of the Rain falling upon Sloping Walls. ibid.
Terrasses so shaped as to give some more Advantages, in reference to Rain and
Heat. p. 60 Idea of a Paved Sloping Ground upon a Hill, to be used instead of
Terrasses with Sloping Walls. p. 62 It will prevent the Dissipation of the
Spirits of the Earth. p. 63 What the Author finds said by others, particularly
by Monsieur La Quintinye, that may have some relation to Sloping Walls. ibid.
An Account of what Monsieur La Quintinye calls des Ados. p. 64 And of his
Slopes of Earth, exposed to the South or East, and purposely made for Fruit. p.
65 Reflection upon this contrivance: p. 66 Which is here compared with Sloping
Walls. ibid. Our Gardens, tho Square, may at once enjoy the Sun upon their four
Walls. p. 67 In Monsieur La Quintinye's Ground Plat of the French King's
Garden, no Footstep found of Sloping Walls. ibid. To what degree they may be
unpleasant to the Eye. ibid. Objection from Monsieur La Quintinye's English
Translation solved. p. 68 Account of an Amphitheater with Sloping Walls. ibid.
And of some Melons, and other Fruits, heated with Unequal Glasses. p. 69 The
Fault of Vines that are commonly made to grow against a Roof, or the Coping of
a Wall. ibid. Judgment of those and all other such Trials, in order to make
the most of the Sun's Heat. p. 70 Caution against too much Heat Sloping Walls
are like to procure. ibid. Frames called Espaliers by the French recommended,
to take off some of the Sun's Heat, and to give more liberty to Trees. p. 71 A
Method for choosing the Elevation of a Sloping Wall in any Exposition
whatsoever. p. 72 The Heat sensibly the same upon a South or upon a North
Sloping Wall, tho a little declining from the true North or South. p. 75 A
singular sort of Maximums and Minimums, very different from those that are
commonly considered. ibid. The same in some measure already observed by others.
ibid. The Ground of the foregoing Method. p. 76 Experience must also be
consulted. ibid. Of Walls that are not smooth. ibid. There can be no such thing
as a Wall giving the Heat proportional to the Sine of the Sun's Elevation upon
it. ibid. But if there was, the Method of calculating the Heat upon it would be
easy. p. 77 And Sloping Walls would be yet very advantageous, even in that
Supposition, tho less than before. p. 77 Of a Wall giving a mean proportional
Heat, between such a Wall as this and a Plane Wall. ibid. A smooth Wall
compared with a rough Wall. p. 78 How to make a Brick Wall smooth. ibid. Of a
Sloping Wall with Semi-cylindrical Furrows upon it. p. 79 These Furrows
compared with a plane Wall of the same breadth with them. ibid. Measure of the
Heat upon a Semi-cylindrical Space. p. 81 An Account of a Table giving, from 40
to 67 Degrees Latitude, the proportion of the Sun's Heat, in the Solstice, upon
a perpendicular and a Sloping South Wall. ibid. The use of Sloping Walls in
very hot Countries, in such Situations as, being high, are naturally temperate
or cold. ibid. The Table it self, and its Explication p. 82 The Use of the
Table. Example for Paris. p. 84 Of South Walls that are more inclined to the
Horizon, than the Wall that passes through the Pole of the World. p. 85
Perpendicular and Sloping South Walls may be well compared together in the
same, but not in different Climates. ibid. Of some other Advantages of Sloping
Walls. p. 86 In reference to Dew and Rain; especially as to the East Wall:
ibid. In reference to Frost, occasioned by the Earth's transpiring some
moisture; p. 87 Or by the cold Vapors in the Air driving with the Wind and
sticking upon Trees. ibid. The growing of Fruits extended to more Countries and
Places: ibid. And the time of their Ripeness and Use for Men to more Days in
the Year. p. 88 Ordinary Walls compared among themselves and with Sloping
Walls, as to the Forwardness of their Fruits. ibid. The Certainty made greater
of our Latter Fruits coming to Perfection. p. 89 Slopes of Earth for smaller
Plants. ibid. Of the dividing a main Slope into many small ones. ibid. Of
shaping the Level or ordinary Ground, into very large Furrows running East and
West, with a gentle Slope Southwards, and a steep one Northwards, or contrary
wise, in order to increase or diminish a little the Sun's Heat. ibid.
Application of this Practice to Use. p. 91. Of the Difference of Heat upon the
North and South side of Mountains, Hills and Downs. ibid. The Heat of the Air
in any place dos not very easily spread into the next Air. p. 92 Nor the
reflected Heat spend it self so fast but that it may be strongly felt. ibid.
Our European Plants grow naturally, upon the Mountains in the West Indies, in
such places where the Heat is fitted to their several Natures. p. 93 An Account
of a Slope where extraordinary Strawberries are said to grow. ibid. Advantage
of Sloping Walls in such days as the Sun is seen for some Hours only. p. 94
Advantage of inclining Sloping Walls more or less, according to the Climate,
Situation, and Exposition. ibid. Advantage of Terrasses with Sloping Walls, in
reference to a sufficient quantity of good Earth, which is easily procured. p.
95. Description of a Garden for Fruit, according to the present Theory. ibid.
The Use of making the outside Wall thicker at bottom than at top. p. 96 A kind
of Canal or Ditch, to keep the Garden from too much Water. ibid. Measures of
the Slopes, which are respectively made equal. But being made different they
may be better fitted for several Fruits. p. 98 A Table showing the Heights,
Elevations, and Bases of the Walls. p. 99 Measures for the Ground Plat taken
across the Garden. p. 100 Of a Garden for Vines only. It requires but small
Terrasses. p. 103 Of the Number of ordinary Trees the Garden could hold; from
whence is to be estimated the Number of its Fruits. ibid. A Table showing the
Heights and Lengths and Expositions of the Walls. p. 104 Short Table giving the
Result of the former. p. 105 Some Suppositions taken from Monsieur La
Quintinye; ibid. By which a Table is made of the number of ordinary Trees the
Garden would have. p. 106 3 Vines to be substituted for one Tree. p. 107
General Sum of ordinary Trees and Vines in the Garden. ibid. Of Terrasses for
Vines only. ibid. Vines ought to be kept very low. ibid. Of a large Terrasse,
parted into two, for Vines. p. 108 The Garden will not hold so many Trees as it
would, if they were to keep within the ordinary Sizes. ibid. The Trees in it
will grow very large, and why: ibid. And must be far asunder: ibid. Yet will
not yield a less Crop of Fruits. p. 109 They will be more lasting. ibid. A
Guess at their Distances. ibid. Proportion of the London Foot to that of Paris.
ibid. A Draught of the Garden in Perspective. ibid. Division of a large Garden
by some Canals into four or sixteen little Gardens, or any other number. p. 110
This will yield the Earth necessary for the Terrasses. ibid. And either give
different Ponds for several sorts of Fishes: or else open the way by Boats
among the Gardens. 111 And leave also a Foot-way into them all p. 111 Any
ordinary Gentleman may have a few Terrasses or Slopes well exposed. p. 112 A
Trial of Sloping Walls not to be depended upon, unless made by a very good
Artist. ibid. A good Culture more significant than a good Exposition. p. 113
Sloping Walls very necessary, while our Summers continue to be so cold. ibid.
The Cause of that Change, in our Seasons, referred to a Phenomenon, like Smoke,
that incompasses the Body of the Sun, and is seen to spread an exceeding great
way from it. p. 114 The Origin of that Smoke. p. 115 How to determine the
Figure of the Space it lies in. ibid. It may grow thicker and yet not be
perceived to have changed, except perhaps by its Effects. p. 117
Some Directions relating to Fruit-Walls.
Directions about Garden Walls ought to be taken from Monsieur La Quintinye,
and the present Discourse. p. 118 Let your Walls be Straight. ibid. How they
must be if they stand by themselves, without any Earth on either side. ibid.
How if they rest against a Terrasse or Slope of Earth. p. 119 Let the Earth of
the Terrasses be thoroughly settled. ibid. The Perpendicular Height of Sloping
Walls. p. 120 Their Inclination. ibid. Of a broad Terrasse, and how it may be
made; ibid. When its sides are almost equally leaning; ibid. And when the
Terrasse runs from East to West. p. 121 The Ground of Alleys for Fruit may be
made sloping toward the South. ibid. The North Wall may be left bare, and
Herbs sown at the Foot of it: ibid. Or else the Earth be kept resting, in order
to renew that of the South Wall. ibid. Slopes preferred to Walls. p. 122 If you
can have but one Slope, give it the best Exposition. ibid. Of a Slope round the
Garden. ibid. Of a Terrasse round the Garden. ibid. Of more Terrasses in the
Garden. ibid. Of flat and sharp Terrasses ibid. Description of a Wall very well
secured from Winds. p. 123 Of the Disposition the Roots ought to have, in a
Tree that is to be planted against a Sloping Wall. p. 124 Description of a
Ladder to be used about Sloping Walls. p. 125 Of Harbors and Summer Houses, in
our large Gardens. p. 126 Of Ornaments of Architecture, in a Wall altogether
smooth. p. 127
THE END OF THE TABLE.
ERRATA.
PAGE xviij. l. 14. THE. p. xxj. l. 21. Latitudes. p. 4. l. 28. Neighborhood.
p. 14. l. 30. err. p. 15. In the Note A Table. p. 16. l. 22. dos. p. 19. l. 27.
China tells us, how. p. 23. l. 2. we should gather from. p 26. l. 23. not to
be. p. 29. l. 18. Terrasse. p. 33. l. 21. Ridings for Fruit might. p. 37. l.
27. proceed. p. 38. l. 10. smooth South Wall. p. 43. l. 4. 10593. p. 50. In the
Column of Degrees read 55. p. 53. In the Column of Degrees read 41. p. 54. l.
5. Add in the Margin the following Note if it be wanting: How to find, in an
Air of an uniform Density, the Diminution of Heat, for the several Altitudes of
the Sun. p. 60. l. 6. B A is the Slope. p. 67. In the Notes La Quintinye's. l.
27. Begin a new Paragraph. p. 69. l. 2. tried, about 53. p. 78. l. 5. would. p.
96. l. 29. Canal. And so in the Marginal Note. p. 104. l. 17. 16. 6. l. 19. 10.
2 and. p. 115. l. 4. that it has. p. 121. l. 2. In the Notes read when. p. 122.
l. ult. and. p. 124. l. 29. judgment. p. 127. l. 8. fear yet lest. p. 128. l.
4. Frontispice.

ADVERTISEMENT.
A Mistake of one Degree, in the supposed Latitude of Paris, which ought to
have been 48 Degrees 50 Minutes, has spread through the Numbers in the whole 85th
Page, and the beginning of the next. But it is easy to rectify this mistake,
which is not very material. If you are minded to correct it;

Instead of 49. 183. 781. 427. 548. 427. 121. 548. 121. 487. 4. 2 Degrees. 49.
Write 48. 169. 773. 460. 595. 460. 135. 595. 135. 527. 5. 1 Degree. 48.

IN the Latin Mathematical Treatise, which will be bound at the end of some
Copies of the present Discourse, the last Number in the 21th Page, ought to be
2^302584.

To the BOOK-BINDER.
THE Frontispice and the Title Half-sheets ought to be folded so, one within
another, as to have first two white Leafs; then the Frontispice and the Title
facing each other. The Garden in Perspective ought to face the first Page; and
the large Mathematical Cut ought to face the last Page, that is the 128th Page.
Both these Cuts must be so disposed, as to lie, when unfolded, altogether out
of the Book. After the same way must also be folded the small Mathematical Cut.
It belongs to the Latin Mathematical Treatise, and it must face the 24th Page,
which is the last Page of the said Treatise.

Horti Fructuum edilium feracis Orthographica Delineatio, Spectatore versus
Occidentem Acquinoctialem prospiciente Hac Tabula Murorum ad Horizontem
inclinatorum. Arboribus pandendis ac before diutiusque Soli exponendis,
exhibetur vsus.

S: Gribelin sculp.


FRUIT-WALLS IMPROVED, BY INCLINING THEM TO THE HORIZON: OR A WAY TO BUILD
WALLS FOR FRUIT TREES, Whereby they may receive more Sunshine and Heat than
ordinary.
AFTER all the Application of so many Men in all Times and Countries to
Agriculture, one would scarce have thought there was yet left so notable and so
very obvious an Improvement of it as that I am a going to propose. Idea of
sloping Walls for Fruit.
It consists in building Walls for Fruits, Grapes etc, not in a perpendicular
Situation, as is commonly done, but so sloping, tho otherwise straight and
plane, as to receive the Beams of the Sun, not only for a longer time, but also
with a much fuller and better Exposition.

It will appear that this way of building Fruit-Walls will be very
advantageous, if we compare perpendicular Walls in several Countries and
Expositions with one another, and with sloping Walls: examining withal some of
their most considerable Proprieties.

South-Walls are commonly reckoned to be the best for Fruits. Defects of
perpendicular South-walls.
But in these Climates, and much more in hotter Countries, when the Days are
something long, and the Heat of the Summer is in its greatest strength, it is
late before the Sun shines upon them, and the Sun leaves them as early in the
Afternoon. When it is about Midday the Sun is so high, that it shines but
faintly and very sloping upon them; which makes the Heat to be much the less;
both because a small quantity of Rays falls then upon these Walls; and because
that very quantity acts with a kind of glancing; and not with full force.
Before or after Noon the Rays come yet upon our ordinary South-walls with more
obliquity. Perpendicular South-walls, East-walls, and West-walls compared
together.


In the North part of France East Walls are looked upon as almost of the same
goodness for Fruit as South-walls: which proceeds more from the Defect I have
noted in South-walls, than from any particular Excellency in those facing the
East. And accordingly South-walls are here, and in all other cold Climates,
much the best of the two. West-walls in France, as well as here, are but
indifferent, tho they have the like Exposition to the Sun as East-walls. I take
the reason of this difference between East-walls and West-walls to be partly
because in the Morning the Air is purer, and that the Sun shines oftener and
stronger than in the Afternoon; and meets with the Dew while it is yet fresh
upon Plants, whose motion it revives after a long rest, and as it were a
refreshing Sleep. But the chief cause of it must be attributed to the coldness
of the Air in the Morning, that checks the Vegetation, till the presence of the
Sun revives it; which it dos much sooner and much more effectually on the
East-wall than on the Westerly. In the Afternoon the Heat of the Air is great
every where; and Heat alone, without any Sunshine, is able to make Plants
vegetate, tho not so perfectly. Which, if it were not sufficiently known, might
be easily evinced from what is observed in Summer in the Fields, when the Sun
happens not to be seen for some Weeks together. I said that the Sun shines
stronger in the Morning than in the Afternoon, tho it be hotter in the
Afternoon than in the Morning. But this is not because the Sun in the Afternoon
shines with more force; but because it continues to act upon an Air already
warmed with the impression of the Morning Sun. In order to be satisfied in it,
one may, when the Days are long, compare nicely the Effects of a burning
Speculum at 5, 6 and 7 a Clock in the Morning, with its Effects at 7, 6 and 5
in the Afternoon. For the like reason it is much warmer a Month or two after
than a Month or two before the Summer Solstice; tho we cannot but suppose the
Sun to shine sensibly with the same force at equal distances from the Tropic.

Conceive a perpendicular Wall with Trees against it. Perpendicular Walls
compared with Sloping Walls.
It is evident that it is exposed only to one half of the visible Sky. And the
point to which it is directly exposed falls upon the Horizon. To which point
should we suppose the Sun to be something near, one half of the time it would
be under the Horizon, and the other half it would shine but weakly through so
great a depth of Air.

But if we suppose the said Wall remaining on the same place to be inclined,
with the Trees against it, so as to become elevated only 45 Degrees upon the
Horizon, and to have the Trees on its upper side; the Wall in that situation
will be exposed to three quarters of the visible Sky: and the point to which it
is directly exposed will be 45 Degrees high. To all the Neigbourhood of which
place if the Sun happens to come, it must needs act from thence upon the Wall
with a considerable force. And so far the advantage of sloping Walls is already
plain and obvious, without any Calculation.

Now if we proceed farther, and bring the matter to a Calculation, according to
some Principles, which shall be explained in a proper place, and which most
Mathematicians will admit of; we shall not only say that there is a great
advantage in sloping Walls; but we may also show in Numbers, sometimes exactly,
sometimes by a near Computation, the Increase of Heat we shall have, by using
them rather than perpendicular Walls.

Thus, The same done in a particular Example for the Equinox;
for Instance, if in the Latitude of 52 Degrees, which is more Northerly by one
Degree than London, a South-wall, very smooth and even, be so leaning as to
have its Plane passing through the Pole of the World; which sloping for many
Fruits is not altogether the best that might be assigned; the Action of the Sun
upon it in an Equinoctial Day will be to the Action of the Sun in the same Day
upon an ordinary upright South-wall (supposing it also to be smooth and even)
as 100 to 63. And these Numbers we can easily continue with exactness to many
more places at pleasure. So then here the Heat of the Sun is increased
something more than in the proportion of 3 to 2 (not to say of 11 to 7) above
what it is in the perpendicular Wall; which is very considerable. But that
Increase will be yet greater and greater, as the Sun comes to have a greater
Northerly Declination.

For in the Summer Solstice the Action of the Sun, and for the Summer Solstice.
upon that even and smooth sloping Wall, will be increased so as to be upon one
account more than 3 times greater than the Action upon the perpendicular Wall.
Besides another very considerable addition of Heat, which would make that
Action from 3 to become 4 times greater, were it not that something is to be
subtracted from this last number, upon the account of the Light of the Sun not
coming so freely through a greater depth of Air: which Correction has no place in
the Equinoctial Day. However we may suppose the Heat, in the Summer Solstice,
to be about fourfold what it would have been upon the perpendicular Wall.

This Increase of Heat is so extraordinary, The result of which shows the great
advantage of Sloping Walls.
and for above two Months the Sun keeps so very near the Tropic, viz. within a
distance from it of 3 Degrees, that seeing what our South-walls are already
able to do, I do not doubt but such a Wall as this would make Grapes, and Figs,
and other Fruits equal here in goodness to those of some much hotter Climates.

Yet I confess this improvement for Fruit-Walls is not like to be so useful
here as in France, What Countries they are best for.
or those other Countries where they enjoy the sight of the Sun oftener than we
use to do; a due regard being had every where to the natural productions of the
place. A good Culture is necessary for them to have their full effect.
Nor do I look for any excellent effect from it, unless the Trees or Grapes be
raised from the best Kinds, and the Soil be good and deep, and the Trees and
Vines be governed and cultivated by a skilful Artist. It is too common here to
leave these Plants to themselves, and in a manner without any Culture. Whereas,
besides the necessary care of Pruning them duly, they do not think it too much,
even in Latitudes where they have not the same occasion for those foreign
helps, to dig very frequently about them, or to do it at least four or five
times in a Year.

Lest those that desire good Fruits, and are no proper Judges in an Inquiry
that depends so much on Geometry, should look upon what I have said as a bare
Speculation, I will make them acquainted with the following Story. By which it
will appear, that as we have already our Reflections and Calculations of our
side, so we are not altogether destitute of Experience.

Having explained to a Person of Quality the present Invention of Sloping
Walls, An Instance from Experience of the usefulness of Sloping Walls.
I received for answer, that upon a Sloping Wall, which I saw since, and I will
describe by and by, there grew some Years ago Grapes equal in Goodness to those
that grow in France. This Wall was nothing but a facing of Bricks laid flat
(and by consequence only two or three Inches thick) upon a natural slope of
Earth, about seven or eight Foot high. It was of very many Years standing, yet
extremely sound and entire; except in some few places, where the Brick it self
was mouldered away. It had been made only because (being very near and directly
opposite to the House) it was thought to be handsomer than the naked Earth. It
made an Angle of about 60 Degrees with the Horizon; and was exposed not
directly to the South, but several Degrees Westward. The Soil is not
extraordinary. The House was but low, but it must needs shade that place a
great part of the Day. There has been added since some pretty high Buildings to
both ends of the House, which Buildings by their shade have entirely spoiled
the said Vine, so that it has been pulled up. I felt the Bricks of that Slope
one Day, when the Sun shone almost perpendicularly upon them, and they were
exceeding hot. But those Noble Persons, to whom the House belonged, thought the
goodness of the Grapes might arise from the Soil; and forgetting the
Exposition, they never tried to recover their loss by another Sloping Wall, for
which the Ground would have afforded them abundance of convenient places.

And thus we have not only a notable Experience for us; How Sloping Walls may
be built with little charge:
but we see also how easily and how cheap our Sloping Walls may be built,
without any danger of their tumbling down, as our Garden-walls are apt to do.
But this being a very material Point, and considering that most People may
think it either very chargeable, or very impracticable, to build a Sloping
Wall, let us a little enlarge upon it.

I conceive then that the facing the Slope of Terrasse Walks, either with a
Brick-wall, such as I just now described, or else with a Wall twice, or at most
three or four times as thick is the best, easiest, and handsomest way of
building our Inclining Walls. Whose name ought not therefore to mislead one so
far, as to make him think, that we would propose the building of a thick Wall
sloping and encompassed on both sides with Air. The thicker Walls are properest
when they are less sloping: for so their strength may better serve to keep the
Terrasses from breaking out. It is not required we should lay the flat sides of
the Bricks perpendicularly to the plane of our Wall: but it will be more proper
to lay them parallel to it: So that each Bed or Floor of Bricks, of which our
Wall is composed, may be only two or three Inches thick. And thus the Joints of
the Bricks may be so disposed as to leave no room for Plants or Insects to come
out of the Ground.

After having explained a better way, And how far the Roofs of Houses might
serve instead of Sloping Walls.
it is hardly worth our while to observe that the Roofs of long and low
Buildings in the Country, and even the Roofs of Houses in great Towns, might
also conveniently be made to serve for Sloping Walls; especially if some regard
were had to it in building. So, for instance, in the Country the Roof of a long
Building might on one side be brought as low as the very Ground. And thus Trees
and Vines, especially the last, might be made to grow against the Roof, without
spending their very strength in growing up to an immoderate height. In Cities,
where they use sometimes to make one Roof to serve many Houses of one side the
Street, one might, between the Garret Windows, cut out in the Roof a
rectangular Space, of the same height and breadth with the Space the Windows
take up; and from within one might slide up to that Space a square Box full of
Earth, of a fit Figure and bigness to stand handsomely between the Windows. This
Box being supported at some height from the Floor, one need not fear any
inconveniency from the Water's dropping out: which, in case it should do, might
be received in some Vessels. It is so easy to prevent the Rain from running
in, between the Roof and the Box, that it is to no purpose to enlarge upon it.
Out of these Boxes one might raise some excellent Trees and Vines, and spread
them upon some Frames disposed against the Roof. And this, besides the more
substantial Advantage of yielding a considerable quantity of Fruit, would also
prove a delightful Ornament to that part of our Buildings, which seems to want
it most. However at London the Smoke of Sea-coal is much to be feared; since it
both takes off the strength of the Sun, and dos settle upon Trees, where its
great acrimony must needs be unnatural and pernicious. But I must give over and
leave the Application of this Doctrine to every body's Industry.

I need not mention that, in the making our Bricks, some holes may be made in
them to receive Pegs of Wood to serve as necessity shall require: unless you
choose rather to use those Frames the French call des Espaliers; which indeed
seem to be much better. The Advantage of their having no Foundation.
But it is worth observing, that such Walls as these, having no Foundation,
leave in the Earth more room for the Roots of our Trees; and are cheaper built
and less apt to fall. If they be not made both exceeding heavy and little
sloping, I do not think that they will compress so much the Ground under them
as to obstruct the growing and spreading of the Roots. And thus much is
sufficient as to the manner of building our Walls.

Let us now see, as far as we can, how we may choose, in any Latitude, the
properest Elevation for our South Wall, and for the Fruit we design to raise.

In order then to determine what Slope is best to give, Rule for determining
the quantity of the Inclination of Sloping South-Walls.
in cold and temperate Countries, to our South-wall, I look for the Sun's
Meridian Altitude at least ten Days, or a Fortnight, or three Weeks, etc.
before the latter half of the Fruit of the Kind I design to have uses to be
ripe: and then I make the Complement of that Altitude, to 90 Degrees, the
measure of the Elevation of the Wall above the Horizon. However I would not be
tied by this Rule, but that I might alter, upon the least consideration, the
sloping of the Wall by several Degrees; especially if one be afraid of taking
in too much Heat. And if the Sun's Declination, belonging to the Meridian
Altitude found by the Rule aforesaid, should be otherwise, I commonly reduce it
so (in our Northern Climates) as to make it fall in the Space, which is from
the Equator to the Parallel that goes through the 16th or 20th Degree of North
Latitude. The longer the Fruit is a growing ripe, and also the more distance of
time there is between the first and the last ripe Fruit of the same Tree, the
more Days would I allow backwards in the finding the Sun's Meridian. Altitude,
and Declination: Endeavoring by this to make, for the most part, the strongest
Heat of all to fall something before the middle of the ripening time. For the
Degree of Heat, that arises barely from the Exposition, is during many Days
sensibly the same, and as it were at a stay, when it is at the greatest. And we
must, for the most part, endeavor that, when our Tree makes an end of yielding
its Fruit, especially if this be about the latter end of the Year, the Sun may
already, by changing its Declination, have been withdrawing it self some 5, or
10, or 15 Degrees from the Line perpendicular to our inclined Plane. Thus all
the while the Fruit is growing ripe it will enjoy the greatest Heat.

But let us inquire more particularly after the Limits of the Elevations of
South-walls: so that we may resolve to keep them, in each Climate, within the
two Extremes we shall find.

I should not easily choose to make any where, except perhaps in extraordinary
high Grounds, the South-wall more sloping than an Elevation of about 30 or 40
Degrees upon the Horizon would make it to be. For, tho a great obliquity of the
Wall would not hinder. Vegetation, but rather, for ought I know, forward it;
yet, our experience in this kind being so very narrow I cannot know otherwise,
than by guess, how the Elevations of only 10 or 20 Degrees upon the Horizon
would agree with Plants. However such small Elevations are not fit for
South-walls, in these Countries. Of Sloping-Walls in very hot Countries.
But, if there were any use for our South-walls in the Torrid Zone, as there
may possibly be for those Fruits, which, being peculiar to that Climate,
require also a great deal of Sunshine to bring them to perfection, especially
in the higher Situations, upon some Hills or some Mountains, I should even
there choose not to give these Walls less than 40, or 45 Degrees Elevation:
which sloping would perhaps give but too much Heat. For there is some reason to
doubt whether it would not scorch any Plant whatsoever, that is set, in these
hot Countries, against a Wall very much inclined. So I should leave the most
sloping South-walls for the Climates that have about 40, or 45 Degrees
Latitude: and not use them there neither, but upon Mountains, or for the Plants
of hotter Countries. In Iseland, which is placed under the Polar Circle, the
inclined South-walls must make an Angle of more than 46 Degrees, and less than
66 Degrees with the Horizon. Generally, in all the temperate Zone, I should
limit the Elevation of the South-wall between 30 and 66 Degrees. These several
Considerations must be duly weighed together, as well as the tenderness of your
Plants, in order to choose a properer Elevation. But a small error in this is
not of great consequence, if you intend to raise all the Heat possible. For you
can indeed err considerably but one way, to wit, A Table giving the Limits of
the Elevation of South Walls in Temperate Countries.
in procuring too much Heat. If you do not fear to exceed in this, you may
follow the Numbers of this Table; where the first Column gives the Latitude or
Elevation of the Pole; Latitude. Degrees. Greatest Elevation of the South Wall.
Degrees. Least Elevation of the South Wall. Degrees. Least Elevation corrected. Degrees.
Middle Elevation. Degrees. 40 40 20 30 35 50 50 30 35 42 60 60 40 40 50 70 70 50 50
60 I II III IV V The second Column gives the greatest, and the third Column the
least Elevation of the South Wall upon the Horizon. The fourth Column gives the
same least Elevation, with some Corrections, that are not made in order to
increase the Heat, but, at the expense of some Heat, to give (in smaller
Latitudes) more Elevation to the Wall. The fifth Column gives only the middle
Numbers between those of the second and fourth; never differing from them one
way or another more than 10 Degrees. The Table was made from this Rule, That
the Elevation of the South Wall, in temperate Countries, ought, in order to
make the most of the Sun's Heat, neither to be more than the Height of the
Pole, nor less than the Height of the Pole wanting 20 Degrees.

So then the second and fourth Column may pretty well serve, especially in
great Latitudes, for Limits of the Elevations of our warmest South Walls. It is
difficult to determine those Limits in very hot Countries.
But the Elevations, for hottest Countries, cannot be so well determined, till
Experience has taught what may and what may not be done there. In those hot
Climates the Rule I gave just now is of little or no use. For it supposes that
Fruits are ripe by the end of October, or long before. But in the Torrid Zone
we may have Fruits all the Year round. In great Latitudes the Sun in Autumn and
Winter shines seldom, and always through a great depth of Air; which inclines one
to neglect that insignificant Sunshine, and to make the most of the Sunshine
in the Spring and Summer; by keeping the South Walls, as our Rule does, rather
more sloping than they needed have been otherwise. But pretty near the Equator
the Sun comes every Day to a considerable Height. And that invites one not to
neglect the Sunshine so much during Autumn and Winter, and by consequence to
make there the Walls rather less sloping. Which the scorching Heat requiring
also, all these Reasons seem to prove that the South Walls must again grow
rather more upright, as one comes nearer the Equator. For let it ever be
remembered to consider whether the Climate, the height of the Situation, the
Soil, the Exposition, the Nature of your Plants, and the Season of their
growing be such as to permit you to give your Sloping Walls the most Heat you
can procure.

As to the Use of the Table, The Use of the Table.
the Fruits that ripen in Autumn, and very late in the Year, require the
greatest Elevations; those that ripen in June, or July the least. Such as grow
ripe in May will have almost the least Elevations: and such as grow ripe in
April, August, and September, require some middling ones. But if any Fruit,
such as Pease etc, are to grow ripe in March, they require again the greatest
Elevations. Now all this is said upon supposition that you are in no fear of
procuring too much Heat. And this is what we can at present determine about the
Limits of the Elevations of South Walls.

Before we proceed farther, Vines are commonly planted upon a rising Ground
well exposed.
should not we relate, as an Experiment favoring our Inclined Walls, that
where Vines do grow in the open Air, they choose to Plant them not upon a flat,
but upon a rising Ground, exposed to the East, or South-East, or South? Which
sloping of the Ground, consonant to the Theory I have been proposing, is found
by Experience to be of an extraordinary Advantage. And to this must also be
referred what Monsieur La Quintinye has writ concerning the Exposition and
Declivity of the Ground for great Gardens. But, if after all there should be
left some Scruples in the Reader's Mind, let him either examine the
Demonstrations I shall give in this Discourse, or cause some proper Judge to
tell him how far he may rely upon them.

Having then no reason to think, but that our Theory will be found agreeable to
Nature, we may see farther how it can be brought to an extended and easy
Practice.

If any body therefore is desirous, particularly in a Country not exposed to
some returns of Frost in the Spring, A Hill well exposed cut into Terrasses
with Sloping Walls for Fruit.
and to blasting Winds, to raise a pretty deal of good Fruit, either for his
own use or for the Market, I would advise him, both as the best and the least
chargeable, to choose, in a very good Soil, especially in the side of a narrow
Vale, a convenient Hill or Rising, with a pretty strong Ascent, and exposed to
the South South East, or to the South and by East, or to the South, or to the
South and by West, or at least not far from these Expositions: and to dispose
his Ground by Terrasses, one above another, so that, in the Latitude of London,
the sloping of the Terrasses be elevated upon the Horizon, for the South Wall,
neither less than 36, nor more than 52 Degrees. Fig. I.
See the Figure I, where the Section of those Terrasses is represented, in two
several Places, to the Eye. And here you may take notice that, if the Ground be
not very steep, the less the Sloping Wall is elevated upon the Horizon, the
less Room, all things being alike, each Terrasse will take, and the less charge
will be required. In the making of these Terrasses a sufficient quantity of the
good Earth must be carefully gathered along the Ridge of each Walk, there to
receive and nourish the Roots of our Trees. Neither is it necessary to be very
curious in keeping your Terrasses, or Sloping Grounds, straight and parallel.
But you may follow the winding of the Hill, provided it keeps within the extent
of good Expositions: and take every where so much breadth as dos most
conveniently give your Terrasses the Height you require. Thus the Expense will
not be considerable; and even the plain Country Man may not think it above his
power; especially if he dos his Work by parts, and in several Years. And I am
much mistaken, if even those irregular Terrasses do not prove very pleasant and
entertaining to the Eye. Something like this done in China, but for another
reason.
A late ingenious Account of China, tells us how agreeable the prospects of
their Hills are, which the Country Men divide into several Levels, parted by a
Sloping Ground between. All this trouble is taken, in that industrious Country,
in order to keep the Rain from running off their Fields. But here we shall have
probably more occasion to think how we may not be troubled with too much Water;
and how that of the upper Terrasses may be prevented from falling into the
lower ones: which being always easy to be done, and the Remedy depending, in a
great measure, upon the Extent of the Ground, I must here forbear any farther
Discourse.

Thus have I brought our Theory to some consistence, and shown how it might
easily be reduced to Practice. Fig. I.
But while the first Figure is under our Eyes, A considerable Declivity to the
South in a large Garden may be turned to much advantage.
I cannot but observe, that instead of looking with others upon a great
Declivity toward the South as a considerable inconveniency in the Ground for a
great Garden, I should rather admire it, for the multitude of Sloping Walls,
well exposed, it would afford from place to place; besides the pleasantness of
many Walls breast high, and of a good prospect abroad. And as to the shade for
Walks, one might have it at the top of all from some rows of Trees.

I will here add some Reflections, I choose among a great many, by which we may
farther compare Inclined Walls with perpendicular ones. For I should swell this
to an unreasonable Bulk, should I speak of all the Calculations I have made
relating to this matter. A perpendicular Wall in no Country so hot as a
Sloping Wall proper to the Place and Exposition.
I shall only then observe that, from the Equator to the very Pole, that is in
the whole Terrestrial Globe, I find not one Place, and not one Exposition
whatsoever, in which a perpendicular Wall is so hot as a Wall sloping to a
proper Degree for the Exposition. The North Exposition is made tolerable by a
Sloping Wall.
And, whereas the North Exposition is utterly naught, in our ordinary manner of
building perpendicular Walls, if in the Latitude of 51 Degrees a North Wall be
elevated only 38 Degrees upon the Horizon, it will enjoy the Sun, tho much
sloping, for every Minute it can shine in the whole half Year, from the Spring
Equinox to the Autumn Equinox. But during the two Months and three Days about
the Summer Solstice it will enjoy the Sun with an Elevation, or Inclination,
ever greater than of 20 Degrees: which gives more than the ninth part of the
full Action of the Sun. And for ought I see that may be near as much as our
ordinary South Walls do then receive. This might serve for the Summer Fruits
that are ripe about the end of July, and for raising of Pease, etc. For tho one
would not choose to build such a Wall without some necessity, or some other
considerable advantage, yet having it at hand one would not leave it without
use. The North Exposition dos mend very fast as the Country lies more
Southerly: And above all others it dos require, in temperate Countries on this
side the Equator, Walls with a very small Elevation, such as 25, or 30, or 35
Degrees. So then we find that even the very worst of perpendicular Walls may
become tolerably good, if they be made sloping.

It will appear, by the sequel of this Discourse, how many Advantages, besides
the bare Increase of Heat, do follow our building of Sloping Walls: But one of
them lies already too obvious not to be spoken of here.

I say then that this Contrivance seems to be of an extraordinary consequence,
Use of Sloping Walls for having Fruits, Melons etc, early and thoroughly ripe.
for the raising of all sorts of Fruits something earlier than we use to have
them, and for their perfect ripening: And that it may prevent some of those,
that are fond of Fruits, from falling into the Diseases that usually follow the
eating Fruit not thoroughly ripe. I expect from these Walls such Melons, and
Figs, and Grapes, as, I think, have never been seen in this Country. I forbear
speaking of other Fruits; but shall only say that, if we had once some
excellent Kinds of Trees raised by this Method, we might not need to send for
new Graffs again to France. And if, the Summer being extraordinary wet and
cloudy, our Sloping South Wall should bring forth but indifferent Fruits, yet
even then those Fruits will be more tolerable than such as we gather from our
ordinary Walls. But all this will become more evident, when the Principles I
build upon shall be laid down.

There is yet something I have to say, both in reference to the properest
matter to build our Walls withal, and to some other circumstances in the manner
of building.

As to the properest Matter for our Walls, Walls of Bricks are best in England.
I think Brick to be much better, in this Country, than Stone: because they
grow hotter, and keep much longer the Heat. By which means they do still warm
the Plants a good while after the Sun is hid under a Cloud, and, in a manner,
lost to other Walls. I know nothing* that is more convenient than they are, or
of a better Shape for our purpose. The biggest and thickest Bricks will be
best: And I should choose, as I said before, to dispose them so that they might
appear by their broadest sides. Thus the Wall will be cheaper, the Bricks will
be apt to grow warmer, and, their Interstices being fewer and less deep, there
will be less room to take care of against Insects finding a shelter there. Of
Walls of Slate, or of any dark colored Stone, whether natural or painted.
Walls of Slate, or of any dark colored Stone, whether natural or painted,
will also be very good. For these Colors imbibe the Light, or Heat, much more
than Colors that are whiter.

Our Walls ought not to have any Building raised from the top of them; Sloping
Walls not to be clogged with any Shade, except perhaps in Winter, or when the
Sun is very low.
nor any other Shade cast upon them in Vegetating time, by the Interposition of
any thing standing, on either side of them, between them and the Sun. But if
they be deprived of the sight of the Sun, while it is only within a few Degrees
from the Horizon, the loss is not considerable, and abundantly made up, if, at
the same time, they be secured from Winds.

The Foundation, Sloping Walls may ascend obliquely upon a Hill; and the use of
making them so.
or rather Bottom of Sloping Walls needs not be horizontal; but it may ascend
obliquely upon a Hill by some Degrees. Which is of some convenience for the
running off of the Water, and for the choosing a South Exposition upon a Hill
that looks to the South-East, or South-West, or to any other point, either
between, or, at least, not much above 45 Degrees distance from these places.
For the most part of the Spring and Summer such a Wall will enjoy as much Sun,
as if the Foundation had been horizontal; but the Ground at the Foot of it will
enjoy less. And this is what I had further to mention as to the way of building
our Sloping Walls.

I have seen, Many Slopes in several Gardens are ready made, and fit for
Sloping Walls.
in many Gardens, and other places, some Slopes of Earth ready made, and fit
every way for Trees to grow against them, if they had been but faced with
Bricks. But they lay neglected, perhaps because the good Use that might be made
of them was unknown.

If any were apt yet to think that there can be no great difference between two
South Walls, The goodness of a Wall proved owing in a great measure to the
Exposition.
of which the one receives the Light of the Sun much fuller and longer than the
other; let them consider that, upon the very same Soil, the South Side of a
Wall is as good for Fruit as the North-side is bad. That the East Side of
another Wall is very good, at least in France, and the West Side but
indifferent. Which diversity can certainly be attributed to nothing but the
Exposition; and makes it more than probable that by so much as this is mended,
by so much Fruits ought to be more perfect.

I have given to this Theory some of the Commendations it justly deserves, The
Author's Design in commending this Theory.
knowing how hard a matter it is to persuade People to go out of their ordinary
way: And I wish I may have said enough to bring it into common Practice. I hope
this is not out of any vain Ostentation, since I choose to publish here what I
know to be much inferior to some Meditations of another Kind, I have had these
many Years by me. And thus much I beg leave to say; lest a thing that might be
useful should be neglected and thrown by, before it be understood.

If the vegetation of Plants did only depend upon the Sunshine coming freely
to them, there would be but little occasion left for any farther Improvement.
The Advantage for Vegetation of a close and warm Air; and of small and narrow
Gardens.
But it is well known that a warm and pretty close Air, well sheltered from
Winds, tho not so much exposed to the Sun, in a word, such an Air as is found
in the Gardens at Paris, and other great Cities where they do not burn Sea
Coal, dos often bring forth better Fruit than will be found in other places, in
the Neighborhood, tho better exposed. However, at the same time that we get
wholly the advantage of Sloping Walls, we may also keep all others, and secure
those Walls from cold and dangerous Winds. This makes me recommend Gardens of
but an indifferent bigness, with high Walls to them: being willing to purchase
a close Air with some little loss of Sunshine. But if the Gardens be very
narrow, as I should for the most part choose, the Walls may be less high. The
breadth of your Gardens ought not be the same in all Expositions. And it is of
great consequence that the length of very narrow Gardens be from East to West,
and not from North to South. In disposing thus the length of the Garden, the
Wall may be from 8 or 10, to 15 Foot, or a little more, in the Slope: the
breadth of the Garden, or Earth, between the Walls, from 11 or 12, to 50 or 100
Foot: and the length as great as you please. But the smallest Breadths are
best: And those, as I said, do not so much require high Walls: and by
consequence will not be so chargeable. In Gardens that run from North to South,
a very small Breadth will be as prejudicial as it is good in Gardens that run
from East to West. For it is easy to see that, in these last, the Shade of the
long Walls upon each other is but little, in vegetating time; and falls either
upon the shortest Days, or upon such Moments as the Sun is but low and weak.
But, in Gardens that run from North to South, and are of the same breadth with
the former, the Shade is more considerable. And I find that such Gardens,
having an East Wall and a West Wall, each with an Elevation of 30 Degrees, and
each of 7 Foot in perpendicular Height, must be 68 Foot wide, from Wall to
Wall, if you will that neither Wall should take from the other the sight of the
Sun, but when it is less than 5 Degrees high.

Lest any one should wonder at this extraordinary narrowness, which dos often
turn what we called a Garden into a narrow Walk, I will show that I do not
choose it without securing that great advantage of a warm and close Air: In
order to which I give here the Section of a Walk, or narrow Garden for Trees,
whose length runs East and West. Fig. II, III.
Let the South Wall AB have a proper Elevation for your Climate, How to make
some Terrasses running from East to West, so that the Air between be extremely
warm;
and for the Fruits you design to have; suppose at London an Elevation of 45
Degrees. That Elevation is good for those Trees, whose latest Fruits are ripe
near the 20th of September, when the Sun is about 3 or 4 Degrees South
Declination: at which time the Sun is already withdrawn about 10 Degrees from
the perpendicular to the Wall AB. Let the perpendicular Height BC of your Wall
be for Instance, of 7 or 10 Foot; which will give 99, or 141 Foot in the Slope
AB, and 7 or 10 Foot in the horizontal Line AC. Let the Line AD be in the Plane
of the Equator: and it will make here at London an Angle of 38 Degrees with the
horizontal Line AE. Make the Breadth of your Walk the narrowest you can. Allow,
for Instance, four Foot to the Ground that is to receive the Trees, and to be
now and then cultivated: three Foot to the Walk or Path; which ought, of right,
to be dug up every Winter: four Foot more to another Line of cultivated Ground.
So you will have 11 Foot for the whole Breadth of your Walk AE. Draw from the
top B of your Sloping Wall an horizontal Line BDG. Draw also the Sloping Line
EG, representing your North Wall, and make it, if you please, parallel to the
Plane of the Equator; or rather, if you think fit, make it yet more inclined to
the Horizon, I mean more approaching to it, by some 10 Degrees. Make the tops
of your Terrasses GH, BY, of what Breadth you please; suppose of 1, 2, or 3
Foot. But they must be broader if you intend them for Walks. Draw the new
Slopes HK, IL, either parallel to BA, GE, or else with what alteration you
think convenient. And so you have two Terrasses; to which you may, upon the
same Level, and at convenient Distances, add as many more as you please. Now it
is evident that the Heat of the Sun, being at the same time reflected, in the
Spring and Summer, by both the Walls, will warm extremely the Air ABGE; and, in
all probability, give a much closer Heat than is in great Cities: especially
if, to break the Winds, you have, from distance to distance, another Terasse
running from North to South, and that they be not exposed to Winds.
between those I have described. These Terrasses have a double advantage
against Winds, in that they receive them more sloping, and also reflect them
upwards: So that the first Terrasses are a pretty good Shelter to defend the
following ones. If the Ground be falling or hanging toward the South, the top
GH might be kept lower than the top BY; or the contrary done if the falling be
to the North and but little. For I would choose, except in hot Countries, to
avoid any other North Exposition.

In case you should desire to make your Walls higher, you might, for instance,
increase by a quarter the Lines in each of the Figures; or else increase them
in any other such proportion; and keep the same Inclinations as before. So you
might make AB of 132 Foot, and AE of 147 Foot; or else AB of 188 Foot, and AE
of 147 or 20 Foot. Only the cultivated Ground needs not exceed 5 or 6 Foot; and
the Path may be accordingly increased as it lights.

On the other hand, Terrasses to be made higher when they are far asunder.
in case your Walk be made a pretty deal wider, it would, at the same time, be
proper that your Sloping Walls should be made higher, tho in a less proportion
than the Walk is increased. And this is in order to procure more closeness to
your Air, and to have both more Sunshine and a better Shelter against Winds.
So, for instance, if you make your Walk four times as broad as it was supposed
in the second and third Figures, and your Wall higher only in the proportion of
4 to 3 than it was already, the Foot of your Wall would not, after that change,
lose half the Sunshine it should have lost before. And the Sun, of which it
would be deprived, being ever very low and oblique, it would yet amount to much
less as to the loss of Heat: Especially almost all that loss falling upon the
shortest Days, and coming to nothing near the Equinox.

But those extraordinary Banks would perhaps be more chargeable, Roofs may be
used instead of Terrasses.
as they would also be more lasting, than two bare Roofs, like those of Houses,
and supporting, instead of Tiles, a Brick Wall. Which Roofs would also yield
under them a Space that might be turned to some use. The greater those Banks or
Roofs are, the greater is the quantity of Rain brought to the Foot of them; and
the closer and stronger is the Heat. Unless, for the convenience of a Garden
between, Of Plants of hotter Countries.
you should remove them farther asunder. Such a Walk as I have described would
also be good for raising in it those rare foreign and Medicinal Plants, that
require more Heat than the Climate dos give. Of Orange Trees.
And I don't doubt but Orange Trees may grow there in the nature of Standards,
provided, in Winter, the place be secured from Cold: which is not
impracticable. However we have what we aimed at, the closeness of Air, and
Walls pretty well secured against dangerous Winds.

I cannot here dissemble some faults of our Sloping Walls. Of some Objections
against Sloping Walls.
For, as they have several very great advantages, so on the other hand there is
in them some inconveniences, which I could heartily wish were otherwise.
However these last are not at all able to balance the former; as will easily
appear to any one that reads impartially this whole Discourse.

Let me first mention one very considerable Objection, Sloping South Walls
exposed to the mischiefs of latter Frosts, unless prevented.
against our Sloping South Walls, in those cold Countries, where the passage,
from cold to fair Weather, is not, as in Denmark, quick and certain; but the
Air is subject, as here, to some returns of Frost, after it has been fair for a
good while. And that is, that the Heat of these Walls will probably make the
Blossoms of some Trees to come out too soon, and expose them to an evident
danger of being spoiled by the latter Frosts. To this Objection I have little
to say, but that it dos already grant a great deal in favor of our Walls: and
that we may take our chance, as others do; there being but a few Days more of
danger, for our South Walls, than for those of other people; whose Blossoms are
like enough to be spoiled when ours are. Let us also remember that, in those
Climates, a kindly and natural forwardness, together with a perfect maturity,
owing not to our artificial Fires, but to the light of the Sun, is hardly to be
had, but at the rate of running that hazard. Let us then, as I said, try our
Fortune; and in the mean while use, Of Remedies against an early Vegetation and
Winds.
if we think fit, all the Remedies Agriculture dos afford, to keep back this
early Vegetation, and to prevent the mischiefs of Frost: for which I refer you
to the proper Authors. See La Quintinye.
However here is an easy Remedy we may use, not only against this too great
forwardness, but also against Winds.

Suppose we make but few parallel Terrasses, all of them running from East to
West, for instance, but two, or four, etc. Let, in the II Figure, AB represent
the South Wall of the Northermost Terrasse, Fig. II.
and EG the North Wall of the Southermost Terrasse. Prolong upwards,
indefinitly, the Lines AB, EG, in M and N; and prolong also the Horizontal Line
EA Northwards in O, and Southwards in P. You may fill all the Angle MAO with
Trees, and very tall and thick Hedges etc, without any injury to the South Wall
AB, and the Angle NEP, without any injury to the North Wall GE. And yet both
the Walls AB and EG will, for six Months together, enjoy the Sunshine, for
twelve Hours or more. Now this Remedy is better against Winds, and against the
forwardness of blossoming, than against the forwardness of Fruits; and, by
consequence, is so much more to be valued. Thus several Ridings might be made
in a large Forest; provided the Ground were not already worn out; or that it
were put in heart again.

Another Objection against our Sloping Walls, Sloping Walls are exposed to one
sort of white Frosts.
is, that in the Spring, in some cold Mornings, the Dew may sometimes fall, in
great plenty, upon the Blossoms, and there freeze, as it falls; which might
endanger them, and blast all our hopes. I confess, I do not know how far this
mischief is to be feared. But this I may say, that, in the coldest part of the
Spring, the Sun shines upon our Terrasses, from the time it begins to be some
few degrees high; and, by consequence, soon after the Dew is fallen. So that
there will be no time, at least in fair Weather, without which we have commonly
no Dews, for much harm to be done: Especially the Vapors, or Steams, that
arise from the Ground, being more like to disperse in the Air, than to condense
against our Trees; as I shall explain hereafter. However this inconveniency
being already too much felt in ordinary Gardens, the Remedies against it are
found, and well known; at least by such as raise some early and tender Plants,
at the latter end of Winter.

Our Walls are also more exposed to Storms, They are much exposed to Hail.
and Hail, than ordinary Walls. Yet this ought not to deter us. For we shall
not have this accident every Year, at such times, when we may fear it. And, if
we should have it, yet it is to be supposed that many of our Fruits will escape
being spoiled. Neither is it impossible to cover such Trees, as are most
precious, when there is any prospect of a Storm.

I expect some will object also, Of the Trees growing obliquely to the Ground.
that, the natural posture of Trees being to grow upright, their leaning
against a Bank will be like to disagree with their Vegetation. But this
Objection has not that strength in it, which is in the former; and might well
have passed under silence. For it is a common thing, in our Gardens, to force
Trees into a Figure not at all natural to them. And even Trees, that grow in
the open Air, have some of their Branches bending downwards; and most of them
in a manner parallel to the Horizon. It was ordered wisely, for the beauty and
stability of Trees, but not for their fruitfulness, that they should naturally
grow upright. Now these first considerations ceasing, in an Inclined Wall, I do
not doubt but that, as to the production of Fruit, Vegetation will have there
its ordinary course. Of the dampness that may be objected against Sloping Walls.


It has been twice objected to me that the dampness of the Ground would
probably spoil the Fruits growing against our Sloping Walls. Which makes me
take notice of this Objection, for otherwise I should have neglected to give it
an answer. I say then that either this inconvenience is not at all to be
feared; or, if it be, that the Remedies are obvious and easy. I do not fear it
in such Terrasses as those of the II, III, and XIth Figures; especially when
they are well exposed. For I cannot see what mighty store of Dampness can come,
or be kept there; since water naturally runs off of such heaps. But as to the
lower Terrasses of the first Figure, if one or two beds of Bricks be not
enough, at least three or four such Beds, and what else one pleases underneath,
will be sufficient to make the Wall remain dry at the outside. Moreover it is
not necessary that the Fruit should touch the very Wall. But in case it should
grow too close against it, a thin Slate, or a small Ring, of any proper matter
and shape, will easily keep it from the Terrasse. After all I think Experience,
to which I must appeal, will add no strength to this Objection.

Some have urged, Of their being exposed to Mice and Ants, etc.
against our Walls, that our Fruit will be eaten up by Mice, or by Ants, etc.
Tho I might say that all other Trees are exposed to this very mischief; for
it is known that those Mice and Ants can easily creep upon them, yet to this,
and all other Objections, I will give but one general Answer. Of all other
Objections against them.
I ask whether the inconvenience that is objected be real, necessary, general,
and unavoidable? or else whether it be not, in a great measure, imaginary? I
ask whether there be no Remedy left against it to our Care and Industry? I ask,
when all is granted to the Objection that can be given it, whether there will
be nothing at all left for us, but Trees without Fruit? It Is true that I ought
by so much more to fear the resort of Insects to our Fruits, as they are like
to prove more excellent than others are. But it is well for us that the first
Inventers and Improvers of Arts have not at all been moved by such Objections
as these. Are they greater than such as may be made against a Countryman, who
would sow his Grounds? How is he secured against the vexations of troublesome
Neighbors, against the Invasions of an Enemy, the mischiefs of Civil Wars, the
unfaithfulness of Servants? How can he depend upon fair and seasonable Weather;
without too much Drought or Rain, without Hail and Storms and strong Winds? May
not his Seed be eaten up in the Fields; may not his increase be stolen away
from him; or destroyed by numberless sorts of Insects? What shall I say of the
mischiefs of Fire? What of Taxes and Tithes? What of the price of Rents and
Leases? What of selling one's increase to such as will not, or cannot, pay
their Debts? What of all other fears and troubles that may come upon this poor
Countryman? Yet for all this our Fields are ploughed, we are nourished, and
our Barns are filled with Grain. Such is the Profusion, with which God Almighty
provides for us, that, after all deductions made, we have enough to bless his
Munificence, and to live with plenty.

Now having, in some measure, satisfied the curiosity and impatience of the
Reader, I may proeeed to show how I calculate the proportion of Heat, I gave
before, between a Perpendicular and a Sloping South Wall; and treat at large of
the Principles and Method, upon which those, and the like Calculations, are
grounded: endeavoring to make our Doctrine as general and as exact as the
Nature of the Subject will bear.

I begin with Calculating, Calculation showing for an Example the proportion of
Heat at the Solstice, in the Latitude of 52 upon a perpendicular Wall, and a
sloping smooth South Wall, passing through the Pole.
for the Parallel that lies one Degree North of London, the proportion between
the Actions of the Sun, in the Summer Solstice, upon a Perpendicular, and upon
an Inclined smooth Wall, with an Elevation of 52 Degrees; which is an
Inclination very good there, for the Fruits that are ripe in the Month of
October, or the latter end of September. For other Fruits that Elevation is
rather of the greatest.

The Circle PTEP described from the Center C represents the Celestial Sphere.
Fig. IV.
CH is the Horizon; The Ground and Method of this Calculation.
P the Pole; CE the Equator; IT a Parallel to the Equator, as suppose here the
Tropic of Cancer. CIP is the Plane of the Inclined Wall Ci; CM the Plane of
the perpendicular Wall Cm. Upon the Circumference of the Parallel TI I suppose
a right Cylindrical Surface elevated and prolonged of each side as far as is
necessary: Which I do in order to find upon it the proportion of the Sun's
Heat.

Now it is easily known that the Quantity of Rays, falling from the Sun upon
any Plane, is as the Sine of the Sun's Altitude on that Plane.

And that the Force of each Ray, coming from the Sun upon a Plane, is also as
the Sine of the Sun's Altitude on that Plane.

From whence it follows that the whole Action of the Rays, upon a Plane, is as
the Square of the Sine of the Sun's Altitude on the Plane, and the time that
Action lasts, jointly: neglecting the Effects of the Atmosphere.

Let now the whole perpendicular Force of the Sun, upon a Plane directly
exposed to it, be expressed by the Radius CE, which is Unity divided into 10000
parts. The Force of the Sun at the Meridian in T upon the Wall C i, will be as
the Square of the Sine TI; that is, supposing still CE for Unity, as the Line
TV equal to 8410 parts; which I take upon the Cylindrical Surface Northward.
Now from the Vertex I, upon the Axis IP, I draw through the Point V the Parabola
INV. And the Lines or Ordinates as TV, MN etc, drawn parallel to the Axis IP,
from any Point as T or M in the Line IT, till they meet the Parabola IV,
express by their Lengths TV, MN the Action of the Sun in the Tropic, in T or M
etc, upon the Sloping Wall Ci. The Sum of all those Lines till Noon is the
Cylindrical Surface ITVI, which gives the whole Heat of the Morning Sun upon
the Sloping Wall Ci, secluding, as before, the Effects of the Atmosphere.

Now from the Point T drawing a Parallel to the Horizon, till it meets with the
Line CmM, make the Line TL opposite to TV equal to the Square of that Parallel;
supposing still Unity to be expressed by CE. And in our Example you will find
TL equal to 2350 parts. Draw the Parabola ML, of which M is the Vertex, MT the
Tangent at the Vertex, and L a Point through which that Parabola passes. The
Ordinates, such as TL, will give, for every correspondent point of the Circle
TM, the Action of the Sun upon the perpendicular Wall Cm. And the Cylindrical
Surface MTLM will give the whole Heat of the morning Sun, upon that
perpendicular Wall, excepting only the Effects of the Atmosphere.

Make the Point M the Vertex of another Parabola, of which MT is the Tangent at
the Vertex, and V a point through which the said Parabola passes. It is evident
that the Cylindrical Spaces MTV, MTL are to one another as TV to TL, that is as
8410 to 2350, or as 358 to 1. And that proportion obtaining for every Point in
the Arc MT, it is clear the Heats arising from thence keep that very proportion
upon the Walls; notwithstanding any variety you may suppose in the Thickness
and Effects of the Air, through which the Light is to come from different
Altitudes.

But there is yet all the Heat expressed by the Cylindrical Surface MVI to be
accounted for.

The Proportion between the Arcs TM, TI will be found, by the help of their
Versed Sines, to be as 100 to 1276. And the Proportion between the very small
Arcs tm, ti will be found as 100 to 122: which depends upon the Proportion of
the Line TM to TI being as tm is to ti. And if upon TV you take the Point t,
which is three times farther from v than from T, and through that Point you
conceive the Circle tmi parallel to TMI, and meeting the two Parabolas in m and
i, you will find the Proportion, between the Arcs tm and ti, as 100 to 124.

So then one cannot err sensibly with supposing the whole Cylindrical Space
MTVM to the Cylindrical Space ITVI as 100 to 125, or thereabouts; that is as
8410 to 10512; which stands for the Cylindrical Space ITV, supposing the
Cylindrical Space MTL, MTV to be 2350 and 8410. And the Number 10512 being
divided by 2350, you find the Cylindrical Space MTL to the Cylindrical Space
ITV as 1 to 447. But this Number is to be something diminisht, because of the
different Transparency of the Air for different Altitudes. IMN is very
considerably less than the 1/27 of the Cylindrical Space ITV: and it is upon
IMN, and the neighboring parts, that the greatest Diminution of the Heat of
the Sun dos fall. From whence it appears that the said Diminution cannot be
very great: Especially, in our present Inquiry, not the whole Diminution of the
Sun's Heat being to be accounted for; but the Diminution or Difference only
from what the Heat of the Sun is, when as high as in T.

However the Number 358 being certainly too small, The Result of it.
and the Number 447 certainly too great, to express the whole Heat upon the
Sloping Wall, it cannot but be pretty near 4 times as great as the Heat upon
the perpendicular Wall: the middle Number between those being 402.

This Method, which is clear and easy, is sufficiently exact for our purpose:
and it can be easily transfered to other Latitudes, and to the Cases where the
Wall is more or less sloping: not to mention those where the Wall has
indifferently any other Exposition.

Thus if we leave the Latitude of 52 Degrees, Other Examples to the same
purpose for the Latitudes of 51;
which is about the middle of England and Holland, and make the like
Calculations for the Latitude of London, LT will become 2204; TV will remain
8410. The Space MTL will be to the Space MTV as 2204 to 8410; or as 1 to 382.
The Arc tm will be 47 38. ti is of 60 Degrees, as it was before. Now as 47 38
to 60, so is 8410 to 10593, which comes for the Space ITV. And dividing 10595
by 2204 the Quotient is 481; which is too great to express the Heat upon the
Sloping Wall, as 382 is too little. The middle Number is 431, which was only
402 before. So here the Disproportion is considerably greater, between the Heat
for the Sloping and the perpendicular Wall. On the Equinoctial Day the Heats
are as 1000 to 614.

In the Latitude of 45 Degrees TL becomes 1344, and 45 Degrees.
which gives MTL to MTV as 1 to 626. So the Heat is already 6 times greater for
the Sloping than the Perpendicular Wall: besides the Addition of Heat MVI,
which is very considerable. For the whole Space ITV is about 8 times bigger
than MTL. The Middle between those two Numbers is 7. On the Equinoctial Day the
Heat is exactly doubled. The immediate Action of the Sun upon the Walls,
without any regard to the Heat reflected from the Ground, or occasioned by the
Warmth of the Air, dos not become equal for both the Perpendicular and Sloping
Wall, Sloping Walls are more necessary in colder Countries; but the Increase of
Heat they give is greater in warmer Climates.
till the Sun has got a considerable South Latitude.

By this it appears that our Walls are not only good for the Climates of cold
Countries, but that they will have the greatest Effect farther from the Poles.
In England and Holland, and all the North, they are almost necessary; because
without them Fruits can hardly be very good. In France etc, they cannot fail of
producing most excellent Fruits, of the Kinds that require a great deal of
Heat, they being able there to outdo so much ordinary South Walls; than which
confessedly there is among perpendicular Walls no hotter Exposition.

Hitherto I have not compared Sloping and Perpendicular South Walls to the best
Advantage of the former. Sloping South Wall passing through the Pole less hot, in
the Solstice, than the South Wall passing through the lower point of the Polar
Circle.
For in our first Latitude of 52 if the Sloping Wall was at Noon exposed
directly to the Sun in the Tropic, there would already be above 4 times the
Heat from the Comparison of the two opposite Parabolas. Besides that Addition I
have so often mentioned, which would make the Heat about 6. times greater, were
it not for the Interposition of the Atmosphere. The middle Number is 5 or
thereabouts. In the Equinox the Proportion of Heats would be found as 1000 to
748. So then a little loss of Heat near the Equinox is here very largely made
up about the Solstice. And this may invite (instead of giving to the South
Walls the same Elevation, as the Pole has above the Horizon) to give them
rather a smaller Elevation by 15 or 20 Degrees.

If you desire a more accurate Method of comparing the Sun's Heat upon two
different Walls, A more accurate Method of comparing the Sun's Heat upon two
plane Walls in any Situation. This Method depends upon the Quadrature and
Center of Gravity of the Line of Sines and its Segments:
but with neglecting the Effects of the Air, you will have it in the Solution
of the following Problem; which depends upon the Quadrature and the Center of
Gravity of the Line of Sines.

The Latitude being given, for Instance that of London, to find for a given
Day, suppose that of the Summer Solstice, the Heat of the Sun upon any Plane
Wall whatsoever; suppose a Sloping Wall that lies, for Instance, North-East and
North-West, and has an Elevation of 48 Degrees upon the Horizon, going
obliquely from the North-East Point toward he North. The great variety of
Cases, into which this Problem may be branched, obliges me thus to fix my
Discourse, by applying it, in a great measure, to a particular Example.

Conceive, Fig. V(...).
in the fifth Figure, the Sphere POBD abGAP, projected about the Center C, for
an Eye placed at an infinite Distance, in the common Section of the Planes of
the Sloping Wall, and of the Equator, or its Parallels. Let akCNKA be the Plane
of the Sloping Wall; bXCExB the Plane of the Equator; P the Pole of the World;
DEZKHzkD the Horizon; OTZNzG the Tropic or Parallel; N the common Section of
its Plane, with the Plane of the Wall, whether this Section fall within or
without the Sphere; Z, z the two Intersections of the Tropic or Parallel with
the Horizon, if they meet each other. In the Triangle CKE the side EK being
given, as here of 45 Degrees, and the Angle E being of 38, and the Angle K of
48 Degrees, you will easily find the side EC and the Angle C. Take upon the
Equator CX equal to the Complement of CE; and through the Point X conceive the
Meridian XHPTxX. In the Rectangular Triangle EBD find BD; and so draw through the
Point E the Horizon DEZKHzkD, cutting, as I said, if it lights so, the Tropic
or Parallel OG in the Points Z, z; and draw the Indefinite Lines ZY, zu
perpendicular to OG. Take the Radius of the Sphere for Unity; and make OV,
perpendicular to OG, equal to the Square of the Sine of the Arc OA. From the
Point N as Vertex draw through the Point V the Parabola NYV u, making NO to be a
Tangent at the Vertex. Transfer as much of the Cylindrical Surface NVNON into
the sixth Figure, Fig. VI.
(where it is opened, and the Parallel or Tropic becomes a straight Line) as
there is of it that is seen from the Wall. And thus having drawn from the
Points Z, z duly transfered, if they be seen by the Sloping Wall, the Ordinates
ZY. zu, the Space between them ZYVNZ, after it is increased in the proportion
of the Circumference or Radius of the Tropic or Parallel to the Circumference
or Radius of the Equator, will give you the measure of the Heat upon the
Sloping Wall. But this is with neglecting the Effects of the Atmosphere. Now
that Space, or a Solid proportional to it, is found by having the Quadrature
and Center of Gravity of the Line of Sines, and of its Segments; all which are
already known. The Truth of this Assertion is obvious without any farther
Demonstration of it; and will appear to agree with the following Construction,
which also dos solve the Problem.

To the Circle ONG, Fig. V.
Fig. V. conceive the correspondent Line of Sines AOYBZGA Fig. Fig. VII.
VII. In which the Axis AB is equal to the Semi circumference, and the other
Axis OG is equal to the Diameter of the Parallel or Tropic. Through the Point N
duly transfered upon OG, to wit, with making GN, GN equal in both Figures, draw
the Parallel NNN to the Axis AB, till it meets in N, N with the Curve AOB
continued for that purpose as far as is necessary. And having also duly
trasfered the Point Z, by taking the Line NZ equal to the Arc NZ, and having
drawn ZY perpendicular to NNN, and meeting with the Line of Sines AOB in Y,
upon NNZ as the Edge, and ZYOANZ as Basis, erect a Semi-quadrantal Ungula; and
find its Solidity or bigness, by those Rules Dr. Wallis has published in his
Mechanics; where he has given the Quadrature and the Center of Gravity of the
Line of Sines and its Segments. Then depress that Ungula, or make it smaller,
in the Proportion of the Square of NO to the Square of the Sine of the Arc OA.
When the Solid of this new Ungula is found, correct it again, increasing it in
the Proportion of the Circumference or Radius of the Tropic or Parallel to the
Circumference or Radius of the Equator. The new resulting Solid will be
proportional to the Heat of the Sun upon the Sloping Wall, if we neglect the
Effects of the Air.

After the same way might be found the Solid expressing the Heat MTMLM of the
IV. Fig. IV.
Figure, upon a perpendicular South Wall; for the Solution is general. and is
general:


But if the Cylindrical Surface MTMLM be also duly transfered into the VI. and
in some few Cases Fig. VI.
Figure, as you see it done; capable of a very easy Approximation;
and upon the Basis MTM, when it falls entire between the Points N, N, you draw
the Curve Line MAM, whose Ordinates upon MM are every where proportional to the
correspondent Ordinates of the Curve MLM, and whose swelling comes just to
touch the Curve NVN, the Heats expressed by the Surfaces MLMM, notwithstanding
the Effects of the Air.
MAMM will be as TL to TA, notwithstanding the Effects of the Air. Which
consideration may be of some Use, where the begness of the remaining part is
but small, and to be guessed at, as we did heretofore, by some easy
Approximation. But this by the by.

This Solution gives, A Corollary for finding the Heat of the Sun upon a Plane,
parallel to the Horizon.
as a Corollary, the Method of measuring the Heat of the Sun upon the Horizon,
any Day in the Year, for any proposed Climate; tho it remains yet to account
for the Diminution of Heat arising from the Atmosphere.

I do not expect that the whole crowd of Geometers will see that our
Constructions carry with themselves the Strength and Evidence of a
Demonstration. But this Discourse being intended to be, in a great measure,
popular, I am loath to fill it with a long Digression, only to make our Proofs
evident to a greater number of Mathematicians. Let it be enough that some of
them may perceive that we have advanced here nothing but what is exactly true.
A Table showing the Sun's Heat upon a Plane for each Degree of the Sun's
Elevation upon it.


Having calculated a Table of the Sun's Heat upon a Plane, for each Degree of
the Sun's Elevation upon the said Plane, I thought it might be acceptable to
some if I transcribed it here. In this Table the Heats to an Elevation and to
its Complement make always the same Sum: Which depends upon the Squares of the
Sides being, in a Rectangular Triangle, equal to the Square of the Hypotenuse.

The Sun's Elevation upon a Plane. The Sun's Heat upon the Plane. The Sun's
Elevation upon a Plane. The Sun's Heat upon the Plane. The Sun's Elevation upon
a Plane. The Sun's Heat upon the Plane. Degrees. Parts. Degrees. Parts. Degrees. Parts. 1 3
31 2653 61 7650 2 12 32 2808 62 7796 3 27 33 2966 63 7939 4 49 34 3127 64 8078
5 76 35 3290 65 8214 6 109 36 3455 66 8346 7 149 37 3622 67 8473 8 194 38 3790
68 8597 9 245 39 3960 69 8716 10 302 40 4132 70 8830 11 364 41 4304 71 8940 12
432 42 4477 72 9045 13 506 43 4651 73 9145 14 585 44 4825 74 9240 15 670 45
5000 75 9330 16 760 46 5175 76 9415 17 855 47 5349 77 9494 18 955 48 5523 78
9568 19 1060 49 5696 79 9636 20 1170 50 5868 80 9698 21 1284 51 6040 81 9755 22
1403 52 6210 82 9806 23 1527 53 6378 83 9851 24 1654 54 6545 84 9891 25 1786 45
6710 85 9924 26 1922 56 6873 86 9951 27 2061 57 7034 87 9973 28 2204 58 7192 88
9988 29 2350 59 7347 89 9997 30 2500 60 7500 90 10000 Degrees. Squares of their
Sines Degrees. Squares of their Sines. Degrees. Squares of their Sines.

If the Sun's Altitude be given, The Use of the Table.
and you expose to its Rays a Plane, with more or less Obliquity; the Sun's
Heat upon it will be, in any Obliquity, as the Table shows. But if the Sun's
Altitude be supposed to change, the Effects of the Atmosphere ought also to
come under consideration. I need not say that I make no allowance for the Sun's
apparent Diameter being of a pretty great bigness, and not insensible like the
Stars.

As to the Diminution of the Sun's Heat, The Diminution of Heat occasioned by
the Air is considerable;
occasioned by the Interposition of a greater or less depth of Air, it is
certainly very great. We cannot bear the Sight of the Sun when it is something
high; much less if it was in the very Zenith. But it is no hard matter to bear
it, when the Sun is within three or four Degrees of the Horizon. It is not
easy to find by bare Study the Laws of that Diminution; but hardly to be found
by Meditation; and why.
not only because of the different Density and continual Refraction of the Air,
at several Heights from the Center of the Earth; but especially because of that
wonderful Propriety of Light, that makes it go through, and among Terrestrial
Bodies, under a certain and determinate Degree of smallness, depending upon
their Density, A Method for finding it by some Experiments with a burning
Speeulum.
without being affected at all in its Passage. However I see how that
Diminution might be found, by some Experiments made with a large burning
Speculum constantly turned to the Sun for a whole Summer-Day, and with a
Thermometer kept by it always at the same degree of Heat.

The middle of the Speculum must be shaded by a round Plate, supported exactly
over against it. In the Shade of this Plate, and not far from the Focus of the
Speculum, the Thermometer, which ought to be but small, must be duly fastened.
The Speculum ought to have a graduated Circle about it. And by the different
opening of an Arched Ruler, that is to move about the Center of the Speculum,
and to be every where pretty near its Surface, it ought to have an Opaque Vail
spread, more or less, before it: So that a greater or smaller Sectour be
uncovered, according as the strength of the Sun's Heat requires. That Heat will
be reciprocal to the Arc or Sectour uncovered. So then keeping, in one of the
longest Days, a Table of the Quantity of this Arc, for the several Minutes, or
other Intervals of Time, of which the Day is composed, one may easily gather
the Proportion of the Sun's Heat itself, such as is transmitted through the
Atmosphere.

A Table giving the Length of a Beam of Light in the Air, supposing the Height
of the Atmosphere given, etc.
The following Table, which is very short and easy to make, or, instead of it,
some other Table made upon the like Principles, might help us also to guess a
little, in so dark an Inquiry. This Table gives, upon some Suppositions, the
Length of the Way of the Sunbeams through the Air, to every apparent Altitude of
the Sun.

Apparent Altitude of the Sun. Length of the Way of the Sunbeams through the Air.
Degrees. Min Parts. 0. 0 20. 0. 18 19. 0. 37 18. 0. 57 17. 1. 18 16. 1. 41 15. 2. 6
14. 2. 33 13. 3. 4 12. 3. 39 11. 4. 19 10. 5. 6 9. 6. 3 8. 7. 13 7. 8. 45 6.
10. 51 5. 13. 55 4 19. 4 3 29. 45 2 31. 31 19 33. 32 18 35. 51 17 38. 30 16 31.
39 15 45. 26 14 50. 9 13 56. 21 12 65. 19 11 90. 0 1.

Let 2r be the Diameter of the Earth, equal, for instance, to 400 Parts: a the
Perpendicular Height of the Air that is able to obstruct sensibly the Light of
the Sun: this I suppose, for an Example, equal to 1 Part. Let the Indeterminate
q be the Length of the Way of the Sunbeams through that Air: s the Sine of the
Sun's Apparent Altitude to the Radius r: and neglect the Effects of Refraction.
In these Suppositions you will find ^. Which Equation is the Ground, upon which
the Table was calculated. And if you give any other Value to the Quantity a,
you will easily make such another Table, at your pleasure, by the help of the
same Equation.

If we suppose the Air every where of an Uniform Density; and its Perpendicular
Height given; which will be easily determined in that Supposition: and the
whole Refraction of the Rays of Light to be, at their coming into the
Atmosphere: and that the same Quantity of Light penetrates into the Air,
whether it comes with more, or with less Obliquity; it will be easy to make a
Table showing the loss of Light occasioned by the Air, for any given Apparent
Altitude of the Sun. And this may, perhaps, serve well enough for Use.

From Experience find the Proportion of Light, suppose as a to b, for any two
Apparent Altitudes of the Sun; suppose 62 and 30 Degrees. Let the Length of the
Rays in the Air for those Apparent Altitudes be as n to m. Draw, Fig. VIII.
in the eighth Figure, the Assymptote OAB, of an Indefinite Length. Take in it
OB equal to m; OA equal to n; and AB will be equal to m -- n. Draw to the
Assymptote the perpendicular. Lines AD, BC, equal respectively to a and b. Through
the Points C and D draw the Logarithmic Line FCDQ: and draw the Ordinate OQ.
If* you suppose OQ for the whole Light, that enters the Atmosphere; and, upon
the Assymptote, you take, from the Point O, the Line OE equal to the Length of
the Rays of Light in the Air; the correspondent Ordinate OF will give the
Quantity of Light remaining, after the Passage through so much Air, as the Length
of the Rays dos expose: And a Table of its Diminution will easily be
calculated. The Ground, I proceed upon, is that if two Solid Rays of Light
pass, through a given Thickness of Air equally dense, they will lose of their
Quantity, or Strength, in the same Proportion, as they have to one another. By
the like Method you may find how much more Light there is, at any time, near
the Surface of a Calm Water, than in any given Depth. And this is what we had
to say of the Diminution of Heat, occasioned by the Rays of Light crossing the
Atmosphere. Let us now take our leave of these Mathematical Speculations, and
go on to consider what Advantage we can make of Movable Walls.

As there are some Countries, or some sorts of Fruits, for which the best is
not always the hottest Exposition; so there are some other Countries, or some
other sorts of Fruits, for which we cannot well procure too much Heat. But it
will be a hard matter to outdo much the South Walls of our second, or third, or
eleventh Figure; of which last I shall speak hereafter; unless it be perhaps by
a Movable Wall. Of Movable Walls, in order to receive the Light of the Sun
almost perpendicularly for the whole Day.
I shall not mention here the placing some Earth, and having a Sloping Wall
built, all along in a kind of Boat; or otherwise built, in any other sort of
floating Vessel; as suppose a round one. Tho with the turning of the Vessel, so
as to follow the Sun, and making it, and the Wall at the same time, lean more
or less, one might be sure to enjoy almost all the Sun's Heat. Description of
an Engine for that purpose.
I will only describe a kind of movable Box, which having an Inclined Brick
Wall fastened to it, will, without any Water, which both is difficult to
procure, and rots Vessels too easily, have the same advantage of being
constantly turned toward the Sun; and may, in Winter time, be laid up in an
Orange House. Fig. IX. X.
In the IX and X Figures AB is a strong Post fastened upright in the Ground;
whose upper end B is shaped into an Hemisphere, or rather into a Part of a
Sphere, yet something bigger. Upon B there rests a strong piece of Oak, CC; in
the middle of which there is a concave Place, so made as to fit the Figure of
B, and to leave the liberty of turning and inclining the Box several Degrees to
and fro. The concave Surface will be great enough, if it contains the half of
the Surface of an Hemisphere. D is the Box it self; which is somewhat long, and
so shaped that the Sun may shine pretty fully upon the foreside of it. To the
two sides of the Box, and to the Piece CC, are fastened two inclined Pieces of
Timber OF, OF, almost parallel to one another; and upon these, close by the
Box, another pretty long horizontal Piece of Timber GG. The remaining Pieces
GF, GF; GF, GF; FF; EG, EG; EE, are so disposed as to give much Strength to the
whole Frame. Upon the Part GFFG I place a Floor of Boards, and the Piece GG
jets out some two or four Inches, from that Floor. I use both the Piece GG, and
the Floor of Boards, for the Foundation of my inclined Brick Wall; to which I
give a thickness equal to once or twice the thickness of a Brick, according to
the Weight as I desire it should have. Under the Box are yet two strong
parallel Pieces of Timber HH, running on each side close by the Post AB; and
made firm together, at both their Ends, by two cross Pieces. From the back End
of HH there rises several Pieces HK, HI; which being fastened to the Pieces OF,
some near the Middle, some at or near the upper End of the Floor or Frame, help
to bear it up. In the Pieces HH there might be some holes, at proper distances
from each other, for two Iron Pegs, one of each side the Post AB, to keep, at
your pleasure, the whole Box in a proper Elevation. But this might be done more
conveniently with Cords. For from the Ends E, E; F, F; G, G; H, H, you might
have some Cords fastened to some pretty great Weights of Metal or Stone, or
else to some Buckles, to keep the whole Engine firm in any position. In the
making of it it must be so proportioned, in all its Parts, that the Center of
Gravity may fall under B, but withal near it. And so it will be proper that the
Floor be not exactly flat, but unequal. The Addition of some movable Weight like
P might also help to alter the Center of Gravity, and to manage the Engine more
easily. And it is to be observed, that the farther ^C is from the Box, the
wider you may make it at bottom. Such an Engine as this will easily be defended
from Ants and other creeping Insects. About the Floor GFFG one might have a
kind of plain Border, with an Inclination to the Floor, of about 45 Degrees
every where: which Border, by its Reflection, would much increase the Heat, and
make it closer; giving besides some Shelter from Winds: And upon it one might
spread a Net, to keep off the Birds and Flys.

If, by an easy change, you should desire to have two Boxes and two Trees, in
one single Engine, the Boxes being something distant from each other, there
would be room for the Post AB between them; and you might make them as broad as
you would at Bottom; and fix the bearing Place much lower, if you thought it
convenient so. Instead of Bricks the Floor might perhaps be covered with Lead,
either painted dark or black, or not painted at all. But I am apt to think it
would give, in some Climates not far from this, and at some Seasons in the
Year, too great a Heat for Vines, and such other tender Trees.

One advantage of Movable Walls is that they may, Advantage of movable Walls
against storms and winds.
at any time, be turned from Storms, and from cold or blasting Winds; and take
in as much, or as little, of the Sunshine, as one pleases. They might besides,
when the Sun is strong, and the Fruit grown large, be sometimes presented side
ways to the Sun, that it may shine fully upon the Sides of the Fruits; and give
them also that fine Color which becomes the whole Fruit so well. But after all
these Walls may better serve the turn of some Curious Body, Their Use for early
Fruits.
than the Public. They will be good particularly for Melons, Vines, Figs etc,
and for raising early most sorts of Fruits.

As to our former Sloping Walls, Of the Rain falling upon Sloping Walls.
it remains yet to order them so that we may not be troubled with the Rain,
they are apt to bring in abundance to the Root of our Trees. But this certainly
can be no fault in a dry Season, or light Ground, or Easterly Wall, or hot
Country; especially considering the great force of the Sun upon our Terrasses,
which will quickly dry the Ground. In other places, besides what may be done,
by receiving and turning off the Rain, the Walk might be made as you see in the
XIth Figure; Fig. XI.
where it is pretty deep in the middle of it. is the Slope of the South Wall;
Terrasses so shaped as to give some more Advantages in reference to Rain and
Heat.
AM the Cultivated Ground, some three, four, or five Foot broad: MN another
thin Sloping Wall, parallel to BA, and some three or four Foot high: NO the
Walk, or Path; which may be five or six Foot broad, and paved, if you think
fit. OP, PE, EG are the correspondent Sloping North Walls and Cultivated
Ground. The great Depth of NO will keep the Grounds AMN, EPO pretty dry: and
the Path NO may be made falling, in order to bring the Water to some Drains,
where it may be lost. In an extraordinary wet Weather, one might use some
slight Boards, like QR, and place them so, near the Foot of the Sloping Wall,
that they might receive the Rain at their upper end, in order to convey it to
the bottom NO. For this purpose it is proper that there be a very small jetting
out in the Wall, to which the Boards may be closely applied. Or rather one
might, at first, fix in the Wall a long and narrow piece of beaten Lead, which
necessarily receiving the Rain, would easily bring it to the upper Surface of
the Boards, or to some Gutters placed along the Wall, which would be much
convenienter than the Boards; and would easily convey the Water to some other
Gutters that should make it fall upon the Bottom NO. The Slope MN, receiving so
directly the Sunshine upon it, will help very much to heat the Ground NMA; and
by consequence will, in some measure, forward Vegetation. The Bottom NO, which
is to serve for a Path or Walk, must be raising near the middle in a round
Figure, to keep it dry there. The two Terrasses being farther from one another,
than in the second or third Figure, the Heat will accordingly be less close.

Now we have begun to propose, for our Terrasses, a Shape something different
from that excellent one, in the second and third Figure; we may farther observe
that there would perhaps be some small Advantage to shape our cultivated Ground
so as to have it better exposed to the Sun, and grow warmer. We might, for
Instance, let the Section of our Walk, in the eleventh Figure, be according to
the Lines BRMNOTEG; and order matters so, as not to be troubled with the Rain,
especially in the Ridge E. And by these means we should also get a Sloping Wall
OT, of a tolerable bigness, and very well sheltered, but ill placed, and of an
indifferent Exposition.

You may remember how, speaking to the first Figure, I did choose, in the side
of a narrow Vale, a pretty steep Hill well exposed; which I did shape into
several Terrasses, one above another. Idea of a paved sloping Ground upon a
Hill, to be used instead of Terrasses with Sloping Walls.
I don't know but that, keeping to the like Idea, it may succeed pretty well,
especially about 45 Degrees Latitude, to choose that Hill very steep, to take it
almost as Nature dos give it us, and to pave it all over with Brick laid flat,
except some Holes of an Oval Figure, about six or seven Foot long, and about
four Foot broad. These Holes are each to receive at the Top of them a Tree,
whose Branches must be made to spread upon the paving of Bricks. The greatest
Diameter of the Ovals ought to be horizontal. They must be disposed with as
much regularity as possible. They will look handsomer, and will be more equally
divided, and lie more convenient for the spreading of the Tree, and to receive
all the Rain, if they be Checker-wise; as you see them in the twelth Figure.
Fig. XII.
But they will lie something more conveniently to turn off the Rain, if they be
above one another. However it seems there is no great danger to be feared, from
too much Rain, in a Hill so well exposed to the Sun; and where an extraordinary
quantity of Rain will not fail to find its way down, or will ever be easily
turned off. The uncovered Earth must be dug as often, as it is convenient. The
Bricks will grow very hot, by the Sun shining so fully upon them: It will
prevent the dissipation of the Spirits of the Earth.
And, for ought I know, they may hinder the too great and useless Dissipation
of the Spirits of the Earth, that secret and precious Fire of Nature, not only
by preventing the growth of Grass, but also by intercepting their way, and
making them come out, in greater abundance, at the place where the Trees and
their Roots are. The good Earth must have been gathered to a sufficient Depth
about the Ovals. It is easy to order it so that either all the Rain shall run
into the Ovals, or most of it run down at the sides of them, according as your
Climate or the Season requires. As to the Charge, both in Bricks and Mortar and
Day-labour, it will come, for each Tree, to much less than half the
correspondent Charge, in building of a perpendicular Wall; tho we should
suppose this to have Trees on both sides.

Since I began this Treatise, What the Author finds said by others,
particularly by Monsieur la Quintinie, that may have some relation to Sloping
Walls.
I have often inquired whether our Sloping Walls had been used any where: And
particularly I have endeavored to find, in Monsieur la Quintinye's Book, what
he says that may relate to this matter. It is very plain that they are in no
common use, if used at all, in these Northern Climates, where they are most
wanted. And probably they have have had no occasion to think of them in hotter
Climates, where, for the most part, Heat is as much feared, as here it is
desired. But I would fain have known whether ever they had been designedly
built, on purpose to enjoy the Sun longer, and to increase its Heat.

Monsieur la Quintinye speaks Tom. 1. p. 20. Edition of Amsterdam, 1692.
of some Sloping Grounds, which he calls des Ados. These, he says, are an Earth
raised up, with a Slope, along a well exposed Wall, in order to sow upon it, An
Account of what Monsieur la Quintinye calls des Ados.
in Winter time and in the Spring, some Plants, that are designed to be more
forward, than in the open Ground. So Pease and Beans are sown, and Artichokes,
Vines, Rasberries etc, are planted upon an Ados; the Reflection of the Sun,
probably from the Wall above, and from the Ground before, heating these Slopes,
as if they were real Walls. What I find said of them, in the rest of the Work,
is much to the same purpose.

By this contrivance, the Origin of which I do not at present inquire into,
one dos considerably increase the Heat, at all times in the Year; and I do not
see that one can outdo it much in Winter or Autumn. But, in the Spring and
Summer, the Wall hides the Sun from the Slope for some time; which perhaps the
Reflection from the said Wall is not a sufficient recompense for. To which must
be added, that the Heat is perhaps better, being divided to a greater part of
the Day, than crowded together about Noon. However by this Disposition of the
Wall the Heat is made closer.

In another Place Page 92. And of his Slopes of Earth exposed to the South or
East, and purposely made for Fruit.
he dos mend the hanging of the Ground, in a large Garden, but without admiring
at all the Remedy, by dividing it into several Parts, of different heights, and
making each of them level, and parting them, either by some little Walls, or
only by some Slopes of Earth closely beaten together. And being satisfied, as
he has it somewhere else, that there is no place, in a Garden, but what may be
of some use; he says, That these little Walls may serve for several things he
mentions: and that the little Slopes will not be useless neither; but on the
contrary, when they are exposed to the South or East, they may either be used
to raise at first some early Plants, for the Spring; as Winter Lettuce, Pease,
Beans, Strawberries, Artichokes etc; and after the Spring they may serve to
raise some Seeds of Purslain, Basil etc: or else, if there be a great quantity
of those Slopes well exposed, a part of them may be employed for good and all
to bring forth good Grapes and other Fruits; as it has been done in the King of
France's Fruit or Kitchen Garden, in certain Slopes purposely made for that use.

I guess, Reflection upon this Contrivance;
by these Passages, that the worthy Author, who is ever very particular and
full in what he writes, tho he says no more in this matter, used these Slopes
no otherwise than as Grounds, and as they do choose some Hills well exposed for
their Vines, which is here compared with Sloping Walls.
or even for their Gardens. But tho this be something akin to the main Idea I
follow, in this Discourse, and a Confirmation of it, yet I believe there remain
some considerable differences, between what Monsieur La Quintinye has writ, and
what I propose. The Gardens of his making may justify whether or no he had
left any room for our Meditations. Which would indeed be only a fuller
Explication of his Thoughts, if he had covered his Slopes with Bricks or
Stones; and had made his Trees to grow against them obliquely to the Ground;
and had used them in any Exposition rather than perpendicular Walls; and had
made them sometimes more, sometimes less Sloping; and had defended them, as I
do, against Winds; and had likewise procured the closeness of Air, with no loss
of either Sun or Rain, for the six or seven hottest Months, from Equinox to
Equinox: Not to mention some other Improvements you will find in this Treatise.
However those Ados of Earth have a peculiar advantage for all Herbs; and
particularly for those early Plants, that are to be gathered in February,
March, or April.

To this I might add the Account Monsieur La Quintinye gives of Square or
Rectangular Gardens; Part 1.
where he explains how the Sun never shines upon more than two Walls at once;
page 205.
and in some Moments upon one only; without ever shining upon two opposite
Walls together. Our Gardens, tho square, may at once enjoy the Sun upon their
four Walls.
But near the Summer Solstice one might see, for a good while together about
Noon, the Sun to shine at once pretty full upon the four Walls of a Rectangular
Garden built after our way: and seldom, in the rest of the Day, to shine upon
less than three Walls, except the Sun be very low.

There is in Monsieur La Quintinye's Book a Ground Plat of the Kitchen Garden,
In Monsieur La Quintinei's Ground Plat of the French King's Garden no footstep
found of Sloping Walls.
or Fruit Garden, of Versailles. Tho there be in that Garden a high and very
long Terrasse, with Trees on both sides against it, yet the Ground Plat shows
that the Walls of it are perpendicular. So this Terrasse having at once the
disadvantages of being more chargeable, and less solid or lasting, and worse
for Vegetation than a Terrasse with Sloping Walls would be, I cannot but
conclude also from thence that Monsieur La Quintinye knew no other Walls than
perpendicular ones. As to the Beauty, To what degree they may be unpleasant to
the Eye.
I acknowledge indeed our Sloping Walls not to be altogether so handsome as the
others are: And yet I do not doubt but the Eye will soon be accustomed to them;
especially when it may look upon them more as Terrasses, than as Walls; so that
their leaning may not seem to threaten a fall.

In the English Translation of Monsieur La Quintinye, Objection from Monsieur
la Quintinye's English Translation solved.
I find a place, that seems peremptorily to condemn our Sloping Walls. It is
near the end of the fifth Chapter of the third Part of the first Volume. There
you may read, By all I have newly said, about the Height of Walls, it appears
that I have little value for those leaning Walls, to pretend to make them Fruit
Walls for Pears, Peaches, Apricocks etc; but they may serve for something else.
And in the Margin you find also writ, Leaning Walls not proper. But the Sense,
in the French Original, is that such Walls as are only breast high ( des Murs
d'appui) are not good for Fruit. Neither was the Author speaking of Sloping
Walls before, but of the Height of perpendicular Walls.

I have also heard of a large round Pit, Account of an Amphitheater with
Sloping Walls.
like an Amphitheater, built here in England with Sloping Walls all about it.
The Ground in the middle was, as they said, several Yards Diameter, perhaps
about 50 or 100 or more. And upon all that Ground there grew Vines, both
sheltered from Winds, and cherished with a closer Heat, than they could have in
the open Air.

A Person of Quality has tried about, And of some Melons, and other Fruits,
heated with Unequal Glasses.
53 Degrees Latitude, in the present Year 1697, to increase the Sun's Heat upon
his Melons, by some pretty large Unequal Glasses. These being placed, between
the Sun and the Melons, did gather the Rays in a pretty small Focus each. And
we have been told, to our admiration, that the Melons thus helped have been
tolerably good, and much better than others that did grow in the Neighborhood,
which were generally bad ones. As if it were enough to heat any one part of the
Fruit, to make the Effects of it to spread over the whole. But I hear also that
the like Trials having been made upon several Fruits, in other places, have had
no other success than the giving them some unkindly precocity, leaving withal
to them a harsh and unpleasant taste.

In some places, The fault of Vines that are commonly made to grow against a
Roof, or the Coping of a Wall.
they make a Vine to grow as high as the Roof of some ordinary Building; and
there to spread its Branches over the whole Roof. In other places, they make
the Vines to grow first as high as the top of a Garden Wall; and there to part
into two Branches, running on each side, for 25 or 30 Foot together, upon the
small Coping of Bricks, they do sometimes end their Garden Walls withal. Tho I
have been told that, with the first of these two ways, they have had some good
Grapes in England; yet I find, in both of them, this capital fault, that the
Roots having work enough to feed so long a Stock, and to garnish such a large
extent with Leaves, and a thousand other little useless Shoots, there can
remain no strength in the Sap, for the production of Grapes; unless perhaps
they be some few and ill favored ones.

All these and the like Trials were endeavors toward what is here more fully
stated: Judgment of those and all other such Trials, in order to make the most
of the Sun's Heat.
for I do not doubt but a great deal more besides has been attempted, in many
places, in order to make the most of the Sun's Heat. Whether I have done any
thing more toward it than others, let either Experience justify, or those
determine, that are able to understand the Mathematical part of this Discourse.
But after all I acknowledge readily that our Invention required but an ordinary
Capacity, to light upon it; and even but an indifferent Skill in Geometry, to
examine and establish it upon its true Principles.

I must here repeat again and again, Caution against too much Heat Sloping
Walls are like to procure.
that I have, in this Discourse, endeavored to increase the Sun's Heat to an
extraordinary degree: and this, I hope, I have found how to do effectually. But
it is easy in hot Climates, and in some light and dry Grounds, and in the
governing of tender Plants, to err by an excess of Heat. If any body should
fall into that Error, it must be by his own fault. He may take as much and as
little, as he pleases, of that degree of Heat, which is to be had by our
Sloping Walls. Tho accommodating my self to the Climate of England, where too
much Heat is hardly to be feared, I may perhaps have sometimes spoke, as if one
were always to take the most. However a pretty good Remedy, against too much
Heat, is to keep constantly the Ground sufficiently watered: So that the Trees
being conveniently full of moisture, their Fruits may be so much the farther
from being scorched and dried up. And here I may observe by the by, that if our
Terrasses be so broad as to have, at the top of them, a little Rivulet, or
Aqueduct, it will be very easy from thence to water them on both sides. But
this is perhaps above the Circumstances of an ordinary Gentleman's Estate. The
same convenience for watering would be found, in the steep Hill of the twelfth
Figure, Fig. XII.
provided there were some Water at hand, above the uppermost Ovals.

If you have a Sloping Wall ready built, Frames called Espaliers by the French
recommended, to take off some of the Sun's Heat, and to give more liberty to
Trees.
and you are unwilling to have all the Heat it dos give, you may keep your
Trees upon some Frames or Espaliers, at some little distance from the Wall, as
half a Foot, or a Foot, or a Foot and a half, more or less, as you intend to
take off more or less of the Sun's Heat. Those Frames, tho not much used in
England, are yet better than the bare Wall, because they leave more room and
liberty to Trees.

Perhaps you may desire to have some Method, A Method for choosing the Elevation
of a Sloping Wall, in any Exposition whatsoever.
for the choosing of the Elevations of your Walls, when they have any other
Exposition than to the South, or to the North. I do for this make use, in our
Climates, of the following Construction; which I do not give as a Geometrical
one, but only as a Mechanical Approximation, for the Solution of a Problem
perhaps too hard, to be solved, in its full Extent, with any great exactness.

An Exposition being given, in a given Climate, it is easily understood, by
what I said before, that all Fruits do not require the Sloping Wall should have
the same Elevation: but that some Fruits will have it great, some little: and
that among these Elevations there is two Extremes, to wit, the highest
Elevation and the lowest, that stand, as it were, for Limits of the rest. I
call the highest Elevation, the Sloping Wall can have, in the given Exposition,
simply the greatest or highest Elevation; and its proper Wall the highest Wall.
And I call the lowest Elevation, the same Wall can have, in the same
Exposition, the smallest or least Elevation; and its proper Wall the lowest
Wall.

Let HA be the Horizon, Fig. XIII.
AOP the Meridian; AO an Arc equal to the Elevation you choose to give to your
Sloping Wall, when it looks to the North: AP the Height of the Pole. And you
may find thus the greatest Elevation of your Declining Wall; whether it
declines to the East, or to the West. Draw the Line PO, whose middle is D; and
determine how much more you would take, for the greatest Elevation of your East
Wall, than for the greatest Elevation of your West Wall. For I do choose to give
the East Wall a greater Elevation, that it may enjoy the Morning Sun more
fully: and to the West Wall a smaller Elevation; that the Sun may come the
sooner to shine upon it. Suppose, for instance, you choose 5 Degrees, or 10
Degrees, for the difference of Elevations, between the highest East Wall, and
the highest West Wall. Place those 10 Degrees, for instance, in the middle of
the Arc PO, from S to T; and let S be higher than T. And draw the Lines DS, DT.
Make the little Circle PDO to serve as a Compass; where the Point O will answer
to the North Exposition, and the Point P to the South Exposition. Let your
proposed Expositions look, for instance, toward the 60th Degree, taken on both
sides the North: and upon the Circle ODP take OE equal to 60 Degrees. The Lines
E s, E t, parallel to DS, DT, will give, upon the Arc AP, the greatest
Elevations A s, A t, for the two Walls: to wit, A s for the Wall that looks 60
Degrees Eastward, from the North Point of the Horizon; and A t for the Wall
that looks 60 Degrees Westward, from the same Point.

The smallest Elevations, belonging to the same Expositions, will be found with
taking AQ equal to the smallest Elevation of the South Wall, and proceeding,
with the little Circle OQ, as was done, with the little Circle OP. Now the
Point Q cannot be lower than the Point O. For whatever be the least Elevation
you can give to the South Wall, the North Wall requires either the same, or a
lower: and never the same, but when it seems inconvenient, for Vegetation, to
give a lower.

If the Point Q happens to be very near the Point O, as suppose within 5
Degrees from it; you may, upon the little Circle OQ, take O^ of 60 Degrees, as
before; and draw to OQ the perpendicular eh, meeting with the Arc AP in h; and
so you will have the Arc Ah, for the least Elevation. And, if you think fit,
you may add to and substract a little from it, at your pleasure; if you intend
to give more Elevation to the East Wall, than to the Westerly. But let it be so
that you may still remain, between the Limits O, Q. However much Niceness, in
so wide a Construction, is probably superfluous.

The Heat remains sensibly the same, The Heat sensibly the same, upon a South
or upon a North Sloping Wall, tho a little declining from the true North or
South.
for the South Wall, and for the North Wall too, if, keeping their Elevation
each, they are made to decline some few Degrees, from the North or from the
South. This is partly plain, because the Heat, upon a Wall, whose Elevation is
given, is a Maximum, when the Exposition is to the South, and a Minimum, when
it is to the North. And, this not being a sufficient Proof, it is also further
evident, by some Calculations, which I forbear to insert here.

For tho a Maximum, A singular sort of Maximums and Minimums, very different
from those that are commonly considered.
or a Minimum, dos not, for the most part, alter its bigness sensibly, when the
Elements, from which it results, are but a little changed; yet it happens
sometimes, as in the Points of Retrogression of Curves, that a Maximum, or a
Minimum will alter very much, upon the least change in its Elements; as suppose
in the Abscisse. And not only a Maximum, or Minimum, may be found, where the
Fluxions of the Abscisse and Ordinate are either of them infinitely greater
than the other; but where those very Fluxions have any determinate and finite
Proportion among themselves. The same, in some measure, already observed by
others.
But a part of this has already been observed by others.

This Equality of Heat is the Ground of the Construction I have given, The
Ground of the foregoing Method.
for determining the Elevation of declining Walls. For it follows easily from
it, that the Elevation of the South Wall will remain sensibly the same, tho it
declines, some few Degrees, from the true South; and that the Elevation of the
North Wall will also remain sensibly the same, tho it should decline, some few
Degrees, from the true North.

But Experience will be, Experience must also be consulted.
in all Climates, the properest way to determine, for each Fruit, and each
Exposition and Situation, and each sort of Materials, our Walls may be made
withal, the Elevation that should be given to Sloping Walls.

We must now compare, Of Walls that are not smooth.
as well as we can, a smooth and plane Wall, with a rough irregular Wall, and
with some other Walls, that are not plane.

In this Theory I have supposed hitherto the Walls to be very smooth and plane.
And in that Supposition the Heat is as the Square of the Sine of the Sun's
Elevation, upon the Plane of the Wall. There can be no such thing as a Wall
giving the Heat proportional to the Sine of the Sun's. Elevation upon it.
But, if it was possible to have a Wall, of an uniform and determinate
roughness every where, that could perpetually fold its rough Surface into
larger and straight prismatical Furrows, so as to have always one side of the
Furrows parallel to the Rays of Light, and the other side perpendicular to
them, the Heat would then be, and only then, as the Sine of the Sun's Elevation
upon the Wall. Which must be so understood, as not to exclude a Wall, whose
roughness vanishes into an exact Plane. I am apt to think that our ordinary
Walls, tho very rough and uneven, come nearer the first Supposition, But if
there was, the [Fig. IV.] Method of calculating the Heat upon it would be easy.
than the second. But, if the second was to take place, TV, TL must, in the
fourth Figure, be made equal to the Sines of their proper Arcs TP, TZ: And the
Parabolas MV, ML, IV, must be turned into straight Lines, And Sloping Walls
would be yet very advantageous, even in that supposition; tho less than before.
and the rest of the Calculation must be altered accordingly. The result of
which would be a much smaller disproportion of Heat than before, between the
Sloping and the perpendicular Wall. But, notwithstanding this, there would be
yet left a very considerable Increase of Heat for Sloping Walls; which would
give a sufficient encouragement for the building of them: As will soon appear
to you, by an easy Calculation, too obvious after all I have said, for me to
explain it any farther. Of a Wall giving a mean proportional.
However it is not possible that the Heat should follow this Proportion. If the
Heat was supposed as S, Heat, between such a Wall as this and a Plane Wall.
which is the mean proportional, between the Heats in the two former
Suppositions, taking S for the Sine of the Sun's Elevation upon the Wall; then,
TV, TL being duly determined, the Parabolas would be turned into Parabolas of
another Kind, where the Cube of the Ordinate would be as the Square of the
Abscisse. And the Calculations would be made after a Method like that I followed
before. And the result would come much nearer my first Supposition: tho it
would perhaps yet fall short of the true Increase of Heat, upon the Wall. A
smooth Wall compared with a rough Wall.


A smooth South Wall seems to receive more Heat in all, than a rough irregular
Wall. But the rough Wall receives more Heat, while the Sun shines very
obliquely upon it, than a smooth South Wall would do: And it receives less Heat
than the smooth Wall, when the Sun shines near full upon both. For my part I
think the smooth Wall to be preferable; not only because it seems to have more
Heat in all, and looks much neater, but because it gives no shelter to Insects.
How to make a Brick Wall smooth.
The very sloping of a Brick Wall will give an advantage for the polishing or
making of it smooth, by the drawing to and fro of a rough and hard Stone
sufficiently plane upon it, the Stone being large and suspended from above, to
some convenient place for that purpose. But we have one sort of very large and
thin Bricks, whose Figure is an exact Square, already polished to our Hands.

Neither should I be very fond of a Sloping South Wall, with some smooth
semi-cylindrical Furrows upon it, Of a Sloping Wall with Semicylindrical
Furrows upon it.
running from top to bottom, in all the Wall; as in Architecture some Pilasters
are often made; the flat part between the Furrows being also very smooth;
unless the Furrows were very small indeed; which would bring the Wall so much
the nearer a Plane. Any other Furrows would prove too convenient a Nest for
Insects. These Furrows compared with a Plane Wall of the same breadth with them.
I have calculated, more out of Curiosity, than for any real Use, the
Proportion of Heat, for an Equinoctial Day, upon such a Furrow, and upon the
Plane Wall, or Fascia, that could fill it up to the very Axis; supposing the
Atmosphere not to act upon the Rays of Light, and the Elevation of the Walls to
be the same, with that of the Pole; and these Walls to be turned directly to
the South. And I have also calculated the Heat, that the like Fascia would
receive, if it was turned directly to the Sun, for the whole Day.

In the seventh Figure, Fig. VII.
where C is the Center of the Lines of Sines OA, AG, make up the Rectangles
OCAD and GCAE; and upon the Axis AC conceive the Solid formed by the Revolution
of the Space OAGO, as well as the Cylinder formed by the Revolution of the
Space DEGOD. The Heat of the Sun, upon the Fascia always perpendicular to its
Rays, will be, at the Days end, as the Moment or Weight of the Cylinder ODEG,
in reference to the Line OD; suppose as the Number 9870. And the Heat upon the
Cylindrical Surface, will be as the Moment of the Solid OAG, in reference to
the Line DE, that is as 2723. And the Heat upon the inclined Fascia, will be as
the Moment of the Solid OAG, in reference to the Line OD; that is as 2467.

But the inclined Fascia, or the Plane Wall, receives, in proportion to its
Surface, much more Heat than the Semi-cylindrical Cavity; as appears both by
the very Numbers I have just now given; and by taking upon the Semi-cylindrical
Surface a small Space, equal to the like Space upon the inclined Plane Wall.
For the Space, taken in the Cylindrical Surface, will be seen by the Sun, only
for six Hours: And the most it can receive of the Sun's Heat dos but equal the
Heat, that the Space taken in the Plane Wall dos receive, from Nine in the
Morning to Three in the Afternoon. The Wall with the Cylindrical Furrows has
some Advantage, in that the Solid, between the Furrows, not being thick, it may
be heated from side to side, and in that the Reflection of the Sunbeams makes
the Heat something closer. But the advantage will be greater if the Furrows be
very close, and very small, as suppose six or ten or more in an Inch: In which
case they seem to be even preferable to a Plane Wall, tho the difference
between them can be but little.

The whole direct or unreflected Heat, Fig. XIV.
upon a Semicylindrical Space ADB, Measure of the Heat upon a Semicylindrical
Space.
is as the Sectour DAB, the Line DA being directed to the Sun, and the
perpendicular Heat being expressed by a Height equal to the Radius of the
Cylinder.

From whence it follows that the Heat, upon the Plane AB, is equal to the Heat,
or Action of the Rays of Light, upon the Cylindrical Space ADB, when the Angle
DAB is of 59 Degrees 4 Minutes, and about 50 Seconds. And so we leave off
considering of Walls that are not Plane.

I have, An Account of a Table giving, from 40 to 67 Degrees Latitude, the
Proportion of the Sun's Heat, in the Solstice, upon a perpendicular and a
Sloping South Wall.
for the Reader's satisfaction, calculated, according to the Principles that
have been laid down, the following Table, which gives for all Countries, from
40 to 67 Degrees Latitude, the proportion of Heat, in the Summer Solstice, upon
a Perpendicular South Wall, and a Sloping Wall passing through the Pole of the
World. This Space dos comprehend almost all Europe. The Use of Sloping Walls,
in very hot Countries, in such situations as being high, are naturally
temperate or cold.
But, in the South parts of it, I should not much care for our Sloping South
Walls, unless it were for some Plants of the hottest Countries, or in a place
naturally temperate or cold, upon the side of some little Vale duly chosen in a
high Hill or Mountain. And thus those many Habitations, which, being placed
very high, are, in all times of the Year, much colder than the neighboring
Plains, and unfit upon that account, even in hot Countries, for the production
of good Fruits, may hereafter enjoy that blessing. And this so much the more,
that the Heat of the South Wall may, perhaps without danger, be extremely
increased there. So, for instance, in the middle of Spain, which is a
Mountainous Kingdom, the Heat may be made, in the Solstice, ten or fifteen
times greater, upon our Wall, than upon a perpendicular South-Wall. And this,
or rather a part of it, will give a very good help against the coldness of a
Situation, proceeding from its Height.

Suppose that, in the fourth Figure, the Point t is, as before, three times
nearer to T than to V: and that the Cylindrical Surface TMV is to the
Cylindrical Surface TIV as the Arc tm to the Arc ti: You will find the
Proportion, between the Cylindrical Surfaces TML, TMV, TIV, to be, The Table it
self, and its Explication.
at the Solstice, as in the following Table. The first Column gives the
Elevation of the Pole in Degrees from 40 to 67. The fourth Column gives the
Heat TIV, upon a smooth South Wall, so much inclined to the Horizon as to pass
through the Pole of the World; and it makes it always equal to 1000.

HP TML TMV TIV MN TML TMV TIV M. N. 40 65 677 1000 838 100 1043 1540 1291 41
74 690 1000 845 100 930 1348 1139 42 84 702 1000 851 100 835 1189 1012 43 95
714 1000 857 100 755 1057 906 44 106 725 1000 863 100 686 946 816 45 118 736
1000 868 100 626 851 738 46 130 746 1000 873 100 574 770 672 47 143 756 1000
878 100 529 700 614 48 157 765 1000 883 100 489 639 564 49 171 774 1000 887 100
454 586 520 50 185 783 1000 891 100 422 540 481 51 201 791 1000 896 100 394 499
447 52 216 799 1000 900 100 369 462 416 53 233 807 1000 903 100 347 430 388 54
249 814 1000 907 100 327 401 364 55 267 821 1000 911 100 308 375 342 56 284 829
1000 914 100 291 352 321 57 303 835 1000 918 100 276 33O 303 58 321 842 1000
921 100 262 311 287 59 340 848 1000 924 100 249 294 272 60 360 855 1000 927 100
238 278 258 61 379 861 1000 930 100 227 264 245 62 399 867 1000 933 100 217 250
234 63 420 873 1000 936 100 208 238 223 64 441 878 1000 939 100 199 227 213 65
462 884 1000 942 100 191 217 204 66 483 890 1000 945 100 184 207 196 67 504 895
1000 947 100 177 198 188 I II III IV V VI VII VIII IX

The Explication of the TABLE.
I. Elevation of the Pole in Degrees. II. Heat upon the perpendicular South
Wall, in the Summer Solstice. III. That part of the Heat, upon the Sloping
Wall, that is not affected by the Air. IV. Heat upon the Sloping South Wall, in
the Solstice; its Elevation being the same as that of the Pole. V. Middle
Numbers, between those of the third and fourth Column. VI. Heat upon the
perpendicular South Wall, in the Summer Solstice. VII. That part of the Heat,
upon the Sloping Wall, that is not affected by the Air. VIII. Heat upon the
Sloping South Wall, in the Solstice. IX. Middle Numbers, between those of the
seventh and eighth Column.
And indeed that Heat would be always the same, if it was not for the different
Effects of the Atmosphere, in several Climates, and for the various
communication of Heat from the Ground to the Air, and so to the Sloping Wall.
The second Column gives, in the same proportion, the Heat TML, upon a smooth
perpendicular South Wall: And the third Column gives that part TMV, of the
total Heat TIV, upon the Sloping Wall, that is not affected by the Air. The
fifth Column gives the middle Numbers between those of the third and fourth.
The three following Columns give the same Heats, and with the same Proportions;
but the Heat, upon the South Wall, is always expressed by 100. The ninth Column
gives the middle Numbers, between those of the seventh and eighth. The real
direct or unreflected Heats, upon the Sloping Wall, being determined, by the
Atmosphere, to some Number between TMV and TIV, they cannot be very far from
the Strength expressed in the fifth and ninth Column.

The Use of the Table is as follows. The Use of the Table.
Suppose I would know what might be at Paris, Example for Paris.
in the Solstice, the Proportion of Heat, between a perpendicular plane South
Wall, and a Sloping plane South Wall, passing through the Pole of the World. I
take the Height of the Pole at Paris, which is 49 Degrees 50 Minutes. And over
against this Number I find TML, TMV, TIV must be 183, 781 and 1000. Or else
that they must be 100, 427 and 548. I will use these last Numbers, as being
more convenient. I conclude therefore that, the Heat, upon the perpendicular
South Wall, being supposed of 100 Parts, the Heat, upon the Sloping Wall, is
already, upon a consideration, which is not at all subject to the Effects of
the Atmosphere, of 427 Parts. Besides an additional Heat of 121 Parts, that
would raise it to 548 Parts, were it not that from this Number, 121, something
is to be subtracted, because of the Effects of the Air. The last Column gives
the middle Number 487; which we may suppose is not far from the real Heat upon
the Sloping Wall. Of South Walls that are more inclined, to the Horizon, than
the Wall that passes through the Pole of the World.
And this is about 4 times greater than the Heat upon the perpendicular Wall.

But if we go about to calculate the Heat, upon the Sloping South Wall, that
passes through the lowest Point of the Polar Circle, we shall find the Increase of
Heat, upon it, to be yet much greater. Perpendicular and Sloping South Walls
may be well compared together in the same, but not in different Climates.


And in general a Sloping South Wall, elevated at Paris, upon the Horizon, by
so much as is the Height of the Pole, wanting the whole Distance between the
two Tropicks, being much hotter in the Solstice, than the Sloping South Wall,
that passes through the Pole: it follows that any South Wall whatsoever, whose
Elevation, upon the Horizon, is there between 2 Degrees 50 Minutes, and 49
Degrees 50 Minutes, must be hotter also.

This comparing together of perpendicular and Sloping South Walls proceeds well
enough, for the same Climate, whether it be often cloudy or often fair:
provided the Clouds do not use to come more at some certain hours of the Day
than at others: suppose more about Noon than in the Morning. But we cannot,
from the Table, determine safely the Proportion of Heat, between the
perpendicular and Sloping South Walls of several Countries; the Interposition
of the Air, and especially the difference of Weathers being almost an
insuperable Obstruction against it.

In the Tract of this Discourse, Of some other Advantages of Sloping Walls:
I have, in several places, shown some of the Advantages we get by using
Sloping instead of perpendicular Walls. I will now run over some other
Advantages, that are yet untouched, or else not fully treated of.

Our Sloping Walls enjoy much more the benefit of the Dew and Rain's falling,
In reference to Dew and Rain; especially as to the East Wall.
than other Walls can do. And the East Sloping Wall will not have, as the
perpendicular, that great fault of keeping the Rain from its Trees. The
consequence of this will easily be perceived, by those that complain so much of
the Drought incident to their East Walls.

It is a common fault, In reference to Frost occasioned by the Earths
transpiring sonte moisture:
in all perpendicular Walls, that the Ground being wet, and transpiring much
humidity, this will stick upon the tender Blossoms, and in cold weather cover
them with Frost, and destroy them. If our Sloping Walls do not entirely prevent
this, they cannot but do it at least in a great measure: the very sloping of
the Tree turning it from those Steams, and giving room for them to dissipate
themselves in the Air. Or by the cold Vapors in the Air driving with the Wind,
and sticking upon Trees.
In like manner our Terrasses will have an advantage in reference to Frost,
occasioned by the cold Vapors in the Air driving with the Wind and sticking
upon Trees. For one Terrasse dos defend, in a great measure, the following
Terrasses against this Accident.

By our Theory the Extent of those Places, The growing of Fruits extended to
more Countries and Places.
where several Fruits do grow, will be much enlarged. And not only two Zones of
some Miles, or perhaps of some Degrees, round the whole Earth, one of each side
the Equator, will be made able to produce, for instance, some good Grapes,
whereas they afforded before only some bad or indifferent ones. But in
Countries, where Vines do grow plentifully, if you mark upon the Hills, or
Mountains, those Limits, where Vines do begin to be but bad or indifferent,
even against Walls built after the ordinary way; you may often take in yet a
great deal more of Ground, with several Country Houses and Towns in it, and
have there some excellent Vines, by the help of Sloping Walls. What is here
said of Vines is, in like manner, easily understood of other Trees.

So then whereas every Climate in Europe begins to lose some sorts of Fruits,
for want of Heat and Time to ripen them; we may every where open our Gardens to
receive those Fruits, which hitherto we have been unable to have, tho our near
Neighbors Southwards did raise them, with no extraordinary trouble.

And not only the Places for the growing of Fruits are enlarged, And the time
of their Ripeness, and use for Men, to more Days in the Year.
but so are the Times also, in which we may enjoy them. This advantage arising
from our Walls giving probably their Fruits a Week, or perhaps a Fortnight,
sooner than we could have them otherwise. Ordinary Walls compared among
themselves, and with Sloping Walls, as to the forwardness of their Fruits.
For since at Paris the Fruits of good Espaliers are something sooner ripe,
than those of Standard Trees; and these last are sooner ripe, than those of
Dwarf Trees: And, among the Espaliers, those of the South and of the East begin
to give some ripe Fruits about eight or ten Days sooner than those of the West,
and about, at least, fifteen or twenty Days sooner than those of the North; is
it not easy, from thence, to conclude that our Sloping South Walls and East
Walls will give their Fruits considerably sooner, than ordinary Walls can do?

The Certainty of our latter Fruits coming to Ripeness is also much greater;
The Certainty made greater of our latter Fruits coming to Perfection.
since, by our having them early, we need not fear so much the beginnings of
cold and wet Weather, that might hinder them from coming to Perfection.

Walls may not only be so exposed, Slopes of Earth for smaller Plants.
and so inclined, as to make several sorts of Trees, growing against them, to
bear early some excellent Fruits; but, according to the same Idea, the Ground
it self may be so shaped, into Slopes and Terrasses, as to bring early some of
the smallest sorts of Plants, as Strawberries, Sallets etc. And as for such
Plants, Of the dividing a main Slope into many small ones.
as cast a pretty deal of Shade, tho the same Sloping Ground might serve very
well for them, yet one might also use, with some more advantage, a main Slope
cut by Stories into several small ones faced with Bricks, Fig. XV.
as you see in the fifteenth Figure.

In the like manner we might easily so shape the large Furrows of our Fields,
Of shaping the Level or ordinary Ground, into very large Furrows running East
and West, with a gentle Slope Southwards, and a steep one Northwards, or
contrariwise; in order to increase or diminish a little the Sun's Heat.
or the Surface of our other Grounds, as to have them exposed to the Sun, with
the same Obliquity, as the level Ground of any Country, not above 10 or 15
Degrees more to the South, or North, than we are our selves. For instance, in
the Latitude of London, Fig. XVIII.
the Ground will have the same Exposition to the Sun, as the level Ground, in
the Latitude of 45 Degrees, if going from South to North, you make, suppose for
five Yards together, your Ground to rise by an Angle of 6 Degrees, in a Slope
exposed exactly to the South; and then you make your Ground to fall as much
toward the North, by a Slope as steep as it can conveniently be, suppose of 35
or 40 Degrees: and then you begin again another long and gentle Slope toward
the South, for five Yards together, to be followed as before, by a short and
steeper Slope toward the North; and so on. See the eighteenth Figure. Tho we
do not, by this, give the same Weather, or Heat, to the Climate, nor the same
Strength, or Weakness, to the Sun, as there is in a Country, where its Rays do
not pass through so much or so little Air; yet at first sight it seems to be of
some consequence for Agriculture, both in cold and in hot Countries; and I
could not forbear proposing it to the consideration of the Curious. If, in our
Example, we do not get that degree of Heat, they have naturally in the Latitude
of 45, supposing both Countries equally cloudy; yet, with the very Numbers I
gave, we may possibly reach, upon our Ground, the Heat, which they have in 48
Degrees Latitude; and we may yet come nearer the Heat, which the Ground has in
the Latitude of 45, if we make our Slope, that looks to the South, a little
steeper; raising it, for instance, 10 or 12 Degrees above the Horizon. There is
some Ground lost here, tho not very much. As to the Trouble it is not greater
than we see Contrymen take, to make the Water to run off their Fields. And
we have this convenience, that we may give our Slopes only what Breadth we
please; suppose as much as will result from the strength of a Man to throw,
with a Shovel, the Earth from him. But the broadest Slopes are best.

Thus we may help and increase a little, Application of this Practice to Use.
by the shape of our Ground, the Heat of the Sun; or else we may abate a little
from it. And by consequence we may fit our Lands the better, to bear any Plants
we have a mind to raise. This may serve to guide such as would plant some Vines
in their Country, whether it be naturally a little too hot or too cold. For it
will either lead them, as daily Experience dos others, to choose a Ground fitly
exposed and inclined for their purpose: or else, if their Ground be not proper,
it will let them see a possibility and a Method, with a little trouble, to make
it so.

Every body knows what great difference of Heat and Vegetation there is, Of the
difference of Heat, upon the North and South side of Mountains, Hills and Downs.
in the same Climate, between the North and South side of great Mountains; and
the like is, in some measure, observed, at much smaller distances, in our
Hills. I remember that traveling once in England, in Summer, over some Downs,
which had but an ordinary Declivity, one could plainly perceive, by turns that
the Air became of a sudden much warmer, when the Declivity was toward the
Sun; and colder, when it lay from it. Yet the Sun being high then did shine
upon the whole Ground. In any Shade, The Heat of the Air in any place dos not
very easily spread into the next Air.
and even in our Woods, tho the communication be so open with the very next
Air, warmed immediately by the Sun, and its Rays are let in at several places,
yet the coolness is very sensible; the Heat spreading from the ambient Air,
with less ease, than one is apt to think. These considerations incline me to
believe that, by this shaping the Ground, there may be something done for the
benefit of smaller Plants, especially in a close place, or calm weather, when
the reflected Heat may not be blown away from the Ground that reflects it. For
it seems each Surface of Ground makes then, close about it, as it were a
peculiar Climate.

And this is farther confirmed, Nor the reflected Heat spend it self so fast,
but that it may be strongly felt.
by the common Experiment we have, how much hotter it is, in Summer, near a
South Wall, or a row of Houses, that look to the South, when the Sun shines
full against them, than in any other place, where the Light of the Sun comes
with the same Liberty. For it is plain the reflected Heat, being thus
perpetually supplied from the Sun, dos not so much spend it self, into the open
Air, but that it may be strongly felt, at some distance, all along the place
that reflects it.

I cannot here but mention what I heard a learned Gentleman say, who has been
in the West Indies. He assured that upon their Mountains, according as one goes
up higher and higher, and the Heat dos become less, one finds, by degrees, very
many of our European Plants naturally growing; the Mountains always giving
them, in some peculiar places, as it were different Climates, fitted to their
several Natures. So then, as the Diminution of Heat makes the Ground naturally
to bring forth the Plants of colder Countries: so, on the other side, the
Increase of Heat, which in a great measure lies in our power, must needs fit
our Grounds, and Gardens, for an easy and natural Production of the Plants of
such Countries, as are hotter, only to a certain degree, than ours.

The use of Sloping Grounds, for smaller Plants, is pretty well known already;
especially beyond Sea. And as for these Climates, not to mention what they call
in French des Ados, An Account of a Slope where extraordinary Strawberries are
said to grow.
I have heard that a Gentleman, who lives at Dublin, has in his Garden a pretty
easy Slope well exposed; which furnishes him with Straw berries, long before
they be ripe in other Gardens; and with such Strawberries too, as have a
color, smell and taste, to which the others are not to be compared.

It happens pretty often that the Sun dos shine only some part of the Day;
Advantage of Sloping Walls, in such Days as the Sun is seen for some Hours only.
which makes, at such times, perpendicular Walls, in the Spring and Summer, to
be frequently altogether without it. But Sloping Walls, having before them a
much greater part of the Sky, are so much the more likely to enjoy the Sun, if
it comes at all to be seen. This advantage, as well as that of enjoying more
fully the Sun, at any Moment it happens to shine, is so much the more to be
valued, when the Climate is apt to be Cloudy, and subject to much Rain.

In pretty hot Countries, Advantage of inclining Sloping Walls more or less,
according to the Climate, Situation and Exposition.
or in Climates, where their perpendicular South Walls are already as hot, as
they desire to have them, one may often, by inclining another Wall, to a proper
quantity, make any Exposition, from the North East Southwards to the North
West, to be equal in Heat to a perpendicular South Wall. The like may be said
of a perpendicular South East Wall, etc: If it be the best perpendicular Wall,
in your Climate, you may make several other Expositions not to be inferior to
it, by inclining the Walls, as much as is necessary. And further, suppose
Experience has taught, in your Country and Situation, the best East-South-East
Wall, for instance, to be, for such a kind of Fruits, that, which is elevated
75 Degrees upon the Horizon; you may give such an Elevation to another Wall, in
another given Exposition, as will receive an equal Degree of Heat with the
former.

Very few Grounds have so much good Earth, Advantage of Terrasses with Sloping
Walls, in reference to a sufficient quantity of good Earth, which is easily
procured.
as is necessary for Fruit Gardens. The charge of bringing some, from another
Place, is very great: And, unless one fetches it from far, there will probably
be, too near the Garden and the House, some large unsightly place left in a
manner barren and desolate. Neither is it practicable to take away the good
Earth, from some Parts of your Garden, to bring it to some other Parts; except
as far as your Alleys, and such other Places, will give leave. But, in a Garden
for Fruit, made as I shall presently describe, one may find, upon the Spot, so
much good Earth, as will much more than double the natural Depth, there was of
it before; tho you should plant your Lines of Wall Trees, in the middle of a
plat of good Ground, eight or nine Foot wide. And all this may be done, without
altering at all the Beauty or Symmetry, of your Disposition.

The sixteenth Figure is the Ground Plat of a Garden for Trees, Fig. XVI.
made up into Terrasses. It is an exact Square of 470 Foot on each side:
Description of a Garden for Fruit, according to the present Theory.
that Figure not being so offensive, in our Disposition, as it is in that which
is common. If you would have a bigger Garden you may keep the same Breadth, and
add two, or four, or six, or eight Terrasses more etc, and order it so that the
Door may still remain in the middle. If you design to have a smaller Garden,
you may make the Length of your Terrasses less, by 50, or 100, or 150 Foot. And
if you would have it smaller yet, you may, instead of ten Terrasses, The Use of
making the outside Wall thicker at bottom than at top.
make only eight, or six, etc. The outside Wall is about 10 Foot high; and
broader at bottom, than at top. The Breadth at bottom is 3 or 4 Foot. The
Breadth at top might be made of 8 Inches; and it would be better yet, if the
Wall ended there into a sharp Edge. The sides of the Wall are plane; and so
they must needs be somewhat Sloping. Tho this may perhaps seem to be of little
consequence, yet I do not doubt but it will be a considerable advantage for
this Wall, to enjoy thus the Sun, near the Solstice, for about half an hour, or
an hour, longer of each side, than it could otherwise; and at the same time to
enjoy it more fully. To which advantage there must also be added that of a
greater Solidity; which will make the Wall to be more lasting, and seldom to
want any Reparations. On the inside of this Wall is a Line of four or five Foot
of cultivated Ground; A kind of Chanel, or Ditch, to keep the Garden from too
much Water.
then an Alley round the Garden, and a Chanel, or deep Trench, that may serve
for a Drain to the Garden. I did suppose in the Figure that this Canal was
faced on each side, with a competent perpendicular Brick Wall. But it should
always have some Water, whose Surface ought to be about three or four Foot
lower than the Level of the little Walks. One or two of those little Wind
Mills, that turn alone toward the Wind, and are so common in the Fields in
Holland, might serve to empty this Ditch, lest it should grow too full; and, if
one would, they might also serve to distribute the Water of it to any other
place, or to the Alleys, in order to water the Trees. Those Wind Mills might be
placed either within or without the Garden; as you think it most convenient.
The Breadth of the Canal must be considerable, if you design it for state and
ornament; but it may be little, if you design it chiefly for use. Unless the
necessity of having some Earth from thence, for the Terrasses, makes you to
choose a large Canal. Under the Middle of the Alleys, a cross the whole Garden,
should be as it were a Common-shore, to receive all the superfluous Water of
the Alleys, and to carry it into the Ditch. And, if one such Common-shore was
not sufficient, one might have two placed at equal distances, from the Middle
of the Alleys; so as to leave between them about half the length of the Alleys,
or very little more. After the Ditch comes a little Path, and a Line of
cultivated Ground. Then the Slope of the main Terrasse round the Garden. Then
an Alley at the top of it. Then the inner Slope of the main Terrasse. The rest
are the lesser Terrasses, with their respective Slopes on each side; their
Thicknesses at top; the cultivated Grounds at the foot of them, and the little
Walks between. The Door, and Bridge, and main Stairs, to get up the main
Terrasse, and lesser Stairs, to go down from it into the Alleys, are easily
perceived in the Figure; whose particular measures are as follows hereafter.
Measures of the Slopes, which are respectively made equal. But being made
different they may be better fitted for several Fruits.
Tho the Sloping, in all the little Terrasses, have been made the same, and
such as are properest for latter Fruits, yet it would be more convenient to
have them something different. The perpendicular Height of the Terrasses is 8
Foot. The Slopes that look to the South are elevated 51 Degrees 30 Minutes,
above the Horizon. Those that look to the East 45 Degrees. Those that look to
the West 35 Degrees 22 Minutes. And those that look to the North 28 Degrees 53
Minutes. The Height of the South Walls taken along the Slope is 10 Foot 2
Inches. That of the East Walls 11 Foot 3 Inches. That of the West Walls 13 Foot
10 Inches. And that of the North Walls 16 Foot 6 Inches. The Bases of the
Slopes that look to the South, to the East, to the West, and to the North have
in Breath 6 Foot 4 Inches, 8 Foot, 11 Foot 3 Inches, and 14 Foot 6 Inches. The
Door is toward the East.

Expositions of the Walls. Height of the Walls in the Slope. Elevations of the
Walls above the Horizon. Bases of the Walls or their Talus. Perpendicular
Height of the Walls. A Table showing the Heights, Elevations and Bases of the
Walls.
Feet. Inches. Degrees. Min. Feet. Inches. Feet. Inches. South. 10. 2 51. 30 6. 4
8. 0 East. 11. 3^ 45. 0 8. 0 8. 0 West. 13. 10 35. 22 11. 3 8. 0 North. 16. 6
28. 53 14. 6 8. 0

Here I bring into one Table the several Heights, Elevations and Bases I said
did belong to our Sloping Walls.

I go on to give the Measures of two several Sections cross our Garden.

Measures taken across the Garden, going from South to North.
Feet. Inch: 1. 6 EXternal Slope of the Wall. Measures for the Ground Plat
taken across the Garden.
0. 0 Breadth of the Wall at Top. 1. 6 Internal Slope of the Wall. 4. 8
Cultivated Ground. 16. 4 Alley. 19. 4 Ditch or Canal. 2. 0 Path. 4. 8
Cultivated Ground. 6. 4 Slope looking toward the South. 13. 0 Alley at the Top
of the main Terrasse. 14. 6 Slope looking toward the North. Sums. 4. 8
Cultivated Ground. 4. 9 Path or Alley. Feet. Inch: 4. 8 Cultivated Ground. 98.
0 -- 6. 4 Slope looking toward the South. 1. 0 Thickness of the Terrasse at
Top. 14. 6 Slope looking toward the North. 4. 8 Cultivated Ground. 4. 9 Path
or Alley. 4. 8 Cultivated Ground. 36. 0 -- Feet. Inch: 36. 0 Divided as before,
or with what Alterations one pleases. 36. 0 Divided as before, etc. 36. 0
Divided as before, etc. 36. 0 Divided as before, etc. 36. 0 Divided as before,
etc. 36. 0 Divided as before, etc. 36. 0 Divided as before, etc. Feet. Inch: 6.
4 Slope looking toward the South. 13. 0 Alley at the Top of the main Terrasse.
14. 6 Slope looking toward the North. 4. 8 Cultivated Ground. 2. 0 Path. 19. 5
Ditch or Canal. 16. 4 Alley. 4. 8 Cultivated Ground. 1. 6 Internal Slope of the
Wall. 0. 0 Breadth of the Wall at Top. 1. 6 External Slope of the Wall. 84. 0
-- -- 470. 0 Total Sum.
Measures taken across the Garden, along one of the small Alleys, going from
East to West.
Feet. Inch. 7. 8 Wall and Cultivated Ground. 42. 4 Alley, Ditch, Path,
Cultivated Ground. 8. 0 Slope looking toward the East. 13. 0 Alley. 11. 3
Slope looking toward the West. 305. 5 Length of the Alley and small Cultivated
Ground. 8. 0 Slope looking toward the East. 13. 0 Alley. 11 3 Slope looking
toward the West. 42. 4 Cultivated Ground, Path, Ditch, Alley. 7. 8 Cultivated
Ground and Wall. -- 470. 0 Total Sum.
But, with increasing the Breadth of the Canal every where, by 15 Foot more,
the whole Breadth and Length of the Garden would be 500 Foot each.

If the Garden be designed for Vines only, Of a Garden for Vines only. It
requires but small Terrasses.
the Terrasses need not, I suppose, have more than 4 or 5, or at most 6 Foot,
in the Slope that looks to the South; and accordingly they will be smaller, and
nearer one another; and by consequence they will be less chargeable; and the
same Extent of Ground will yield more Fruit.

Supposing the Ground not to be of the very best sort, Of the Number of
ordinary Trees the Garden could hold:
but of a middling kind, between that, and the sort of Ground Monsieur La
Quintinye calls indifferent; the Garden, whose Measures I have just now given,
would hold almost 1600 ordinary Fruit Trees; taking in those that may be placed
against the outside of the Wall, that goes round the Garden. This will appear
upon examining the three following Tables, where I make yet no allowance for
the Trees growing bigger, against our Walls, than against the ordinary ones.
From whence is to be estimated the Number of its Fruits,
But the Tables however will very well serve, to guess at the Quantity of
Fruits, that will be produced. And this must be with allowing for each Tree
according to the common rate of their Fruitfulness.

Height of the Wall taken along the Slope. A Table showing the Heights and
Lengths and Expositions of the Walls.
Length of the Wall. Exposition of the Wall to the Heavens. The Walls spoken of
in this Table. Feet. Inches. Feet. Inches. 10. 0 456. 0 East. Outside of the
Wall that goes round the Garden. 10. 0 468. 0 South. 10. 0 468. 0 West. 10. 0
468. 0 North. 10. 0 458. 8 East. Inside of the Wall that goes round the Garden.
10. 0 458. 8 South. 10. 0 446. 8 West. 10. 0 458. 8 North. 11. 3 347. 6 East.
Outside of the main Terrasse round the Garden. 10. 2 360. 4 South. 13. 10 359.
6 West. 16. 6 360. 4 North. 11. 3 27 Trees East. The Nine little Walls, at the
Bottom of the Nine Alleys. 20. 2 and 9 Trees South and West. The Nine Corners
at the right hand, at the going into the Alleys. 13. 10 16. 6 and 9 Trees North
and West The Nine Corners at the left hand, at the going into the Alleys. 13.
10 16. 6 297. 0 North. One of the North Walls of the little Alleys. 16. 6 2376.
0 North. The remaining 8 North Walls. 10. 2 297. 0 South. One of the South
Walls of the little Alleys. 10. 2 2376. 0 South. The remaining 8 South Walls.

This first Table allows twelve Foot to the Gate and Pillars; and makes the
Length of a Sloping Wall middlemost, between its Length at Bottom, and its
Length at Top. Only, as to the long Slopes of the little Alleys, observe that
they are set down less by 8 Foot, than what they really are at Bottom: So much
being allowed, for the spreading of the Trees in the Corners.

The Result of the first Table is here set down in the second.
East. Short Table giving the Result of the former.
South. South and West. West. North and West. North. Length and Height of the
Walls. Length and Height of the Walls. Length and Height of the Walls. Length
and Height of the Walls. Length and Height of the Walls. Length and Height of
the Walls. 914. 8 10. 0 926. 8. 10. 0 9 Trees. 10. 2^; 914. 8. 10. 0 9 Trees.
16. 6 926. 8. 10. 0 247. 6. 11. 3 3033. 4. 10. 2 and 359. 6 13. 10 and 3033. 4.
16. 6 27 Trees 11. 3 13. 10 13. 10

Monsieur La Quintinye divides our Wall Trees into two Classes: Some
Suppositions taken from Monsieur La Quintinye:
and, according to him, if the Ground be between very good and indifferent
Soil, the Walls, whose Height is in the Table 10 Foot and 10 Foot 2 Inches,
require the Trees of the first Class to be at eight Foot six Inches distance
asunder; and the Trees of the second Class to be at seven Foot three Inches
distance asunder. The middle Number between those is about 8 Foot. But the
Walls, whose Height is in the Table 11 Foot 3^; Inches, and 13 Foot 10 Inches,
and 16 Foot 6^; Inches, require to have their Trees alternately intermixed, with
making them by turns a high one and a low one: and their Distances must be
about five Foot three Inches, one with another.

According to these Determinations, By which a Table is made of the Number of
ordinary Trees, the Garden would have.
the last Table will give the following Numbers of ordinary Trees.

East. South. South and West. West. North and West. North. Trees. Distance.
Trees. Distance. Trees. Trees. Distance. Trees. Trees. Distance 114 8 116 8 114
8 116 8 66 5 379 8 9 68 5 9 577 5 27 5

The total Sum of Trees is 1595. 3 Vines to be substituted for one Tree.
And for one Tree, that takes up 8 Foot Space, you may substitute, if you
please, 3^ Vines. But if the Ground be very good the Number of Trees will be
less.

So then our Garden might hold 1300 ordinary Trees, General Sum of ordinary
Trees and Vines in the Garden.
and 1000 ordinary Vines; or 1400 ordinary Trees, and 680 ordinary Vines. And
from thence must be estimated the Number of its Fruits.

But it would be very unwise to make such high Terrasses, Of Terrasses for
Vines only.
to serve for Vines only. For that Plant being of such a Nature, Vines ought to
be kept very low.
as not to do well in these Countries, if it be suffered, as it is too often
done, to spend its strength in nourishing an overgrown Stock; we may follow
their Directions, that advise us to keep it so low, La Quintinye.
as to give, for instance, to Muscat only the Height from three Foot to five. A
Terrasse for Vines would then be great enough, unless I mistake in drawing this
conclusion, if it was but half as high as those I have described. Neither would
it be necessary to allow more than half the Breadth, we did give to our Alleys,
or very little besides. And since this great narrowness might prove
troublesome, because of the Rain, I would in building the Terrasses spare,
within, and at a good Depth under each of them, a little paved Ditch, to carry
off the Rain at both Ends, and to keep the Alleys clear of too much Water. The
same might also be conveniently done, in building any Terrasses, tho never so
big.

But, Of a large Terrasse parted into two for Vines.
if you think it too improper, to have in one Garden a mixture of large and
small Terrasses, you might cut one great Terrasse so, as to afford, in the
middle of its Height, a Step for another row of Vines; as you see in the
seventeenth Figure. Fig. XVII.
I should however, upon many other Accounts, and also for fear of the Vines of
the lower part of the Terrasse intangling with those of the upper part, rather
choose to have a whole Garden for Vines, excepting only the bad Walls in it: And
such might be, after some few changes, Fig. XVI.
the sixteenth Figure; if we suppose the outside to be only of 240, or 300 Foot.

Now, The Garden will not hold so many Trees, as it would, if they were to keep
within the ordinary Size.
as I did already intimate once before, our Garden will probably not hold so
many Trees, as are set down in the last Table. For there being more room with
our Walls, than with the ordinary ones, for the spreading and growing of the
Roots round about, they will make their Trees undoubtedly to grow bigger, The
Trees in it will grow very large and why:
and larger every way. The best Fault, in determining the Distances, between
the Trees, is to make them too big at first; And must be far asunder:
for fear of the Confusion, and want of Fruitfulness, that attends those
Distances, when they are made too small. However in this we find a new
advantage of our Gardens; since a smaller Number of Trees will garnish the same
Extent of Walls, Yet will not yield a less Crop of Fruits.
and give no fewer Fruits, than a greater Number would have done; and will be
withal more vigorous and lasting. They will be more lasting.
But the Difficulty lies in guessing at the Distances we must choose. A guess at
their Distances.
For my part I would, for the first Trial, if the Ground be good, not only make
them as great, as the Distances, See La Quintinye Vol. II. p. 294. and Vol. l.
p. 208. etc.
Monsieur La Quintinye determines, for the very best sort of Ground; but make
them yet, by about one sixth or one fifth part bigger. Neither would I begin to
mix alternately big Trees and little Trees together; unless the Wall were, at
least, twelve Foot high.

We must take notice here that the Paris Foot, Proportion of the London Foot to
that of Paris.
used by Monsieur La Quintinye, and after him by me, is to that of London as 16
to 15. So that to the London Foot one must add of an Inch, to make it a Paris
Foot.

I have drawn, A Draught of the Garden in Perspective.
with a great deal of care, according to the Rules of Perspective, in a large
Print by it self, the Elevation of the South-West Corner of our Garden. Page 1.
Any body may judge, by the effect of this Figure, particularly with hiding the
lower part, whether Sloping Walls and Sloping Trees will be much offensive to
the Eye. For my part I think it may be a question whether an ordinary
Fruit-Garden, with perpendicular Walls, can ever be made to look so pleasant,
and so full of a regular and stately variety, as I find the Figure to be. That
stateliness is altogether owing to those great and massy Terrasses, which, in
our Draught, overrule, as it were, and master the whole; and have an effect
like to that of very large Columns, in our Buildings. They have besides, from
so many Trees set against them, in a regular order, that Airiness and Gayity,
which arise in our Architecture, from abundance of proper Ornaments. The Canal
is made broader than according to the measures of the Ground Plat. It will not
only be nobler, if it be very broad; but, if you have no natural rising, in the
midst of your Ground, it may yield also the Earth necessary for the Terrasses,
without sinking the level of the Garden. The Figure will help to conceive how
some Roofs might be used, instead of Terrasses.

If the Garden be very large, Division of a large Garden, by some Canals, into
four or sixteen little Gardens, or any other Number.
and you are at a loss where to have all the Earth, that would be required;
even tho you should pretty much increase the breadth of your Canal; keep the
outermost square Terrasse untouched; and in the middle of your Ground Plat,
draw, from side to side, a large Canal, like a Cross, ending at the four ends
perpendicularly against the main Terrasse. This will yield the Earth necessary
for the Terrasses.
This new Canal will give the Earth you want: And each of the four Divisions of
the Garden must be finished by it self, according to the Idea I have followed,
in the sixteenth Figure. Only the new Terrasses, that go round the inner half
of the four Divisions of the Garden, and make up the Banks of the new Canal,
should not be so large, as the main Terrasse.

After the same way, if the Extent of the Ground was extraordinary great, and
there was yet some Earth wanting one might again, by four new Canals like a
Cross, subdivide each of the four last Divisions: which would give sixteen
small Gardens in all. And either give different Ponds for several sorts of
Fishes: Or else open the Way, by Boats, among the Gardens:
If these Canals be designed for several Ponds, where you may keep different
sorts of Fishes, they need not have any communication one with another. But if
you would have the liberty of going every where, with Boats, among the Gardens,
it will be sufficient, if all the Canals be opened, and continued into one
another, along that Branch of the main Cross, which the Bridge dos come up to:
excepting only that part of the main Terrasse, the Bridge ends against. And
leave also a Foot Way into them all.
Thus you might go, at your pleasure, either with a Boat, or walking, to any
one particular Garden. As the outer Terrasses are made less and less, according
as their Length decreases, so should also the Canals be made less and less
broad. Now, by such Canals, your Garden might be divided, not only into four or
sixteen smaller Gardens, but into any other Number.

Tho such large and magnificent Gardens can only be the Work of Princes, Any
ordinary Gentleman may have a few Terrasses, or Slopes, well exposed.
and other Great Men, or of powerful Societies; yet there is no ordinary
Gentleman, that is able to have a Garden, but may, according to his ability,
and the Directions I have given in other places of this Discourse, have one or
more Terrasses, or Slopes, well exposed, of what length he can afford: So that
he may have, against them, a competent number of Vines, and other Trees. And
whereas they say now, for instance, I have got fifty Yards of very good Wall;
they may say hereafter, to a greater commendation of their Gardens, I have
raised 30 or 40 Yards of a Sloping South Wall.

It may happen that, A Trial of Sloping Walls not to be depended upon, unless
made by a very good Artist.
upon some Trials made by an unskilful Artist, our Walls may seem not to be of
any use, for the Production of good Fruits. But ordinary Agriculture dos not
now thrive equally, in everybody's hands. And whilst a diligent and
understanding Country Man is largely repaid for his Care and Industry, the
unskilful often sees himself deceived in his hopes. There will ever be a just
distinction, between those that act by the certain Principles of an Art
grounded upon Nature, and such as act in a great measure by chance. The same
Instruments, according to the several Applications that are made of them, being
managed by two several Hands, produce often both what is deservedly admired of
one side, and what is as deservedly despised on the other. In a word, I do not
hope, by this Theory, to make all Gardeners equal among themselves. But I give
them, in all Countries, an easy, A good Culture more significant than a good
Exposition.
and natural, and very great Increase of the Sun's Heat; which may often assure
them of an extraordinary Success; tho without excluding the necessary Care and
Skill, which after all is the most significant Part.

If what I have been proposing might, Sloping Walls very necessary, while our
Summers continue to be so cold.
at any time, have been acceptable and useful to Mankind, it must certainly be
so now. Every body has been sensible, for these twelve or fifteen Years, of a
very great, and, as some think, unaccountable Change in our Seasons. Our
Summers are much colder than they were; and it is but seldom they bring us any
Thunder. Their Influence is felt in many of the Productions of the Earth;
particularly in all sorts of Fruits, that come late in the Year: for such have
no Heat to bring them to perfection. And the unsettledness of our Springs
commonly destroys the very first hopes we have, at the blossoming of our Trees.
The cause of this Change, in our Seasons, is often the Subject of common
Discourse: And it is no wonder to see how wide and empty the guesses of most
people are, upon that matter. This is certain, and was made out heretofore past
dispute, The cause of that change in our Seasons referred to a Phenomenon like
Smoke, that incompasses the Body of the Sun, and is seen to spread an exceeding
great way from it.
that from the Year 1683 downwards, and I say now even to the present time, the
Sun has been in the very Middle, or Center, of a thin Mist of a prodigious
Extent; which, incompassing the whole Body of the Sun, spreads near the Plane
of the Ecliptic, so as to reach almost the great Orb of the Earth; resembling
much, in its Figure, an ordinary Ocular Glass, or Lens, equally unequal on both
sides. Its Thickness or Opacity (not where it is greatest, but where we may
begin to see it, when the Night is already become dark) is like that of the
Tail of a Comet, or the Milky Way. But it is yet considerably greater, just in
the Line that passes from the Earth through the Body of the Sun. Whoever has seen
this Vail, that is spread between the Sun and us, will easily grant that it
must needs take off some part of its Heat. There has not yet been found, at
least as far as I know, any other old Footstep of this strange Phenomenon, but
that in 1660, Mr. J. Childrey, in his Britannia Baconica, has printed that he
had observed it several Years together, and he desired Astronomers to mind it.
Thus much seems very possible, that it might be many Years unobserved in the
Sky, and perhaps have continued for some Ages, without being minded. But the
very change in our Seasons seems now to be a Proof, that it has either not been
at all, in former times, unless we should find in History such another Series
of cold Summers, or at least that it is has not been so thick, or has not
lasted so long, The Origin of that Smoke.
as at present. The true System of the World having at length been discovered,
by the immortal Mr. Newton, we may perhaps guess more exactly, than heretofore,
at the natural Causes of this Appearance. It seems then, at least, the outside
of it, to arise from some Fumes, or Exhalations, which the Sun throws up, with
an equal Strength, and the greatest it can, all about its Body, perpendicularly
to the several points of its Surface. And the Sun revolving at the same time,
about its Axis, in some 25 Days, occasions the spreading of that Smoke, near
the Plane of the Sun's Equator, much farther than it dos toward the Poles. The
Parts of Smoke, whose Swiftness is not so great, do not rise so high; and
perform all their Motions, within the Body of the Phenomenon; not being able
ever to come near its Extremity. And, supposing several Degrees of Swiftness in
those Particles, the Phenomenon ought to grow much denser, as one approaches
the Sun: which our Observations also do confirm. How to determine the Figure of
the Space it lies in.


From the Supposition that the Particles of Smoke, that fly out at the Sun's
Equator, perpendicularly to its Surface, are able to rise so far, as to reach,
as by Observation they are seen to do, the Circumference of a Circle, that
seems, at its Extremity, to be removed from the Sun by about 70 Degrees, I have
calculated how high would rise the Particles that should, with the same
perpendicular Velocity, fly out of the Poles of the Sun. And the Calculation
gave me that Height, as agreed very well with the Breadth, the Phenomenon seems
to have in all its Parts. It would have been easy, upon the same Grounds, to
make the like Calculations, for so many points in the Section through the Axis, as
would have made it sufficiently known; and by consequence have served to
establish, or overthrow my Conjectures. But as yet I have neglected to do it.
And this is no proper place to handle this Subject more exactly.

I shall only say that I look upon each Particle of Smoke, that rises from the
Sun, as having its Motion as free, as if it was a Planet: The same being
observed also in the Smoke, that composes the Tail of Comets. So then each of
our Particles revolves in an Ellipsis, till being near the end of its
Revolution it falls into the Sun again. The whole Body of the Phenomenon is
thus perpetually supplied afresh, somewhat in the nature of those Jets d'Eau,
or Water Spouts, they call in French, des Gerbes. The extraordinary small
number of Spots, that appear for these many Years so seldom in the Sun, whereas
in the first half of this Age they were so very numerous and so frequent, leads
us to suspect that the matter of those Spots has, for several Years, been kept
evaporated and dispersed, in all the Space I have just now described.

For ought we know yet this Phenomenon may, It may grow thicker, and yet not be
perceived to have changed, except perhaps by its Effects.
at sometimes, by the supervention of a thicker and heavier Smoke, grow denser
about the Sun, than at other times; tho the outside of it spreads but to the
same place, and seems not to increase in thickness. So that our Heat, in our
Summers, may very much alter, without our being able to perceive any Change, in
the outermost Part of the Phenomenon; which is the only Part visible to us;
unless the Sun should be totally Eclipsed; and give us, in the middle of the
Day, an Image of a dark Night.

Some Directions relating to Fruit Walls.
LET the Rules and Directions given by Monsieur La Quintinye be supposed here,
Directions about Garden Walls ought to be taken from Monsieur. La Quintinye,
and the present Discourse.
as the main Foundation of our Hopes, in raising Fruit Trees. To which Rules
must be joined those, that may be gathered, from the present Discourse. And to
the whole the following Maxims may be yet added; some of them being only an
Abridgment of what I have already treated of more at large, and some others
being yet untouched.

Let all your Walls be plain, Let your Walls be straight.
and straight on both sides.

If they are to stand by themselves, How they must be if they stand by
themselves, without any Earth on either side.
without any Earth or Terrasse on either side, let them be thicker at bottom
than at top, where they must end as it were into an Edge.

That Edge, Fig. XIX.
which is at the Top of the Wall, should stand over the Middle of its Thickness
at Bottom, if you would have the Wall to be most solid and lasting. But, if you
intend to favor the Trees of one side, more than those of the other side,
where perhaps it is not in your power to have any Trees, the Top of the Wall
may be removed, going from that side, you intend to favor, toward the other;
provided it dos yet bear directly over some part of the Bottom. And this will
make that side the steeper, which probably you design for the outside of your
Garden.

The broader your Wall is at Bottom the better it is for Vegetation; but the
charge is also greater. 2 or 3 Foot may be a competent Thickness. The Height
will be well from 8 to 10 or 11 Foot. A higher Wall would be more chargeable,
and, unless the Breadth at bottom be also increased, it would be less hot, and
would not last so long.

Walls of darkest Colors are best.

If your Wall is to rest against a Terrasse, How if they rest against a
Terrasse or Slope of Earth.
or Earth, having a Slope faced with Bricks on the other side, it will be well
that the Plane, which parts the Earth and the Wall, Fig. XX.
be perpendicular to the Horizon; which will make the other side of the Wall so
much the more Sloping. And let the several Beds of Bricks, which make up your
Wall, be, not Horizontal, but a little leaning toward the Terrasse. So the
Wall will be able to witstand better the Pression of the Earth.

Let the Earth of all your Terrasses, Let the Earth of the Terrasses be
thoroughly settled.
or other Sloping Grounds, which you intend to face, be thoroughly settled, or
well beaten, before you face them. Lest that Earth, by coming to sink, should
spoil the Regularity of your Wall.

The perpendicular Height of such a Wall as this needs not be more than 8 Foot.
The perpendicular height of Sloping Walls.


If you would have a Terrasse, with solid Walls on both sides, they must be
built after the same way.

Let the Inclinations of all your Terrasses be made, Their Inclination.
according to the Directions, I have given at large, in the present Discourse.

If your Terrasse be very Sloping on both sides, let it have some little
Thickness at top; that the Earth coming more and more to settle, the two Walls,
that face it, may not come to touch one another.

Terrasses that are flat at top, Of a broad Terrasse and how it may be made;
with a Walk there, are very Noble and neat. But if this Walk be broad, you may
consider whether you had rather build two Walls breast high, on both sides of
the Terrasse, Fig. XXI.
so that the facing of it be not altered by them. Fig. XXII.
This will save the charge of bringing so much Earth, and is capable of the
Ornaments of Architecture, or else may be performed after a very plain way, and
with little charge. When its sides are almost equally leaning;
It is most proper for such Terrasses, as have both their sides almost equally
leaning. Such are those that run from North to South, or from North West to
South East.

You might also have a Wall breast high, Fig. XXIII.
only of one side of the Terrasse; Fig. XXIV.
which would spare some charge, and be pleasanter in walking. This is very
proper, And when the Terrasse runs from East to West.
when your Terrasse runs from East to West: for thus your South Wall, having at
the Top of it the Wall breast high, your North Wall will have a more
proportionable Height for Trees. See the Figures quoted in the Margin.

The Ground of your Alleys may be made Sloping by some 5 or 10 Degrees etc, The
Ground of Alleys for Fruit may be made Sloping toward the South.
toward the South: which will expose it better to the Sun; and cause the Water
to run more toward the North Wall, or worst side; and make the Ground near the
South Wall to be the dryer. This will be particularly proper for Vines, which
thrive best in a pretty dry Ground; and for a Country subject to much Rain.

Your North Wall might be left bare, The North Wall may be left bare, and Herbs
sown at the foot of it:
without any Trees; which would make the reflected Heat to be much the
stronger, upon the South Wall. And then, at the Foot of the North Wall, might
be sown some Plants that require, in your Climate, in the Spring and Summer,
much Sun Shine, and a Ground not very dry. Such might be some Strawberries, or
any other smaller Plants, that are common in Gardens. So then one side of your
Alleys may be for Fruit, Or else the Earth be kept resting, in order to renew
that of the South Wall.
and the other side for all sorts of Herbs. But, if you think fit, the Earth of
the North side may wholly rest, and be kept in store, to renew the Earth of the
South side, as there shall be occasion.

You may order, Slopes preferred to Walls.
after the manner I have said, whatever Walls, or Terrasses, you build;
prefering always a Terrasse, with a Slope on each side, faced with Bricks, to
an Earth, or Slope, walled on one side, and only faced on the other: as this
must be preferred to a simple Wall, without any Earth.

I need not say that, If you can have but one Slope, give it the best
Exposition.
if in your Garden you will have but one Slope, it should be against the best
Wall, and reach the very Top.

A Garden may very properly be surrounded by a Slope of Earth, Of a Slope round
the Garden.
walled on one side, and faced on the other; the Wall being at the outside of
the Garden. But, if you please, you may not make the Slope, that would look to
the North.

If you will be at a greater Expense, Of a Terrasse round the Garden.
you may have a flat Terrasse round your Garden. Or else, Of more Terrasses in
the Garden.
before your Slope, that looks to the South, build a sharp Terrasse, having the
whole length of your Garden. The same you might do along your Slope, that looks
to the North. And so you might have as many Terrasses, as you please. But it is
best not to part them, by a Garden between, but to keep them all together;
because they will be thus better sheltered against Winds.

A flat Terrasse is that, Of Flat and Sharp Terrasses.
which has a convenient Walk at the Top of it; whether it be walled or only
faced on both sides. A sharp Terrasse is, for the most part, only faced on both
sides, and ends at Top, as it were into an Edge; there not being Room enough
for a Walk. It may also be walled on one side, and only faced on the other. The
same may be said of a Flat Terrasse.

A Sharp Terrasse is preferable to a Flat Terrasse for Cheapness. A Flat
Terrasse is preferable to a Sharp Terrasse for State, and for the convenience
of the Walk it affords.

If your Climate be subject to very dangerous Winds; Description of a Walk very
well secured from Winds.
from which your Walls must be secured at any rate; the best will be to make,
in a convenient place, two Terrasses, running exactly from East to West, Fig.
II. III*
like those of the second and third Figure. I have no new Directions to give,
about the Insides of those Terrasses. They must be faced with Bricks; and, the
Side exposed to the South being used for Fruit, the North Side may either
wholly rest, or be employed as you think fit. But, as to the Outsides, these
not being designed for any use, you may make them as steep as you please. Then
you may fill the whole Spaces, comprehended by the indefinite Lines, or rather
Planes, AM, AO; EN, EP, continued as far as you think fit, with Trees, and very
tall and thick Hedges etc; or with Buildings, and whatever else is able to stop
the Wind. Both the Ends of the Alley must be stopped, by a cross Terrasse each;
and, at their outside, the same care must be taken for a Shelter, of very tall
Hedges and Trees, against Winds.

Thus the Walk, between your Terrasses, will be sheltered, as much as possible,
and the Heat in it will be very close, and the Sun Shine, that is lost, will be
inconsiderable.

I do not mean only that such Buildings and Plantations, as I spoke of, may be
made about your Walk, to secure it from Winds: but that you may also take your
advantage of Buildings already made, and of Trees already planted, even of
those of a Forest, to make your Alley between them, and to secure it, by the
Shelter they will afford.

The Roots of the Trees, Of the Disposition the Roots ought to have, in a Tree
that is to be planted against a Sloping Wall.
we are to plant against our Sloping Walls, should not be disposed after the
same way, as if the Walls were perpendicular. If there be but one Root, it is
best placed, when it makes an Angle, with the Body of the Tree, equal to the
Angle of the Sloping Wall, with the Cultivated Ground. And then such a Root,
being turned from the Wall, will be Horizontal. But, tho the Root made a
smaller Angle with the Tree, yet there will be commonly some position, where it
will naturally place it self, in your Cultivated Ground, in an Horizontal
Situation. But this must be done with judgment, so that the Roots, of different
Trees, may not too much intermix.

If there be but two Roots in your Tree, when they are opposite, and both
Horizontal, place them parallel to your Sloping Wall. If they be not directly
opposite, they will be best, when they both bend a little downwards, from the
Body of the Tree. And you will easily find what Situation is best, for the
Tree, with keeping its Body parallel to the Situation it is to have, and, at
the same time, turning the Tree about its own Axis. After the same way,
whatever be the number of your Roots, and their Situation, you will know how to
place the Tree, if you endeavor to find how all the Roots, without running too
deep; from the places, which are heated by the Sun, can best remain under
Ground: especially under the Cultivated Ground, which receives more the benefit
of the Dew and Rain and Sun Shine, than that which is under the Wall. And, when
the Roots are long and pliant, you may place them; at your pleasure, in a
Situation parallel to the Surface of the Ground, or to the Plane of the Wall;
according as they are near the one or the other of those.

The Fruits that grow pretty high, Description of a Ladder to be used about
Sloping Walls.
from your Cultivated Ground, will require that you should have* in order to
gather them, a Ladder somewhat particular, with two Arms at the upper End, by
which it may be kept from the Wall, and from the Trees. And such a Ladder,
being once fixed, will be near parallel to the Wall; and will serve to gather
at once all the ripe Fruits in that place; or to do all the necessary Work
about the Trees, be the Wall never so high; till you remove the Ladder, to
another part of the Wall.

Some Harbors, Of Harbors and Summer Houses, in our large Gardens.
Cabinets, or Summer Houses, in our large Garden, might be very well placed at
the four Corners. They should have the full Breadth of the Alleys, or rather
more; so that they may face the middle of them directly. And the Walks may be
continued into one another, by cutting a round Space, from the Corner of the
Canal. I have drawn, in one of the Corners of the sixteenth Figure, Fig. XVI.
some pointed Lines, which show how I mean those Summer Houses should be made;
and what changes they will give, both in the Alleys and Canal, and in the
Corners of our main Terrasse.

Smaller Harbors, or Grottos, may be made under the Terrasses; and may serve
for shelter against Storms, and for Storehouses for our Fruits: not to keep
them there for a good while; but to lay them up, till they be carried to a more
convenient Place. They may be of about ten Foot Square; and have their Floor
lower than the Ground: and cause no other change, in the outer Part of the
Terrasses, but that a Way must be cut to them, along that Corner of the Walk,
which is exposed to the North West. They must have a good deal of Air from the
Door etc. And, according as you would have them dry, you may have, under your
Trees, in the South Wall, a small Window, of a convenient bigness, so much
raising from the Wall, as to exclude the Rain. And, if you fear lest you
Harbor, or Storehouse, might prove too damp, you may make it narrower, and
spread it under a greater length of the Terrasse. This will give you the
liberty of making the Floor higher, and level with your Alley, or raised above
it, by two or three Inches, or more.

One is not apt to think that a Brick Wall, Of Ornaments of Architecture, in a
Wall altogether smooth.
altogether smooth, and without any jetting out, and Windows, should be capable
of some pretty Ornaments of Architecture. Yet I find it may be very much
imbellisht, barely by the different Disposition of the Bricks: And I have given
an Instance of it, in the Frontispice. There I made use only of Bricks, whose
Measures are as follows.

Ordinary Brick; Length 4 Parts; Breadth 2. Double Brick; 4. 4. Half Brick
square; 2. 2. Half Brick long; 4. 1. Quarter Brick; 2. 1.

But one might also employ Bricks of different Colors and Sizes. What is done
in the Frontispiece, for imitating an Architrave, Freese and Cornish, might
also be done for Pilasters, and for large Partitions between them, like the
Square Frames of our Wainscot, or like our Windows. I say this, after having
tried it, and perceived that even the Schizzos I made looked noble and pretty;
and imitated our good Architecture, beyond what I could have expected, without
having any thing either Gottick or Fanciful. The Example you have, in the
Frontispice, is very much inferior to what might have been done, if there had
been more Room. And not only the Modillons, of the finest orders, might be
easily imitated; but so might also the Triglyphes, and Metopes, of the Dorick.

F.I. F.II. F.III. F.IV. F.V. F.VI. F.VII. F.VIII. F.IX. F.X. F.XI. F.XII.
F.XIII. F.XIV. F.XV. F.XVI. F.XVII. F.XVIII. F.XIX. F.XX. F.XXI. F.XXII.


S: G: sculp:



