A WOMAN forbidden to speak in the CHURCH, The grounds examined, the Mystery
opened, the Truth cleared, and the ignorance both of Priests and People
discovered.

Written by a friend of the Truth, whose Name in the flesh is RICHARD FARNWORTH.

And Jesus answering, said unto them, Do ye not therefore err, because ye know
not the Scripture, neither the power of God,

Mark 12.24. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have pur ou
Christ: There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there
is neither male nor female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus,

Gal. 3.27, 28. Jesus answered and said, My Doctrine is not mine, but his that
sent me; if any man will de his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine whether it
be of God, or whether I speak of my self,

John 7.16, 17. LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black-Spread-Eagle, at
the West End of Paul's. 1655.

A Woman forbidden to speak in the CHURCH.
The Grounds examined, the mystery opened, the Truth cleared, the Ignorance
both of Priests and People discovered.
But the Spirit of Truth may declare through the Temple, and dwell in it, which
the World cannot receive,

1 Cor. 6.19. John 14.16, 17.
THe Church is in God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, as Paul and Silvanus
writ to the Thessalonians, 1 These. 1.1. and it is made all of living stones
elect and pretions, 1 Pet. 2.5. and the Saints, their bodies are made fit
Temples for the Holy Ghost to dwell in, 2 Cor. 6.16. and they are made a fit
Habitation for God through the Spirit, being builded upon the Foundations of
the Prophets, and the Apostles of the Lord Jesus, in whom all the building
fitly framed grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord, Ephesians. 2.20, 21, 22. and
in this Church are all taught of God, as it is written in the Prophets, Isa. 54
13, 14. and Jer. 31.33, 34 and likewise in Heb. 8.10, 11. and says Jesus
Christ in John 14. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he way abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth, whom
the world cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him, but ye
know him, for be dwells with you, and shall be in you, v. 16, 17. now nothing
is to speak in this Church which is spiritual, but that which is spiritual,
even the Holy Ghost, which is invisible and incomprehensible; the Woman or
wisdom of the Flesh is forbidden to speak in the Church, that is, of the things
of God, for that which is flesh is flesh, and the natural man knows not the
things of God, they are foolishness to him, neither can he know them, because
they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.4. and so the carnal minded man he
says, that a Woman (or the female kind) ought not to speak in the Church: now
the first birth either in man or woman, has nothing to do to speak in the
Church, (the carnal part) for it knows not the things of God, and every man by
nature is a child of wrath, and he is forbidden to speak with his carnal
wisdom, which he gathered out of Books and Studies, for that nature is
adulterated from God, and nothing must speak in the Church in God, but the Holy
Ghost, and that may speak in the Temple, either in male or female, nothing must
speak in the Church but the Spirit of Truth, whom the world and carnal minded
ones know not, God is a Spirit, and they that know him, know him to be so, and
none know him but they that are spiritual, for says Jesus Christ, Except ye be
born again ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, John 3, and that which
is flesh is flesh, and that knows not the things of God neither in male nor
female, but is adulterated from God, but that which is Spirit is Spirit, and is
born of God either in male or female, that knows him, and that is permitted
to speak in the Temple, and none can call Jesus Lord but the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor.
12.3. and the manifestation of the Spirit is given to profit withal, Ver. 7.
and the Spirit of the Lord was made manifest through the Female kind, as Women
in former Ages, and it was profitable; for Deborah she had the manifestation of
the Spirit of God ruling in her, by which she, or the Lord in her, did
administer Justice to the Israelites, which were the Church, and People of God,
and she was a Judge amongst them, and judged Israel, Judges 4 4. and she
Prophesied to Barak; that at the River Kishon the Lord would deliver Sisera the
Captain of Iabins Army into his hand; See the noble acts that the Lord did by
the Prophet^ss his Servant Debora, read Judges 4.5. Chapters, and the Lord has
said, he will pour out his Spirit upon all Flesh, and their Sons and Daughters
shall Prophecy, Joel 2 28. he does not say, that Flesh shall prophecy neither
in Sons nor Daughters, that is forbidden; Let all Flesh be silent both in Sons
and Daughters, and let the Spirit speak, for that is permitted either in Son or
Daughter: it is the Spirit that Prophesies, and foretells of the things of God,
and the manifestation of the Spirit is given to profit withal in a Daughter as
well as in a Son, that God may speak where he does dwell in his Temple. Let all
carnal Wisdom in Male as well as in Female keep silence, for that is not
permitted to speak, it is adulterated from God, and the natural man knows not
the things of God, and he that is joined to an Harlot is one body, 1 Cor. 6.16.
and that must be judged and cast out by the Spirit of Truth, and judgment
being brought forth into Victory, let the Truth declare it self, but let all
Flesh be silent till the Spirit be poured out either in Son or Daughter, for
all the Wisdom of the World it knows not God, who is a Spirit, and he chooses
the weak things of this world to confound the things which are mighty, 1 Cor.
1.27:28:29. and the Woman is counted the weaker Vessel, but the Lord filling
that Vessel full of his Wisdom, and ruling it by his holy Spirit, he dwelling
in his Temple, and declaring himself through it by his Son Jesus Christ, it is
for the praise of the glory of his Grace, that no Flesh might glory in his
sight, for that must be trodden under foot, fleshly Wisdom, and carnal Reason
both in Male and Female, that the Lord may be all in all in the Creature,
making them fit Temples for his holy Spirit to dwell in, 1 Cor. 3.16. That he
may speak in his Temple, in the Female as well as the Male.

The Body it is but the Temple, it is the Man-child Christ Jesus, where he is
bornup into the understanding that is to declare the Fathers will, and that is
permitted to speak, the Spirit of Truth which the world cannot receive, Ioh. 14
16:17, 26. but not carnal Wisdom, and fleshly imaginations, which is out of
Covenant with God, and must be burnt up by the Spirit of Truth, before the
Temple be fitted and prepared for the Masters use, for nothing must speak in
the Church but the Spirit of the Living God, let all Flesh keep Silence, that
is not permitted to speak in any, and Paul he was made a Minister, not by the
will of Man, but by the will of God, Who revealed his Son in him, Gal. 1 8, and
your Daughters shall prophecy, Acts 2.17, 18. And there was one man which had
four Daughters which were Virgins, and they did Prophecy, Acts 21.8:9. and he
says, all may Prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be
comforted, and the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, 1 Cor.
14.30:31. it is the Spirit that is to Prophecy, and it is the Spirit that is to
speak in the Church, and where the Spirit is made manifest it is profitable to
others, and none can call Jesus Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, and where he
says, Let your Women keep silence in the Church etc. for he says, it is a
shame for Women to speak in the Church, but he does not say, let the Spirit of
God keep silence in the Temple, but that may declare where it is manifested,
either in Male or Female, and then it is the Man Christ that speaks in them,
for great is the Mystery of Godliness, Christ in you the hope of glory, Col.
1.27. and his sheep they hear his Voice: If any man has an ear to hear let him
hear what the Spirit says; for says the Lord by the Holy Ghost, Let no men
deceive you, for if any man among you, seem to be wise in this World, let him
become a fool that he may be made wise, for the Wisdom of this world is
foolishness with God, for it is written, he takes the wise in their own
craftiness, and the Lord knows the thoughts of the Wise that they are vain, 1
Cor. 3.18, 19, 20. man by his carnal wisdom is sottish in the things of God,
that he would compare spiritual things with carnal things, because his wisdom
and understanding is altogether carnal, to be carnally minded is death, Romans
8.6. but the Holy Ghost teaches to compare spiritual things with spiritual
things, because they are spiritually discerned, and the natural man knows them
not, for they are foolishness unto him, 1 Cor. 2.11:12:13:14.

Now the Scriptures were not spoke forth by the will of man, nor by the carnal
mind, and fallen wisdom, if they had the carnal mind could have understood
them, but as they was spoken forth by the Holy Ghost, which the carnal mind or
fallen wisdom knows not; therefore the Scriptures are a Mystery to the first
nature in man, and he reads, but does not understand, for the life of them is
hid from his carnal mind, and so he argues from them carnally, but he can
deceive none now but blind men, and Fools like himself, for a wise man's Eyes
are in his Head, his Light is in Christ, and he sees that the Scriptures need
not an Orthodox Key, for Holy men of God as they were moved they spoke them
forth by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.19:20:21. and where that is made manifest
again it reads them plainly, but till then they read they know not what, as the
worldly Wise men, and Sir Simons do now, that gets pearking up into a high
place, such as the Pharisees used, who were Enemies to Jesus Christ then, as
they are now, and they are called of men Masters as they were, and without
money will they do nothing: but now the Key of David is found again, and it is
turned about freely to unfold the Mystery that has been hid, amd reveals the
Mystery both to Sons and Daughters, according to the promise of the Lord, so
that the Woman Jezabel, that has so long born Rule in the Synagouge of Satan,
where Simon Magus did rule, that sold the Letter for money, will not now be
permitted to speak in the Church, but cast out, for the wisdom of the Flesh
must not be suffered to usurp authority over the Man-child, the Spirit of
Truth, for he will rule, and all DEVINERS will be MAD, Isa. 44.24, 25. such as
ye proud Priests are, that sell the Letter without the Spirit, and speak
Divinations of their own Brains, and not from the mouth of the Lord, and such
must now be stopped, and not permitted to speak in the Church, nor of the
things of God, by their carnal wisdom, which is foolishness with God, and their
studied out Knowledge which is adulterated from God, and leads them a whoring
after their own inventions, forsaking the Fountain of living mercies to delight
in lying vanities, but now they must come under the Law, and be severely
punished, and their mouths will be stopped by the Truth, for it is written,
Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn; and I
will have mercy and not sacrifice: go to the School of Christ to learn what
that means, and then you will know what the Apostle says in that place of
Scripture; when you are come through the fire, to have your own works, and
Wisdom, and studied out Arts burned, 1 Cor. 2.13:14:15:16. that you may know
the same mind ruling in the Temple that was in Christ, that nothing may be done
through strife or vainglory, but in lowliness of mind, each one esteeming
other better than themselves, and being of one accord, and one mind, as they
were that spoke forth the Scriptures, Phil. 8.1:2:3:4:5:6: to the 12. Then will
you know what is to be understood concerning the Woman's non-permission, but
read on in that place of 1 Cor. 14. and see the following Verses, where he has
been speaking of the Woman, and he says in the 36. Verse, What, says he, came
the Word of God out from you, or came it unto you only? for says he, If any
man think himself to be a Prophet or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the
things that I write unto you are the commands of the Lord; but if any man be
ignorant, let him be ignorant, 1 Cor. 14.36:37:38. but he does exhort to
prophecy, and says, forbid it not, but rather covet after it, and your
Daughters they shall prophecy as well as Sons, and the Spirits manifestation
is to profit with all; therefore forbid not to speak with Tongues, the Tongue
of the learned, such as are taught of God, by the Spirit of Truth, the Holy
Ghost, which the world cannot receive, and that is to speak in the Temple, and
in the Church, for else Paul would not have commended Phebe to have been a
Minister, or Servant to the Church, Romans 16.1. if he had forbidden the Spirit
of Truth for being declared through Women in the Church: but are ye not yet
carnal, and it is carnality which is forbidden to intermingle with
spirituality; for Paul writ to the Romans to receive Phebe, which was a Servant
or Minister to the Church at Cenerea, and not only to receive her, but to
receive her in the Lord, and to assist her in whatsoever business she had need
of, Romans 16.3. and he writ to them also to greet Priscilla, and Aquila; and see
what he says more in 3:4:5. Verses, and says he, Greet Mary, who bestowed
much labor on us, Rom, 16.6. and says he, Salute Tryphena, Tpythena and
Tryphosa delicious or delicate, two godly Women, beloved of the Lord who
labored with P ^ in the Go spel, and Persis a faithful woman, who labored
much in the Lord with Paul in the Gospel, Romans 6.1.
and Tryphosa, who labor in the Lord, and salute Rufus chosen in the Lord, and
his Mother, and mine; and many are called but few chosen, as these, Romans 16.13.
Salute Philologus, and Julia, Nereas and his Sister, and Olympas, and all the
Saints that are with them, Salute one another with an holy kiss, the Churches
of Christ salute you, Romans 16.15:16.

And Again says Paul to the Brethren, Help those Women that labored with me
in the Gospel, with Clement also, and with other my fellow laborers, whose
Names are in the Book of life, Phil. 4.1:2:3. Here is not Women forbidden to
speak in the Church where the Spirit of Christ was manifest to rule, but they
are saluted with an holy kiss in the Lord, and Woman-labourers in the Gospel,
and they are to be received in the Lord, and to be assisted, etc. But says he,
Mark them which cause divisions, and offenses contrary to the Doctrine of
Christ, which ye have learned, and avoid them, for they that are such serve not
our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, as the Priests of the World do
now in this generation, who by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts
of the simple, Romans 16 17, 18. Now such as these that serve themselves, and
their bellies, and seeks for great Benefits, and teach for Tithes, Bribes,
Augmentations, Gifts and Rewards, as the Priests do, contrary to the practice
of the Saints, and speaks by their own wisdom, and not from the mouth of the
Lord, they cause divisions and dissentions, and they are to be marked, and to
be cast out, and not to speak in the Church, nor of spiritual things, by their
carnal reason, therefore take counsel, and hold them not up, the Lord is
against them.

But to Aquila and Priscilla salute me, and to the Church that is in their
House, 1 Cor. 16.19 and let her speak by the Spirit of the Lord the things of
God made manifest unto her, for if she be not permitted to speak in the Church,
and the Church be in her house, she must not speak, but go out of her house;
but the Spirit of Truth is permitted to speak in any, where it is made
manifest, the manifestation of the Spirit being given to profit withal, 1 Cor.
12 and every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down
from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of
turning, for of his own will begat he us with the word of Truth, that we should
be a kind of first fruits of his creatures, Jam. 1.17:18, that we may be to the
praise of the glory of his grace, who calls us out of darkness into his
mavelous light, and makes us sit together with Christ Jesus in heavenly
places, Ephesians. 2.4:5:6. To him alone be praise, honor and glory, who is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords; therefore let God arise, and let his Enemies be
scattered abroad, for he will make his People a willing People now in the day
of his power, to worship him in Spirit, and to serve him both day, and eke each
hour. Amen.

Hallelujah to the Highest, the Lord God omnipotent reigns. Let all that love
the Lord, bless the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever.

Richard Farnworth.

FINIS.

