Licensed, May 9. 1678.

To. L'Estrange.

Fatal Prudence, OR, DEMOCRATES, THE Unfortunate Hero.

A Novell.

Translated out of French.

LONDON, Printed by J. Bennet for R. Bentley and M. Magnes in Russell-street
near Covent Garden, 1679.

Fatal Prudence, OR, DEMOCRATES, THE Unfortunate Hero.
A Novell.
THe Unfortunate Hero of this History, having through many considerable
services merited the good Graces of his King, and seeing himself honored with
his favor, and being possessed of a very large estate by his liberalities,
descended a while to make some reflection within himself of that glorious Rank
and Eminence he was in at Court by his Prince, and to examine to what those of
his quality were exposed. He looked on the favor he had, not as those use to
do who are yet in prosperity, he had better eyes then your generality of
favorites, who know not that it is deceitful, but when they can no longer keep
it from destroying them. He saw very well that it was inconstant, and that he
ought to mistrust it, that it exposed to all the dangers immaginable those whom
it raises to the highest dignity and honors, and that in giving them riches
and credit, it makes their best friends become their Emulators, and renders all
those inferior to them enviously jealous of their glory and happiness. The
consideration of all these things made Democrates (for so was this unfortunate
Hero called) resolved to take a very strict care of his least accounts, and of
all his words: that so he might not raise to himself any enemies, nor give
those, whom the noise of his fortune might make malicious, any occasion of
becoming prejudicial to him, though they should daily watch for an Opportunity
to be so; nor to undertake any thing which he had not very well examined, and
to follow the Directions of prudence, when those that were equal to him never
did consult it.

He had scarce made this resolution, but the Duke Nicanor, brother to the King
his Master, desired him to assist him in his Love, and acquainted him with the
design he had to marry Fulciana, a Lady that was one of the greatest beauties
that shone in the Kingdom, and daughter to one of the first Officers of the
Crown, but whom he could not marry without blemishing his quality, because she
had not received so many advantages from fortune as to place her in the number
of Princesses, as she had from Nature, which had made her one of the Charming
beauties in the world. This confidence gave Democrates a very great trouble,
for he well knew prudence sometimes was altogether unprofitable, in that it
could not give happy Counsels. But yet, after he had sufficiently consulted
what he ought to do, he thought that to oblige at once both the King his
Master, and the Duke Nicanor, it was his duty to dissuade the Prince from a
design that would be a disreputation to his glory, and contrary to the esteems
that all persons, even the highest dignified of the Kingdom, had conceived of
him. He told him therefore, he thought he should not deserve the honor he did
him, if he should disguise his sentiments to him, whereupon he represented to
him in terms that were as pressing as respectfull, all that might oblige him to
leave off such a design, and that he could not marry Fulciana without lessening
himself extremely, and without betraying his quality, and lowering that great
reputation he had acquired. The Prince, after he had heard all his reasons, did
as most Lovers use to do when they are persuaded of the truth of what is told
them, that is to say, approve them sighing, and told Democrates he was not then
in a condition to hearken to his counsels, because it was not in his power to
follow them.

A little after the King hearing of the Amors of his Brother, and fearing he
would make an alliance so prejudicial to his quality, told Democrates, that as
he had always assumed the care of his fortune, so he would also take upon him
that of his marriage, and give him still new accessions with the beautiful
Fulciana, though Democrates had not as yet engaged his heart to any, and had
beheld in that person all he was able to desire, yet the resolution of the King
to marry him gave him a very sensible affliction; because the Duke Nicanor, who
was passionately fired with the same charms, had made a Discovery of his Love
to him, and also desired him to serve him in it. He endeavored nevertheless
to conceal from the King's eyes the surprise that that discourse was the
occasion of to him, and after he had returned him his acknowledgments for all
the favors and kindness he for him, and testified to him that he was ready to
do all he should command him, he made him to foresee that he had no mind to
marry Fulciana, but through obedience; and that he had not yet any design to
dispose of himself, nor any inclination for that fair one; the King, who was
firmly resolved upon that marriage, did not seem to apprehend any thing of what
Democrates would fain have had him understood, and told him he was glad to see
him in the resolution of obliging him. Democrates went away from him very much
troubled, and was musing all the rest of the day, and all the night, about the
means to keep himself in the good graces of the King, and in those of the Duke
Nicanor; but Prudence not having furnished him with any, or at least having
given him but very weak ones, he went the next day betimes to wait upon the
Duke, who no sooner preceiv'd him coming into his chamber, but he looked upon
him with eyes full of threatening, and told him in a very disdainful manner, and
which showed a great deal of scorn, I do not any longer wonder, why you were
able to persuade me not to marry Fulciana, a Rival ought not to give any other
Councels to his Rival; but you ought to regard your difference that is betwixt
us, not to abuse my confidence, to sacrifice all your flame to me, and not to
demand of the King the object of my vows, and that of my earnest desires. You
may, added he with a look capable to make a heart of the greatest assurance and
resolution tremble, press on this marriage if you are weary of living; but let
heaven be my witness, you shall sooner be in the arms of death, then in those
of Fulciana. Death, replied Democrates to him, shall not beget any fear in me
in the estate to which I am reduced, and I do so much the more earnestly desire
it, as I see it is only that which can deliver me from the confusion into which
I am cast, by the confidence you have made me of your Love, and that extreme
kindness the King has for me; since that that confidence makes me to pass for a
traitor, and for one ungrateful, without having merited that name; and that the
Bounties of the King, in bestowing upon me more then I desire, makes me to pass
for their Rival, without ever loving the object of their flame; but to show
you, continued he, that all I say is true, if you can find out any means to
prevent my marrying of Fulciana, and keep the King from being displeased with
me for it, I protest to you I Will subscribe to whatever you are pleased to have
me, and I will likewise, to assist you, do all that ever I am able, without
appearing ungrateful to the Kings bounties, and rebellious to his commands.
This discourse, far from giving the Duke Nicanor any Joy, only served to
increase the trouble he had in his breast; he knew very well that a Rival was
not all he had to fear, and that the King having heard of his passion, did not
press Democrates to marry Fulciana, but only to prevent his marrying of her;
this consideration made him almost immovable; fear and grief took possession
of his soul, and for some time kept him from speaking; but after his grief had
lost a little of its violence, and he was somewhat come to himself, he told
Democrates, he would think upon what he had said, and that on his side nothing
should be spared to make things succeed according to his desires. Democrates
being retired, the Duke opened his breast again to grief, and was buried in a
profound study, which he got not out of till he had light upon a way to divert
the blow which threatened him. He resolved with himself, the more easily to
attain the end of his design, to remove Democrates from the high place he held
in the King's affection, and therein to follow the examples of all great men,
who sacrifice to their interests all those who serve them, and who little are
troubled for the misfortunes that befall them, so they can but have what they
desire: this made our despairing Lover go and tell the King that Democrates
proclaimed openly that he had more hatred then Love for Fulciana, that he had
rather lose his favor, then marry her, that he knew how to turn aside the
stroke, and that it was more then he could do, to make him buy, at the expense
of his heart, the bounties he had received from him; and that his services
having merited those rewards, it was not just that he should buy them over
again, or rather sacrifice himself to conserve 'em; the King did so much the
more readily believe this discourse, as he began to remember that Democrates
had made him foresee he would not marry Fulciana, but only in obedience to him,
which so incensed him, that a little more would have made him been immediately
arrested. After the Duke Nicanor had persuaded the King his brother what he had
a mind to make him believe, Fulciana, the Father of his Mistress, who joined
with him in the intrigue, came by his order to speak to the King and to conjure
him not to give his daughter to a man, who only had a scorn and an aversion for
her; he would with all his heart most readily have consented to this match, if
the heart of Democrates had been disposed to it, but that since he discovered
by those discourses that he would never have any Love for her, and that he
would not marry her but by constraint, he entreated him that he might have the
sentiments of a father, and that he might not consent to the unhappiness of a
daughter, whom he most tenderly loved. As the King was going to reply to him,
Fulciana entered to act the personage of the Duke Nicanor, her Father and she
had resolved on beforehand to have her represent. Fulcian had no sooner
perceived her, but he feigned to be much surpised, and asked her if she came
to stir up the Kings pity, and to divert the misery she was threatened with. I
come, replied she to him, mauger all the aversion I have for Democrates, and
all the hatred he declares he has for me, to show I can obey the commands of my
Prince, and to tell him I am ready to follow his Laws. Ah! child, did Fulcian
answer her, think upon what you are doing, and do not promise that which you
may have cause to repent of, and do not so rashly run to meet your misery.
Although I very well know, replied she, that I am likely to be the most
wretched person in the world, in marrying him whom my Prince would give me, yet
I will never relent, that I have obeyed my King: it is a crime to refuse him
any thing; he demands of me my heart, and it is to him that I give it, and not
to Democrates, though I am ready to marry him. Ah, Sir! cried out Fulcian,
throwing himself at the Kings feet, have pity of a child, who to obey you, has
none for her self; and if my prayers and tears cannot soften you, suffer your
self to be overcome by her generosity, and content your self with her obedience.

These Discourses so surpised the King, that after he had admired the power
that Fulciana had over her self, he sent them both away without resolving on
any thing, and told them he would advise what to do.

Whilst all these things were happening, the Duke Nicanor, whom Love had inspired
with all these stratagems and devises, waited the issue of them with
impatience; for he had not made Fulciana say, that she was ready to marry
Democrates, but that so their actions might be the less observed, and that
there might be no suspicion either of the Love that that fair one had for him,
or of the hopes he gave her of marrying her: but at the same time, after such
an acknowledgment to prevent the Kings pressing on the marriage which he
feared, and also that it should not be accomplished, he caused the Father of
Fulciana to oppose it, and to drive things off so long till he had absolutely
removed Democrates from the place he held in the Kings affection, and had made
all the world believe that he had a most invincible hatred for Fulciana, he
hoped if all these things did not cause the breaking off the match which he
feared, they would at least serve to gain him time; and indeed he did obtain a
great deal; for the King testified so much anger against Demoerates, that it
was a long while before he was willing to permit him to come into his presence.
On the other side, seeing himself yet but ill confirmed in his Estates, and
Fulcian having very great credit, and several considerable friends, he was
afraid to provoke him; so that all these things, joined to the thoughts he had,
that since Fulciana consented to marry Democrates, she was not so much beloved
by the Duke his brother as they had been persuading him, troubled him
exceedingly, and made it a long time before he could determine any thing. He
found he was not likely to get out of the incertainty and confusion which he
perceived himself involved in, if he had not resolved to send for Democrates,
and to discourse with him in private, to see if he could not persuade him to
stifle, or at least to conceal the hatred he thought he had for Fulciana; but
he was extraordinarily surprised to learn from his mouth, that he found himself
more disposed to Love then hatred, and that he begged of him not to demand the
cause of that coldness and indifference he had shown the first time he had
spoken to him of that marriage. That Discourse made the King suspect some part
of the truth, and he obliged Democrates to tell him the rest, which he thought
he might do, without any imprudence, and without loosing the respect he owed to
the Duke Nicanor, after what he had done for him, the King having learnt all,
confessed he had acted prudently, and not being any longer able to doubt of the
Love which his Brother had for Fulciana, and fearing that that fair one would
suffer her self to be vanquished by the charms of ambition, again told
Democrates that he would have him marry her, and that he would protect him from
the fury of his Brother: which he promised, not knowing any means how to turn
it off.

The Duke Nicanor having learnt this news, sought every where for Democrates,
to immolate him to his Love, and to his choler; but not having found him, he
resolved to marry Fulciana privately, and afterward to declare his marriage to
the King. He communicated that design to Fulcian, who seeing by that his
Ambition satisfied, told him he might be married without fearing any thing, and
if the King resolved to make his marriage void, he would then discover to him
that he could not bring any into his family who might procure him more
considerable advantages then his daughter, and that he had still need of
Fulcian and his friends.

There wanted no more to oblige the the Duke of Nicanor to marry the adorable
Fulciana, which he did in the presence of several considerable witnesses. In
the mean time news was brought to the King of it, who notwithstanding caused
her to be sought for, to make her marry Democrates in his presence whom she was
already married to. For indeed he could not give any belief to the certainty of
it, until it was confirmed to him by the Duke his Brother, who presently came
to throw himself at his knees, and to entreat him to consent to his marriage.
He told him he knew very well he was much to blame in that he had done it
without his knowledge; but he had not the power to be Master of his passion,
which he had a long time contended with, and that it was impossible for him to
resist the violence of his Love, and to deny his hand (where he had sacrificed
his heart) to the most beautiful person in the world: the King replied to him,
that for a Mistress he could not make choice of one who might be more
advantageous to him, and he doubted not but Fulciana had that honor; but that
he did not believe she was his wife, and he knew very well that he was, too
prudent, and had too much Spirit to do so great an injury to his Quality and
Eminence. He replied to him, that what he told him was true, and named him all
those persons who had seen him married. The King stood immovable at this
discourse, with despite and choler in his eyes, and especially in his
Countenance; but yet he durst not let them break out but lightly, nor go to
break off so unequal a marriage; because he saw very well that Fulcian having
had that temerity to permit it, he had likewise more friends and greater power
then he imagined, and that he could not oppose him without raising up against
him a party of the most considerable Grandees in the Realm, which was the cause
that he pardoned his Brother, and that he agreed to his marriage rather through
policy, then out of any satisfaction he received by it.

The choler and despite of the King, (being thus forcibly stifled in him, as
that he durst not let it break forth either against the Duke his Brother, or
against Fulcina,) fell upon Democrates; he was greatly enraged against him, and
blamed his prudence, which he but a little before did so highly value. He told
him that he was the cause of the injury his Brother had done to his blood, and
so deprived him of his favor, but yet without banishing him the Court, where
he afterward looked upon him for sometime, but (...) with a great deal of
indifference.

Democrates, perceiving that he was deprived of the good graces of his Prince,
and that he had no favorable place in the mind of the Duke Nicanor, because
when he had justified himself of what that Duke had said to the King, he had
consented to the marriage of Fulciana, knew at his own expense, that when
misfortune is obstinately resolved to pursue a person, prudence signifies very
little, and how profitable soever it is at other times, one consults it then
but in vain. Is there any one, says he, (in bewailing himself with his friends
at the disgrace that had happened to him,) to whom prudence can be favorable;
when he is forced to do evil, whatever it is possible for him to do? and when
he runs the same danger in not pursuing its direction? Those whose lives, fate
has determined shall be miserable, and yet who have the Election given them of
two or three punishments, have enough to consult of prudence to know what they
shall do, and notwithstanding at last they are necessitated to choose one
punishment. Fortune has now almost put me into this condition, I could not
consent to what the King-commanded me, without provoking the Duke Nicanor, nor
consent to what Duke Nicanor would have me, without incensing the King; and my
unhappiness was such, that I did draw upon my self his anger in doing nothing.

Five or six months were spent before Democrates was restored to the good
graces of his Prince, but at last the King, considering that the Marriage of
his brother had been more profitable to him then he had imagined, and that
Fulcian had hindered a great many discontented persons from breaking out into
any violences, and had brought them to their duty and submission, looked upon
this prudent unfortunate man with as good an eye as ever he had done before his
disgrace; but he did not restore him to his confidence; he loved him without
making him his favorite, that place cannot be easily rendered to those who have
once lost it, through the good order that those observe, who by their wit and
happy address have known how to make themselves Masters of it.

Our Hero who was not wholly satisfied with the reparation that Fortune then
did make him, perceiving himself much less employed then when he had been his
Princes favorite, and was entrusted with all his secrets, was resolved to try
whether the persecutions of Love were any thing pleasanter then those his evil
fortune caused him, and gave up himself to be charmed with the beauties of
Sestiana, the Daughter of Count Sestianes, who was not altogether so happy in
point of Estate as he, but who was of as illustrious a Family: Although his
passion was very violent, yet as he did nothing but with a great deal of
prudence, he was resolved to know before he would declare it, if it were likely
to be approved of, and would not make a discovery of his flame, before that his
actions, his services, and his regards had made the judication. Sestianes began
to perceive his love, and wished with all his heart that his tongue would
confirm what his eyes did seem to tell him, when her father was solicited for
her by a considerable person: Sestianes fearing lest he might fall off, gave
him his word before he had ever acquainted his daughter with it, and came not
to tell her the news till after the marriage was concluded on. This fair one,
who began to have some inclinations for Democrates, received it with a very
cold indifference; but she always told her father that she was ready to be led
by his commands, which she looked upon as her duty to do, as much because of
the obedience she owed him, as because that Democrates had not as yet declared
the passion he had for her.

This unhappy Lover whom Prudence had always betrayed, had scarcely learnt this
sad and afflictive news, but he came to wait upon Sestiana to make a discovery
of his love to her; She had no sooner perceived it but she was instantly
sensible of so great an emotion, and so violent a grief in her breast, that it
was plainly remarkable in her face. Democrates on his part appeared so
planet-struck, that he could not so much as get one word, which occasioned them
a great while to do nothing but keep their eyes fixed upon one another, without
having the power to speak a syllable; but at last Democrates broke the silence,
and after he had eased himself of two or three sighs which lay very heavy upon
his soul, and which made the afflicted fair one sufficiently to know the
trouble he had in it, he said to her; Is it possible, Madam, that what I have
now lately heard is true, and that you are within these few days to be led to
the Altar by -- Yes, reported she to him in a little kind of rage, I am, since
you have been willing to permit it: Pardon me, my Lord, replied she immediately,
repenting that she spoke to him in that manner, and do not attribute it to any
thing but the terrible transports of grief I have upon my spirit, and which do
confound me, that they keep me from thinking either of what I do or say. Ah!
Madam, did Democrates answer her, flinging himself at her knees, You need not
longer conceal from me, that I should have been the happiest man in the world,
if fate which continually is persecuting me, had not fully opposed it; Your
eyes and mouth do tell it me; they are witnesses you cannot disavow; do not
make them false, for heavens sake, but suffer me to feel in all their extent
the fatal and yet charming displeasures of learning my happiness, when it is
impossible for me to enjoy it: They will give me joy and sadness both
together, the former in hearing that I have the glory to be beloved by so fair
and generous a person, and the latter in having known it too late, and in not
having sooner declared my passion to you. Ah, cruel man! replied Sestiana to
him sighing, why did you no sooner speak of it? or why do you speak of it so
late? If you loved me, as you say you did, you ought to have loved my repose,
and not to deprive me of it, to let me believe that you have never had any
kindness for me: The little worth there is in me, replied Democrates to her,
not rendering my loss considerable, ought not to cause that of your repose; but
as my loss is vastly great in losing you, it is only I my self ought to
complain, and to repent that I have no sooner discovered my flame to you: From
whence did it then proceed, said Sestiana to him, that you were so long without
speaking of it? those who demand a heart, answered he her, without having
merited it by their services, by their love and submissions, have been often
ill received; I looked on yours as too considerable to be hazarded; besides I
was not ignorant that a heart does not sacrifice its self but to the knowledge
it has of the Love of its votary, and not to the demand he shall make of it,
and that there is no beauty but refuses it to those who have not merited it by
their Love and Services, unless ambition constrains them to it, or that the
grandeur and the illustrious merit of those who demand it do oblige them: as
likewise we ought not to be esteemed Lovers, as soon as we begin our passion;
it is time which must acquire that quality, and those who have not discovered
that they do with justice possess it, are much to blame to pretend that they
are beloved, because they begin to love. The Love of a beautiful and charming
person ought not to be the conquest of a Gallants first sigh; and those who are
so vain to believe they could obtain it before they have learnt to love,
deserve to meet with the highest severity and Indignation of the fair One,
whose heart they are so bold to demand. This has been it, continued Democrates,
which made me forbear so long to discover the ardour with which I burn, and as
I feared provoking you by the confession of my Love, I was willing to dispose
your breast to it by dutiful submissions, by my assiduities, and by a thousand
other marks of the most violent passion that ever was.

Sestiana could not hear this discourse without dismissing some sighs, and when
Democrates, had left of speaking, she told him, that since she had mistrusted
his merit, and he had thought he could never obtain her heart before he had
made himself worthy of it by his services and by his Love, he ought to have
prevented the unhappiness that had befell him, to have demanded her of her
father as soon as he had taken up the design of loveing her, and afterward to
have endeavored by his cares and assiduities to obtain her of her self. Ah!
Madam, replied he to her, I was not willing to serve my self that way, but
would have obtained your heart of your self alone, and have had you to render
it to the proofs of my Love, and not to your duty; without that, I should never
have thought to have the glorious advantage of being beloved by so fair and
beautiful a person, though possibly you would have consented without any
trouble to marry me; I should not have known how to distinguish your Love from
your Obedience, but should have always thought you ought to hate me, not
doubting but I should have merited your hatred, for having demanded you of any
other besides your self. They continued still some time together in
disburthening themselves of their sighs, and in bewailing their unhappiness,
and when they were taking their leaves of one another, Sestiana advises
Democrates to go and declare to her Father the Love he had for her, and she
desired him at the same time not to see her any more, if he could obtain
nothing from him: this unfortunate Lover had no sooner left her, but he went to
discover his passion to Sestianes, who told him, that he did as much resent the
displeasure as himself, in that he had not sooner declared his passion, but now
his Daughters marriage was too far gone to break it off. Democrates, after this
answer that he had foreseen, returned as afflicted, as you may imagine, you
your selves should be in the like circumstances, and a few days after he had
the cruel dissatisfaction to see a person married whom he loved even to
adoration, and by whom he was likewise greatly beloved. Then did he repent the
time he had lost before he had declared his Love, and then did he a thousand
times detest the prudence that had counseled him to act in that manner.

Fortune, which till then had still seemed to repent for all the insultations
she had made over our Hero, and for all the miserys she had procured him,
seemed in this to repent more then ever; since that Sestiana became a widow
within three months after she was married. The death of her Husband gave
Democrates a fresh opportunity to make his applications to her. Sestianes
approved both of his visits, and of the address he made to his Daughter, and
there was only a waiting for the expiration of the year of her mourning to
celebrate the marriage; when, on a sudden, Fortune, which was resolved to be no
longer favorable to this Lover, or rather which had not seemed to be
favorable to him, but to make him the more deeply sensible of the afflictions
she was preparing for him, declared her self absolutely his enemy.

Affairs were then in this posture, when Theomedes, a Prince of the blood, and
a near relation of the Kings, received this Letter from one of the Officers of
the Army.

To Prince THEOMEDES.
BEing now just upon the point of going to be accountable to the Gods for my
actions, and seeing my self very near my last moment of life, I thought it was
my duty to reveal to you a business that concerns you very much. A few days
since one of my acquaintance came to demand of me whether I would join in a
conspiracy that was contrived against your Life: he would not acquaint me with
the names of the confederates, but all that I could draw from him was, that he
believed that Democrates was one of the Number, because he was too great a
friend to those who had engaged him in it, not to be one, and that it was
impossible for him to be wholly unacquainted with it. He was to have come to me
two days afterward, to give me more certain intelligences of it, and to know
my resolution, but he was the next day killed in the sedition you know lately
happened in this City, which has been the cause that I could not know any thing
more of it. You ought after this advise to conserve the days that are so dear
to the State.

Poligesne.


Theomedes had no sooner read over this Letter, but he went and carried it to
the King, who was greatly surprised to find the name of Democrates in it; but
as he could not imagine him to be capable of so great a baseness, he would not
make him be arrested, as Theomedes demanded, before he had sent to his house
who had writ this Letter, to see if no ways were to be found out whereby to get
some further discoveries and satisfactions: but those who went thither having
found him dead, came back without having got any other information, and without
having learnt any thing that might deliver them out of the trouble and
confusion into which in all probability this Letter was likely to cast I know
not how many.

This could not be kept so secret; but that Democrates who had great friends,
was advertised of it; but as he knew himself innocent, and did not think the
King had any suspicion to his disadvantage, nor gave any credit to the
Imposture, he would not follow the advice of those who counseled him to fly.

Sestianes, who was the Author of this conspiracy, having confusedly learnt
this news, and fearing that Democrates, who as it was reported, knew the name
of the chief of the conspiracy, would discover him, came to see him without
examining well what he did, as most guilty persons do, who lose their Judgment
by the fear they have upon them, and told him, that he had heard he would
accuse him; but that those who might have told him he was guilty (in case he
had been told so) accused him unjustly, and their suspicions were not grounded
any otherwise then in that they knew the Prince Theomedes was his Enemy, and
hated him mortally, which made them believe that, to be delivered of so
powerful and redoubted an Enemy, and who was very prejudicial to him at Court,
he had resolved to be his death.

This Discourse much surprised Democrates, he told Sestianes that he acquainted
him with things he had never heard of, that he did not believe he could ceive
so horrible a thought, and so contrary his glory, and that never to having
known the Authors, nor the accomplices of this conspiracy, nor so much indeed as
that they had conspired it, he nere thought of accusing him, nor any other:
those words in some measure dissipated Sestianes's fear, and kept him from
flying, as he had proposed to himself. He went after he had quitted Democrates,
to find out his companions in this conspiracy, and bid them not be alarmed,
whatsoever they might hear reported, for he was sure there was no body knew any
thing.

Whilst things went on thus, they resolved to arrest Democrates, to oblige him
to tell what he knew of this conspiracy. This unfortunate Hero learnt this
news without appearing in the least allarmed at it, and indeed without any
change of countenance; and as he relied much upon his innocence, he went to
address himself to his Prince as he was wont to do, which caused him to have
the honor of being arrested in the Kings Palace, and conducted to Prison by
those Guards. He was kept there two days without having any thing said to him,
and on the third he was interrogated, but to no purpose, this unhappy Innocent
not being able to discover what he did not know; they showed him afterward
Poligesne's Letter, to see whither that would not surprise him, and make some
motion in his face. But he without seeming any whit astonished, answered those
that showed it him, that either Poligesne was an impostor, or that he who had a
mind to have seduced him was one, and as these Judges could not get any other
answer from him, they went their way, and related nothing to the King and
Prince Theomedes, but only the resolution of Democrates.

When those who came to interrogate him were gone, he made reflections upon the
Letter they had showed him, by which he understood that the Author of the
conspiracy was of his acquaintance, and one of his friends: he run over in his
mind all those he knew, to see if among his friends there was any he could
think capable of this baseness, and upon whom he might fasten his suspicions;
but not having found any, he remembered what Sestianes had come and told him
some time before he was taken prisoner, and immediately suspected part of the
truth, which greatly troubled him, and gave him cruel inquietudes; for if on
one side he was almost ready to despair to have any reason to suspect the
father of his Mistress of an action so foul and so unworthy a man of Honor; on
the other side he thought himself obliged to tell all he knew, and was
persuaded that it was to make himself a criminal, and to wound his honor to
keep it undiscovered; yet after he had consulted with himself what he should
do, he saw very well that he ought not to accuse a man of the quality of
Sestianes without any proofs, and upon a simple conjecture, and that if the
evil treatments he had received from the Prince Theomedes made his Enemies
believe it was he who had conspired against him, it was a motive strong enough
to make his friends believe that he was suspected unjustly, and that without
knowing the truth, would be to draw consequences to his disadvantage,
absolutely contrary to his glory and injurious to his reputation; wherefore,
after he had well consulted prudence, to see what he had best do, it gave him
only the advice to be silent, and not to speak of what it was impossible for
him to prove, and that which might undoubtedly make him lose the heart of his
Mistress: yet possibly had he hearkened less to the Counsels of prudence, and
had said all he knew, that Sestianes astonished, confounded and surprised, as
ordinarily most criminals are, when they see they are discovered, would not so
well have known how to hide his surprise and trouble, and that his countenance
would have discovered his crime, but as he had no proofs, it might be not only
to run the hazard of losing the heart of his Mistress, but also be in danger to
be looked upon as an Impostor, for uttering that he could not make out: not but
that if Democrates had been happy, fortune might have made him prosperous in
acting after this manner, but as he proposed to himself that he would follow
prudence in all things, and not put any thing to hazard, he ought not to
undertake that which might be in the least perilous.

In the mean time whilst that this criminal without a crime, or rather this
innocent victim of misfortune, gave himself up holy to his inquietude, and
sought out means to get rid of the doubt that was upon his spirit, Sestianes on
his part was in a fear and trouble very difficult to be expressed. Sometimes he
thought Democrates knew his crime, and that the Love he bore his Daughter kept
him from speaking of it, sometimes he fancied he knew nothing of it, and then
again he was persuaded, that he could not be very long Master of his secret,
but would be constrained to declare it. His mind, being tossed about with all
these different thoughts, successively gave up it self to fear, grief, torment,
and hope, without ever getting it dispossessed of those wracking Inquietudes, no,
not in those very moments wherein he flattered himself that Democrates knew not
any thing, or if he had acquainted him with all, his love would have kept him
from making any discovery.

Though Sestianes was still in fear, and his disquiets were great, and though
the troubles and cares of Democrates were much more smart and pungent, and his
griefs by far more sensible, yet all those torments came not near the cruel
displeasures that Sestiana resented, and as glory was a thousand times more
dear to her then her life, and love; it was only despite that caused all her
sighs, she was more deeply touched at Democrates's being imprisoned, because
she had loved him, then because she did love him, and she had a most
unexpressable regret that she had suffered a person to get her esteem and
tenderness whom she Judged unworthy of it, and whom she thought was guilty of
the most shameful and horrid baseness in the world. This generous Person did
not resemble those who cannot hate the objects they have loved, and who cannot
see the crimes that Lovers do commit after they have once known how to gain
their hearts, but with the eyes of their love; that is to say, only to excuse
them, she looked not upon the pretended crime of Democrates with any other eyes
then those of her choler, and only aimed to be revenged both of him, and of
her self, for that he had been able to constrain her Love; and to make her
declare to him the weakness of her heart in bearing him so ardent an affection:
wherefore she took up a resolution never to marry him, although he should get
out of prison, and be perfectly restored into the Kings favor, unless she
should be fully purged of that injurious suspicion with which his reputation
had been sullied.

Whilst Sestiana gave up her self wholly to her despite, Democrates was several
times interrogated; but he still showed an equal assurance and resolution, and
the Prince Theomedes not doubting but that he had some secret Enemies, took so
great a care over himself, that those who had a design to take away his life,
could not find any favorable opportunity to put their purpose in execution.

The Imprisonment of Democrates, who could not be thought guilty of a crime so
unworthy of him, and so contrary to the great reputation he had acquired,
extremely troubled several of his friends: and, above them all, Anaxander, who
was a stranger of an Illustrious Family, and whose Name is known throughout a
good part of Europe. They had made some Voyages together, and had contracted so
great a friendship, that I know not how to express it, but in saying, that all
the Histories have said of the most strongest friendships in the world cannot
equal that which was between them. It had been already a good while that this
stranger had designed to go back into his own Country, and his departure had
not been retarded, but through the great affection he bore to Democrates, whom
he could not then tell how to leave. But yet now he did resolve to go, seeing
his friend in prison; but it was only for his service, as you will find in the
sequel.

This generous and faithful friend made his departure with all the
precipitation he could, and went out of the Kingdom without taking his leave
of any person, and even without saluting the King, to whom he was very well
known; because all these things he thought might be advantageous to him, in the
design he had to serve his friend, and that he might derive from thence such
consequences, as should be capable to get that to be believed which he had a
mind to persuade.

Democrate's imprisonment began to be the public discourse, both among the
great ones, and the common people. All Judgments were divided, and there were
different thoughts about this action according to the different inclinations of
persons. Some spoke of him as a Notorious Criminal, others maintained his
innocence, and there were some that could not tell how to think him either one
way or other, and knew not what they had best believe, the King himself, and
the Prince Theomedes began to find themselves under no small trouble and
confusion; whilst Democrates, though the only person that was accused, and a
prisoner, enjoyed a greater tranquillity then any of them, and felt his Soul as
serene and calm as ever.

Matters were in this posture, that is to say, no more advanced then they were
the first day of Democrates's being taken prisoner, when Anaxander, who was at
last gone out of the Kingdom, in which his friend was unjustly accused, writ
to the King this Letter which, if you please, you may peruse.

To the KING.
I Thought my self obliged to acquaint your Majesty, not to let an Innocent
perrish, that I am the Author of that conspiracy you have heard of, which
threatens the life of Prince Theomedes, and that the friendship which is
between Democrates and me, has made some of the conspiratours believe, that I
might have discovered to him the design I had against the life of that Prince;
but I too much loved that dear and generous friend, to engage him in it. Yet
possibly I had done it, if he had not been your subject; but his crime had been
too great to set upon the Relations of a King, from whom he had received so
many signal favors, this reason obliged me to be careful of his glory, and
not to put him into the unworthy, and cruel necessity of betraying, either his
King, or his friend. Such an acknowledgment will no doubt surprise you; but my
crime is so glorious, that I hope time will discover that only the generous can
blacken themselves with the like sin, and that how criminal soever I declare my
self to be, posterity will not reproach my glory. As I should be troubled that
Prince Thoemedes should lose his life upon any other subject then that for
which I had resolved to sacrifice him, I would inform him that there are some
of your subjects who conspire against him, though I cannot tell by whom they
are engaged to it, nor what their motives is that thrust them on.

Anaxander.


As Anaxander was endowed both with a great presence of wit, and command of
prudence; and what had happened, concluded him from doubting that Prince
Theomedes had secret Enemies, and that they did conspire against him, she gave
him that information that so the confession of a crime which he had not
committed, should not make the guilty believe that they were in any safety, and
likewise that this Prince should not expose himself to their fury.

I will leave you to Judge of the Kings surprise, and of the astonishment of
Prince Theomedes, as soon as they had red Anaxanders Letter. They were along
time, both of them, without knowing either what they ought to do, or even
believe: but at last the King, who had not yet stifled in his breast all the
sentiments of esteem he had formerly had for Democrates, was of opinion that he
might believe that Letter, and that which confirmed it in his thoughts was the
remembrance of that precipitation that Anaxander had made to be gone, and that
he seemed to glory in his crime, in saying, that posterity would not reproach
his glory, and the agreement he found of this Letter to that of Poligesne's,
who had written that he was not assured of Democrates's being joined in the
conspiracy; but that he believed he might possibly know of it, because one of
his friends was the Author of it.

As we live in an age where invention reigns, and where experience discovers
daily that it is not in the power of Kings to hinder a prisoner from knowing
all that passes, either for, or against him, the friends of Democrates soon got
him to be informed of all that Anaxander had writ in his favor; they also got
conveyed a copy of the Letter he had sent to the King, in his justification.
This Letter gave our illustrious prisoner as great a trouble and intanglement,
as it had done the King, and Prince Theomedes; he could not persuade himself
that a person so generous, and the very bottom of whose soul he thought he
knew, could be capable of such a crime, and the more he considered him either
as innocent, or guilty, he was resolved to save his life, the more that
generosity made him doubt that he was guilty.

He had not been many moments in that reflection, but he quited it to fix upon
another. If Anaxander said he, in himself, was innocent, he would have found
out some way to let me understand that he did not accuse himself, but to save
me my honor, and perhaps my life; and would not have exposed me to the hard
Necessity of doubting of his Innocence, in a time, wherein he would possibly
have divulged mine at the expense of his glory. He was a long while in this
cruel uncertainty, but at last whatever ground he had to doubt, he could not be
persuaded that so perfect a friend could possibly be guilty.

Though Democrates had a deal of prudence, and a very piercing wit, he had his
imagination filled with too many different thoughts, to present at once before
him, the prudence which Anaxander had made use of in this emergency. For that
generous friend had not a mind, for several considerable reasons, to let him
know the truth of what he writ to the King, he apprehended that he should not
find out a person that would be faithful enough to acquaint him with it viva
voce, or if he should write to him, there might be a great deal of difficulty
to get that Letter come safe into his hands without any surprise. But yet these
were not the principal reasons which obliged him not to discover to Democrates,
that he was innocent, and only did declare himself the contrary to serve him,
he had a more powerful reason then all those, and as he knew the generosity of
that illustrious unfortunate man, he did apprehend, that if he did know the
truth he would discover it, and avow that his friend did only render himself
criminal to serve him.

Sestianes learned all that passed, but yet these Intelligences could not
dissipate his fears, and smooth his breast into a calm, he knew very well that
that had not altered the state of things, he saw well that if Democrates knew
he was a criminal, it was still in his power to declare him so, and as he was
the Author of the conspiracy, he knew better then any person that Anaxander
could not make himself guilty but out of generosity, and to save his friend;
and he also did much doubt of the reasons which had induced him to give that
advice, that he had put at the end of his Letter to the Prince Theomedes.

The King, who as I have already told you, began to retrive his esteem for our
Hero, and who was of opinion that Anaxanders Letter might be relied upon,
after he had made Theomedes to consent to it, who was the most interessed in
this affair, declared that Democrates was innocent, and gave order he should be
let out of prison.

This generous unfortunate person was no sooner set at liberty, but he went to
throw himself at the King's feet. I know Seignior, said he to him, how dear the
liberty which I now receive, has cost the glory of the most perfect friend that
ever was: that too obliging Anaxander has not made himself guilty but to make
me innocent, all his crime is my unhappiness he has thought he ought to give me
at the expense of his reputation, those illustrious and almost incredible marks
of his friendship, but too disadvantagious for himself; since they make him lose
the esteem he had acquired among men: I will resume my setters to render him
back his glory and his innocence, mine will be powerful enough to free me from
'em, or if in spite of all its power I am constrained to perish, I shall not
have the sensible and cruel displeasure of living, and of knowing my self the
cause of a crime which will be unjustly imputed to the most virtuous of all
men. You deserve, replied the King to him, amazed at this discourse, to have
chains put on you far more heavy then those you now have quitted, not so much
for the crime of which you are possibly too justly suspected, as for the
trouble and confusion you endeavor to throw into the breast of a King, who
does all he can to defend you from those perils you are threatened with: I
cannot secure you from them with justice, but in finding another guilty who
justifies you; and yet when I have found him you implore your Rhetoric to
persuade me that he is innocent, and do all you can to destroy what I have been
hitherto doing for you. Cease, ungrateful, your opposition to my bounties, and
if you will not do it, because I desire it, do it then either out of pity to
your self, or from the obedience you owe me, and do not give me the regret of
making him perish, who has been heretofore honored with my Confidence: Though
you should believe Anaxander is innocent, yet receive the testimonies of that
friendship he gives you, and do not publish that he is not guilty, but leave it
to time to justify him; it renders justice to all the world, it does not
suffer it self to be corrupted but oftentimes brings to light the innocence of
those who have been thought culpable, and the crimes of those who pass not only
for innocent but likewise for most virtuous. Think upon what I say, and take
you heed of pulling down my anger upon you, which should be so much the more
violent as you shall have forced it to break out.

The King said no more to him but left Democrates in an inquietude and
perplexity, from which he found it very painful to relieve himself.

He was hardly got to his own house, but he complained of fortune, which had
too dearly sold him the liberty he had then so lately received; insomuch that
he did as earnestly desire as ever he had done, to be sent back into the prison
from which he was but newly delivered; and also complained of the Kings favors
to him, which he then found too cruel: What, said he to himself, in reflecting
upon what that Prince had told him, ought I to suffer so faithful a friend as
Anaxaender, who gives me such powerful and generous marks of his friendship,
to lose for my sake the reputation he has gotten in the world? ought I to
suffer his name to be dishonored, and posterity to doubt of his Innocence? but
on the other side, ought I to oppose the commands of my Prince? ought I to deny
him that which he requires of me? ought I to despise his bounties, and cause a
moment of inquietude to a King who has so much loved me, and from whom I have
received so many signal benefits? no, no, I owe too much to that Royal
Benefactor, I cannot without a crime resist his commands; but though he should
have never bestowed any favor on me, he is my Prince, and I am his subject,
and in that quality I owe him all. Love, and friendship ought to give place to
duty, Subjects owe all to their Prince, and we owe him obedience preferably to
those who brought us into the world.

Democrates thus entertained his thoughts, when Sestianes came to visit him, to
congratulate him for the good fortune of being set at liberty. After he had
paid his compliments, Democrates told him what had taken up his imagination
before his arrival, and the scruple he had to suffer it to be thought that so
perfect a friend as Anaxander was should be capable of the most base and
infamous of all crimes, and the most unworthy the title of a gallant or
generous man.

Sestianes, who fearing lest he should be discovered, had wished with all his
soul they had never spoke of this conspiracy, and that Anaxander who was absent
had still been thought culpable, answered him, that if that friend was
criminal, he ought not to have that scruple, and that he was extremely too
blame to conserve it if he was not. The generous, added he, always receive a
great deal of renown from their famous actions; Anaxander, in doing what he has
done for you, has labored more for his own glory then for yours; that
interessed generous person in saving your life, and in restoring the honor of
it to you, puts you but in the condition you were before suspected; but what
does he not do for himself? since by it he obtains the immortal and glorious
happiness of passing in the ages to come for a grand example of friendship,
since he will have the glory of having been the most generous man in the world,
and of having done the most remarkable action that ever was, and which will
make his memory live, and posterity speak of him with admiration and Elogies:
do not you put so many obstacles, pursued he, to so mamany glorious advantages
that he would presently purchase at the expense of a little honor, which he
will only lose for a time, and which will be restored to him with much more
luster then it will be lost with ignominy; this is the fruit he expects from
the service that he shall have rendered you, and this is that which he will gain
in serving of you, if you do not oppose it: Do not speak any more of crime or
guilty, and let the remembrance thereof for a time lie dead, since that
otherwise Anaxander could not acquire the glory he aims at from so generous an
action, and that it would be said he is of intelligence with you, and that you
are resolved to render that to him which he lends you in the same time he gives
it to you. Democrates answered Sestianes, that all those reasons could not
satisfy the scruple he had in him, that posterity did not always do justice,
and that very often it was misinformed of the truth; that it made him almost
despair to see the glory of his friend hazarded for ever, whilst that the truly
guilty lived in safety; he brought out those words with an air that made
Sestianes believe he intended them to be spoke to him, which was the cause that
he did what we shall tell you in the succession of this History.

As soon as Sestianes was departed, Democrates went to see his Mistress, whom
he found all alone; he went to cast himself down at her feet, but Sestiana
prevented his doing it, and told him with a great deal of fierceness and
scorn, that after what had befell him she could no longer hearken to his sighs
without wounding her glory, nor suffer a criminal to entertain her with his
passion. Ah! Madam, replied Democrates to her, with an air extreme full of
respect, and as sorrowful as passionate, if all the wretched are Criminals, I
avow to you I am the most guilty of all men, since I am the most unfortunate,
but yet not so much, for having been unjustly suspected of the most shameful
baseness imaginable, but because I have no longer the glorious advantage of
being beloved by the most beautiful and most equitable person in the earth:
Since you believe me equitable, answered Sestiana to him, you ought not to
complain of me. I see plainly, replied that unfortunate Lover to her, that
though to this present I always thought my self to be innocent, that I had
never brought any reproach to my glory, and that also now, I do not know my
crime, yet I must needs be a grand Criminal, since you doubt of my Innocence. I
doubt it with Justice, reported to him the provoked fair one, and if what
Anaxander has written in your favor was sufficient to get you out of prison,
and to restore you your life, it is not sufficient to render you your honor,
nor is it enough to make me believe that I should not love in you a man blasted
with a most hateful crime; it is not enough to hinder me from doubting your
innocence, and it is not enough for my satisfaction, for my repose, and for my
glory. Ah! wherefore have I ever seen you? wherefore have you discovered your
flames to me? wherefore have I loved you? wherefore have you been able to
constrain me in spite of my self to show you my tenderest affections;
wherefore have you put me in a capacity of regretting all my life the love I
have born you? and wherefore shall I speak it? yes, to punish you for your
crime, to punish you for having known how to constrain me to confess my Love to
you, and to make you suffer if you still love me; wherefore -- but whence is it
that my heart cannot speak it without sighing, wherefore base man? wherefore
notwithstanding all my despite, have I still more love for you then I ought to
have. Though I read in your countenance that this discourse is not displeasing
to you, pursued she, with eyes inflamed with dispite, with love, and rage, and
that you meet with nothing in it to punish you, yet know, that this new
confession of my flame ought to make you suffer more then you imagine, if you
loved me truly; since there is nothing in the world can oblige me to give you
my hand, before your innocence be so fully justified, that I shall have no
further room to doubt of it; for in a word, continued she, though you be
pardoned, yet you are not sufficiently justified. When one has once lost one's
honor, it is not so easily recovered, and there is need of more convincing
proofs then what a friend writes, who would gladly sacrifice his glory to the
friendship he has for you, and who possibly would speak otherwise, if he once
saw himself charged with fetters.

This discourse gave Democrates both a sensible affliction, and as sensible a
joy; for if on the one side he was even ravished to learn that Sestiana had
loved him always, and to see that notwithstanding all her despite she had not
the power to conceal her love from him; on the other side he resented a most
incredible grief to see himself not in a condition to possess her, nor that he
knew any ways in the world how to justine his innocence so fully, that it might
be impossible for his fair and beautiful Mistress to be able to doubt of it.
These thoughts for some time took up his mind, and occasioned him for some
moments not to answer her, but at last he broke off his silence, and said to
her, I do not know any thing, Madam, that can better prove my innocence to you,
and that can better make it known to all the world, then the passion I have for
you, and which I have been so hardy as to declare to you A heart that had found
it self culpable, would not have had a sufficient assurance to give you the
marks of his flame, and to demand of you the permission and honor to sigh for
you, it would not have dared to add this crime to that which it would have
been sullied with, and it would have apprehended that your wit and your eyes
which penetrate all things, and which have a particular power of discerning,
would quickly have found out both its crime and its most secret sentiments. Do
not endeavor, interrupted Sestiana, to seduce my ^^^pite by this flattering
discourse, and if you will oblige me, let me alone to enjoy it till such time
that I shall be no longer able to doubt of your innocence. I must then, replied
Democrates to her, wait (if so be I can do it without expiring) till fortune
which has rendered me guilty, makes a discovery of my innocence; possibly it
will labor my justification, when I shall least think of it, in the same
manner as it has labored to eclipse my glory, when I as little suspected it.
As this inconstant Deity often makes persons guilty, that so she may divert her
self with the trouble and confusion into which she casts them, she is also
pleased to restore them their innocence, when they believe their virtue shall
never be known, and when they despair to see themselves again in the same
degree of honor as they were before they had the unhappiness to be attacked by
that flitting goodness. This time will come, Madam, and you will know then that
I am not altogether unworthy of the Love you bear me. Ah! why is not this time
come already, cried Sestiana to her self, do not you imagine, replied she
immediately, that Love makes me speak in this manner, it is my glory only that
takes up all my thoughts, and all that is capable of securing it, so sensibly
touches me, that none ought to admire I show so much of ardour, when there is
something told me that may serve either to re-establish it, or bring an
accession to it. But, Madam, did Democrates answer her, if by the justifying of
my innocence, I could render you the glory which you have lost, because you
have loved me, shall not your love be satisfied, and shall not this
justification be also as sensible to it as to your glory? Be you the judge of
it, repeated Sestiana to him, the tenderness you know I have for you, and do
not demand any thing more of me. They were yet some time together, during which
Democrates knew, that if that fair one had any great love for him, she had yet
a greater ascendent over her spirit, and that it would be impossible for him to
obtain her hand, before he should purge himself of the pretended crime with
which she thought he might be yet suspected.

Democrates was scarcely gone from Sestiana, but he was thinking of the means
to justify himself in that manner as the fair one demanded; but the more he was
musing on 'em, the more he found himself perplexed, for he began to believe
that Sestianes was the true criminal, and the Council that he had given him, to
believe that Anaxander was guilty, and to extinguish the remembrance of a crime
whereof it was almost impossible to discover the Author, added to what he had
told him just before he was taken prisoner, confirmed him in that thought, and
redoubled the inquietude that tormented him. What if I should said he accuse
Sestianes? what if he should confess his crime, and by his acknowledgment I
should be justified? I should then do what Sestiana requires of me, I should
likewise make a discovery of my innocence, and satisfy her glory; but also, as
that would cause me to do more than she demands, I should, in finding out the
means of making my self be beloved, find out those of making my self be hated
at the same time. I should, in finding out the means of obtaining her hand,
find out those of making her refuse to give it me, and to conclude, I should in
finding out the means of justifying my self, find out those of making my self
in her esteem guilty of a crime much more odious than this is now lie under the
imputation of and such are the rigours and severities of fate which is
resolutely determined to follow me, that I cannot do the one without the other,
not pass for innocent before the object to whom I would justify my self,
without passing at the same time in her thoughts for ungrateful, cruel, and
for much more guilty than I do appear to her at present. After that this
afflicted Lover had been for some time entertaining himself with these sad and
lamentable thoughts, and had made all these things be run over in his
imagination, he was immovable like a statue for a good considerable time, and
stood as it were so buried in his grief, that very scarcely did he give any
sign of life: when he was a little come out of that trouble which the excess of
his grief had cast him into, he bethought himself on a sudden, that he had
found out the secret of geting out of the incertainty and trouble in which he
was. I must, said he to himself, declare to Sestiana all I know, and discover
to her all the reasons that persuade me, to believe her father is the Author of
the crime of which I am suspected, and demand of her that she will marry me by
way of recompense, for having so faithfully kept the secret, and to oblige me
to keep it still, and I hope that the silence I have observed for her sake, and
the fear she will have of my breaking it, will cause her not to refuse giving
me her hand, least she appear ungrateful toward her Father and me. He had
hardly remained a moment in these remarkable and flattering thoughts, but he
quitted them to let himself be hurried away by others. To act in this manner,
said he, would be to hazard too much, if Sestiana should not give any belief to
my discourse, she would be obliged to have for me an invincible hatred, and far
from obtaining it by this way, I should for ever lose the place I possess in
her heart: I ought therefore to act with prudence, it is too fair a virtue to
lose, it will furnish me with other means to attain the end of my desires; and
as I am sure of the tender affections of that divine beauty which causes all my
pains, I ought to hope that she will have pity of my torments, and that time,
my services, my respects, and my innocence will make her at last resolve to
marry me.

These were the flattering hopes wherewith Democrates buoyed up himself, and
the deference he had for the Counsels that prudence gave him; but it ought not
to be wondered at, he never remembered that it had always been against him, he
forgot the miseries that it had caused him, as soon as ever the danger or the
mischief was past, and though it had always proved treacherous to him, he would
nevertheless rely upon it, and could not resolve to abandon it.

A little while after he returned to Sestiana, whom he found as invincible as
before, and who repeated to him only the same things that she had already said;
which gave him such a cruel vexation and despite, that he went to tell her
Father how obstinately she refused to marry him, and withal to desire him that
he would consider his promise to him, and to speak to Sestiana in his favor.
Sestianes who had resolved to ruin Democrates, and who notwithstanding all the
love this passionate Gallant had for his Daughter, did not think himself
secure; because he persuaded himself that he might very well betray a Father-in
Law, to reestablish the glory of a friend, to whom he was so greatly obliged;
received him outwardly with the greatest joy imaginable, for he had resolved to
be very civil to him until he should find a fit opportunity to work his
absolute ruin, he promised him to employ with his Daughter all the authority of
a Father, and declared to him that he should be sensible how great his
satisfaction was in it by the earnestness of his endeavors to conclude their
Marriage. Democrates conjured him not to employ all his authority, and not to
be enraged against the object of his most dear and tender desires, and told
him, that the love he had for Sestiana was too full of respect to desire she
should be any whit provoked, or to have her obliged to do any thing with
violence. Sestianes made answer to him, that he was exceeding glad to find in
him those sentiments, and that he would manage things in such a manner as that
both should be satisfied.

After that Democrates had given him a thousand thanks, and had conjured him to
be as good as his word, he took his leave of him; but Sestianes to continue the
part of a dissembling impostor and traitor, that he had accustomed himself to
act; instead of what he had promised to do for him, bid his daughter always to
treat him in that manner she had done since that he was got out of prison, and
forbad her to let him know it was by his order that she treated him so. As that
generous person thought her Father acted by the fame motives as she did, this
discourse did not give her any trouble, and she presently replied to him, that
she would obey him so much the more willingly, as that he commanded nothing of
her but what she had already resolved to do. A little while after there was
presented to Sestiana a match more considerable by far then Democrates was.
This blind Father, whose ambition was the only engine that moved him in all
his actions, immediately bid his Daughter not to reject Arcas, (for so was this
new Lover called) but to keep him up with some small hopes, but yet without
letting Democrates know it was by his command; which caused Sestiana to be very
much troubled, and which made her know more certainly that she still bore our
Hero a far greater Love than ever she imagined. Yet Sestianes began to find
himself in a strange perplexity, for he durst not let his Daughter marry Arcas,
because she was long before promised to Democrates, and he was terrible afraid
that this affront might provoke him so, as to make him speak all that he
thought he knew, sooner then he would have done: and on the other side, he
would not give her to Democrates; because he was only searching for a
favorable occasion to ruin him.

During this inquietude of his, our Hero who relied upon his word, and upon
the Love which Sestiana had not been able to conceal from him, began to have
his mind now more at ease, and settled in him; without ever in the least
forseeing the new misfortunes with which he was threatened. After he had taken
order about his Love, he was contriving some means not to pass for ungrateful
toward Anaxander, whom he always thought innocent of the crime of which he had
accused himself; but not precisely knowing the place where he was, and not
being willing to write to him by ordinary ways, he gave a letter to one of his
own Servants, and sent him to look him out, where he imagined he was most
likely to be, and as he did not doubt of the fidelity of this Servant, from
whom he had never any thing of a secret, and that he would not have Anaxander
believe he had hazarded his reputation to save a guilty person, he ordered him
to assure him from his own mouth that he was innocent, and to tell him, to
prove the truth of it to him, that he thought that Sestianes was really guilty,
and the author of that conspiracy; but that he had no mind to accuse him,
because of the love he bore to his daughter, and not being willing to trust all
this to paper, he only writ five or six lines to this most dear friend, to give
him proofs of his health, and to make him see that he enjoyed the liberty which
he so frankly had procured him.

As we live in an age where a secret is no longer a virtue, and the things that
we would keep the most private and concealed, are in a short time known to
those from whom we most desire to have them kept a mystery, it seems Democrates
was not long without apprehending he had a Rival, and that a favored one too,
not only by the father of his Mistress, but by his Mistress her self; this news
was more sensible to him, and touched him deeper then all the outrageous
cruelties that fortune had till then made him suffer; he abandoned himself
wholly to his grief and rage, he called a thousand times Sestiana faithless,
and Sestianes a traitor, and perfidious, and even doubted sometimes if he had
not best tell all that obliged him to believe, that he was the author of the
conspiracy which had been made against Theomedes; but as he was too prudent to
hearken to those thoughts that were conceived in the heats and transports of a
first motion, and to follow the counsels of choler, he quickly turned from that
design to another, viz. of going to wait upon Sestianes and his daughter, and
to reproach them for their perfidiousnesse, and their breach of promise; but
whether they were not within, or else that they would not be spoke withal by
him, it was impossible for him to have a sight of them.

If the news of Arca's love had been a very great affliction to Democrates,
Sestianes was quite despairing when he understood that he had heard of it,
because he saw himself thereby obliged to labor his ruin; for his ambition to
see his daughter married to Arcas (who next to the Princes of the blood, was
one of the first of the Kingdom) being joined to the fear he was in, that
Democrates would discover him one day, and that likewise after an affront so
sensible to his flame, he would declare that he was criminal much sooner then
he had or would have done, did powerfully solicit him to procure his ruin, in
what manner soever it might be; but this new misfortune obliged him to take the
soonest opportunity he could to do it in; wherefore from that day, after he had
commanded his Daughter to treat Arcas and Democrates with an equal kindness,
and to endeavor to keep them both to her, until such time that he should make
known his choice to her, he went his way to one of his Country houses, with
two or three of those that were of the conspiracy against Theomedes, that so
they might contrive amongst them the means to execute the design he had
projected, and to discourse together freely, without being afraid of any ones
overhearing them. They were scarce got half a league from the Town, when they
perceived a good way off them a man set upon by three others; they did what
they could to relieve him, but the assailants who were thieves, seeing them
coming up directly to them, betook themselves to flight; but the rage they were
in to see themselves surprised, made them give this person whom they had
designed to rob, several wounds, so that Sestianes and those with him found the
poor miserable wretch even without life; when they were got up to him, they
searched him immediately to see if they could find any thing about him which
might serve to make him known, but they met with nothing save a Letter which
was directed to Anaxander, and which was written with Democrates his own hand,
which made them, after they had anew examined who it might possibly be, to know
for certain that it was one of his own servants, (for indeed it was he whom
Democrates had sent to Anaxander.) Sestianes had easily got open the Letter,
for as it happened, it had been run through with one of the thrusts that the
dead body had received, just there where the seal was, so that it was in a
manner open of it self: he read it with a great deal of pleasure and
satisfaction, because it might make the innocence of our Hero be called again
into question, and because he thought that it might serve him in the design he
had, which caused him to give it those to read who were with him, who told him
after they had seen it, that it would be sufficient to show it to the King and
to Prince Theomedes, to get Democrates be put into fetters again, from which he
was but newly released, and to make him be believed that he was guilty.
Sestianes who would have had surer ways to ruin him, at first resisted it; but
at last he resolved upon it, seeing he should not expose himself to any danger
in doing so, and that he ought not to let slip an occasion that fortune seemed
to present to him expressly for his service, and that which yet was a stronger
inducement to him, was, that if by that means he came not to the end of his
hopes, it should be in his power in the same manner as before, to execute what
he had resolved upon. The matter being thus settled, one of the two who had
given this counsel, recalled his word a few months after, and said, that they
had not well weighed what they did, and that Sestianes would be likely to
destroy himself, if he went to put in execution what they had projected
together; since that Democrates seeing himself accused by him whom he knew to
be really guilty, would not be able to refrain accusing him in his turn, and to
tell all that he knew. That is all that I demand, replied Sestianes, and that
is the true way to justify my self, and for ever to deprive me of the fear
that I have of being discovered. When I shall have accused Democrates, and he
shall accuse me afterward, he will not be thought worthy to be believed, nor will
any thing he shall say find any credit, for they will cry out, that he speaks
so merely out of rage and matter of revenge, that he would not accuse me but
only because I have impeached him, and if he had known that I had been a
criminal, he would not have tarried so long before he had accused me. All those
that would accuse me after this, let them know my crime, or or know it not,
will be looked upon as Impostors, and it will not be hard for me to make it be
believed, either that they are friends to Democrates, or that they are gained
by him; So that that Letter will be doubly profitable to me, for it will both
serve me against Democrates, and against those who shall be apt to accuse me,
and it will likewise keep off others from having the confidence to do it, for
fear least I turn the crime upon themselves.

This perfidious Man, having confirmed himself in this resolution, so fitly
took his time, that he did not give the King this letter but in the presence of
Prince Theomedes, for fear, that if the Prince had not been there by, the
osteem the King had for Democrates had kept him from making him be arrested
again, and that he had quite stifled this proof of his crime.

The success of this baseness answered the expectation of him who had been
guilty of it: the King after he had learnt how this Letter came to be found,
and had read it over, could not refrain showing it to Prince Theomedes; because
that Sestianes in giving it to him had said out aloud enough to make the Prince
know what it was.

Theomedes having seen the Letter, said without much examining what he had
read, he was so highly transported with choler, that Democrates having himself
giving undisputable proofs of his crime, it was very fit and necessary to have
him clapped up again, and that without doubt he would acknowledge then what they
could not before get him to confess. The King who thought that demand was just
and equitable, immediately gave orders to have him put anew into prison. He
could not but admire as well as Theomedes to see Sestianes accuse a man that
was so near being his Son in Law; but he answered, that he ought to sacrifice
all things to the Royal blood, and that since Democrates was guilty of so
ignominious a crime, he was unworthy to come into his family, that he had lost
all the esteem he once had for him, and that he would no longer acknowledge him
for a man that aspired to be made happy in the possession of his Daughter.

The unfortunate Democrates therefore returned to his fetters from which he had
been but newly released, but he was not long there before they spoke to him
about it, for the next day he was sent for to be interrogated, and to see what
he had to say for the letter he had written to Anaxander which they showed him;
it was contained in these words.

DEMOCRATES to the Generous ANAXANDER.
TO charge your self with my crime to free me from my fetters, and to oblige
me, to ruin the great reputation you have in the world, and the esteem that
your virtue has gained you are such signal and valuable favors, as can never
be returned; and I must acknowledge that I shall be obliged to you, not only so
long as I live, but even after I am dead, since you have kept my memory from
being stained with a crime of which you your self have purged me. I will not
say any more about it, for I believe you are not ignorant that if nothing can
be imagined capable to requite such an obligation, it is impossible to find out
terms that may be sufficient to express it well, wherefore I will content my
self to assure you that I am ready to pour out all my blood for the generous
Anaxander, to which I owe both my honor and my life.

After that Democrates had seen this Letter, he said without ever altering his
countenance, that indeed it was writ with his own hand, and that he did not see
it could be any ways prejudicial to him, nor did it make it evident that he was
guilty of a crime that had never entered into his thoughts; his Judges replied
to him that his Letter was contrary to his words, and that he affirmed in it,
that Anaxander had charged himself with a crime to deliver him from his
Fetters, and that he was redevable to him for his life. They added, that
nothing was able to keep them from believing such convincing proofs, and that
he could not deny what he had just then affirmed, in confessing the Letter they
had shown him, and which was adressed to Anaxander, was of his own
handwriting. They bid him afterward speak whither he had any thing to say that
might serve for his justification. Honor, replied this illustrious and
generousprisoner to them, which is a thousand times more dear to me than my
life, obliges me to answer you, and if I was not afraid of losing it in dying,
the world should see me run with joy to meet my death; since nothing but that
can deliver me from the infultation of my evil fortune. I will say then since
it is honor, and not the fear of death, that would have me defend my self,
that none need to wonder if I writ to Anaxander, not as to a criminal, but as
to the generousest person upon earth, since I never have believed that he was
guilty of the crime which he has accused himself of, to deliver me from the
danger he saw me threatened withal; but am and shall be always persuaded that
his generosity, and the friendship he has testified to me, did oblige him to
undertake what he has done in my favor. You cannot doubt but that I thought
thus as soon as I knew he had imputed that Crime to himself, when I shall tell
you, that I declared it to the King, who is a witness you cannot refuse, and
whom every body will think, both in duty and justice, you ought to believe.
Acknowledging therefore Anaxander innocent, and that generous friend having
declared himself guilty, to discover to me the greatness of his friendship, and
to free me from my chains, could I write otherwise to him (without deserving to
be looked on for it as a criminal) then that he had charged himself with my
crime in declaring that he was guilty of that which I my self was accused of,
since that tho he was innocent and I was so likewise, it is still true that he
did take upon himself my crime, since it was that which I was accused of. Ought
one afterward to wonder if I write to him; that Iowe him both my honor and my
life? was I not equally in danger, either as innocent, or as a criminal? have
not I the same obligations to him also both ways? and has he not done as much
for me, as if it had been impossible to doubt of the crime which was imposed
upon me?

When Democrates had ended his discourse, his Judges went away very much
satisfied with his answer, and made it visible both in their eyes, and
countenance, that they approved his reasons. But that did not keep him from
complaining of the rigours and injustice of his fate, and to show more concern
and trouble at his imprisonment then he had done the first time he had been
taken. What said he to himself, seeing he was alone, must my prudence and my
love procure to me so sensible an affront? must I be aecused by him whom I
ought to accuse? and must I be in Irons in the room of him whom I ought to have
put there before now? it is too much to suffer unjustly, let us discover the
proofs we have of the crime of Sestianes, so as he has done those he had
against us, and if that cannot save us, nor is able to work his ruin, let us
have at least the pleasure of accusing him who impeaches us, of making his
innocence to be suspected, and of giving him some confusion and trouble as well
as he has us. Yes, the lot is cast for it, let us no longer hearken either to
love or prudence. But what, replied he immediately, if I have too long taken
their counsels, and if my prudence ruined me, I cannot in this case be
imprudent, without doing a far greater injury to my self then prudence has ever
done me; since that having let the time be lost of accusing Sestianes I cannot
now speak against him, without being looked upon for an impostor, and a wicked
wretch, and without giving them to think that it is only revenge which makes me
do so, and that I would not ruin him but because he has been the cause that I
am now a prisoner. Ah! prudence, cried he to himself, after he had reflected
upon all the misfortunes it had caused him, how dear do you cost me now?
wherefore have you hindered me from putting into the letter I writ to
Anaxander, all that I had a mind he should know, and wherefore have you
counseled me to have him only know it by the mouth of him I sent to him? I do
see very well that you resolve I shall have the unprofitable satisfaction not
only of having harkned to, but also followed your counsels in all things that
have happened to me of trouble and vexation, and to console me in my
misfortunes; you would have me impute all to Fate, which has put things to such
a pass that prudence fails in whatsoever it advises, and produces effects
contrary to those it has been wont to do. It is true, said he, going on talking
to himself in that melancholy way, that since I resolved to be governed by
prudence in all things, and have learnt to know it, I have perceived that one
ought to rely no more upon it then upon fortune, and whatsoever it has made one
undertake for the best, has often proved to be very unhappy. It is at present
so suspected, that those who are directed by it as a guide of their actions,
and those who never in the least consult it, do equally mistrust it, and both
of them, thinking that every body uses it as a vail to hide other designs then
what they make to be visible, apprehend it in another, and are so very fearful
of it, that they are not sensible of the mischief it does, but when they are
past all hopes and opportunity of remedying it.

This Illustrious and Eminent prisoner, who had no other entertainment then
that which his sad and troubled thoughts furnished him withal, was three or
four days before he knew what to do, either to save himself, or ruin himself;
and during this time, he resented all that love choler, and revenge do make
those suffer who are laboring under those 3. cruel passions. He laid before
him the perfidiousness of Sestianes, whom he began to look upon as the most
deceitful and wicked of all men breathing, and he did whatsoever he could to
stifle the love he had for his Daughter, but she had too powerful an ascendent
in his heart, for him to be able to remove her from it in so short a time, and
he made very unprofitable attempts about it; for the more he thought on
Sestiana, the more her beauty came into his memory, and notwithstanding all his
resistance, it gave an accession to the love he had for that charming and
generous person, and which he endeavored to destroy with so little success.

As this Irresolute Lover had his thoughts more upon his love, than his
imprisonment, and upon the fetters that Sestiana had made him wear, than on
those in which his supposed crime retained him, word was brought him from the
King, that his prison was open, and he might go out when he pleased. This news,
which he did not at all suspect, surprised him exceedingly. He thought the
right guilty persons were discovered, and went immediately to be informed of it
to one of his relations houses, who had been very serviceable to him the former
time when he had been a prisoner, and who since his last misfortune had found a
means to let him know in his prison, that he would employ both all his Estate,
and all his friends to make him fully convinced of the share he took in his
intrests. As Democrates was just at his house, he met him coming out to
acquaint him with all that had happened; he told him that his Judges, knowing
the esteem the King had for him, and being fully persuaded of his Innocence, by
the answer he had made them, had declared that they believed him Innocent, and
said that tho he should have been a Criminal, yet things were in such a posture
that they could not Judge him with any justice. He added, that Prince Theomedes
having been desired by several persons of quality whom he named to him, to
consent to his being set at liberty, that Prince thought himself obliged to
solicit for him, for fear of making to himself any more enemies, in seeking,
with too great an earnestness and resolution, the ruin of a person whose crime
was not averred, and who possibly had never been his enemy. Our Hero having
understood all these things, went to return his acknowledgment to the King for
all the favors he had shown him. He likewise thought himself obliged to go and
thank Prince Theomedes, which he did after he had been to wait upon the King;
and the next day he went to visit all those that had interessed themselves in
his favor; and after all he sent one of his servants where he suspected
Anaxander to be, to advertise him of all that had happened; but he gave him no
letter, for fear lest fortune which has persecuted him with as much fury as
blindness, should invert the proofs of his innocence, to render him guilty.

After he had done all that either civility or duty exacted from him, he had a
great desire to answer the demands of his love; to give his flame some
satisfaction; and to go and see his Mistress; But what Sestianes had done to
ruin him, made him see so much unworthyness in that visit, that he durst not
grant any thing to his love for fear of bringing any blemish to his glory.
Never did any Lover see himself in a greater and more cruel perplexity; he
would very fain see Sestiana, and yet he would not see her; love her, and yet
not love her, put her out of his thoughts, and yet keep her in them. What, said
he to himself, reflecting upon the miseries that his love did make him suffer,
must I love the Daughter of a man, that not only has desired my ruin, but all
whose actions have too much encouraged me to believe that he is guilty of the
crime, of which he has made me twice unjustly suspected? but what, said he,
entertaining himself still with his thoughts, if Sestianes is base and
perfidious, Sestiana is one the most generous and most virtuous persons in the
world; but how can so much virtue, and so much baseness be found in one and the
same blood? noe, noe, I only help to abuse my self, I fall into the same
snares, that Love sets for me, and that Tyrant who is resolved to make me love
her, makes me see in her such virtues as she has not; since she is the Daughter
of Sestianes, she must needs resemble him, and be perfidious and wicked as he
is; but (alas!) though she be of his blood, she is still one of the most
charming persons in the creation; the Crime of her Father has not changed the
beautiful lineaments of her face; she loves me, I ought to love her, since that
Love can only be repaid by love. Perhaps I have done her an injury, when the
crime of her Father makes me doubt her virtue; it is no new thing to see wicked
parents have virtuous children, nor wicked children to have virtuous parents.
After he had strengthened himself in this opinion, and had resolutely
determined not to banish from his heart the love he had for Sestiana, he fully
concluded not to recriminate upon Sestianes, but to sacrifice his choler, and
his resentment to his love. He was no sooner settled in his resolution, but he
perceived Sestianes coming up to him. That sight awakened again his choler,
and notwithstanding the resolution he had taken not to discover his resentments
to him, yet he could not refrain uttering these words to him. You ought not
said he to him, with so much eagerness to lay hold upon all occasions of
ruining me, for fear lest I should accuse you, and I have been secret, I think,
for a sufficient time, to oblige you to believe that I could still be so. I do
not know, replied Sestianes to him, with a look full of disdain, what it is you
mean, and if I am guilty of any crime of which I ought to be accused it is only
in your fancy; but I should be too blame to wonder at it, added he, what my
duty has obliged me to do against you very likely may not inspire you with any
thing to my advantage, but revenge may possibly have made you seek out all ways
to ruin me; but my innocence secures me from all that you can say against me,
and those persons that are disinteressed will still know, when you speak after
the manner you do now, that it is only revenge which makes you capable of
having any such discourse: as for my part, continued he, though I am very sorry
I have lost your friendship, yet I shall never repent my having done what I
ought for the safety of the Prince Theomedes: we owe all to persons of his
blood, and in the like occasion, we are obliged to do the same thing for all
the World. Have you that confidence to speak to me in this manner, replied
Democrates to him, and have you forgot what you told me some time before I was
taken prisoner, the first time that I was unjustly suspected? whatsoever I
might have told you, reported Sestianes to him with a very great assurance, I
never told you I was a criminal, and if I had been so, and you had known it, I
should not have had that presumption to carry to the King the Letter that you
wrote to Anaxander; and as it was by mere accident that I met with it, I could,
to serve you, have made it not to be seen, and I had done it, without doubt, if
my duty had not obliged me to the contrary; howsoever I am extremely overjoyed,
that those great proofs of your crime have not produced against you the fatal
effects you could not but expect from them. But as I am not endued with less
virtue then my Daughter, I am not willing to have for my Son-in-Law a man who
is not cleared but by favor of the crime, of which possibly with too much
justice he may have been suspected. I take my self to be quit of my promise
after what has happened to you, and if you think I treat you too severely,
impute it only to your crime, or if you are innocent, impute it then to your
misfortune.

Saying these last words he left Democrates, but in such a condition that was
enough to make the most hardy to fear, and to stir up pity in those that are
least sensible. He had a good mind to break out into the violence of his rage,
and follow Sestianes, to make him repent of his so insolent discourse, but the
excess of that sadness and grief into which those injurious words had put him,
rendered him powerless, and were the cause, that the fire and rage that was
visible in his eyes, was not able to appear in his actions. Then did he
solemnly swear that he would never any longer think of Sestiana's charms, and
the hatred he had conceived against the Father, and which had an accession by
his discourse, made him in appearance stifle all the love he had for the
daughter.

Five or six days past in which Democrates did all he could to drive Sestiana
out of his thoughts, and that fair one all that she could possibly think of, to
forget Democrates.

In the mean time Sestianes who feared nothing from our Hero, frequently saw
those that were of the conspiracy with him, and discovered to them that the
alarm which had been given the Prince Theomedes was the cause that he always
went well guarded, and that they must wait, and take up other measures then
those they had resolved on. He flattered them with the hopes of a happy
success, and made them foresee that if any of them had the confidence to accuse
him, he could order (...) so, that the crime should revert upon him, for he
would say that he was bribed by Democrates, who according to all appearances,
studied to revenge himself of the sensible affront he had given to his honor,
in presenting the King with the letter he wrote to Anaxander; which had been
easy for him, because none of them could give in proofs of his conspiracy,
being all engaged only by word.

But though Sestianes feared nothing from Democrates, yet he resolved not to
let a person live who he knew very well would be his mortalenemy, after he had
offended him in two such ticklelish points as are honor and love; but as
nothing did engage him to precipitate his ruin, he waited till time furnished
him with a favorable opportunity to set about it with safety, and without fear
of being ever discovered: and being as expert in his politics, as he was
treacherous and wicked, he stired up Arcas, in covert words, to kill
Democrates, telling him that as long as he lived, it was impossible for him to
root him out of the heart of his Daughter, and that he would have the
dissatisfaction of knowing that she loved another besides himself; which so
awakend the Jealousy of this new Gallant, that he narrowly watched the actions
of Sestiana, to see if after the prohibitions of her Father to love his Rival,
and evermore to speak to him, her love would make her find out any way to come
to discourse with him.

Whilst these things were happening, Democrates was the most perplexed man in
the world. The love that he thought he had for ever driven out of his breast,
had by degrees got in again, and ruled there with so much violence, that he
could not find out any ways to get the mastery of it; which obliged him by all
means imaginable to try if he could not possibly speak with Sestiana privately,
to learn if he was still beloved by her, and to resolve, according as she
treated him, whether he should persevere in his Love, or continue the efforts
he made, to stifle a flame, which tyrannised in his breast with so absolute an
Empire, and which he had several times unprofitably attempted to remove from it.

After he had a good while been contriving how to come to the end of this
design, and to entertain the object of his vows with that freedom he desired,
he thought it was his best way to entreat the service of one of Sestiana's
relations, who had always testified to him a very great esteem, and also as
great a friendship; and to beg of her to order it so, that this fair one might
be one day at her house, that so he might have the happiness of discoursing
with her there. Sestiana who had an absolute confidence in this person, and who
did as earnestly desire to speak with Democrates, as Democrates did to speak
with her, made her the same request, so that this Lady found it no hard matter
to give them both a satisfaction.

The day that these two Lovers were to see one another being come, they each of
them resolved, on their parts to resist with all the power they could the
tender sentiments that Love inspired into them; and to that end both of them
left their lodgings in this resolution, but when they were got together, a very
small matter would have made them forgot what they had resolved upon, and have
set them upon new protestations of Love: for though their design was fully to
hate one another, and to make their hatred visible by the reciprocal
testimonies of it; yet they were never in a less disposition to do it. But
however, Sestiana, who had a very great ascendent over her self, and who was
resolved to be as good as her intentions, spoke first, and said to Democrates,
I would willingly demand a favor of you, which I desire you would grant me in
the name of that Love which has reciprocally reigned in both our hearts; if you
still love me, and if you have any kindness for your self, you ought not to
deny it me, it being a thing that will re-establish our repose, and keep us
from doing that which may be shameful to us; it is a thing that will be
profitable to us both, and which will spare us a great many sighs: in a word,
it is your hatred; I do whatsoever I can to give you mine, but I know very well
that without the help of yours all my efforts will signify little. This request
added she, looking steadfastly upon him, ought not to give you so great a
surprise as I see plainly by your countenance it does, for I demand nothing of
you but what is just, you owe me your hatred, and I likewise owe you mine; you
owe me yours, after what my Father has done against you; and I owe you mine,
because you have had the confidence to demand of me my heart, and even to
seduce it, yours being stained with a crime which as yet you have not been able
to purge your self of, but through the bounties of the King, and the favors of
Prince Theomedes. You see by that, continued she, that we cannot love one
another without betraying our glory, and not to have a hatred for each other is
to wound it, and therefore you ought to grant me yours, for the price of mine.
Ah! Madam replied Democrates to her with a languishing voice, and an air the
most passionate in the world, if there be nothing but my hatred that can draw
upon me yours, I am sure you will never hate me as long as you live; you demand
that of me which is not in my power, for love and hatred are not voluntary
things, and if when one has once began either to love or hate, it is impossible
any longer to be Master of those two great and violent passions, it is very
difficult to kindle them when one has not as yet began to resent them. But yet
I will avow to you, if that can bring you any satisfaction, that my desires
were agreeable to yours, that I have done whatever I could to hate you, and that
it has not been possible for me to effect it, any more then it has been for
you; which clearly shows that our hearts do not agree with our desires, that
they have given themselves up absolutely to love, and that they have not any
place in them to receive hatred. Since you will not hate me, replied Sestiana
to him, I will be more generous then you, I will begin first to do my duty, and
by my example inspire into you those sentiments you ought to have What, Madam,
answered Democrates, can you then resolve to hate me, when you ought to give me
the most signal marks of your love? Ah! let me beseech you think of the
violence I do to my self for your sake, and remember that the ardent affection
I conserve for you, after those treatments I have received from your father,
ought to make you have in my favor more pleasant and obliging sentiments. That
ardent affection which you conserve for me, after an affront which ought to be
so sensible to you, replied she to him, produces more effects then you imagine,
for if it makes me to know the greatness and excess of your love, it at the
same time makes me to understand your baseness, and if according to the rule,
which is, that one should return love for love, it obliges me to have a
kindness for you, according then to that other, which is, that one should look
upon the base with contempt, it obliges me to hate you. Do whatsoever you
please, replied this unfortunate Lover to her, I will bear all from you without
murmuring, I will respect your choler, I will respect your hatred, and in
spite of all your contempts, I will conserve for you a love so firm and
constant, that there shall be nothing in the world capable to shake it. Well
then! answered this Generous Heroin Lover, since you force me to acknowledge a
weakness, which shall never be of advantage to you, I do love you, I own it,
and though I would, yet I cannot oblige my heart to hate you; but in spite of
all that love that this perfidious heart will conserve, I am going to marry
Arcas, to make you know that. Ah! Madam, (interrupted the miserable Domocrates,
whom those words had almost rendered immovable,) what crime have committed
that can oblige you to punish me with so much rigor? hate me rather, for
heavens sake, then love me in this manner. So long as you shall hate me, I
shall hope always that my love, and my respects may be able one day to overcome
your hatred, and render me possessor of one of the fairest persons in the
world; but when I shall see you in the arms of Arcas, I shall only hope from
death to derive the end of all my pains and sufferings. Yet if you knew,
pursued he, fetching a deep sigh, what I do for your repose, and if you knew
the tears, and the cruel afflictions I keep from you, I am sure you would treat
me with less rigor; but whatsoever the evils that my silence causes me, your
repose is too dear to me not to prefer it to mine; I should be afraid I might
see you die with regret and grief, and that fear forces me to conceal from you
a secret which would cost you too dear. All that I demand of you, continued he,
for the reward of a service, which possibly you will never know the greatness
of, and which proceeds only from an excess of love and generosity, is that you
would not marry Arcas. You would then, interrupted Sestiana, oblige me to pay a
service without knowing it, and even without knowing whether it be true that
you have rendered me any or no. Ah! Madam, cried Democrates, interrupting he
rin his turn, this service has somewhat so particular in it, that I cannot
render it to you, and discover it to you both together; the one is incompatible
with the other, and if I told it you, I should not then render it to you. Since
that this secret is of so great importance, replied this charming person to
him, I will not oblige you to reveal it, and show my self curious, as the
generality of my sex do, for fear my curiosity should be punished, and I should
repent my earnestness in pressing you to discover it. This discourse, replied
Democrates to to her, does not surprise me, I knew long since how much above
other women you were, and that you do nothing wherein there is not an
extraordinary height of prudence to be observed; but in short, Madam, as this
virtue is not repugnant to that which I demand of you, and and that it does not
oblige you to betray me, let me beseech you to tell me, what it is you would
have me to hope for, and if you are resolved to marry, -- Ah! let us not
discourse any longer, said the fair Lady interrupting him, either of love, or
of marriage, do not force me if you love me, to discover my weakness to you and
do not constrain me to betray my virtue. When you were without a Rival, I did
not find it so difficult to testify my choler to you; but now I must complain
of you in spite of all my resistance; my heart will not let me resolve to hate
you, but speaks to me in your favor, and tells me you will cost me not a few
tears. I do not know whence this melancholy foreknowledge proceeds, but I
perceive very well that pity does interess it self as much for you, as Love;
and endeavors to stifle all those sentiments I ought to have to your
disadvantage. Do not enquire any further, answered-our Hero, from whence those
sentiments of love and pity proceed, that speak to you so much in my favor, my
Love and my innocence without doubt are the cause of them, and thereby do
advertise you, not to betray in marrying Arcas, the most faithful and most
passionate of all Lovers; because that when you come to be convinced of his
innocence, the death you will have brought upon him by your cruel carriage,
will oblige you to bestow upon him some tears. The Lady staid till then without
pouring out any, but at those very words she could not forbear shedding a few,
which she mingled with those sighs that at the same time broke from her, and
immediately took her leave of him, not to give him the satisfaction he might
have derived from the pleasureableness of a frailty which was of so much
advantage to him: but she told him as she was going away, that if she could
make her duty to agree with her Love, he might assure himself that she would do
whatsoever he desired her, and that she would never marry Arcas. Democrates,
after he had this answer, returned back again, but not so well satisfied as he
would have been, if he had had a less knowledge of the power that Sestiana had
over her self, for he was sensible that although this generous person had more
then an ordinary kindness for him, yet she would sacrifice her love to her
duty, and the obedience she owed to her Father would make her to marry his
Rival, though indeed she had never so great an aversion to him.

As this Lover, whose heart was divided between hope and fear, was going to his
lodgings, he found an occasion to exercise his valor, for he met with a
numerous troop of seditious persons, who had conspired the ruin of all the
House Royal. He put himself in the head of the Soldiers whom the King had sent
to seize those Traitors and perfidious subjects, and to punish, by a sudden
death, those they could not arrest. Democrates animated them in such a manner
by his courage and words, that they wrought miracles by his Example, and
brought back five hundred of those seditious fellows prisoners.

The King having heard what was done, received our Hero with a tenderness as
you may easily imagine, and the Prince Theomedes, who was no less obliged to
him then the King, in as much as the conspiracy respected all the House Royal,
testified to him the esteem he had of his valor.

And whilst love and fortune were treating Democrates in a more civil and
obliging manner then they had done before for I know not how long, fear began
to take a violent possession of the heart of Sestianes. He could not tell what
was become of one of those who joined with him in the conspiracy against Prince
Theomedes, and as it was he of all the number whom he most mistrusted, his
absence gave him so great an inquietude as would be very difficult to express,
unless one could be sensible of all that fear produces in the hearts of
criminals that are afraid of being discovered.

But as there is nothing can be kept so secret long, as to be a reserve from
jealous Lovers, Arcas, who had very faithful spies, was soon informed that
Sestiana had had a long discourse with Democrates at one of her cosins houses.
He immediately complained to her Father of it, who was glad to hear it, and
assured him that for the future he would so order things, as they should not be
able to find out any way for a conversation. He would have made the same
complaint to Sestiana, but she received it in such a manner, as made him know
that his love and his jealousy were both indifferent to her and that he would
find it a hard matter to root out of her breast a Rival who had made himself
Master of it, and who had long before obtained her esteem, and had surprised
her tenderest affections. There was very little wanting, to make this Lover,
who abandoned himself to his despair, lose that respect which is due to so
charming a Sex, and to speak like one that is jealous, and a husband, instead
of speaking like an inamoured Gallant: and the violence he did himself in
retaining his jealous transports, made him go away from this fair and scornful
Lady, full of an extraordinary despite, and so furious a jealousy, that as
soon as he was got within his own doors, he wrote a challenge to Democrates, to
oblige him to fight him the next day.

Our Hero was too generous not to meet at this assignation of honor, and
indeed he was first at the place, which Arcas had appointed. That Rival, whom
despite and choler animated, came thither a little after. They were not long
before they had their swords in their hands, and were engaged; and they
immediately, by the passes they made, gave one another the mutual marks of
their valor, but at last, you must know (without any necessity of my
describing to you the manner of their combat, which I was no eye witness of)
that Arcas was forced to ask his life of Democrates, and to promise him that he
would never marry Sestiana. Fame quickly spread this news abroad, and Sestianes
was as much afflicted at it, as his daughter had joy, and the whole Court
commended Democrates, and esteemed his prudence, in that he had given life to a
man of the quality of Arcas, and who had in the opinion of all the world such
relations and friends as would most certainly revenge his death.

But whilst hope began to repossess the heart of Democrates, and likewise he to
feel the joy that fortune never gave him but for a few moments, and only to
presage new miseries, Arcas felt whatsoever rage and despair make those endure
who are violently tormented with them, and a little more would have made him
revenge upon himself the injurious and sensible affront that fate had put upon
him.

If those two Lovers resented, the one joy, and the other grief, Sestiana
singly resented both; for if Democrates's victory gave her the former, she was
greatly troubled in that she could not see him, nor have the liberty to speak
with him, and the assurance that her father gave her, that he would never
consent she should marry him, in a great measure allayed the joy she had at
first conceived from the victory of that dear and faithful Lover.

But as misfortune, which never observes any measures in the evils it causes,
when it has once begun to make a person feel the rigor of its most cruel and
piercing malice, and which was resolved that our illustrious and generous Hero
should be exposed to the grievous and terrible severity of its assaults, and
that the unfortunate Democrates should not long make her waver between joy and
sadness; though she was in a condition much more capable to raise pity, then
stir up envy, for the joy she had was so far from causing the effects it was
wont to produce, that it only served to make her the more sensible of the
unjust and tormenting pains of her destiny; it found that she was still too
favorably dealt with, and that her grief ought not to be mixed with any joy at
all, nor with any hopes of ever being able to get out of it, nor so much as to
see it lessen and decay; and therefore made her know with as much diligence, as
those, who thought they brought good news, could inform her, that the faithful
and unfortunate Democrates had been cruelly assassinated the precedent evening,
as he was going from his lodgings to wait upon the Prince, by three men
unknown, who after they had given him several mortal wounds, with all the have
they could, betook themselves to their heels for safety, and they proved so
succesful to them, that those who had pursued them, were not able so much as to
learn any news of them.

The generous and faithful Lover of the unfortunate Democrates had no sooner
heard this sad and fatal truth, but the lively excess of that grief she
resented at it, so violently seized upon her, that at first she was not able to
complain of her fate for a loss that was so sensible to her; but as soon as the
trouble into which this dreadful news had put her, was a little dissipated, and
her grief had given her leisure to reflect upon the new calamities that her
unhappiness had brought upon her, and to think of the death of a person to whom
she had given her heart, she discovered, by her sighs and tears, and by her
complaints, that notwithstanding the ardent affection Areas had for her, and
the commands that her father had laid upon her to be favorable to it, she had
still had a kindness for Democrates, and that she did yet love him even after
his death.

Though Sestiana was in one of the saddest and deplorable conditions in the
world; though her miseries were extreme, and one would think that nothing was
capable of giving them any accession, yet her cruel destiny, which was not
weary of persecuting her, had, in causing the death of Democrates, prepared new
matter to increase the grief of this illustrious miserable Lady; and to
redouble her tears; since that those, who confirmed to her the death of her
Lover, told her likewise that those Assassines having thought him dead, after
they had given him so many wounds, had betook themselves to their heels, and
that Democrates had also yet so much strength as to speak to those who were
come to his relief, and to tell them that the condition in which he was,
obliged him to inform the King and Prince Theomedes that he believed Sestianes
was the Author of the conspiracy against the latter of them, and that the Love
he had for the divine Sestiana, had kept him from making any discovery of it.
They also added, that after he had pronounced the name of Sestiana, those sighs
which Love had made him fetch, joined to the extreme weakness, that the loss of
his blood had put him into, for some time had kept him from speaking; but at
last he had said with much ado, that he was not fully assured that Sestianes
was guilty, but that he had very powerful indications of it, and that Prince
Theomedes ought only to make use of his words, to constrain him, in case he was
a criminal, to discover all himself, after he had got him arrested, or at least
but to oblige that Prince to mistrust him, and to take heed that he does not
expose himself to the fury of his assaults.

It is impossible to represent well to you the estate of the afflicted
Sestiana, after she had heard of this new misfortune. Fear, despite, hatred,
Love and grief had their several combats in her, from which she never got with
any advantage, but the end of them was always fatal to her repose. Fear made
her apprehend something that would be of very ill consequence to her Father;
despite and hatred made her hate him, whom love for all that forced her still
to have a kindness for, though he was only fit for his grave; and grief made
her bewail him whom she detested. Her sighs were divided between love and
Nature, she gave some to the future unhappiness of her Father, and some she
bestowed on her Lover, and if she was not to be comforted for the loss of him,
those words he uttered dying against her Father, afflicted her yet more. She
loved him, bewailed him, and hated him altogether: she hearkened to her duty,
she followed the sentiments that love inspired into her, and at the same time
gave somewhat too to her despite; but though she did what she could to content
them all, yet her mind was no whit the less quiet nor her afflictions less
great and cruel, and grief got absolute mistress of her soul, and tormented it
with all the rigor and severity that it is wont to make use of when it has a
mind to give a cruel persecution to those whom it undertakes to make most
miserable, by putting them into a condition never to be able to enjoy a moments
repose.

Democrates's words at dying were quickly carried to the King, and to Prince
Theomedes, who were no less surprised at them, then at the death of that
generous unfortunate man. They were both very hard to believe that Sestianes
should be guilty, and what he had done outwardly for Theomedes, in giving to
the King the letter that Democrates had writ to Anaxander, kept that Prince
from giving any credit to that information against him. But yet as nothing is
dearer to us than life, which ought to be kept with the greatest care, he was
resolved to let him be atrested if he was to be found, that so he might be the
better satisfied of the truth of it, and to see if his looks would not betray
him, and if his surprise of finding himself a prisoner would not make him
confess a crime of which he was only suspected by force, or make him do what he
could to the contrary, give some manifestations of it, and designed at the same
time to set him at liberty, if he did not acknowledge any thing, without forcing
him by any wrack or torture to declare himself guilty. But it was not the love
he had for Sestianes, nor any happiness that he wished him, obliged him to act
after this manner; but what he thought he had done to serve him, in accusing
Democrates, who was to have been his Son in-Law, had much lessened the severity
he would have had toward him, and engaged him to treat him generously, at
least until he might have some proofs of the attempt of which he was accused.

Prince Theomedes was in this resolution, and had already desired the King to
permit Sestianes to be arrested, and to go out of prison a little while after,
if he should not confess himself a criminal, and if no other more convincing
proofs could be alleged against him of his crime then the last words of
Democrates, which did not positively conclude him guilty, when that Sestianes
was coming up to them where they were. The King, and Prince Theomedes were
greatly surprised to see him, for they could not doubt but that he had heard of
the last words of Democrates, which were spoke before too great a multitude not
to have been reported to him, and they were persuaded that he would rather have
thought upon flying, then upon coming thither. But this perfidious wretch was
too subtle too have conceived any such design that would have been so
prejudicial to him, and he had not resolved to betray himself. I come, said he
to them with a countenance that seemed not to have the least concern upon it in
the world, and with as great an assurance in his voice; to render my self a
prisoner, to justify me of what Democrates has said of me dying: had I been
criminal, I should not with so much confidence dare now to appear before you, I
should have been by this time far enough off of this place, and have had time
enough to make my escape from the just chastisement that would have been due to
me; but I desire to prove it a mere imposture, and so show my innocence, for it
is only virtue that is the cause of my crime. Yes, my virtue is all that has
rendered me guilty; since that, continued he, addressing himself to Prince
Theomedes, what I lately did for you, in discovering the Letter that Democrates
was sending to his friend, was the occasion of his resolving to do what he
could to make my innocence be suspected, and to be revenged for my making his
to be called in question. It is well known how sweet revenge is, and what it
will prompt a man to do; what effects it produces daily; that there are some
persons who find it impossible to stifle the sentiments it inspires them
withal; that there are some with whom it never dies; and indeed who keep it up
even after death, in leaving it as an Inheritance to their Children or friends,
or elce in saying such words when they are dying, as make 'em persecute, after
their death, those whom they were resolved to be revenged of while they were
alive. This revenge is often times too deeply rooted in the hearts of men, and
which of all the passions dies last with them: which has made Democrates to say
that he had very powerful manifestations of my crime: it is clearly
demonstrable by those last words, that he was cruelly troubled with this
outrageous passion, that it completed his desires, and took up all his
thoughts; since that then when he should have been only thinking on that great
account he was going to make to the Gods of all his actions, it was only the
power of revenge that was able to open his mouth. Yet he had not that
audaciousness positively to affirm that I was a Criminal, for fear least his
Imposture might have been too apparent; but was forced, in-spite of his good
inclination to ruin me to be contented with only making my innocence doubted
of, possibly thinking, that in case his wounds should not be mortal, he might
be obliged to prove what he had said. And thus you see, continued he, both what
is my crime, and wherefore I am criminal, yet notwithstanding my Innocence, if
you suspect me to be guilty, said he, throwing himself upon his knees before
the King, and Prince Theomedes, I have deserved to die, and will seek it with a
passionate earnestness, since I Have merited your anger and whosoever has had the
unhappiness to displease Kings and Princes, and has procured himself their
anger, is unworthy to live, or at least deserves to have but a languishing
life, accompanied with a thousand miseries, and full of melancholy fears, and
torments, and inquietudes.

If the King and Prince Theomedes could not keep their surprise from being
taken notice of, in seeing Sestianes coming up to them, his words made it much
more visible in their looks: they stood a good while silent, not knowing what
they had best to do, nor indeed what they had best to say to him; but at last
being overcome by his artifices, they took the most deceitful and perfidious of
all men breathing for the most generous, and thought it would be an injustice
to question his innocence, and that they ought to send him away with a perfect
absolution; that which persuaded Theomedes to it, was, that if he had conspired
against him, which he could not believe, for the reasons I have acquainted you
with, this civil treatment would oblige him possibly to change his design of
killing him, into that of doing him service.

This crafty perfidious wretch, after he had kissed the Kings hand and the
Princes, withdrew very much satisfied at the favorable success of so uncommon
a temerity, and as before ever he went about this devise, he had acquainted his
assosiates with it, and bid them not to be allarmed at it, nor fear any thing,
he went strait from the presence to give them an account of what had past, and
to let them know the good fortune, that his address and artifices bad met with,
and the esteem that the King and Prince Theomedes had of him. This intelligence
did exceedingly rejoice the confederates; they thought they had no cause of
apprehending any thing, but that they were as safe as could be, and that no
mischief could be fall them, it being out of the power of fortune to betray
them, and ever to make them be discovered, having got a person so witty, so
fortunate, and so courageous as Sestianes, who was able to turn those things to
his advantage, which in all probability, would have wrought his absolute ruin.

When Sestiana was informed with how much honor her Father was come off of the
imputation he lay under, her fear began by degrees to abate, in thinking that
her Father was not looked upon as criminal, and that he was not taken prisoner,
but the more this fear grew off, the greater was her regret for the death of so
faithful a Lover; all her virtue, though it was most severely strict, could
not keep her from bestowing some tears on a person who had like to take away
her Fathers life. I perceive very well, said she to her self, if Democrates
were still living, my virtue would not suffer me, either to see him, or to love
him, or so much as permit him to have any Love for me; but pity obliges me, do
what I can, to bewail the unhappy fate of him to whom I had given my heart;
none ought to wonder at it, nor ought I to wonder at it my self, pity produces
many other effects, and if it force us to bewail our enemies, when they are no
longer in a capacity of doing us any hurt, none need to be amazed, if it makes
us to regret those whom we have loved. I wish, said she to her self,
discoursing still with her thoughts, that Democrates had not spoke against my
Father, but has not my Father spoke against him, and after he had promised he
should marry me, did not he deprive him of all hopes that he would ever give me
his hand? I wish that Democrates had had those sentiments a generous person
ought to have, but he was a Man; that is to say, sensible of injuries, and
besides, an abused Lover, and those two things do often oblige persons to do
both more then they ought, and more then they would. To conclude, I wish that
Democrates had not done what an Heroic, but what a severe and scrupulous
virtue inspires in those who possess it in the supremest degree; but revenge,
that cruel imperious passion, which always governs with an absolute Empire the
hearts of those it has got the power over, and which has as little reason to
qualify it as love, and besides is full as blind; that Tyrant of Souls did
force him, in spite of all his resistance, to prefer its counsels to those of
generosity. These were the sentiments of Sestiana, who imputed to revenge all
that Democrates had spoke against her Father, and who never yet suspected the
truth, and was less disposed to divine it, for it is very rare for a child to
doubt the innocence of those who are the occasion of their coming into the
world.

But although Democrates was almost universally lamented, and his friends took
his death with a great deal of grief, which was likewise bewailed most
passionately by her, who notwithstanding the severity of her virtue, had not
the power to hate him, yet his death was not left to be unpunished, though they
were ignorant of the Authors of it. Not but that Arcas was suspected of it; but
the want of sufficient proof, together with his eminent quality, kept the
relations of Democrates from discovering their resentment and revenge, as much
as they had done, had they known that another had been the Author of so foul
and base an action, or had they had any sufficient proofs against those who had
been so, to which there might have been some credit given.

Sestianes began to hope for a favorable success of his barbarous and cruel
design; he thought he had blown over all the storms that threatened him, that he
was not likely to be exposed to the reverse of fortune, and that the esteem the
Prince Theomedes testified to him, would give him a more convenient opportunity
to execute what he had resov'd upon when the Court received a Letter from
Anaxander, whom fame, and the particular friends of Democrates, had informed of
all that had past. This sad and generous friend of our Hero, who studied to be
revenged of his death, sent word that it was no longer necessary to keep things
in disguise, and that he was Innocent of the crime, of which he had impeached
himself, to save a friend, who was no more a Criminal then he or the clearest
person alive; but that he was very sure that what Democrates had said against
Sestianes after he had received his deaths wound, was most certainly true, that
the love he had for his Daughter, was the occasion that he did not discover it
sooner, and that the Father of that fair One suspecting our Hero knew of his
crime, had accused him purely out of fear, that so if it should happen to him
to be accused again, he might have a very fair plea for himself, and make the
world believe that what he should speak was only out of malice and revenge. He
added also that his friend had given him a full account of all these things a
little before that fatal accident befell him, and in the same letter sent all
the particulars that made Democrates to suspect Sestianes, and what he had said
before he was taken prisoner the first time. Moreover he offered to come, if
they desired it, to render himself a prisoner to maintain what he said, and to
defend the honor of his friend after his death as well as he had done when he
was living, and earnestly petitioned the King to let Sestianes be arrested to
force him to discover all, and showed him that he should not run the hazard of
committing an injustice, in case he did act in that manner; so long as it was
always in his power to restore him his liberty, if he judged him to be
innocent, but that it was necessary to have him arrested for the safety of
Prince Theomedes's life; because he knew of no other Criminals but him, and
that what he had said, after he had excused himself for fa^ing the life and
honor of his friend, was only that the true guilty persons, whom yet he did
not know, might not live in any security, and that the Prince Theomedes might
not remain any longer exposed to their fury.

This Letter was presented to the King with as much faithfullness as secrecy,
and was perused by him and Theomedes without Sestianes's knowing any thing of
it in the world. It gave them a very great confusion, and before they ever went
about making Sestianes to be arrested, they examined into the whole life of
Democrates, to see if he had never been guilty of any action misbecoming a
Gallant man, and which might give them any cause not to believe him. They
likewise upon the same account looked over all the actions of Anaxander, and
whatever they had known of him, during the time he had made his residence in
that Court; but they found nothing in neither of them that did not very highly
commend their virtue, and their generosity, and which did not persuade them to
give an entire belief to all their words. They also reflected upon all they
knew of Sestianes; but they were sensible upon several occasions, that he had
given them some cause of doubting his virtue; and they believed that since
Democrates had never given them any of mistrusting his with justice, and that
he accused him at a time, when persons are wont to speak the truth more then at
any other time; upon the whole, they thought they were obliged to believe
Sestianes guilty: all these things considered with what they began to be
persuaded of that he had possibly blinded them by a false and pretended
semblance of virtue, and that his generosity was only an artifice to dazzle
them, and to divert the blow that threatened him, made them resolve to have him
taken, and be clapped up in the Tower, where none might be admitted to discourse
with him, which they immediately caused to be put in execution.

Though he was not a little surpised to see himself become a prisoner, yet he
had so much wit with him as to conceal his inward disorder, and though fear had
taken full possession of his heart, yet his countenance did show all the
tranquillity imaginable, and as he perceived they had no proofs against him,
and had only put him into prison to see if he would not betray himself, he
defended himself so admirably, that he deceived all those who in the least
thought any thing to his disadvantage. He was demanded why, upon the report
that ran up and down, that Democrates knew all the Conspiracy, he had told him,
that he was unjustly suspected, except he had always apprehended him, or had
heard that he should be accused by him. They added also, that if he was not
guilty, he should not have made such a discourse, and that whether either he
had suspected him, or had really told him that he was a Criminal, or that he
pretended he had heard it, there was still an equal ground to doubt his
Innocence; since if that was true which was told to Democrates, that he was
guilty, of necessity there was a report of it, and likewise some proofs of his
crime, and if it was not, in all probability he only came to sound him, and to
endeavor to know cunningly of him, if it were true or not, that he was
acquainted with all the conspiracy, thereby the better to order his affairs.
Sestianes answered, that nothing of all this was true, and that if he had been
to wait upon Democrates, to hold such a discourse with him, he should not have
dared to act against him, as he had done, for fear he should have recriminated
upon him, and that since he had said nothing of it all the time he lived,
whilst it was supposed that he had said those things to him, which very likely
would have ruined him, and that he had not so much as spoke of them when he was
dying, it was very easy to see that it was a mere falsity that was imputed to
him. He added that it was no wonder if Anaxander did seek to take away his
life, for having put into the hands of the King the letter that Democrates writ
to him, that he had done things much more considerable to secure the reputation
of his friend, and that since he had rendered himself guilty for his sake,
though he was Innocent, he might very easily be induced to tell a lie to be
revenged of a person who had acted against him, who was not able to bear his
crime without horror, and who likewise could not refrain showing the proofs he
had of it.

Never were persons seen in a greater perplexity and confusion then were the
King and Prince Theomedes, after they had heard the answer that Sestianes made,
they were clearly of opinion that he might justly be suspected, but they did
not see which way he could be convicted, and as all probabilities signify
nothing without positive proofs, and that it is a most unjust thing to condemn
a person upon a bare suspicion, they could not tell how in the world to get out
of this trouble that Sestianes put them into by his confidence, and undaunted
resolution. What, said Prince Theomedes, must I confound the Innocent with the
guilty, believe the most generous of all men are the most base, and the most
perfidious and that the most perfidious and base are the most generous? must I
think Anaxander to be an Imposter? and must I think Sestianes a wicked and
perfidious wretch that has determined my death? he, who, to serve me, declared
against his designed Son in Law? and must I, in a word, by a cruel necessity do
an injury to the memory of Democrates, and doubt his Innocence, who all his
life was never known to be guilty of an action unworthy an honorable person?
But what, said he again presently, must I be always in fear? daily exposed to
danger, and wait till he, whose life I dare not yet take away, come and run me
through? Yes, I ought always to be exposed to danger and not fear the fury of
those who aim at my life; fear is unworthy of a Prince, and much more of a
generous man: Princes ought not to be too careful to secure themselves from the
danger that threatens them, their courage and their virtue ought to be their
guard, and to answer for what befalls them, and that which is looked upon as
foresight in others, will in them be counted baseness and Cowardice.

Prince Theomedes, after he had a pretty while abandoned himself to his
inquietude, began to hearken to those sentiments which generosity usually
inspires into persons of his Rank and Quallity, and went to demand of the King,
that the most Criminal of all men might be set at liberty, when word was
brought that one of the five hundred prisoners, who had been taken in the late
conspiracy, where there were ten thousand that rose up against all the Royal
house, accused Sestianes of the Crime, which Democrates had charged him with as
he was dying. This undaunted Criminal, who was ignorant who he should be, said
as soon as ever he heard of it, that this fellow was some cheat and impostor,
that he did unjustly accuse him, and that he would make him to confess the
contrary, and deny all he had said. Whereupon Cleobis (for so was that prisoner
called) was brought before him; but he was greatly surprised when he saw that
it was one of those who had been of the conspiracy with him, and that it was
the same person, who we were mentioning before, was missing, and for whom he
was so much concerned since, that he knew not what was become of him, and also
that it was him of all the Number whom he most suspected. The sight of him had
even almost made him change his countenance, and his emotion went very near to
discover what he had always concealed with so favorable a success. Yet
notwithstanding, his confidence having immediately banished the fear that had
begun to seize upon his heart, he looked upon Cleobis with an air full of
fierceness and a contemning scorn mixed together, and said with a disdainful
smile; though in the condition I am in at present, I might fear all things from
my Enemies, and that the imposture, which may justly be termed, the innocents
executioner, makes use of all the most cruel and artificious ways of malice to
take away my life, yet it is sufficient to scarter my fear, that it is only
Cleobis who presents himself, and is the man that accuses me. I do not believe
the King nor the Prince Theomedes will easily give any credit to him: for any
one may very well think, that if I had conspired, I should not have discovered
the secret to a man so much to be mistrusted, and it is very apparent that he
does not now accuse me, but only to prolong his life, and by this artifice to
hope, that Prince Theomedes, thinking himself greatly obliged to him, will
demand his pardon of the King: I have been assured by some persons of my
acquaintance, that my Enemies, and the Relations of Domocrates, has promised to
get his crime pardoned, provided he would say that which he had been so hardy
to utter against me, and which he still neither durst, nor can maintain. But
though all this should not be true, pursued he, it is very well known that he
has formerly been my greatest Enemy, and that he was forced to seek my
friendship. All these circumstances do discover, that his former hatred had not
now been awakened, but that he saw he had a most convenient opportunity for it;
nor that he had accused me, but either from the prospect he had thereby to
obtain his pardon, or from the satisfaction he should have to see me perish
with him; and that there ought not to be any credit given to such a person,
whom so many several reasons do induce to accuse an innocent.

If before that Cleobis had accused Sestianes, the King and Prince Theomedes's
perplexity was great, this discourse of that subtle and ingenious Politician
gave a greater accession to it, and he had still so much good fortune, that he
made use of those things which were most likely to ruin him, to confound
others, and cast them into a far greater trouble then that with which his
breast was agitated; but at last that good fortune grew weary, of accompanying
so perfidious a wretch; and Heaven, which was resolved to leave him no longer
unpunished, now made a truth to be known which had so long been kept secret,
which had given confusion to so many persons, and which until then, could
never be discovered, what ever ways they had made use of, and notwithstanding
all they had done to find it out. But yet this wicked man had the happiness
not to betray himself, and still stood it out with a great deal of wit and
bravery, as long as it was possible for him. He did not put fortune to the
blush for the good services she had done him, but he showed that his boldness,
his constancy, and his wit did equal his crimes, and possibly he might yet have
defended himself longer, if that some of the conspirators, whom Cleobis named,
had not fled for it, and if the others had not been taken prisoners, discovered
all the particularities, maintained to Sestianes's face that he was guilty, and
had not by convincing proofs, and such as were impossible to be doubted of,
deprived him of all the means of defending himself any longer.

They asked Cleobis, to be more clearly satisfied in all things, why he, (who
had told Poligesnes, that he would discover all things to him, and who was dead
before he saw him,) had said, that he believed Demotrates was of the
conspiracy. Cleobis answered, that they had all thought so, for he being so
near marrying the daughter of Sestianes, they were fully persuaded that he had
communicated his design to him, but it seems that time had discovered to them
the contrary.

The perfidious Sestianes, seeing himself convicted, yet was not at all the
more allarmed at it, nor did he show any actions that betrayed the constancy he
had always testified, he confessed all without changing his countenance, and
spoke with as much assurance, as if his judges had been the Criminals, and he
their Judge. Yes, said he to them, since I cannot tell how any longer to defend
my self, I acknowledge I did conspire against Prince Theomedes, and the ill
Offices he did me at Court, together with the displeasure I received in that he
had given to one of his creatures a place which the King intended to bestow on
me, and which he had even promised me, did make me hatch the design of taking
away his life, and for that purpose I elected such persons as had as
indifferent a kindness for him as my self, and who had as great reason to
complain of him; and if you examine well all those of the confederacy, added
he, you will find that the greatest number of them are those that live near
his lands and dominions, and whom he has by his unjust tyranny, obliged to have
an invincible hatred for him, and to study all ways imaginable how to compass
his death. After this confession you may imagine that Democrates was innocent,
and that I would not have destroyed him but for fear lest he should accuse me
in the thoughts I had, that one of the Conspirators had discovered all to him,
and that it was only for that he had been suspected of the crime that I was the
Author of. If Democrates, said I to my self, knows all, nothing but the love
he bears my daughter, will keep him from speaking and revealing my crime; but
as there are several things that may stifle this love, that may make him repent
of his silence, and at last hearken to his duty, when it shall counsel him to
discover and betray me, it is my best way to make him undergo the same fate, as
I have designed for the Prince Theomedes, and to be only thinking now how I
should effect it with the greatest safety. I was in this resolution, when a
mere chance presented me with the means to bring it about, more secret, and
less perilous, then those were I had proposed to my self, and gave me an
opportunity to execute part of what I had projected, and without any blood
shed, to divert the blow that teemed to threaten me. The letter that Democrates
writ to Anaxander fell into my hands, and I thought it my prudentest course to
put it into those of the Kings, and that this ill office I should do to the
unfortunate Innocent person would prevent all manner of belief of whatsoever he
should say against me. You have known the success of it, but you are ignorant
yet that the fear of being discovered having taken a new possession of my
heart, and that the desire which Ambition had kindled in me, to see my Daughter
married to Arcas, who is, as you know, both by his Estate, and birth, much more
considerable then Democrates, obliged me to seek out fresh occasions of
destroying this latter. Fortune, which continued still favorable to me,
presented me with one less hazardous then the former: I knew that Arcas was
cruelly persecuted by his jealousy, and that he could not endure my Daughter
should conserve any tenderness for Democrates, I made use of this occasion to
bring my design about, and told him, that he ought not to suffer a Rival to
have half shares of a heart which ought to belong wholly to him. As there is
need of but a little thing to stir up a jealous man, who does not doubt but
that his Rival has too great an Interest in the favors of his Mistress, and
whom Arcas his jealousy had counseled before to call him to an account for
it, he strait fought with Democrates, and in that duel met with the shameful
success you have heard of; which being so fatal to his honor, he came to give
me a relation of his unhappiness, and of the sensible disgrace that Fortune had
made him receive. I knowing him then to be in a humor fit to undertake any
thing, I told him it was such a shame to suffer his Rival to live any longer,
and to have an object that should daily represent to him the affront his honor
had received, that without any more a do he was resolved to put a period to
his days. A short time after he caused Democrates to be assassinated by three
persons whom he had hired for that purpose, or rather by three of those
mercenary Assassines, who are daily employed in such murders. Now, continued
he, after this particular information, you ought not to ask any thing further
of me, and I have told you more then you would have known had you only learnt
that I was the Author of Democrates his death; since that without my Conncel,
Arcas possibly would never have assassinated him. This is, pursued he, a
faithful account of all my crimes, and all the favor I demand of you, if you
can grant any to so great a Criminal as I am, is to hasten the day of my death,
lost I should repent that I had committed them, and that the tormenting rigor
of a long and cruel imprisonment should abate my constancy, so as it would do
my countenance, and make those who should be spectatours at my Death, to think,
that I was afraid of punishments, and that Death was terrible to me. I know
very well, continued he, that I cannot hope for pardon, and as I would not
desire to live after I had acknowledged my self a Criminal, I confess all my
crimes, and even those whereof I was not accused, that so the horror you ought
to have to suffer so great a Criminal to live, should oblige you to give a
sudden determination of my death, and as short a day for it.

Though Sestianes was long before suspected, and even before his confession
they ceased any longer to doubt of his crime, yet his discourse was very
surprising to those Judges, as well as it acquainted them with the Author of
our Hero's Death. They caused him to be locked up again, and went to inform the
King and Prince Theomedes of all had passed, and what Sestianes had told them.
Their astonishment could not keep them from bestowing some sighs upon the Death
of Democrates, whose innocence thereby was fully known to them, and reflecting
upon the generosity of Anaxander, whom the trouble and confusion in which they
were, had till then kept them from esteeming as they ought to have done; Prince
Theomedes cried out, that he had never seen a person so generous, nor so
faithful a friend, and that he had reason to boast of his crime in the first
Letter he had sent them, the misterious fence of which he so perfectly knew,
and which he had reason to say, that as bad a Criminal as he declared himself
to be, he hoped that posterity should not be able to reproach his honor; since
that his crime was so glorious, and generous, that posterity ought to conserve
the remembrance of it, to cause it to be admired by all those that should hear
it.

The King having understood, by the relation that was given him, what Sestianes
had said, and heard of all the crimes he had charged himself with, and that
Arcas had caused Democrates to be murdered, immediately ordered him to be
arrested; but as he was of too illustrious a birth, and likewise had several
Relations and Friends that held a very considerable rank at Court, he presently
learnt all that had past there, and by a hasty flight had escaped the prison
they had prepared for him, and some time after they heard that he was got into
France. As for Sestianes he had what he desired, and was a little while after
condemned to lose his head. Prince Theomedes would nevertheless have used his
utmost interest to prevent that sentence against his life, if he had been only
guilty against him; but there was so much perfidiousness in his crime, which
came from a breast so black and wicked, that he was judged utterly unworthy to
obtain any favor, and that such a perfidious and dangerous man ought not to be
permitted to live, who knew how to dissemble with so much art, and who was
capable of accomplishing whatsoever he undertook, which could be no other then
such things as must needs have most cruel and pernicious consequences.

This crafty and undaunted Criminal satisfied at the expense of his life the
sentence that had been given against him, and died as almost all of that
Country are wont to do, that is to say, with a constancy worthy to be admired,
and so it was by a great number of people, who spoke very advantagiously of his
Criminal and ingenious carriage, and said, that he had a wit capable of the
most difficult and hazardous enterprises.

That which was the more remarkable in this History, was, that Democrates,
without thinking in the least of it, had himself labored to revenge his death,
before he died, and that Heaven had suffered Cleobis to be among the five
hundred prisoners, whom that generous Hero had helped to take, in the service
of his King, without knowing that among them there was a person, who could
remove the doubt they had of his Innocence, and discover the real guilty
person, and who, in re-establishing his glory, could hinder posterity from
making his memory odious, and in a word, who could revenge his death, by the
blood of the most perfidious man in the world.

I think it is not necessary to relate what Sestiana said, and did, between the
condemnation of her Father, and his death, nor at that time that she heard of
his death; for it is very well known than the power of grief makes one at first
not to resent it, that the surprise it causes keeps one silent, and that the
extreme weakness it easts one into, takes away the sense. The violence of
Sestiana's grief produced all these effects, and she could not resent, and know
all the calamities that were befallen her altogether, until the trouble and
seizure were a little over, which gave her such fatal and sensible
intelligences. But when she was a little come to her self, and in a condition
of resenting the cruel assaults of her grief. O heavens! said she to her self,
is it possible you should have resolved that I should endure so many miseries?
is it possible that you should permit it, and can it be believed that a poor
harmless maid should be destined to bear all the rage of the most barbarous and
pittiless fate? Ah! how did Democrates say to me, when I spoke to him of the
crime which he was unjustly accused of, that the guilty person would cost me
many tears. Both the guilty and the innocent do cost me so at once; I knew not
the crime of one, until it was impossible for me to prevent his destruction,
and I did not learn the innocence of the other until after his Death. I did
not demand so much, nor would I have known of my Fathers crime, only have heard
of the innocence of Democrates, but I would have known it, that so I might have
recompensed it, and not have been obliged only to pour out tears. Ah! too
sensible loss of a dear and faithful Lover, into what a sad condition do you
reduce me? Ah! Democrates, how will thy Death cost me tears? ah! too blind
Father, what have you done? ah! but what, pursued she, am I sensible of what I
do? I more bewail a Lover then a Father; yes, it is true, I do bewail him, and
that without shocking either reason, or duty, or virtue; and though I ought to
bewail them both, yet fate will have it, that he who should be the dearest to
me, should be the least bewailed. Ah! wherefore too scrupulous Lover, did you
not discover your secret to me, I should have known your innocence, and would
have married you before my Father had forbid it; but you imagined, that I would
not have believed your discourses, and you would not put any thing to the
hazard. You resolved to be prudent, but your prudence, which was almost fatal
to you, has not in this occasion been more favorable then formerly. It is true
it has spared me many displeasures which possibly would not have been so cruel
to me, and which perhaps I might have now forgot, and I acknowledge this
service after thy death. But replied she immediately, ought I to count that a
Service, which makes me now to weep, and which has caused thy death, and
likewise that of my Fathers? yes, continued she, it was one, but time has made
it fatal, our common unhappiness has poisoned it; and prudence, which promises,
and which affords others so much good fortune, will give us only causes of
afflicting our selves, and after it did make thee lose the favor of thy
Prince, kept thee from making any further declaration of thy flame to me, when
thou might have married me, to have made me doubt your Innocence, to have
betrayed you in all things, and to have rendered all your actions fatal to you,
and at last to have cost you your life, that if it had not hindered you from
being the death of Arcas, that inhuman Rival had not made you be assassinated.
It is impossible for life to be any longer pleasing to me, after the loss of so
faithful a Lover, and it cannot but be hateful to me after the death of a
Father who has lost his head upon a Scaffold; wherefore in honor and Love I
ought to be so much the more desirous to die, since it is only that which can
put an end to all my cruel torments, with which my Soul will be overwhelmed as
long as I have a day to live.

The sorrow of this fair and generous afflicted Lady could not possibly meet
with any diminution, time which for the most part wears out other griefs, how
cruel so ever, could do nothing upon hers, till at last she met with what she
so much desired, which was so violent a Feavour, that in a few days it put an
end to all her troubles, as it did to her life.

Five or six months after all these bloody and Tragical adventures, they were
informed that Anaxander had revenged the death of his friend, for having met
Arcas in France, he obliged him to draw, in which duel he only received a
slight wound from him, but came off a conqueror, by laying his Enemy dead at
his feet,

FINIS.
Novels Printed for R. Bentley and M. Magaes.
Zelinda, a Romance. 12d. Happy Slave in 3. parts complete, 2s. 6d. Heroine
Musquiteer, in 4. parts complete, 3s. Cheating Gallant, 12d. Disorders of Love,
12d. Triumphs of Love over fortune, 12d. Almanzor and Almanzaid, 12d. Double
Cuckold, 12d. Obliging Mistress, 12d. Colona's Memoirs, 1s 6d. Fatal Prudence,
1s 6d.
In the Press.

The Princess of Cleves. The Theater of the World.
Some French Books.


