Fear God, Honor the King: OR, Great Britains Allegiance to their Royal
Sovereign: In a Loyal Remonstrance to CHARLES the II. for the Establishing of
Him ^n His Royal Throne, and the restoring of Him to Crown and Scepter.

Prove. 24.21. Fear thou the Lord, and the King, and med^^^ not with them that
are given to change.

Eccles. 8.2. I counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandments.

Eccles. 10.20. Curse not the King, no, not in thy thoughts.

Prove. 8.15. By me Kings (...)

C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown
and flanked by the English lion and Tudor rose on one side and the Scottish
unicorn and thistle on the other

London, Printed for Obediah Brook, and are to be sold near the Castle in
Cornhil. 1660.

FEAR GOD, Honor the KING.
AS Magistrates are Rulers over the persons of the People, so are they but
servants to the good of the People; As it is the duty of all to serve them, so
it is their Office to serve all. It Is no Paradox to affirm, That Rulers are the
greatest Servants. The Ancients were wont to place their statues of their
Princes by their Fountains, intimating that they were, or at least should be,
Fountains of the public good: The Counselor says, That a man in public
place should give his will to God, his love to his Master, his heart to his
Country, his secrets to his Friends, and his time to business. It is a base
and unworthy spirit for a man to make himself the Center of all his actions.
The very Heathen-man could say, A man's Country, and his friends and others,
challenge a great part of him. The Sun that is the Prince of Lights, does
impartially serve all the Peasants as well as the Prince, the poor as well as
the rich, the weak as well as the strong. Does not the Sea feed and refresh the
smallest Fish, as well as the greatest Leviathan? Does not the Trees shade and
shelter from heat the least Bird, as well as the greatest Beast? Let all Loyal
Subjects then endeavor to be like the Sun: For behold, The Son of
righteousness was of a brave public spirit; He healed others, but was hurt
himself; he laid out himself, and he laid down himself for a public good. And
shall not Christians; any Englishmen, return to their due and lawful
obedience, and merit the praise and fame which of late years they have lost,
and all to save the Ship of poor England from sinking; whose Pilot the raging
violence of a tempestuous storm has cast down headlong from the Stern, and
caused her to stagger To and Fro amongst the unquiet Waves of the rough Ocean,
sometimes clashing against the proud surley Rocks, and at other times reeling
up and down the smoother Waters; now threatening present shipwreck and
destruction, by and by promising a seeming safety and secure arrival, yet never
settled fast, nor absolutely tending to the quiet and desired Haven: So the
vexed and various Government of bleeding and frantic England, ever since the
furious madness of certain turbulent spirits, (divided her Head from the Body
politic, and stern of Government, and took it into their Unlawful and
Usurping Hands) it has been tossed up and down through several Devouring
Interests, as a Lamb amongst Wolves; yet in all our Revolutions, although many
Gaps have been laid open, the Government has not steered its Course directly
to Charles the second, its only right and quiet Haven, till now; blessed be the
instruments thereof.

And as for this Rising Sun, though hitherto obscured by the foggy mists of
disobedient Subjects; yet do the rays of His Sacred Majesty shine throughout
all Europe, and His Renown ecchoeth in every part of the World, to the
admiration of foreign Kingdoms, and the envy and hatred of all Disloyal
Subjects: yet cannot their malice but marvel at the virtues and patience of
their too long exiled KING, whom they so much wrong; and it grieves them to see
that royal Progeny (whose ruin they have so greedily hunted after) flourish
with such glorious splendour amongst the Kings and Princes of the earth, growing
in favor with God and Man, whilst they (odious to all but themselves) by
their Tyranny and Disobedience, incur the displeasure both of Heaven and Earth.
And certainly, had they not been infatuated with strange delusions to deny what
their own Consciences tells them tobe true, they wou d presently declare,
that the only way to settle our Distractions, and restore our Nation to its
Pristine happiness and glory, were to call in the King, re-establish Him in His
Own, and set Him upon His Fathers Throne and with the best of men cry out, and
say, Fear God, Honor the King. Which that we may all do, the Lord grant, that
the cries of the People may ascend up unto the King of Glory, for the restoring
Our Gracious King Charles the second to His Hereditary Crown, whose Youth His
Divine Majesty has been pleased to season with the Afflictions of King David,
and Clouded the morning of His and Our happiness with the various changes of
some men's wicked Lusts and Passions; who as that holy Prophet and King says;
They rejoice when they have ruined others; they laugh to see them lament.
Belshazzers sumptuous feast was heightened by the Hogs of his delicious meats
and drinks, as they were served in the Vessels of the Sanctuary: No Bowls, to
such Atheists, like a consecrated Challice to carouse in; and no Flesh so
sweet, as that which the Eagle robbed the Altar of: Money gotten by stinking
means (as the Roman Emperer told his Son) smells as sweet as honest gain. What
care such fools though they rend and tear the Churches Garments, so theirs may
be whole? Or to build up their Babels with the ruins of Sion; so that we may
justly cry out with a learned Father; And when they have robbed the King and
the Church of their Patrimony, and the whole King^^^ (...) her ancient plenty,
then a self-denying Ordina^^^ (...) there is no more left to be taken away) not
on^^y makes satisfaction for the Sacrilege, but justifi^s it to be no sin. So
that it is evident, that our late changes have introduced into this Nation many
woes and miseries; and they that took most delight in urging of these changes
cannot yet give any satisfaction to themselves for the present, and much less
can they assure themselves of any sound Government for the future in the way
they took; For, as it is truly observed, all changes in Government, commonly do
cheat them most at last, who at first did most desire them. Indeed, it is hard
for a good Historian to say on the sudden, how many several kinds of Government
were introduced among the Romans, by this insatiable desire of change: It is
notorious, that they had Kings, Senators, Dictators, Tribunes, Consuls, etc. of
some of which that jeer was started, vigilantissimum habuimus procansulem etc.
We have now had a mest vigilant Pro-Consul, for during the whole time of his
Consulship, ^e never slept, meaning, that he was elected at Noon and discarded
before Night. And by name, Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, three of their no^ed
Emperors, enjoyed their Dignity so shor^ a space, that Apollonius wittily
termed them Lords of Greece but a short time, so these three continued but
Emperors of Rome for a few months: so in-constant was the Humor of the
Giddy-headed Romans in those days, that whom they had but newly set up,
without any other reason then a mere affection of novelty, and desire of
Change; they soon after pulled down. And no marvel, though the Luxurant Romans,
that then knew little of God, were so desirous of Change, when as we find Gods
own People, the Jews, (...) troubled with a spice, but desperately sick of
(...) Disease; for they had their Dukes, or Leaders, their Judges, their
Prophets, their Highpriests, their Kings; and for a time they had an
Inter-regnum, and no King in Israel, besides diverse other horrid Jaw-falls in
Government. And if we draw near home, we cannot but take notice how
praedominant, in all Ages, this desire of Change has been in all parts of
Christendom. What chopping and changing in several parts, especially in the
Kingdom of Naples, where they so often changed their Governors, that at last
their estate was represented in an Ass, that having cast his Rider, turned
back, to see who would be so mad as to bestride him any more. And may it not be
said of such who fight against God and his Anointed, instead of disingaging do
the more entangle themselves; And like so many unruly Colts, get nothing by
their disorderly desire of Change, but only to have the Brand of Gods
indignation fastened so much the deeper in their flesh.

Thus they that willingly and wilfuly resist Gods Ordinances (as the Fanatics
of these Times do) turn that which they relied upon as their likeliest Remedy,
to the worst of mischiefs that could have befallen them. So it is pregnant in
History, that very few Nations (out of the mere desire of Change) will long
endure any Government, no, nor scarce any Governor; how then shall it satissie
the too Arch-Enemies of Rule and Government, the Fanatics and non-sensicall
Quakers, who would (if they had power to their will) soon lay the Axe to the
root of all Magistracy and Ministry whatsoever. Intolerable mischiefs are
ingendered by confusion, and the inordinate desire of Change amongst those
Phanatques, who are so greedy of Parity, and so fond of Anarchy, may be termed
to be like the fruit we call Medlers, which are never good till they be rotten.
Men that are fancifully and fanatic, we need them not to make us happy: I am
sure they made a shift to make Us miserable. And if God had not in mercy set
bounds to the rage of that Sea, and the madness of that People they would have
endangered to have made the City an heap of Ashes, and our Country a field of
blood: It will be the wisdom therefore of our Rulers and their posterities
Honor and Hapiness, to keep in the bounds of just, moderate, religious and
sober Counsels, to aim at ^egal, honest, and tried ways of settlement, that by
their endeavors the People may flourish, and Salvation break forth throughout
the three Nations.

FINIS.

