AN ANSWER Returned to the Letter from Legorn, BY A MERCHANT concerned in the
SHIP.
Honest Ralph,
I Received yours, and having so considerable a Cargo a-board the endangered
Vessel, communicated the sad news to most of the Part-owners, who are all not a
little surprised, and it is believed most of the Christian World must be amazed
to hear of such a desperate Conspiracy, which bids defiance to all the ancient
maxims of policy; for a Plot once discovered, was ever heretofore looked upon
as prevented and defeated: But This it seems bears up and increases, like some
very foul-stomack, that converts weak and languid Medicines into nourishment
for the Disease. For besides the account given by you, we since understand from
other hands, That this Hellish Contrivance has a-long time been fomented by
the Mahumetan Faction; That the Algerines under-pretence of Traffic and Amity
have maintained several Spies a-board amongst you, and afforded large Pensions
to some eminent Officers to debauch them from their duty; particularly the
Purser, who from a private Tarpaulin, in few months raised himself to
incredible favor with the Captain, and a prodigious estate, has been a most
treacherous Villain, and by ill management much wasted the Provisions and
Stores of the Ship; and though he be at present confined to the Gun-room, yet
pretends an Acquittance of all miscarriages under the Captains hand, and it is
feared has left too great an influence behind him: Besides, we hear that there
are two pernicious Passengers a-board that lie in the great Cabin, the one, an
Algerine Woman, that sometimes pretends her self a kind of Sultaness, but is in
truth the spurious issue of a base Musleman, and imagined to be an Enchantress,
for that the spir^t of infatuation is her constant familiar. This Hag, it is
said, devours more Provisions in a day than would serve the whole Ships Crew a
month; the other a Renegado, formerly Steersman of a Pinnace, in which it is
said, the Lieutenant sails at present; these are supposed to be great Remora's
to the Assembling of the general Council of Officers, being assisted with a
Chians of Algiers, who seconds their destructive counsels.

But notwithstanding all this, and the apprehensions you justly are in of
danger, yet we hope the worst is past; for we have stated the whole Case to our
Judg-Advocate, and consulted several Learned Civilians, well skilled in the
Laws of Oleroon, and usages of the Seas, entreating their Best advice in this
important Affair; from whom we have received the following Instructions, which
I think fit to acquaint you with, that they may be communicated to the honest
Sailors.

Before all things, it is advised, That notwithstanding all discouragements and
jealousies, you continue steadfast in your obedience to the Captain, and by no
means suffer your selves by indiscreet zeal, or frightful amusements, to be
hurried into any undutiful behavior or mutiny; hearken not to any malicious
whispers, either of the Mahumetans, Algerines, or Mungril-Christians, whose
only design is to raise disturbances, and make you accessory (if they could) to
the Captains just severities. It Is well known, that when formerly he traveled
the Mahumetan Regions, he bravely maintained the Christian Faith, and would not
suffer himself to be seduced by any temptations of the Infidels; his Father
likewise dyed a Martyr for the true Religion, and nothing but the most
mischievous malice, can imagine that he can be prevailed with now to connive at
their impious Idolatries: you know how great an Interest he has in the Ship
more than any, and that those that endeavor to betray you, aim likewise at his
life. Let this consideration secure your fears, and persuade you to wait with
patience; though to some overheated spirits he seem not so violent in
prosecuting the Conspirators, yet the necessary care and zeal he has already
shown, demonstrates the sincerity of his intentions. Remember, when our great
Masters followers were so rash as to call for fire from heaven, he told them
they knew not what spirit they were of. Your Captain's great Command furnishes
him with better means from the fore-castle (...) foresee impendent dangers; and
no doubt when he finds ^ffairs brought to a crisis, will strike home, and
redeem the delay by the severity of the Blow.

2. It will yet not be inconvenient, That by all due and lawful means all the
faithful Sailors should in an humble manner address and make application to the
Captain; To remonstrate their dangers, and possess him with a right
apprehension of things; it being part of their duty by their solemn vow when
first they entered into the service, to discover to him all private Conspiracies
that shall fall within the verge of their knowledge. For it is not impossible
that some of the grand Conspirators or their Confederates may so besiege his
ears; and misrepresent the state of affairs, and the true end of the Loyal
Seamens applications, that without such repeated Instances and Importunities,
he may mistake his Friends for his Enemies, which is the greatest misfortune
that can befall any Commander.

3. As for the Algerines you mention, they are known to be the general pest of
Christendom, the common Enemies of mankind, neither good Christians nor yet
true Mahometans; a sort of Fantastic Mungrils, who within these few years
under a most Christian name have spilt more Christian Blood than was shed in
the Ten primitive Persecutions. And though it is true they pretend to embrace
and advance the Alchoran, yet indeed they value it no further than it is
subservient to their Secular Interest; so that the Mufti himself is afraid of
them, and all his petty Hodgsa's (or inferior Priests) are forced to truckle
(as much as their own wooden-shoo'd Peasants, the most sneaking slaves in
Europe) to their absolute Tyranny. Nor is there any regard to be made of their
most solemn Vows or Alliances. Some years since they entered into a confederacy
offensive and defensive, first with the Republic of Boggland, against the
mighty Monarch of Oteana. After that, shifting sides with the Oteanian Monarch,
against the Bogglandea's; but truly served neither, only bubbled both, advanced
their own Grandeur, increased the number of their Galleys, and learnt their
slaves more de^trously to handle their Oars, and manage Navigation as well in
the Mediterranean as the Narrow Seas. How many Christian Temples have they
since demolisht! How many Pyracies have they committed! How m^^y Leagues have
they violated! How many affronts have they offered! Yet still ^se mischievous
Apes in some Countries pass for Birds of ^^^^ice: It Is these Villains that
understand occasion the disturbances in your Ship, and abet the Conspirators;
but had our Captain briskly fallen upon them three or four years ago in their
harbors, he might most probably have fired these Nests of Hornets, and
prevented the general mischief that now threatens the Christians from their
overgrown Grandeur. We therefore advise you most seriously, That you entertain
no Treaty or Correspondence with these perfidious Ragamuffins. The time was
when half your number would not only have baffled them at Sea, but routed them
at Land, and planted St. George's Ensigns on the tops of the highest Towers in
Algiers. Courage I know is not yet wanting; nor shall, I hope, Conduct be
lacking. We have a brave able Commander, though now under a cloud (the Sun you
know may be eclipsed, but emerges, as to more admiring eyes, so with greater
luster) that has given signal proofs of his Abilities, and made the Rascallions
at once admire (though they durst not imitate) his Valor for them, and dread
if ever it should be employed against them. Be it He, or be it who else that
the Captain shall please (according to his Commission) to order to manage
Affairs, and carry on the War against these pestilent Encroachers, we do not
question but in short time to have a good account of that Expedition. I shall
not enlarge at present, intending to give you a fuller Account of my thoughts
by the next. I remain,

Yours, L. F.


