A further and full Account of the Great and Entire Victory obtained by their
Majesty's Forces in Ireland, under the Command of Lieutenant General Ginckle,
on Sunday July 12. 1691.
Published by Authority.



THE great Convoy of Provisions being arrived in the Camp from Dublin, under
the Guard of the Earl of Portland's Regiment of Horse, the whole Army passed
the Shannon on the 12th of July, about 11 in the Morning, the Horse by two
Fords, and the Foot and Artillery over the Bridge of Athlone; some of the
Enemies Squadrons showed themselves on the Hills, but we quickly drove them
from thence, with two Squadrons of Horse; and two of Dragoons: And having
afterward viewed the Enemies Camp, and the Ground which we might possess our
selves of between two Bogs, we found that half our Army could not Encamp there,
which obliged us to begin our Camp on the Right, in order to extend it as far
as we were able on the Left. But the Enemy having possessed themselves of a
Pass on the Left, in the middle of a Bog, it was thought necessary to force
them from thence; The Regiment of Blue Dragoons, a Squadron of the Dragoons of
Cunninghame, and the Regiment of my Lord Portland was Detached for this Service.

The Enemy seeing them advance, and that but a small part of our Army was yet
come up, sent some Foot and Horse through the Bog; upon which the blew Dragoons
dismounted, and repulsed them. The Enemy detached diverse Battalions and
Squadrons to support their Men; and the Prince of Wirtemberg with two of his
Battalions came very opportunely to the Assistance of ours, and gave time to
the rest of the Troops of his Wings to come up. This obliged the Enemy to
retire to their main Body, who were posted on a great Hill, surrounded almost
on all sides with Bogs, and having a Castle on their left, it was resolved to
attack them there; in order whereunto our Foot passed through a Bog, many of
them up to the middle, receiving the sire from 3 of the Enemies Retrenchments;
and our Horse, notwithstanding of their continual Fire, having passed the
Defile, the two Armies about six in the evening were entirely engaged at a
place called Aghram near Bellinasloe; The Fight was very sharp, and lasted
about three hours; our Men being obliged to Attack them from Trench to Trench,
which they had thrown up for their greater security. The Irish were never known
to Fight with more Resolution, especially their Foot, Their Army was Superior
to ours in number, consisting of 20000 Foot, and 8000 Horse and Dragoons, and
had all the advantage imaginable by the situation of the Ground; but it pleased
God to bless their Majesty's Forces with an entire Victory, their whole Body
being broke and dispersed: Of the Enemy there are above 5000 killed upon the
place, of which number are the Lord Galmoy, Colonel Moor, with many others; and
as some Deserters report, their French General St. Ruth. Major General
Hamilton, Colonel Dorington, Lord Slane, Lord Bedlow, Colonel Butler, Colonel
Bourke, Colonel Gordon, Colonel O-Neile, and diverse other persons of Note are
Prisoners; and had it not been for the coming on of the Night, all their Foot
would have been cut off.

We took all the Enemies Baggage, Tents, Provision and Cannon, which latter
consisted only of nine Pieces: On our side we lost about 500 Men; Major General
Holestaple and Colonel Herbert are killed; the Prince of Hesse and the Lord
Cuts, wounded. The Bravery and Courage of our Men in this Occasion, exceeded
all the Account that can be given of them; and the Vigor and Conduct of the
General Officers, contributed extremely to this great and glorious Victory. The
General has sent a Detachment to Attack Portumny, where the Enemy have a great
Magazine of Provisions.

Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, Anno DOM. 1691.


