THE QUAKERS PLEA WITH THE BISHOPS AT THEIR Ecclesiastical Courts. OR, An
Answer of the People of God, reproachfully called Quakers, to the Bill of
Presentment put against them into the Bishops Courts, for not coming to the
Church as is pretended. Whereby it may appear, that the Quakers, so called, do
come to the Church, both according to the Scriptures, and Common Prayer books
account, and ought not in equity and reason to be presented, or punished for
that, etc.

By Richard Farnsworth.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1663.

The Quakers Plea with the Bishops at their Ecclesiastical Courts, etc.
Whereas the People of God (reproachfully called Quakers) are presented to the
Bishops as Offenders, for not coming to the Church, as is pretended. Now if we
can make it appear (as we hope we can) according to truth, the Scripture, and
Common Prayer account, that we are the only people (or of them) that do come
to the Church and Service of God, then we ought in equity and reason to be
cleared, and clearly acquitted from those pretended offenses, and from all
punishments due thereunto; and the case in controversy ought to be terminated,
and we to be acquitted, and clearly discharged therefrom, and our Accusers to
be sharply reproved, to the end and intent that they do so no more.

One main question, or thing enquirable by the Bishops, or their Officers, of
us, at their Ecclesiastical Courts now in this age and time, is, Whether we
come to the Church and Service of God, or no?

In order to a full and satisfactory answer to the things in that case charged
against us, we ask, What is it that you do really own to be, or call, and
account the Church? Whether the Church according to your own account, be the
Cathedrals and Parish Meeting-places, because many in ignorance call them the
Church? And whether does the Scriptures or Common Prayer book account, or
declare Cathedrals, or Parish Meeting-places to be the only true Churches,
which we and all the people of God are enjoined to come unto, in point of
Religion and worship of God, according to Gospel Order, and practice of the
people of God under that dispensation, as left upon record in the holy
Scriptures? If in answer thereunto you say no; then we further enquire, Whether
you would have us to own that to be the only true Church of Christ, which is
neither really owned, or declared so to be, either by the Scriptures, or
Common Prayer Book? And would you make us offenders, when neither Scripture nor
Common Prayer Book makes us so? or would you punish us as offenders for not
coming to that which in reallity is neither owned by the Scripture, or
Common Prayer Book? Is there any equity or reason for that? Consider well of
it, and if upon serious consideration, the witness of God in you answer the
equitableness and justness of our innocent cause, and tell you by testifying to
your consciences, that there is neither equity nor reason to punish us as
offenders, for that which is neither owned by the Scripture, or
Common Prayer Book, because you profess them both as your rules in point of
Religion and worship of God. Then be advised, and do not proceed against us in
judgment, when the witness of God in your own consciences answers for us,
lest God the righteous Judge enter into judgment with you for so doing.

And if you be convinced and persuaded in your hearts and consciences, that
Cathedrals, or Par sh-Meeting-places are not the only true Church of Christ,
(as well you may, if you have any right understanding in the things of God,
according to Gospel dispensation) because the Scriptures do declare the only
true Church to be the body of Christ, and Christ to be the head of the Church,
which is his body, as it is written and left upon Record in Scripture, Ephesians.
1.22, 23.

And if you do believe that the Church is the body of Christ, and that Christ
is the head of his body the Church, then you may well be convinced and
persuaded (or at least ought) that Cathedrals, or Parish Meeting-places are not
the Church, because Cathedrals, and Parish-Meeting-places are not the body of
Christ,

Christ so loved the Church, that he gave himself for it, that he might
sanctify and cleanse it, and make it unto himself a glorious Church, that it
should be holy and without blemish, Ephesians. 5.23, 24, 25, 26, 27. And also the
Lord does nourish and cherish the Church, as it is written, Ephesians. 5.28, 29.

But where is it written, that Cathedrals and Parish-Meeting-places (commonly
called Parish churches) are the body of Christ, or that Christ is the Head of
them, or that Christ laid down his life for them, or that they are nourished
and cherishby the Lord, as aforesaid?

If you say, Cathedrals and Parish Meeting places, commonly called Parishes,
are not the body of Christ, therefore not the Church, neither did Christ lay
down his life for them, neither are they nourished and cherished by the Lord,
as aforesaid therefore we do not account them the Church.

What then is it that you call and account the Church, and require us to come
unto, which we are presented for not coming to? if you say and confess that
Cathedrals and Parish Meeting places, commonly called Parish Churches, is not
the thing you require us to come unto, because it is evident by the Scriptures
and Common Prayer Book, that Cathedrals and parish Meeting places are not the
Church, which is the body of Christ; and nourished and cherished by the Lord,
as aforesaid.

We further ask, What is the Church? If you deny Cathedrals and
parish-metting-places to be the Church, as aforesaid; are the ungodly people,
such as are not governed and sanctified by the Spirit of God, (though they may
meet in Cathedrals and parish-meeting-places) the Church, which is the body of
Christ, subject unto Christ, and as aforesaid?

And if you say, No: They who are not governed and sanctified by the Spirit of
God, are not true Members of the Church of God. If so, then may not we say,
That though we may not come to Cathedrals or parish meeting places, commonly
called parish churches, nor meet in point of Religion and Worship of God, with
such people as are not governed and sanctified by the Spirit of God, it cannot
properly be said, that we do not come to the church, neither ought we to be
presented or punished for refusing to meet in point of Religion and Worship of
God with them who are not governed and sanctified by the Spirit of the Lord,
though they may meet in Cathedrals or parish-meeting-places, commonly called
parish churches as aforesaid.

Concerning the Church what it is, according to Scripture-account.
THe sanctified and beloved people of God are in Scripture accounted and
declared to be the Church of God. It is said in Ephesians. 5.25. Christ so loved the
Church, that he gave himself for it. And in Ephesians. 5.1, 2. it is said concerning
the Saints, Be ye therefore followens of God as dear children, and walk in
love, even as Christ has loved us, and has given himself for us; Christ so
loved the Church, that he gave himself for it, Ephesians. 5.25. And Christ so loved
us, that he gave himself for us, (said the Saints and beloved people of God,
Ephesians. 5.1, 2.) Therefore the Saints and beloved people of God, according both to
the Scripture and our account, are the Church, as aforesaid: And such we meet
withal, therefore we come to the Church.

But fornication and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be once named
a among you, as becomes Saints, Ephesians. 5.3. Fornication and uncleanness are
things not owned by the Church, neither filthiness, neither foolish talking nor
jesting, which are things not comely, as it it is written, Ephesians. 5.3, 4. These
things are cast out of the Church, and are found amongst the unsanctified
people, who are not govemed and sanctified by the Spirit of God.

The Scriptures do own the Saints and beloved people of God to be the Church of
God, and we own them so to be. Therefore with the Ser ptures we concur and
agree, 1 These. 2.14 Acts 13.1, 2, 3. Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17 Acts 20.28. Col.
1.24, 25. Ephesians. 5.27, 28, 29, 30, 31.32.

The Scripture says, That holiness becomes the House of the Lord for ever;
and we say the same; therefore the Scriptures and we agree in one And the
people of God in the New Covenant are said to be the House of God, Heb 3.5, 6:
therefore holiness beconieth them. The Scrip ture says, That the Saints or
people of God are the House and Household of God, and we say the same; therefore
the Scriptures and we agree in one, 1 Timothy 3.15. Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21, 22.

The Church of God in the New Covenant and Gospel dispensation is the House of
God; and the people of God are the Church of God: Therefore the people of God
in the New Covenant and Gospel Dispensation, are the House of God, as may be
read, 1 Timothy 3.15. Ephesians. 5.23, 24. Heb. 3.5, 6. 1 Pet. 2.5.

To meet in point of Religion and Worship of God, with them who as dear
children are followers of God, Ephesians. 5.1, 2. is to come to the Church; and such
we meet withal in point of Religion and Worship of God; therefore we come to
the Church according to the Scripture-account, as aforesaid.

The Church according to the Scripture account, is the Household of God; and the
Saints and beloved people of God are the Household of God, as may be read Ephesians.
2.19, 20. Therefore the Saints and beloved people of God, according to the
Scripture account, are the Church, as foresaid.

To meet in point of Religion and Worship of God, with the Household of God, is
to come to the Church, according to the Scripture account; and we meet in point
of Religion and Worship of God, with the Household of God; therefore we come to
the Church according to the Scripture account, as aforesaid.

They who come to the Church according to the Scripture account, ought not in
equity and reason to be presented for not coming to the Church: And we (who are
reproachfully called Quakers) do come to the Church according to the Scripture
account; therefore we ought not to be presented or punished for not coming to
the Church, by them that own the Scriptures as their Rule in point of Religion;
there is neither Equity nor reason for it.

The Household of God, which is the Church are builded upon the Foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets. Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone,
as may be seen, Ephesians. 2.18, 19, 20. Then they who are builded upon the
Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
cornerstone, are the Church, the Household of God. And we who are reproached
for the Name of Jesus, and are built upon the Light and Power of God, are built
upon the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ Jesus himself being
the chief Cornerstone. We are of the Household and Family of God, and do come
to the Church, according to the Scripture-account* And by the Church we are
neither presentable nor punishable for that.

They who are governed and sanctified by the Spirit of God, are true Members of
the Church of God, 1 Cor. 1.2. Romans 9. 1. And we witness on the behalf of the
Lord, and the Lords Spirit bears witness on our behalf, That we are governed
and sanctified by the Spirit of God, Romans 8.14, 15, 16.17. Therefore we are
true Members of the Church of God, and are neither presentable nor punishable
for not coming to the Church, especially by them who own the government and
sanctification of the Spirit in declaration, though they seem to come far short
thereof in life and conversation.

And if you say, It Is true, we come to the Church according to the Scripture
acccount, and you do not present us, or go about to punish us for that, but
because we come not to the Church according to the Common Prayer Book account,
Well.

Concerning the Church, what it is according to the Common Prayer Book account.
IF it be granted that we (who are reproachfully called Quakers) do come to the
Church according to the Scriptureaccount, and are neither presentable nor
punishable for that, then therein we are cleared. And if you say we are
presented for not coming to the Church according to the account of the
Common Prayer Book, then if we can make it appear by the Common Prayer, that we
come to the Church according to the account of the Common Prayer, as aforesaid,
then by your own rule, and that according to Equity and Reason, we ought to be
clearly acquitted from the force of the aforesaid presentment, and therefore
discharged to all intents, constructions, and purposes whatsoever. If you say
yea; then be men of your word, and let your yea be yea, by making good what you
say, and we shall proceed to prove the thing in hand, or matter in question
aforementioned, that is, Whether we come to the Church according to the
Common Prayer Book account, or not?

To the which we answer and say, We do come to the Church according to the
Common Prayer Book, and are therefore neither presentable nor punishable for
that, but ought in equity and reason to be acquitted and clearly discharged
therefrom, as aforesaid.

And if you say, it is not sufficiently proved by our affirmation aforesaid; We
say, We do not say that which is false, but regard our word, and our yea is
yea; therefore you may believe it for a truth in what we have said; but if you
would have a further proof for the same, we ask (in order thereunto) whether
you own that only to be the Church, which the Common Prayer Book owneth, or
declares so to be? If you say yea; then stand to your word, and be as you say,
and we shall give you a further proof to make good what we have said, viz. That
we come to the Church according to the account of the Common Prayer Book.

And if it be asked, Who, or what sort of people are owned by, or declared, in
the Common Prayer Book to be the church of God? It is answered, That they who
are governed and sanctified by the Spirit of God, are the only people owned by;
or declared in the Common Prayer Book to be the church of God.

Then to meet in point of Religion and Worship of God, with them who are
governed and sanctified by the Spirit of God, is to come to the church,
necording to the account of the Common Prayer Book. But we (who are
reproachfully called Quakers) do meet with them who are governed and sanctified
by the Spirit of God, in point of Religion and Worship of God; therefore we
come to the church as aforesaid.

And so we ought to have equal liberty and toleration with you in point of
Religion and Worship of God. The Common Prayer Book owneth or declares the
Household and Family of God, to be the church of God. And we say, That the
Household and Family of God, are the saints and beloved people of God: Therefore
to meet in point of Religion and Worship of God, with the Household and Family
of God, which are the saints and beloved people of God, is to come to the
Church according to the account of the Common Prayer book, and we met in point
of Religion and worship of God with the household and family of God; therefore
we come to the Church, as aforesaid, and are neither presentable nor punishable
for that by the Church before mentioned.

For proof that the Church is owned, or declared by the Common Prayer book to
be the household and family of God, 5 Sund. after Epiph. Coll. and 22 Sund.
after Trinit. Coll.
See the 5 Sunday after Epiphany, the Collect (so called where it is said, Lord
keep thy Church and household continually in thy true Religion. And see 22
Sunday after Trinity, the Collect (so called) where it is said. Lord we beseech
thee to keep thy household the Church in continual godlmess. Here the Church is
declared to be the household of God, and it is the work or act of God to keep it
in continual godliness. Then they who are in continual ungodliness, are not
accounted the household and Church of God, as aforesaid, because they are not
willing to be ordered and kept by the Lord in continual godliness, as
aforesaid. So that wicked and unsanctified people are not accounted the Church
by the Common Prayer book, neither are we enjoined thereby to come to meet with
wicked and unsanctified people in point of Religion, nor presentable for
refusing so to do.

And for proof that the Church is accounted the family of God; see Good Friday,
the Collect (so called) and moreover it is there said, Almighty and everlasting
God, by whose Spirit the whole body of the Church is governed and sanctified.
So that the whole body of that Church which is owned or declared of in the
Common Prayer book, is said to be governed and sanctified by the Spirit of God
as aforesaid: then that body which is not governed and sanctified by the Spirit
of God, is not there owned or declared by the Common Prayer book to be the
Church of God aforementioned. If the whole body of the Church be governed and
sanctified by the Spirit of God, then every particular member of that body is
under the government and sanctification of that Spirit. And if the whole body
of the Church of God be govenned and sanctified by the spirit. of God, whether
are they any Ministers or members of the Church of God, who are not governed
and sanctified by the Spirit of God? for it is said by the Apostle, If any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8.9. (no Minister of
Christ, nor member of his Church.) And does not the Common Prayer Book say the
same in effect, in saying, That the Church of God is the household and family of
God, and that the whole body of the Church is governed and sanctified by the
Spirit of God? Does it not therefore follow that they are no Ministers of
Christ, nor members of his Church, who are not governed and sanctified by the
Spirit of God, as aforesaid? If so, whether they who daily err and go astray
from the ways of God, be governed and sanctified by the Spirit of God; and if
they who daily err and go astray from the ways of God, be not governed and
sanctified by the Spirit of God, whether such be any Ministers of Christ, or
members of the Church of God? and whether such as daily offend against Gods
holy Laws, be governed and sanctified by Gods holy Spirit? because Gods holy
Spirit does not lead men daily to offend his own Laws. Or whether any for
denying or refusing for conscience toward God, to meet in point of Religion
and Worship of God with them who daily err and go astray from the ways of God,
and for neglecting to meet with such as are not governed and sanctified by the
Spirit of God, can or ought in equity and reason according to truth be said to
deny and refuse to come to the Church, which is the household and family of God,
who are sanctified and governed by the Spirit of God, as aforesaid? will it not
follow then, and that from the Common Prayer Book, viz.

1 That the Church of God is the household and family of God, and that the
household and family of God are the Saints and beloved people of God? 2 That the
family and household of God are governed and sanctified by the Spirit of God,
and they are the household and family of God, who are governed and sanctified by
the Spirit of God? 3 That to come to, and meet with the household and family of
God, is to come to, and meet with the Church of God? 4 That to meet in point of
Religion and worship of God with them who are governed and sanctified by the
Spirit of God, is to come to the Church and service of God? 5. That they who
are not governed and sanctified by the Spirit of God, are not the Church of
God. 6. That to refuse for conscience toward God to meet in point of Religion
and worship of God, with them who daily err and go astray from the ways of God,
and are not governed and sanctified by the Spirit of God, is not to refuse to
come to the Church as aforesaid. 7. That they who daily offend against Gods
holy Laws, and being untaught of God, daily err from his ways, and refuse to
meet in point of Religion and worship of God, with the household of God, which
is governed and sanctified by the Spirit of God; those are such as neglect to
come to the Church and service of God.
For we say the Saints and beloved people of God are under the administration
and teaching of the light and Spirit of God, and subject thereunto. And they
are the Saints and beloved people of God, who are under the administration and
teachings of the Light and Spirit of God, and subject thereunto, as aforesaid.
For the grace of God which brings salvation has appeared unto all men,
teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world; as it is written, Tit.
2.11.12.

The grace of God has a teaching office in the hearts of the people of God,
and they are taught by the grace of God to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts,
in order to a godly life and conversation. They who in obedience to the
teachings of the grace, do deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, in order to a
godly life and conversation, do make it appear thereby, that they are under the
administration of the grace of God, and subject thereunto. And it is an evident
demonstration that such are the beloved people of God; and we who are
reproachfully called Quakers, are under the teachings of the grace of God, and
it is apparent to the world by our denial of ungodliness and worldly lusts, in
order to a godly life and conversation, humbly be it spoken in the denial of
all self-justification.

And the Common Prayer does acknowledge, that God does instruct his holy Church
with heavenly doctrine, (see S. Marks day in the Collect so called) (Here the
Church of God is not declared to be a company of miserable sinners, who have no
souls health in them; and if they have no souls health in them, have they any
cure of souls or heavenly doctrine in them? but) the Church is here declared to
be a holy Church. And on Good Friday so called) in the Collect, the whole body
of the Church is said to be governed and sanctified by the Spirit of God. So
that the Church which is governed and sanctified by the Spirit of God, is
declared to be the holy Church; and the holy Church is a sanctified body, and
under a spiritual Government; because the whole body of the Church is governed
and sanctified by the Spirit of God, as aforesaid. And such a Church we own and
come unto as is holy, and instructed by the Lord with heavenly doctrine.

If God instruct his holy Church with heavenly doctrine, S. Mark day Coll.
and the people of God be the holy Church which God does so instruct; then the
people of God are a holy people, and under the administrations and teachings of
the Light and holy spirit of God, which we own in principle, doctrine, and
conversation: And you own the same in declaration; are you not then in words,
or declaration therein become one with those you call Quakers? How can you then
in equity and reason go about to present or punish us for owning in life and
conversation, that which you own in declaration, but seem to come short of in
life and conversation? Consider well of it, and let the light and spirit of God
Judge in this case between you and us, and join you therewith; so will you
clearly acquit and justify us, and our innocent cause, which is the cause of a
good conscience.

And on Sim. and Jude, Sim. and Jude the Coll.
in the Collect (so called) it is said, Almighty God which have builded thy
Congregation upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, jesus Christ
himself being the chief cornerstone. Here again may it not be observed, that
Cathedrals and Parish Meeting-places, nor a company of miserable sinners,
though they may meet therein, are not accounted the Church, which is the
building and holy Congregation of God, by him builded upon the foundation of
the Prophets and Apostles, Christ Jesus himself, as aforesaid.

Then to meet in point of Religion and worship of God with them who are sought
and taught of the Lord according to John 4.23. and 6.44, 45. and are the holy
Congregation, or building of God by him built upon a spiritual foundation of
the Prophets and Apostles, Christ Jesus himself, as aforesaid, according to
Ephesians. 2.18, 19, 20, 21, 22. is to come to the holy Church and household of God,
which is governed and sanctified by the Spirit of God; though they may not come
to a Cathedral, or Parish Meeting Place, to meet with a company of miserable
sinners, who have no health in them, as aforesaid.

The holy Church is a sanctified Church, both according to the Scripture and
Common Prayer account, and they who are governed and sanctified by the Spirit
of God, are the holy Church, as aforesaid; and such a Church we are members of,
and come to in point of Religion and worship of God.

Concerning the service of God
In the second Collect for peace, 2 Coll. for peace.
it is said, O God which art the author of peace, and lover of concord, in
knowledge of whom stands eternal life, whose service is perfect freedom.

If God be the Author of peace, then he is not the author of persecution about
matters of Religion, but a lover of concord; and lovers of God are lovers of
peace and concord. Who then are the authors of persecution about matters of
Conscience in point of Religion and worship of God? For our Lord Jesus Christ
has said to his friends, who do his commands, John 15.14. I command you that
ye love one another: John 15.17. If the world hate you, ye know that it hated
me before it hated you: Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is
not greater then the Lord: If they have persecuted me, they will persecute you,
John 15.18, 19, 20.

True Christians the friends of Christ, that are obedient unto his commands,
they love one another with the love of Christ, and are hated and persecuted by
the spirit of the world for their love and faithfulness unto Christ.

And whereas it is said, that the service of God is perfect freedom what is it
then? is it not a freedom from sin, wrath, and condemnation? and are not they
that are in the service of God in perfect freedom? And if the service of God be
perfect freedom, whether ought any to be forced either to it, or from it, by
outward compulsion? and if you say, though the service of God be perfect
freedom, yet it is not perfect freedom from sin, what is it perfect freedom
from, and unto? seeing that the Apostle says, when ye were the servants of
sin, ye were free from righteousness, Romans 6.20. Are servants of sin free from
righteousness? who are they then, who daily err and go astray from the ways of
God, and daily offend against Gods holy Laws, being as themselves say,
miserable sinners? What fruit have they then in those things, whereof they are
now ashamed? for (says the Apostles) the end of those things is death; Romans
6.20.21. But the same Apostle speaks of a freedom from sin, saying, Now being
made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto
holiness, and the end everlasting life, Romans 6.22, 23. They who are free from
sin, are at liberty to serve the Lord, whose fruit is unto holiness, and the
end thereof is life everlasting, as aforesaid.

Concerning the Light.
In the third Collect for aid against all perils: it is said, Lighten our
darkness we beseech thee O Lord. Are you yet in darkness, and not illuminated,
because you say, Lighten our darkness we beseech thee. O Lord? And again, in
the Letany you say, That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Pastors,
and Ministers of the Church. Are the Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of the
Church in darkness, and not yet illuminated; or does God send forth Bishops,
Pastors, and Ministers, before illumination? Because the Apostles and Ministers
of Christ, said, We preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our
selves your servant for Jesus sake, 2 Cor. 4, 5, 6.7. For God who commanded
light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the light of
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ; but we have this
treasure in earthen ^essels, that the excellency of the power may be of God,
and not of us. The Ministers of Christ were not in darkness, but in the light,
and therefore illuminated, and were sent to illuminate others, or to turn them
from darkness unto light: they who by virtue of their preaching, did turn
people from darkness unto light, they did convert people from their sinful ways
and courses unto God, by turning them from the power of Satan unto God; and
such were and are the true Ministers and Messengers of God. That light which
turn^ people from the power of Satan unto God, is a soul-converting light; and
they who in the power of that light, and by virtue thereof do by their
preaching turn people from darkness unto light, they do convert them by their
Ministry on the Lords behalf from their sinful ways and courses, by turning
them from the power of Satan unto God; and such are the Ministers of Christ, as
aforesaid.

The light of Christ declared of in the Scripture, and now owned and born
witness of by the people of God called Quakers, is that light which turns
people from their sinful ways and courses unto God, who believe in, and obey
the same. Therefore that light is a soul-converting light, as aforesaid.

And for owning, holding forth, and bearing witness of this light, in
principle, doctrine, and conversation, have the people of God called Quakers,
met with great opposition and persecution. And now this light is acknowledged
by common confession; therefore inasmuch as you own the light by common
confession, how can you in equity and reason raise opposition against us, or
present, and punish us, for owning in principle, doctrine, and conversation,
that which you confess unto and own in declaration.

It is said (3. Sunday after Easter in the Collect so called) Almighty God,
which show to all men that be in error, the light of thy truth, to the
intent that they may return into the way of righteousne^^ And we say the same;
do you not herein with us agree in dec^^ration, or are you nor in this
principled for Quakers so called How then can you in equity and reason punish
us for own in principle, doctrine, and conversation, that which you yo^^ selves
own in declaration? You say that Almighty God does sh^^ the light of his truth
to all men that be in error, to the into that they may return into the way of
righteousness. Do you n^^ here confess and acknowledge these six things?

1 That God is the author of the light. 2 That the light it self is a pure,
spiritual, soul-saving justifying light, in its own nature and poperty, and
also to them who believe in, and obey the same. 3 That the Act of discovery, or
manifestation of the Light, is Gods own act. 4 That the persons, or parties to
whom the Light is so discovered, shown, or made manifest, are all men without
exception. 5 That the state and condition wherein they are at the first
discovery or manifestation of the Light unto them, is whilst they are in
error, and out of the way of the Lord. 6 That the intent of Gods act of
discovery and manifestation of the Light unto them; is that they may come out
of error, and the ways of unrighteousness, into the way of righteousness,
peace and salvation, which is the way of the Lord.
If so, do you not acknowledge and confess,

That all men are in error, and out of the way of the Lord, until they believe
in, and receive the Light of the Lord to lead them therefrom, and guide them
unto God from whence the Light does come.

That all men who believe in, and receive the light of the Lord after discovery
and manifestation thereof, do come out of darkness, error, and the ways of
unrighteousness, into the ways of righteousness, peace, and salvation, which is
the way of the Lord?

That the way from error and heresy, is the light which God discovers, with
an intent to lead all that believes in, and obeys the same, out of error and
heresy into the way of righteousness, the way of the Lord?

That the light of God guides men out of error, in point of salvation and
worship of God, and leads them unto God that believes in, and receives the
same, according to the act of discovery, and intent of God, as aforesaid?

Then to reject the light of Gods truth after Gods act of discovery thereof, by
refusing and denying to yield obedience thereunto, is to reject God, who is the
author of the light, and to reject Gods act of discovery of the light; and also
to reject Gods love held forth in the intent of the discovery thereof; and such
remains in error, and are out of the way of righteousness, and very unfit to
guide others into the ways of God, who daily err and go astray therefrom
themselves.

And how can any be competent Judges of error, who themselves are subject
unto, and daily live in error? And if error from the ways of God be an
offense punishable by Law; what Law is it punishable by? and are not they daily
punishable by the same Law, who daily err and go astray from the ways of God,
and do daily offend against Gods holy Laws?

Forasmuch as you own in declaration many of those things which we own in life
and conversation, though you seem to come far short of in conversation, you
ought not in equity or reason to punish us as offenders about matters of
conscience in point of Religion and worship of God, but rather give us the
right hand of fellowship, and equal liberty with you in point of Religion and
worship of God, because we own in life and conversation many things which you
own in declaration, which we could be glad to behold and meet you in, in life
and conversation (setting all your contradictions aside) You own purity of
heart in declaration, and we own the same in principle and practice, or life
and conversation? How can you be offended at us for holding forth purity of
heart in conversation, when you own the same in declaration? where the Priest
exhorts the people, saying, I pray and beseech you, as many as be here present,
to accompany me with a pure heart, saying after me: and they must say with him,
that they have daily erred and strayed from the ways of God like lost sheep,
and that they have followed too much the devices and desires of their own
hearts, and that they have daily offended against Gods holy Laws: and that they
have lest undone those things which they ought to have done, and that they have
done those things which they ought not to have done, and that thereis no health
in them, but they are they say, miserable sinners. Are these the signs of a
pure heart? and if there be no health, neither in Priest nor people, is there
any cure of souls in them? is it not spoken in reference to souls health?
because there is bodily health in them, when they make that confession. And if
there be no souls health in them, is there a sound or pure heart in them? yet
they allow of purity of heart however, and that it is a Christians duty to
accompany one another in prayer with a pure heart to the throne of the heavenly
grace; and we acknowledge it to be our duty and practice to accompany one
another in prayer with a pure heart to the throne of the heavenly grace.

And presently after they have ackno^ledged purity of heart, and made their
confession, as aforesaid, they say, We beseech him to grant us true repentance
and his holy spirit, that those things may please him which we do at this
present, and that the rest of our life hereafter may be pure and holy. Here
they beg repentance and Gods holy Spirit, as if they had not yet received the
same. However they ought not to be offended at others who have obtained
repentance, and received the holy spirit, because they pray for the same: and
it is also to be observed, that they acknowledge that the people of God, by
virtue of the Spirit of God are guided and impoured to pray and perform the
things that are good, acceptable and well pleasing unto God, and we own the
same; here they own in declaration the principle and practice of the people of
God called Quakers, and therefore ought not to be offended at them for the same
viz. that the people of God, by virtue of the Spirit of God, are guided and
empowered to pray and perform the things that are good, acceptable and
well-pleasing to the Lord; and that the people of God who have obtained
repentance, and received the Spirit of God, are by the same directed and
enabled to live in purity and holiness of life continually, which is
well-pleasing unto the Lord.

And you say, O God, make clean our hearts within us, and take not thy holy
Spirit from us. Then you account that you have the holy Spirit, or else what
need you pray that it be not taken from you? that cannot be taken from one, if
he have it not; however you ought not to be offended at others for having and
owning the Spirit, because you acknowledge you have it your selves. You also
confess that your hearts are unclean, saying, O God, make clean our hearts
within us; and before the Priest said, I pray and beseech you, as many as be
here present, to accompany me with a pure heart. If you had a pure heart when
you begun your service, how comes your hearts to be unclean before you have
done, or were they not as unclean before? however you acknowledge that your
hearts are unclean within you, and that it is the work of Gods holy spirit
within to cleanse the heart from its inward uncleanness, though you cannot yet
witness the same to be done in your selves, whose hearts you say are unclean.

You say, (first Sunday in Advent, in the Collect so called) Almighty God, give
us grace that we may cast away the works of darkness, and put upon us the
armor of light, now in the time of this mortal life. It seems though you
acknowledge, that you have not yet cast away the works of darkness, nor put
upon you the armor of light; you do account it to be a Christians duty to cast
away the works of darkness, and to put upon them the armor of Light. And the
people of God, by virtue of the grace of God, are enabled to cast away the
works of darkness, and to put upon them the armor of light, now in the time of
this mortal life. And therefore you ought not to punish them for so doing.

You say, Almighty God, mortify and kill all vices in us, ( Innocents day in
the Collect.) Though vices yet live in you, it is to be observed, 1 That you
acknowledge it to be the work of God to mortify and kill all vices inwardly in
the hearts of people. 2. That people ought to have all vices mortified and
killed in them by the power of God, whilst they live upon the face of the
earth. 3 That you allow of the work of God in mortifying and killing all vices
inwardly in others, because you pray for it to be done in your selves: then you
ought to allow of them as the people of God, and be in love with them, wherein
God has so appeared, as to mortify and kill all vices within them: then you
ought to allow of us as the peopl of God, and be in love with us, because God
has been pleased to mortify and kill all vices in us (who are reproachfully
called Quakers) as much as in any people this day upon the face of the earth.
And our blameless life and godly conversation does testify the same, to the
praise of the glory of his grace who has called us out of darkness into his
mavelous light.

And do you not acknowledge and own inspiration, and that the thoughts of your
hearts are unclean; when you are about the receiving of that called Communion?
because there you say, Almighty God, unto whomall hearts be open, all desires
known, and from whom no secrets are hid, cleanse thou the thoughts of our
hearts by the inspiration of thy holy spirit, that we may perfectly love thee,
and worthily magnify thy holy name. May it not be observed, that you hereby do
acknowledge, 1 That the thoughts of your hearts (and at such a time as when you
say you are at the Table of the Lord) are unclean within you? 2 That the
uncleanness of the thoughts of your hearts is the cause of the imperfection of
your love to God.

3 That it is the act of God, by the inspiration of his holy Spirit, to take
away the uncleanness of the thoughts of the heart; which were the cause of
imperfection of love toward God, as aforesaid

4 That the uncleanness of the thoughts of the heart being removed and taken
away, the heart is made capable of being perfect in love toward God, even to
love him perfectly, and worthily to magnify his holy name.

And you acknowledge, that all your doings without charity are nothing worth,
and therefore you desire God to send his holy Spirit, and pour into your hearts
that most excellent gift of charity ( Quinquages. ^^ll) If all your actions be
nothing worth without charity, and if you yet want that excellent gift of
charity, because you pray for it, and for the Spirit to pour it into your
hearts, what are your actions worth without charity? your selves confess they
are nothing worth without it; then wait to receive the Spirit to pour forth
that excellent gift of charity into your hearts. And when you have received
that gift, you will not unworthily punish us, or any of Gods people for matters
of conscience in point of Religion and worship of God, but will see it just
that we have equal liberty and tolleration with you in point of Religion and
worship of God?

And to that holy Spirit of God, by which the whole body of the Church is
governed and sanctified, which does cleanse the thoughts of the heart by its
holy inspiration or operation, and pour into the sanctified heart that most
excellent gift of charity, to that we can commit our innocent cause, which will
be for our vindication and justification.

If you were a pure-hearted people, you would not cause us to suffer by you for
the same; that would be to contradict and oppose your own principles. For a
pure heart is a sanctified heart, and does not oppose it self in a sanctified
people. If you were governed and sanctified by the Spirit of God, you would
love us and be one with us in matters of conscience in point of Religion and
worship of God; because we own in principle and practice the government and
sanctification of the Spirit of God: and therefore we ought in equity and
reason to be beloved of you, and tolerated by you in matters of Religion and
worship of God, because you own that in declaration, which we own in principle
and practice, or life and conversation.

And whereas you own the light of Gods truth in declaration, to enlighten men's
darkness, or that men are enlightened by it whilst they are in darkness, error,
and the ways of unrighteousness, to the end that they may come out of error,
and the ways of unrighteousness, into the ways of righteousness, which is the
way of the Lord; and as aforesaid, you own in declaration, that which we own in
principle, doctrine, and conversation, who have believed in, received, and
obeyed the light of Gods truth, according to Gods act and intent of discovery,
and manifestation thereof; and are by the light led out of darkness, error,
and the ways of unrighteousness into the way of the Lord, as aforesaid:
therefore you ought to love us, and let us have equal liberty and toleration
with you in matters of Religion and worship of God, and free us from the force
of the aforesaid Presentment, and stand up amongst men and Christians for the
vindication and justification of the people of God called Quakers, because you
own in declaration, purity of heart, divine and spiritual teachings, the
government and sanctification of the spirit of God amongst the people of God,
the light of Gods truth also to guide men out of error and the ways of
unrighteousness, into the way of righteousness, peace, and salvation; and that
it is a Christians duty by virtue of the grace of God received, to cast away
the works of darkness, and put on the armor of light now in the time of this
mortal life; and that all vices are to be mortified and killed in the hearts of
the people of God; that by inspiration and operation of Gods holy Spirit, the
thoughts of men's hearts are to be cleansed, to the end that they may perfectly
love the Lord God, and worthily magnify his holy name; that the people of God
who have obtained repentance, and received Gods holy Spirit, are to live in
continual holiness and godliness; and by virtue of the Spirit of God received,
are empowered to pray and perform the things that are good, acceptable and well
pleasing to the Lord. That the people of God by the Spirit of God have a right
judgment in all things. And that the hearts of Gods people are cleansed and
sanctified by the Spirit of God. And that God does pour into sanctified hearts
that most excellent gift of charity; so that the love of God is shed abroad in
the hearts of the people of God by the Spirit of God, and much more. All which
are the known principles, doctrine, and practice of the people of God called
Quakers. And if you did but experimentally and really own, and live in the
same, you and we should be one. However inasmuch as you own in declaration,
that which we own in principle, doctrine, and practice, or life and
conversation you ought to love us as the people of God, and free us from the
force of the aforesaid Presentment, to all intents, constructions, and purposes
and let us have equal liberty and tolleration with you, as aforesaid; and to
stand up for our vindication and justification amongst men and Christians.

Written about the middle of the ninth month, 1662. Richard Farnsworth.

THE END.

