THE NOVELTY Of the Modern ROMISH RELIGION SET FORTH IN AN Answer to three
Queries propounded by N. G. Priest.

WITH A Rejoinder to his Reply, and a Reply to an Answer made to three Queries
propounded unto him.

TOGETHER WITH Animadversions upon some Reflections made by an unknown Author;
and an Answer to his Appendix, concerning several Points of Religion
controverted between PROTESTANTS and PAPISTS.

Wherein it is proved that the Opinion of GREGORY the Great, did agree in those
Points with the Doctrine of the REFORMED CHURCH.

Written by S. F. M. A. and Vicar of Mitton in Craven.

Stand ye in the Ways and see, and ask for the old Paths, where is the good
Way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your Souls, Jer. c. 6. v. 16.
London, Printed for Tho. Simmons at the Feathers in Ludgate Street, 1682.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THE Apostle James has told us, That pure Religion and undefiled before God
and the Father, is this, to visit the Fatherless and Widows in their
Affliction, and to keep unspotted from the World; and that the Wisdom which is
from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated,
full of Mercy, without Partiality, and without Hypocrisy; what then must be
said of the modern Romish Religion, which owns and maintains several
treacherous, cruel and bloody Principles, according to which the Practices of
the Romanists have been frequently conformed, being treacherous, cruel and
bloody? is that pure and from above? Nothing less; but we must conclude it to
be from beneath, therefore impure, counterfeit, and false.

Yet the great Brags of the Romanists are continually sounding in our ears,
that they have Antiquity and Succession for their Religion, and that it has
descended unto them through the Current of all Ages, even from the Primitive
Times: This is the main Pillar wherewith they endeavor to support their
tottering Religion; and the great Argument they use to prove the Truth, which
they injuri^usly claim as pertinent unto it, while they do make this Plea, they
think themselves sufficiently armed for Offense and Defense, and do shout for
the Battle, assuring themselves Victory over all Opposers.

But when we do demand how they prove their great Brags to be true, they tell
us, that the Obligation of proving, does not lie on their side, but it belongs
to us to disprove what they say; The greatest Flourish which they make for
themselves, is, by propounding of Querie^^ such as my Antagonist has
propounded, and such as cannot certainly be determined either in the
Affirmative or the Negative.

Christian Reader, If thou were possessed of an Estate in Land, unto which thy
Title is pleaded to be Illegal, and that thy Possession was gotten by fraud or
violence, thy own natural Reason should advise thee, and to avoid a tedious
Suit, Charity should oblige thee (I am sure the Court of Equity will compel
thee) to produce thy Evidences, and to show thy Deeds to make good thy Title;
to ask what hour, or what day, or what month, or what year the fraud or the
violence was acted, and the intrusion made, will never procure the Verdict of a
Jury, and the Sentence of a Judge to justify the Tenure.

Here thou have the great Brags of the Romanists examined, and proved to have
no strength to produce any effect for their advantage; it is vanity in the
Abstract for them to boast of Antiquity and Succession, while they want that
Religion which was professed by the Primitive Christians, and do own and
maintain Doctrines and Practices which were never warranted by Christ or his
Apostles, and the Authority of the holy Scriptures.

That my Discourse comes forth in an homely Dress, thou must take this to be
the reason; thou can not expect to find any better fruit than the Tree is
able to produce. So many have my Discouragements, and Disadvantages, and
Impediments been, that had not several weighty Considerations overruled me, I
had not appeared in public after this manner; Providence thought fit to order
me to live under a Sacrilegious Popish Patron, whose Ancestors began, and he
continues so great an Alienation of the Churches Revenues, that the Pittance
which is left, is not able to afford a Competency for a convenient Livelihood;
for if the Back be clothed, the Belly grumbles for want of Meat; and if the
Belly be filled, the Back complains for want of Clothing; there is not enough
to supply the Necessities of both, so that there is nothing to be spared to
purchase a Library, which is a very great help to assist in the course of the
Ministry, and in managing of Controversies with the common Enemy; but if the
number of my Books were equal to the Vatican-Library, there is little leisure
to be spared for conversing with such Companions, alas, I must spend my time in
casting about, and contriving how to proportion my little Barrel of Meal, and
to draw out my little Cruise of Oil to the greatest Advantage, that it may
reach to answer the importunate Cravings of those that are concerned to have a
share of it.

Help, O Mighty and Religious King, help ye Learned and Pious Bishops; ye wise
Senators and Judges of the Nation; suffer not the Patrimony of the Church to be
devoured by Popish Laics, who thirst after our destruction more than the
chased Heart pants after the Waterbrooks, and would rejoice to see that day
wherein we should have (if they might have it so) neither Church nor Being.

If it be said (as the Town Clerk in the Acts said to Demetrius and his
fellow-Craftsmen, The Law is open, and there are Deputies, let them implead one
another; I ask whether a Pigmy (though his Cause be never so good) be an equal
Match to encounter with a Giant? And is there any hope of Success for him in
combating with such an Enemy? Is there no other course to be found to recover
the alienated Rights of the Church? Must a poor Incumbent, that has not
Necessaries for a convenient Livelihood, be forced to contend with a powerful
and rich Patron, whose Purse is able to purchase that Elixir that can turn
Brass into Gold, and Lead into Silver, and make the most bright shining Cause
to appear as a dark Lanthorn: Money is the Queen-Regent, what can it not do? It
is said, Pecunia omnia potest; and it is too often known, that the Verdict of a
Jury is biased by the swagging of the Purse; and all do know that the skilful
Pleaders of the Law will not open their mouths, to speak in the best Cause,
unless their Tongues be gilded with Gold, or tipped with Silver, which the (...)
of an indigent Incumbent is not able to perform.

And what can be expected from one that is thus shattered and broken in his
Fortunes? is his dejected, heartless, and therefore unactive Spirit able to
produce any thing in relation to Controversies, fit to be presented to the
public view? But these following Considerations overruled my dull and
backward hand to put my unskilful Pen upon motion; first, That if a Servant
have but half a Talent allowed him, he is not to lap it up in a Napkin, and
bury it in the Earth, but to employ and improve it to his Master's use.
Secondly, That God accepts of the Will far the Deed, and does not expect that
the cock should run more water then is put into the cistern. Thirdly that at
the building of Solomon's temple, all were not master builders, but there were
inferior Workmen that contributed much to the erecting of that glorious
structure; besides all this, the necessity of the People committed to my
Charge, required some Armor to defend themselves against the Assaults of
Romish Agents, there being many such surrounding us on either side, and many
such residing within the compass of our Neighborhood, among whom, my conceited
Patroness is one that carries a great sway, and exceeds for her Activity, to
propagate the Romish Religion; whenever any opportunity falls out, serving
for her purpose, she is ready, not only to strain her Person, but also to send
forth her active Emissaries to fill People with the poisonous Doctrines of the
Church of Rome.

Such as the Work is, thou have it here; thou may read and judge of it; but
while thou do so, let me entreat thee to lay aside Partiality and Prejudice;
by which means thou will do me less wrong, and thy self more good; though it be
not so excellently Cooked, as to please delicate and curious Palats, yet it
will afford some good Nutriment to such Stomachs as will content themselves
with wholesome Diet; for such it was designed, and to such it is presented by
him, who subscribes himself

The meanest Undertaker in this kind, but according to his power, an Abettor of
the Truth, S. F.

A Brief Note concerning Points of Religion; wherein it is desired to be
known by Nich. Grimshaw Priest,
First, WHether the Religion professed by the Roman Catholics, commonly called
Papists; be the same Religion in point of Faith, with the Religion brought into
England by Saint Augustine the Monk, and Apostle of England many years ago?
Secondly, Whether the aforesaid Religion brought into England by St. Augustine,
was not the same in point of Faith with the Religion professed by the Britains,
that were at his coming into England, Christian Inhabitants in England?
Thirdly, Whether the Religion professed by the aforesaid Britains, at
Augustin's coming into England, was the same Religion in point of Faith with
that professed by the Britains in the Primitive Church of England, when England
was first converted to the Christian Faith?
If Answer be made, that there has been a Change in the aforesaid Points, it
is required that the Change be showed to have been in Points of Faith, and not
in Ceremonial only, which would be nothing to purpose.

An Answer unto certain Queries written in a Paper, Entitled, A Brief Note
concerning Points of Religion, wherein it is desired to be known, etc.
SIR,
WHile you have been writing of your Queries, you forgot what you promised in
the Title, you promised points of Religion; Queries are not Points; indeed the
determination on either side, may in some respect be termed such, but while
they are undetermined, and do remain Queries, they are not such.

If you mean by Points of Religion, the Determination of the Queries on either
side, then I must ask you, what you mean by Points of Religion; whether such
Truths as are absolutely necessary to be known, or Truths of an inferior Allay,
such as are convenient for some respects to be known?

If you mean Truths of the first sort, there is as little affinity between your
Title and your Queries, as there is between me and you, and that is none at
all; for none of these Queries are necessary to be known, either in the
Affirmative or the Negative, with either a general and confused knowledge, or
that knowledge which is distinct and particular; for you and I and others may
worship God, and so advance his Glory, and come to be saved without it; and I
say farther, that if your Queries be made concerning a distinct and particular
knowledge, if ever we shall be saved, we shall be saved without it; there is
much required to complete this Knowledge, than you, or I, or any other can gain
by the best Intelligencers we have to inform us.

If you mean Truths of the second sort, pray, let me assume the boldness as to
ask you, why you are so injurious to the common sort of people, as to load
their Heads with unnecessary Positions, and to puzzle their Brains with such
like Queries? will you imitate the Scribes and Pharisees, to teach for
Doctrines (as they did the Commandments of men, so you) the private Conceits of
men.

To your Queries in general, I answer, first you take a Journey of three miles
about, while a Journey of one would have served better, and brought you sooner
home; it would have saved you some pains in Querying, and me in Answering, and
been as much, yea more to purpose, if you had, instead of making three Queries,
propounded but one; namely this, whether the Religion now professed by the
Papists in England, be the same that was brought into England at its first
Conversion, and so the same that was taught by Christ and his Apostles? I do
not see any reason for this long Vagary, why you should go about, to know what
Religion S. Austin professed, what Religion the Britains in his time professed,
whether yours agrees to his, his agrees to theirs; if I should grant you so
long Succession for your Religion, what advantage could you make of it? if you
reason after this manner, to confirm the Truth you pretend for your Religion,
my Father, and my Grandfather, and my great Grandfather, and so onward, until
you come to Austin the Monk, and the ancient Britains were of this Religion,
therefore it is true; a Jew or a Turk may reason with the same probability: or
if you reason thus, our Religion is as ancient as Austin the Monk, and the
ancient Britains, therefore it is true; a Turk may plead as great Antiquity for
his Religion, and a Jew greater for his.

Secondly, In all these Queries I suppose you are on the Affirmative side, and
that you conceive us to be on the Negative; pray let me ask you, which in
reason should first be proved; whether ^our Affirmative or ^our Negative? If
your Affirmative should first be proved, as you must grant, if you have the
Reason of a man; why will you deny to put your Shoulders under the Burden, and
lay it wholly upon ours: It seems you are somewhat like unto the Egyptian
Taskmasters, you would have us to make Brick, while you would be looking on;
you would be putting of Queries unto us, while we must be laboring our Brains
in proving unto you: Let me propound a reasonable Request, and desire you once
to be as forward in practice, as you are in precept; and as ready to prove as
you are to quere; and to prove the Affirmative of these Queries, and to set
down a substantial proof, such as may be convincing to the non-prejudging
Understanding; I think I may allow you a longer time to do this, than the
Elephant is in bringing forth her young.

To the first Query, my Answer is Negative; we may presume that Austin's
Religion was the same which his Master, Pope Gregory professed, and your
Religion differs from his in these Particulars, the Canon of the Scripture, the
Sufficiency of the Scripture, the Reading of the Scripture, the Real Presence,
Private Mass, Communion in both kinds, Merit of good Works, Veneration of
Images the Pope's Supremacy, his Doctrine in these being the same that is
maintained by the Church of England, as can be evidenced out of his Writings.

To the Second, my Answer is likewise Negative; it is probable it was not: my
Reasons are these; because those ancient Britains told Austin the Monk, that
they had a Bishop of their own* to whom they were to submit; therefore they
would have nothing to do with the Pope of Rome: Besides, they rejected Austin's
Traditions; would they have done so, had their Religion been the same with his?
For which, the Monk stirred up the wrath of Ethelbert King of Kent, against
them, who raised his Forces, and came ( Austin being in his Company, and
destroyed about twelve hundred of them: howsoever this Fact of his may be
colored, it was a horrid Fact; but much more wicked would it have been judged
to be, had those murdered Britains been of his Religion.

To the Third, my Answer is this; That neither you, nor I can determine
positively on either side, unless we do (as he that writ of the World in the
Moon, did) take upon us to write of things so far distant from us, that they
cannot come within the compass of our Knowledge, we having no certain Records
to inform us what were the Tenets maintained by the* Ancient Britains: We have
so much Charity toward them, as to think well of them; and have great reason
to believe, that they were far more Religious and Holy than Austin the Italian
Monk was.

To your Cautional Conclusion, First, I say, that I have toyled my Brains, and
turned the Words every way, to make sense of them, and to reconcile their
Contradictions, and yet the work is to do: a Change you say, in the aforesaid
points; I find no foresaid points, but Queries; and how to show a Change in
those Queries, unless you would have me to propound them after another manner,
and in another shape, I do not apprehend; nor yet to show a Change in points of
Faith, where there are no points of Faith to show a Change in.

Secondly, you imply your self to be an Abetter of this Position, That a
Difference in Religions made by Ceremonies, is to no purpose; what mean you
then by those Loads of needless Ceremonies, which are laid upon your Religion,
which have made the very Axle-tree to crack; are they used to no purpose? why
is the Use of your many needless Ceremonies pressed with such absolute
Necessity, that unless they be observed, there is no obtaining of eternal
Salvation, while the Use of them is to no purpose? it seems that you confess,
that while you fall out with us, for rejecting your Holy Water, and your Beads,
and your Crossings, and your Unctions, and your Ashes, and your Spittings, and
such like Stuff, you fall out with us for things that are used to no purpose: I
thank you for this fair acknowledgment of the Truth, though it dropped unawares
from your Pen, and do promise, whenever I meet with an opportunity, to return
your Courtesy.

But what will you say, if I can prove that a Difference made in Religion by
Ceremonies, does alter the Nature of Religion? Certainly this will be to
purpose, and no hard Task to undergo; when the Composition of Religion is like
unto that Image which Nebuchadnezzar saw in his Dream, part of Gold, part of
Silver, part of Iron, part of Brass, part of Clay; when Religion is made up,
part of necessary Truths, part of superstitious Ceremonies, when the Use of
Ceremonies (by a strange Metamorphosis) is converted into Acts of Religion;
when it is maintained, that ex fide they must be used, because without the Use
of them, neither God is duly worshipped, nor Religion truly exercised, as it is
now in the Church of Rome; this Change by Ceremonies alters Religion from that
Nature it had when it was made up of one sound Metal, in its original Purity.

And now because you have been propounding of Queries, let me assume liberty to
imitate you a little, and to propound as many Queries unto you.

First, Whether God is to have the whole Glory of the work of Man's Salvation?

Secondly, Whether Christ deserves to have the whole Glory of mediating and
interceding for Sinners?

Thirdly, Whether it be the safest way for Man to cast himself down unto the
lowest dust of Humility, before the footstool of God, and to acknowledge his
own worthlesness and unworthiness.

If you grant me the Affirmative of these three Queries, as you must do, unless
you will bring the Guilt of Blasphemy upon your self, I make no question, but
to improve them to be powerful Engines to batter down a great part of the
Structure of your Religion.

Mr. Nich. Grimshaw's Letter, sent with his Reply, to the Answer made unto his
brief Note concerning point of Religion.
It Is now above a Year, since I was so happy as to receive your Answer to my
Note, concerning points of Religion: Immediately after the receipt of which, I
was forced, by importunity of Occasions, to remove into a remote place of the
Kingdom, and consequently to depart in Silence against my will; yet this was my
comfort, that I hoped to return you a Reply with all speed; but I found the old
Proverb truly verified, Man Proposes, but God Disposes: For immediately after
my arrival to my Journeys end, it pleased the Divine providence to visit me
with a sharp Sickness, which confined me to my Bed and Chamber until the 23. of
March; in which time I was not able to look on a Book, much less to set Pen to
Paper: But at last, having recovered my former Strength, I make bold to return
you these Lines, which (I hope) will be a no less satisfactory Reply to your
Answer, than the continuance of my long Sickness, a sufficient Excuse for the
long Silence of

Your Servant, N. G.

A Reply unto the Answer, made unto the brief Note concerning points of
Religion.
I Perceive, by the tenor of your Discourse, in your large Answer to my Brief
Note concerning points of Religion, that you fancy rather to lie in ambush,
catching at men's Words, by wilfully misinterpreting their Sense, than to give a
clear, positive and satisfactory Answer to the Question proposed: For the
greatest part of your whole sheet of Paper, consists of nothing else but verbal
flourishes, intermixed with Erudition and exasperating Language, with which you
beat the Air more than your Adversary: Truly this way is neither Edificative to
the Reader, nor Satisfactory to the Opponent. You are not ignorant, that it is
the chief part of a Polemick, to wave verbal flourishes, and with solid proof
(drawn from Reason or Authority) answer the Question proposed; otherwise the
greatest part of time and paper, would be spent in fighting only with shadows;
and the result would be, parturiunt montes nascitur ridiculus mus, whilst in
the mean time the whole substance of the Question would, in a manner, be passed
in silence.

Wherefore, to avoid this inconvenience of a verbal Engagement, which would
never have an end, words being subject to as many Interpretations as men have
fancies; I will only Answer those few* Paragraphs in your large Discourse which
come nighest the Mark, and touch the Question proposed.

The Question proposed was this:
I. Whether the Religion professed now in England by those you call Papists, be
not the same Religion which St. Austin brought into England. II. Whether the
Religion which St. Austin brought into England, was not the same Religion with
that which the Britains professed, when he came into England? III. Whether the
Religion, professed by the Britains at the same time, was not the same Religion
with that which was first planted in our Country?
To which you Answer, first, That seeing I am of the Affirmative part, you
wonder much that I did not rather prove, than demand: Which to do (say you)
with a substantial proof, such as may be convincing to the non-prejudging
understanding, will require in me, a longer time than the Elephant is in
bringing forth her Young.

Sir, The reason why I did demand, and not prove, was not any difficulty (as
you imagine) that I perceived in so easy an enterprise; it was only to see,
whether you would grant or deny. For if you grant; then habeo intentum: For, if
our Religion be the same with Austins, his with the Britains, and theirs with
that which was first planted in England; it must necessarily follow, that ours
is the true Religion. If you deny; then I have the Testimony of many of your
learned Protestants against you; which Sir (at least with you) ought to be a
substantial and convincing proof to a non-prejudging understanding: For, as
your learned Whittaker does testify, De Ecclesia Controver. 2. Quest. 5. Cap.
14. Firmum sit necesse est Argumentum illud, quod sumitur ex adversariorum
confessione, etc. efficax enim erit adversariorum ipsorum contra ipsos
testimonium, etc. and quidem fateor veritatem etiam e suis inimicis testimonium
extorquere, etc.

If you will only vouchsafe to peruse the beginning of that learned Book,
Entitled, The Protestants Apology for the Roman Church, you shall meet with
undeniable Testimonies of our learned. Adversaries, asserting the Affirmative
of the aforesaid Question, and consequently must be forced to confess, that I
shall not require so long a time to prove the same, as the Elephant is in
bringing forth her Young; the thing being already proved.

If perchance you be not furnished with this Book, be pleased only to peruse
that learned Treatise, Entitled, The Three Conversions of England, and you
will meet with substantial proofs to a non-prejudging Understanding, asserting
the Affirmative of the aforesaid Question.

Your second Answer unto the Question in particular, is Negative: And why?
Because (say you) we may presume, that Austin' s Religion was the same that his
master Pope Gregory professed; and his Religion differs from yours in these
particulars, The Canon of the Scripture; The Sufficiency of the Scripture; The
Reading of the Scripture; The Real Presence; The Private Mass; Communion in
both Kinds; Merit of Good Works; Veneration of Images; The Popes Supremacy; His
Doctrine in these, being the same that is Maintained by the Church of England,
as can be evidenced out of his Writings. Thus you.

Sir, I remember in your verbal Triumph over my Cautional Conclusion
(occasioned by your wilful mistake, sciens and prudens, mis-interpreting my
words quite contrary to the sense they were spoken in) you told me, That you
returned me many Thanks, for the courtesy which I dropped you at unawares;
withal promising, That if ever you met with an opportunity, you would return my
Courtesy. Now Sir, you have met with an opportunity, and I challenge your
promise: For, all the Courtesy that I do require, is, That you would be
pleased to show all these foresaid Points (nay, rather than I should impose too
great a task upon you) or any one of them all; pick and choose where you
please, evidenced out of St. Gregory's Writings. Mark (I beseech you) your own
word, Evidenced, not wrested by your own sinistrous interpretation; be pleased
to set down the Saints own words, or at least cite the place where they are to
be found; which to do, will require in you a longer time, than the Elephant is
in bringing forth her Young.

Your third Answer to this Question, Whether the Religion of St. Austin was the
same with that of the Britains, is also Negative: Your first Reason is this,
Because the ancient Britains told Austin, that they had a Bishop of their own,
to whom they were to submit; therefore they would have nothing to do with the
Bishop of Rome.

Sir, the Fountain from whence this Objection Originally sprang, was Galfridus
Monumetensis, lib. 11. c. 7. whose words, if they be but duly considered with
an impartial Judgment, allow not at all of this your inference; therefore they
would have nothing to do with the Bishop of Rome; for his words are these,
There was an Abbot of Bangor, named Dynoot, that had above two thousand Monks
under his charge, who answered to Austin ( when he required Subjection of the
British Bishops, and that they would join with him to convert the English
Nation) That the Britains owed no Subjection unto him, nor would bestow the
labor of Preaching upon their Enemies, seeing the Britains had an Archbishop of
their own, and that the Saxons took from them their Country, for which cause
they hated them extremely, nor did esteem their Religion, nor would communicate
with them more than with Dogs.

Behold, here is all that is to be found in this Author to this purpose, which
is nothing else (as any impartial Reader may see) but a passionate and
choleric Answer of the Britains, as of men afflicted and exasperated: here is
not so much as one word of their having nothing to do with the Bishop of Rome
(as you and they, the Magdeburgians many years before you infer) but only that
they acknowledged not the Superiority of Austin over the Britains; seeing he
was sent only unto the English, and the Authority of their own Archbishop, was
not taken away by his coming, for any thing they yet knew, but remained as
before: Which Question of Jurisdiction between two Archbishops falls out
daily, even where the Popes Authority is most acknowledged, and so any one that
has Eyes to Read, and Judgment to understand what he reads, may clearly see,
that it is a vain and malicious inference in you and the Magdeburgians to infer
so peremptorily; therefore they would have nothing to do with the Bishop of
Rome: for they speak as you see of Austin's Authority, and not of the Bishops
of Rome, from whom we read not, that he showed to them any Authority to place
him over their Archbishop; and consequently it is a vain inference, which both
you and the Magdeburgians do make out of the Britains Answer, that for so much
as they admitted not of Austins Authority, they would have nothing to do with
the Bishop of Rome.

Your second Reason, why St. Austins Religion was not the same with that of the
Britains, is this; Because (say you) they rejected Austins Traditions.

Sir, I believe the Reason, why you did not set down the Traditions in
particular rejected by the Britains, was because you cannot show any one
Article of Faith (which unless you do, your Objection is nothing to purpose) in
which they dissented from St. Austin; for all the difference that was between
them, was only concerning some certain tolerable differences for that time; as
namely, their Dissent from the use of the Roman Church in their Ministering of
Baptism and keeping of Easter; which latter, as your learned Osiander does
testify in Epitom. Cent. 2. l. 3. c. 2. was tolerated, in like manner by the
Apostles, in regard of the known weakness of some, as for like respect
Circumcision was by them in like sort tolerated, and Abstinence from blood,
and that which was strangled, especially prescribed, Act. 15. 29. all which
argue no more differenee in Articles of Faith betwixt the Britains and St.
Austin, then the keeping of Easter, etc. argued difference in Articles of Faith
betwixt the Apostles, and their new Converts.

Now that the Britains rejected only the Traditions of St. Austin in these (for
that time) tolerable differences; in the first place venerable Beda, does
testify, Hist. l. 2. c. 2. where he mentions this saying of St. Austin to
the Britains, Si in his tribus obtemperare mihi vultis, ut pascha suo tempore
celebretis, ut ministerium Baptizandi quo deo renascimur, juxta morem Romanae
and Apostolicae Ecclesiae compleatis, ut genti Anglorum una nobiscum predicetis
Verbum domini, cetera quae agitis, quamvis moribus nostris contraria,
aequanimiter cuncta tollerabimus: The like is testified by these following
Protestant Writers, Hollinshead. vol. 1. p. 103. Mr. Goodwin in his Catalogue
of Bishops. p. 6. and by the Protestant Author of the History of Great Britain,
printed Anno. 1606. who l. 3. c. 13. says hereof, The Britain- Bishops
conformed themselves to the Doctrine and Ceremonies of the Church of Rome
without any difference in any thing, specially remembered, save only in the
Celebration of Easter, etc.

By which their so earnest dissenting, about these only matters of smaller
importance, is most plainly signified unto us, their full Agreement in all
Articles of Faith: for the Britains who contradicted St. Austin, and that so
earnestly, about these so few and small matters, would never have been silent;
but much rather have withstood in the other so many and incomparably much
greater points, had they in like sort disagreed from him therein: nay, and
their Union in Faith is yet farther proved; because the Britain-Bishops as then
confessed, that it was the right way of Justice and Righteousness which Austin
taught: Tum Britones quidem confitentur intellexisse se, veram esse justitiae
viam, quam proedicaret Augustinus: Beda l. 2. c. 2. The which is farther
confirmed by your learned writer Mr. Fulke, affirming that Austin did at the
last obtain the aid of the British-Bishops, to the Conversion of the Saxons.
Fulke in his confutation of Purgatory: p. 335.

And whereas you peremptorily affirm, that Austin, because the Britains
rejected his Traditions, inflamed the wrath of Ethelbert King of Kent against
them, who raised his Forces, and murdered about twelve hundred of them, the
Monk himself being in his company, is (to say no worse) a gross mistake; for it
was not Ethelbert King of Kent, but Edilfred King of Northumbers that committed
this horrid Massacre of the Monks, as Beda does testify. l. 2. c. 2. in these
ensuing words.

It happened afterward that the most mighty King of the English men Edilfred
gathering a great Army, made a foul slaughter of this unfaithful and naughty
people, (to wit) the Monks of Bangor; for being now ready to give the onset of
the fight, when he espied the Priests, which came together to pray for their
Soldiers Warring, stand a part from the rest in a sure and safe place, he
demanded what they were, and to what end they came thither, etc. The cause of
their coming thither, when King Edilfred had understood, he said, If these men
cry and call upon their God against us; truly, although they have no Armor,
yet they fight against us, etc. therefore he commanded his Soldiers first to
assault them, etc. So you see, that it was not for rejecting Austin's
Traditions, that these men were slain (as you would fain persuade the Ignorant)
but for coming to pray for their Army, whereby the Heathen King was mightily
exasperated, fearing lest their Prayers might obtain of Almighty God the
victory against him; your own writers, Speed and Fox acknowledge the same.

Moreover, it is no less gross mistake in you so peremptorily to affirm, that
St. Austin himself was present at this slaughter. For Fox, your great Writer,
does confess that both Huntington and other Authors affirm, that St. Austin was
dead when this slaughter happened; and venerable Beda. l. 2. c. 2. does
testify the same in these words, The Holy Bishop St. Austin was himself long
before taken out of this Life unto the Kingdom of Heaven. True it is Austin did
Prophecy (as Beda does testify in the same Book and Chapter) that the
Britains, because they were refractory, refusing to submit unto his wholesome
counsel, and Preach the Word of God unto English men, should suffer the
temporal punishment of death from the English; which Prophecy was fulfilled in
this battle, long after St. Austins death; In this manner (says Venerable Beda
having described the slaughter) was fulfilled the Prophecy of the Holy Bishop
Austin, who was himself, long before that, taken out of this Life into the
Kingdom of Heaven. And thus these ungracious and false People, suffered the
punishment of temporal Death; because they had refused and despised, the
wholesome Counsel of perpetual Life and Salvation offered unto them: Beda. l. 2.
c. 2. So you see, that this very slaughter of the Monks, which you unadvisedly
brought against us, makes clearly against you; for they were slain, it is
true, but by whom? by Ethelbert King of Kent? no, but by Edilfred King of
Northumbers, as your own Writers do tell you: Was it done by the Instigation of
St. Austin then present? no, for long before that, he was taken, out of this
Life unto the Kingdom of Heaven; but why did Almighty God permit this great
slaughter of these Monks? because (says venerable Beda) they refused and
despised the wholesome counsel of perpetual Life and Salvation, offered to them
by the Holy Bishop St. Austin; which makes me to say with your learned
Whittaker, Fateor veritatem etiam e suis inimicis testimonium extorquere; and
withal, leave it to the serious Consideration of the Impartial Reader, whether
or no, you have not dealt most Disingeniously, in so peremptorily affirming
these two gross Mistakes, quite contrary, not only to your own Authors, but
even to venerable Beda himself, a Witness in this point without Exception: For
living near the time of St. Austin, and withal being a Man so eminent, both for
Virtue and Learning, that he is known by the name of Venerable; he cannot
choose but be a substantial Proof, to convince a Non-prejudging Understanding,
that you were either wilfully or ignorantly mistaken; either whereof argues no
less then an indelible Stain to the Reputation of your calling.

Sir, I do not question, but these specious Pretexts of your fallacious
Arguments, may easily induce the illitterate Rabble, to believe what you
please; for they looking upon you as their Oracle, placed in the Chair of
Moses, to dictate nothing but Verities, acquiesce without further inquiry, to
what you say; because (forsooth) ipse dixit: But the learneder sort, which have
the least Scantling in the knowledge of Antiquity, cannot choose but smile in
their Sleeves, to see one of your Profession, so peremptorily affirm two such
gross Mistakes; and without bringing any one Authority, either modern or
ancient, save only your naked Affirmation in your own Cause; which I suppose,
you will not presume should be looked upon, as a substantial Proof, to convince
a Non-prejudging Understanding; especially meeting with such undeniable
Testimony to the contrary, not only of your own Authors, but also of Venerable
Beda; the Authority of whom, is of more force, to convince a Non-prejudging
Understanding, then any one you can bring to the contrary.

Your fourth Answer to this Question, whether the Religion professed by the
Britains, when Austin came into England, etc. is this: That neither You nor I,
can determine certainly on either side, unless we do (as the man did, that
writ of the World in the Moon) take upon us, to write of things of so great
Distance from us, as cannot come within the compass of our Cognizance.

Sir, I can scarce persuade my self, the World is so Lunatic in the affairs of
Antiquity, as you pretend: If you please to peruse the beginning of the
aforesaid Book, entitled The Protestants Apology for the Roman Catholic
Church; you shall see, that these things came within the Cognizance of the
Author thereof; and withal find substantial Proof, for the Affirmative* of the
said Question, which may convince a Non-prejudging Understanding; and lastly be
forced to confess, that to prove the Affirmative of the aforesaid Questions,
there is not a longer time required, then the Elephant is in bringing forth her
young.

After these your aforesaid Answers, which have not so much as the Shadow of a
substantial Proof, to convince a Non-prejudging Understanding, you propose unto
me three Queries; the Affirmative whereof (say you) if granted; you make no
question, but to improve them to be powerful Engines, to batter down the
greatest part, of the Fabric of our Religion.

Your first Query is this, Whether God be to have the whole glory of the Work
of man's Salvation? To which I answer Affirmatively; but deny the sinistrous
Consequence, which you usually hence infer, Therefore no merit of good works;
for though there be no Insufficiency in the Actions or passions of Christ the
Head; yet his Wisdom, Will and Justice requires and ordains, that his Body
and Members, should be Fellows of his Passions, as they look to be Fellows of
his Glory; that so suffering with him and by his Example, they may apply unto
themselves and to others, the general Medicine of Christ's merits and
satisfactions, as it is also effectually applied unto us by Sacraments; the one
sort being no more injurious unto Christ's death, nor consequently hindering him
of the whole Glory of the work of man's Salvation, then the other;
notwithstanding your vain clamours, that would upon the Pretense of Christ
passions take away the Value of good Works: if you please to peruse St. Paul's
Epistle to the Colossians (c. 1. v. 24.) you may see how the Apostle taught and
practiced this Doctrine. Neither do I see, what pretense you can have, to
affirm, that the Merit of good Works, hinders God of the whole Glory of the
Work of man's Salvation, seeing the said Merit is a pure Gift of God, and no
less his than his own; for not only those passions, which Christ suffered in
himself, which were fully ended at his death, and were in themselves abundantly
sufficient for the Redemption of the World, and of all sins; but also those,
which his body and members suffer, are Christ's also, because of him they
receive the Condition, Quality, and Force to be meritorious and satisfactory.

Your second Query is this, Whether Christ deserve to have the whole Glory of
mediating and interceding for Sinners? To which I answer also Affirmatively;
but withal deny the sinistrous Consequence which you hence infer, Therefore we
must not pray to Saints; for it does no more derogate from Christ's whole Glory
of mediating for sinners, to pray unto Saints in Heaven, then to pray unto the
Faithful upon Earth, (if it do, I pray you show me the Disparity) and yet our
Prayers unto the Faithful upon Earth, does not at all derogate from Christ's
whole Glory, etc. Witness the Practice of the Apostle Paul in this very point
to the Romans Epist. ad. Romans c. 15. I beseech you Brethren, for the Lord Jesus
Christ's sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that you strive together with me
in your Prayers to God for Me, etc. These be the words of your own Translation,
in the year, 1662.

Your third and last Query is this, Whether it be the safest way for man, to
cast himself down to the lowest dust of Humility before the Footstool of God,
and to acknowledge his own worthlesness, and unworthiness? To which I Answer
Affirmatively, as above; and am now in great expectation, to see you improve
these three Queries to be powerful Engines, to batter down the greatest part of
the Fabric of our Religion.

But before you do embroyl your self in this new Engagement, of demolishing the
Fabric of our Religion, I must make bold to entreat these following Favors of
you, which in Honor you are bound to perform.

First, that you would show me any one of the foresaid Points, evidenced out of
St. Gregory's works; mark I beseech you, your own word evidenced, not wrested
by your own sinistrous Interpretation; cite faithfully the Saints Words, or at
least the Place, where they are to be found: pick and choose which of the
foresaid Points you please.

Secondly, that you would show me any one Article of Faith, included in the
Traditions of Austin, rejected by the Britains, in which the Britains dissented
from St Austin.

Thirdly, that you would show me a substantial Proof, which may convince a
non-prejudging Understanding, affirming that the foresaid Monks were not slain
by Edilfred the Heathen King of Northumbers, but by Ethelbert the Christian
King of Kent, and by the instigation of St Austin being present, as you
peremptorily affirm.

Fourthly, that you would stick to the thing you undertake to prove, until such
time as you have sufficiently proved it, without diverting to any other point.

Fifthly, that you would be pleased to desist from wilfully misinterpreting my
Words, quite contrary to the sense they were spoken in; diverting thereby the
Reader, from the true state of the question; as you did in your answer to my
note, leaving no more Connection between my Words and my meaning, then there is
coherence in, which is my way to London, a poak full of Plumbs. I do not
question, but this uncharitable manner of proceeding, may easily induce the
illitterate Rabble, which have scarce wit to distinguish right from left, to
pass a rash judgment upon your Adversary; but withal will be sufficient witness
to a Learned Jury, to make them bring in their verdict against you, according
to your desert. I confess this pitiful shift, afords you a starting hole to
your impertinent Erudition, verbal Flourishes, rhetorical Excursions, and such
like impertinence; but when you have talked your self weary, the result is vox
and preterea nihil; you have only catched shadows, and aerem verlerans whipped
your self more than your Adversary, as incurring hereby the just Censure of
unhandsome dealing.

Sir, Seeing the dispute betwixt me and you, is not as it is among Butter-women
at the Market-Cross, that either you or I may have the upper hand therein; but
that Naked-Truth may have place: I must make bold to beg one favor more, that
you would be pleased to abstain from such reviling and exasperating language,
fit rather to be spoken in the confusion of Babel, than by one of your calling,
as you unadvisedly vented in your answer to my note; for in troubled waters
truth can never be discerned, and as St. Paul says in his first Epistle to the
Corinthians Chapter the Eleventh, If any man seem to be contentious, we have no
such custom, nor the Church of God.

A Letter sent to N. ^ concerning the Reply made unto the Answer of his brief
note.
Sir,
HAd not Divine Providence (as you say it dealt with you) appointed me to a
great Indisposition of body, you had long since received a Rejoinder to your
Reply: and now it comes into the World as Ichabod did, being the Issue of an
hasty Travail; though I have not yet enjoyed the date you used in replying
(which in Equity should have been granted) yet some Philistines, that defy the
Truths of the everliving God, begin to triumph, as if my pen was struck dumb by
yours.

To silence these, that it may not be told in Gath, nor Published in the
streets of Askalon, that there is any weakness in the Cause maintained, or
difficulty in the Work to be done by me, it anticipates my recovery, and comes
forth before my health affords me the liberty and opportunity, of taking that
serious view of your Reply, and of the Authors to whom you send me, which I
desired to bestow upon them.

By that hasty Perusal I have made, I find your Reply speaking this Truth, spes
est rei incertae nomen; it is so far from being satisfactory to me (as you
hoped) that it has mightily confirmed me in my judgment, against the Cause
maintained by you, and made me to fall somewhat, in my good Opinion of your
Person; giving me occasion to think, that you are a man that will do and speak
any thing, for the advancing of your own Interest; because you bring many heavy
Charges against me, for which you have no more reason, than the man had for his
Conceit, who thought his Body to be made of glass, which was only the working
of his disturbed Brain.

1. You accuse me of Impertinency; but this is very impertinently done by you,
because you have not showed, how and wherein my answer has run beyond the
limits of your Queries.

2. You charge me with reviling and exasperating Language; but because you have
not (as I am sure you could not do) directed the Reader, to one reviling and
exasperating word given by me, it persuades me to believe, that in this you did
but imitate the man in the Comedy, who when he met with his Adversary, cried
out against him, O damned Villain, because he had nothing else to say.

3. You inveigh against our common People, terming them an illiterate Rabble,
detained by us in Ignorance, on purpose to keep them possessed with a Prejudice
against your Religion; but of all the men in the world, you have least Reason
to object this against us; because while you accuse us, you condemn your
selves; you train up your People as Faulkoners do Hawks, keeping them
constantly Hoodwinked, lest the light of Truth should shine into their
understandings.

4. You accuse me of Scolding and Brawling, but whether you or I do bewray most
the true Genius of a Scold, let the indifferent Judge determine; when he finds
who is most guilty of railing Language, of needless Repetitions, of multitudes
of words used to no purpose; which are the natural productions of Scolds.

If you be offended at my Similitudes, you discover your Ignorance of the
nature of that kind of Illustration, nulla similitudo currit quatuor pedibus:
do but take them in that purpose, for which they are used by me, and do not
apply the remaining part to your self any more than I do, and you will find
Reason forbidding you to fume at the use of them.

The Cause that I do maintain, scorns the help of such rotten Supports as
these, and leaves them to be used by those, who do maintain a Cause, that is
like unto a Cripple; who, because he wants the Strength of natural Legs, is
glad to creep on any fashion, and to make use of wooden legs to go on.

Truth will stand by its own native strength against all Opposition; though the
raines of Aspersions do fall, and the floods of false Accusations do come; yea
though the Winds of Persecutions do blow and beat against it; yet (being
founded upon the Rock) it will not fall, but according to the sentence of those
Judges, that were to determine what was strongest, magna est veritas and
praevalebit.

A Rejoinder to the Reply made unto the Answer of a Note, entitled a brief
Note concerning Points of Religion.
SHould I tell you, that you are fallen out with your brief Note, you would say
that I lie in Ambush to catch at your words, by wilfully mistaking your
meaning; what mean you then by entituling your three Queries now, so as to make
them all but one Question, the question (say you) propounded was this, etc.
there is reason to suspect some design in it; but I matter not what it is,
because I do not fear any disadvantage, to fall unto the Truth by it: but I
would have the Reader to consider, how much Credit is to be yielded to your
words, being that you are thus contradictory to your self; if it be not a
Contradiction, pray resolve me, how three distinct Queries can be but one
Question, and that one Question entitled a brief Note concerning Points of
Religion.

And here in the beginning of your Reply, I find the old proverb to be
verified, Claudius accusat Maechum; you are guilty of that, for which you have
accused and condemned me. Here are verbal Flourishes and rhetorical Excursions,
charging me highly of many misdemeanors committed in my Answer, and promising
great things for your self, how exact and pertinent you will be in your
following Reply; to dispel (as a light vapor) all that is material in my
Answer. Thus while by fair flourishes you raise a mist before the eyes of your
Reader, you lurk away without taking notice of a great part of my Answer upon
the pretended ground of Impertinency.

But tell me seriously, is it Impertinent to examine the nature of your
Queries? I told you, that the Determination of them on either side was
unnecessary: First for the common People; this I put you in mind of, in the
beginning of my Answer, therefore I desired to hear of some reason, why you
would send out such Queries; you who pretend so much unto Edification, charging
my Answer as ineffectual in relation to this end, should have given some Reason
for this, to shield your self from the imputation of loading their heads with
unnescessary Positions, and puzling their brains with such like Queries; you
should have proved the Determination of them to be edificative, which being not
done, your talking of Edification may be deservedly interpreted mere
Dissimulation.

Secondly, Unnecessary for your Self, as to the effecting of that end you
looked at, in propounding of your Queries; wherefore I demanded earnestly to
know, why you would have these three Queries disputed, while the Disputation of
one (namely whither your Religion be the same, that was taught by Christ and
his Apostles) would bring us sooner to the Knowledge of the Truth: I will tell
you once again, that if you have no better Arguments, to prove your Religion to
be true, then such as Jews and Turks may use for the proof of their Religion,
such as Antiquity and Succession; for all your great braggs, yours may be (as
theirs is) The mere invention of Man.

But necessary or not, you must have your Queries determined, or else the
Truth, pretended to belong unto your Religion, falls unto the Ground; what is
the Reason of this impatient Longing? Sure, it is some great Distemper, which
you know to be in your Religion, for which you distrust it, as not able to
endure the Trial of the infallible Rule.

And, I find you very scarce of Arguments, to prove your Religion to be true,
being that you are so earnest, to have that which is necessary to be known,
proved by that Knowledge which is unnecessary; whether your Religion be true or
false, is necessary to be known; but whether Austin was of your Religion, or
the ancient Britains was of his; or whether the Religion of the ancient
Britains, was the same with the primitive Religion, is not necessary to be
known. There are many precious Souls gone to Heaven, that never heard of you,
nor Austin, nor the ancient Britains; and yet this is the grand Method you
use, and hence you would draw a convincing Argument, to prove the Truth you
claim for your Religion.

Well, because you dote upon this Argument (as much as the Ape does upon her
Issue, though never so deformed) I am content, you should use the Strength of
it against me, and let us see how advantageous the Management of it will prove
for you. Thus you argue, that Religion which Austin professed is true; but the
Religion now professed by the Papists in England, is the same that Austin
professed, ergo, etc.

Your Assumption, being one of the things in question, shall not be spoken to
now; how you do prove it, will be examined in its proper place. The Juncture of
your Queries tells me, that you must prove your Major thus; that the Religion,
which the ancient Britains professed in Austins time, is true; but the
Religion of Austin is the same which the ancient Britains in his time
professed, ergo etc. your Assumption likewise being another thing in question,
shall be passed by until another Opportunity; it is your Major I shall speak to.

It should seem that you are not the man I took you to be; are you not a Roman
Catholic? This is a Title you assume unto your self, though there be a
Contradiction in the terms; and will you forsake your Colors, and fight under
another Banner? Have you not forsaken the Roman Church, which sometime you say
is the infallible Guide? And do you not fly unto the poor distressed Britains
for help? You must confess your self to be guilty of this Practice, or else you
must throw away your Argument. I hope you are not ignorant of this, that the
Medium used for a proof, must be more evident than the Thing proved; you must
confess then, that the Religion professed by the Britains, was more evidently
true, then that professed by Austin, or that of the Roman-Church; otherwise why
do you draw an Argument thence, to prove Austins Religion to be true? and why
an Argument thence, rather than from the Religion of the Roman Church? Pray
Sir, let me know, whether you claim a Succession in Religion from the ancient
Britains, as well as you are beholding to them for this Argument? It seems to
me, that you do acknowledge this Claim; were I assured of it, I could make
excellent use of it against you.

The Major Proposition you prove thus; The Religion brought into England by its
first Convertors (it being that which was taught by Christ and his Apostles) is
true; but the Religion professed by the ancient Brittans, is the same that was
brought into England by its first Convertors, ergo etc. the Assumption I
likewise pass by, until another time of Consideration.

The Major is an undeniable Truth; the Religion first brought into England, the
Religion taught by Christ and his Apostles is true, here we do rest our selves,
upon this Rock do we build, and hither by the conduct of your queries do you
fly; why did you not use this medium at first, to prevent the unnecessary
Travel that you have made? is it not a far more easy work to examine, whether
your Religion be the same, that was taught by Christ and his Apostles; than to
examine whither yours be the same with Austins, Austins the same with that of
the ancient Britains, the ancient Britains the same with that taught by
Christ and his Apostles? Let us then leave Austin and the ancient Britains, to
stand or fall to their own Master, and let us dispute this Question fairly,
whether your Religion be the same that was taught by Christ and his Apostles?
and if you can convince me of the Truth of the Affirmative, by proving your
Religion to be conformable unto the infallible Rule, (where we are to inquire
for the Religion taught by Christ and his Apostles) I will be of your Religion;
until that be done, I am obliged, by that little knowledge which I have, to
remain as I am.

Having put you in mind of that part of my Answer, with which you were pleased
to deal, as the Levite dealt with the wounded man, only looking upon it, and
passing it by, I come now to examine the matter of your Reply.

Reply.

You say the Reason why you did demand and not Prove, was not any Difficulty
that you perceived in so easy an enterprise; it was only to see, whether I
would grant or deny: If I Grant, you attain your end; if I Deny, you have the
Testimony of many learned Protestants, to prove the Affirmative of the
aforesaid Question; besides you have the Proofs used by the Author of the
Three Conversions of England.

Rejoinder.

You send me for a Proof of your Affirmative, unto the Author of the Book
called the Three Conversions of England, and to the Author of that called The
Protestants Apology for the Roman Church: Surely, this is a compendious way of
proving, and very cheap too, costing very little pains; and do you think that
it is substantial enough to prove your Affirmative? because you have sent it to
me, as an argument endowed with that great ability, you are bound by the Law of
Retaliation, to accept of the like proof from me, as substantial enough to
prove my Negative; be pleased then to peruse that learned Treatise, called the
Protestants Appeal written by Dr. Moorton, where you will find your Apology for
the Roman Church substantially confuted, together with Arguments, taken from
your own learned Writers, to confirm my Negative. Peruse likewise that
Treatise, called, The Subversion of the three Conversions written by Dr.
Sutcliffe; and you will find Arguments there for the same purpose. Thus you
teach me to argue by your Example, being that my Argument, is as like unto
yours, as one Egg is unto another, there is great reason, that you should
suffer it to have as powerful working upon your self, as you expect yours
should have upon me: So there is no need, that I should stand to refute your
Affirmative, or to confirm my Negative, the work being done already to my hands.

But what mean you by foresaid Question, for the Proof of the Affirmative of
which (you say) you have the Testimony of many learned Protestants? if you mean
one of the three Queries singly, then which of them is it? The first or second,
or third? you should have expressed which it is, then had you played your Game
above-board; it may be that you can produce some Protestant Writers, asserting
the Affirmative of some one of them; if you would therefore persuade your
Reader, to believe that there are Protestant Writers, that do grant the
Affirmative of all; this is real Juggling.

If by foresaid Question, you mean all the three Queries; I wonder that you are
not ashamed to vent such an Expression; can you persuade any one to believe,
that a Protestant (while he is a Protestant) will maintain the Affirmative of
all the three Queries? that your Religion is the same with Austins, his the
same with the ancient Britains, theirs the same with that first brought into
England; is not this in effect to say, that your Religion is the same that was
taught by Christ and his Apostles? and will any Protestant say this? is not
this ipso facto to renounce the Protestants as false, and to acknowledge yours
to be true? and will or can any Protestant (while he is a Protestant) do so?
surely that Religion has but a weak Foundation, that needs to be supported
with such Stories as these.

And here you deal with me, as the man did who challenged his enemy into the
field, but when he came to the place appointed, (for reasons best known to
himself) refused to combat, but b^ought two Seconds to maintain his Quarrel,
while he stood by as a Judge, to determine concerning the Victory. The Quarrel
being begun with you, it is neither valiantly nor reasonably done by you, to
send me into the lists, to encounter with your Seconds: have you a Power of
imposing such Tasks upon me? and will you say that my Rejoinder is not a
sufficient Return unto your Reply, unless I swell it to the Bulk of confuting
such large Volumes? be pleased to send me a brief Account of the Arguments used
by your Authors (in whom I perceive the strength of your confidence is fixed)
and the more to provoke you, I challenge you to the doing of it; and if I do
not refute them, I will then acknowledge them to be (such as you say they are)
substantial.

I leave it now to the Judicious Reader to determine, whether you have
performed that enterprise (which you account so easy,) of proving the
Affirmative of your Queries with substantial Arguments, such as may be
convincing to the Non-prejudging Understanding; truly this cannot be done by
sending me to Authors, who produce some Testimonies, speaking nothing to your
purpose, and who use some arguments, as lame in their Propositions, as the
Cause is, which they endeavor to strengthen; if I do wrong your Authors by
this imputation, I hope you will vindicate them, by displaying their arguments
to be viewed in their greatest strength.

If you would prove the Affirmative of your Queries thus exactly, you should
first set down all the points of Faith, that do belong unto your Religion; and
then prove that Austin brought all, and no more into England; and then prove
that all, and no more, were maintained by the ancient Britains; and then that
all, and no more were preached by the first Convertors of England: to do all
this (without which there can be no substantial Proof made for your
Affirmative) you may take a longer time then the Elephant is in bringing forth
her young; I believe you may as the Areopagites did with their hard Causes, put
it off ad longissimum diem.

2. You Reply to my Answer made in particular to the first Query; and here you
begin to boast, as if my expression had given you an Advantage to improve to my
utter Overthrow; you challenge me (with a great measure of Confidence in the
impossibility of the work) to produce the Testimony of Gregory, to witness
evidently his Doctrine, in any one of the particulars mentioned, to be the same
that is maintained by the Church of England; for thus you say.

Reply.

Be pleased to show all these foresaid points, nay rather then I should impose
too great a task on you, or any one of them all, pick and choose where you
please; evidenced out of Gregory's writings, mark beseech you your own word,
(evidenced) not wrested by your sinistrous interpretation; be pleased to set
down the Saints own words, or at the least, cite the place where they are to be
found, which to do will require in you, a longer time then the Elephant is in
bringing forth her young.

Rejoinder*

Ante victoriam noli cantare triumphum, let not him that girdeth on his
Harness, boast as he that puts it off; I can with ease perform your imposed
task. In relation to the Cannon of the Scripture, Gregory expresses himself
thus, Non inordinate agimus, si ex libris licet non canonicis, sed tamen ad
Edificationem ecclesiae editi^ testimonium proferamus; he speaks of the Book of
Machabees, and can you have a plainer Testimony than this, Greg. mor. l. 19. c.
13. art. 6. here is no need of wresting his words, mark (I beseech you) they
are evident for me. Hence your Canus expresses himself after this manner,
Machabeorum libros ab ecclesia recipi Gregorio licuit aliquando disputare, it
is plain by the Doctrine of Gregory, that the Book of Machabees did not belong
unto the Canon of Scripture, Can. loc. theol. l. 2. c. 11. whether does this
Doctrine agree to that of your Church, which denounces an Anathema to all that
will not receive the Book of Machabees for canonical^ Scripture, Con. Trid.
Sess. 4. or to that of the Church of England, which excludes it from the Canon.

By producing this one Testimony out of Gregory, it being as evident as the
Sun, I suppose your enjoined Task is sufficiently performed; but because I did
undertake to produce his Testimony, for every one of these mentioned
particulars, I will bound my Actions according to my* own undertaking, not to
your imposition.

Concerning the Sufficiency of the Scripture, Gregory has these words, in hac
volumine, omnia quae erudiunt, cuncta quae edificant, Scripta continentur, in
this Book (says he, speaking of the Holy Scriptures) are contained all things
that are necessary for Instruction and Edification. Greg. in Ezekiel. hom. l. 1.
hom. 9.

For the reading of the Holy Scripture, you find him instructing Theodorus, a
Phisician and Lay person thus; The Holy Scripture is an Epistle sent from God
unto his Creature, I pray thee therefore study them, and daily meditate on the
words of thy Creator. Greg. l. 4. Epist. 40.

Of the real Presence you have him venting this expression, Pensemus quale sit
hoc sacrificium, quod pro absolutione nostra Passionem filii semper imitatur;
Let us consider what kind of Sacrifice this is, that does imitate the passion
of the Son of God for our Absolution; Greg. dial. l. 4. c. 58. He terms the
Lords Supper a Sacrifice, but how is it a Sacrifice? by way of Imitation,
because it is an imitation of his Passion.

Against the private Mass you find him ordaining thus, Cumque in eadem
Ecclesia missarum solennia celebrarentur, atque ex more Diaconus clamaret si
quis non communicet, det locum; When Mass is celebrated in the Church, and the
Deacon according to the custom cries out, if any one will not Communicate, Let
him depart; Greg. dial. l. 2. c. 13. You see the People by his Command, were
not to be idle Spectators, to behold the gestures of the Priest, while he only
received the Sacrament, but they that were prepared, were to Communicate with
him, and the rest were to depart.

For the Communion in both kinds, you have him speaking after this manner, You
have learned what the blood of the Lamb is by drinking, not by hearing; Greg.
de cons. did. 2. It seems then there was Drinking used in the Administration
of the Sacrament; if you will believe the Centurists (whom your Apologist has
brought forth as witnesses in your own cause) they will tell you, this is the
opinion they entertained concerning him, in relation to this particular, de
caena domini recte docet Gregorius, the Doctrine that Gregory delivered
concerning the Lords Supper is true, Cent. 6. de Greg. I have the testimony of
your Apologist on my side for this, he tells you that Austin brought into
England with his other Utensils, Chalices and Pots; for what use think you, did
he bring them? Your Suares will determine this; In the former days (says he)
when the Sacrament was administered in both kinds, besides the Priests Cups,
there were others to be employed only for the use of the People, Tom. 3. disp.
81.

Against the Merit of good Works you have him speaking thus, I grow unto
Eternal Life, not by the Merit of my Works, but by the pardon of my Sins,
presuming to obtain that only by the mercy of God, which I do not hope for by
my own desert, Greg. in Job. and in Psalm.

Against the Worship of Images, you may read what he said to Serenus, Bishop of
Massilia, Though you did well in forbidding the Adoration of them, yet it was
inconsiderate Zeal in you, to break down those Historial Pictures, which are
set up only for the instruction of the ignorrnt, not for Adoration, Greg. l. 9.
Epist. 109. Agrippa speaks this concerning him, It is certain that Gregory
allowed not the Worship of Images, Agrip. de van. c. 70.

What an Enemy he was unto the Popes Supremacy, your self will confess, (unless
you have steeled your Forehead to maintain an Opinion, contrary to his own
express Testimony in many places of his Writings) he calls the Title of
Universal Bishop a Title of Novelty, Error, Impiety, Blasphemy, the universal
Poison of the Church, contrary to the Ancient Cannons, to St. Peter, to the
Holy Gospel, and God himself, Greg. l. 4. Epist. 32. and 37. and 39.
Pronouncing any one, that shall presume to challenge it, to be the Forerunner
of Antichrist; whereupon Cardinal Cusanus says of him, by the Doctrine of
Gregory, no Bishop, except he will be like unto Lucifer in presumption, may
bear such Rule, as to make all other Bishops subject unto him.

Now give judgment uprightly, speaking, as you are obliged, by convincing
Reason (once according to the truth of the Thing, and not according to the
groundless affection you bear unto your own Cause) and tell me whether the
Doctrine of Gregory in these particulars, be the same with the Doctrine of the
Church of England? the matter is so plain, that unless you wilfully shut your
eyes against the light, you cannot deny it; go then and divide between Pope
Gregory, and his Legate Austin, by saying that they were different in Religion,
or else confess ingenuously, that your Religion is not the same, that was
brought by Austin into England.

Notwithstanding all your great brags of Antiquity, the Religion now professed
by you, wants so much of the date of Austins, that it is no older than the
Counsel of Trent, and to make good what I say, I shall lay down these following
positions.

The first is made by Veroon (one of your great Champions) mustering all his
Forces for the maintenance of your Religion; he tells you in his Rule of Faith,
that that Doctrine is an Article of faith, which has Divine Revelation, and
the Churches Proposition, either by her general practice, or by the definition
of a general Council; These two Requisites he makes the formal cause of an
Article of Faith.

The second is this, the Additions of Doctrines for Articles of Faith, which
were not Articles of Faith before, unto the Religion formerly professed, does
alter Religion really from what it was. Articles of Faith are the essential
parts of Religion, and the addition of more Essentials to a compound, alters
the Compound: What is it which changes Religion from its primitive
Constitution? it must be either Additions or Substractions, either of which
being made, the necessary Result is, a real Change in Religion.

The third is this, by the Council of Trent there were many Doctrines
propounded and defined to ^ Articles of Faith, which were not Articles of Fait^
before; which is proved, because they were not propounded for such by the
Church, either by her general Practice, or by the definition of a general
Council: that they were not generally practiced for such before is clear
enough; because they were defined to be such by the Counsel of Trent. For the
Definition of a general Council is to correct the want of general Practice,
otherwise that definition is unnecessary. If a Doctrine be received by the
universal Church for an Article of Faith, what need is there of a general
Council to define it to be an Article of Faith? And that they were not defined
before, is as clear; for if they were defined before, where was the
Infallibility of your Head the Pope? Was it not an Error in him to summon a
Council, to perform an unnecessary work, to do that which was done before? and
if they were defined before, show me to what Council or Councils, the Council
of Trent agrees in all its Definitions: From all this it necessarily follows,
that the body of Religion, compacted by the Council of Trent, is not the same
that was professed before.

Whether this Discourse be rational and concluding, I submit to the
determination of better Judgments; and how you will avoid the force of it, I
desire to know; for I profess my self to be a Learner, and would fain be
undeceived in any Opinion maintained by me, that can be proved to be contrary
to the Truth: You cry out upon us to show, where our Religion was before
Luther, as if it was a Child of his begetting, and never saw the light before
he brought it into the world: But we have greater reason to call upon you, and
demand where your Religion was before the Council of Trent; until I be
convinced by stronger Arguments, than I have found yet in any of your Writers;
I will maintain this to be a Truth, that the Religion professed by you, looks
no farther toward Antiquity, than unto the late little Council of Trent.

In the third place, you reply unto the Answer made unto the second Query; and
here ( I believe) you conceit your main strength to lie; because you have taken
such pains in penning a long Discourse, charging me with a vain and malicious
Inference, together with two gross and shameful Mistakes: And indeed if the
Charge was deserved, there would be some matter of boasting for you; but when I
have spoken in my own Defense, I shall desire the Judicious Reader to
determine, at whose door the gross mistakes deserve most to be laid, whether
at mine or yours?

The vain and malicious Inference, with which you charge me is, for concluding
from the words of Galfridus Monumetensis, that the ancient Britains would have
nothing to do with the Bishop of Rome; but if you were required to prove, that
I made this Inference from his words, you would find but a feeble Argument for
it, unless you can prove, that you know every thing that is done by me, or that
there is no other Author that speaks to my purpose: But let this pass, and
let us reason a little concerning the force of his words, in what they may
freely intimate unto us, without any stress laid upon them; and I doubt not but
to make it plain to your own understanding, that you had no reason to say, that
the deduction made from his words is vain and malicious.

Reply.

You say, he reports the Britains returning this Answer unto Austin ( when he
required subjection from them) That they owed no subjection unto him, because
they had an Archbishop of their own, to whom they were to subject themselves.

Rejoinder.

Let me ask you, whether Austin had a Commission to require Subjection from
them or not? if you say, he had not, you make him a strange kind of Apostle;
while he should have been diligent in employing his utmost endeavors for the
Conversion of Pagans, you report him to be exercising of Pride and Ambition, in
requiring subjection from them, from whom he was not authorized to require any
such thing.

If you say that he had a Commission, and did not show it; (as indeed there is
somewhat in your words to this purpose, you say that you do not read, that he
showed any Commission unto them,) but this is but a weak Argument to prove that
he did not show it) then you make him guilty of Indiscretion and
Uncharitableness in his carriage toward the Britains. Think you that it was
any part of Discretion and Charity in Austin, to conceal that which would have
sheilded him, from the Imputation of Pride and Ambition, and would have helped
to compose the difference between them; if the Britains acknowledged that to
be true, which you say is a Maxim, to wit, that every Christian should be
subject to the Bishop of Rome?

Now choose whether you will brand your Apostle of England (as you style him)
with Pride and Ambition, by saying he had no Commission? or with Indiscretion
and Uncharitableness, by saying he did not show it? or will grant, that he did
show it? I suppose this last mentioned, will be the object of your Choice,
rather than you will acknowledge him to be guilty of so great failing as is
mentioned, in managing the Trust committed unto him by his Master; and tell me
whether it be a vain and malicious Inference, to conclude from the words of
Galfridus Monumetensis, that the Britains returned this Answer unto Austin,
that they would have nothing to to do with the Bishop of Rome; if they denied
to yield Subjection unto Austin, authorized by the Pope, and knowing him to be
authorized to require Subjection from them; this is not only to reject Austin,
but also the Bishop of Rome, and to have nothing to do with them both.

But yet I have not done with you as to this matter: You say, that for any
thing the Britains did know, Austin was sent only to the English: sure you
would have the Brittain-Bishops to be mere Idiots: Did they not know that he
required subjection from them? And do you think that they would not (as the
Scribes and Pharisees demanded of our Savior) enquire of him, by what
authority he did those things, and who gave him that Authority?

Beda tells us, that Pope Gregory gave him authority to require Subjection from
them; Bed. Hist. l. 1. c. 27. And no doubt, had they not known this, that he
was sent to them, by one greater than himself for this end; they would not have
spent time in disputing Jurisdictions with him; but soon have told him, that he
was a proud and pragmattical Fellow, for attempting to domineer over all, and
to subject all unto himself, upon his first footing in England: therefore if
they dispute Jurisdictions with him, it was (without question) in relation to
Pope Gregory, and their own Archbishop, and so their answer was not (as you
say) as of men inflamed with Choler for the Injury done by the Saxons; (and
pray consider, what justice would have been acted, in being angry with one man
for another man's fault) but as of men preferring their own Archbishop, before
Pope Gregory, asserting no dependence upon, and owing no Subjection unto him;
but owning their own Archbishop as his Superior in relation unto them:
wherefore, I say, if I had no other Testimony to produce, but that of Galfrides
Monumetensis, it is sufficient to discharge me from the guilt of a vain and
malicious Inference, and to prove, that the ancient Britains told Austin, that
they would have nothing to do with the Bishop of Rome.

But I have other Testimonies to produce; be pleased to search Antiqui.
Britain. in Augustine. page 46. and you will find these words, cum
Archiepiscopum suum haberent, cui deberent and vellent parere, externo vere
Episcopo minime subjectos fere; is not this plain enough for my purpose? They
said they would not be subject to any foreign Bishop; Is not this to say that
they would not be subject to the Bishop of Rome, for sure he was a foreign
Bishop? your own Baronius terms the Brittain-Bishops Schismatics for this very
reason, because they divided from the Church of Rome, and so did not yield
subjection unto the Pope. Bar. com. ad ann. 604. number. 65.

To the second Reason which I used to prove, that the Religion of the ancient
Britains, was not the same with Austins, which was this, because they rejected
Austins Traditions, you reply thus.

Reply.

You Believe the Reason, why I did not set down in particular the Traditions
rejected by the Britains, was, because I could not show any one Article of
Faith (which unless I do, my objection is nothing to purpose) in which they
dissented from Austin.

Rejoinder.

I perceive you are very credulous, especially where the matter to be believed,
has any tendency to your advantage; otherwise you would not believe this
conclusion to be true, that thing is impossible to be done, which is not
actually done; but whatsoever this work, of showing Articles of Faith wherein
they differed, be possible or impossible, it was not so necessary (as you say
it was) for me to do it; a general Proof being sufficient to confirm what I
said; and (I am sure) as strong as any Argument used by you to prove the
contrary; if you had weighed your own Performance in the balance, you would
have found Reason forbidding you, to object this against me; least you should
teach me to retort and say, That I believe the reason why you did not show me
any one Article of Faith wherein they agreed, was because you could not; for
neither you nor your Author to whom you sent me, has done any thing like unto
this work, and yet this should have been done by you: yea, if you would have
proved your Affirmative with an argument any thing like unto substantial, you
should have proved in particular, that they agreed in all the Articles of their
Faith.

I am of opinion, that it is as possible for me, to show some Article of Faith
wherein they differed, as it is for you to show Articles of Faith wherein they
agreed; Histories being equally silent in both: Only it must be necessarily
concluded that, because they were all Christians, they agreed in some
Principles of Christianity: and on the contrary, because they were disagreeing
Christians, why might it not be strongly presumed, that they dissented in
others? and why might not my Argument, be able to prove this presumption? but
you have rejected it as weak (though, as will appear, you have no reason for
it) by which you have obliged your self to produce a stronger on your side; and
whether yours be such, I come now to Examine.

Reply.

To prove that they did not differ in any one Article of Faith, first you say,
all the Difference that was between them, was only concerning certain
tolerable Differences for that time, as namely their Dissent from the use of
the Roman Church, in their ministering of Baptism and keeping of Easter,

Rejoinder.

Was this all the difference that was between them? did you not tell me even
now, that they differed in Point of Jurisdiction? you charge me with gross
mistakes; let me desire you to reconcile your expressions, to free your self
from the charge of Contradiction; for if you do not here contradict, what you
said before, I know not what I say.

Reply.

That this was all the difference that was between them; you bring Beda to
testify saying, si in his tribus obtemper are mihi vultis, and tum Britones
confitentur se intellexisse, etc.

Rejoinder.

Do not you by your Assertion contradict this Testimony? what is the meaning of
those words, caetera quae agitis, quamvis moribus nostris contraria
aequanimiter cuncta tollerabimus; if Beda's relation be true, and I do
understand the Latin he writes, they differed in many particulars, besides
those mentioned by you: and what is employed in his other words ( tum Britones
confitentur se intellexisse etc.) it should seem that they differed about the
way of Justice; otherwise how could Beda use this expression? and to differ (as
you say) about things that are tolerable, is this to differ about the way of
Justice? I hope you will not say, that the observation of unnecessary
Testimonies, is the way of Justice.

The Author of the History of great Britain, whom you produce for a Testimony
on your side (as you quote him) speaks not for you, but against you; he says
the Brittain-Bishops conformed themselves to the Doctrine and Ceremonies of the
Church of Rome, without any difference in any thing specially remembered, save
only in the Feast of Easter, and Administration of the Sacrament of Baptism;
what means this limitation of special remembrance? does it not strongly import,
that there were other differences between them, that were not remembered and
specially remembered; that is (as remembrance is to be understood) fell not into
open Debate between them at that time?

Hollinsheads Words you have not mentioned, therefore all that I say to him is
this, that if he speak no more on your side, then Beda or the Author of the
History of Great Britain, you have as little reason to quote him, as you had
to quote them, that is none at all.

As to Goodwin in his Catalogue of Bishops; I have searched his sixth page,
whither you direct me, and do find there, no such thing as you speak of; but in
the 43. Page you will find him speaking directly against you. And because you
have quoted him as a Witness for your self, his Testimony should be of good
account with you; his words are these, but their Answer to him was short and
peremptory, that they might not submit themselves to him, having an Archbishop
of their own. That the Doctrine and Discipline of their Church, they had
received from the Apostles of Christ, neither would they change the same, for
any man's pleasure whatsoever.

And whereas you say, that Mr. Fulke affirms, that Austin did at the last
obtain the Aid of the British Bishops to the Conversion of the Saxons; if you
think this to be a Testimony on your side, you are very much mistaken; for the
words do but prove expressly, that they agreed to work together for the
Conversion of Pagans, which Consent was not any hinderance, but there might be
differences, and great ones too, between them concerning other matters; but if
you should strain the words to make them imply, that there was not any
difference between them, when they joined together to carry on that good work,
yet this was not any impediment to hinder differences between them before.

Reply.

Secondly, you say; That by their earnest dissenting about these only smaller
matters, is most plainly signified their full agreement in all Articles of
Faith; for the Britains that contradicted him in these smaller matters, would
not have been silent, but much more have opposed him in matters of greater
Concernment.

Rejoinder.

You go on still upon that ground, which you have not yet proved to be true,
nay, some of the Testimonies produced by you, have proved it to be false;
namely, that they dissented only about those matters of smaller Importance, and
that the Britains opposed him only in those matters. I tell you once again
from your Author Beda, that they differed in many more and greater matters;
search the second Chapter of the second Book of Beda, and you will find him
reporting, that Austin told them, that they did many things, contrary to the
Practice of the Catholic Church, and that he prayed unto God, that by a
Miracle he would be pleased to show, which was the true way unto the Kingdom of
Heaven: it seemed they differed about this way, otherwise why would he make
this Prayer? And he tells you in the latter end, that they opposed him in all
that he said, and sure he said somewhat more unto them, than what concerned
those tolerable Differences you speak of; otherwise how could Beda, with any
show of Truth, conclude his second Chapter thus, ut etiam temporalis interitus
ultionem sentirent perfidi, quod oblata sibi perpetuae salutis concilia
spreverant, were your tolerable Differences the Councils of Everlasting
Salvation?

This Argument you borrowed of your Apologist, and he borrowed it from the
Author of the three Conversions; and if by earnest dissenting, you mean an open
Debating and Disputing, where it is as true as it is false, that they dissented
only about those smaller matters; I wonder that you and your Authors should
expose such a tottering Argument as this to the view of the Reader, without
supporting it with some Reason, to keep it from falling to the ground. It is as
if you should reason concerning Michaiah and Zedekiah (of whom you may read in
the 18 chapter of the 2 Book of Chronicles) and say they openly dissented only
concerning the event of Ahabs going to Ramoth-Gilead, therefore they agreed in
all weightier matters; for Michaiah that opposed Zedekiah in this smaller
matter of Importance, would never have been silent, but much more have opposed
him in a greater matter; but this is to conclude both against Reason and
Experience; for the one was a true Prophet, and servant to the God of Heaven,
the other a false Prophet and Worshipper of Baal. You and I were in open and
actual Debate, concerning only the Determination of the three Queries
propounded by you, which (in my judgment) is a matter of small Consequence. I
assure you the Determination of them on either side, is not any Article of my
Faith; and if it be an Article of yours, I must say, that your Creed is larger
than that set forth by Pius the fourth; and yet this open and actual Debate, is
no sufficient Argument to prove, that you and I do agree concerning all greater
matters; for you know that we do not.

Having set forth your Argument to be viewed in its strength, the Reader may
judge now, whether yours or mine has more in it, to establish the Conclusion:
notwithstanding all that you have yet said, it may be justly determined, that
my Argument taken from the rejection of Austins Traditions (which you have so
much scorned) is of so great force, that the best resistance you have made
against it, is only to say, that it was used to no purpose; for this you have
not yet proved; and to let you see more of the strength of it, I shall add
this; if the Traditions, that were received by the Britains, did concern only
the tolerable Differences you speak of; was it piously and charitably done of
Austin, to threaten them for this Rejection? And could he justly prophecy of
their Ruin for it? Did the rejecting of those small matters, deserve so great
Revenge at the hands of the Almighty? You must cast an everlasting blot in the
face of the Italian Monk, or else you must acknowledge that they opposed him in
greater matters; for which (you must say) they deserved to be thus retributed:
and farther I say, if Austins Traditions agreed to the Doctrine of those Romish
Bishops, which were in the time of Laurentius (Austins immediate Successor)
they were so distastful, that Bishop Dagamus denied all Communion with the
maintainers of them, and refused to eat Bread in the same Inn where they did
Lodge. Bed. Hist. l. 2. c. 4. sure this carriage of Dagamus proves, that there
were greater differences between them, than those few tolerable ones you have
spoken of.

And now I cannot but take notice of that remarkable Limitation which you do
apply unto your tolerable Differences, you say for that time tolerable; will
you be pleased to tell me, whether those differences, if happening before, or
at any time since, must have the contrary Epithet given unto them, and be said
to be intolerable? Can matters of Indifferency by revolution of time change
their Natures and become matters of Necessity? Can Circumstances be made
Articles of Faith? The Church of Rome is fruitful in bringing forth such and
more strange Mutations; but they who prize that benefit of Christian Liberty,
which Christ has purchased for them, will not by owning any such Change, bring
themselves again into Bondage: It is true, the command of the Church, does
oblige unto the observance of Circumstances, tending to Decency and Order; but
she does not enjoin the use of them, otherwise than they are, that is, not as
necessary, but indifferent; and bears with tender Consciences that scruple to
use them, until better Information does remove the Scruple, and convinces
them of the Convenience there is, that they should be used.

To manage your Cause against me with greater Applause, you accuse me in the
next place of two gross mistakes. First, in reporting that Austin for the
rejection of his Traditions, stirred up the wrath of Ethelbert King of Kent,
against the Britains: to make good your Charge you bring Beda for a Witness,
whose words (as you set them down) are these.

Reply.

It happened, that the mighty King of the Englishmen Edilfred gathered a great
Army, and made a foul slaughter of this unfaithful and naughty People, to wit,
the Monks of Bangor; for being now ready to give the onset of the Fight, when
he espied the Priests (which came together to pray unto God for their Soldiers
Warring) stand a part from the rest in a safe and sure place, he demanded who
they were, and to what end they came thither, etc. the cause of their coming
thither when King Edilfred had understood, he said, if these men cry and call
upon their God against us, truly though they have no Armor, yet they fight
against us, therefore he commanded his Soldiers first to assault them. Beda.
l. 2. c. 2.

Rejoinder.

Your Author speaks very contemptibly of the Monks of Bangor, terming them an
unfaithful and naughty People; therefore if you think that he speaks Truth, it
is strange to me, that you are so earnest in claiming kindred with their
Religion; and from his words you conclude, that the Cause of their slaughter,
was not the rejection of Austins Traditions, but their meeting together to pray
for the good success of their Army, and that it was not Ethelbert King of Kent,
but Edilfred King of Northumbres that made this slaughter.

While you are accusing me of a gross Mistake, you attract the same guilt unto
your self, by forcing your Witness to speak what he never intended, and by
which you make him to contradict himself; he says (as you pretend) that the
Monks were slain for coming together to pray for the good success of their
Army; suppose he does say so, does he mean that this was the only Cause? no, he
cannot mean so; for you confess in the next Paragraph, that he he tells of
another Cause, to wit, their Refractorinesse in not submitting to the wholesome
Council of Austin, and refusing to Join with him in Preaching to the English;
by which the Prophesy pretended to be made by Austin was fulfilled: Beda
reports him, and (I believe) you accoun^ him a Prophet; and pray tell me how
he could prophecy, that they should suffer death by the English men for this
cause, if this was not a Cause of their slaughter? And how will you keep his
words from clashing, if you will have him to say, that the only cause was their
coming together to pray for the success of their Army?

The Testimony of your own Witness, should be a full satisfaction unto you, his
words are so plain to prove, that there was another Cause of their Slaughter,
besides that mentioned by you; but least you should not suffer his words to
have this Influence over you, I shall prove by convincing Reason that there was
another Cause. You will acknowledge that there was a cause of Edilfreds
gathering together of an Army, and of his marching against the Britains; which
could not be the Monks coming together to pray for the success of their Army;
for he had mustered his Forces, and marched against them, before they came
together to pray: It was then something else that was that Cause, and that very
cause was the Cause of their Slaughter; for sure he did not march against them,
with an Intention to sport with them, but to fight with them; and
notwithstanding any thing you have yet said to the contrary, (yea, does not
Beda say as much) that the cause was the refusing of Austins Counsel, the
rejecting of Austins Traditions.

Let me commend one Memento unto you (it may do you a pleasure, if you will
observe it whenever you shall have occasion to write of the like subject)
which is this: Where there are many different voluntary Agents, working
subordinatly for the producing of an Effect, there may be different Ends aimed
at in that Production; whence I conclude, though you could number as many final
Causes of the slaughter of the Monks, as there were Hands acting in that
Tragedy, yet this would not be any argument to prove, that Austin having an
hand in it (as I have said) did not look at this end, (to wit) the execution of
Revenge for the affront he received from them by the Rejection of his
Traditions.

And what though Beda say, that it was by the command of Edilfred King of
Northumbers, that the Monks were slain? Does he say that he only was guilty of
the Slaughter, and that Ethelbert was not there? He lays no such Restriction
upon that Action; therefore it is a wonder to me, how you can make that
antecedent to bring forth that consequence; this is a strange kind of reasoning
to say, Beda makes mention of Edilfred, but says nothing of Ethelbert;
therefore Edilfred was the only man that was guilty, and Ethelbert was not
there; how much time must I allow you to spend, in seeking for an Argument able
to prove this Consequence to be true? Suppose that you and I were traveling
toward London together, and it should be reported by one that met with us,
that I was traveling that way, but no mention made of your Society; would this
be an Argument to prove, that you was not journeying with me? If you expect
Historians always to write the whole Truth, you expect that from them which
they do not perform; it is known by experience, that as they are sometimes
redundant, speaking more than Truth, so they are oftentimes defective, relating
not the whole Truth; therefore notwithstanding any thing expressed by your
Witness, Ethelbert King of Kent might be with Edilfred King of Northumbers, and
Austin with them both, marching against the Britains, and present at the
slaughter of the Monks, and so they all might have their hands imbrued in the
Innocent Blood of that Murdered People.

Now to prove that (as I said in my Answer) Austin upon the Rejection of his
Traditions, did stir up the Wrath of Ethelbert King of Kent against them; and
to prove, that though Beda say, that Edilfred was the Murderer of the Monks,
Ethelbert was likewise guilty of that Horrid Fact, I have witness to produce as
credible as your extolled Beda.

Amandus Xierxiensis a Friar Minorite tells us, Antiqu. Brittan. pa. 48. when
the Britains were Catholics, the Saxons were Gentiles; for the Conversion of
whom, blessed Gregory sent Austin and Melitus, who Converted the Saxons; but
when Austin, would have brought the Bishops and Abbots of the Britains by
Apostolic Authority, to receive him as Legate, and Preach with him to the
English, discord was moved, and so War was raised between the Kings of the
Britains and of the Saxons, who (now being Converted) would have subdued the
Britains unto Austin.

Galfridus Monumetensis tells you (l. 4. c. 12.) that Dynoot (a man
marvellously well learned) by diverse Arguments made it appear, when Austin
required the Bishops to be subject unto him, that the Britains owed him no
Subjection, therefore. Ethelbert King of Kent ( as soon as he saw them refuse
to yield obedience unto Austin, and despise his Preaching) stirred up Edilfred
and other Princes of the Saxons, to gather a great Army, and go to Bangor, to
destroy Dynoot and his Clergy; who taking the City, commanded the Swords of his
men to be turned first upon the Monks.

Thomas Le Gray in his History tells you, That Austin being refused of the
Bishops, and others the learned of the Britains, made such complaint thereof
to Ethelbert King of Kent, that forthwith he levied his Power, and marched
against them, and slew them in a most cruel manner, having no more regard of
Mercy, than a Wolf has toward a Sheep.

It is Recorded also in an English Chronicle, that when Austin came and told
Ethelbert, that the Britains would not obey him, that the King was Wroth, and
sent to Edilfred King of Northumbers, to come to help to distress the Britains
of Wales; and Austin the Archbishop of Canterbury met with them at Leicester;
the King of Leicester was called at that time Brocvale; he being afraid of the
two Kings fled out of the Land and never came again; and the two Kings seized
all his Lands, and parted them between themselves; afterward they went toward
Wales: The Britains hearing of them, sent men in their shirts unto them and
barefoot to ask Mercy; but they were so cruel, that they had no pity on them.

Besides these Authorities, I would have you to consider and weigh well the
words of Beda, he says, that Austin foretold the Britains in a threatening
manner, that because they would not accept of Peace with their Brethren, they
should have War with their Enemies; and if they would not Preach the doctrine
of Life unto the English, they should suffer at their hands the revenge of
Death: Was this a Prophesy or not? a Prophesy it could not be, for this was a
method of prophesying, never used by any true Prophet: Our Savior, when he
prophesied of the destruction of Jerusalem, did not deliver his Prophecy in an
ireful and threatening manner, but wept over it: And when the Lord commanded his
Prophets, to go and Prophecy against the Children of Israel for their sins, we
read, that many of them were loath to go at first, and all of them, when they
did go and Prophecy, did deliver their Message, not in an ireful manner; but
rather mourning for, and lamenting the Condition of the People. And how could
it be a Prophecy, when (as you say) all the difference that was between Austin
and the Britains, was concerning some tolerable Matters? Could he Prophecy
destruction unto them for that which deserved no such Retribution? Any one that
has so much understanding, as to judge of the meaning of the words, will find
them importing, that Austin had hatched a design of procuring their
Destruction, (and what he purposed he might easily foretell) for the execution
of which, he stirred up against them the Wrath of his new Convert Ethelbert
King of Kent.

Reply.

The other gr^sse mistake with which you charge me is; for affirming that
Austin was present at the slaughter of the Monks, which ( you say) is
impossible to be true, because Fox confesses that Huntington and others
affirm, that Austin was dead before, and venerable Beda does likewise testify
the same.

Rejoinder.

What though Fox does make that acknowledgment, is this an Argument to prove,
that it was so? I have quoted some Authorities that affirm him to be alive
then, is not this as strong an Argument to prove, that it was so? As for those
words ( quamvis ipso jam multo ante tempore ad caelestia regna sublato)
pretended to be Beda's words; it has been often disputed whether they were
really his or not, and as often proved that they were none of his; but foisted
into his Book to save the credit of the Italian Monk; for in the old Chronicle
written by Beda in the Saxon Tongue, there is no such Relation as this to be
found, as Archbishop Parker, a famous Antiquary, does manifest in his book, de
antiqui. Brittan c. 18.

It is the will of divine Providence that you should speak Truth, while you are
acting with your whole might to conceal it; for your own Expression furnishes
me, with a demonstrative Argument to prove, that he was alive then: You produce
Dr. Fulke testifying, that he did obtain at length the aid of the Britains in
Preaching to the Saxons, whose Testimony you cannot deny, because you have
produced him as a Witness for your self in this matter: let me ask you then,
whether it was before or after the slaughter of the Monks, that he obtained
this Aid? Before it could not be; for had it been before, how could Austin
threaten the revenge of Death to fall upon them, because they would not Preach
the way of Life unto the Saxons? It must then be after the slaughter of the
Monks, when the Britains had been sufficiently beaten to it; Austin then was
alive after the slaughter of the Monks, for sure you will not say, that (when
he was dead) he with the Britains Preached for the Conversion of the Saxons.

To convince you more of the Certainty of this Truth (that Austin was alive at
the time of the slaughter of the Monks) be pleased to take notice of the
Chronicle of some remarkable passages relating to those times. In the year 596.
Austi^ arrived in England Pol. virg. 4. l. In the year 604* he Consecrated
Mell^tus Bishop of London, and Justus Bishop of Rochester, Beda l. 2. c. 3. In
the year 605. the Wars were maintained against the Britains, and the Monks
slain at Bangor, as is found in the Saxon Chronicle of Peterborough. I^ the
year 608. Austin dyed as Matheus Westmonasteriensis says, but as Pol. Vir.
Affirms, l. 4. he dyed in the year 610. By this it appears plainly to him that
has but half an eye, that Austin was alive a long time after the slaughter of
the Monks.

If yet your Will be not sufficiently wrough^ upon, to receive this for a
Truth, do but repai^ unto the defense of the Apology of the Church of England,
written by the learned and reverend Bishop of Sarum page 439. where you will
find the copy of a Charter, granted by Ethelbert King of Kent to the Abbey of
St. Peter of Canterbury* and witnessed by Austin in the year 605. which is the
year wherein the Monks were slain at Bangor, which surely will carry you out of
the compass of all Doubts; and, if you be not settled in a resolution to oppose
the Truth, will persuade you to believe, that Austin was alive at the
forementioned time.

Now where are the gross Mistakes, with which you charge me, are they not
vanished into nothing? And the guilt of Mistaking, lies at your own doors, for
bringing a Charge against me, for which you had no other Reason, but your own
vain Imagination.

And the Mistakes being vanished, that detractive Deduction you make from them,
rebounds strongly against your self, to use your own expression, they that have
the least scantling in the knowledge of Antiquity, cannot but laugh at your
Confidence in building where you have not ground to lay a Foundation, and will
take notice how fruitfully disposed you are, in bringing forth mere Fictions.

Reply.

To my Answer to the third Query you reply thus: I can scarcely believe, that
the world is so Lunatic in the affairs of Antiquity, for if you will take the
pains to peruse the beginning of the foresaid book, entitled, the Protestants
Apology for the Roman Church, you will see that these things came within the
Cognizance of the Author thereof, and withal find substantial proof for the
Affirmative of the said Question, which may convince a non prejudging
Understanding.

Rejoinder.

I answered for my self, taking you with me by the right hand of Fellowship,
saying that neither you nor I was able to determine this Query certainly on
either side, and showed a Reason for it: You reply that you believe the world
is not so lunatic in the affairs of Antiquity; but had you replied to purpose,
instead of sending me to your Author to seek for Arguments; you would have
produced Arguments to void the force of my Reason; which being not done, it
stands firm against you, and will stand against all Opposition; being there are
no Records to inform us, what were the particular Tenets maintained by the
ancient Britains; neither you, nor I, nor any Man in the World, is able to
make a certain Determination on either side.

But what mean you by the World; if you mean the World, taken Divisim, that is
every particular person in the World, I have cause to suspect you of Lunacy,
for employing your Faith after this manner: Do you think, that every particular
Person in the world, is able to make a certain Determination of this Query? if
so, I expect to hear of some proof for it; for the proof you have here
produced, is too scant to bear any proportion to that Latitude; if you could
prove, that the Author, to whom you send me, was able to do this, it would be
but a pitiful Argument to prove, that every particular Person in the World, was
able to do so too.

If by the World you understand some little Parcel of the World, and do take
your Author to be that parcel, you bring the World into a very little Compass;
and yet you have not proved this World to be able to make that determination:
If any such Ability was in him, he has hid his Light under a Bushel, and kept
it from the sight both of me and you; you have not mentioned any of his
Arguments, which is an argument to prove, that you did not see any; and I have
searched his Book, and do think my self to be as quick-sighted as you are, yet
I cannot find any; no, not any thing in all his Book like unto an Argument to
prove, that the Religion of the ancient Britains, was the same with the
Religion of the primitive Church of England.

But while you stickle thus peremptorily for a Determination of this Query in
the Affirmative, you do not consider, how you are working to the great
discredit of the Italian Monk; for if the ancient Britains did conform in every
particular to the primitive Pattern, how can he be freed from the guilt of
heinous Presumption, in presaging Destruction unto a People, that were more
pure in their Profession, than both Austin and Pope Gregory; as if he had the
Arrows of Gods Wrath at his own dispose, to shoot against a People when he
pleased; and was it not high Injustice in him to presage Destruction unto a
People, that for their Profession, according to your tenet of Merit, were so
far from deserving to be retributed with Destruction, that they deserved to be
crowned with happiness.

Here you make an end of your Reply, and such as your beginning was, such is
your ending; I find you here likewise guilty of Tergiversation; you have turned
your back upon the Answer made unto your cautional Conclusion; which I must
make bold to bring into your remembrance, until you refute it with some
stronger Arguments, than to say it was Impertinent, and that your meaning was
mistaken.

I told you by your Caution, included in your Conclusion, you intimated your
self to be a^ Abettor of this Position, that a difference made between
Religions by Ceremonies, is to no purp^s^, therefore I desired to know to what
purpose you used your multitudes of strange and ridicu^ous Ceremonies; if you
replied, that Ceremonies are to no purpose, as to the making of a real
Difference; I told you that when the Composition of Religion is made, part of
necessary Truth^, part of superstitious Ceremonies: when the use of Ceremonies
is converted into Acts of Religion: when it is maintained, that de fide they
must be used, because without the use of them, neither God is duly Worshipped,
nor Religion truly exercised: This change by Ceremonies alters Religion really
from its primitive Constitution; and I desired to know what you can say in the
behalf of your Religion, to prove that it is not such a Composition.

It is easy to make Replies, when Liberty is taken of speaking to some
particulars only, such as have least strength in them to make Resistance, and
of passing by all the rest upon feigned pretensions; but you must not think,
that Truth will be trodden down, and Error supported by such pitiful shifts as
these; our Religion (I hope) as yet has lost no part of its Luster and Beauty,
by my management of the present Controversy; and what your Religion has gained
to cover its Deformity by your handling of the business, let the indifferent
Reader judge. Without doubt you sent your Queries abroad with a purpose to
improve them to this end; but let the Reader search your Reply, as strictly for
your advantage, as Diogenes sought for an honest man, and let him say whether
there be any thing to be found like unto an Argument, having the least tendency
unto this.

The greatest part of your Discourse is framed, concerning the Cause of Austins
Rejection made by the Britains, and Edilfreds murdering of the Monks, and
Austins Decease before the acting of that Murder; and if all that ye have said
concerning these things, had been as true, as it is false; what Arguments could
you patch together out of it, for the maintaining of your Religion; if you have
no better a Storehouse elsewhere, (as I have cause to believe you have not) I
do not wonder, that you keep a Vail over the faces of your People, to hinder
them from looking into the Holy Scriptures; if they had Liberty to use those
eyes to see, and understandings to judge, which God has bestowed upon them,
they would soon discover the vanity of your erroneous Religion.

A Reply unto the Answer made by N. G. unto the three Queries propounded unto
him.
HAving ended your Reply to the Answer made unto your Queries, you proceed to
Answer the Queries propounded unto you, and to the first you answer
affirmatively, Confessing that God is to have the whole Glory of the work of
man's Salvation; but (you say) you deny the sinistrous consequence that is hence
inferred, therefore no^^ Merit of good Works.

Reply.

The Deduction you make is not answerable in latitude to the strength of the
Antecedent; for it concludes more against you, it throws down not only the
Merit of good Works, but also many other groundless Positions maintained by
you: But because you have made mention only of this opinion, I will not here
show the utmost bounds of its Strength, but will confine my self to this task,
to examine the device you use to make these two consistent; good Works to have
merit in them, and God to have the whole glory of the work of man's Salvation.

Answer.

You say, Though there be no Insufficiency in the actions or passions of Christ
the head, yet his Wisdom Will and Justice requires and ordains, that his
body and members should be fellows of his passions, as they look to be fellows
of his Glory; that so suffering with him and by his Example, they may apply to
themselves and to others, the general medicine of Christ's Merits and
Satisfactions, as it is also effectually applied unto us by Sacraments; the one
sort being no more injurious to Christ's death, nor consequently hindering him of
the whole Glory of the Work of Man's Salvation, then the other: Notwithstanding
your vain Clamours, that under pretense of Christ's passions, take away the
value of Good Works; if you please to peruse St. Paul's Epistle to the
Colossians C. 1. V. 24. You may see how the Apostle taught and practiced this
Doctrine.

Reply.

You must mean, that the Will and Wisdom and Justice of Christ, requires
passions in his Members, to merit the application of the merrits of Christ;
otherwise your whole discourse is impertinent, to the thing you undertook to
speak of; for you undertook to speak of Merit; and it seems you would have me
to receive for a Truth, upon your own bare Word, all that you do say; for you
have not showed, where this Wisdom and Will of Christ is revealed, and what Law
there is for this act of Justice; no, nor discovered the least hint of Reason
to prove it.

You quote the Apostle to the Colossions. C. 1. V. 24. but I wonder that you
are not ashamed of the Impertinency of the Quotation; let his words be set upon
the tenter hooks, yet they cannot be extended to include this sense in them;
here is not any thing of Merits in them, or of the Application of the Merits of
Christ, or of meriting that Application, or that the Will and Wisdom and
Justice of Christ requires passions for this end.

The Apostle tells the Colossions, that He suffered for them, but his meaning
is this; to encourage them to suffer by his Example, and to confirm the Truth
of that Doctrine he delivered unto them: and he says likewise that by his
sufferings he filled up that which was behind of the afflictions of Christ in
his flesh; from which expression is to be gathered, that there is a certain
measure of sufferings, which the Members of Christ are appointed to undergo, to
which the malice of Hell cannot add to make it more, and the Apostle had his
measure determined for him, to the filling up of which, the sufferings he here
speaks of, conduced.

He terms them the afflictions of Christ, because they were laid upon him for
Christ's sake, and by them he was made conformable unto Christ, and because
there is such a near relation between Christ and his Members, that what is done
unto them, he accounts as done unto himself. And he says moreover, that the
filling up of this Measure, was for the sake of Christ's Church, that by his
Courage and Constancy in suffering, he might draw some unto the Truth, and so
increase the Church according to that saying, Sanguis Martyrum est semen
Ecclesiae: and to confirm others in the Truth, and so as a Instrument to help
to establish the Church; This (without doubt) is the meaning of the Apostle;
and if you will believe Lyranus and Anselmus, you will take the word in this
sense; so that here is nothing to prove that strange Doctrine which you
deliver; here is nothing but your bare Affirmation for it, therefore I might
justly send it away with a bare Negatur, until you find an opportunity to
produce some better Arguments; Yet I shall bestow some Animadversions on it.

First, You cast an intolerable Slander upon us, while you say upon pretense
of Christ's Passions, we take away the value of Good Works. No Sir, we do not
maintain any Opinion detractory from that price, we are warranted to set upon
them; we maintain them for necessary uses; they will be the Rule of Proportion,
according to which, we shall have our Reward meted unto us, for the Lord will
reward every one according to his Works. We must have good Works to testify the
truth of our Faith; for Faith without Works is dead. We must be full of good
Works, to witness our Thankfulness unto God for benefits received: if we have
not this Witness to produce, upon examination we shall be found an ungrateful
People; and we must be fruitful in bringing forth of good Works, to give a good
Example to our Brethren; for in this sense we are our Brethrens Keepers: But we
will not maintain with you, that we must have good Works to merit by them at
the hands of God.

Secondly, You confound Actions and Passions; you speak here of the Passions of
the Members of Christ, notwithstanding you have undertaken to speak of good
Works; though they be really different, and sometimes you speak of them as
such; yet here you make them one and the same thing: Indeed it is a point of
Policy, necessary to be observed by the Abettors of Errors, to be mutable and
moveable, to change, and to pass from one thing to another; that when they are
hunted from one Refuge, they may have another Hole to creep into; and when one
Card fails of winning the Game, they may have another ready to Play.

Thirdly, You have, with your own hands, pulled down that ruinous Fabric,
which your Intention was to support. For first you say, There Is no
Insufficiency in the Actions and Passions of Christ. Hence it necessarily
follows, That there is no Merit in the passions or actions of the Members of
Christ: If Christ's Merits be sufficient, there is no need of any other Merit;
and if there be no need of any other Merit, then there is no other Merit: If
you deny the truth of this Consequence; you had best provide a substantial
Argument ready to prove, that Christ requires that of his Members which is
needless; for this proof will be required from you.

2. You say, That the Justice of Christ requires Passions in his Members;
therefore it necessarily follows, that there is not any Merit in the Passions
of his Members: Justice, when it acts, looks at Man's desert; therefore, if it
require Passions in them, those Passions must be laid upon them, upon the
ground of their Desert. And sure you will confess, that Sufferings are evil in
themselves; it is then for some Evil of Sin acted by them, that the Evil of
Sufferings is laid upon them; and pray let me hear of a substantial Argument to
prove, that Suffering for Sin does merit the application of the Merits of
Christ: This would be good News for the Wicked in this World; yea, for the
Damned in Hell.

Fourthly, Your Expressions are cloudy, therefore you are desired to come out
of the dark. And First tell me what you mean by Fellows of Christ's Sufferings:
The Prophet Isaiah Prophesying of the Suffering condition of Christ in the
World, delivers himself after this manner, in chap. 53. ver. 23, and 24. He
has no Form nor Comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is no Beauty that
we should desire him; he is despised, and rejected of Men, a Man of Sorrows,
and acquainted with Grief; and answerable to this Prophesy his condition was:
If you mean, that all his Members are to be in the like Suffering Condition,
while they are in the World; tell me how this can consist with that which (you
say) is one Mark of the Church, to wit, outward Prosperity, Luster, and Beauty.

Secondly, Tell me what you mean, when you say, That the Members of Christ are
to suffer, that they may apply to themselves, and to others, the general
Medicine of Christ's Merits and Satisfactions, as it is effectually applied
unto us by Sacraments; do you mean, that there is Merit in the Use of the
Sacraments? This must be your meaning, or else you do not make your Comparata
to agree to do you Service: And being that the holy Spirit works in the Use of
the Sacraments, for the Application of the Merits of Christ, by making a tender
of them, and by begetting of Faith to receive them; Do you mean, that the holy
Spirit works, after the same manner, in the Passions of the Members of Christ?
If you mean all this, where are your Arguments to prove all this to be true? I
cannot discover here, so much as the shadow of an Argument; and until you
produce some Proofs to confirm all this to be true, the Argument drawn from
your Similitude, to prove that the Merit which (you say) is in Passions, does
not hinder Christ of any part of the Glory of Man's Salvation, is so weak in
its Loins, that it is not able to bring forth your Conclusion.

Thus you argue, The Merit of Passions does no more hinder Christ of any part
of the Glory of Man's Salvation, than the Use of the Sacraments; but the Use of
the Sacraments does not hinder Christ of any part of the Glory of Man's
Salvation, Ergo, etc. Your Major is a most false Assertion: In relation to the
hinderance of Christ's Glory, there is not the same working, or reason for
working in both the things you speak of: The Sacraments are no hinderance to
Christ's Glory, because there is not any Merit in the use of them; for the use
of them is a Duty, and our Savior tells you, ( Luke chap. 17. ver. 10.) that
there is not any Merit in the Performance of a Duty. Besides, they are outward
Means instituted by Christ, for this very end, The Application of the Merits of
Christ, and so the whole Glory of the Work of Grace, that is wrought in the use
of them, redounds unto him; but you maintaining Passions to Merit the
application of the Merits of Christ, and these being no Means appointed by
Christ, for the working of this end, do hinder Christ of the Glory due unto
him: If you say they be Means, be pleased to show me the Institution of Christ
for it.

Truly Sir, howsoever you judge of the matter, to say, that Passions do Merit
the application of the Merits of Christ, is to say, that the Redemption wrought
by Christ is not free; and to say, that there is any Merit but in Christ, is to
say, that the Merit of Christ is not sufficient; both which are so great an
hinderance to his Glory, that they are perfect Blasphemy.

And moreover, though the means that are instituted by Christ, are no
hinderance to his Glory; yet the means that are made by the invention, and
device of Man, are an Hinderance in an high measure; for they speak a distrust
in his Wisdom, as if he was not wise enough to prescribe an effectual Method,
for the application of that Remedy, which is provided to Cure Man's Disease;
and they exalt Man's Wisdom above its reach. He was so foolish, as to Destroy
himself; but he was not so wise, as to find out a way for his Recovery: It is
God that bestows Salvation freely upon Man; and it is He that fits him with a
Capacity to receive Salvation; which Work, he performs after that manner which
he has appointed, and revealed in his Word; not after that manner, which vain
Man does invent, by the working of his foolish Imagination.

Fifthly, You maintain two gross Absurdities here, one of them is mentioned
already, and part of its absurd nature showed, and more of it will be showed
now: First, that Passions do Merit the application of the Merits of Christ: the
Apostle Paul teaches you other Doctrine, ( Romans c. 8. v. 18.) That the
sufferings of this life, are not worthy to be compared unto the glory which
shall be revealed in us. If they be not worthy to be compared unto that Glory,
they are not worthy of the Receipt of it; and if they be not worthy to receive
it, they do not merit the Application of those Merits, which purchased that
glory.

Reason it self will convince you of this, that Passions cannot be meritorious
of the application of the Merits of Christ; no, nor so much as a disposed
Capacity to receive them; for if they be either way for the application of the
Merits of Christ, they must be previous (at least in order of nature) unto that
Application; but this they cannot be, for there can be no suffering as a member
of Christ before man be made actually a member of Christ, (if he suffer before,
(he suffers but as a natural man) and man cannot be actually a member of
Christ, before this application be made; for it is the Application of the
merits of Christ, that makes him actually a member of Christ; therefore this
Application must needs be before those Passions, and then how can they be for
the application of the merits of Christ, either by way of merit to deserve
them, or of Capacity to receive them: Say not now, that after the Application
is made, Passions do merit a continuance of the Application; for upon the
grounds that it is first made, upon the same it is continued, and that is only
the love and mercy of God unto poor miserable man.

Your second great Absurdity is, that the memmers of Christ by Passions, do not
merit only for themselves, but also for others: Where did you take up this
Doctrine? I am sure you did not find it in the Trent-Creed; therefore this
being an Article of your Faith, I question now, whether the Religion you do
profess, be as old as the Council of Trent?

Is there so much redundancy of virtue in the passions of a member of Christ,
that besides what is necessary for himself, he has some to spare for others;
are you wiser than the five wise Virgins, of whom we read in the Gospel, they
told the foolish, that they had no Oil to spare to lend them? And dare you thus
contradict the Holy Spirit, who tells you, that the Lord will reward every one
according to his work? Math. 16. 27. And that every one must bear his own
Burden. Gal. 6. 5. And that the Righteousness of the Righteo^ shall be upon
himself, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon himself, Ezekiel. 18. 20.

I would fain know, who these others are, to whom the Passions of a member of
Christ will be thus profitable; they cannot be the members of Christ; for you
say, that the Will and Wisdom, and Justice of Christ, requires that they should
have Passions of their own, for the application of the merits of Christ unto
themselves; and these others cannot be such as are not Members of Christ; sure
you will not say, that the servants of Satan have the Merits of Christ applied
unto them; it must remain therefore, that these others are some Ideas, that are
subsisting no where, but in your own Imagination.

The Apostle tells you, that Heresy is like unto a Gangreen; take heed that you
be not infected with this Disease, your extolling of Actions and Passions above
your Warrant, has multiplied into many dangerous Opinions, and take heed that
it eat not up all Faith; for if it once grow to that Malignity, it is not your
own Passions or Actions, nor the Passions or Actions of other men, that will
procure the application of the Merits of Christ unto your soul.

After you have spent some breath in speaking of Passions, you convert your
speech unto Actions, and then presently you return to passions again. It seems
that you are somewhat like unto Noah's Dove, hardly finding any rest for the
soles of your Feet; you are doubtful where you should fix your Opinion of Merit
with greatest certainty, and there is great reason for this; for I am
persuaded, that if this Query were propounded to you, Whether passions or
actions have more of Merit in them? there is so little in either, that to
determine this, you would require as long a time as the man took, that
undertook to teach an Ass to speak.

Answer.

Thus you express your self; neither do I see what pretense you can have to
affirm, That the Merit of good Works hinders God of the whole glory of the
work of man's Salvation, seeing the said Merit is the pure gift of God, and no
less his than his own; for not only those passions which Christ suffered in
himself, which were fully ended at his Death, and were abundantly sufficient
for the Redemption of the World, and of all Sins: But also those which his body
and members suffer are Christ's also, because of him they receive the Condition,
Quality, and Force, to be Meritorious.

Reply.

Here are some expressions liable to Exception, while you say, That the
passions of Christ are abundantly sufficient for the Redemption of the world,
and of all sins; what Interpretation can you make of the latter words, as they
are used in Coherence with the former? they cannot be explicatory of the
former, because the former are more plain; and if you will have them to signify
somewhat that is not in the former, when you write again, be pleased to inform
me, what it is: The world is Redeemed from Sin; but how the world can be said
to be Redeemed, and all sin too, I do not well understand.

Nor do I apprehend to what purpose you have penned this Discourse, telling me,
That not only those Passions, which Christ sufferd in himself, which were fully
ended at his Death, etc. I have looked upon the Words with as much favor as you
can desire, to improve them to your Advantage, and yet they fail in my eyes of
attaining that end. They relate unto these Words, and no less his, than his
own: Do you mean that the Merit which he gives unto Good Works, is no less his,
than the Merit of his personal Actions and Passions? If you mean this (as I
suppose you do) for as much as I can perceive, there is no more Coherence
between these Words and the following, than there is between the Poak full of
Plumbs, and your Way to London, of which you tell me: If you can prove that I
do wrong your Words, by imputing this unto them; I must say (what you do often
say) that I have Mistaken your meaning.

But howsoever it be, you maintain here two False Positions:

1. That Christ gives Merit unto the Passions of his Members.

2. That because of this Merit which he gives unto those Passions, they are his
Passions: The one is the ground of the other; and if the Foundation be sandy,
the Superstructure must fall.

And that it is so, and that both these Positions fall together, I shall prove,
in answering that Argument, which you do here use to prove, That the Merit,
which you pretend to be in Good Works, does not hinder God of any part of the
glory of Man's Salvation.

Thus you Argue, That which God gives, is no hindrance to his Glory: But God
gives the Merit that is in Good Works, Ergo, etc.

Your Major Proposition you have left naked, without any proof; Yet in my
conceit, it is so weak, that it stands very much in need of this support: The
thing that is given by God, admits of a twofold Consideration: It may be
considered as given by God, or as employed by. Man. And as employed by Man, you
must grant that it may be an hindrance to God's Glory; unless you will say,
That man cannot Mis-imploy it, which, I hope, you will not do. God gives Meat,
and Drink, and Riches to the Sons of Men, and yet you know that these things
are Abused sometimes unto his Dishonor.

So I may say of that Merit, which you pretend to be in good Works; if I should
grant, that there is Merit in them, and that this Merit is given by God; yet if
you should mis-imploy this, by trusting in it for the Salvation of your Souls,
(whereas your whole confidence is to be placed in the Merits of Christ, which
are the fruit of his personal Actions and Passions) that Merit pretended by you
to be in good Works, would be an hinderance to his Glory.

Your Assumption is this, that God gives Merit unto good Works: Being that you
say so, (though such a Novice as I am, is not fit to give advice to such a
Gamaliel as you are, yet) vouchsafe to be persuaded by me this once: Undeceive
that poor people, over whom you have undertaken a Charge; tell them that all
Merit belongs unto Christ; for you say, that the merit which is in good works
in his Gift: tell them that the best of the Sons of men have not any merit of
their own, neither for themselves, nor for others; for this is a necessary
Consequence of that which you say; that the Merit of good Works is Christ's
Gift, and Christ's Merit: by this means you may be more instrumental for the
health of their souls, than as yet (I fear) you have been: I am of this
opinion, that many poor souls have been deceived, in their hope of Salvation,
by your maintaining of the Merit of good Works: for being ignoant of that
Curiosity, which you have conceived in your breast, and expressed here, and so
not skilful enough to distinguish between their own Ability and Gift, but
ascribing that to themselves for their works, which (you say) is Gods Gift;
while they thought to fly into Heaven, by the Wings of their own Merit, (it
being unfit, and unable for that service) fell down to the Chambers of Death.

But I must not suffer your Assumption to pass thus; you left it as naked as
your Major, though it stands in need of help, as much as any proposition that
you have made; for it is a most false Assertion, God gives not merit unto good
Works; no, nor to the passions of the members of Christ; the glory of meriting
belongs only unto Christ; he humbled himself for it, he suffered for it, he
dyed for it; and what he gained at so dear a rate, and is due unto him upon
that account, will not be given unto another; you have a plain testimony for
this in the Prophet Isaiah, I am the Lord, (says God) that is my Name; my
Memorial will I not give unto another, nor my Praise unto graven Images, Isa.
chapter 24. ver. 8. His Glory he will not give unto another. What other? Neither to
Saints, nor to Angels, nor to Actions, nor to Passions, nor any thing else: The
Apostle Paul preaches this Doctrine, he tells you that because of the
Humiliation, Sufferings and Death of Christ, There is a Name given unto him
above every Name; Phil. chap. 2. ver. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. How then can the name of
Merit be ascribed unto Actions and Passions as well as unto him, and as much as
unto him? for pray consider, whither (while you say that Passions do merit the
application of the merits of Christ) you do not ascribe as great a name of
merit unto passions, as you do give unto him; I am sure, to merit the benefits
of the Merits of Christ, is to merit all that Christ has merited for us: And
consider well likewise, whether any Actions or Passions of men be capable to
receive this.

Because you have so little to say for Merit, and by that device which you use
for the ma^ntaining of that opinion, you are compelled to confess, that the
head of that Stream is Mercy; for you say that God gives merit unto good Works,
and to Passions, (that gift must be wholly out of Mercy, without any previous
Merit); methinks you should be easily persuaded to leave talking of Merit, and
to cry up Grace, Grace, Mercy, Mercy, only; this is via tuta, the safe way; for
it is mercy only that is the saving help of miserable sinners.

Answer.

To the second you answer likewise Affirmatively; but withal you say, you deny
the sinistrous Consequence hence inferred, therefore we must not pray unto
Saints; for (say you) it does no more derogate from Christ's whole glory of
mediating for Sinners, to pray unto Saints in Heaven, than to pray unto Saints
upon Earth: if it do, pray show me the Disparity; and yet your prayers unto the
faithful upon Earth, does not at all derogate from Christ's whole glory; witness
the practice of St. Paul in this point, Romans chap. 15.

Reply.

Here is a wonderful position maintained by you; to wit, that Saints on Earth
are invocated and prayed unto: Is not prayer an act of religious Worship; and
is that Worship performed unto any Mortal? It is true, there is a course of
civil Entreaty sometimes used to gain from mortals the Object that is desired;
so Kings and Princes, and other great persons are petitioned; and so the
Apostle Paul does request the Romans: (it is not an act of religious Worship
that he performs, but an act of civil entreaty) but that the incense of prayer
is offered up unto any mortal, is a thing that I never heard of before.

That you should pray unto them, rather than to dumb Pictures and Statues,
there is great reason; because they resemble the Creator and Savior of the
World, more than any Picture or Statue made by an Artificer: but if you do
practice this, you are the first that I heard of, using this Practice; and I
must tell you, that your praying to Saints upon Earth, and your praying to
Saints in Heaven, are both dishonorable to the Savior of the World; for you
ascribe unto them that worship which is due only unto God: God is styled, the
God that hears Prayer, therefore to him ought all flesh for to go, Psalm. 65.
ver. 2. And though you do not pray unto them directly for Grace or Glory, but
only for the benefit of their mediation; yet you make them to share in that
Glory, which is wholly due unto Christ; for he is the only Mediator between God
and Man, 1 Timothy chap. 12. ver. 5. And besides, you maintaining this needful to
be done, do detract from the sufficiency of the Mediation of Christ; if his
mediation be sufficient for a Sinner, the Mediation of Saints is needless; but
if theirs be needful, then is not his sufficient.

That we are commanded to desire the Prayers of the Faithful upon Earth, I
grant; but this desire is not expressed by an Act of Religious Worship, such as
Prayer is; but by an act of civil Request; which civil Request cannot be made
to the Saints in Heaven; because we (wanting the liberty and convenience of a
nere Converse) have not an opportunity for it; they are in patria, we in via;
they are in Heaven, we on the Earth; we do enjoy that Communion and Society
with the Saints upon Earth, which we have not with the Saints in Heaven: Your
own Schoolmen are uncertain, how they do hear Prayers, therefore they are not
certain, that they do hear them; nay, they may be certain, that they do not
hear them; for they are ignorant of the affairs of the World: Abraham (says
the Prophet) is ignorant of us, and Israel does not acknowledge us, Isa. chap.
63. ver. 16.

It is a wonder to me, that you dare be so bold, as to maintain this Assertion
(having not the least shadow of Proof for it); where is there an Injunction, or
President for it? Search the Book of God, from the Alpha of Genesis, to the
Omega of the Revelations; yet you will not find the least Iota to this purpose.

Much there is to be found against it; God bids you to call upon Him, and
Christ bids you to come unto Him; and Christ has taught you when you pray, not
to say, Sancte Petre ora pro nobis, or Sancte Paul ora pro nobis, etc. but to
say, Pater noster, qui es in Caelis, etc. Psalm. 50. ver. 15. Mat. c. 11. v. 28.
And sure you will not say, That Saints are to be believed in; you do not find
this to be an Article of Faith in the Apostles Creed; and then the Apostle
asks, How can you call upon him, in whom you have not believed? Romans c. 10. v.
14. But if th(...) was nothing else to be said against it, this would be a
sufficient Confutation: God is not like unto an earthly (...), who does not
know the Grievance of his Subject, before he be informed; nor will afford
Relief, before he be entreated; to whom, Access cannot be obtained, but by the
use of Door-keepers, and the Mediation of Servants and Favorites. God seeks
us, before we seek unto him; and calls upon us, before we call unto him; and is
more willing to give, than we to ask; and more ready to hear us, than we are to
pray unto him: And the reason why we do pray unto him, is not to instruct him
in the knowledge of our Wants; but to obey his Command, and to own him for our
Helper, and to express our desire to receive Help from him.

Because you maintain this Assertion, that The Saints in Heaven are to be
prayed unto, I shall make bold to propound some Questions to you.

First, Whether they are moved to intercede by a feigned Prayer, as well as by
that which proceeds out of unfeigned Lips? If not, How can they distinguish
between them? Can they (as God does) search the Heart and the Reins?

Secondly, Whether all are to be prayed unto? If not, Why to some, and not to
the rest? If they be, Whether in general, or in particular, by name? If but in
general, Why do you pray unto some in particular? If in particular, Whether you
know the number, and names of all? And, Whether to pray to some by name, and
not to the rest after the same manner, be (...) to have respect of persons?

Thirdly, Whether all have an equal Prevalency in interceding? If not, but
differently proportioned, according to their different measure of (as you say)
Merits; Whether it be not the wisest practice to pray unto them, that have the
greatest Prevalency? And that you may not be deceived in the use of this
Practice, What mark of Distinction have you to know them by?

Fourthly, Whether the Mediation of Christ be not more prevalent, than the
Intercession of all? If it be, we being assured, that Christ sits at the Right
Hand of God, making Intercession for his own People, whether it be not needless
upon this ground, to pray unto them?

I could propound many more, but these shall suffice: When you Write again, I
hope you will say somewhat tending to a Resolution of them, because this is
very necessary for the better understanding, and practicing of this your
Article of Faith.

To the Third Query ^our Answer is also Affirmative, but you do not make
mention of any (as you speak) sinistrous Deduction from it; nor shall I show
here, what Conclusions may be drawn thence, to be levelled against your
Religion: my Task being to Reply, I shall speak no more, than you give me
occasion to say; but shall let that work alone, until Providence fit me with
another opportunity.

But here I must take Notice of your Expressions, how fully (as I do conceive)
they do reveal your mind: You say, That you are great in expectation to see me
improve these Queries, to the demolishing of your Religion; and yet you think
to place a Remora in my way, by imposing a Task, and prescribing of Rules,
which (you say) I am bound in Honor to observe. Thus you deal with me as King
Saul dealt with David, upon condition of bringing an hundred Fore-skins of the
Philistines, promising his Daughter to Wife: but though he pretended this
outwardly, he intended no such thing; but that the condition should be a
perfect hinderance to his Promise.

How my Strength will deal with your Task, and your Rules, I cannot foretell;
but however it prove, I will attempt an Encounter with them:

To the First, I have, out of Gregory's Writings, not sinistrously interpreted,
but plainly quoted, proved that his Doctrine agrees with the Doctrine of the
Church of England, in all the forementioned Particulars.

To the Second, When you do show me a particular Article of Faith, wherein they
agreed, and prove that Agreement by express, and good Authority; I shall show
you particular Articles of Faith, wherein they differed; until then, it will be
judged by any indifferent Arbitrator, sufficient to tell you from your Author
Beda, That they differed about the way of Justice, the way to Heaven; and so
great were there differences, that Austin Judged them worthy of Death.

To the Third, When I say, that the Monks were not slain by Edilfred King of
Northumbers, I will produce a substantial proof for it; I have proved, that
they were slain by Ethelbert King of Kent, and that by the instigation of
Augustine the Monk, who was present at the Slaughter: My Affirmation, that they
were slain by Ethelbert, does no more exclude Edilfred, than Beda's
Affirmation, that Edilfred was the Murderer, does exclude Ethelbert from
having an hand in the Slaughter; and that this may sink into your Understanding
for a truth, Consider whether there may not be many coordinate Agents, working
together for the producing of an Effect; and whether the Production may not be
truly ascribed to one of them, not mentioning the rest; His Majesty's Fleet was
out, under the conduct of the Prince, and the Duke, and should I say, that the
Hollanders were beaten by the Prince, not mentioning the Duke; or by the Duke,
not mentioning the Prince, I should speak nothing but truth.

To the Fourth, This sufficient proof may be considered diverse ways, in
relation to yours, or my own, or the Readers Judgment, in relation to yours:
If I must stick until the Proof be sufficient, perhaps I may stick until the
last day; if you be resolved to shut your Eyes against the Truth, I know no
body bound to stick in proving until you open them; what I have undertaken to
prove, to my own, and (I hope) to the indifferent Readers Judgment, is
sufficiently proved; and what I shall do hereafter (I hope) will proceed from
me in the like Strength.

To the Fifth, If you will not (as the Heathen Oracles heretofore did) deliver
your self in a doubtful Manner, but will speak your mind plainly; there will be
no cause to fear a Misinterpretation; but however, if I do wrest your words to
a wrong sense, I hope you are able enough to tell me in particular, wherein I
am Guilty; which (if you do it) will oblige me to a return of thanks, for
dealing fairly with me: I would not have you to deal with me again, as you have
done already in your Reply; wherein you accuse my answer of this Guilt in
general; but you show nothing in particular to prove the Accusation.

Thus (I conceive) your Remora is removed, and now I am at liberty to improve
the Queries, to the demolishing of your Religion; yet there is one way left to
prevent this Exercise, which is your returning to my Rejoinder, and rejoyning
to this Reply: which if you do (because I would not have too great a weight to
lie upon my weak shoulders at once) I shall employ my self wholly in defense of
what I have written; but if (after some time of expectation) I find you
unwilling to grapple any farther, (Providence permitting and assisting me) I
shall (according to the Tallent bestowed upon me) endeavor to demonstrate,
that many Tenants of your Religion are injurious to the Glory of God, who is
the Author of Man's Salvation; and to the Glory of Christ, who is man's Mediator
and Intercessor; and that they exalt man far above his height, who is so
worthless, and unworthy, that the best plea that he can make for himself before
the Tribunal of God, is to say (with the dejected Publican) God be merciful
unto me a Sinner!

And now I protest to the World my Innocence, as to that Charge you brought
against me in your Reply, accusing me for giving reviling, and exasperating
Language; that I have not either in my Answer, or in this Rejoinder, or Reply,
given the least word sounding to that purpose: Wherefore (when you Write again)
if your Will be disposed to renew your Charge (my strain of Writing being
(though low, yet as I conceive, still the same) you are required to mention the
particular word, wherein I have transgressed the rules of Civility and Modesty;
and if I do not clear my self, before the Face of any indifferent Judge, let me
and my Cause bear the Blame, and the shame of it for Ever.

Reflections upon a piece of Controversy written by S F.
The occasion of the Reflections.
S. F. having formerly put himself upon answering some Quaeries concerning
points of Religion, and thereby engaged himself in a formal disputation, after
much pains taken therein, both by himself and the person, whom he had made his
Antagonist; the matter at last, as it seems, was laid aside, whether because
his Adversary left the Country, or else seeing the Disputation was likely to
prove both fruitless and endless, he thought it not worthy his further notice;
I can only give a bare conjectural Reason, because I never yet understood who
this person was; nor did I ever hear any thing of this so much Celebrated Piece
till now, although the Author of it has boasted very much that it has
travilled all Lancashire over to meet with an Answerer, but never has found
any so daring as to encounter it, so that needs it must remain victorious and
unanswerable; and upon this acount was intended very speedily for the Press.
But amidst these vapors, one replying that this seemed very strange, being
that they never yet had heard of any thing that came forth, even by the most
Learned, of the Protestant Religion, which had not been fully answered. The
Author therefore resolved that it should first be showed to a certain Person,
who it might be conceived had never heard of it by reason of his late coming
into those Parts; and accordingly sent it with this assurance, that if he did
not answer it, it should very speedily be printed; his Answer hereunto was,
that if it was only satisfaction and truth that he aimed at, he conceived
himself obliged, both in civility and charity, to endeavor it; so to save him
both the trouble and charges; but instead of a Paper as it was told him,
receiving a formal piece of Controversy already swelled up to half a score
sheet^ of Paper; what with answering, replying and rejoyning, he was almost
determined not to concern himself any farther in it for several reasons, at the
least he resolved for the present only to return him a civil Letter, to let him
know, that although he should be ready to vindicate the Cause when in reason it
should be required, and to endeavor his sat^sfaction, if he found him desirous
to receive it: Yet why he should concern himself with any thing that looked
like a personal Quarrel, especially in the behalf of a person altogether
unknown unto him, he saw no reason, neither could it be expected from him,
since the Party already concerned had laid it aside, as seeming to judge it not
worth any farther notice* adding moreover some other reasons, drawn from the
heats, animosities, and other inconveniences, which disputations of that
nature, when indiscreetly, or passionately managed are most of all subject too:
for which he was not willing to engage himself in this: yet secluding these if
he found him so moderately and sincerely disposed, as to oblige him to take any
farther pains in endeavoring his satisfaction, either in this, or ^n any thing
else he could serve him in; he should find him so far from doing it to make him
an Adversary, that he would not so much as think of it with any other
intention, but to make him more a friend; and to convince himself likewise how
much he was an hearty well wisher of him. This Letter, although, free from
intending the least prejudice to any one, and only in general expressing the
inconveniences, which but too frequently ensue upon such like occasions, was
afterward answered by S. F. with another, captiously inferring many things as
meant against himself, and quite through a great number of cavils and wordish
exceptions. This made him absolutely resolve to sit down in a protest silence,
because it was not then an hard matter to foretell what would be the event of
such a Controversy, and what credit to himself, or satisfaction to others might
be expected, when such a Letter, not Matters of Religion was now become the
subject of so furious a Contest; and therefore he would make an end of it with
another Letter to inform him only of this his resolution, and his reasons why;
let him make what sinistrous use of it he pleased, if it needs must be
understood contrary to the sincerity and candor of it, or the former intended.
This last Letter was so heinously taken, because he will neither allow one to
vindicate himself from his accusations, as far as is reasonable; nor yet which
is a far harder cafe, to sit quiet, and let him say what he pleases, and also
perhaps because he foresaw that his Book was in danger to be sent back without
an answer unto it, which he seemed all along to be afraid of; that whosoever
has but heard how violent and passionate he has been in his expressions,
discoursing with several persons since the recite of that Letter, would now at
least condemn him of a guilt a personal quarreling, though there was no such
charge brought against his Papers in either of those Letters, and commend mend
the other for his prudence in seeking to decline so certain an occasion.

But still S. F. continuing his importunities of having his Papers answered, or
else acknowledged as unanswerable: I was desired by a very worthy Person whom
he had likewise importuned very much for an answer, and whose request to me is
always an obliging command, to look over them, and to consider how far they
might in any wise deserve an answer, if perhaps for the future it might be
thought convenient to send one without detaining them any longer; finding my
self therefore under this obligation; and after some time also in such a
condition that I could afford my self a little leisure, I purposed to peruse
those Papers; though I must confess not without a certain unwillingness as to
the thing it self, being also but too fully satisfied, That Opinions and
Controversies once raised, are seldom or never laid by reason, because for the
most part, the one Party puts on a resolution never to yield to the other, or
never to acknowledge himself satisfied and his judgment convinced, though it be
clearly evinced, both by Scripture, Authority of the Church, Councels, Fathers,
or whatsoever: because he will only be tied to his own rule; and neither shall
that signify any thing, unless applied as he will himself; so that in effect
he makes himself his own Judge, which is a certain way of victory, at least in
his own conceit, and in the apprehension of the meaner sort of capacities, whom
therefore such an one will not fail to amuse and inveigle with boasting words;
and if there comes not forth immediately an Answer or Reply to every petty
quibble, and exceptious cavil, presently to proclaim it unanswerable, and cry
out victory, because very few, or scarce any Body has heard of it, and no Body
judges it worth the taking notice of: Truly, it seems to me no small piece of
fondness and extravagancy for any private person to buisie himself now-adays in
writing against Points of Religion, and trouble others, either with reading, or
answering his Books; when as the multitude already written upon that Subject,
and affording incomparably more satisfaction, has long since made the world to
nauseate; and yet they are so far from deciding any one Point controverted,
that they rather give growth unto it through interest and passion, than any
ways abate the fury of hot contenders by reason. This I say not to decry
Controversies, or a prudent and serious examine and inquiry into the Truth; but
the wilful abuses and passionate errors that are committed in the management
of them, and the industry that is used to render them unprofitable, and
endless; so that in fine, instead of putting an end to one Controversy, they
often beget another, which is, whose Pen has best expressed his passion not
kept close to the matter controverted, and discussed it with reason. Now
whether or no the learned Controvertist has taken such a Course as to observe
the one, and avoid the other, I leave to the judgment of the discreet and
impartial Reader, having first offered to his consideration these few
Reflections upon his method and way of answering, and afterward somewhat in
answer not to every quible and captious criticism, for that would be both
endless, and below the gravity and seriousness of the thing treated of, but
only so far as may suffice to inform the Author of his insincere dealing, and
give satisfaction both to him and the prudent Considerer.

Reflection. I.
FIrst therefore by that short perusal that I have made of this piece of
Controversy, I can only gather, that the Ground of this was no other than that
the Person whom S. F. has made his Adversary has a desire to satisfy some of
his friends, that the Religion professed by those that are called Papists is
the same Religion, which was first preached in England, when it was first
converted to the faith of Christ. And this by showing that it is the same
Religion which St. Austin the Monk, and Apostles of England preached to the
Saxons; that which he taught the Saxons to be the same with the Religion he
professed amongst the Britains; and that of the Britains to be the same with
the Religion which was planted in England by its first Converters. Now I see no
reason why any one should so heavily fall out with this way of proceeding; for
certainly had he taken the pains to have derived the Catholic Religion through
every Century from the Apostles Time downwards to this present; and that by
showing a visibility, and a continued and an interrupted succession of it ^
every Age, it would in all reason have added very much to the satisfaction of
any discreet inquiring person; and yet because he had traced it upwards through
sixteen Ages; S. F. might have said with as much reason, or more, that he had
made a Journey of sixteen miles about, as that he has made a Journey of three
miles about, when one would have ser-as well. Whereas certainly to see a
Religion proved to be visibly handed down through all Ages, and conserved in
the same purity of Doctrine wherein it was at first delivered by its first
Propagators, and the Apostles themselves, should be the greatest assurance and
satisfaction imag^nable, that it must needs be the only true Religion, and all
others wanting this ancient visibility, succession and continuance are false,
and the mere inventions of men. Agreeable to this Cavil, he frames as strange
an Answer to the Qu^ries, upon which likewise shall I fix my Observations how
that.

Reflection. II.
ALthough to any rational Person not blinded with passion, or prepossessed with
error, antiquity alone and succession of that Religion, which is acknowledged
by all to be the only true one, would be a sufficient manifestation of the true
Religion; Truth only being able to prevail at last, and yet with S. F. it
serves for nothing, and must not be of any advantage to those that pretend unto
it: Because (says he) should I grant so long succession, what advantage? A
Turk may reason with the same probability, and prove as great Antiquity for his
Religion; and a Jew greater for his. I can scarce in civility presume that
there is any one of so mean a capacity in his Parish, but would be able of
themselves both to find out the disparity, and weakness of this Argument, but
that a Divine should shuffle off an Argument always reputed and granted to be
of so much force and value with so poor a shi^t and weak a comparison, minds me
of a saying in holy Scripture, Psalm. 26. 12. Mentita est iniqu^tas sibi;
fa^shood evermore standing in need of such rotten supports, that at length it
betrays both it self and its Abettors. The difference is obvious and plain to
any of understanding; for ^ the Turks* every Body knows that they do not
pretend to derive their Religion any farther, or from any other than from
Mahomet, or their Law, (...) from the Alcoran, which being acknowledged by
themselves; as you cannot expect good fruit from a bad Tree, so neither from an
Impostor and false Prophet can you expect other than lies and impostures, which
being supposed as it is by all Christians, both of Mahomet, and his Law;
neither the antiquity nor succession of his Sect can be any argument or proof
of its truth; whereas Catholics, at least, pretend to derive their Religion,
and to prove a continual succession of it from our Savior Christ himself to
his Apostles; and by them delivered unto others, and so downwards to this
present, as they make it to appear, both by Scripture, Tradition, Counsels, and
Holy Fathers, in an unanimous consent of all Ages: and as for a Jew pleading
greater antiquity for his; this answer as well as the other would have
something of force from the mouth of a Heathen or a Jew; but from any one that
professes Christianity, it has neither any thing in it of sense or reason:
for neither do they any more than the Turks believe in Jesus Christ, or in his
holy Gospel: So that indeed, for us to press this argument against them, that
the Catholic Religion is that which our Savior taught his Apostles; and from
them it has descended down unto us, and therefore it is the True Religion,
would be of no force to convince them, because they would admit all that is in
the antecedent; and yet still according to their Principles deny the
Consequence, viz that it is the True Religion, as well as we grant them the
one, and deny the other of their Religion: whereas all Christians being agreeed
thus far, that is all of them pretending to profess the Faith and Law of
Christ, and to have their Religion, Sacraments, and Doctrine from him, cannot
in reason urge one another with those same arguments wherewith the Infidels do
impugn us; and which all Christians are equally obliged to deny, and to answer
alike: nor can they without a manifest contradiction answer us in this
particular as a Turk or Jew would do, unless they will deny their own
principles, betray their belief, and renounce Christianity; but must of
necessity grant, That that Religion which is most ancient, and which is proved
to be unalterably derived by a continued and interrupted Succession from him
that is acknowledged by both Parties to be the Author of the True Religion, is
to be admitted of as true by all; and consequently the continuance and
antiquity of it allowed as undeniable marks and testimonies thereof. And if to
prove these be of no more advantage than if a Turk or a Jew should prove the
continuance and antiquity of theirs, I would fain know what must be
advantageous for the Catholics; certainly if Mr. S. F. will not have antiquity
and continuance to signify any thing in behalf of our Religion, he will find
that novelty will prove a very weak argument to support his own with: but I do
not much wonder why he should be so grievously fallen out with antiquity
considering his principles; first because he is assured it will be no friend to
him. secondly, because it is due to the Catholic Religion, even by the
acknowledgment of Protestant Writers themselves; and lastly because to do it is
very agreeable to the present Enthusiastic humor, that takes the liberty of
setting up every day a new Religion, according to the whimsies of their own
private spirit.

Reflection. III.
MY third Reflection is upon the reasonableness of a request, which he tells
you after all this he will make unto the person whom he has formerly made his
adversary, viz. That he would substantially prove the affirmative of his
queries, to wit this continuance or ancient succession.

This in the judgment of any indifferent or judicious person, must needs seem
an unreasonable thing to be demanded, first because he had immediately before
declared, that although it were so yet it should signify no more with him,
then if a Turk or a Jew pleaded the same; so that it is so far from being a
reasonable request, that every body will grant, that it is the most
unreasonable thing in the world, to urge any one to prove a thing, and at the
same time to declare that the proof of it shall be of no benefit or advantage
unto them; besides it is otherwise an unreasonable request or demand, since
that the Protestants, of whom he professes himself (as I suppose) to be one,
pretending to the title of Reformers, must needs grant as the word it self does
import, that they found the Catholic Religion in possession, not only in
England, but all the Christian world over, with the unanimous and general
consent of all Nations, without either disturbance or contradiction; but on the
contrary flourishing in the greatest calm, peace and ferenity that could be,
till Martin Luther made an opposition and rebellion; but whether upon the
account of Reformation, or Deformation and Passion, might easily be made to
appear, were it proper for this place; His own words to the Duke of Saxony, are
a convincing argument, where he told the Duke of Saxony; persuading him for
Gods sake, to return to the obedience of his Holy Mother, the Catholic Church;
this quarrel was not begun for Gods sake, neither for Gods sake, should it be
ended; so the Church of Rome being thus settled in an Ancient Possession, and
that such an one, that at least in the Judgment and Confession of the
Protestants themselves was justly prefumable to have come from Christ, ought
not in any wise, to have been disturbed therein, without sufficient motives,
and very weighty and evident reasons, possession it self alone being a
sufficient Title, till evident and rigorous Proofs, not bare presumptions and
probabilities are brought against it, to invalidate it and show that it is
wrongful; as it is undeniable out of the principles both of Nature and Reason,
as also by the practice of the Laws of England, as our Lawyers will tell you*
and give you a number of examples and instances according to the common Maxim,
Melior est conditio pessidentis. A Religion therefore the most anciently
settled, the most universally acknowledged, the most apostolically delivered,
and the only one in possession, and being through the Christian world, as the
Catholic was at the time of the first breach, ought not in common reason to
have been changed or disobeyed upon pretenses, suppositions, and mere
probabilities, but ought to have been obeyed and admitted off, as the only true
and undoubted Religion, till the contrary had been evinced and Demonstrated by
most rigorous and manifest Proofs, by this the reader may judge whether party
stands oblidged to bring a substantial Proof the Catholics an affirmative
for the antiquity and continuance of their Religion, or the Protestants a
negative against it, as also whither the demand was reasonable or unreasonable,
and truly though it had been a reasonable request, yet it must needs be a great
deal of severity to complain that it is not fulfilled before it was requested;
and because Catholics prove not what was not required of them, they must needs
therefore be compared to the Egyptian taskmasters.

Reflection. IV.
MY fourth and last Reflection, is upon his method and way of proceeding, as
being both disorderly and unconclusive; for had he had a mind to have proceeded
solidly in a disputation about points of Religion, it being a thing of the
greatest importance that may be, he ought rather to have laid down some
principle felf-evident; or as they say in Schools, per se notum, as a
foundation to build his discourse on, and to have nominated also a Judge to
determine whatsoever should be controverted betwixt them, and not to run and
chase from one thing to another without fixing upon any thing certain, or able
to decide the thing in Controversy: for to any rational Person it must needs
appear, that it will prove both an unprofitable and endless disputation, when
one Party says one thing, the other quite another, without being first agreeed
upon some one Principle, or Rule to be directed by. Now had this learned
Disputant assigned any such Rule, or Judge to give judgment in behalf of what he
had objected against the Catholic Religion, it would have been either allowed
of, or disallowed by his Adversary; and if allowed of, the business would have
come to a fair and speedy Trial; or else if he had required this from the
Desendant, and disproved of what he had nominated to decide the difference
betwixt them, then might he with credit have endeavored to destroy such a
power; and with the same blow likewise the whole Fabric of the Catholic
Religion; for if we do not know whether a line, or a piece of wood be straight
or crooked, but by applying a Rule unto it, by which we may be enabled to judge
of its st^eightness or crokedness; how can he with any show of reason or
justice pretend to write against a settled and ancient Religion, and argue it of
falsehood, without first proposing something whereby its errors and falsehood
may be discerned: but this must not be the dead Letter of Scripture; for we
know Arrians impugned the Divinity of our Savior Christ; and with far more
plausible Quotations and Texts out of Scripture than he can produce for the
Protestant Religion; neither must it be Scripture interpreted by the private
spirit, for by that the Quakers would easily defend themselves, and oppose all
others: from which Hold Protestants are not able to drive them, but by making
use of those very arguments which Catholics use against Protestants: nor
lastly, must it be any thing that is only probable, conjectural, or uncertain;
for the same uncertainty and danger of erring, or of being false, it has
within it self, the very same must it of necessity have and retain in judging
any Controversy, and its judgments or decisions will be equally exposed and
subject to error; so that to pass sentence betwixt two Religions, evincing the
one of falsehood and the other of truth; there is of necessity required an
infallible Rule to go by; a certain Guide for direction, and unerring Judge to
give sentence, without which there can no be infallibility or certainty of
truth in this Decision. I easily foresee what Mr. S. F. will object against
this, that it either equally touches both Parties, or else it does not at all
concern him. For the prevention of which evasion I answer, that he being the
Oponent, and undertaking to write against a Religion maintained by its
Professors to be infallibly true, cannot in reason seek to overthrow it,
unless by arguments and reasons, which are manifest and certainly convincing:
who therefore shall be the Judge of this? himself that were unreasonable, unless
he will pretend to have the gi^t of infallibility bestowed upon him; he ought
therefore to submit them to the examination and judgment of something
infallibly able to judge of them, and determine the business; and if he leaves
it to the Catholics nomination, he might both complain of partiality, and
expect to have them retorted upon himself, at least if he will be so daring, it
ought to be by his own free election; so that the obligation lies wholly upon
himself. Indeed in his Papers he speaks of an infallible Rule, conformable unto
which he requires that our Proofs be, and then he will be of our Religion; but
to keep himself out of this danger; and because he dares not stand to the
judgment and determination of it, being already assured that he shall bring a
staff to his own head, and find his Religion to be disagreeable unto it: he
tells us not what this infallible Rule is; nor can I imagine what he means by
it, if he will stick to the Protestant Principles, for Scripture alone it
cannot be, for the reasons I have given before, Traditions they will not allow
of; Councels they reject, and to the Fathers they grant not so much Authority;
so that although now and then they pick out some sentences out of them, yet
they hold them not at all to be decisive, but take and leave them at their
pleasure, just as Mr. S. F has done in his rejoinder, where he quotes St.
Gregory in his 9 hom. upon Ezekiel, for the sufficiency of Scripture; and
produces a saying of that holy Father indiscreetly spoken, and making nothing
at all for his purpose, as will appear hereafter; and all along never takes
notice of the difficulty of understanding it; of which St. Gregory Treats ex
professo; nor how he reconciles grace and merit, of both which he discourses at
large; the consideration of which if Mr. S. F. had been so disposed, would have
clearly convinced him what St. Gregory's belief was in these particulars; and
although he has picked some other sayings out of the same Father, which he
persuades himself upon the same mistake, will work wonders, yet if he would be
but content that he should decide the things in Controversy, and resolve us
what his belief was in those particulars, or any thing else that is
controverted betwixt us and the Protestants, he would find (as you shall
presently see) that even in those places which Mr. S. F. tells you, are
evidently opposite to the Catholic Religion, and agreeable to that of the
Church of England, that they either make nothing at all for his purpose, or
else that they absolutely conclude against him.

De ore tuo te Judico. Luke 19. 22.
Proofs pretended to be taken out of St. Gregory, examined and showed to be
pitifully wrested if not flalsly quoted.
I Had purposed neither to have given my self or the Reader any further
trouble, but that in his rejoinder I found him saying, that to grant that our
Religion is the same with Austines, is the same with the Ancient Brittans, and
theirs the same with that which was first brought into England, is in effect to
say, that our Religion is the same that was taught by Christ and his Apostles,
and consequently to grant ours to be the true Religion, and to renounce the
Protestants as false, so that a Protestant as a Protestant (he says) cannot
grant us this, and yet a little before, in his answer to the queries, he is so
liberal, that he cares not how much of antiquity he grants us, because he
professes that it is of no advantage, nor shall it signify any more, that our
Religion is the same with St. Austin, and the Brittans, than if a Jew, or a
Turk pleaded the antiquity of theirs, which he says, they may do with as much
Probability. This put me also in mind of his former answer to the first query,
which was Negative, presuming that St. Austines Religion was the same with that
which his Master Pope Gregory professed, from which he boldly undertakes to
prove evidently out of St. Gregory's own words, that our Religion differs in
all these particulars; the Canon of the Scripture, the real Presence, the
private Mass, Communion in both kinds, merit of good Works, veneration of
Images and the Popes Supremacy; his Doctrine in these (as he says) being the
same that is maintained by the Church of England, as it is evident; so that now
you see him in a manifest contradiction of himself, making that which before
was of so little value and advantage, to be now the sum of the whole
controversy, nay whereas before he had all along treated St. Austin so
irreverently, as to make him guilty of the Massacre of the Britains, and of
many other misdemeanors, yet now on the contrary side the main business is to
find out what his Religion was, it being become even the Rule of his belief,
and that which the Protestant Religion must stand or fall by.

I must confess I did not a little wonder at this unexpected change, but much
more at his great undertakings; but because it is one thing to undertake, and
another to perform, this being acknowledged to be of so great concern, I could
not let it pass unexamined, because here at length I thought I had something
more certain to build upon, but must needs see how well he had acquitted
himself of his own imposed task, and made it evidently appear that St. Gregory,
and consequently St. Austin did not profess the Catholic Religion, but that of
the Church of England. Let us therefore now examine whether or no, he has done
it with as much solidity and truth, as he says he had done it with ease.

Against the Canon of the Scripture, he cites St. Gregory speaking thus, Non
inordinate agimus, si ex libris licet eon Canonis sed tamen ad edificationem
editis testimonium proferamus; which in plain English signifies no more, then
that it is not amiss sometimes to bring a Testimony or proof out of the books,
though they be not Canonical, yet if they be put forth for edification.

Although I have diligently sought for this place in St. Gregory, yet I cannot
find any such thing in him, nor so much as such an Article, but supposing the
truth of this quotation, how does the opponent make it evident that St. Grogory
speaks here of the first and second book of Machabees, rather then of the third
and fourth, which neither the Catholic Church holds to be Canonical? he tells
you out of Canus speaking of St. Gregory thus, * Machabeorum libros ab ecclesia
recipi Gregorio licuit aliquando disputare, Gregory was pleased for a time to
dispute, whether the book of Machabees were received by the Churchor no? he did
well to put neither of these Texts into English, since they make so little for
his purpose, for first Canus likewise speaks only in general of them, withour
particularly mentioning either one or other, and besides he says only, that St.
Gregory was pleased to hold them as disputable, not that he did reject and
condemn them all as Apocriphal, as the Church of England absolutely does.

But to show him all the Favor that may be, let us suppose that S. Gregory
does here speak of all the Books of the Machabees, not collectively taken; for
in that acception it would still make more against him, but distributively, as
well of the first and second, as of third and fourth, it can be only inserred
from thence, that they were not declared to be Canonical in his time, but it
does not prove that they were then either rejected as Apocryphal, or that they
are not since declared Can. loc. Theol. l. 2. c. 11.
to be, or are not truly Canonical, as some other parts of Scripture have
likewise been, which nevertheless the Church of England holds now to be
Canonical, although formerly they were doubted of, and were not received as
Divine Scripture, as the Epistle of S. James, the second of S. Peter, the
second and third of S. John, and S. Jude's Epistle; of all which Eus. l. 1. c.
25. hist.
Eusebius. and S. Jer. de Vir. illust.
S. Jerome testify, that some Learned Fathers doubted sometimes whether they
were Canonical or not, till the 3. General Council of Carthage under the Pope,
these two Books of the Machabees, together with others, were expressly declared
to be Divine Scripture: and since by the Council of Florence and Trent, it
being most certain that in the Primitive Church the Canonical Scriptures were
not generally received all at once, so that amidst that great variety of
pretended Scriptures, great care and special industry was requis^te to discern
the true from the false, whereby it came to pass that diverse Books were for
some time doubted of, or not received; which yet afterward upon better search
and consideration were generally acknowledged and received as Canonical. This
is so evident for us that Doctor Bilson Bishop of Winchester, and one of the
most learned of the Protestant Divines testifies on our behalf that the
Scriptures were not fully received in all places, no not in Eusebius his time,
he says the Epistle of James, Jude, the 2. of Peter the 2. and 3. of John, are
contradicted as not written by the Apostles, the Epistle to the Hebrews was for
a while contradicted the church of Syria did not receive the 2. Epistle of
Peter, nor the 2. and 3. of John, nor the Epistle of Jude, nor the Apocalips
and the like may be said for the Churches of Arabia, will you hence conclude
(says Dr. Bilson *) that those parts of Scripture were not Apostolic, or that
we need not to receive them now, because they were formerly doubted of? So
fully is M. S. F. his Objections answered by one of the Protestant Doctors;
which he may be pleased to compare with the testimony of our Canus, and then he
may easily see the difference betwixt some one doubtful saying, or such an one
as does not at all make for that purpose for which it is forcedly made use of,
and a number of Testimonies which might easily be brought, even from the
Protestants themselves, but that it would be over-tedious to the Reader, all of
them ex professo intending expressly to declare their approbation and assent to
the Truth of this Catholic Tenent. Now seeing that it is expressly held and
defended by Dr. Bilson, (...) also by diverse of the chief Protestant Writers,
that this most weighty Controversy of discerning true Scripture from false,
cannot be otherwise decided, but by the Authority of God's Church, hence it is
that the Church having determined this Controversy, all parties are obliged to
submit unto it, or else if Mr. S. F. refuses this and will still deny the
Machabees to be Canonical, because they were formerly doubted of, or not
received by S. Gregory, then for the same reason must he likewise reject the
Epistle to the Dr. Bilson in his Survey of Christ's Sufferings, page 664.
Hebrews, and those orher Books named by Dr. Bilson, because they were noless
doubted of by sundry ancient Writers.

The Weakness and Absurdity of this Objection being thus clearly discovered, a
wise Man, whoma word suffices, would presently suspect all the rest, when this
which he places in the Front, and calls as clear, and as evident as the Sun,
has not so much as the outward appearance of an Argument, I thank God that I am
not of his Religion, yet I am confident, that if I were, I should have so much
of reason in me, as either to expect stronger Proofs than this, or otherwise
seek to find a better satisfaction elsewhere. Let us see however, if his
Success will be better in his other Undertakings.

Concerning then the sufficiency of the Scripture, he brings a Saying out of S.
Gregory, viz. In hoc volumine omnia quae erudiunt, cuncta quae aedificant
scripta continentur, In the Holy Scriptures are contained all things that are
necessary for instruction and edification.

This is easily answered by granting him all the Words import, only I desire to
know how we may come rightly to understand them without mistaking the true
Sense; being that there are many things in Scripture so deep and mysterious,
that they transcend all humane Reason, so that though it be sufficient if
rightly interpreted and understood, yet it is not a sufficient interpreter of
it self. For answer hereunto, I remit you to the Divine Words of Vincentius
Lyrin, in his Golden Book he wrote against the profane Innovations of Heresy:
Here some perhaps may ask, forasmuch as the Canon of the Scripture is perfect,
and in all points very sufficient in its self, what need is there to join the
Authority of the Ecclesiastical; Understand (so he calls the Churches Sense,
and the Fathers interpretation of Scripture) for this cause surely, for that
all take not the holy Scripture in one and the same sense, because of the
deepness thereof, some interpreting it one way, some another; so that there may
almost as many Senses be picked out of it as there be men; for Novatian does
expound it one way, and Sabellus another, otherwise Donatus, otherwise Arrius,
Eunomius, Macedonius; otherwise Photinas, Apollinaris, Priscillian; otherwise
Jovin, Pelagius; lastly, otherwise Nestorius. And therefore very necessary it
is, by reason of so great windings and turnings of diverse Errors, that the Line
of Prophetical and Apostolical Interpretation be directed according to the Rule
of the Eclesiastical and Catholic Sense and Understanding. Thus far this grave
and learned Author; and may we not say the same of Wickliffe, Luther, Calvin,
Beza, and many others such like, which we also behold with our own eyes in the
Quakers, Fanatics, Independents, etc. every one of them pretending to the holy
Scripture, and each of them explicating it after their own way; and what
Remedy? for it must be according to private interpretation, one has as much
Title unto it, and as much Reason for what he says, as another. How S. Gregory
therefore comes to be so evidently opposite to the Doctrine of the Catholic
Church, either in these Words, or any where else, I confess I do not understand.

For the reading of the Holy Scripture, he quotes S. Gregory in an Epistle to
one Theodorus, a Physician and Lay-person, thus; Greg. l. 4. Epist. 40.
The Holy Scripture is an Epistle sent from God unto his Creatures; I pray thee
therefore study them, and daily meditate on the Words of thy Creator.

The Occasion of S. Gregory's writing this Epistle* was to acknowledge the
Receipt of a Sum of Money which he had received from this Theodorus, to be
bestowed among the Poor, and for the Redemption of Captives; S. Gregory
thereupon writes unto him in commendation of his Charity, and withal advised
him to read the Holy Scriptures for a farther increase in Charity and the Love
of God. Now you see this Theodorus was pious, and although a Layman, yet a
Scholar, as you may suppose, being a Physician; but you do not find in all
this, that Gregory persuaded him to read the Scriptures to make himself Judge
of Controversies, or to interpret them according to his own fancy, but only for
his Devotion and Encouragement in the Service of God. And this is the constant
Practice and Advice of the Catholic Church to such as are discreet, and not
likely to make ill use of it, but not without restraint to every Girl, and
Enthusiastic Woman, and felf-conceited Artificer, who may have it explicated
piously, and fitted much better to their capacity, without the danger of
mistaking it, by Learned Expositors in their Books of almost any sort. Alas,
methinks the too lamentable effects which have happened by the too much tossing
and reading of the Holy Scripture, or rather abusing of it, should convince any
considering and well-meaning Person of the great Inconveniences that ensue upon
it, when not a silly Girl, if she has but learned to read, but must have her
Bible with her to Church, and there upon Presumption of Wit, or I cannot tell
what Spirit, make her self not only Reader, but a Teacher, Controuler and Judge
of Church, Scripture, Teachers and all, without finding the least difficulty in
the Apocalypses, or in the Canticles, though they contain as many Mysteries as
Words; it seems not to them a sacred Book clasped with seven Seals, as it did
to Apoc. 5. 1.
S. John, nor need they an Expositor, as the holy Eunuch did, that was
Treasurer to Acts 6.
Candace Queen of Ethiopia, and as S. Austin did, when he cried out, O
wonderful Profoundness of thy Words! wonderful Profoundness, my God! wonderful
Profoundness! it makes a man to quake to look on it, to quake for reverence,
and to tremble for love thereof! So that being it is so hard to be understood,
even by the Learned, Reason methinks should dictate and tell us, that they were
not ordained indifferently to be read by all; and by sad experience we see the
Inconveniences: for although the Letter were most pure and not corrupted in it
self, which yet cannot possibly be expected amidst such a variety of
disagreeing Translations, yet the Sense is still in danger of being corrupted,
mistaken, and adulterated; as S. Augustine Aug. Tom. 16. in Jo.
teaches, That Heresies and perverse Doctrines entangling Souls, and throwing
them headlong down into the depth, do not otherwise spring up, but when good or
true Scriptures are not well or truly understood, and when that which is not
well understood, is rashly and boldly avouched. What would he then have said,
if then there had been so many false Translations, and Corruptions of
Scriptures as are now adays, threatening no less than the Ruin both of Church
and State. To conclude, S. Gregory's Words make nothing for this licentious and
popular reading of the Scripture, as it is used now adays, to intermeddle and
judge of Matters of Faith, but only for instruction of Life and Manners; and so
the Catholic Church allows of it; but as the Romans c. 12. v. 4,
Apostle says, usque ad sobrietatem, to be wise, but with sobriety, and only
restrains the reading of them, to prevent Heresy and blind ignorant
Presumption, and that which the Apostle calls falsi nominis scientiam,
Knowledge falsely so called.

Against the Real Presence he cites Greg. Dial. l. 4. c. 58.
S. Gregory speaking thus; Pensemus quale sit pro nobis hoc Sacrificium, quod
pro absolutione passionem unigeniti semper imitatur. Let us therefore consider
what a Sacrifice this is for us, which for our Absolution does always imitate
the Passion of the only Son of God.

This is so far from being opposite to the Real Presence, that it is very
agreeable to the Catholic Doctrine in that point, and very much contrary to
what the Church of England holds. For first, he speaks of a Sacrifice,
which Catholics allow of; whereas Protestant^ deny all true, proper, real and
external Sacrifice, and afterward he says, that is done in imitation of the
Passion of Christ, which is also Catholic Doctrine, and does no way deny the
Real Presence of our Savior Christ in the Blessed Sacrament, because the
Passion was a bloody and general Sacrifice, but this Sacrifice of the last
Supper, or the holy Mass is a Representation unbloody, and particular
Sacrifice, applying the said general and bloody Sacrifice unto us; so that
although in this sense it be in imitation, it is nevertheless real. This more
fully appears by the words of the Context; for immediately before S. Gregory
speaking of the greatness of this Sacrifice, and of the manner of our Savior's
being in the Blessed Sacrament, that is, after a Divine, immortal, and
impassible manner, he adds, That although Christ being risen again from Death,
does now die no more, nor shall Death have any farther Dominion over him, yet
living in himself immortally and incorruptibly, he is again sacrificed for us
in this Mystery of the holy Oblation or Mass, for there his Body is received,
his Flesh is distributed for the Salvation of his People, and his Blood is not
powered out by the hands of Infidels, but received by the mouths of the
faithful. Let us therefore hence consider, etc. Thus most clearly does S.
Gregory speak in our behalf, who is therefore very much reproved by many
Protestant Writers. Mr. Beacon affirms, That the Mass was fully finished by
Pope Gregory the first, about the year 600. Melancthon confesses, that he
allowed by public Authority the Sacrifice of Christ's Body and Blood, not only
for the living, but also for the dead. Dr. Humfry acknowledges that S. Gregory
and S. Austin brought into England the Archbishop's Pall for solemn Masses; and
many others, which for brevity sake I omit.

Against the private Mass he brings Greg. Dial. l. 2. p. 13.
S. Gregory, as he calls it, ordaining thus, When Mass is celebrated in the
Church, and the Deacon according to custom calls out, if any one will not
communicate, let him give place; therefore, says Mr. S. F. the People were not
to be idle Spectators, etc.

How faithfully he has quoted here S. Gregory, let himself be Judge; for
though I have diligently read over the whole Chapter, I find not a word of it,
nor any thing to that purpose: but however, that his Objection may not fail of
an Answer, nor lose any thing of its strength, to prove the thing intended,
which is as much as the former had, and that is just none at all, I Will suppose
it to be in S. Gregory; yet I cannot imagine how it can so much as prebably be
gathered from thence that S. Gregory ordains any thing here against the private
Mass, since the words, as you see, import not any thing of Ordination or
Prohibition; and as for the Deacon's words unto the People, they can signify
no more, than if at Easter, when Mr. S* F. gives the Communion to the People,
the Clerk or whosoever does assist him, should call upon the Non-Communicants,
that they should give place or make room for those that are to communicate,
which in Catholic Countries upon solemn Days, when the Number is very great,
as well of Communicants as Non-Communicants, they are often found to do; and
what does all this prove against private Masses? No more than as if because I
have now mentioned Mr. S. F. his communicating his People at Easter, it should
be inferred out of my words, as a Testimony against him, that he never read
Service but at Easter, when he gives the Communion to the Parishioners, which
he would look upon to be somewhat severe, if not an unjust way of proceeding,
but at least by these words in the Objection, you see that Masses are clearly
mentioned to have been in use; which is contrary to the Doctrine of the Church
of England; and Chytreus a Protestant Writer, affirms, Apol. in cap. 9. page
199.
That in the Times of S. Gregory, the great private Masses were used: so that I
do not see how Mr. S, F. can clear himself of a Contradiction, or at least of
imposing one upon S. Gregory; for before he quoted the holy Father, as denying
the Real Presence; and now again he brings him in allowing of solemn Masses,
and by consequence holding the Real Presence; so that he is not ashamed to make
S. Gregory even contradict himself.

For the Communion in both kinds, he tells us, S. Gregory says thus, Greg. de
Cons. did. 6.
You have learned what the Blood of the Lamb is, by drinking, not by Hearing:
from which he would infer, That there was Drinking then used in the
Administration of the Sacrament.

This Place also I have diligently sought for in S. Gregory, but cannot find
any such in him, nor so much as that he has written any thing either De
Consid. or by way of distinctions: indeed S. Bernard has written a Treatise De
Considerat. unto Pope Eugenius, who had been his Disciple; but neither does he
divide it by Distinctions, but into Books and Chapters; so that neither could
I, though I endeavored it, find it in him; but let it be whose it will, it
makes nothing for Mr. S. F. who mistakes the very state of the Question; for
the Controversy between Protestants and Catholics in this point, is not
whether Christ did institute the Sacrament under both kinds, or whether he
himself did administer it in both kinds to hi^ Apostles, or whether the
Apostles and the Primitive Christians did in like manner at sundry times
practice the same? All this we are agreed of: but the thing in controversy is,
whether Christ did command the Administration of both kinds to the Laity; and
whether the Essence and Substance of the Sacrament be entire in one, or no? Now
the Catholic Church holds, and has always taught, That there is no
Necessity or Divine Precept for the Laity to communicate under both kinds, but
it is sufficient and lawful for them to do it either under one kind or both;
and our Savior Christ himself, and also his Apostles did administer the
Sacrament to the Laity under one; so that the Precept herein, being not Divine,
but only Ecclesiastical, the Church has power to ordain and dispense with it,
according to the various Exigencies and Occasions of Times and Places; and
accordingly sometimes has allowed of Communion under both kinds, and at other
times has forbidden it, as she judged it more expedient for the Receivers, or
the Reverence of the Sacrament it self. To conclude, This Saying imputed to S.
Gregory, implies nothing of a Command, or of a Necessity of receiving under
both kinds, without which, the Sacrament would not be entire, which is the
thing Mr. S. F. ought to have proved, otherwise he says nothing to the purpose,
though he should bring a thousand clear and undeniable testimonies out of S.
Gr. or any else witnessing, That the Laity had received under both kinds;
because whenever either S. Gregory or any other of the Fathers speak of the
Laities receiving under both kinds, they speak of such Times in which the
Church so appointed and commanded the Administration of it, which is not at all
against us; but rather by showing a difference in Practice at several times,
confirms the Authority and Power of the Church, in commanding the
Administration of the Sacrament to the Laity either under one, or both kinds.

Against the Merit of Good Works, he brings S. Gregory Greg. in Job, and Psalm.
Pen.
speaking thus; I grow unto eternal Life, not by the Merit of my Works, but by
the Pardon of my Sin, presuming to obtain that only by the Mercy of God, which
I do not hope for by my own Deserts.

Here I cannot but most of all commend Mr. S. F. for his Prudence, because by
shooting at rovers, he has made himself pretty secure from all danger of being
detected of falsification, unless one would take the pains to search through
all the 35 Books which S. Gregory has written upon Job, and his explanation
upon the seven Penitential Psalms, which is to send his Reader to seek a Needle
in a Bottle of Hay; but to acquit my self of such a Trouble, let the Saying be
whose it will, it is not at all to the purpose; for the Catholic Church in
this point teaches, that our best Works in the state of corrupted Nature, as
they are ours precisely, are not meritorious of a Reward from God, because we
can do no good thing our selves, as of our selves; but our sufficiency is from
God; yet as proceeding from the Grace of Christ working in us and with us, and
elevated by his Merits and Promises, he has promised a reward to them, and
made them worthy of a reward, which is all we intend by the merit of good
Works: Hence the Reader will easily see that the words objected are not at all
opposite, but very* agreeable to the Catholic Doctrine in this point; and that
this was the Belief and Doctrine of S. Gregory, we have the Testimony of diverse
Learned Protestants, and amongst others, the Cent. 6. c. 10. col. 74.
Centurists making a Catalogue of S. Gregory's pretended Errors, amongst the
rest, number his Error of Good Works and Justification.

Against the Veneration of Images, he quotes S. Gregory writing unto Serenus
Bishop of Marseilles, thus Greg. l. 7. ep. 109.
Though you did well in forbidding the adoration of them, yet we judge that you
should not have broken them down.

This likewise I shall answer by showing briefly what the belief of the
Catholic Church is in this point, which teaches that it is good and lawful,
and profitable to keep holy Images and Pictures of Christ and his Saints, to
set them up in Churches, and to give them a relative Honor. Now let the Reader
compare the Words of S. Gregory with this, and tell us wherein they are
opposite: For first S. Gregory blames this Serenus for breaking down the
Images; because, as he tells him, he ought to have taken away the Abuses, not
the Uses of them, which is agreeable to the Catholic Doctrine and Practice,
forbidding all Divine Honor to be given unto them, but only a relative or
inferior sort of Honor or Respect agreeable to the Objects which they do
represent. And secondly, S. Gregory allows of the Use of them as pious and
profitable, though they are capable of being abused; for certainly were the Use
of a good thing to be taken away, because it may be abused, we should in a
short time have very few good things left us; for which S. Gregory, in the
words immediately following, gives this Reason; because, says he, Images are
therefore kept in Churches, to the end that the ignorant may at least read upon
the Walls, what they cannot in Books; you ought therefore, says he, both to
have preserved them, and yet to have hindered the People from the adoration of
them, etc. What S. Gregory therefore taught in this Point, is so clear, that I
will appeal herein to the Protestant Writers themselves, who all of them
reprove him for his special devotion and reverence toward holy Images; for Mr.
Bale Act. Romans ^ont. page 44, 45.
reprehends him for that he suffered the Image of the blessed Virgin to be
carried about, etc. Osyander Cent. 6. page 2^^. 290.
affirms, that Austin, sent by Gregory, thrusts upon the English Churches,
the Roman Rites and Customs, to wit. Altars, Vestments, Images. Dr. Fulk
Against Phem. test. Math. 4.
confesses, that Gregory allowed of Images* for which very Point Calvin
affirms, that Gregory was not taught in the School of the Holy Ghost; but for
brevitys sake I omit the rest.

Now for an upshot he would so confidently persuade his Reader, that S. Gregory
Greg. 1. 4.
is so great an enemy to the Pope's Supremacy, that he tells his Adversary, he
must needs have steeled his Forehead, if he does not likewise confess it, and
this because S. Gregory Epist. 32. 3^. 36. 39.
in diverse Epistles rejects the the Title of Universal Bishop as a Novelty,
Blasphemy, etc.

To which I answer, that S. Gregory rejects or condemns that Title, as it
excludes all others from being Bishops; but not as it signifies one to be
supreme above all the rest, as he himself was at that time; for so does he
express himself in the same Book, Epist. 62.
saying. If there be any crim^ found in Bishops, I know no Bishop but is
subject to the Sea Apostolic; and in the Epist. ^2.
3^ Epistle of the same Book, which is the place quoted, by Mr. S. F. he
clearly declares his sense and meaning of the former words, thus; The Care and
Principallitty of the Holy Church has been committed to the Holy Apostle and
Prince of the Apostles, S. Peter; yet is not he called Universal Bishop, as if
there were no other Apostle but himself. Nay, which is more, S. Gregory does in
this very Epistle Cite the Council of Chalcedon, and the Canons for this Title
due unto S. Peter and his Successors the Popes of Rome; and besides, he pleads
here his own right, and that that Title was then only due unto himself, as
being chosen Head of the Church, and Successor of S. Peter; and consequently
not to be ass^med by any one else but himself; for in all those Epistles which
he writ to Mauritius the Emperor, and the Emperess Constantia, he complains
grievously of the injuries done unto him by John Bishop of Constantinople,
because he usurped the Title of Universal to himself, and robbed the Popes of
Rome of it, to whom only it was due. You see therefore, both ^n what sense, and
in what kind of person he disallows of the word and Title of Supremacy.

The Conclusion.
I Have now answered all the objections pretended, to be taken out of St.
Gregory without any farther examine or search into the nature of either his
Queries, Answers, or the rest of his Rejoinder, further than as I have briefly
touched upon them in my Reflections, hoping they will prove rational and
satisfactory enough; consdering besides, that the greatest part of the
Controversy (excepting the arguments out of St. Grogory) was come to be rather
concerning Historical Reports than matters of Faith: Indeed, as touching what I
have said in answer to the objections out of St. Gregory; I was the more easily
persuaded unto it, because, there at least, I saw something to build upon,
which was the authority of that holy Father, whom he seemed to be willing to
submit unto as a Judge, because he had often promised not a wrested
interpretation of the sense, but evident proofs out of the Father's own words;
so much authority did he seem to allow the holy Doctor; but one may presume it
was only in those particulars, wherein he thought ^e had him sure, or at least
that he could have persuaded some body or other to such a belief; and yet I had
no reason to believe he would submit to him, even in those, since all along he
had treated his Disciple St. Austin so irreverently, although by his Brethren,
Dr. Godwin, Mr. Holinshead, Mr. Mason, Mr. Fox, Dr. Bilson, and others, he is
honored with Title of Apostle of England, and acknowledged to be a Monk of
great virtue: and even he himself at the same time, does suppose that S. Austin
converted England to the faith of Christ, and was of the same Religion which
his Master Pope Gregory professed, and which he would gladly prove to have been
this of the Church of England: observe now how well these things hang together.
In answering his objections, I have studied rather brevity than multiplicity of
reasons; making it only my designed Task, which I wish the Reader to take
notice of) to show the true sense and meaning of S. Gregory's words, and how
agreeable, if rightly understood, they are to the Catholic Doctrine, and
disagreeable to that of the Church of England, which is all that any one in
reason can expect in such circumstances; this being absolutely opposite to what
Mr. S. F. had undertaken, and yet not by a wrested interpretation of the sense,
but by evident proofs out of S. Gregory; so that should I have brought many
proofs from elsewhere, as I might have done very easily, it would rather have
seemed a work of superfluity, than any ways necessary, or to the purpose, by
which he may see the weakness of his arguments, and how easily he is confuted
and foiled, even by those very weapons wherewith thought not only to have
defended himself, but he also to have destroyed all round about him. The thing
in controversy being at present, not whether those assertions were true or
false; but whether S. Gregory held them or no; for this reason therefote, and
for a final prevention of all farther cavilling shifts, and evasions which
might be made, I have ^^ther argued ad hominem, as the Schoolmen term it, and
showed (besides the genuine interpretation of S. Gregory*s words) even by the
confession and testimony of many of the best Protestant Writers; what was his
doctrine and belief in those particulars; because an argument drawn from the
confession of Adversaries, is the most convincing proof against the adversary
himself; his testimony as Dr. Whitaker says, being effectual against himself.
But I must needs confess, I do not so much wonder he should of his own accord
undertake such a task, as to prove evidently that S. Gregory was a Protestant
out of his own works, without any wresting of the sense, which yet is a very
bold attempt, because such a bravado as that might possibly proceed from an
over great zeal and affection he bare to his own cause, through inadvertency or
passion, as it happened to the Preacher at Paul's Cross, as that which after
deliberation and study upon it, he should not then at least see how weakly he
h^d acquitted himself of it; but on the contrary should still cry out upon his
Adversary to give judgment, as obliged by convincing arguments, and speak once
according to the truth, and not according to the groundless affection he bare
to his own cause, whether or no it be not clear, that S. Gregory in these
particulars held not the same with the Doctrine of the Church of England; to
bring which about he'el make Pope Gregory even un Pope himself; a shrewd
displeasure I promise you; and far more cruel than John Bishop of
Constantinople, who opposed S. Gregory was; for though he stood in contention
with S. Gregory, yet he never endeavored to make him to act this cruelty upon
himself; besides after all this, he complains heavily against his Adversary, as
well as he has done since of others, that they will not set forth a charge
against him, as if he had been secure of being detected, either of
^alsifications, or of being found to have failed in any of his undertakings;
whilst attempting to maintain so many errors as he has done, and that in full
view; the method that he has followed has been very inconclusive; his
arguments weakness of reasoning, and his reasons inconsequent: and after this
insincerity, must necessarily endeavor to establish such a groundless Fabric,
which once discovered there is no way left but to fall to open contradictions,
wrested interpretations, and inexcusable falsifications; and last of all for
s^curing h^mself to puzle the Reader with wordish cavils and exceptions.

I have done therefore, but whether this little which I have said be
satisfactory or no, is not mine to decide, but is wholly submitted to the
tribunal of the judicious and rightly informed Reader, whose pardon I beg for
the se^ming harshness and severity of some expressions, which truly sound
ungratefully to my own ears; but I desire it may be considered, that since it
fell to my lot to be the examiner of such a tough piece, full of many more
faults than I have given names to; 'twas nothing but rational in maintenance of
the truth, and to undeceive the Reader, to call some of them by their own
proper names, though I have done it as little as possibly I could, and only to
breed in the Reader a true conceit and reflection upon the substantial part of
the Controversy, not in the least reflecting either upon the person, or
quibbles, and exceptions, and cavils, that are frequently enough to be found in
it.

This is all that I have to Apologize for, excepting only for the long delay of
this, which truly was occasioned for no other reason, but because it was
conceived, that time and absence might wean him, or at least make him less fond
in the opinion he seemed to have of his own productions; but this not
prevailing against his importunities, you have here an hasty product, and
consequently subject perhaps to some critical exceptions in words, but yet such
an one as may afford a sufficient satisfaction, either to Mr. S. F. if he will
but seriously consider it, or at least to the judicious and indifferent Reader.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
THE Protestants and the Romanists have been a long time set in Battle ar^y,
Army against Army, contending which should make the fairest claim and Title
unto Truth; and some years are passed since a Champion of the Roman Church
stalked forth with this proud Challenge; I defy the Armies of the Protestants;
give me a man to resolve three Queries; thus the brief Notes concerning Points
of Religion came upon the Stage.

The Queries (I confess) were not brought immediately to my hands, but
delivered to a Gentleman, whose acquaintance and friendship I am obliged to
esteem; and by him were transmitted to me with earnest importunities to employ
my weak Pen in returning an answer unto them, otherwise I had not entered into
the Lists with this daring Enemy.

For truly, after I had taken a view of the Queries, and considered their
nature and tendency very well, I manifested an unwillingness to enter into such
Contests by giving my importunate Friend a positive denial, urging several
reasons for it: First, the unprofitableness that would be sure to follow the
clearest resolution that could be made; therefore I told him that it was
altogether unworthy the pains of an Inquisition. Secondly, the great
difficulty, yea the utter impossibility that would hinder the probable
resolution of them; it being like unto the Task that the Prophet Elijah imposed
upon his toyling servant, which was to climb up steep and craggy Carmel upon
hands and knees, and nothing to be seen in the conclusion but a little dark
Cloud: Because there is no other Intelligence to be found but the Writings of
fallible men to instruct us in the knowledge of the Op^nions of our
Predecessors, and no History, to inform us of the particular Tenants that were
maintained by the Ancient Brittans; how is it possible for any dilligent
Enquire, to attempt the Work, and to raise it to the height of a probable
Determination?

But my importunate Friend continuing his Importu^iti^s; and I owing my self to
his whole dispose by the right of many undeserved obligations, suffered my self
to be persuaded to make a cursory answer, and the rather because I knew how
studious and active the Romish Emissaries are to spread their erroneous
Opinions* and to gain Proselites; what was said of the Scribes and Pharisees,
that may be truly applied unto them, they will compass Sea and Land for this
end; and as I had reason to suspect this to be the design of the Champion in
sending forth his Queries, so I knew there was an obligation lying upon me to
endeavor to prevent the effecting of it.

Thus I have given a short and just account of the Ground and Reason of the
Encounter that I have made; I did not run without a previous consideration, and
of my own head into the Battle; but may truly say, as David said unto his
Brethren in another case, was there not a cause for it: There have been many
Protestant Worthies, who out of their abundance have cast into the Treasury for
the maintaining of the Protestant Cause, and have acted beyond the power of the
enemies resistance; so that all farther pains may seem superfluous and
needless; yet this will not excuse the wilful neglect of those, who when there
is an occasion and call for it, are not ready to throw in their mite.

There is now another Champion stepped forth, who undertakes to be a second to
the first, to revenge his quarrel, giving out high language, because (as I
suppose) he expects a wonderful effect to be the issue of it; that as the Walls
of Jericho fell down at the sound of Rams Horns; so all that has been written
by me should fall to the ground; not for the strength of his arguments, but at
the noise of his great words: May I oppose this Man of valor without the
imputation of factiousness and vain glory; I hope to do it without the danger
of receiving a foil in the Cause I have undertaken to maintain; and to show how
doughtily he has quitted himself, and answered the expectation of his obliging
Fr^end, who (as he says) has engaged him in the Quarrel.

What needs many words among Friends; I presume gentle Reader, thou art a
friend to him that is an Abettor of the Truth; and for the maintaining of it I
shall offer to thy view some anim^dversions upon this Champions reflections; It
is my purpose to be as brief as the matter to be handled will permit, that I
may not imitate the Reflector's dealing with thee, to present thee a shadow
instead of a substance, and to shufle thee off with a multititude of empty
words instead of real arguments; but because I am to trace him step by stey to
discover every falsity that he makes; and h^s expressions being very observable
in some sense, I must not pass by any thing that is spoken by him without a
remark upon it; therefore it is my fear that I shall trespass upon thy patience
more th^n I desire to do.

Accept in good part what ^s here presented unto thee, but let me premise, that
it is not the refined Gold of Ophir, nor the sweet spices of Arabia; I mean any
fruits of my labor, fit to be compared to those elaborate Tracts that have
dropped from the Pens of the worthy defenders of the Protestant Faith; but such
as I have, that give I thee; let the good will of the Author excuse the
worthlesness, and prevail for the acceptance of his work, being that it
proceeds from one, who is as desirous to conduct thee in the saving way of
truth, as he would be unwilling to walk himself in the destructive paths of
errors; and if from this little seeding thou reapest any harvest to confirm
thee in the acknowledgment and profession of Protestant Truths, and to
strengthen thee to resist the impostures of Romish errors, ascribe the glory
only unto God, who manifests the power of his agency in the weakness of the
instrument, enabling a Barley Cake to overturn the Tents of Midian; and blessing
the planting and watring that is made by the meanest of his servants, with a
fruitful increase; thus I attain the and of my writing, and thou make an
happy advantage of thy reading, and may my pains and thy patience, my writing
and thy reading be evermore like unto the Tree planted by the Rivers of Waters,
bringing forth Fruit in due season, to the glory of God, and thy direction in
the way of truth. This is the earnest desire, and shall be the constant Prayer
of thy Servant, and Fellow Servants in the Service of Jesus Christ.

S. F.

Animadversions upon the Reflections made against a piece of Controversy,
written by S. F.
Upon the occasion of the Reflections.
I Had almost determined to pass by the Reflectors Discourse upon the occasion
without taking the least notice of it, and to leave it to be his special
Storehouse, whence he might fetch with little ado the best arguments his
ability promises for the Defense of the Romish Religion, but fearing that my
silence in relation unto it should beget in himself or in others, a fond
conceit of the strength and truth of it, while there is not the least Title of
any such thing to be found, I thought fit to throw away sometime in returning
an Answer unto it.

If it be ominous to stumble on the threshold, the Reader may expect to find
strange matter of Entertainment in the Reflections: here is a long Prologue of
a wonderful composition, it is my persuasion that this Gentleman does not agree
in opinion with those Judges that awarded the prevalency unto truth, because he
speaks it so seldom besides, he that seeks for pertinences and coherences here,
is sure to lose his labor; earnest importunities putting my pen upon motion,
how did I put my self upon answering, and if by answering I made an Antagonist,
what did he make himself by Querying

Because Conjectures are not proofs, I pass by the conjectural reason given by
this Gentleman; why the first Champion laid down his Arms, and quitted the
Field, though there be in it a censorious reflection made against my Papers,
which is the usual charge of Mr. H. L. for the proof of which I have hearkened
very long, but cannot yet hear any such news.

That my Papers were very much boasted of, I am assured there is no other proof
but Towntales, which (like unto Snow-ball) do gather by rolling: and being the
intelligence that was given concerning the bulk of my Papers, is acknowledged
to be false; methinks little credit should have been afforded to the Tale that
was told concerning this; but I see now any kind of report will serve him for
the groun^ of a confident assertion, who is inclined to cry up Oral Tradition
for a proof of his Religion.

I never yet boasted of the travels of my Papers to meet with an Answerer; but
suppose I had done so, is it so great a fault, that it deserves to be chastifed
with bitter and scornful upbraidings? is it a fault to boast in the Conquest of
a perverse enemy? Were the Children of Israel faulty for glorying in the
Conquest of the Philistines, saying Saul has slain his thousands, and David his
ten thousands? How would the first Champion have boasted, had not some return
been made unto his Queries, and a Rejoinder unto his Reply? verily, because it
was retarded but a little while, by reason of my indisposition of body, it
wanted not much of being proclaimed upon the Housetop. How do the Factors of
the Church of Rome; boast, when they have gained a Proselite though it be by
the use of most shameful arguments such as the Devil propounded to our Savior,
serving to attract, not by the force of truth, but of slavish fear, and
fruitless hope; the terror of Eternal death, and the prolonging of a temporal
life: I can instance several late examples to prove that when a Protestant lies
upon his sick bed, it is the practice of Romish Priests, by some Engine or
other, to open a way to a visit; and then they tell the sick person, that there
is no hope of recovering his health unless he will abjure his Religion, and
dying in the profession of it, he is sure to be damned; but if he will forsake
it, and embrace theirs; there is no doubt to be made of receicing a speedy
recovery; and of obtaining a suture salvation; and may that boasting which is
made upon this intolerable ground be excused, while I should have been
condemned, had I gloried in the truth; for had I gloried in this, that the
Champion was fled from his Colors, and left his Queries gasping on the ground,
I had gloried in nothing but the truth.

Amongst those great vapors, who was it that vented that expression concerning
Protestant Writers, of which if the meaning be this, that there is not any
Protestant Writer that has not been fully answered; it is very like unto
Jacob's Tale unto his Father Isaac, when he told him that he was his very Son
Esau; there are many Protestant Writers, that have not yet been, nor ever will
be fully answered, by any Champ^on of the Roman Church.

The next Relation is of the same stamp, it was not my resolution to send my
papers unto any one before they were requested; nor with that assurance the
Reflectors speaks of when they were requested; M. H. L. relating to an Esquire
of ancient Extract, was presumed to be endowed with qualifications suitable to
the sphere in which he was fixed: because he belonged unto an eminent Family, I
supposed him to be a person of eminent Learning, therefore upon the request of
one of his own Church, I sent my dapers unto him with this assurance, that if
any errors had dropped from my pen, he was the man that could quickly discover,
and effectually refute it, which none can be more ready to do, than I in that
case would be desirous to have done, for I am not (as some are) so devoted to
an opinion, that I cannot afford my self the liberty of a chang upon better
Information, not out of any doubt of the truth of the Protestants, but out of a
full persuasion of the erroniousness of the Romish Religion, it has been my
frequent expression unto many, which is all the boasting that ever I made, if
any man can produce a stronger evidence for his opinions, then I can do for
mine, or can refute any Protestant Tenants with Arguments not answerable by me,
I shall soon submit unto his clearer light, and better informed Judgment, it is
sad for any man wilfully to shut his Eyes against the truth, and to run
headlong in an Error, leading others hoodwinked in the same destructive path,
it is my desire to walk, and to lead others, in the beaten Tract toward heaven.

When M. H. L. had taken a view of my papers he was pleased to make this
bravado, that if I would propound any particular, wherein my Antagonist had
sailed in giving satisfaction, he would undertake to supply the defect, upon
which I was importuned by my friend to write unto him, and accordingly did,
whereupon several Letters passed betwixt him and me, Now because I am charged
with many faults committed in my dealing with M. H. L while he is reported to
be altogether unblamable in his dealing with me, though the Letters which passed
betwixt us are not laden with any matter of importance, being only like unto
the daring of two timorous enemies, unwiilling to run the hazard of blows: it
is my desire that the Reader would peruse them in the end of the
Animadversions, and then he need not take it upon trust, but will see with his
own eyes how much truth is to be found in the Reflector's discourse here; in
the mean time he may make a probable Conjecture, by taking notice of some
expressions that are vented by him; he that is frequent in roving out into
contradictions, seldom keeps within the Limits of Truth: He tells us of a paper
that was sent, and a promise made of answering it, but afterward it swelled to
such a bulk, that the Gentleman who made the promise was almost determined not
to concern himself in the performance of it; and again he tells us, that the
reason expressed by him why he would not write against my papers, was because
he would not concern himself in any thing that looked like unto a personal
quarrel; yet afterward he tells us that there was no such charge brought
against my papers in any of his Letters, because this Gentleman takes upon him
to be so quick-sighted, as to discover contradictictions where there are none
to be found; it is a matter worthy to be considered, what truth there is to be
found in these contradictory expressions.

Still says the Reflector S. F. continuing the importunities of having his
Papers answered, or acknowledged unanswerable; and still he continues his
remarkable strain of writing, my thoughts have been perplexed in disputing the
reason of it; is it because he has a great dispensation from his great Lord
and Master, or has a blank pardon lying by him, wherein he may insert his
faults at pleasure; or rather is it not because his Pen is accustomed to drop
such stuff? if so, we know what the Prophet says? can the Ethiopian change his
skin* or the Leopard his spots: after my last Letter sent to M. H. L. I did not
speak or write unto any person concerning my Papers; and if the obliging person
which he speaks of be (as I suppose) a Female, I did not speak or write unto
her concerning them since they were written by me. If beginnings do make any
prediction of the nature of the ends; and Prefaces do foretell any any thing of
the quality of the Postcripts, the Reader may without any farther inquisition
give a probable judgment concerning the Gentleman's Reflections, and say that
he has penned some stories as likely to be true as that of Valentine and
Orson, or of Beves of Southampton; and for his own credit, I could wish that
such strange fictions were not to be sound in the Reflections.

But shall I do him the favor, as to suppose all that has been said upon the
occasion to be as true as it is false; S. F. put himself upon answering, and
made an Antagonist, and boasted of his papers, and dealt peremptorily with M.
H. L. put altogether; what an heinous provocation was this? what congealed
blood would not boil in the veins to hear the relation of these things?
certainly the Reflector being one of the Worthies of the Roman Church, and a
mighty man of valor, had shamed himself for ever, had he not undertaken to
chastise such intolerable misdemeanors: But is this all the matter of occasion
that could be found for the Refl^ctions? Controversies concerning Religion
should have a Rise answerable to their nature, because they are of high
importance, some matter of weight should be the Headspring; therefore in
reading this Prologue, it was my expectation to meet with some heinous charge
brought against me, either for opposing some saving truths, or maintaining some
distructive errors, which might justly have stirred up the choler of the
Gentleman, and provoked him to run into the field, to employ all his strength
for the subduing of a dangerous enemy, but there is no such charge brought
against my Papers here, nor indeed is there any ground for such a charge to be
found; it seems that upon the design of detaining his obliged friend in bondage
to Superstition and Ignorance, and Idolatry; he resolved to say something,
though (besides the importunity of his friend) he had nothing but mere triffles
to be the occasion.

Hitherto is expressed the occasion of the reflections, what follows speaks the
reason of his pretended unwillingness to appear in the field, one is because of
the abuse that is committed in the management of controversies, of which (he
tells us) some are guilty in an high measure; now because this is indefinitely
spoken, and the application of M. H. L. Generals is charged upon me as an
heinous crime, I am disputing whether I should take it as reflecting upon my
Papers; if not, the Gentleman has made himself guilty of a very great failing,
in expressing that to be a reason, which could not be any; for if I did not
observe that practice, how could he be terrifyed with it, and ^o his expressing
it to be a reason serves only for this purpose, to help to piece out a long
Prologue to no purpose; if I must needs take it as reflecting against my
Papers, I would know whether he thought that to be true, which he writes
concerning the travels of my Papers; if not it was a shame for him to report
it, as the occasion partly of his reflections; if he thought it to be true, I
must inquire how it could be that few or scarce any body heard of them, while
(as he says) they traveled all Lancashire to meet with an answerer; but however
it is to be taken, whither reflecting upon my Papers or any other controversy,
how can that universal be true, that no body judges it (...) worthy the taking
notice of, while few or scarce any body heard of it? hew he judges is not
worthy the taking notice of, because his judgment serves to write so many
contradictions within the compass of a Prologue.

Another reason is, because the multitude already written upon the same
subject, and affording incomparably more satisfaction, has long since made the
world to nauseat, and yet has not decided one controverted point; I suppose he
speak in relation to Protestant writers, and what can be the reason or motive
that moves him to speak thus contemptibly of those worthies, censuring and
condemning all that has been written by them in defense of the truth, and in
opposition to Romish errors; is it an high conceit of himself that makes him
to have a low conceit of others? thus have I known schoolboys revile those whom
they durst not encounter, and mere cowards rail upon those whom they durst not
attempt to conquer, and it is the practice of effeminate combatants, to display
their courage more by invective words, then by their great deeds; I do not
account my self fit to be compared in the least degree to any of those
worthies, yet for my self, I do profess (if there be no more strength in him,
then that proportion which he has manifested in his reflections and appendix)
to be foiled by him, would be an argument) of greater weakness then is to be
found in a stripling of nine years old, and for them I will say this, that the
weak^es^ of their arguments weelded against him, would frighten him to run as
the false Prophet Zedekiah sometimes did, from Chamber to Chamber to hide
himself.

What is to be understood by the world? Protestants cannot be included in that
compass, because they judge their writers (as they are) truly, satisfactory and
convincing to all that are not possessed with prejudice, and desperately settled
with a resolution to oppose the truth and the Romish Laity cannot be any part
of it, because they are not permitted to converse with Protestant writers in
the least measure, but are kept in a persuasion that the touch of them is as
fatal and deadly, as the touch of Mount Synai would have been to the Children
of Israel, when the law was delivered, and this done on purpose to frighten
them from seeking to find out the truth, and from searching to discover that
Superstition and Idolatry, which adheres to the Romish Religion, and
consequently they cannot judge of that satisfaction and force, which is to be
found in the writings of Protestants; wherefore by the world we must understand
the leaders of the Romish Church, and it is no wonder that Protestant writers
should be loathsome and unconvincing unto them; a foul stomach loathes that meat
which is wholesome, and a blinded eye cannot see the light which is held out
unto it; though the truth of the Protestant tenants be demonstrated as clear as
the Sun, and the Tenants of the Romish Church proved to be as visibly
erroneous; yet that veil of prejudice which hangs before their eyes, and that
cloud of self-conceit, which darkens their understanding will not suffer them
to discern the truths that are to be found in the one, nor to observe the
erroniousness ^ha^ is visible in the other.

What is unjustly charged upon the Writings of Protestant Worthies has been
abundantly proved to be true concerning Romish Writers, all their performances
in maintenance of the Doctrine of the Romish Church is nothing but loathsomness
to a judicious understanding, and altogether unsatisfactory and unconvincing to
every Reader, that is not resolved to be satisfied with very course fare, and
to be convinced with very feeble arguments.

Now it is to be observed how upon the ground of this reason, he deals with
that worthy person, whom he acknowledges to have a powerful influence over
him, fastening upon an obliging friend the odious imputation of fondness and
extravagancy; and that by his own confession, most injuriously; I am confident
this person is not one that sits at the helm, either in Church or State, and
mark his own words; it is no small piece of fondness and extravagangy, for
private persons to write against points of Religion, and to trouble others with
either reading or answering his books; and afterward he says, not to every
quibble or captious criticism, for that would be endless, and below the gravity
and seriousness of the thing treated off, it seems that he is not ashamed to
throw dirt in the face of a worthy person, to fasten upon an obliging friend
the ignominious title of fondness and extravagancy, for importuning him to
answer papers, which by his own confession, do afford matters of gravity and
seriousness to be insisted on.

And enlarging upon this reason, once again he falls heavily upon the faulty
mannagement of controversies, but deals not fairly with the Reader, giving no
direction how to find the persons guilty, but leaving him in a Wilderness, to
seek them he knows not where, and possibly he may find them, but he knows not
when; surely Mr. H. L. and this Gentleman are very like in their dispositions,
they are so visibly like in their practices; what outcries do they make
against controversies? how fruitless and endless, and full of quibbles and
captions, and passions, and what not are they reported to be? alas that any
controvertists have deserved so evilly at their hands; but walking under this
Cloud of generals, and not accusing any controvertist in particular, do they
not cover themselves with deceit? Oh that these Priests of the Roman Church,
had the Noses of all people in a string, as they have their seduced followers,
that they might lead all whether they listed, what happy persons would they be
in their generation, because it is not thus with them, but their Religion is
contradicted, and their Tenets confuted, therefore do they make these great
outcries, to keep their people in a persuasion, that they are absolute
Champions in the defense of their Religion, and could if they pleased, bear all
opposition down before them, but they scorn to defile their pens by engaging
them in muddy controversies, while this is most that they can say, and all that
they dare say; knowing that if they should stir to support their Religion, by
their best endeavors, they would but shake that tottering Fabric, and expose
it more to ruin, by subjecting their arguments to a speedy confutation.

But though controversies (as he says) have this sad hap to fall into the hands
of unskilful, and abusive writers, yet he would not be mistaken, it is no^ the
use that he decries, he allows of a prudent and serious inquiry to find out the
truth; but the confirmation of this allowance by his own practice, he leaves
unto the next opportunity of writing; mark good Reader how serious and prudent
he is now, he tells thee that thou must judge of the matter of my papers,
whither I have in them expressed passion, and keep close unto the matter
controverted, and discussed it with reason, by those reflections which he makes
against my method and way of proceeding; and surely if thou can do so, thou
must have an extraordinary spirit of discerning; as if thou can judge of the
honesty and uprightness of the person by the outward and visible parts of his
face, thou must have more then an ordinary skill in physnomy; I have known a
great deal of good matter, hudled together in a confused method, and disorderly
way of proceeding, and a great deal of corrupt matter exposed to the view in a
very exact method, and orderly way of proceeding; and for thy greater
assistance in giving of judgment, he promises to answer, but I know not what,
sure it was some matter of secrecy, therefore he keeps it private to himself,
and this answer must be so full and operative, that it shall be able to give
Information of the insincerity of my dealing, and satisfaction to me and the
prudent considerer, but it is well if we do not find him acting like unto the
Son, which we read of him in the Gospel, who said unto his Father, Sir I go,
and went not; in Platoes great year when all things must undergo a change, and
this Gentleman's writing among the rest, it may prove thus satisfactory; how it
is at present, will presently be examined.

Upon the Reflection in general.
HE promised to reflect against my method and way of proceeding, but I find him
employing his strength another way, reflecting against the matter of my Papers,
I shall pass by this infirmity, and take him as I do find him, confounding two
different things, and will see what it is that is objected against me.

I have said that my Adversary in propounding the quaeries, went three miles
about, while a journey of one would be more serviceable for finding out the
truth, and that the Turk can plead as great Antiquity and Succession f^r his
Religion, as the Romanists can do for theirs, pretending to the antiquity of
Austin and the ancient Britains, and the Jew can plead a greater Antiquity and
longer Succession for his, and I have required my Adversary to prove the
affirmative of the three quaeries that are propounded by him; and have not
agreed with him about a rule for the determining of the controversy: These are
the great faults that are laid to my charge, and this is the rule that is
prescribed to the Reader, by which he must give judgment concerning my Papers,
and determine whither I have in them expressed passion, and keep close unto the
matter in controversy, and discussed it with reason.

Now (Christian Reader) what conclusions can be drawn from these premises to
overruled thy judgment, to determine against me? here is not the least smell of
passion, and the matter in controversy being the determination of three trival
and unprofitable questions, what can be closer unto it, and more consonant to
reason then to tell my Adversary, that it is needless for us to incumber our
selves with it, because the resolution of this one question, whether the
Religitn now ^rofesse^ by the Romanists be the same that was taught by Christ
and his Apostles, will bring as sooner to the knowledge of the truth; and what
can be more close likewise unto it, and more consonant to reason then to tell
him that the determination of two of those questions will be altogether
unprofitable for the Romanists? for if they could prove that the Religion now
professed by them, is the same that Augustine professed, and his the same that
the Ancient Brittans in his time professed, notwithstanding this Antiquity and
Succession, they must give Protestants leave to account it the mere invention
of man, until they prove that it is the same that was taught by Christ and his
Apostles; and what can be more close unto it, and consonant to reason, then to
require my Adversary to prove the affirmative of the quaeries, because the
Romanists do boast so much of the Antiquity and Succession of their Religion,
and will have Antiquity and Succession to be the touchstone, whereby the Nature
and Constitution of their Religion is to be tried? and how can it be dissonant
to reason, not to have agreed with my adversary concerning an infallible rule,
while that agreement is improbable, if not impossible to be effected.

And what is written in answer to the questions, is likewise to be observed;
unto two of them there is some resolution made in the negative; and as to the
third, I have told my Adversary; that it cannot with any show of probability be
determined either in the affirmative or the negative, because there are not any
Histories to be found, that do speak directly and expressly to the Religion of
the ancient Brittans, informing us, what were the particular tenants maintained
by them; and what can be more close unto the matters in controversy, and more
consonant to reason then this? would this Gentleman have the Reader so much
enslaved to his dictates, as not to believe his own eyes, nor to credit his own
judgment; but upon his groundless suggestions, to believe and to determine that
is not done, which (he may see) is really done.

And the quality of the Rule that is prescribed is to be taken notice of, a
complete Rule is index recti as well as obliqui, it shows what is straight as
well as what is crooked, and such a rule should have been prescribed by this
Gentleman, but in the three Reflections he tells the Reader, what, as he
conceived, should not have been done; I should not have said that my Adversary
in propounding of the Queries went three miles about, while a journey of one
would have been more serviceable for finding out the truth and I should not
have sa^d that the (...)k can plead as great Antiquity and Succession for his
Religion as the Romanists can do for theirs, pretending to the Antiquity of
Austin, and the ancient Britai^s and that the Jew can plead a greater Antiquity
and longer Succ^ssion for his; and I should not have requi^^d my Adversary to
prove the Affirmative of the three Queries, that are propounded by him; but he
does not declare his mind to inform us, what he conceived necessary to be done,
yet by this crooked and defective Rule the Reader must give Judgment concerning
my Papers; I perceive he would have the Reader to be, as his self is, an
imitator of his great Lord and Master, the pretended head of the Church; to
draw conclusions from any kind of premises, and to determine by any kind of
rule, nor is this to be accounted a matter of admiration, while this principle
is maintained by the Romanists, that it is meritorious to speak or do any thing
that is serviceable for the advancing of the Romish Religion.

Upon the first Reflection.
HE misreports the end of propounding the Quaeries, they were not propounded to
satisfy some friends, that the Religion now professed by the Romanists is the
same that was first preached in England, but to unsettle and pervert some
Christians that believed the truth of the Reformed Religion; it is too
frequently known that the first method and practice that is used by Impostors
in sowing their Tares, is to beget scruples and doubts, which is done by
propounding of Queries.

To Quaere only was never accounted a method of satisfaction, nor ever known to
produce that effect; if the Reflector will have it thus operative, why may not
a Protestant as easily and effectually demonstrate and satisfy the contrary
that the Religion now professed by the Romanists, is not the same that was
first preached in England; suppose that the same Queries should be set forth
with an intimation, that they are to be resolved in the negative; or suppose
that these Queries should be sent forth: first whether the Religion professed
by the Protestants in England be the same which Luther professed: secondly
whether his was the same that was maintained by the first four General
Councels: thirdly whether that be the same that was taught by Christ and his
Apostles; why should not these Queries be as powerful to demonstrate and
satisfy that the Religion professed by the Protestants is the same that was
taught by Christ and his Apostles, as the Queries of my adversary are to
demonstrate and satisfy, that the Religion now professed by the Romanists is
the same that was first preached in England.

But says the Reflector, had my adversary taken the pains to derive the
Catholic Religion through every Century, it would in all reason have added
very much to the satisfaction of any discreet enquiring person; what then, this
would not have demonstrated, that the Religion now professed by the Romanists,
is the same that was first preached in England, for there is as great a
difference between that Catholic Religion, and the Religion now protested by
the Romanists, in what it differs from the Protestants, as there is between
truth and error: whether the present Romish Religion be the Catholic Religion
is the great question that hangs in dispute between the Protestants and the
Romanists, which the Protestants do justly deny; and which the Romanists with
evident proof will never be able to affirm; and it is a most unjust usurpation
in them to assume that Title, before a right unto it be fully proved.

Had the Reflector said, if my adversary had taken the pains to derive the
present Romish Religion through every Century, he would have spoken somewhat of
pertinency to the Queries, but then I would have told him that derivation would
have been as great a wonder as the production of an impossibility; if my
adversary, or the Reflector, or any other will go to the Fountain and examine
the present Romish Religion by the Doctrine of the first Ages, that is the
Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles delivered in the Sacred Scriptures, he will
soon discover this impossibility; I am sure, if it be impossible to derive it
through the first Centuries, it is impossible to derive it through every
Century.

Upon the supposition that is made, the fault charged upon me is aggravated in
a high measure; I did but cavil (says the Reflector) when I said that my
adversary went three miles about while a Journey of one would have been more
advantageous for finding out the truth; and I might as well have said that he
went sixteen miles about: but I perceive that he is like unto the Actor in the
Tragedy, who was so desparately bent to accuse his Enemy that he forgot what he
did; while he thought to have laid diversity of Crimes to his charge; instead
of multiplication he made a repetition: By the method which the Reflector
prescribes for the resolution of the Queries, he confessed that I said this
very thing; for if the Queries are to be resolved by a derivation of Religion
through every Century; in saying that my Antagonist went three miles about; I
said that he went the Reflectors sixteen miles about, while a Journey of one
would be far more serviceable; and this is not to cavil, but seriously and
pertinently to speak the truth. That Travelers may deservedly be charged with
great indiscretion, that declines the short, and plain, and easy road, and
chooses to range over craggy Mountains, and through darksome Woods and
Thickets, and unfrequented Deserts: It is not probabble that this Travellor
will ever arive unto the end of his Journey: and I desire the Reflector to show
some reason, why for the prevention of all such long, troublesome, and
sruitless vagaries, an inquisition in the Doctrine of the first Ages may not
lead unto a clear, and speedy discovery of the truth.

But if this be the method that is to be used in resolving of the Queries, how
can the Reflector with any show of discretion make this supposition, while in
the third Reflection he takes upon him to show some reasons, that the Queries
were not to be resolved at all by Romanists; and how can he lay down this
position, to see a Religion proved to be visibly handled down through all Ages,
should be the greatest assurance and satisfaction imaginable that it must be
the true Religion, while he tells us likewise there, that must not be proved by
them, they being in possession the obligation of proving the negative lies on
the Protestants side.

Mark gentle Reader, the Reflector is propounding of Riddles; what Religion is
that, of which it is only queried whether it be true, yet this was to make a
demonstration, and to give satisfaction of the truth of it? and what Religion
is that, the derivation of which through every Century, would be an
irresistible proof of the truth of it; and yet this derivation is not to be
made; and to see it visibly handed down through every Age, would be the
greatest assurance that could be made of the truth of it; and yet this must not
be seen? thou may without ploughing with Sampson's Heifer easily unfold this
Riddle.

Lo here thou have the visibility and succession and antiquity that is boasted
to belong unto the Romish Religion: Great is Diana of the Romans, who would not
be a worshipper of this Goddess; a Religion (says the Reflector) so anciently
settled, so universally acknowledged, so Apostolically delivered: but thou
see that the proof of all this hangs wholly upon imagination; and this must
act contrary to the experiment and evidence of the outward senses, as in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist; though thou see bread, and feel bread, and
tastest bread, yet thou must imagine that it is the real and proper body of
Christ: so, though thou must not have the Queries resolved by the Romanists,
no^ s^ their Religion proved to be visibly handed down* nor must thou have it
derived through every Century, yet thou must imagine all this to be done. Now
it appears plainly, that the strange matter that was feigned to be the
occasion, was a true prediction of strange matter to be found in the
Reflections; but let us proceed and we shall find greater abominations.

Upon the second Reflection.
HEre is a great Cry, but little wool; a great outcry made against me, but
little, yea no reason for it but the fictions of his own disturbed fancy, where
did I speak of antiquity and succession in relation to that Religion which is
acknowledged by all to be true, and proved to be unalterably derived by a
continued and uninterrupted succession from the Author of the true Religion?
and where did I speak of an undefined antiquity and succession?

It is evident to him that will see, that I spoke of antiquity and succession
in relation to the present Romish Religion, which is not acknowledged by all to
be true, but accounted by a great part of the Christian World to be false, and
is so far from being proved to have its derivation from the Author of the true
Religion, (That if we must believe the Reflectors) it is unreasonable for us to
require any such proof; and it is evident that I speak of that antiquity and
succession, which claims not farther than to the Times of Austin the Monk, and
of the ancient Britains that were contemporary with him.

Is this the man that comes furiously against me saying, mentita est sibi
iniqu^tas, while he stinks of that odious crime which he lays to my charge? and
is this the method that is by the Champions of the Roman Church in showing
their ^alour, to charge the figments of their own Brain upon their Antagonists?
certainly this is a plain discovery of the nature of that cause and Religion
which is maintained by them; an unconscionable management is a clear evidence
of an evil cause, and the use of such fictious supports as these, is a plain
demonstration of a rotten Religion; Truth will not endure to be supported with
lying inventions.

And by my consent the odious imputation of fondness shall be translated, if
the present Romish Religion be acknowledged by all to be true, who is there
that can be blinded with passion, or prepossesse^^ witherrour against it? and
to whom, and to what purpose must that manifestation be made, which is
pretended to flow from antiquity and succession? surely all will not come so
near in fondness to this Gentleman, as to make this acknowledgment without a
previous ground and reason for it.

But the present Romish Religion being accounted by a great part of the World
to be false will antiquity and Succession alone afford a convincing argument to
prove it to be true? St. Austin Aug. in quest. vet. and nov. Test. quest. 114.
maintains the negative, quod anterius est, says he, inquiunt Ethnici falsum
esse non potest, quasi antiquitas and vetus consuetudo praejudicet veritati,
the Heathen say, that the Religion that was first cannot be false, as if
antiquity and old custom could prevail against the truth, and Tertullian T^t*
de Virg. Veland.
says, viderint ergo quibus novum est, quod sibi est vetus, haereses non tam
novitas, quam veritas revincit, quodcunque contra veritatem sapit, hoc est
haeresis, etiam vetus consuetudo, let them therefore take heed who count that
new which in its self is old, heresy is reproved not so well by novelty as by
verity, whatsoever thing savoureth against Truth, the same is an heresy, though
it be a custom never so old.

The argument that is to be raised upon this medium in the behalf of the Romish
Religion, is this; That Religion which has antiquity and succession is true,
but the present Romish Religion has antiquity and succession, ergo etc. unless
the major proposition be an universal truth, the premises are not able to bring
forth a conclusion, ex particularibus nihil concluditur; if it be, I would know
some better reason then is expressed by the reflector, why this argument may
no^ be used by a Turk or a Jew, both having Antiquity and Succession for their
Religion; neither Turk nor Jew will acknowledge his Religion to be the mere
invention of man, but are both pretende^s to a Divine original, and the
Romanists having only a pretense unto Christ and his Apostles, the meanest
capacity that sits under the instruction of the reflector, will easily discern
the disparity spoken of, to be a mere nullity, is there any difference between
feigned pretenses whatsoever show or color they do bear, they are but feigned
pretenses still, and the opinions of the Romanists that are contradicted by the
Protestants can be no more really derived from Christ and his Apostles, then
the Religion of a Turk or a Jew.

Should I comply to his humor, and say what cannot be truly said, that a mere
pretense unto Christ and his Apostles, alters the nature of the argument,
making it serviceable for the Romanist, while it is unserviceable for the Turk
and the Jew; suppose then that a Nestorian, or Arrian, or Pelagian should step
forth, and plead Antiquity and Succession for his opinions, saying that they
were handed down from one to another, from Father to Son, through all ages
until they arrived with him, they all pretend to Christ and his Apostles as
well as the Romanists do, and if upon this pretense the argument be
irrisistable for the Romanists, it must be as serviceable for all the other
Heretics; but it is an undoubted truth that Antiquity and Succession alone
cannot be serviceable for any, whatsoever they pretend unto; for that can never
be an evidence of truth that is common to error. and it is certain that many
heresies are of an a^tient standing and long Succession.

His argument of Antiquity and Succession alone being defeated, now let us
observe, first how artificial he is in his j^gling, confounding different
things to render that expression, which savoured of nothing but truth, more
odious unto the ignorant, that are not able to discern his legerdemain; he
makes no difference between Antiquity and Succession in the abstract, and that
Antiquity and Succession which is Primitive and Apostolical, otherwise why does
he tell us, that Antiquity and Succession alone is a sufficient manifestation
of the truth, and afterward tells us, that for us to press this argument
against the Turk and the Jew, that the Catholic Religion is that which our
Savior taught his Apostles, and from them it has descended unto us, therefore
it is the true Religion, would be of no force to convince them: to say Religion
has Antiquity and Succession, is it to say that it was taught by Christ and
his Apostles, and that from them it has descended unto us? no Sir, there is a
great difference between Antiquity and Succession alone, and that Antiquity and
Succession which is Primitive and Apostolical, and the Romanists wanting this,
whatsoever title they have to that, yet the claim which they make unto truth
upon that ground, is but like unto the plea that was made by the base son, who
because he had a spurious Succession, would have taken the inheritance from the
right Heir.

Secondly; let us observe how rational and demonstrative he is in his
deductions, he tells us, that to any rational Person not blinded with passion,
or prepossessed with Error, Antiquity, and Succession alone of that Religion
which is acknowledged by all to be the only true one, would be a sufficient
manifestation of the true Religion, and that of necessity it must be granted
that the Religion which is most ancient, and which is proved to be unalterably
derived by a continued and uninterrupted Succession from him that is
acknowledged by both Parties, to be the Author of the true Religion, is to be
admitted of as true by all, and consequently the continuance and Antiquity of
it, allowed as undeniable marks and testimonies thereof.

The Gentleman would be very much offended, if I should assimilate him to
Balaam the forcerer; but truly there is very great reason for it, they are so
visibly alike in their performances, both acting quite contrary to their
intentions; Balaam came with a purpose to curse Israel, but he altogether
blessed them; and this Gentlemon intended to prove Antiquity and Succession
alone to be a great supporter of his Religion, but he has altogether wrought
the contrary; Reader, whosoever thou art (it is not extorted from his words,
but his own plain and free confession) thou must not believe the Romish
Religion to be true upon the account of Antiquity and Succession alone, before
thou do know it to be acknowledged true by all, and it must not be admitted
as true by all, until it be proved to be unalterably derived by a continued and
uninterrupted Succession from him, who is acknowledged to be the Author of the
true Religion, afterward by consequence the Antiquity and Succession alone of
it, is to be allowed as undeniable marks and testimonies thereof.

Verily he has done so worthily in the behalf of that transcendent, and always
reputed argument of Antiquity and Succession alone, that he deserves, serves, I
will not say a Cardinals Cap; just as if he should say, a black Horse must
first be proved and acknowledged to be an Horse, and then by consequence his
blackness is a manifestation and mark, and testimony that he is an Horse,
whereas thou can not distinguish him by his blackness from an Ox.

If he be asked when his Religion will be acknowledged by all to be tru^, he
can return no other answer, but ad C^lenda^ Grecas, that is to say, never, and
why it must have that acknowledgment, and how it is proved to be unalterably
derived from the Author of the true Religion, by a continued and uninterrupted
Succession; I doubt he will be in a great straight for an answer, unless he
says by Antiquity and Succession alone, and then that Antiquity and Succession
may return unto him (as Jeptha returned to the Elders of Gilead) did thou not
hate me, and expel me out of my Fathers house, and why art thou come unto me
now, when thou art in distress, did thou not make me a consequent of the
proof of the truth, and would thou have me to be an antecedent to prove the
truth.

It is the will of providence to infatuate this Gentleman so much, that instead
of a builder he proves a destroyer of his own cause, wherefore it will be his
greatest wisdom to be of another mind, to lay aside that manifestation which is
pretended to flow from Antiquity and Succession alone, as unsufficient, and
unnecessary; and instead of saying that Antiquity and Succession alone is a
sufficient manifestation of the truth, le^ him say this which will stand
against all opposition, that the truth of Religion is a sufficient
manifestation of the Antiquity and Succession of it that Religion which is
proved to be true, is proved to have Antiquity and Succession, but every
Religion that is proved to have Antiquity and Succession, cannot be proved to
be true.

Let him prove the present Romish Religion to be true, and the Antiquity and
Succession of it to this day shall be freely aknowledged, but not as needful
for the clearing of the truth of it, for this will be done by the pr^ceeding
Proof, and until that be proved, let him not make these senceless brags,
telling us they pretend to derive their Religion, and to prove a continued
Succession of it from our Savior Christ and his Apostles, it being by them
delivered unto others, and so downwards to this present, as they make it to
appear by Scripture, Tradition, Councels, Holy* Fathers, in an unanimous
consent of all Nations; I would know what Scripture they have for those
opinions wherein they differ from Protestants, and what Nations, what Fathers,
what Councels they are that are consenting unto this, that the body of the
Romish Religion, that was compacted by the Council of Trent, and never saw the
light before, received this Derivation and Succession; did the Fathers, and
Councels, and Nations of the former ages, foresee what would be done in the
latter age by the Romish Church, and upon that foresight praefix and afford
their consents unto the actions and determinations of that Church concerning
points of Religion.

Nor let him break out into impertinent flourishes, telling us that Christians
are not to impugn and answer one another, as they would impugn and answer the
Turk and the Jew, and as the Turk and the Jew would impugn and answer
Christians, for though it be granted that there must be a difference in
treating and handling each other, yet the argument of Antiquity and Succession
alone in the mouth of a Romanist, is of no more force then when it is to be
found in the mouth of a Turk or a Jew; for if it be lame in it self, it is not
a feigned pretense that can work a miracle, and make it to leap in the Temple.

Nor let him upbraid us with mutability and novelty, these faults (injuriously
charged upon Protestants) do sleep in the bosom of the Romish Church; they are
the Changlings that coin and declare new Articles of Faith; and they are
novelists that have not Primitive and Apostolic Antiquity and Succession; this
was never yielded unto the Romanists by any real Protestants; but whatsoever
Antiquity and Succession has been granted unto them for those opinions wherein
they differ from Protestants is merely spurious, and many ages postnate to the
Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles.

Nor let him tell us that we are assured that Antiquity and Succession will not
befriend us, until he do prove his Religion to be true, we are assured that it
will not befriend him; as for our selves we do profess that we stand not in
need of any such friendship; though that Antiquity and Succession which is
sound and legitimate belongs only unto us, yet it is not Antiquity and
Succession in the abstract, but the proof of the truth, that is the ground on
which we do build.

Which proof will not be made for the present Romish Religion, by saying that
Religion professed by the Romanists, is the same with Austines, his the same
with the ancient Brittans, their's the same that was first preached in England;
or by saying that the Religion now professed by the Romanists is the same with
that of the fifteenth age, that the same with the Religion of the fourteenth,
and so backward to the first; can he say that the water at the foot of the
River is proved to be as pure and clear as it is at the head, by saying that it
runs through those cuts and passages of land, which do strike up to the head,
possibly many stinking sinks and unclean puddles, and muddy ditches may empty
themselves into the stream, between the head and the foot.

And let him tell us how he knows all this to be true, that the Religion now
professed by the Romanists is the same with that of Austin, his the same with
that of the Ancient Brittans, theirs the same with that which was brought into
England; I am certain that for the determination of this Identity in most
points of Faith, he wants the evidence of Hystories; and let me ask him
likewise how he knows that the Religion of this last age, is the same with the
fifteenth, and so backward to the first; does his measure of knowledge exceed
that of Cardinal Perron, who being required to show his Romish opinions in the
three first ages, cries out upon it as an unjust demand, because (says he) the
monuments of the three first ages are so far ^ost, as no^ the hundredth part of
them remains unto posterity, so that it is very foolish and unjust from such a
paucity of books to require us to decide all the controversies of our times, or
prove the Articles of our Faith; with the want of Histories for some ages, let
him take the corruption of Histories in others, and the contradiction of
Histories in others, and then let him proceed to a resolution of the question;
he is an excellent artist that can build an house without a foundation, or can
draw a certain and infallible conclusion from uncertain and fallible premises.

That the truth has continued and succeeded from Christ and his Apostles, unto
this day cannot be denied, but that there was never any chaff or tares mixed
with the wheat, that corruptions and errors never entered into the Church in
any age, since the first cannot be proved; Histories do inform us of the
contrary; that sometime Pellagianism over spread the Churches of Brittany,
sometime* Arrianism the Churches of the whole world, certainly he will be at a
great loss for the visible Succession of his Religion in those times, unless he
do say that it is the same with Pellagian sin and Arrianism, and it is reported
that Pope Liberius was an Arrian; C^lestinus a Nestorian, Honerius a
Monothelite; and that John the twenty second denied the Immortallity of the
Soul, he must acknowledge that his Religion failed in its visible Succession
during the times wherein those Popes did live, or he must say that his Religion
is a maintainer of those errors, or that he does not derive his Religion by
Succession from the Popes of Rome, neither of which (I suppose) will be
affirmed by him.

The purity of the water at the foot of the River is to be tried by that which
is taken up at the head, the truth of Religion is to be proved by the Doctrine
of Christ and his Apostles delivered in the sacred Scriptures, and whether the
Protestants or the Romanists do make the fairest claim unto this proof, the
Romanists themselves have determined, by their wicked rejection of the
Scriptures, denying it to be the rule of Faith, and loading it with many
Ignominious and Blasphemous Titles.

Upon the third Reflection.
IF the ground of the controversy, and the propounding of the queries was to
satisfy some friends concerning the truth that is pretended to belong unto the
Romish Religion, the proof of the queries in the affirmative was absolutely
necessary; yet says the reflector, it was unreasonable to require it: first
because it is the most unreasonable thing in the world, to urge any one to
prove a thing, and at the same time to declare that the proof of it shall be of
no benefit or advantage, or no more then if a Turk or a Jew should plead the
same.

Where was this Declaration made, I am very unwilling to use this expression,
but the present discourse constrains me unto it, he that is frequent in telling
of untruths, has need of a strong memory, is it likely that a Tu^k or a Jew
should prove the affirmative of the queries; do not impose upon me an
improbable supposition from thence to draw a worse conclusion, in your appendix
to your reflections you acknowledge that I have declared the contrary; I have
said (and you confess it) that to grant your Religion to be the same with
Austins, his the same with the ancient Brittans, theirs the same that was
brought into England, is in effect to say that yours is the same that was
taught by Christ and his Apostles, to say this is to declare contrary to that
wherewith you charge me.

But to salve this sore, you make a strange Interpretation, and do tell how you
would have the proof of the a^ffimative of the queries to be understood, to wit
(say you) this continuance and ancient tient Succession: verily every one will
say that you wanted either grace or wit, when you made this (to wit) to prove
the present Romish Religion to be Austins, his the same with the ancient
Brittans, theirs the same that was first brought into England, is it no more
then barely to prove the continuance and ancient Succession of it; to prove a
Religion, to have Primitive and Apostolical Antiquity and Succession, certainly
is a great deal more then barely to prove the continuance and ancient
Succession of it; and to prove the continuance and ancient Succession of the
Romish Religion, is it to prove that it is the same with Austins, his the same
with the ancient Britains, theirs the same that was first brought into England?
If your witty interpretation be not a wilful perversion, the expressions will
be convertible, and then every Religion that is proved to have antiquity and
suceession, is proved to be the same with Austins; then the Turk proving the
continuance and ancient succession of his Religion, proves it to be the same
with Austins, or a Nestorian, or Arrian, or Pelagian proving the continuance
and ancient successiof his Religion, proves it to be Austins.

And from whence do you make this Deduction, that I have declared, that the
proof of the three Queries, as you do interpret it, should be to no purpose?
though some account of the words has been already given, yet it is necessary
here to make a repetition of the substance of them; I have said that the Turk
may plead as great antiquity, and as long succession for his Religion, as the
Romanists do for theirs, pleading to the time of Austin and the ancient
Britains, which were contemporary with him; and a Jew may plead a greater
antiquity and longer succession for his.

By the woeful experiment of the bloody Rebellion in Ireland, I have learned
that some Romanists will act any cruelty for the advancing of their Religion;
and now I learn by experience that some will speak and write any thing for the
same end, though it be never so absurd and false; I speak of a defined and
limited antiquity and succession; you charge me with speaking of that,
antiquity and succession which is illimited and undefined, between which there
is as great a difference, as there is between a particular Country, and the
vast extent of the whole world; and this you do make the interpretation of the
proof of the three Queries in the affirmative, when will you be more honest and
upright in your carriage for the defense of your Religion? when will you leave
off these deceitful devices wherewith you do blind the eyes of the ignorant
multitude, persuading them to believe that you say very much to the advantage
of your Religion, while you say nothing to the purpose; and nothing but what
any rational man would be ashamed to speak.

Secondly, it was unreasonable to require a proof of the affirmative of the
Queries, because (say you) the Catholic Religion, the Romish Church was in
possession when the Reformers first attempted the work of Reformation.

I say little of your confounding two different things; the Catholic Religion
is not the Romish Church, nor the Romish Church the Catholic Religion, any
more than a particular Church can be said to be the Catholic Religion; but
what mean you by Catholic Religion? If that which our Savior commanded his
Disciples to preach, when he gave that commission in the last Chapter of the
Gospel according to S. Matthew, go and teach all Nations; it is denied to be in
possession according to your expression; that is, flourishing in the greatest
calm, peace and serenity that could be all the world over; within the compass
of the Romish Jurisdiction the truth was darkened with the Clouds of
superstition and errors; the professors of the truth persecuted and driven
into Corners; if you will believe one of your own Bishops, Cornelius of Bitonto
by name, who sat in the Council of Trent, and advanced your great Master, the
Pope, unto a dignity equal to that which our Savior appropriated to himself,
saying Papa Lux venit in Mundum, which in English is this, The Pope which is
the Light is come into the world; you will find him declaiming thus against the
Romish Church, utinam a Religione ad superstitionem, a fide ad Infidelitatem, a
Christo ad Antichristum a Deo ad Epicurum, velut prorsus unanimes non
declinassent, dicentes incorde impio and ore impudico non est Deus, would to
God they had not fallen with common consent, and altogether from tru^ Religion
to superstition, from faith to infidelity, from Christ to Antichrist, from God
to Epicure, saying with a wicked heart, and shameless mouth there is no God.

If you mean the Religion that is now professed by the Romanists, you beg the
question, which will never be proved in the affirmative; it will never be
proved that the present Romish Religion is the Catholic Religion; and I must
ask what the present Romish Religion was possessed of? if you say of those places
wherein the truth was sometime sincerely professed; I deny this possession to
be (as you say it was) without disturbance and contradiction; witness the
persecution of those Christians, and the blood of those Martyrs, which suffered
and died for the sake of the truth, in opposition to the Romish Religion.

But suppose this possession had been without disturbance and contradiction, is
it therefore unreasonable to require a proof of the affirmative of the Queries?
because the Turk has been a long time possessed of those places where
Christian Religion once flourished, and that without disturbance and
contradiction, is it therefore unreasonable to require him to prove the truth
he pretends to claim for his Religion? because a Thief has been possessed of
an honest man's purse without disturbance and contradiction, is it therefore
unreasonable to require him to prove a right of possession? If the Lawyers do
tell you, that melior est conditio possidentis, the condition of the Possessour
is best; this is to be understood with this supposition, if the possession be
legal, otherwise if it be an usurped possession, gotten and kept by force or
fraud, the condition of the dispossessed that has a legal Title is best; and
in this case the Lawyers will tell you, that prescriptio temporis non tollit
bonum Titulum, prescription of time does not make void a good Title, which
being the case of the Romanists, the Court of Equity will compel you to bring
in your evidence to make out your Title.

And you denying to do this, which equity obliges you unto, it is a most fond
and vain practice, to make such great cracks and flourishes, crying out of the
present Romish Religion; a Religion so anciently settled, so universally
acknowledged, so Apostolically delivered, and the only one in possession; and
being through the Christian World, and confessed by Protestants to be justly
presumable to have come from Christ: all this must be taken upon your own bare
assertion, there being not proof of it to be found; and there is no more ground
or reason for me to believe you, than there was for the Prophet Elijah to
believe his servant Gehazi, when he said that he went no whether; the Romish
Religion was not pr^mitively, nor legally settled, wheresoever it was settled,
but by usurpation, as the Turk has been settled where Christian Religion
sometime flourished; nor was it universally acknowledged, but opposed and
contradicted in every Age since it first sprang up in the world; nor was it
Apostolically delivered; it is my desire to be informed what Apostle it was
that delivered these Doctrines, that the Pope is the Head of the Church; that
Images are to be worshipped; that Saints and Angels are to be invocated; that
Christ is corporally in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and the rest of your
superstitious and Idolatrous Opinions; nor was it the only one in possession
and being; there were Christians in Asia and Grecia that never submitted to the
Romish Jurisdiction, nor embrace the Romish errors; but if the Romish Religion
had been the only* one in possession according to your acceptance of the word;
yet this could not be an argument to prove it the only one in being; though in
Ahab's Time the Religion and Worship of Baal was only visible in Israel; yet
the Lord told the Prophet Elijah, that there were seven thousand in Israel that
had not bowed their Knees to Baal; nor ever was it acknowledged by any real
Protestant to be justly presumeable to come from Christ, but proved to be a
composition of superstition and Idolatry; therefore the mere invention of
erring and deceitful men.

Because you lay this great weight upon this argument of possession, do us the
right to suffer it to be as serviceable for us, as you expect it should be for
your selves; and you will find your self beaten with your own weapon, and
forced to confess that which you have peremptorily denied, melior est conditio
possidentis, the condition of the Possessor is best; and the Protestant
Religion has been, and is in as calm, and serene, and flourishing possession
in England as ever the Romish Religion was; therefore it ought not in common
reason to be changed or disobeyed upon pretenses, suppositions, and mere
probabilities, but to be obeyed and admitted as the only true, and undoubted
Religion, until the contrary be evinced and demonstrated by most vigorous and
manifest proofs; therefore it was unreasonable to propound the Queries; and
being unreasonably propounded, there was great reason to require a proof of
them in the affirmative.

And though you do suggest the contrary, it was not upon pretenses and
suppositions, and mere probabilities that the Reformers disobeyed, and changed
the Romish Religion, but upon manifest and convincing proofs made of the
superstition and Idolatry, which was and is maintained by the Romish Church;
the expression of the Prophet Isaiah might justly have been applied unto her;
how is the faithful City become an Harlot; it was full of judgment,
righteousness lodged in it, but now Murderers; thy silver is become dross, thy
wine mixed with water; it was high time for the Refiners to work, to purge away
her dross, and to take away her Tinn; to dispel those mists of Romish errors
that clouded the truth, and cried against Religion, as the Edomites did against
Jerusalem, down with it, down with it even to the ground.

As to your report concerning Luther; first, I answer that all reports made by
Romish Writers are not true; witness the untruths that are reported in your
Prologue and R^flections; and this I know, that many things are charged upon
Luther, of which he was not guilty in the least measure; and this report which
you do make here, is one of them, to charge this expression upon him, in that
manner as you do, is a wilful and wicked slander; the expression was vented in
the heat of disputation with Eckius and his companions, whom Luther perceived
to be desperately settled in opposition to the truth, they being stirred up by
ambition and malice, and hired thereunto by the Pope, when L^ther found that
they would not be convinced by the light of the truth, but would persist in a
desperate opposition against it; he says in relation to that opposition, non
propter Deum haec res caepta est, nec propter Deum finietur, this work was not
begun for God's sake, nor for God's sake will it be ended; and so I may say of
you, your writing against me in defense of your erroneous Religion, was not
begun for God's sake, nor unless I had some better ground of hope than yet is
visible, for God's sake will it be ended.

But Secondly, suppose he had vented that expression in that manner as you say,
you that build your justification upon charity, should have been so charitable
unto him as to have taken his words in this sense; for no other interpretation
can be imposed upon them without the breach of charity, that is, it was not by
man's entreaty or beging that he was moved to attempt the work of reformation;
neither by man's entreaty or begging would he be persuaded to desist from it;
you know it was man's entreaty and begging, if the Duke of Saxony desired him
for Gods sake to return to the obedience of the Church of Rome.

But should malice make the worst interpretation that could be made of the
words, what advantage can you reap from them? if a personal fault must be an
argument against Religion, why do you make claim unto S. Peter, to derive from
him the chiefest Article of your Religion, to wit, the Pope's Supremacy? you
know that he was guilty of a very great fault, in denying and for swearing his
Master; and then give us leave to account the worse of your Religion, because
Pope Hilderbrand threw the Sacrament into the Fire; Pope Sylvester, with
several other Popes, were Necromancers and Conjurers; several so prodigious and
execrable in their Lives and Conversations, that Platina (one of your own
Writers) terms them very Monsters; two of your Bishops at the Council of Trent,
were taken in the Act of Adultery, and the one clubbed to death, the other
hanged; you will acknowledge your self to have some personal Faults, unless you
will say, that you stand not in need of the Forgiveness of Actual Sins, which
if known, by your Logic a Deduction might be made thence, to convince you of
the Erroneousness and Malignity of your Religion.

Now let the Reader determine, whether you have made good your Position, that
it was unreasonable to require a Proof of the Affirmative of the Queries; you
have builded very much upon the Lawyers Opinion concerning Possession;
therefore it will be unreasonable and unjust to reject his Opinion concerning
the Proof of the Affirmative; and (besides all that has been said to show the
Necessity of it) he tells you, that affirmanti incumbit probatio; Affirmatives
are to be proved; wherefore, it being a Duty which my Adversary was obliged to
perform, he should not have been so careless and sloathful in the Proof of his
Religion, as to stand in need to be requested to do it, therefore your Charge
of Severity vanishes into mere Smoke, and it was just to assimilate him to the
Egyptian Taskmasters, because he would be laying of unnecessary Burdens upon
us, and would have us to be working to prove the Negative, while he would be
neglecting of his Duty.

Upon the Fourth Reflection.
IN your Prologue you told me, that it was your purpose to level your few
Reflections against my Method and way of answering, prescribing them to the
Reader, as a Rule whereby to determine concerning my Papers, whether I had in
them kept close unto the Matter in controversy, and discussed it with Reason;
here you direct one particular Reflection against the very same Mark. It seems
your Memory is very frail, you forgot to prosecute your purpose in the three
first; but to supply that defect, you rub up your Memory in the fourth: I shall
pass by this infirmity, leaving the Reader to descant on it as he pleases, and
will mind you of that which you told me in your* Prologue concerning the
unprofitableness of Disputation; concluding thence, that it was against your
inclination to enter into the Lists: but here you say, that solid disputation
is a matter of greatest importance: When will you be constant to your self? It
is not you distinction of solid and unsolid, or prudent and imprudent, that can
salve the Contradiction; for all that has been done concerning Points of
Religion, has not been unsolid and imprudent; and yet you say, all has but
made the world to nauseate, and has not decided one controverted point.

And here I find you agreeing with that remarkable Disputant M. H. L. in your
Opinion concerning my Papers, my Method, and way of proceeding (say you) has
been disordered and unconclusive; so says M. H. L. but he passes an ipse dixit,
for a sufficient Proof, while you make some little show of Reason for it; in
answer to which, I will tell you a true story: There were two Fencers, that
quarrelling about their Valor and Skill, for a decision challenged one another
to the Stage; where, when they met, their greatest Quarrel was concerning the
Weapons they were to use; and not agreeing about this, they presently whipped off
the Stage, leaving the Spectators to gaze one upon another in a friutless
Repentance for their misspent Pains and Coin.

I shall leave the Application of this to be made by your self, and do appeal
to your own Judgment to determine how* pertinent your present Discourse is, you
know my imposed Task was, the resolution of three trivial and unprofitable
Queries; will you tell me what infallible Rule, or Guide, or Judge there is to
be found and used for the effecting of this? If there be none (as I am sure
there is none) for the determining of that which is unnecessary to be known,
why talk you of an infallible Rule, and Guide, and Judge?

And why do you say that if I had a mind to have proceeded solidly in a
disputation concerning points of Religion, such an infallible rule or guide or
Judge should have been nominated, can there be a solid proceeding in a
disputation concerning points of Religion, when they are not points of Religion
that are to be disputed? The great concern of the Queries is the Identity or
Non-Identity of the present Romish Religion with Austin's, and of Austin's
Religion with that of the Ancient Britains, and of the Religion of the Ancient
Britains with that which was first brought into England? which are not points
of Religion; they are not points of Religion which may be affirmed or denied
without any hinderance to the Worship of God, and the ignorance of which cannot
prejudice the health of the Soul, while man is upon the quest of his Salvation.

Your Discourse here is as pertinent as that was of the Traveller, who when he
should have related those things that concerned his Travels, as what Countries
he passed, and the nature of their Soil, with the quality of the Inhabitants,
and the entertainment he found amongst them, talked of the Land of Vtopia, and
of the World in the Moon, and other feigned Regions, that are not to be found
in rerum natura: it seems that you were resolved to put your Pen upon motion,
though you did not matter how irregular it was, and to blind the Eyes of your
obliging Friend, you would be saying something, though it was nothing to the
purpose.

But to follow you in this wild Chase, and to show how much your Reflection is
troubled with the Simples, as well as with Impertinency; First, I will tell
you, that all Disputations concerning points of Religion, that have been made
between Protestants and Romanists, have been without a previous Agreement
concerning an infallible Rule, Guide or Judge, therefore upon this ground their
discourses must be as disordered and unconclusive as mine; and solamen miseris
socios habuisse doloris; it is no small comfort to me, to be ranked among those
Learned Protestant Writers, against whose convincing Reasons you dare no more
object, than a Child dares to enter into the Lists to fight with a Man of War.

Secondly, By the force of your own Reason, you are compelled to shake hands
with me, and to say Hail fellow, well met, in reflecting against my Papers, you
have written as much concerning Points of Religion, as I have in answering the
Queries, and you have not previously agreed with me concerning an infallible
Rule, or Guide, or Judge, therefore your whole Discourse has been disordered
and unconclusive; and pray Sir, to avoid this inconvenience in the future, do
not write again, until you be assured that we do agree about these things: the
observation of this Advice will save you the pains and the shame of writing any
more Impertinences and Untruths; for if you do continue in retaining your
Opinions, for want of this Agreement, you may lay aside your Pen until the last
Day of the World does come.

But you say, it was my Duty to lay down some Principle per se notum, or to
nominate an infallible Rule, or Guide, or Judge; if there be an infallible
Rule, there is no necessity for an infallible Guide, or Judge; for he that
guides and judges according to that infallible Rule, guides and judges
infallibly, though he be not infallible in himself; therefore I assure you,
being there is an infallible rule, that I do not know any infallible Guide or
Judge under Heaven; if you do know any, it is my desire to be informed by you;
and if you will comply to my desire, when you lay down your Instructions, be
sure to observe your own Prescriptions, and produce not any thing that is
probable, conjectural, or uncertain, but some infallible Proof for them;
otherwise (according to your Assertion) they must be rejected as erroneous, or
at least doubtful: as for an infallible Rule, or Principle per se notum, the
Obligation lies as much upon you, or any other undertaking to write concerning
Points of Religion; will you, or any other have your Assertions to be received
for infallible Truths upon your own bare Authority? the Reasons for which you
transfer the Duty wholly upon me, are so childish, that it is a shame to take
noti^e of them; he that writes concerning Points of Religion, whether he be
Opponent, or Answe^er, whether he write against an ancient, se^led, or a new,
upstart Religion; whether he da^e freely to put the nomination of an infallible
rule to his Adversary or not, must not think to have his Assertions to pass for
infallible Truths, only because of an ipse dixit.

Thirdly, You have an admirable short and ready way of refuting all
Disputations that shall be made against your Religion; though Protestants do
lay down never so many Principles per se nota, and tell you of the infallible
rule never so much, yet while you do retain your own Principles, you will never
agree with them about it; therefore (you will say) all that shall be objected
against your Religion, will be disordered and inconclusive; and thus though
your Religion be an House built upon the Sand, yet (in your Conceits) it
remains as firm and unmovable as a Mountain; upon the ground of this shameful
Defense, which you do make for it; but, good Sir, if a disagreement about this,
be of such strength to conclude, let it be as strong in the mouth of a
Protestant, as you would have it to be in the mouth of a Romanist, and let us
retort upon you and say, that all that shall be objected by you against the
Protestant Religion, will be disordered and unconclusive, because you will not
agree with us about an infallible Rule.

Fourthly, Either your Ignorance is wonderful, or your Unconscionableness not
to be paralleled: Do you not know that I have propounded three Queries to my
Adversary? the Affirmatives of which are as many Principia per se nota,
undeniable Truths, though not for the determination of my Adversaries Queries
yet, by which the pretended Truth of your Religion may* be examined? And do you
not know what Protestants do mean, when they speak of an infallible Rule? Yea,
have I not told you what is meant by it in that Expression, viz. I do not
wonder that you keep a Veil over the faces of your People to hinder them from
looking into the Holy Scripture? And if you do know these things, why do you
conceal and deny your Knowledge? Can it stand with the preservation of a good
Conscience to speak a notorious Untruth?

And your inconsistency with your self is as prodigious as either, what you do
expressly deny, you do implicitly confess, that you do know that by the
infallible rule Protestants do mean the Holy Scripture, because you do produce
arguments to prove, that it is not the infallible Rule, Protestants do maintain
the Holy Scripture to be this Rule, and if you do not know this, while you are
writing against Protestants, why do you produce Arguments against it? it seems
that by the frequent use of contradiction, you have attracted such an habit,
that if you do open your mouth to speak you must incur the use of it.

But supposing your ignorance to be as great as you do pretend, which no
rational man will believe, while you do profess your self to be a Romanist; how
can you conclude that I dare not stand to the Judgment and determination of
that infallible rule, which I have spoken of, being assured that I should bring
a staff upon mine own head, and find my religion to be disagreeable unto it?
can you draw conclusions from premises that you do not know? it is a great
shame to use this kind of argument, but I have your self to be my famous
president, which will shield me from the imputation of folly, and bring it home
to your own doors; you talk here of an infallible rule, and guide, and Judge,
but you have not told me, nor do I know certainly what you mean, whether
Fathers or Traditions, or Councels, or Popes, or Church, therefore you dare not
stand to the Judgment and determination of your own infallible rule or guide or
Judge, being assured, that you would bring a staff upon your own head, and find
your Religion to be disagreeable to them; this (I confess) is as if I should
reason after this simple and contradictory manner, I know not the quality of
the man, but I know that he is a dangerous man, and will do me a displeasure,
because he has not made himself known unto me.

Because you plead ignorance so much, I shall dispell this dark mist, and tell
you that by the infallible rule, I do not mean Fathers, or Counsels, or
Traditions, or Church, or any thing else, but only the Holy Scripture, that
sacred Word of God, which was dictated by the Holy Spirit, and written by such
penmen as were specially fitted for that Employment: this is the rule by which
we walk, and by which we do prove the truth of our doctrines, and demonstrate
the erroniousness of the modern Romish Religion; and this you do know, though
you have the face to deny it, saying, That while I speak of an infallible rule:
you cannot imagine what I should mean, while I stick unto the Protestant
Principles, for Scripture alone, say you, it cannot be for reasons expressed
before; the meaning of which is utterly unknown to me, unless by it, you do
say, that when you do see you are stark blind, for you do know that this is one
of the Protestant Principles, that the Holy Scripture is the infallible rule:
as for the reasons wherewith you do labor to refute the truth of it, when they
come to be examined, which will be presently, they will be found to be lighter
than vanity, in the mean time let me ask you, why you do fasten the reproachful
term of a dead Letter upon the Holy Scripture, and in what sense this may be
done? I cannot find by the strictest inquisition, that (as from its self) it
can (in any respect) have this ignominious Title applied unto it, nor can I
imagine how you can reconcile what you say to the experimented Efficacy of it,
and the Doctrine of the Apostle Paul; he proves it to be a living Letter;
saying that it is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, and
that it is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for
Instruction in Righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished to every good work; and that the reading of it has produced these
wholesome effects in many, is so abundantly confirmed by Experience, that it
cannot be denied: if the Word of the ever-living God can in any respect have
the Title of a dead Letter applied unto it,, I would know whose Word it is that
is the living Letter: Is it the Word of Fathers, or Traditions, or Councils, or
Popes? Are Abana and Parphar, Waters of Damascus, better than all the Waters of
Israel? Must the Word of vain, mortal, fallible men be advanced above the Word
of the ever-living God? take heed of making such blasphemous Assertions, this
is the Word that will judge you at the last Day; and if you do not repent for
that Blasphemy which you have wilfully and wickedly breathed out against it, it
is not the imaginary Flames of Purgatory-fire that will procure you a tolerable
Judgment,

It is not your pitiful Reasons that can disanul the Authority of this
infallible Rule; every one will laugh at the simplicity of your first
Deduction: The Arrians (say you) quoted Scripture for the maintaining of their
Heresy, therefore it is not the infallible Rule. I will help you with another
as conclusive as this; the Devil quoted Scripture to persuade our Savior to
cast himself down from the Pinnacle of the Temple, therefore it is not the
infallible Rule: Is that Authority disanulled, which is abused by some
disobedient and unruly persons? Possibly you may be abused as a Romish Priest;
but I suppose, you will not acknowledge, that by this that Power and Authority
is disanulled, which you received by Commission from Rome; God is abused by the
Sins of men, yet I hope you will not conclude thence, that his Power and
Authority is disanulled which he claims over the Sons of men: you do
acknowledge the feebleness of this Argument, while you do affirm, that the
Abuse of a good thing should not take away the Use of it (of which I will tell
you more hereafter) and what was the Arrians impugning the Divinity of Christ
by Scriptural Quotations, but an abusing of the Scripture?

That the Arrians impugned the Divinity of Christ with far more plausible
Quotations and Texts of Scripture than I can produce for the Protestant
Religion, is an Assertion which I deny; and which you ought to have proved;
which being not done, persuades me to believe, that you knew it to be a gross
untruth, yet you would confidently avouch it, purposely to deface the
Authority, and vilify the Use of the Holy Scripture, that you might induce
your followers to believe, that the evidence it holds out, is not a sufficient
proof for the manifestation of Truth, and the discovery and confutation of
Errors; and all this is done as a mere shift, to prevent (if it might be) the
Use of that refuting force that is in it, to be employed against your Religion:
what will not the Conscience of this Gentleman swallow? what will he not
adventure to do for the defense of his erroneous Religion? while without any
sign of regret, he can favor the Arrians, tread under his feet the Sacred Word
of God, and maintain it to be a greater Patron and Defender of the Arrian
Impiety, than of Protestant Truths: it is well known, that though the Arrians
quoted Scripture for their wicked Opinion, yet they were irresistibly confuted
by the clear evidence of Scripture; and it is as notoriously known, that you do
reject the Holy Scripture, not admitting it to be a rule for the determination
of that Controversy which is between the Protestants and the Romanists, and
consequently, it is easy to determine which of us, whether I and other
Protestants, or the Arrian Heretics can produce most plausible Texts of
Scripture for our Opinions; though you distill this false persuasion into the
minds of your people, that we cannot find any convincing Evidence in the
Scripture for the proof of our Religion; yet you know very well, that the
Evidence which we produce thence against you, compels you to fly (as sometime
the Israelites did from the Philistines) into Holes and Caves, and Thickets; I
mean the Coverts of Church, Traditions, Motives of Credibility, and other dark
Corners, to hide your selves.

It is a certain sign that you labor under a miserable scarcity of Arguments,
while the objections which you do make against me, do put weapons into my
hands, to be employed for the overthrowing of your self, if you maintain either
Fathers, or Councils, or Traditions, to be the infallible rule, or guide, or
Judge; the Heretic Diascorus cried out at the Council of Chalcedon, Ego habeo
Testimonium sanctorum Patrum, I have the Testimony of the holy Fathers on my
side; Eutiches appealed to Tradition; sic a progenitoribus accepi and credidi,
so have I received from my Progenitors, and so have I believed; the Eutichian
Heretic Carosus pleaded the Council of Nice; Ego (says he) secundum
trecentorum Patrum expositionem sic credo, My Faith agrees to the exposition of
three hundred Fathers; therefore neither Fathers, nor Councils, nor Traditions,
are the infallible Rule, or Guide, or Judge: Sure you will not have the face to
withstand the force of your own Argument; and this is as like unto it, as one
Egg is unto another; but howsoever you shall take the force of this Argument
against your self, I will tell you that your Argument is of no force to work
against the Authority of the holy Scripture; though all the Heretics in the
world should wrest the holy Scripture to maintain their destructive Opinions,
yet it will stand according to the purpose and appointment of God, to be an
infallible Rule, to direct his people in the way of salvation.

Nor is it your second Reason that can work any thing to disanul its Authority;
it is not Scripture taken according to the private interpretation of fallible
men, that is the infallible rule, but Scripture taken in its own native sense,
which in things necessary to be known, is plain and evident to the meanest
ordinary capacity: He that calls not many wise men after the flesh, not many
mighty, not many noble, but has chosen the foolish things of the world to
confound the wise, and the weak things of the world to confound the mighty;
has not failed in the end, for which he appointed the Use of the holy
Scripture, which is the instruction of those whom he does call; therefore it is
suited to their capacity, that they may read and understand the things that
concerns their eternal Peace; wherefore it is a most injurious Assertion which
you do make, telling us, that we cannot defend our selves against the pleas of
the Quakers, without the use of those Arguments which you do employ against us:
while we have the benefit of this infallible Rule, we are sufficiently enabled
to deal with all Enemies whatsoever, that do profess any thing of Christianity;
for by its power we confound the Quakers, and you, and all other Heretics,
that do maintain Doctrines contrary to the plain and evident sense of it; and
by its strength the Protestant Tenets are established and maintained in
clearness as far above the Scriptural Pretenses af Arrians, as Light is above
Darkness, Truth above Error, and beyond the greatest resistance that can be
made by the strongest Champions of the Roman Church.

Where the Scripture is obscure the sense is not necessary to be known, as God
does not cast his pearls before swine, so he does not hide them from his
children, and for the interpretation of such places we willingly submit unto
the Wisdom of Councels, or the Judgment of the ancient Fathers, while they are
constant to themselves, and consistent one with another, and do not give out
any interpretation, that is contradictory to those places that are manifest and
plain: and while we allow so much unto Councels and Fathers, you have no reason
to say (as you do) that we reject all Councels, and undervalue the Fathers: we
must not advance the word of fallible Men above the word of the everliving God,
least we should attract the guilt of blasphemy and Idolatry; but yet our
allowance does exceed that measure, which you do afford unto them: when the
Fathers speak against you, they are but children in your account, and when the
Decrees of Counsels contradict any of your Doctrines, you cry out against them
as illegitimate; you dare not expose your Religion to the decision of the first
four General Counsels.

Your Argument is so remarkable for its vanity, that I cannot yet have done
with it, though it be sufficiently confuted already, but must expose it in its
formality to the view of the judicious Reader, if the Scripture be privately
interpreted and that interpretation employed to maintain errors it cannot be
the infallible rule; but the Scripture is privately interpreted by the Quakers,
and that interpretation is employed to maintain their errors, ergo, etc.
certainly you did not ruminate upon the hypothetical proposition that is
included in this Syllogism, when will you prove the consequence of it to be
true? if ever that come to pass, it will be miraculous, and then you will be at
a very great loss, if you do maintain either Traditions, or Fathers, or
Counsels to be your infallible rule, or guide, or Judge, Traditions, Fathers,
Counsels, have been privately interpreted, and that interpretation employed by
Heretics to maintain their Errors, therefore neither Traditions, nor Fathers,
nor Counsels can be the infallible rule, or guide, or Judge verily the world
will wonder at your dexterity in defending the cause of the Romanists; while
you have been vainly sighting against me, you have been destroying them, and
have cast the greatest supports, wherewith they pretend to uphold their
Religion, down unto the ground.

Because you have blasphemed the Holy Scripture, denying it to be the
Infallible rule, and you confess, that there is a necessity of having such a
rule; I must ask you once again, what and whose word it is, that must have this
power and prerogative appropriated unto it; is it the word of any single man,
or any society of men, if so, why must that word be advanced above the Word of
God? because you say that nothing that is probable, conjectural or uncertain,
can be a principle to prove, or a rule to walk by, or a Judge to determine; for
the same uncertainty, or danger, which it has, of erring and being false in
its self, the same it must have in proving, ruling and judging; I expect you to
produce somewhat of certainty to be the reason; and when this is done, it will
afford me that satisfaction, which is not to be found in any of your Writers;
but because I am assured, that this will never be done by you; I am bold to
commend unto you this wholesome advice, which deserves to be accepted by you;
let God be true and every man a liar, be not so desperately wicked as to
advance the word of frail man above the Word of the everliving God, but let his
Word have the pre-eminence above all: and let his people have the benefit of
that light, which it holds out for their instruction, that they may see the
vanity and destructiveness of those many Errors, which the Roman Leaders have
politickly devised to keep them in bondage, and to maintain the wealth, height
and state of the Court of Rome: if you do embrace and practice this advice, you
will have less blood to account for, then otherwise you will have, when the
great day of the general Account shall come.

An Answer to the Appendix.
THe great Artillery of this mighty Champion, to wit, his four Reflections,
wherewith he presumed to level all before him, being examined and proved to be
like unto Childrens Pot-guns, charged with nothing but Paper and Blast, I come
now to take a view of the Appendix, and here I find him perked on high, sitting
in the seat of Judicature, and having (as he supposes) confitentem reum, he
takes upon him to pass a peremptory sentence against me, disparaging my weak
endeavors, and advancing his own in the superlative; but he is not like unto
Solomon's Judge, scattering away all evil with his eyes, but very like unto the
unjust Judge spoken of in the Gospel, that feared not God, nor regarded Man; in
his last Reflection he blasphemes God by declaiming against the holy Scripture,
and here he brings several accusations against me; for which he had no more
reason than Jezabel had to accuse Naboth; it is my persuasion that it is as
natural for him to use Forgeries and Calumnies, as it is for the sparks to fly
upward*

In what Line or Leaf of my Papers was this Concession made, that I cared not
how much of Antiquity and Succession was granted unto the present Romish
Religion? there was never any Protestant, that granted unto it the least share
in Primitive and Apostolic Antiquity; and as for the Antiquity that was spoken
of, it was limited to the time of Austin, and his Contemporaries the ancient
Britains; nor was this spoken of in relation to the Romish Religion, but by way
of supposition; my words are plain to any common capacity, which were these; If
I grant you so long Succession for your Religion, what advantage could you make
of it? Are Suppositions Concessions? I shall make one Supposition more here;
What if I say, that all the Ministerial Acts performed by the Romish Priests,
are null and void, because by exalting the Pope to be the visible Head of the
Church, they have rejected Christ, disclaiming him as the only head, will he
take this Supposition to be a Position? But howsoever he shall take it, verily
there is more of truth in it, than of concession in the former; when he did
read over my Papers, he could not but find me proving, that notwithstanding the
great Brags made by the Romanists concerning Antiquity, the Religion now
professed by them, can claim no farther than to the little Council of Trent: if
I made that Concession, where was the Gentleman's eyes, that he that is so apt
and forward to accuse me of contradiction, could not espy a contradiction
between this Concession and that proof, in relation to which he stands like the
Guest in the Gospel, that came to feast without a wedding garment) speechless;
but alas, he could not help it, he would have spoken, if he could have found
any thing to say.

And in what Line or Leaf of my Papers is the unexpected change, which is so
much wondered at, and that manifest contradiction, which is charged upon me? is
there any inconsistency between the forementioned Supposition, and the Answer
that was made to the first Query? My Supposition (of which some Account has
been already given, but I am forced to trouble the Reader with another
repetition) was this; if I should grant you so long Succession for your
Religion, what advantage could you make of it, if you reason after this manner
to confirm the Truth pretended to belong unto your Religion, my Father, and my
Grandfather, and so onward, until you come to Austin the Monk, and the Ancient
Britains, were of this Religion, therefore it is true; a Jew or a Turk may
reason with the same probability; or if you reason thus, Our Religion is as
ancient as Austin the Monk, and the ancient Britains, therefore it is true; a
Turk may plead as great Antiquity for his Religion, and a Jew greater for his:
My Answer to the first Query was this; we may presume that Austin's Religion
was the same which his Master Pope Gregory professed, and your Religion differs
from his in these Particulars, the Canon of the Scripture, the Sufficiency of
the Scripture, the Reading of the Scripture, etc. Now what carping Momus can
find occasion to bark at these Expressions, or what subtle Sophister is there
that can draw from them the Position charged upon me, viz. That the Sum of the
Controversy, and the main Busine^s is to find out, what Religion Austin
professed, it being become the Rule of my Belief, and by which the Protestant
Religion must stand or fall; and if this Position be deducible from my
E^pressions, how diligent was he upon his watch, that another contradiction
should escape his Observation? He finds me telling my Adversary, that the
determination of the Queries was a business of very low Concern, not deserving
the pains of an Inquisition; therefore I desired him to leave Austin and the
Ancient Britains to stand or fall to their own Master, and without any vagary
to prove that his Religion is the same that was first brought into England.

Is it possible for a man to write while he sleeps? certainly if he was awake,
he was more dimsighted than the blind man in the Gospel, who saw men walking
like trees; or rather did he not look upon my papers (as Astrologers tell us,
the Planets do look sometime upon this inferior Orb) with a malevolent Aspect,
like the Basilisk to kill with his sight, but that the darting of his Venom is
prevented by a careful foresight; here is not one symptom of an alteration, nor
any terms of contradiction to be found, which the Gentleman himself does
expressly acknowledge by contradicting of himself, which he does twice within a
little distance, first he says that I granted a boundless antiquity to the
Religion of the Romanists, yet he confesses that I limited the antiquity
spoken of to Austin and the ancient Britains, Secondly, he speaks boldly and
positively, saying, that the sum of the Controversy, and the main business was
to find out what Religion Austin professed, it being become the Rule of my
Belief, and by which the Protestants Religion must stand or fall; but in his
Conclusion, he speaks very timerously and doubtfully, and says, I did but seem
to rest upon the Judgment of Pope Gregory, and he could hardly believe that I
laid any weight upon his authority, which yet was contrary to his own knowledge,
for he could not but know that (as the resolution of the first query was
designed) the Religion of Austin was to be tried by those opinions that were
maintained by his master; here is a perfect imitation of Susannas accusers,
convincing himself to be a false witness against me by his manifest
contradictions; I would attempt to persuade him to leave of his practice of
bringing false and injurious accusations, but that I know my endeavors would
be to no purpose, forgeries and callumnies must be used by him, otherwise he
will want one of those rotten supporters, that are frequently used by the
Romanists in upholding their erroneous Religion.

I will tell him, that it is not upon the opinion of Austin, or Pope Gregory,
or of any other private Doctor, that the truth of the Protestant* Religion is
founded, nor do we apply our selves to any such rule for the trial of it, it is
the word of the everliving God contained in the Holy Scripture, that is our
foundation and rule, which only is the infallible rule, without the direction
of which none can be assured to find out the truth, and without conformity unto
which the Religion that is practiced, will be no more acceptable unto God, then
the offering of Swines flesh or the cutting of the neck of a dog, and if he
will vouchsafe to look upon my papers once again he will see this very plain,
that neither the Religion of Austin, nor of Pope Gregory was mentioned for any
such end, but only for the determination of the quere in the negative,
presuming that Austins opinions were the same with his masters, this was all
the weight that was laid upon Pope Gregory.

Therefore it is a wonder to me (unless he did in this imitate the practice of
Fencers, who build most upon the use of that weapon, in the handling of which
their greatest activity does consi^ what inducement there was, to move him to
bestow this high denomination upon it, terming i^ a certainty to build on, and
choosing it to be the thief Subject of his discourse, and in which he reposed
his greatest confidence, to trouble himself in writing, and me in answering,
and the Reader in reading a business of very low concern* for supposing this to
be true, that I was mistaken in quoting and understanding Pope Gregory; what do
I lose, or what does he gain by it, all amounts but to this, that the quere was
not sufficiently determined in the negative; that this was not sufficiently
proved, to wit, that the Religion now professed by the Romanists is not the
same, that was brought into England by Austin; and what of all this, what
deduction can be made from this serviceable for his purpose, this does not
prove that the Religion now professed by the Romanists is the same that Austin
brought into England, a defect in proving the negative, is not a sufficient
proof of the affirmative; because Joseph had not any substantial witness to
prove that he was not guilty, it did not therefore follow, that he was guilty
of that crime, which was charged upon him by his wantom Mistress; because I
cannot sufficiently prove that you are not an Englishman, it cannot be
therefore necessarily concluded that you are an Englishman, possibly you may be
a Spaniard, or an Italian or a French man.

But because the Romanists are unwilling to attempt the proof of the
Affirmative, and great reason there is for it; being it is far out of their
reach, suppose secondly that this insufficient proof of the negative should be
interpreted according to their mind, to be a strong demonstration, that the
Religion now professed by them is the same that was brought by Austin into
England, what use can be made of this? a derivation of Religion from fallible
men cannot prove the Religion so derived to be true, if Austin and his Master
Pope Gregory had maintained the modern opinions of the Romanists, it is easy to
prove that they did err, as well as the Romanists now do.

But thirdly, this which he is pleased to term a certainty to build on, is a
real uncertainty, it being the meaning of Pope Gregorys expressions, that he
vented the expressions (either in the same words, or for the substance of them)
charged upon him, is as visible to him that ^ill open his ey^ to see as the
Sun, and whether mine or his interpretation comes nearest to Pope Gregory's
mind, does not belong to him to determine, considering those many faults
committed in his papers. I cannot trust him for an infallible interpreter; and
for him to judge in his own cause, and to determine on his own side, before I
do enjoy the liberty of speaking for my self, is contrary to reason and equity;
when I have pleaded in my own defense, and delivered what I have to say
concerning Pope Gregorys expressions, who can tell but an indifferent
Arbitrator may cast the balance on my side, and determine my interpretation
most to deserve the Title of certainty; what ground there is for this, and what
building he has erected upon his conceited certainty, will be presently
discovered; I do not doubt but it will prove a lasting Monument to perpetuate
his own sha^e, and to witness the vanity of those great clamours that are made
for the antiquity of the present Romish Religion.

Concerning the Canons of the Scripture.
IT is strange that he should presume to rely so much upon Pope Gregory's
Testimony, terming it a certainty to build on, while he is altogether a
stranger to his opinions; otherwise how could he be ignorant that Pope Gregory
vented that expression, which is charged upon him; and how could it escape his
search, while the very Index affixed to Pope Gregory's Writings will afford
sufficient direction to find it; this surpasses the running of shooting at
Rovers; he is a wonderful* Artist that can hit the wh^te without looking
toward the But: but though he could not find the expression, yet upon a
supposition that Pope Gregory said it, he takes upon him to make an evasion,
but how seebly he pursues his undertaking the Reader may easily judge.

Here is nothing of coherency or sense to be sound in most of his expressions,
therefore what was the chief reason of this exception against the quotation may
be speedily conjectured, he knew not what to say, nor can he tell what he has
said; but to answer him with some sense, though not with as many just
exceptions as may be made against his words, if he will allow me that liberty
which Printers claim as an undoubted privilege belonging unto them, that is, to
correct the Errata of the Transcription; and to write 17 for 13; and search
once again into the Writings of Pope Greg^ry, according to this direction, he
will find that the expression was vented by him; where he speaks (as may be
presumed) not only of all the Books of Machabees in general, but also of all
those Books that are rejected by Protestants as Apocryphal; and then passes to
a particular quotation of the first Book of Machabees moralizing upon Eleazers
killing an Elephant, and dying under the weight of him; therefore to talk at
this rate, demanding how I make it out that he speaks of the first and second
Book of Machabees, rather than of the third and the fourth; and to say that
Canus speaks in the general, and says only that Pope Gregory held them as
disputable, not that he rejected them as Apocriphal, and to say that all that
can be inferred thence, is that they are not declared to be or are not truly
Canonical, is nothing but vain babbling, altogether unable to resist the
testimony, that is given on my side, Pope Gregory's wo^d^ being positive and
plain; in his Opinion all the Books of Machabees were non-Canonical, and then
by his opinion they were rejected as Apochryphal; for truly I do not know any
difference between non Canonical and Apocriphal.

And let us observe what is said beside; suppose (says he) that Pope Gregory
does speak of all the Books of Machabees, not collectively taken, for in that
acceptance it would still make more against me, but distributively as well of
the first and the second, as of the third and the fourth: I have no reason to
say unto him as Festus said unto Paul, too much learning has made thee mad;
but certainly he was beside himself, or else he was in a dream when these
expressions were committed to paper, here is a distinction without a
difference, as he explains it; if Pope Gregory spoke as well of the first and
the second, as of the third and the fourth, he spoke of all collectively taken,
and how an absolute Identity does work more and less against me, will nor enter
into my apprehension; and every fresh-man that is but newly matriculated and
initiated in Logic will tell him, that the genus does include the species, and
the whole the parts; if the whole heap be unsound, every parcel of that heap is
unsound, if all the Books of Machabees collectively taken, were in Pope
Gregory's opinion non-Canonical; let my adversary mention in particular what
book he pleases, whether the first or the second; for these as will as the
third, and the fourth were in his opinion non-Canonical.

And let us observe here what he says in the conclusion; the thing in
controversy (says he) at present not being whether the assertions be true or
false; but whether Pope Gregory held them or not: there his integrity is to be
applauded; he once spoke truth; but then I must ask him how much truth is to be
found in this expression, when he says, so fully is my objection answered by
Dr. Bilson: how could Dr. Bilson's words answer my objection, and determine the
controversy, while (as he is quoted) there is not any thing spoken by him in
relation to this question, whether Pope Gregory held the Books to be
Apochryphal or not? surely, this Gentleman is admirable for his answers and
reasons, as he is wonderful for his contradictions; and this being the
controversy, his following discourse may be rejected as impertinent by his own
confession; for the whole scope and drift of it, is to prove that though in
Pope Gregory's opinion the books of Machabees were not Canonical, yet now they
are to be received as Canonical; but to show how languishing every word that he
speaks is, I shall bestow some observations upon it.

First, the truth of the supposition being granted, which I perceive, he is
^^willing at length to do; my desire is obtained, while he is crying out to
triumph as if he had gotten the day; he is flying from his colors; leaving the
assertion he undertook to maintain to shift for its self, and granting that
which I undertook to prove: the present Romish Religion differs from that
professed by Pope Gregory in this particular, the Canon of the Scripture; and
thus far falls short of its highly conceited and boasted antiquity; which
concession I take to be a good Omen of Success to follow me in maintaining the
other particulars.

Secondly, I shall let him see what fruit he brings forth in the behalf of his
Religion, by laboring to introduce the books of Machabees into the Canon, it
is not the declaration of the Church that makes the holy Scripture to be a
Rule; but divine inspiration, which gives its intrinsical rectitude, whereby it
is qualified and fitted to be a rule; for a rule is not such because it is
declared to be a rule, but because of its intrinsecal rectitude which it
receives from the Author, who upon that ground designs and appoints it to be a
rule; therefore where a writing wants divine inspiration, it would be a capital
error in the Church to declare it to be Canonical: This being preposed I shall
offer this Dilemma so his serious consideration, the books of Machabees, either
had divine inspiration, or they had it not; if they had it, it was an error in
Pope Gregory to hold them non-Canonical; which was not only his own private
error, but it is strongly deducible from his expressions, that it was the
error of the whole Church; for sure there is none of this Gentleman's Tribe
will dare to say, that the Opinion of the pretended Head of the Church did dash
against the opinion of the body; if they had it not, it was an error in the
third Council of Carthage; and in the Council of Florence and Trent to declare
them to be Canonical: it is supposed now that he will not stand mute at the
sight of this Dilemma, but will make choice to some side, and whichsoever is
made the object of his choice, it will shake some of the greatest Pillars that
are invented for the supportance of the Romish Religion; for the one throws
down the infallibity of the Church and Pope, the other the infallibity of
Councels.

Thirdly, not to spe(...) much of the nature and the constitution of those
Councels that are nominated and affirmed to declare the books of Machabees to
be Canonical; that of Carthage and Florence were particular, therefore falsely
denominated general; and that of Trent was but a Conventicle, made up (like
unto Nebuchadnezars Image of different matter, some real, some imaginary
Bishops, only to serve for the advancing of the Popes Interest; I shall oppose
to these Councels the Council of Laodicea, which excluded the books of
Machabees from the Canon; and likewise the general Council of Trullo, which
approved and confirmed the Council of Laodicea; I shall object also against
these, the Opinion of Euse. l. 4. c. 25.
Mellito, Euse. l. 6. c. 18.
Origin, Hill. m. Prol. in Psalm.
Hillary, Cyp. l. cat. 4.
Cyrillus Atha. in Syn.
Athanasius, Jer. in pref. l. Sol.
Jerome, Cyp. in exp. Sym.
Cyprian, Aug. in civ. dei. l. 18. c. 36.
Austin; all these Ancient Fathers maintaining ^ Cox. Lao. can. 59.
all the books of Machabees to be Apochriphal: contradictories cannot be both
true; therefore I would have this Gentleman to determine which side the truth
is to be ascribed; but in the mean time he may again take notice of the
tottering condition of the Romish Religion; how unable the foundation is to
support the building, while Councels are contradictory to Fathers, and the
subsequent Councels to those that were preceding; I desire to know whether the
Title of Infallibility is to be fixed upon any of them.

Fourthly, he speaks of a Catholic tenent that was intended to be assented
unto and approved by Protestant Divines, but his meaning lies in the clouds,
and truly I have wearied my self in guessing what it should be; if it be that
which he has undertaken to prove here, viz. that though in Pope Gregory's
opinion the books of Machabees were Apocriphal, yet now they are to be received
as Canonical: It is a most injurious and false assertion, for all protestants
have unanimously maintained the contrary: if he means that tenet, which he says
is expressly held and defended, not only by Doctor Bilson, but also by diverse of
the chief Protestant Divines, to wit, that this most weighty controversy of
discerning true Scripture from false, cannot otherwise be decided, but by the
Authority of Gods Church, I suppose he understands the Church representative,
otherwise I do not apprehend his meaning, while he says, that the Church having
determined the controversy concerning the books of Machabees, all parties are
obliged to submit unto it; it is most injuriously done to report any Protestant
writers to be Patroons of this most gross untruth; what did not the general
practice of the Primitive Church, planted and watered by the Apostles, and
their immediate Successors, and the opinion of the Fathers, which lived next
after them, serve effectually for the deciding of this controversy, and
discerning of true Scriptures from false? Did the Apostles (as without question
they did) after the writing of the Holy Scriptures, propound them as a Canon to
the Church, and while the original copyes were extant, did the Apostle John
collect and consign a Canon for the Church, as is proved by the concurrent
suffrage of antiquity, and was not this transmitted to posterity? did not the
Church of God know what Scriptures were Canonical for the space of three
hundred years after Christ, during which time there was not any general Council
to determine this controversy? and what perspectives does a general Council
use, that the Primitive Christians and Fathers had not the same glass to look
through for the discerning of true Scriptures from false, that Religion is very
indigent of supports, that stands in need to be sustained by those slanderous
reports, that are the Parents of many irrational and senceless conclusions.

If he had said that Dr. Bilson, and other Protestant writers do affirm that a
general Council has authority to enquire concerning every controverted part of
Scripture, and to examine whether the evidence that it has on its side can
afford sufficient inducement, to believe that it can have no other derivation,
but from the Fountain of truth, and accordingly to declare and propound their
opinions to be embraced by the Church, I should have easily assented to the
truth of it; but this is nothing serviceable for him, but altogether repugnant
repugnant and destructive unto his present design; for inquisition has been
made concerning the books of Machabees, and upon examination they have been
found so defective in evidence, that they have been judged to be merely the
issue of man's invention, therefore they have been determined and declared to be
Apocriphal, and that determination and declaration being agreeable unto truth,
there is no general Council, can have authority to determine and declare the
contrary.

Fifthly, I will tell him that the books of Machabees were not only doubted of
by some particular Churches and Persons, but rejected as Apocriphal by the Pope
(who is pretended to be the head of the Church) declaring not only his own
private opinion, but also the opinion of the whole Church, and they were
doubted of and rejected not only for some short time, but for many ages upon
just and undeniable grounds, they being originally not in Hebrew, but in Greek,
and the Jewish Church, to whom (as the Apostle tells us) were committed the the
Oracles of God, never received them into the Canon, besides the style of them
is so low and unlike the style of the holy Scriptures; that it is a disgrace
unto the spirit of God, to affirm them to he his dictates; they contain
likewise several matters contradictory, to those books, that were never doubted
of by any in the Church; nor did our Savior or any of his Apostles give
testimony unto them, by quoting any part of them, as they did to several books
of the old Testament: now must he prove that the books of the new testament
mentioned by him; were not only doubted of, but rejected by the whole Church
for several ages upon as just and undeniable grounds, otherwise the members of
his comparison are as unequal and lame, as the legs of Mephibozeth were, and
his argument grounded upon it as ridiculous and unconclusive as that of
Cardinal Bellarmin, who because there is but one King in an hive of Bees,
concluded that there was to be but one visible Monarch in the Church: he must
not think to pass that coin, that is proved to be counterseited by wanting
purity of Metal, and the Kings impression for current money, as well as that
which is proved to have both, though it be q^^stioned by some unskilful
persons, that want understanding to distinguish between the good coin and the
counterfeit.

I dare refer it to his own judgment, to determine whether there was as much
reason for the rejecting of the books of the new Testament, that were doubted
of but for a short time, by some particular Churches and Persons; as there is
for the rejecting of the books of Machabees, that for many ages after their
first existence in the world, were not received as Canonical by any part of the
Church, and then whether it was rationally and justly done by the Councels of
Carthage, Florence and Trent to decree contrary to the opinion of the Primitive
Church and Fathers, and contrary to the Council of Laodicea, which declared
them to be Apocriphal, and to the Council of Trullo; which approved of and
confirmed the decrees of the Council of Laodicia.

Sixthly, let it be observed once more how consistent he is with himself, here
he labors tooth and nail to bring the books of Machabees into the Canon, which
(if I do understand what the word Canon does import) is to join them to the
Holy Scriptures in being a rule; and in his fourth reflection, with one wipe of
his Pen he dashes out the whole Scripture from being a rule, by denying it to
be a complete and infallible rule, for if it be a rule, it is propounded by God
unto his people, who can propound a rule of faith and manners to direct them in
the way of Salvation, but himself? and if it be propounded by God as a rule, it
is complete and infallible, I hope he will not face Heaven and say that God
has deceived his people by propounding to them an imperfect and fallible rule,
therefore to deny it to be complete and infallible, is to deny it to be a rule.

He thanks God that he is not a professor of the Protestant Religion, but by
this how blasphemously he charged God to be the author of those delusions, that
are entertained and owned by him, I leave to the judgment of any rational and
pious person; if instead of thanking God for this, he had prayed to God, that
he would have given him grace to open his eyes to see and acknowledge those
truths that are professed by Protestants he would not have been least to
himself, to use such shameful contradictions, and such pitiful arguments, as
he has used in defense of that cause which he undertakes to manage and
maintain against me.

Concerning the Sufficiency of the Scriptures.
IN his Fourth Reflection, he denies the holy Scripture to be the infallible
Rule, and fastens the Title of a dead Letter upon it: Here, being dazzled with
the Light of Pope Gregory's expression, he is not ashamed to make a
Recantation, confessing the truth, and bringing with him the witness of
Vincentius Lyrinensis to confirm it; saying, that the Canon of the Scripture is
perfect, and in all points very sufficient in it self: that cannot in any
respect be rotten, which is altogether sound; the Scripture cannot in any
respect (as from it self) be termed a Dead Letter, if it be perfect, and in all
points very sufficient in it self; and if it be such, it alone must be the
infallible Rule.

And it is strange that he did not understand how Pope Gregory's expression
(the truth of which is acknowledged by himself, and confirmed by Vicentius
Lyrinensis) should be evidently contradictory unto the Doctrine of the Roman
Church decreed in the Council of Trent, (Council. Trid. sess. 4. decr. 1.) viz.
Scripturae sine traditionibus nec fuerunt simpliciter necessariae, nec
sufficientes; Scriptures without Traditions are neither simply necessary nor
sufficient. What, do the Scriptures contain all things necessary for
instruction and edification, and are perfect and in all points very sufficient
in themselves, and yet not simply necessary nor sufficient without Traditions?
truly I do not know how to unfold these Riddles, that Scriptures should contain
and not contain all things that are necessary for instruction and edification,
and that they are perfect and imperfect, and in all points very sufficient in
themselves, and yet not simply necessary nor sufficient without some help
afforded by Tradition.

It is not his distinction between the sufficiency of the Scripture in it self,
and its sufficiency to interpret its self, nor the inference of Vincentius
Lyrinensis, that can reconcile these Contradictions; for first, though the holy
Scriptures be mysterious and dark in many places, yet in all things necessary
to be known for instruction and edification, they are plain to every ordinary
capacity. Pope Gregory says, that the holy Scriptures are an Epistle sent by
God from Heaven unto his Creature upon Earth; and certainly God would not lap
up his mind concerning things necessary to be known, in such mysterious and
dark Expressions that his Creatures could not attain to the knowledge of it;
this in effect would be not to send any Epistle at all: for I do not apprehend
any great difference between denying to set Meat upon the Table, and setting
hard bare Bones instead of Meat. St. Augustine is more plain, (Aug. de Doct.
Christ. l. 2, 5, 9.) In iis (says he) quae aperte i^ Scriptura posita sunt,
inveniuntur omnia illa, quae continent fidem moresque vivendi; in those things
which a^ plainly expressed in holy Scripture, are to be found a^ those things
that do contain Faith and good manners. And Chrysostom is as clear, (Chrysostom.
Ho^ 3. in 2. Epist. ad These.) Omnia (says he) pla^ and clara sunt in
Scripturis divinis, quaecumque necess^ria sunt, manifesta sunt: In the holy
Scriptures whatsoever things are necessary, are manifest and plai^ And
Bellarmine himself does acknowledge this truth (Bell. de Verb. Dei, l. 1. c.
1.) His sacris Scripture (says he) quae Propheticis and Apostolicis* libris
cont^nentur, nihil est notius, nihil certius, hae fidei Catholi^ sunt sine
dubio regulae; There is nothing more know^ and more sure than the holy
Scriptur^s contained in the Books of the Prophets and the Apostles, these are
without doubt the rule of the Catholic Faith.

Secondly, I do not find that Vincentius Lyrinensis affirmed that the holy
Scripture in every part and parcel thereof is mysterious and dark; nor could
this be affirmed by any man with any color of truth: but it must be
acknowledged by all, that as many places are mysterious and dark, so many more
are manifest and plain; wherefore his words are to be taken as spoken in
relation to those places that are mysterious and dark; and he does not infer
from the mysteriousness and darkness of those places a necessity of the
Ecclesiastical understanding, but that the Line of Prophetical and Apostolical
Exposition be directed according to the rule of the Ecclesiastical
Understanding; that is, that the mysterious and dark places of the Prophets and
Apostles be interpreted according to that Rule which is to be used by the
Ecclesiastical Understanding in interpreting such places. I do not say that the
meaning of those places is necessary to be known; but that the meaning of them
may be known, it is necessary that they be interpreted according to that Rule.
Wherefore was it that Eunomius did interpret the Scriptures one way, Sabellius
another way, Donatus another way, and the rest of the Heretics other ways? It
was not because of the mysteriousness and darkness of them, but because they
did not interpret them according to this Rule, but according to their own
Fancies; and all others, interpreting the mysterious and dark places of
Scripture after the same manner, will be sure to faulter in their
Interpretation, and fall upon an erroneous sense. Hence it is that Vincentius
Lyrinensis concludes, that the Line of Prophetical and Apostolical Exposition
is to be directed according to the Rule of the Ecclesiastical Understanding;
but not a necessity of the Ecclesiastical Understanding. If the holy Scriptures
be in all things necessary, manifest and plain, it is but a weak inference, to
conclude from the mysteriousness and darkness of some or many places, the
necessity of the Ecclesiastical Understanding. If the holy Scriptures be in all
things necessary, manifest and plain, the meaning of the dark places is not
necessary to be known; and then where is the necessity of the Ecclesiastieal
Understanding?

And it is as deceitfully demanded how we may come rightly to understand the
holy Scriptures without mistaking the true sense, there being many things in
them so deep and mysterious, that they transcend all Humane Reason? It is a
mere fallacy, from the deepness and mysteriousness of many things, to conclude
a difficulty in understanding all things contained in the holy Scriptures.
Though many places are hard to be understood, yet there are many most easy and
plain to any ordinary capacity. And though he does close his own Eyes, and will
not see, yet he must give us leave to open our Eyes to see and to understand
those places that are manifest and plain.

And the holy Scriptures being manifest and plain in all things necessary to be
known. they are the best Interpreters of themselves, and sufficient to
interpret themselves; that is, they are the best Rule to walk by, in
interpreting those places that are mysterious and dark, and sufficient to
regulate that interpretation for the preventing of Errors and Heresies; and
that is the Rule that Vincentius Lyrinensis speaks of, as is evident from his
own words, ( Vinc. Lyr. c. 41.) he tells us that the Canon of the Scripture
alone is sufficient for all things, Non quia (says he) Scripturarum Canon solus
sibi non sufficiat ad universa, etc. If it be sufficient for all things, it is
sufficient to regulate the Interpretation of it self. But to clear this
farther, let us observe what the Reflector says; he interprets the
Ecclesiastical Understanding to be the Churches sense and Fathers
interpretation of Scripture; (here he reckons the Fathers as Giants, ranking
them close by the side of the Church; though treating of the Communion in both
kinds he counts them all Pigmies;) and he may observe that Vincentius
Lyrinensis does not say that the Line of Prophetical and Apostolical Exposition
is to be directed according to the Churches sense and Fathers interpretation,
but according to the Rule of it: He speaks of these things as different, and so
they are; the sense of the Church, and the interpretation of the Fathers is one
thing, and the Rule of this Sense and Interpretation is another thing; the
Churches sense and Fathers interpretation cannot be a rule unto it self. Now
what this Rule is, has been showed already; it is only the holy Scripture in
those places that are manifest and plain. How can we know whether the
interpretation of the dark places be agreeable unto the Truth, unless we do
compare that interpretation with places that are manifest and plain? Must we
take any Interpretation to be infallible because of an ipse dixit? Must the
sense of the Church or the Fathers interpretation be received for infallible,
because she or they do (if they should) say it is infallible? The claim of
Infallibility upon an ipse dixit belongs only unto God; and we must not take
that for sound Doctrine, which is contradictory or disagreeable to those places
that are manifest and plain.

To put this matter quite out of doubt, I ask the Reflector, Whether is likest
to be true, to say that the Ecclesiastical Understanding is a Rule unto the
Scripture; or to say that the Scripture in those places that are manifest and
plain, is a rule unto the Ecclesiastical Understanding: which is as much as to
say, whether it is the Ecclesiastical Understanding that directs God how to
speak unto his people, or it is God that directs the Ecclesiastical
Understanding how to speak and to interpret. Surely he will not say that the
Ecclesiastical Understanding directs God how to speak unto his people; then let
him acknowledge that the Scripture in those places that are manifest and plain
is a rule unto the Ecclesiastical Understanding, and it is God that in those
places directs the Ecclesiastical Understanding how to speak and to interpret.

Besides, Gods holy Word is his Law and Rule, which he has prescribed unto us;
and though it receives very hard measure at the hands of the Reflector,
wheresoever he meets with it, yet for the Authors sake he should not be so
desperately bent against it, as to deny it that perfection and sufficiency,
which he must allow unto Humane Constitutions. Now suppose a Statute, or Clause
of a Statute, be obscure and dark, who must interpret it? He will say, the
Judges. Well; but how must that interpretation be made? Must it be according to
Law, or contrary to Law, or according to their own private Opinions? He will
not say, contrary to the Law, nor can he say, according to their own private
opinions, unless he will maintain the breast and will of the Judges to be Law;
and then he must say, that it must be made according to the Law: Possibly one
Statute may be clearer than another, and one Clause may afford light unto
another; but howsoever, the interpretation must not be made in opposition to
the Law, but to run as adequate and near unto that Line as possibly it can. The
Law then must still be the Rule of interpretation; and I would have him for
Gods sake to yield the same perfection and sufficiency to the holy Scriptures:
but what need I to beg this at his hands, while the force of Vincentius's
words, acknowledged by him to be true, has granted it already? Vincentius
says, that the holy Scriptures are sufficient in themselves. From this
undeniable position must issue this Conclusion, That they are sufficient to
regulate the interpretation of themselves; for certainly that self-sufficiency
was not given to be lapped up in a Napkin, or covered under a Bushel, but to
show it self to the understanding of the Reader.

If the Fathers might pass in any account with this Gentleman, I could produce
the testimony of many on my side. Augustine says, (Aug. cont. litt. petil. l. 3.
c. 6.) Sive de Christo, sive de ejus Ecclesia, five de quacunque re alia, quae
pertinet ad fidem vitamque nostram, non dicam si nos, sed si angelus de coelo
nobis annuntiaverit, praeterquam quod in sacris Scripturis legalibus and
Evangelicis accepistis, anathema sit; whether it be of Christ or his Church, or
of any thing else, I will not say, if I my self, but if an Angel from Heaven
should teach us otherwise than we have received in the Book of the Law and the
Gospel, let him be accursed. And speaking in relation to Cyprian, he uses this
expression (Aug. cont. Cresc. l. 2. c. 13.) Nos nullam Cypriano facimus
Injuriam cum ejus quastibet litteras a Canonica divinarum Scripturarum
authoritate distinguimus, neque enim sine causa tam saluber vigilantiae canon
Ecclesiasticus constitutus est, ad quem certi Prophetarum and Apostolorum libri
pertinent, quos omnino judicere non adeamus, and secundum quos de ceteris
litteris vel fidelium vel infidelium liber judicemus; We do Cyprian no wrong,
when we distinguish any of his Writings from the Canonical Authority of Divine
Scriptures; for not without cause is such an Ecclesiastical Rule of vigilance
constituted, to which certain Books of the Prophets and Apostles belong, which
we may not at all dare to judge, and according to which we may freely judge of
other Writings, whether they be of believers or unbelievers. And speaking of
the discourse of Reason in understanding of Scriptures, he says, (Aug. de Doct.
Christ. l. 3. c. 12.) Haec consuetud^ periculosa est, per Scripturas enim multo
tutius ambulatur; This manner of expounding is very dangerous, the safer way is
to walk by the Scriptures. Irenaeus tells us, that Ostensiones quae sunt in
Scripturis, non possunt ostendi, nisi ex ipsis Scripturis; the Evidences that
are in Scriptures cannot be manifested but by the Scriptures themselves. Origin
likewise speaks after the same manner, (Orig. Enchir. Hom. 2.) Necesse est
(says he) nobis in testimonium vocare sanctas Scripturas, sensus quippe nostri,
and enarrationes, sine iis testibus non habent fidem; we must needs call to
witness the holy Scriptures; for our Judgments and Expositions without these
Witnesses carry no credit. Chrysostom also is positive in this, (Chrysostom. in
Oper, Imperf. Hom. 49.) Nec ipsis (says he) omnino Ecclesiis credendum est,
nisi ea dicant vel faciant que convenientia sunt Scripturis; we may in no wise
believe the Churches themselves, unless they say and do such things as be
agreeable to the Scriptures. And Tertullian gives us this rule for the
expounding of the Scriptures, saying, (Tertul. adver. Prax.) Oport^t secundum
plura intelligi pauciora; it is meet that we expound the fewer places according
to the more; and then certainly by the law of parity this rule will hold, it is
fit that we expound the darker places by the clearer.

By this time it appears plainly, that the flash which the Reflector made,
saying, that he did not understand how the Doctrine of Pope Gregory concerning
the sufficiency of the Scripture, should be contrary to the Doctrine of the
present Roman Church, was but like unto the glittering of a Glo-worm, visible
to him that is in darkness, but disappearing upon the approach of the light. It
is evident that the holy Scriptures are plain and easy to be understood in all
things necessary to be known: and to know the meaning of the mysterious and
dark places, those Texts that are plain and easy to be understood are the best
rule for Interpretation; so that the holy Scriptures need not to be beholding
to Councils, or Churches, or Fathers, or Traditions, in borrowing any
sufficiency from them. Nor have they any to lend, but whatsoever is delivered
by way of Interpretation or otherwise, is to be examined by the rule of the
holy Scriptures. And this being the Doctrine of Pope Gregory, that all things
necessary to be known for Instruction and Edification are contained in the holy
Scriptures; and the Doctrine of the present Roman Church being this, That the
holy Scriptures without Traditions are neither simply necessary nor sufficient:
Unless some dark M^st does cloud his Eyesight, he may with half an Eye
perceive that the Doctrine of Pope Gregory is as contrary to the Doctrine of
the present Roman Church as truth is unto error.

What is objected concerning the perverting and wresting of the holy Scriptures
made by Heretics, is as truly applicable to the Ecclesiastical Understanding:
For the same fate has befallen it; so that it lies open to the force of the
same inference which the Reflector does deduce thence. It is well known that
the Fathers have been claimed and quoted by Heretics; and if by the sense of
the Church the Decrees of Councils are to be understood, Heretics have
pretended and appealed unto them, as I have already showed; Councils as well as
Fathers have been perverted by Heretics; and the truth is, nothing can be
delivered so plainly, but it may be perverted, where there is a will and a
purpose to do it. Therefore the perversion of the sense of the Scriptures made
by Heretics, can no more prove a necessity of the Ecclesiastical Understanding
to interpret them, than it can prove a necessity of interpreting the
Ecclesiastical Understanding, and a necessity of interpreting that
Interpretation; and so ad infinitum.

I ask this Gentleman, whether God could not, or would not speak as
intelligibly and plainly as any Ecclesiastical Understanding? To say that he
could not, is to deny his Wisdom; and to say that he would not, is to deny his
Goodness. Will he say that God purposed for to delude his people, when he
inspired those sacred Penmen that were employed to write the holy Scriptures,
that instead of Bread, he would give his people a Stone; and instead of sending
a bright shining Light, he would involve them in a thick Cloud, to cause them
to grope out their way in the dark? I entertain such an opinion of him, as to
think that he will not affirm any such thing.

I demand farther, if the holy Scriptures be not plain and intelligible of
themselves in all things necessary to be known, but there is a necessity for
the Churches sense to interpret them, why is not the work done? Is there a
Talent given to be employed and improved, and must it be lap'd up in a Napkin,
and lie buried in the Earth? Why are the common people hindered from the
enjoyment of that benefit which the Church can afford? Why are not the holy
Scriptures, with the Churches sense of them, delivered unto the common people,
to be read by them, that they may know the things that concern their eternal
peace? I doubt he will be hard puzzled to answer these Questions, unless he
tells us, that the Churches sense lies hid in the bosom of the Parish Priest,
unto whom the people have liberty to apply themselves at pleasure, to enquire
what they must do, and what they must believe; and what he says must be taken
for sound Doctrine, though it be quite contrary: Thus, though (according to the
Doctrine of Pope Gregory) the holy Scriptures do contain all things necessary
for instruction and edification, yet the word of a Romish Priest, and it may be
one that is not able to draw a rational conclusion from apt and fit premises,
must be preferred before the word of the ever-living God; and what is this but
the blind leading the blind, whose end will be to fall both together into the
Ditch?

These things being considered, it will be his wisdom to observe this advice,
to acknowledge according to the Doctrine of Gregory, Augustine, and Chrysostom,
that God in the holy Scriptures has delivered intelligibly and plainly all
things necessary to be known; therefore there is no absolute necessity for
private or public interpretation, but all that is needful to be done, is to
open the Eyes to see, and the Heart to receive, and to order the Will to
practice those truths that God has delivered plainly in the holy Scriptures.

Concerning the Reading of the Scriptures.
TO speak of the occasion of writing this Epistle, is impertinent. Theodorus's
Charity to the poor did not entitle him more to the reading of the Scriptures,
than the meanest of the people: they all had, or were to have Charity, and the
Love of God; and to increase in these Graces, as well as he: neither did any
other conjoined acts of his, beget a singularity of Privilege; God keeps open
house, and Strangers as well as Children are admitted to this Table. The
privilege of reading the Scriptures is common to the unconverted, as well as
to the converted: the Apostle Paul says, that all Scripture is given by
inspiration from God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in Righteousness; they that want these things are
privileged to seek where they are to be found; every one is privileged to use
the means of conversion, and the reading of the Holy Scriptures has been
profitable unto the unconverted, as well as to the converted; St. Augustine was
converted by reading of the Holy Scriptures.

Nor have the learned a greater privilege of reading than the unlearned; but
if there be any inequality of privilege between them, the unlearned ha^^ most,
if it be measured according to the line of necessity; St. Chrysostom affirms
this, for thus he writes ( Chrysostom. l. in Math. hom. 2.) Hoc est quod omnia
qua^ una peste quadam corrumpit, quod lectionem divinaru^ scripturarum ad solos
putatis monachos pertinere, cu^ multos vobis magis quam illis sit necessaria,
itaque mu^ to est gravius atque deterius rem superfluam esse puta^ legem Dei,
quam illam omnino non legere, haec enim verba sunt, quae de diabolica prorsus
Meditatione promuntur; this is that which as it were with a pestilence
infecteth all things, that ye think the reading of the Scriptures pertains
only unto Monks, whereas it is much more necessary for you, than for them: it
is more wickedness to think Gods Law is superfluous, than if you should never
read it; for these be the words that no doubt come from the study of the Devil.
I am sure that the unlearned want instruction and direction more than the
learned do; and as certain it is, that the learned may wrest the Scriptures to
an erroneous sense, as well as the unlearned, and whose perverting of the
Scripture is most destructive, let the Reflector determine. Who were the
authors of those numerous Heresies that have infested the Church of God? not
the unlearned, but the learned; and sure he will grant those Heretics wrested
the Scriptures to maintain their erroneous Opinions.

He may find that Pope Gregory (Greg. epis. l. 9. epis. 75.) did not only
exhort Theodorus who was a Scholar, but such as he speaks of very contemptably
here, illiterate women, to the reading of the holy Scriptures: and there was
great reason that he should do so, being that the holy Scriptures (as he says)
are an Epistle sent unto the Creature; which general term does include both
learned and unlearned. It had been strange if with the Epistle he had not given
unto all a commission for the reading of it: must God beg leave of man, that
his creature may know his mind? and shall he write an Epistle, and must it not
be opened without a license from the Bishop or Inquisitour?

He tells me that Theodorus was not persuaded to read the Scriptures that he
might make himself Judge of Controversies; but what his meaning should be, I am
very doubtful, this expression being subject unto a different understanding: it
is one thing for a man to assume the power of Judging and Determining for
others; another thing for a man to use the liberty of Judging and discerning
for himself. If his meaning be this, that Theodorus was not persuaded to read
the Scriptures that he might assume the power of propounding his Opinion
authoritatively in matters of Controversy to be embraced by others, it is
willingly granted. But then if he shall say that Protestants are persuaded to
read the Scriptures for that end, it is a most injurious report; our people are
not persuaded to read the Scriptures for any such end; but in cases of
Controversy they have Governors and Rulers to whom they are to apply
themselves, and to them they are exhorted to subject themselves by a ready and
willing submission unto their determinations.

If his meaning be this, that Theodorus was not persuaded to read the
Scriptures to judge and discern for himself, it is denied: does he think that
Pope Gregory persuaded Theodorus to shut his own Eyes, and to deny the exercise
of his own Reason? to what purpose has God made Man a rational creature, and
given him understanding, if he must not use it? must he not see with his own
eyes, and discern with his own understanding between Right and Wrong, Truth and
Falsehood? The Apostle Paul enjoined the Corinthians to judge of the Doctrine
which he delivered unto them, 1 Epist. ad Cor. c. 11. v. 3. I speak (says he)
as unto wise men, judge ye what I say and the Bereans were commended for
searching the Scriptures, and judging of that Doctrine which he delivered unto
them, Act. Apost. c. 17. v. 11. And our Savior asks the common peop^^, Yea,
and why of your selves judge ye not what is right? Luke c. 12. v. 57. And while
the Roman Leaders do restrain the common People from this Liberty, they deal
worse with them than the Ammonites would have dealt with the Inhabitants of
Jabesh-Gilead; their cruelty extends to put out both the Eyes; though their
common People have Eyes to see, yet they must not see; and though they have
Understandings to judge and discern, yet they must not judge nor discern: but
whatsoever is propounded must be embraced, whether it be right or wrong, truth
or falsehood; and they must know no other reason for it, but only this, because
it is propounded.

And as the Roman Leaders do put out the Eyes of their ignorant Followers, so
this Gentleman endeavors to put out the Eyes of all others, or else would
persuade them to believe that they do see that which they cannot see: All their
common People are strictly forbidden to read the Holy Scriptures. How is it
then the constant practice of the Roman Church, to persuade them that are
discreet to read the Holy Scriptures for devotion and encouragement in the
Service of God? To reconcile these things, will he say, that all the common
People do want Discretion, that is, are mere fools? And he says, the
Ecclesiastical understanding is to expound Scriptures: How then have the common
People the Scriptures expounded and fitted much better by learned Expositors in
their Books almost of any sort? Where are those Books almost of any sort, which
do contain the Churches sense upon the Scriptures? It must be a bad Cause that
is managed and defended with such contradictory stories as these.

The common People which (he says) are exhorted to read the Holy Scriptures for
Devotion, and encouragement in the Service of God, are some Phantasma's, that
are existing only in his own brain: for there are no such common People to be
found in the bosom of the Romish Church. And the Expositors which he speaks
of, are some such imaginary Entities, or else he must say, that the Jesus
Psalter, or the Ladies Psalter, or the Exposition of the Mass, or the Legend of
Saints, or some such superstitious and idolatrous Books as these, are those
learned Expositors: for these, or some such, are all the learned Expositors
that are to be found among their common People. I suppose he will not include
the seven Champions of Christendom, or the Maiden-Knight, or the Knight of the
Sun, or some such feigned Histories, in the number of those learned Expositors.
Such Histories as these (I confess) are frequently and plentifully to be found
among their common People; the reading of which, is allowed for the passing
away of time, and approved far above the reading of the Holy Scriptures: so
careful and provident the Romish Leaders are for the Souls of their poor hood
winked and deluded People.

Because he tel^s me that Theodorus was not persuaded to read the Holy
Scriptures to interpret them according to his own fancy, I will tell him
again from St. Augustine, Gregory, and Chrysostom, that the Scriptures, in all
things necessary to be known, are easy and plain to the lowest ordinary
Capacity: So that it is altogether improbable, if not impossible, that a
well-minded person that goes humbly to draw Water out of this Fountain, with an
earnest desire to be instructed and edified unto Eternal Life, should fetch
thence any bitter Waters, that he should interpret the Scriptures to an
erroneous and destructive sense; and then what great need is there for those
learned Expositors of almost any sort? I would not be understood to undervalue
the elaborate Tracts that have dropped from the Pens of learned Expositors;
where Scriptures are obscure, there is a necessity of Exposition for him that
desires to know the right sense: for which end, learned Expositors are highly
serviceable. But I must tell him, that the sense of those places is not
necessary to be known; in all things that are necessary to be known, the
Scriptures are as plain as any learned Expositor can make them: which himself
must acknowledge, or else he must say, that God could not, or would not speak
as plainly and intelligibly as any learned Expositor can.

He makes a tragical Exclamation against the use of the Holy Scriptures; but he
bites his own Tongue for it, and very wisely retracts his detracting
Expression: for this is the sense of his Yea rather, if any sense can be made
of it; It was my great folly to speak unadvisedly; my Tongue has uttered
perverse things against the Holy Scriptures, they cannot be too much tossed and
read; nor is it the tossing and reading of them that is productive of
lamentable effects, but only the abuse of them: And this being the sense of
his Yea rather, alas for the reason of that man, that concludes against the use
of the Holy Scriptures, with an Argument taken from the abuse of them. He has
forgotten what he said in his Prologue to the Reflections, there he will not
decry Controversies for the abuse of them; but here he will decry the reading
of the Holy Scriptures for that very cause. I perceive that he would show
himself to be as able an Artist as the Shoemaker is, that can make of the same
Leather a shoe to fit any foot; or as the Tailor is, that can make of the same
Cloth a stockin to fit any leg, either the right or the left: he can make the
abuse of a thing to fit for any purpose. It must depose the reading of the
Scriptures, they must not be read at all, because they are sometimes abused;
but Controversies must ^^and and proceed in their greatest vigor, though they
be subject unto the same fate. Why will he be thus partial in his dealing? why
must the Holy Scriptures receive this hard measure at his hands? I know the
reason of it, he will serve an Enemy with the same measure that is meted by
him; because the Holy Scripture is utterly against his Church and Religion,
therefore he is utterly against the Holy Scripture.

And alas for the Conscience of that man, that, to maintain an erroneous
Opinion, and to bring an Odium upon a Religious Duty, which is the reading of
the Holy Scripture, fears not to speak a notorious Untruth, manifest to the eye
of every Christian that will cast his eye upon it; there is not any girl no^
any man in the world that reads the Holy Scriptures, but he will acknowledge a
difficulty in understanding the Books of Canticles and Apocalypse: and where
are those girls that upon presumption of Wit, or an unknown Spirit, do make
themselves Teachers and Controulers, and Judges of Church, Scriptures,
Teachers, and all? He says, every Girl: I ask where there is any such? if he
cannot (as I am sure he cannot) show any such within the Protestant Communion,
let him acknowledge this to be one of his learned Hyperboles; the frequent use
of which, will beget this great credit for him, not to be believed whenever
he chances to speak truth. If there be any persons that in the least measure do
abuse the Holy Scriptures, they are not indulged by Protestants in this
practice, but sharply reproved for it; and from the abuse of the Scriptures, he
cannot conclude against the use of them: He will betray a very soft place in
his head, if, because Meat is sometime abused to Gluttony, and Drink unto
Drunkenness, he shall therefore conclude that neither Meat nor Drink is to be
used. Let him but observe this practice for a while, to abstain from Meat and
Drink upon this account, and his Body will be as hunger-starved and lean, as he
suffers the Souls of his poor People to be, for want of the use of the Holy
Scriptures.

Alas for the lamentable effects of the injurious detainment of the Holy
Scriptures from the common People! the Apostle Paul tells us, that the Holy
Scriptures are profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for
Instruction in Righteousness: And the Psalmist tells us, that the Law of God is
perfect, converting the Soul, and inlightning the Eyes, and refreshing the
Heart: contrary causes do produce contrary effects. Alas then, that for want of
the Holy Scriptures, the common people should want Conversion, and
Illumination, and Reproof, and Consolation. St. Chrysostom says (Chrysostom. hom. 9.
in Epist. ad Col.) Hoc omnium malorum causa est, quod Scripturae ignorantur:
This is the cause of all Evil, that the Scriptures are not known. And he says
likewise, (Chrysostom. de Laz. Can. 3.) Magna adversus peccatum munitio est
Scripturarum lectio, magnum praecipitium and profundum barathrum Scripturarum
ignoratio; nihil scire de divinis legibus, magna salutis perditio, ea res and
Haereses peperit, and vitam corruptam invexit, hoc sursum deorsum miscuit
omnia: The reading of the Scriptures, is a great fence against sin; and the
ignorance of the Scriptures is a dangerous downfall, and great dungeon; to know
nothing of Gods Laws, is the loss of Salvation: Ignorance has brought in
Heresies, and vicious life; Ignorance has turned all things up-side-down.

Alas, that the common People should pray to Saints and Angels, that they
should not worship God without the use of Pictures and Images, but should
worship him in and by them, and worship Pictures with him; that they should
believe a Purgatory-fire, and be tied to an impossible confession of sin unto a
Priest, and build upon merits, and assumed or imposed Penancies, and purchased
Indulgencies: That they should believe that Christ's Body (which is ascended
into Heaven) is really and properly in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and
should be put off with an half Communion; and should pray after such a manner,
that they know not how they pray, nor what they pray for; that they should know
little or nothing of that Service which they do pretend to perform unto God,
and should acknowledge the Pope to be the Head of the Church; and that they
should give no other reason for their Faith, but because the Priest, or the
Pope, or the Church has taught it them: all this, and much more is the rotten
Fruit, which the want of Scripture does produce: if they had the liberty of
reading the holy Scriptures, they would not believe and practice any of these
things.

I shall use this tragical exclamation once more; alas, that out of a miserable
scarcity of better Arguments, he should be forced to use his deceitful and
irrational inference again, concluding a general from a particular; because
some Books and Texts of Scripture are obscure and hard to be understood, an^
because St. Augustine says in relation to some partic^lar Book or Text of
Scripture, O wonderful profoundness, etc. therefore he says (including the wh^^
Scripture) it being so hard to be understood by the learned* reason should
teach us that they were ^^ indifferently to be read by all, and by sad
experien^ we see the inconveniences.

The sad inconveniences of the want of Scriptu^ are obvious; the
inconveniences of reading the Sc^pture are only imaginary, otherwise this
Gen^man would have instanced some particulars, and t^ us where to find them.
Truly, I know not where to find, nor did I ever hear or read of any Girl, that
by reading of the Scriptures, did make her self a Controuler, and Teacher, and
Judge of Teachers, Church, Scripture, and all. But, to answer his childish
inference:

1. He may as rationally and probably conclude, because some men are rich in
the world, and some Kings, therefore all the men in the world are such; as he
can infer, because some parts and books of Scripture are hard to be understood,
therefore the whole Scripture is so: St. Gregory and Augustine, and Chrysostom
do say, and so say I, and so will every one do that is not sottishly ignorant,
or blinded with prejudice, that as there are some Books and Texts that are hard
to be understood, so there are several Books and Texts that are plain and easy
to every ordinary capacity, and whatsoever is necessary to be known is fully
contained in them.

2. If the difficulty of understanding a particular book or Text of Scripture,
be a reason why the Scriptures are not indifferently to be read by all, it is a
reason to prove that it is not to be read by any; for if none must read the
Scriptures, but such as do understand every particular book and Text, there is
not any learned man in the world that must read them, because there is not any
learned man in the world that does understand every particular book and Text of
Scripture.

3. I shall offer to his consideration an inference that does fully and firmly
conclude the contrary, as himself will acknowledge, unless he be possessed with
a wonderful prejudice against the Truth: as the Books of Canticles and
Apocalypse, and other Texts of Scripture are hard to be understood; so there
are many other books and Texts of Scripture that are plain to any ordinary
capacity: therefore the Scriptures were ordained indifferently to be read by
all* In them (as Pope Gregory says) there are Ebb* waters where the Lamb may
wade, as well as deep waters where the Elephant may swim. In them (as
Fulgentius says) is Milk for Babes to suck, as well as Meat for strong men to
eat. The unlearned will find in them matter of instruction to beget and
increase Knowledge, as well as the learned, matter of scrutiny, to exercise
their Wit and Industry, to find out the meaning of obscure places.

If there be such a dismal number of false Translations, and corruptions of
Scriptures, threatening no less than the ruin both of Church and State, as is
pretended, why does he suffer his Pen to lurk away under this Cloud of
generals? Why has he not told us what and whose they are, and wherein they are
false and corrupt? Had he done this, he might have seemed to have spoken
somewhat like unto Truth; but now this high exp^ession will be taken for one of
his exorbitant Hyperboles, far surpassing the bounds of Modesty and Truth, used
purposely to bring that sacred book into contempt, which above all books is
most serviceable for the benefit of the Church of God; thus tender this
Gentleman is of the Glory of God, and the Welfare of his People.

Does he think that the Governors of the Reformed Churches are not as careful
to provide wholesome Viands for the nourishment of their People, as the
Governors of the Roman Church are cautious that their People be kep^
hunger-starved, without that Provision which is necessary for them? The
Translations that are common in the Church of England, are not many, nor are
they different in any matter of importance; which have been diligently penned,
revised, and approved by as learned Doctors as any the world can afford, who
were employed by Authority; and laying aside all sinister respects, aimed
directly at the Glory of God, and the Good of his Church. And I leave it to any
man of common sense to determine whether is safer for the common People to rely
upon such Translations for instruction in matters of Faith and Manners, or to
rely upon the instructions of the Priest, and the Dictates of the Pope with his
Conclave, declaring for their own private ends, matters to be believed and
practiced contrary to the Scriptures.

His Objection of corrupting, and adulterating, and mistaking the sense of the
Scriptures, is so silly, that a mere Novice that has not yet learned the
Principles of the Romish Religion, would be ashamed to expose it to the public
view: Upon the same ground let not any Romish Priest, nor the Pope and his
Conclave, nor the Representative Church, propound any thing to the common
People: for the sense of their plainest Declarations is as much subject to
corruption, and adulterating, and mistaking, as the sense of the Scripture is.
Pray let him grant that God has a will and power to speak for the instruction
of his People as far out of the compass of this danger, as any Romish Priests,
or Pope, or Council can: and having a will and power to do this, let him not
detract from the goodness and tendemess of God toward his People, and say,
that this has not been done by him.

And I perceive that he harps still upon the same string, though he does make
very harsh Music. What is falsifying and corrupting Translations, and what is
corrupting, and adulterating, and mistaking the sense of the Scripture, but an
abusing of the Scripture? And what a pitiful Argument this is to conclude
against the use of it, has been already demonstrated. What if there were
twenty corrupt and false Translations, would it therefore follow that there is
none true, or that the true Translations are not indifferently to be read by
all? And what though the sense of the Scripture in some places be subject to be
mistaken and adulterated, and that by come ill-disposed persons; does he
certainly know the Capacity of all the common People, that he dare conclude,
that there is none amongst them that can make a good use of the Scripture, and
take it in a right sense? Has God by his special Providence appointed the
penning, and preserved the being of the Scripture for his People, and will his
Providence now fail in providing a true and pure Translation? And has he
promised the guidance of his Holy Spirit to lead his People into all Truth, and
will that Spirit suffer them to pervert the Scriptures to their own
destruction? Let not any one be so wicked as to think that God will not perform
his promise, and make all necessary provision that is fit for his People; and
then let not any one dare to say, that there is danger in reading of the
Scriptures, lest the People of God should fall upon a false and corrupt
Translation, or should mistake the sense of it, and pervert it to their
destruction.

If St. Augustine had seen never so many false Translations, he would not have
concluded as this Gentleman does, but have taken care to furnish the People
committed to his charge with a true Translation, and would have taught them how
to distinguish between the true Coin and the Counterfeit. He quotes St.
Augustine in speaking (as he pretends against the reading of the Scriptures, how
pertinently, shall presently be showed;) but he does not observe how he exhorts
Christians to the reading of the Scripture, not fearing the danger of falling
upon a corrupt Translation: Non solum, says he, ( Aug. in cap. Jeju.) sufficiat
quod in Ecclesia Divinas lectiones auditis, sed diam in domibus vestris aut
ipsi legite, aut alios legentes requirite: Think it not sufficient that ye hear
the Scriptures in the Church; but also in your houses at home either read your
selves, or get some others to read unto you. And he tells us, that there were
many Translations in his days, and testifies their incorruption, by showing the
happy Fruit that sprung from the use of them: Scriptura Divina, says he, ( Aug.
de Doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 5.) ab una Lingua profecta per varias interpretum
linguas, long lateque diffusa innotuit gentibus ad salutem: The Holy
Scriptures passing from one Tongue, and being published abroad far and wide by
sundry Tongues of Interpreters, have come to the knowledge of Nations to their
Salvation. If there were many Translations in his days, and not any of them
corrupted, how comes it to pass that there is such variety of corrupt
Translations in these days, as is affirmed by this Gentleman? Does Gods
Providence fail now in relation to his People? and are all the Rulers of the
Church in a deep sleep, while there is none but this vigilant Gentleman with
his Romish Brethren, awake to discern them?

Augustin's Expression makes nothing for his purpose: for he does not say, that
the reading of the Holy Scriptures is the Spring of Heresies, but the
misunderstanding of them: Nor is this all the original that he speaks of, but
he tells us, that this misunderstanding must be confidently avouched and
maintained; which is a fault more incident unto the Learned than the Unlearned.
There is no rational man will think that an unlearned person wanting abilities,
can or will as confidently avouch and maintain his misunderstandings, as the
learned who conceit themselves to be able to make out any position, though it
be never so much contradictory unto truth. But however, if some ill-disposed
persons (like unto the Spider) should suck Poison by abusing this Rose; yet let
him acknowledge that the well-minded and humble (like unto the industrious Be)
do gather Honey from it. Now it appears plainly to the Reader, that the great
Thunder-crack that he made, crying out alas for the inconveniences of reading
the Scriptures, was nothing but a great blast of Wind without any Bolt to hurt,
or hinder the common people from reading of the Scriptures.

But I perceive that he is resolved to have the good hap to fall upon Truth
sometime: For though Contradictions cannot be both true, yet it is very
unlikely that they should be always both false. He affirms and denies the very
same thing; a little before he told us, that Pope Gregory did not allow of a
Licentious and Popular reading of the Scripture, only he exhorted Theodorus who
was a Scholar: and it is the practice of the Roman Church to exhort those that
are discreet, but to restrain Girls, and enthusiastic Women, and Artificers;
and he gives this reason for it, The difficulty of understanding Scriptures by
those that are learned, is sufficient to convince a rational man, that they
were not indifferently to be read by all. Here he says, that though Pope
Gregory's words do make nothing for a Licentious and Popular reading of the
Scriptures, as it is used now adays, to intermeddle and judge of matters of
Faith; yet they make for this kind of reading, to intermeddle and judge for
instruction of life and manners; and this very allowance is made by the Roman
Church.

It is strange that he should be such a refractory son to his holy Mother the
Church of Rome, as to labor to prove that is not to be done, which (as he
says) she does freely allow: And how can I make these things to hang together?
that the Church of Rome does allow the common people to read the Scriptures for
instruction in life and manners; and yet the Scriptures are not indifferently
to be read by all, because of the variety of corrupt and false Translations,
and the difficulty of understanding them; and because the sense of them is
subject to be corrupted, mistaken and adulterated?

But why must this Licentious and Popular reading of the Scriptures, to
intermeddle and judge for instruction of life and manners be allowed, and not
also for instruction in points of Faith? Is it because the holy Scriptures are
more intelligible, or the Understanding more apprehensive in matters of life
and manners? Or is it because the Church of Rome does not much regard how the
Life and manners of the common people are ordered, she being an excellent
Physician, having a ready Cure for every Distemper that is made known by
auricular Confession? Or is it because she dares not trust God for instruction
in matters of Faith, as well as in matters of Life and Manners? I would enquire
concerning the validity and truth of these Reasons, because some of them are of
a strong influence; but that there is another thing that carries the
pre-eminence above all, that which wrought upon Demetrius the Silver-smith,
causing him to cry out, Sirs, ye know that by this Craft we have our wealth.
Whatsoever the rule be that regulates the life and manners of the people, their
Faith must be pinned upon the Priests or the Popes sleeve; this is the Harvest
that brings in their full sheaves; this is the great supporter of the Roman
Hierarchy; this maintains their pomp, and state, and wealth: the Fire of
Purgatory would be quite extinguished; the price of Indulgences would fall; and
soul-Masses would be at a very low rate; besides, many other new-coyn'd
commodious Articles of Faith would vanish out of the world, if the common
people should be permitted to read the Scriptures to be instructed in points of
Faith.

The meaning of that restriction, which he lays upon the allowance, that (as he
says) is made by the Roman Church, is as dark and doubtful as the predictions
of Astrologers; but I shall use my best endeavors to find it out: The Text
which he has quoted speaks not one word of reading the Scriptures, nor of any
limited measure of knowledge, which is to be attained by reading of them: If he
use these words ( unto sobriety) in the same sense with the Apostle, Romans c.
12. v. 3. they are to be taken in opposition to excess, and then he must say
that the extent of this allowance, which is granted unto the common people for
reading of the Scripture reaches no further, but to the attainment of that
Wisdom, which is bounded with Moderation, that they may not be excessively wise.

But then I must ask first what this wisdom to excess is, for the preventing of
which, the Church of Rome is thus circumspect: I never heard, nor did I ever
read of any person that was made too wise by reading of the Scriptures, nor
will any real Christian believe, that the common people can be made too wise by
the greatest liberty that can be granted ^ used in reading of them. To answer
this questi^ will be a matter of great difficulty, unless he will say* that it
is too much wisdom for the common people to know that they are enjoined the
doing of man^ things which God does not require of them; an^ that there are
many Doctrines imposed upon the^ for articles of Faith, which are not to be
found i^ the Apostles Creed, nor the Nicene Creed, nor Athnasius Creed, nor in
any part of the Holy Scriptures; and so to know that the way in which they are
conducted by their Leaders, is not the beaten Tract that was used by the
Primitive Christians in walking toward Heaven.

Secondly, What are the bounds of Moderation, within the Compass of which it is
the care of the Roman Church to keep the wisdom of the common people? he will
be as hard puzzled to answer this, unless he will say, that it is the greatest
security of the Church of Rome, that is to say, the greatest assurance she can
make for her self, that the common people shall not discern those follies and
errors that are imposed upon them to be believed and practiced; and then we
know what this allowance to be wise to sobriety is. The surest way to keep a
man from Gluttony, is to keep him quite without Meat: And the surest way to
keep a man from Drunkenness, is to keep him quite without Drink. Thus the
surest way to keep the common people from discerning those follies and errors
that are imposed upon them, is to keep them quite without Scripture; this is
the allowance that is granted by the Church of Rome to be wise to sobriety, as
is very evident by that strict prohibition that was made by Clement the 8th,
Biblia vulgari lingua edita legi non possunt, nec retineri; Bibles in the
vulgar Tongue must not be read nor kept: and it is undeniable, that one among a
thousand of the Church of Rome has not the Bible in possession.

I wonder that the following expressions should fall from the Pen of one that
pretends unto Christianity; can the reading of the holy Scriptures bring forth
these deformed issues, Heresy, and Blindness, and Ignorance, and Presumption,
and Science falsely so called, that the Church of Rome should restrain it from
the common people to prevent the production of them? God appointed the penning,
and commanded the reading of the holy Scriptures; Can he be the Author of sin?
and if the reading of the holy Scriptures does produce these monstrous births,
I would know what writings are to be read by the common people for the
preventing of them; is it the Writings of a sinful man? Is the writing of a
Priest, or a Pope, or a Council, more virtual and powerful than the writing of
the Holy Spirit, that the reading of that will open the eyes of the common
people, and make them really cautious, and wise, and Orthodox, while the
reading of the Scriptures will produce the contrary effects? unto what height
of wickedness is this Gentleman transported, to act contrary to the common
notions of Christianity?

How much Atheistical he declares himself to be, by reproaching the Word of the
ever-living God, I shall not determine; but I will be bold to say, that the
Christianity practiced by him is not conformable to the pattern of Trent; he
will not reproach and condemn Traditions after this manner, and say, that the
knowledge of them is to be withheld from the common people for the preventing
of Heresy, and Blindness, and Ignorance, and Presumption, and Science falsely
so called; and that the holy Scriptures should receive as great respect from
him, was decreed by the Council of Trent, denouncing an Anathema against such
as do not receive them both pari pietatis affectu, with an affection equally
pious.

The reading of the holy Scriptures does not produce any of these things, but
the contrary effects; Timothy (2 Epist. ad Tim. c. 3. v. 15, 16, 17.) Knew the
Scriptures from a Child, yet was neither heretical, nor blind, nor ignorant,
nor falsely wise; nay, the Apostle told him, that they were able to make him
wise unto salvation; and that they are profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof,
for Correction, for Instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work. And Cyril says, ( Cyr. cont.
Jul. l. 7. p. 162.) Etiam pueri in sacris litteris enutriti, statim fiunt
religiosissime, etiamsi minus eloquentes; even our Youth being brought up in
the holy Scriptures, straightway become most godly, although not so eloquent.
And Chrysostom affirms, Manichaei and omnes haeretici decipiunt simplices, sed
si babuerimus sensus animi exercitatos ad discretionem bo^i and mali, poterimus
hujusmodi discernere: quomodo autem fiunt sensus nostri exercitati? ex usu
Scripturarum, and frequenti auditione: the Maniches and all Heretics deceive
the simple; but if we had the senses of our minds exercised to discern good and
evil, we may be able to discern them; but how may our senses become exercised?
by the use of the Scriptures, and often hearing. Theophylact speaks to the same
purpose, (Theoph. de Laz.) Illis (says he) qui scrutantur Scripturas divinas
nihil potest illudere, illae enim sunt lucernae, qua fur deprehenditur; nothing
can deceive them who search the holy Scriptures; for they are the Candle
whereby the Thief is discovered.

But how can the reading of the holy Scriptures be both allowed and restrained?
this is like unto his teaching of the common people how to fast and to eat both
at the same time; though they eat Fish, he will tell them that they fast from
Flesh; but this is but a mock-fast: and so though the reading of the holy
Scriptures be restrained for the preventing of Heresy, and Blindness, and
Ignorance, and Presumption, and Science falsely so called, yet it is allowed to
be wise to sobriety; but this is but a mock-allowance, these things being
inconsistent. If the reading of the holy Scriptures be restrained for the
preventing of those destructive inconveniences, it cannot be allowed to be wise
to sobriety; and are not these things Identities? Is not avoiding of Heresy,
and Blindness, and Ignorance, and Presumption, and Science falsely so called,
the same thing with being wise to sobriety, taken in his own sense whatsoever
it be? and if so; how can the reading of the Scripture be allowed and
restrained for one and the same end?

I suppose he will now say that I have set his Expressions upon the Rack, and
tortured them to make them speak quite contrary to his meaning; but I appeal
unto any indifferent Judge to weigh his Expressions, and if he do not say that
I have charged nothing upon him but what is plainly expressed, or necessarily
deduced from his words, I will acknowledge my self to be so impotent in my own
defense, that I do not understand common English. When he has more grace, he
will have more wit, and then he will be so cautious as to hinder his Pen from
dropping such nonsencical, contradictory, blasphemous, and atheistical stuff as
there is to be found in his Expressions.

Concerning the Real Presence.
WOuld he forbear the use of this Term Catholic, until he had proved the
present Roman Church to be the Catholic Church, and the Tenants wherein she
differs from the Protestants, to be Catholic Doctrine; his Pen would never
speak this Language. The Reader is to take notice, that wheresoever he uses
this Title, as pertinent to his Church or Religion, it is to be taken
abusively: and verily I must say, That in teaching his Premises to bring forth
Conclusions, his Faculty is admirable. First, Pope Gregory speaks of a
Sacrifice: Secondly, of an Imitative Sacrifice: Ergo, He holds the Real
Presence, That the Body of Christ is really, properly, and externally
sacrificed in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. Lo, these are his Demonstrations.

Now some inquisitive Logician, that shall examine his Logic, will be ready to
ask him, how he knew the Mind of Pope Gregory, that he durst conclude thus a
genere ad speciem, and a signo ad signatum; that because Pope Gregory speaks of
a Sacrifice, and of an Imitative Sacrifice, therefore he meant a particular,
proper, and external Sacrifice? As if he should say, Pope Gregory speaks of an
Animal, therefore he speaks of an Horse; as if there were no other Animals in
the World but Horses: and as if he should say, Pope Gregory speaks of the
Ambassador, therefore he speaks of the King; as if there were no Personal
difference between the Ambassador and the King.

But Protestants do deny all proper, real and external Sacrifice; thus he
proves the Consequence: But thus (as Tinkers use to do) in stead of mending one
Hole, he makes two. Verily he was to blame with himself, to toil in searching
into Pope Gregory's Writings, to know whether his Opinion in the Controverted
Particulars be the same that is maintained by the present Roman Church, and to
prove it to be contradictory to the Opinion of the Protestants. Here, at a
pinch, his Ingenuity has found out an Inference that will speedily do the
whole Work, without any further trouble: What Protestants do deny, Pope Gregory
does affirm; therefore he maintained the Doctrine of the present Roman Church,
and contradicted the Doctrine of the Protestants. But besides the disability
that is in the Antecedent, for the proof of the Consequence; it is no more true
than Chawcer's Winter-Tales, that are mere Fictions. Protestants do acknowledge
That One true, proper, and real Sacrifice of the Son of God, once offered upon
the Cross, for the Redemption of Sinners, which is remembered and represented in
the Sacrament of the Lords Sup-Supper; and besides, they do acknowledge the
infinite Value and Efficacy of that Sacrifice, which the Romanists do deny, by
maintaining the Necessity of a frequent Repetition of it.

As there was a proper and external Sacrifice, so there is a spiritual
Sacrifice, and a figurative and mystical Sacrifice; and it is plain to him that
will open his Eyes to see, that Pope Gregory speaks of a figurative and
mystical Sacrifice: he tells us, That it is a Sacrifice by imitation; and that
which is a Sacrifice by imitation, cannot be a proper Sacrifice; as he that
imitates the King of France, cannot therefore be said to be really the King of
France. It was a Practice used sometime in England, by Boys in their Sports, to
imitate Priests in singing of Masses; I suppose he will not therefore conclude,
that they were true and proper Priests. Besides, Pope Gregory terms the
Sacrifice which he speaks of, a Mystical Oblation, and says, That it renews the
Death of the Son of God per mysterium, by a Mystery; and in the same sense that
his Blood is poured into the Mouths of the Faithful, and his Flesh divided to
the Health of his People, must this Sacrifice be taken. Now Pope Gregory could
not hold, nor can this Gentleman say, That his Blood is properly and really
poured into the Mouths of the Faithful, and that his Flesh is really and
properly divided to the Health of his People, but only in a mystical sense.

He tells me a Tale, That the Sacrifice of the Lords Supper is a
Representative, unbloody, particular Sacrifice, applying the general and bloody
Sacrifice; which agrees with some of his former Expressions as Light and
Darkness do together, and hangs in its self as coherently as a Rope of Sand.
This Sacrifice which he speaks of, must be really the same that was offered
upon the Cross, or really another. He cannot say that it was really another,
because he cannot say that it is another Christ that is sacrificed, and another
Body of Christ that is offered; for Christ has not several distinct Bodies:
Wherefore he must say, that it is the same Sacrifice: And it exceeds my
Understanding to apprehend, how the same Sacrifice can be bloody and unbloody,
particular and general, a representation and the thing represented, the thing
applying and applied, the imitation and the thing imitated. When he writes
again, he will proclaim his Wisdom wonderfully to the World, if he shall unfold
these Riddles, and reconcile these Contradictions: And the Sacrifice which he
speaks of being invisible, (for, What Priest is there among the Romanists that
can see the Body of Christ in the Sacrament?) it will be a further promulgation
of his Wisdom, to tell how that Sacrifice which is invisible, can be a
Representation of that which was visible.

It is a double Injury to the Memory of Pope Gregory, to interpret his Words in
that sense, which charge him with these gross Absurdities and Contradictions,
and makes him to maintain an Opinion that is first contradictory to the clear
evidence of Scripture; the Scripture tells us plainly, That it was not a
Sacrifice to be offered up unto God, but a Sacrament given unto the Disciples,
which our Savior did institute: Take, (says he) eat and drink, and do this in
remembrance of me. In all the Passages and Circumstances of the Institution,
there is not the least mention made of any Oblation; and the very Words of
Institution are as contrary to the Corporeal real Presence, as Light is unto
Darkness: This is my Body (says our Savior): The Demonstrative This must be
referred unto something that was present, and had a Being; for a Non ens cannot
be demonstrated: and something that was visible, otherwise the Disciples could
not have understood our Saviors meaning; and that which is invisible cannot be
demostrated to the Eyes: But this thing could not be the Body of Christ
contained under the species of Bread, for That (according to the Opinion of the
Romanists) is not in the Sacrament until the last Syllable of the Words of
Institution be pronounced; and it is visible to the Eye that it is not to be
seen there: It was Bread that was present, and Bread that was visible;
therefore the Demonstrative This must be referred unto That. This is cleared,
beyond all contradiction, by the foregoing Words, As they were eating, Jesus
took Bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the Disciples, and
said, Take, eat, this is my Body, Matthew. cap. 26. v. 26. What can be plainer?
It was real Bread which our Savior took, and that he blessed, and that he
brake, and that he gave unto his Disciples; and of that he said, Take, eat,
this is my Body.

The other Part of the Institution is as clear, This (says our Savior) is my
Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many, for the remission of Sins.
What does the Demonstrative This relate unto here? It must be that which was
contained in the Cup, the continent being put for the thing contained, of which
mention was made before; And he took the Cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to
them, saying, Drink ye all of it, Matthew. cap. 26. ver. 27. which, by the
confession of the Romanists, must be Wine; for, as I said before, according to
their own Tenets, until the last Syllable of the Words of Institution be
uttered, the Blood of Christ is not in the Sacrament; and it is evident, that
our Savior bad his Disciples drink of it, before he uttered those Words:
Besides, after the Words of Institution, in the following Verse, he tells them
expressly, that it was the Fruit of the Vine; I will not drink henceforth (says
he) of the Fruit of the Vine, until that day when I drink it new in my Fathers
Kingdom, Matthew. cap. 26. ver. 29.

Dare any of the Romanists affirm, That our Savior falsified his own Words? He
said that he would go away, John cap. 16. ver. 5. and leave the World, ver. 28.
and be no more in the World, cap. 17. ver. 11. which connot be understood of
his Deity, for that is Omnipresent; nor of his spiritual Presence, for that was
promised to his Disciples, and is with his People, and in his Ordinances:
Wherefore it is to be understood of his Humanity. Nor must it be understood of
an imaginary, but of a real departure. Will the Romanists affirm, That though
he said these things, yet he would not go away, nor leave the World, but be in
it Corporally, under the species of Bread and Wine? And will they contradict
the Voice and Testimony of Angels? Ye men of Galilee, (say they) why stand ye
gazing up into Heaven? This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into Heaven,
shall so come in like manner as you have seen him go into Heaven, Act. Apost.
c. 1. v. 11. which must be understood likewise of his Humanity. And how could
he be taken from them, if he was still with them Corporally in the Sacrament?
And how could he be said to come again, if he was not taken from them? And how
can it be said that he comes again invisibly, and ingloriously, under the
species of Bread and Wine; while the Angels said, That when he came again, it
should be after the same manner in which he went away, that is, visibly and
gloriously.

Doubtless the Apostle Paul knew the meaning of the Words of Institution; and
had he known that the Romish Sense was to be imposed on them, being that he was
so earnestly desirous (as he expressed, 1 Epist. ad Cor. cap. 2. ver. 2.) to
instruct the Corinthians in the knowledge of those Mysteries that related unto
Christ, he would not have concealed it from them; but while he treated of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, would have told them plainly, that in the use of
it they were not to believe their own Senses, though they did feel, and see,
and taste Bread and Wine, yet they were to know that it was not Bread and Wine,
but the real and proper Body and Blood of Christ: But he declares no such
thing, telling them with several Repetitions, that it was Bread, and it was the
Cup, that is, Wine in the Cup after Consecration; and applying several Actions
to those Elements, which could not be used to the Body and Blood of Christ, as
breaking, and eating, and drinking, 1 Epist. ad Cor. cap. 11. ver. 26, 27, 28.
Besides, he tells them, That the Cup of Blessing which we bless, is the
Communion of the Blood of Christ; and the Bread which we break, is the
Communion of the Body of Christ, 1 Epist. ad Cor cap. 10. ver. 16. These Words
must be taken as an Exposition of the Words of Institution; otherwise speaking
of the same thing which Christ did speak of, how could he express it better,
than by conforming his Words to the Pattern of Christ, and saying, That the Cup
which we bless is the Blood of Christ, and the Bread which we break is the Body
of Christ? But in stead of this, he says, That the Cup and the Bread is a
Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ; whence it must be concluded, That
the Substance of Bread and Wine remains after Consecration, and Christ is not
Corporally in the Sacrament: For, a Communion cannot be the same thing with
that of which it is a Communion; nor does this Communion of which the Apostle
speaks, require the Corporal Presence of Christ, any more than that Communion
which the Israelites received while they were journeying toward the Land of
Canaan, and by which they did partake of the Body and Blood of Christ, as well
as Christians do by theirs: The Apostle says, That they did all eat the same
spiritual Meat, and did all drink the same spiritual Drink; for they drank of
that spiritual Rock which followed them, and that Rock was Christ, 1 Epist. ad
Cor. cap. 10. ver. 3. and 4. And we are assured, that to be saved, there was
not one way for them, another for Christians; but as Christians are saved by
Christ that did come, and has suffered in the World; so they were saved by
Christ that was to come, and to suffer in the World. And this is as true, That
their Communion could not require the Corporal Presence of Christ, it being
celebrated many Centuries before Christ came into the World.

That Text which is frequently quoted by the Romanists in favor of their
Opinion, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, you
have no Life in you, John cap. 6. ver. 53. makes a great sound in the ears of
the Common People; but while it is interpreted to that purpose, how shamefully
it is perverted, contrary to our Savior's meaning, is evident to every one
that will open his Eyes to see. First, It cannot have any reference to a
Corporal eating and drinking of the Body and Blood of Christ to be made in the
Sacrament, because the Words were spoken at least a year before the Sacrament
was Instituted, which is acknowledged by several of the Romish Doctors.
Besides, the Eating and Drinking which our Savior speaks of, is sure to
produce the Fruit of Eternal Life: Whosoever (says he) eats my Flesh, and
drinks my Blood, has Eternal Life, ver. 54. which cannot be verified of a
Sacramental Eating and Drinking. Judas (according to the Opinion of St.
Augustine) had the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood administered unto him;
and the Romanists themselves must acknowledge, that wicked Persons do receive
that which (they say) is the real and proper Body and Blood of Christ; unless
they will affirm (which cannot be affirmed with any color of Truth) That no
such Persons are to be found in their Society.

Secondly, It is a Spiritual Eating and Drinking that is spoken of in that
Text, as appears plainly by several Contexts. The Disciples being offended with
our Savior's Expression, to heal that Sore, and take away the Offense, he
tells them how it was to be understood, What and if (says he) ye shall see the
Son of Man ascend up where he was before? It is the Spirit that quickneth, the
Flesh profits nothing: The Words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit, and
they are Life, ver. 62. and 63. Which is as if he had said, You must not think
that I speak of a Corporal eating and drinking of my real Body and Blood; for
this cannot be done: I must leave the World, you shall see me ascend with my
Body into Heaven: It is a Spiritual eating and drinking which I do speak of,
for it is that only which is profitable, a Corporal eating and drinking does
not profit. This is further cleared by that which is expressed before, He that
eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, (says our Savior) dwells in me, and
I in him, ver. 56. What kind of In-dwelling is this which he speaks of? It
cannot be Corporal; for it cannot be said that Christ dwells Bodily in a
Christian, or a Christian Bodily in him: Wherefore it must be Spiritual; and
then this eating of the Flesh, and drinking of the Blood of Christ, must be
also Spiritual. St. Augustine affirms them both to be one thing, making the
latter to be an Exposition of the former: Hoc est (says he) manducare illam
escam, and illum potum bibere, in Christo manner, and illum manentem in se
habere; This is the eating of that Meat, and the drinking of that Drink, for a
Man to dwell in Christ, and to have Christ dwelling in him: Agust. in Johan.
Tract. 26. Besides, there is this undeniable Reason expressed in the Text; the
Eating and Drinking which is spoken of, is absolutely necessary for the
obtaining of Eternal Life; Except (says our Savior) you eat the Flesh of the
Son of Man, and drink his Blood, you have no Life in you: Which cannot be said
of a Corporal eating and drinking, without the uncharitable guilt of excluding
all Infants and Children, who dying in their Minority, and all others who
through any invincible necessity do not receive the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, from a possibility of obtaining Eternal Life.

Thirdly, This Spiritual eating and drinking of the Body and Blood of Christ,
is a believing in Christ: This is likewise evident by several Contexts. Our
Savior injoyns the People to whom he preached, to labor, nor for the Meat
that perishes, but for the Meat that endures unto Life everlasting, ver. 27.
Upon which, in the following Verse, they propound this Question, What shall we
do that we might work the Works of God? Which is as if they had said, (and this
must be the meaning of the Words, taking them in a right Coherence with the
former) What must we do to gain the Meat that endures unto Life Everlasting,
for that is to work the Works of God: To which our Savior returns this Answer,
This is the Work of God, that you believe on him whom he has sent. ver. 29.
Christ's Flesh and Blood is the Meat and Drink that endures unto Life
everlasting; and it is plain, that to believe in him, is to work for it, to
gain it, to eat and drink it. This is further evidenced by what follows; And
Jesus said unto them, I am the Bread of Life; he that comes to me shall never
hunger, and he that believes in me shall never thirst, ver. 35. What can be
more plain than this? He tells us that this Bread is his Flesh, that he would
give for the Life of the World; and it is evident, that to come to him, is to
believe in him; and to believe in him, is to eat that Bread: therefore it is,
that he that believes in him, shall never hunger; and so to believe in him, is
to drink his Blood; therefore it is that he that believes in him, shall never
thirst. Certainly the Romanists will grant, that it is Eating and Drinking that
does satiate the Stomach, to the preventing of hungring and thirsting.

While our Savior does attribute the gaining of Eternal Life to Eating and
Drinking, and the very same effect to Believing, as is abundantly testified in
the Holy Scripture, John c. 6. ver. 47. and cap. 3. ver. 15, 16. and cap. 5.
ver. 24. and while there are such great and saving Effects ascribed unto Faith,
as that by it we are regenerated, by it we are justified, by it we are the
Children of God, by it we overcome our Spiritual Enemies; and all this, because
Faith is the Hand that lays hold on Christ, who works all our Works in us and
for us, and from whose fullness we receive all that is necessary unto Eternal
Salvation; who can be so senseless as to think, that this Eating and Drinking
of Flesh and Blood, which our Savior speaks of, can be any other thing, but an
unfeigned believing in him? I ask the Romanists, Whether the Fathers that lived
and died before the Nativity of Christ, did eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood,
in that sense of which he speaks? If they did not, how could they be saved, it
being absolutely necessary for obtaining Eternal Life? If they did, how could
they do it otherwise than by Faith? And that they did it by Faith, is confirmed
by our Saviors Expression, telling the Jews, That their Father Abraham
rejoiced to see his day, and he saw it, and was glad, John cap. 8. ver. 56.
That day must be the day of his Nativity, and living and suffering in the
Flesh: And how did Abraham see this day? Surely it was by Faith, after which
manner he did eat the Flesh and drink the Blood of the Son of Man; for it is
without doubt that Abraham was saved by him.

Besides all this, which (I hope) the intelligent and impartial Reader will
judge to be abundantly sufficient to prove the repugnancy of the Romish
Interpretation to our Saviors meaning, I shall add, for the consideration of
the Romanists, how sutably their Interpretation works for them, displaying
their Religion in fit and proper Colors to the view of the World. The Doctrine
of the Romish Church is this, That it is not requisite and necessary for the
Laiety to partake of the Cup; according to which the Practice of the Roman
Leaders is conformed, they denying to administer the Cup unto the Laiety: And
our Saviors Assertion being positive, declaring both the eating of his Body,
and the drinking of his Blood, to be equally and absolutely necessary for
obtaining Eternal Life; if by it we must understand a Corporal Eating and
Drinking of his real and proper Body and Blood, then that Doctrine is damnably
sacrilegious, and that practice diabolically cruel. How dare the Romanists
detain from the Common People that which is absolutely necessary for them? and
why will they send poor Souls in numberless numbers posting to Damnation, by
withholding it from them? The Concomitancy of the Blood with the Body cannot
acquit them from this Guilt; for daily Experience does inform us, that Eating
is not Drinking: therefore the eating of the Body, cannot be the drinking of
the Blood of Christ.

Secondly, This Opinion, which the Reflector endeavors to fasten upon Pope
Gregory, is contradictory to the Judgment of the Ancient Fathers. Some (I
confess) have given out high Expessions concerning the Sacrament; but it was
only for this end, to beget in the minds of Christians a reverent Apprehension
and Esteem of it, and this to work upon them to entertain a greater Devotion in
receiving it; but that they did not maintain this absurd Opinion, is evident
out of their Writings. Tertullian expounds those Words of Christ, Hoc est
corpus meum, This is my Body, after this manner; Hoc est figura corporis mei,
This is a Figure of my Body, Tert. cont. Marc. lib. 4. cap. 40. Ambrose
speaking of the Sacrament of Christ's Body, uses these Terms, A Figure, a
Similitude, a Sign, a Token of Christ's Body, Amb. de Sacr. lib. 4. cap. 4, and
5. St. Augustine says, Christus adhibuit ad convivium Judas in quo corporis sui
figuram Discipulis suis commendavit, Christ took Judas unto his Table, whereat
he gave his Disciples a Figure of his Body, August. in Psalm. 3. and cont. Adia.
cap. 12. So St. Chrysostom speaks, Si mortuus non est, cujus symbolum ac signum
est hoc Sacramentum? If Christ died not, whose Sign and whose Token is this
Sacrament? Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 83. And thus St. Jerome speaks, In typo
sanguinis sui non obtulit aquam sed vinum, In token of his Blood, he offered
not Water, but Wine, Jerome. adv. Jov. lib. 2.

Thirdly, It is an Opinion that is contrary to Reason, first, That Christ
should be really and properly sacrificed again in the Sacrament, to represent
the Sacrifice of himself upon the Cross: For, first, that Sacrifice once
offered (as the Apostle speaks) was either perfect, or imperfect. To say that
it was imperfect, is Blasphemy; and to say that it was perfect, is to affirm
that it cannot be iterated; contrariorum est contraria ratio and consequentia;
If the Imperfection of the Legal Sacrifices was a reason why they were to be
repeated, as the Apostle to the Hebrews does abundantly testify, Epist. ad
Heb. cap. 7. and cap. 10. certainly the Perfection of the Sacrifice of Christ
upon the Cross, must be a reason why it cannot be repeated.

Secondly, The Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross was not only perfect in its
self, but it also makes the comers thereunto perfect: So the Apostle Paul
affirms, By one Sacrifice (says he) he perfected for ever them that are
sanctified, Heb. 10. 14. And can any thing be added to Perfection? Is there any
need that Christ should be again sacrificed, while that one Sacrifice of
himself upon the Cross does all that is necessary to be done? Surely Christ
will not have the Priest to do that which in every respect is altogether
needless.

Thirdly, If Christ be really and properly sacrificed again in the Sacrament,
to represent the Sacrifice upon the Cross, he must be sacrificed either as he
was in this World subject to Misery and Mortality, or as he is now in Heaven
living and glorious: But the first cannot be, because Bodies that are glorified
in Heaven cannot be subject to Misery and Mortality any more; nor can the
second be, because a living and a glorious Body cannot represent, with any fit
resemblance or likeness, that Body which suffered, shed its Blood, and died;
and to represent being to expose to the view some signification or sign of the
thing represented, the living and glorious Body of Christ cannot be there to
represent, where there is no such representing Body to be seen.

Fourthly, That a Sacrifice may be real and proper, the thing sacrificed must
be destroyed, and besides it must be visible; this is acknowledged by their
great Champion Bellarmin, (Bellarm, de Miss. l. 1. c. 2. and 27.) but we are
assured that Christ cannot be destroyed, he can dye no more, and that which the
Romanists do say, is offered, is not to be perceived by any of the senses.

Secondly, It is contrary to Reason, that Christ's Body and Blood should be
really and properly in the Sacrament; first because this is contrary to the end
of the Sacrament, which was to be a Remembrance of Christ, and to show the
Lords Death until he come, do this (says our Savior) in remembrance of me, and
as often (says the Apostle Paul) as you eat this Bread and drink this Cup, you
do show the Lords Death till he come. The use of Memorials is only needful in
Relation to Persons that are absent, need I any thing to put me in mind of my
Friend, while I see him with mine Eyes, or know him to be close by my side? and
need I any thing to show the Lords Death till he come, if he be not gone, but
is present under the species of Bread and Wine to show his own Death.

Secondly, It is contrary to the constitutive parts of a Sacrament, which are a
Signum and ^ignatum, a sign and the thing signified; If the Body of Christ and
his Blood be really and properly in the Sacrament, I ask what is the visible
sign? It cannot be the accidents belonging to Bread and Wine, these (according
to the Opinion of the Romanists) must be left to hang in the air without a
Subject, and indeed our Savior did not say, this whiteness, or roundness, or
redness, or any other accident is my Body and Blood, nor could the Body and
Blood of Christ, which (they say) is shadowed under the accidents, be said to
be the visible sign, because it i^ invisible; but should the Romanists
(contrary to sense) say this, it would confound the sign and the thing
signified, making them one and the same thing, for Christ has not two several
different Bodies.

Thirdly, It charge Christ) who knew better how to speak than the Pope
himself, though he be pretended to be infallible, and the visible Head of the
Church) with a gross Solecism, and Tautology; for if Christ's Body and Blood was
really and properly in the Sacrament, the meaning of the Words of Institution
must be this; This my Body is my Body, and this my Blood is my Blood.

Fourthly, It is productive of many strange Conclusions, that Christ should
take his own Body in his Hand, and eat it, and give it to his Disciples, and
they should swallow it, while he wa^ sitting visibly with them at the table;
the Christ's Body which is now glorified in Heaven, should be in all the
Kingdoms of the Earth where the Sacrament is administered; that it should be in
the Hand of one, and in the Mouth of another, and in the Belly of another, and
carri^ upon the Shoulders of men in Procession, ^^ Myriads of Persons should
every one recei^ the whole Body of Christ, and yet still be ^^ one individual
Body; that Christ should have* Body fitly proportioned with Parts, and endo^ed
with Properties, and the same Body to ^ without Parts and Properties; which is
as mu^ as to say, that Christ has a Body and no Bod^ for there cannot be a
Body without these ^^ Parts and Properties, that do belong unto it; that Christ
should have an humanity that is finite, and the same Humanity to be in a
numberless number of places at the same time (and if in many places why not
every where?) which is as much as to say, that Christ has an Humanity, and no
Humanity, for Omnipresency, or to be in many places at the same time, is an
incommunicable Attribute peculiar only unto the Deity, and cannot be
transferred to any created Nature; besides, what a blasphemous sound does ^
make in Christians Ears, to say that the Body of Christ may be devoured by Mice
and Rats, may be thrown into the Fire, may be mingled with poison to the
destruction of the Receiver? ^ll which (as experience has proved) has befalln
the consecrated Host: These things are above the power of Wonder, and the reach
of credibility, and all these, with many more; are the deformed Issues that are
naturally derived from that monstrous* Opinion of the corporeal, real Presence.

To plead the Omnipotency of God, will not set a gloss upon it, to pass it
under any show of probability, and to excuse the absurdities that are
consequential unto it; we adore the power of God more than the Romanists do,
while we apply our selves unto him, and not (as they do) to the intercessory
help of Angels and Saints; and we do acknowledge with Theodoret, that Deus
potest quaecunque vult, God can do what he pleases; but his Will and his Power
having determined the nature of things, and appointed what essential Parts and
Properties they must have to constitute them in a Being, without those
essential Parts and Properties they cannot be, for his Will is immutable, and
the effect of his Power must be established; God cannot worl^ against himself,
he cannot deny himself, nor lie nor repent; God has appointed man to be a
rational Creature, consisting of Soul and Body; will the Romanists say, that
man can be without that specific difference, and those constitutive parts; in
like manner he has determined the nature of Bodies, and they cannot be without
those Parts and Properties that by his appointment are necessary for their
existence; a Body cannot be without a place, or space and circumscription, a
Body cannot be without longitude and latitude, profundity; St. Augustine says, (
Aug-Ep. 57.) Spatia locorum Corporibus toll, nusquam erunt, and quia nusquam
erunt, nec erunt; Take from Bodies their places, and they will be no where, and
because they will be no where they will not be. And an humane Body cannot be
without Head and Feet, and Legs and Arms, and Flesh and Bone^. I would know of
the Romanists whether the Angels reasoned solidly, when they made use of this
inference to prove the certainty of Christ's Resurrection, saying, He is not
here, he is rises, come see the place where the Lord lay. If so, then a Body
cannot be in many places at the same time: And I would know likewise whether o^
Saviors Argument was concluding, when he reasoned from the Nature of his Body
after h^ Resurrection, to prove that he was not a Spirit, saying, Behold my
Hands and my Feet, that it ^ I my self, handle me and see, for a Spirit h^ not
Flesh and Bones as you see me have. If so, then his Body cannot be where there
is no Hands, no Feet, no Flesh, no Bones to be handled and felt

Had not carnal ends and advantages been the ^idwife, certainly the Roman
Church had not ^ravelled to bring forth this opinion, but (as it ^alls out
sometime with the fruit of unchaste embraces) it would have been smothered in
the Womb, and not permitted to see the light: what will not worldly men do to
gain their desired ends, upon this ground Gods commands will be violated, and
his Worship slighted, truth will be contradicted, and errors maintained, and
the Worship of Diana, and of the Image that fell down from Jupiter will be
cried up; this puts activity into the Tongues, and Pens of the Romanists to
plead in defense of this monstrous opinion, for the return which it makes,
comes in richly laden; by this means the sacrificing Priest is advanced to the
highest pitch in the esteem of the common People, how powerful is he deemed to
be, while he is conceited to be able by the rehearsal of a few words to make
the substance of Bread and Wine to vanish away; and the real and proper body
and Blood of Christ to be present, and that he can offer this fruit of his lips
as a propitiatory sacrifice, prevalent to take away the sins both of the living
and the dead; this advances the trade of Soul Masses, and upon this ground what
less respect can be paid unto him, then the Worship of genuflection, and to
implore his favor for a benediction, saying holy Father bless us thy Children?
This made Father Cotton to say, that while he carried his God in his hand, and
had his Prince upon his knee in confession, he could do any thing. But the
Romanists should fear to imitate the example of the Scribes and Pharisees, who
for Corban dispensed with the breach of the commands of God, and for a pretense
made long Prayers, lest they should share in those woes which were denounced by
our Savior against the Scribes and Pharisees; surely there is a woe to be
inflicted upon them that draw out the points and practices of religion,
according to the line of carnal ends and advantages.

Having proved the disagreement of the opinion of Pope Gregory to that of the
present Roman Church, concerning the corporeal Presence, I come now to refute
those argument^ that are produced by the reflector to prove the contrary; what
though Beacon do say that the Mass was fully finished by Pope Gregory; this
makes not one fillable on his side, he speaks not of the Mass as it is now
compounded, for as such it cannot be affirmed with any color of truth, that
the Mass was fully finished by Pope Gregory; it is very well known that several
successive Popes have added many ingredients as necessary to the constitution
of the present Romish Mass, and the late Council of Trent has coined several
new Articles of faith relating thereunto, which were not used or known in Pope
Gregory's time, and particularly (if he will believe his own Dr. Tonstall, the
articles of transubstantiation was not determined until the Council of Lateran,
which was many centuries after Pope Gregory; Erasmus (whom he will believe, as
I suppose) says, in Synaxi transubstantiationem sero definivit ecclesia, in the
holy Ministration it was long and very late ere the Church determined the
article of Transubstantiation.

And what though Melancthon does confess that Pope Gregory allowed by public
Authority the Sacrifice of Christ's Body, and Blood, not only for the living,
but also for the dead, this brings no advantage to his cause, for he does not
say, that sacrifice which Pope Gregory allowed, was in Pope Gregory's opinion a
real and proper Sacrifice, neither Melancthon nor any other Person could
rationally conclude from Gregory's expressions that he maintained any such
opinion, but directly the contrary; he terms the Sacrifice of the Lords Supper
(as I have declared already) a mystical and representative Sacrifice, and tells
us, that though Christ dies no more, death has no more dominion over him, yet
ever living in himself, he is again sacrificed for us in this mystery of the
holy oblation; for there his Body is taken, his flesh divided, his blood poured
out into the mouths of the faithful. Besides he says ( Greg. m. 6. poen. Psalm.)
Quis exponere queat quantae fuit miserationis sacratissima pretiosi sanguinis
effusione genus humanum redimere, and sacrosanctam vivifici corporis and
sanguinis sui mysterium membris suis tribuere, cujus perceptione corpus suum
quod est ecclesia pascitur and potatur? How great mercy was it to redeem
Mankind by the most holy effusion of his precious blood, and to give the holy
mystery of his living body and blood to his Members, by the receiving of which,
his body, that is the Church, is fed and refreshed; and farther he says ( Greg.
comment 2. hom. 37. in evang. circa med.) Christus qui a se resurgens a
mortuis, jam non moritur, adhuc per hanc in suo mysterio pro nobis iterum
patitur. Christ who rising from the dead by himself, now dies no more, yet by
this he suffers again for us in his mystery. Now if the Sacrament be a mystical
Sacrifice, and a mystery of his living body and blood, and that partition of
the flesh of Christ, which he speaks of, and the pouring out of his blood, and
that feeding and drinking and suffering is not to be taken in a litteral and
proper sense, as every man will affirm that looks upon his words; then the
Sacrifice of Christ, which he speaks of, cannot be a real and proper Sacrifice,
wherefore the meaning of Melancthons expression must be only this; The
Sacrament of the Lords Supper being a mystical Sacrifice, Pope Gregory did
allow of the use of it, that in it thanksgiving might be offered up unto God,
for the benefits that flow from Christ's death to the living and to the dead, to
the Saints in Heaven, and to the Servants of God upon Earth; this is made more
evident out of that prayer which Pope Gregory used at the time of consecration,
( Greg. de Sacr. in Miss.) in it he terms the Sacrament a Sacrifice of praise,
and says that it is offered for the whole Church, for all the Servants and
Handmaids of God, and farther I will tell the reflector, that I do interpret
Pope Gregory's words, as his own Schoolmen, Peter, Lombard, and Thomas Aquinas
do interpret the Sacrifice that is offered up in the Sacrament; they do
acknowledge that it was not a propitiatory Sacrifice for the living, and for
dead that was offered, but only a commemorative and eucharistical Sacrifice. (
Pet. Lom. sent. l. 4. did. 12. Aqui. 3. part, q. 83. Art. 1.)

As to his Allegation out of Doctor Humph^y, it is a most notorious Untruth, to
charge this acknowledgment upon him, which (in propriety of Speech) could not
be made by any rational man, that knew any thing of Pope Gregory, or of
Augustine's mission into England; Pope Gregory was never in England, therefore
it is certain that he did not bring the Archbishops Pall into England; nor did
Augustine bring it with him when he arrived, for it, with other Utensils, was
sent unto him by Pope Gregory, after he had been several years there, so that
the privilege of wearing the Archbishops Pall was not granted unto him, until
he had made some Progress in the work of Conversion; but if it had been as
clear a Truth as it is a gross Untruth, that Dr. Humphrey did acknowledge, that
Pope Gregory and Augustine did bring into England the Archbishops Pall for
solemn Masses, can any man rationally conclude thence, that Pope Gregory did
maintain the corporeal presence? If the virtue and power of Transubstantiating
be affixed to the Archbishops Pall, then whenever the common Priests of the
Romish Church do consecrate the Sacrament, there is no transubstantiation in
it, because they are not privileged to wear the Archbishops Pall; and thus by
his own acknowledgment, though he finds the corporeal presence in a Metrapolis,
yet it is not to be found in the greatest part of the Romish Dominion.

Concerning the private Mass.
FOr want of better Arguments, he makes a great outcry against me, because of a
Mistake in the Transcription, 13 being written for 23. I could present him with
the like Dish of his own cooking, but I forbear it as trivial. Besides he says,
that if the Expression was Pope Gregory's, there is nothing of Ordination or
Prohibition to be found in the words; un to which I answer, that Doctor Moorton
upon the very same words makes this following Observation; The Roman Church
(says he) ordained in the time of Pope Gregory, that at the Celebration of the
Sacrifice, the Deacon should say, Whosoever does not communicate let him
depart; ( Moort. App. l. 1. c. 2. Sect. 8.) Against which Mr. Brerely (as wise
and as stout a Champion as this Gentleman is) durst never object; and if from
thence the Ordination of the Church may be concluded, why not likewise the
Ordination of the Pope? Surely it will be granted, that the pretended Head was
some part of the Church, and that his power did concur in that Ordination; and
it is strange that the Order which Pope Gregory reports to be observed in
celebrating the Mass, should not be by his own Ordination, being that he was
(though not supreme Head, yet) a Ruler in the Church; and especially if that be
true, which (the Reflector says) is testified by Beacon, to wit that the Mass
was fully completed by him; certainly if this was done by him, he did give
Order when, and where, and after what manner the Mass was to be celebrated:
Besides, the words that were pronounced by the Deacon were Imperative,
commanding the Noncommunicants to depart. Now the Reflector must say, that the
custom of pronouncing that command was raised and continued either by the
Ordination of the Deacon, or of the Pope, or the Church; he cannot say the
first, because the Office of the Deacon was but subservient in the Church, and
by saying either of the other, he will affirm that which he has denied, that
there is somewhat of Ordination in the words, and that Gregory being Pope, it
was by his ordination they were pronounced.

But all this wind shakes no Corn; though this Objection do work its utmost
against me, yet it is as trivial as that of the Cook, who excepted against a
fat Capon, because it wanted some feathers; notwithstanding all this blustering
stir that he makes, the truth which was affirmed stands unshaken, that Gregory
in his opinion differed from the present Church of Rome concerning the private
Mass, which this Gentleman must acknowledge, or else he must say that the
practice of the Roman Church in his time was contrary to his Opinion; for his
words are plain and easy to be understood, cumque in eadem ecclesia, etc. When
Masses were celebrated in the Church, and the Deacon according to custom cried
out, if any does not communicate, let him depart: his strange distinction of
solemn and unsolemn, or solemn and private cannot resist the force of this
testimony; it is folly in the abstract to use a distinction, when it is known
before hand that the controversy is concerning that distinction, and it is
affirmed that there was no such distinction between Masses used in Pope
Gregorys time, as is manifest from his words; for Pope Gregory does not limit
the exercise of that custom, which he speaks of, to any particular day, but
speaks in the general, and says, when soever Masses were celebrated, and the
Deacon according to custom pronounced, If any one does not communicate let him
depart; whence it may be assuredly concluded, that whenever the Sacrament was
administered, it was the custom of the Deacon to make this dismission, upon
which the Non-communicants departed out of the Church; while the rest stayed to
communicate with the Priest.

Should I comply to his humor, and suppose (contrary to the express Testimony
of Pope Gregory) that the words were spoken of solemn in opposition to private
Masses, we find in them, as they relate unto that which follows, a convincing
Argument for the condemnation of private Masses, and to prove that the use of
them is an abuse and Profanation of the sacred Institution of Christ. Pope
Gregory reports an Apparition that was frequently made in the Church, The
Spirits (says he) of two persons that died while they lay under a threatened
Sentence of Excommunication, were observed to depart out of the Church
whenever the Deacon dismissed the Non-communicants. Whence we must conclude
that when private Masses were celebrated, those Spirits resided in the Church,
because then the dismission was not made: Now I ask this Gentleman, why they
departed when the dismission was made, and what was the reason of their
residence in the Church when it was not made? certainly he can return no other
answer but this, when the People were admitted to communicate with the Priest,
there was a secret divine Power working to drive such Spirits away, commanding
them to this purpose, procul hinc procul este prophani, therefore the Sacrament
was then celebrated according to the Institution of Christ; but when private
Masses were celebrated, there was no such power working to that purpose;
therefore the observance and use of them is not agreeable to that sacred
Institution, but an abuse and profanation of it; and it is my persuasion that
private Masses have many such Attendants to take notice of the mimical gestures
of the Priest, and how much Christ's sacred Institution is abused and profaned
by his solitary receiving.

But I need not be beholding unto Suppositions for Arguments to condemn the use
of private Masses, or to prove the disuse of them in Pope Gregory's time, for
his Testimony is as clear as the Sun to evidence, that then it was the custom
of the Church to dismiss the Non-communicants when the Sacrament was to be
administered; therefore there was none but Communicants to stay in the Church,
and there were some that did stay to communicate with the Priest; the Priest
only did not receive the Sacrament, the People being permitted to stand by as
Spectators to take notice of his Actions, as is done now at the celebration of
private Masses; wherefore I must say that the Reason of the Reflector in the
use of his impertinent Similitude runs as low as his confidence speaks high:
but being in a great strait, he is less to be blamed, because it was the best
Device that he could invent to involve the Reader in a dark Mist, that he might
not discern the weakness of that Reply, that he makes to Pope Gregory's
Testimony.

What parity is there between Easter Day, and that time which Pope Gregory
speaks of, when he says, cumque missarum solemnia celebrarentur? and what
parity is there between my saying of Service at other times besides Easter, and
private Masses, which are not mentioned at all by Pope Gregory? And then what
Reason is there why I may no more conclude against private Mass from his words,
then it can be concluded that service is not said by me at any other time,
because I do administer the Sacrament on Easterday? Similitudes do not always
run on four Feet, but I never knew till now, that sometime they have no Feet at
all to stand on. Does this Gentleman conceit himself to be such an infallible
Doctor, that whatsoever is affirmed by him without proof, must be received as a
certain truth against Reason? And did Chytrers say, that the great private
Masses were used in Pope Gregory's time, without any proof for what he said?
And did Pope Gregory maintain private Masses, yet no Expressions to be found in
his Writings, sounding to this purpose, If there be any, why is there not some
Direction laid down where to find them? His Confidence (I see in his bold
Assertions,) is but like unto a Castle built in the Air, without a Foundation;
and the Standing of it will be wonderful, though it be not a Wonder, that it
was the Product of one that professes himself to be a Pillar of the
Roman-Church.

But I perceive, that his Second Thoughts do correct his First, and now he
falls from his former Confidence, At least (says he) by the words of the
Objection, etc. The meaning of which must be this, I have been too bold in
concluding against Pope Gregory's words; for I must confess, that his Testimony
is plain and positive against private Masses; but yet however, there is mention
made of Masses, which are contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England;
and argues S. F. guilty of Contradiction, or of charging a Contradiction upon
Pope Gregory.

If this Gentleman had been as powerful in proving, as he is confident in
concluding, he would be among the Roman Champions, as the Chief was among
David's Worthies; but it is his sad misfortune, that his Consequences are mere
strangers to his Antecedents, and his Premises altogether unable to bring forth
his Conclusions: He may take notice, that the term Missa, which signifies Mass,
was not used by the Fathers and Doctors of the Primitive* Church; and when it
came most into use, it was of different Significations; sometimes it signified
the Assembling of Gods People, sometimes it signified Common Prayers, sometimes
it signified the Communion. Now, I suppose, that this Gentleman will not say,
That Assemblies, or Communions, or Common Prayers, are contrary to the Doctrine
of the Church of England. In this Expression, which is quoted, Pope Gregory
does not say, When Masses were to be Celebrated, speaking in relation to that
which was to be done, after the Deacon had dismissed the Non-Communicants; but
he says, When Masses were Celebrated, speaking in relation to that which was
done before the Deacon made this Dismission; wherefore it is evident, that Pope
Gregory, by Masses, does understand that Common Service, which was performed
before the Administration of the Sacrament; and then, where is the
Contradiction incurred by me, or charged by me upon Pope Gregory? It seems,
this Gentleman entertains an Opinion, that travails far beyond the Limits of
Romish Transubstantiation, being that he would have the Corporal Presence to be
where and whenever any kind of Masses were Celebrated.

If the Use of the term Mass be so powerful to conclude, what does he think of
the Disuse of it? May not I more rationally and firmly conclude from the
Negative, than he can do from the Affirmative, the term Mass was never used by
our Savior, or his Apostles? The learned Doctor Jewel, Bishop of Sarum, tells
us, That it was not used by the Doctors and Fathers of the Primitive-Church for
Three hundred years after Christ; and that it was seldom used by St. Augustine,
St. Jerome, Tertullian, St. Cyprian, Arnobius, Lactantius; and that unto St.
Chrisostom, Basil, Naziansen, Gregory Nissen, and all other Greek Writers, it
was utterly unknown; therefore the Doctrine of the Church of England is the
same that was maintained by them and the Doctrine of the Private Mass, and
Corporal Presence was never owned by them.

And now, Christian Reader, take notice what a load of Injuries is laid by this
Gentleman upon Pope Gregory, charging him with an opinion, which is first
contradictory to his own plain and positive Expressions, as I have already in
some measure showed, and have farther yet to show; If Pope Gregory did allow of
Private Mass, how could that Prayer suit unto the Sacrament, which he penned to
be used after the Receiving of it; Ut quotquot ex hac altaris participatione
sacrosanctum filii tui corpus and sanguinem sumpserimus omni benedictione
coelesti and gratia repleamur? That as many of us, as by partaking of this
Altar, have received the holy Body and Blood of thy Son, may be filled with all
Heavenly Benediction and Grace.

Secondly, Contrary to the Institution of Christ; for it was not a Private
Mass, but a Communion, that was instituted, and administered by Him, and He
commanded the Disciples to do the same in Remembrance of Him.

Thirdly, Contrary to the Injunction of the Apostle Paul, who commanded the
Corinthians, to tarry one for another in the Holy Administration, and to
conform their practice to the example of Christ.

Fourthly, Contrary to the Canons of the Apostles; for in them it is decreed,
That if any resort unto the Church, and hear the Scriptures, and abstain from
the Communion, that he shall stand excommunicate as one that troubles the
Congregation.

Fifthly, Contrary to the Nature of the Sacrament; His own Doctor Harden, in
his Answer to the Reverend Bishop Jewel, concerning the Private Mass, tells us,
That in Christ's Institution three things are contained, which Himself did, and
by His gave Authority to the Church to do the same; the Consecration, the
Oblation, and the Participation. Now in Private Mass, I desire to know where
this Participation is?

Sixthly, Contrary to the Opinion of Ancient Fathers. St. Jerome says, That the
Lords Supper must be common to all; for the Lord delivered the Sacrament to all
the Disciples that were present, Jer. in 1 Cor. 11. St. Ambrose, expounding
these words, Invicem expectate, Wai^t one for another, says thus, Ut multorum
oblatio simul celebrentur, That the Oblation of many may be celebrated
together. Amb. in 1 Cor. 1. Clemens, who was called the Apostles Fellow,
writes thus, Let so many hosts be offered upon the Altar, as may be sufficient
for the People, Clem. Ep. 2. Augustine says of the Congregation in his time,
Every day we receive the Sacrament of Christ's Body, Aug. de ser. Tom. in
monet. Clemens Alexandrinus says, After certain (as the manner is) have
divided the Sacrament, they give every of the People leave to take part of it,
Clem. Strom. l. 1. Chrysostom plainly describes the very Order of the
Communion that was used in his time, by these words, The Spiritual and Reverend
Sacraments are set forth equally to the Rich and to the Poor; neither does the
Rich Man enjoy them more, and the Poor Man less; they have all alike coming
unto them; the Sacraments being once laid forth, are not taken in again, until
all the People have communicated, and taken part of that spiritual Meat; but
the Priests stand still, and wait for all, even the meanest and poorest of them
all. Chris. in 1 Cor Hom. 27.

Lastly, An Opinion that brings forth many vain and ridiculous Practical
Positions, not fit to be believed, and observed by Christians; That the Priest
alone should receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; and that his solitary
Receiving, should be productive of Spiritual advantage to the Common People,
who must live by their own Faith, and be saved by a particular application of
the Benefits of Christ to their own Souls; That his eating, in effect, should
be theirs, and his drinking theirs; and what descends into his Belly, should be
offered up unto God as a Propitiatory Sacrifice, effectual to take away their
Sins; All which is as like to be true, as that One Man may be sustained in a
temporal life, by the Bread which Another Man eats, and may be refreshed by the
Drink which Another Man drinks: And what likewise can be more ridiculous, than
to see the Roman Leaders sometime admitting the whole Congregation to stand by
as Spectators, to behold the Histrionical Gestures of the Priest, and at other
times dismissing the Non-Communicants with an Ite Missa est, while the rest are
permitted to stay to Communicate in an half Communion, the Priest himself
receiving the whole, is the institution of Christ, subject to such variety of
handling; that sometime one alone, sometime the whole Congregation may celebrate
it, and that with this Distincti^n of Partially and Totally. Did Christ
institute his last Supper with this respect of Persons, that some were to
Communicate more freely and fully than others? And is there a Conformity unto
his Institution observed, while the observance is maimed, and part of his
Command, Drink ye all of this, disobeyed? Is this institution as Soft Wax, that
may be molded into any Form or Fashion, that suits to the Humors of Men? The
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, in the Primitive Times, was termed a Love-Feast;
and surely he must be a nigardly Feastmaker, that cannot find in his heart to
afford all his Guests an equal Entertainment; and that must be a very spare
Feast, where the Guests are fed with one bare, dry Mosel, and not allowed the
Refreshment of a little Drink.

Concerning the Communion in both kinds.
SOme Persons are so dimsited, that nothing but a close Conduct will keep them
in the right way: This Gentleman, finding this Marginal direction, ( Greg de
cons. did. 12.) seeks for Gregorius de Consideratione, while he^ should have
sought for Gregorius de Consecratione, a Book that is quoted by Sr. Humphrey
Linne, mentioning the same words which I have expressed; but because this
Quotation has not been plain enough to his view, I shall present him with some
other, as plainly as I can, and as pertinent to my purpose; proving, that the
Practice of the Church of Rome in Pope Gregory's Time, was to Administer the
Sacrament in both kinds to the Laity, as well as to the Clergy. Pope Gregory
tells us, That in the mystery of the holy Oblation, the Flesh of Christ is
divided, and the Blood of Christ poured into the Mouths of the Faithful; and he
says, That by the holy Mystery of Christ's living Body and Blood, his Body (that
is the Church) is fed, as it were with Bread, and refreshed as with Drink;
Diol. Greg. l. 4. c 58. and in 6. Psalm. Pen. which could not be said by him, if
he had maintained the half-Comunion. Can the Flesh of Christ be said to be
divided, where there is no Division at all, but only one whole Morsel received?
And can his Blood be said to be poured into the Mouths of the Faithful, where
there is no pouring at all used, as it is in the Half-Communion? And can there
be any feeding as it were with Bread, and refreshing as with Drink, where there
is nothing like unto Drink used for Refreshment? But more plainly in that
Method and Order of Consecration, which Gregory appointed to be observed in the
Church of Rome, we find that the Cup was to be consecrated for the Laity, as
well as the Bread; and in that Prayer, which he penned to be used after the
Receiving of the Sacrament, there is mention made of the Cup as well as of the
Bread, Greg de Sacra.

But should I bring a Thousand clear, undeniable Testimonies out of St.
Gregory, or any other, witnessing that the Laity had received in both kinds,
all would be to no purpose: Thus says this great Champion here; but, good
Reader, observe what he says in the Appendix to his Reflections, where having
stated the Question between me and my Adversary, and speaking of Pope Gregory's
Authority: Here at length (says he) I had somewhat more certain to build upon;
and observe likewise what he says in the Conclusion; The thing in controversy,
says he, at present, not being whither the Assertions be true or false, but
whether St. Grogory held them, or not. What, is this Gentleman like unto a
Proteus, that he can change himself into any shape, or as subject to Mutability
as the Wind, that blows one while from one Corner, and presently upon a
contrary Point? It is something upon his own confession, if Pope Gregory do
say, that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper was administered in both kinds unto
the Laity, as well as to the Clergy in his time; then I attain my End, the
Cause is yielded, and that by this Gentleman: The Religion professed by Pope
Gregory differs from the present Romish Religion in this particular, the
Communion in both kinds.

And it is not S. F. that mistakes the State of the Question, but it is this
Gentleman, that contradicts himself, and starts new questions to divert the
Reader, that he might not take notice how weak and childish he is in
prosecuting his Design concerning the Communion; His great Foundation is quite
deserted, and the Building which he intended, proves nothing but an idle
Imagination. We must not dispute now, whether Pope Gregory agreed with the
Mode(...) Romanists, in maintaining the half-Communion; but whither Christ did
give any Command to Administer the Sacrament in both kinds, to the Laity? and
whither the Sacrament be entire in one kind? What is spoken in relation to
these Questions, might be passed by, as altogether impertinent; for if all were
as visibly true, as it is palpably false, it would be nothing prejudicial, or
contrary to my design; But because Truth shall not want that maintenance, which
my slender ability can afford unto it, and that the Reader may see what Chaff
the Reflector has provided to entertain and feed him with here, and to
discover what kind of Champion he has showed himself to be, by the Management
of his Questions, I am content to deal with him upon his own terms, and will
spare some time to examine his present Dicourse; but first, I hold it my Duty
to celebrate the due Praises that belongs unto the Church upon the account of
those Opinions and Assertions that are maintained by him.

O wonderful Church! that (while the Body of Christ is maintained to be really
and properly in the Sacrament) have Power to dispose of the glorious Body of
thy Crucified Savior, and that as thou please; that can ordain it to be
delivered unto the Laity under one kind or both kinds, without any Divine
Precept or Command from thy Lord and Master: Had thou a commission from him,
the matter would be less wonderful; but being it is only by thy own
Ecclesiastical Power and Authority, that thou do it, this fills me with
admiration! what glorious privileges art thou endowed with? how highly art
thou favored of God, that thy various and licentious dea^^ng with the glorious
Body of thy Crucified Savior, is not interpreted to be Heinous Presumption and
Desperate wickedness?

And indeed here is a whole heap of the wonders to be considered; That that
Body which is in Heaven, according to an Article of our Creed, and to be
contained there according to the Assertion of the Apostle Peter, until the time
of the restitution of all things, should be also upon the Earth, and in more
than Ten Thousand places at the same time; That the Body of our Savior, which
had Legs and Arms, and Hands and Feet (as he told his Disciples after his
Resurrection) should be in the form of a Wafer-cake, that has no suitable and
answerable Proportions; that Christ's Body, which was visible upon Earth,
should be in the Sacrament, and yet not to be seen; That his glorious Body,
which is more resplendant than the Face of Moses was, which the Children of
Israel could not behold for the Luster and Glory of it, should lie undiscerned
under the forms of Bread and Wine; That Christ's Body, which he would not
suffer Mary Magdelen to touch after his Resurrection, should be touched and
handled by the Priest and the People, of whom some may be presumed to be impure
and unclean, unless the Tares be separated from the Wheat without Reapers, and
before the last Day of the great Harvest be come; That that Body which our
Savior said, was flesh and Bones, after his Resurrection should be touched and
felt, and yet no Flesh nor Bones to be felt; and That Body should lie under the
Form of Bread, or under the form of Wine, or under the Form of Bread and Wine,
according as the Church shall please, to be delivered to the Laity without a
Command from Christ?

Certainly, this Church is as powerful to cure all Spiritual Diseases, as she
is to produce all these forementioned Wonders. Come hither then, all ye Blind,
ye Halt, ye Maimed, ye withered; here is the Pool of Bethesda, that can cure
you without the motion of an Angel, or the condition of Priority in stepping
down. You that know not the Fundamentals of Religion, those necessary Truths
that are to be believed, the Church tells you, That you must believe as she
believes, and thus your Spiritual Blindness is cured; you that have neglected
the Service of God, and Halted by the commission of many heinous Sins, the
Church tells you, That you must Confess unto the Priest, and obtain his
Absolution, which you may have upon reasonable consideration, and thus your
Spiritual Lameness is cured; you that cannot speak the Language of Canaan, to
pray in a sense of your wants, the Church tells you, That it is sufficient if
you do mumble out a certain number of Pater Nosters, and Ave Marias, and Credo
in Deums, in a Language that is not understood, to equal the knacking of the
Beads, and thus your Spiritual Dumbness is cured. You that are like unto the
barren Figtree spoken of in the Gospel, wanting the Fruit of Good-deeds, the
Church tells you, That She has power to dispose of a Treasury of Good-deeds,
that is heaped together out of the superfluous works of Saints, where as much
as is needful is to be gained by an Application made by the Church, without any
great charges to be expended, and thus your Spiritual Witheredness is cured.
What should I trouble my self in numbering particulars? Take the Power of the
Church in Gross, Whatsoever Spiritual Diseases does infest you, apply but your
selves unto this great Mistress of Physic, and you will be cured, as sure as
she can do it, and as sure as the forementioned wonders are real.

But all this while, I must confess that I do not know what is to be understood
by the Church; nor will, nor can this Gentleman inform me. What Church can that
be, which according to the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, is endowed with
Power to Ordain and Appoint the Communicating of the Laity in one kind or both
kinds, as She pleases? It is not the Essential Church; all the Members of that
Church never did, nor ever will meet together; nor have they commission to
consult, or Ordain any thing to this purpose. It is not the Representative
Church; for there was not a General Council in the World for Three hundred
years after Christ: And will he say, that in all this time the Sacrament was
Administered (as it was) in both kinds, to the Laity, without an Institution? It
is not a Particular Church, That cannot make any Sanction, that shall be
Obliging to the Whole Church. It is not the Virtual Church, which some
Romanists will have the Pope to be, by this Gentleman's Assertion Pope Gregory
is utterly rejected, and a manifest difference expressed to be between him, and
the Church that is spoken of; Let him Speak or Write what he will, it is to no
purpose, unless it be the Institution of the Church. Nor can it be the
Consistorial Church (as some Romanists do likewise speak) the Sacrament was
Administered to the Laity in both kinds, before any Pope did sit at Rome, and
before ever the Pope and his Conclave of Cardinals were heard of. And had he
meant this Church, he could not have excepted against Pope Gregory's Testimony,
nor have divided between him and the Church, being the Pope is the chief part
of this Church, as the Romanists affirm; and certainly what he Writes is, ex
Cathedra, with the consent and approbation of his glittering and Princely
Cardinals; wherefore the result of all is this, That this Church which has
Power to Ordain and Appoint the Communicating of the Laity under one kind, or
both kinds, as She pleases, is not to be found: And then what Truth is to be
found in his Expressions, let the World judge.

But for a farther discovery, let us inquire what strength is produced to
determine the Questions; had not this Gentleman conceited that an empty
flourish of words would pass for Demonstrations with his Followers, he would
never have exposed this Stuff to the view of any Reader; The Catholic Church
(says he) holds, and has always Taught, That there is no necessity or
divine Precept for the Laity to Communicate under both kinds; but it is
sufficent and lawful for them to do it under one or both, as the Church
appoints; so that the Precept herein being not Divine, but only Ecclesiastical,
the Church has Power to Ordain and Dispense with it according to the various
exigencies and occasions of Times and Places; and accordingly sometimes has
allowed of Communion under both kinds, and at other times has forbidden it, as
She judged it more expedient for the Receivers, or the Reverence of the
Sacrament it self.

Here is nothing but a vain Repetition of the Churches Doctrine, and a
Concluding like the Dancing about a Maypole, tracing of the same steps backward
and forward, because there is no Divine Precept (as the Church Teaches) forth
Layety to Communicate under both kinds, therefore the Church has Power to make
it to be sufficient and lawful to do it uner one or both: and because the
Church has Power to do this, therefore the Precept concerning the
Communicating of the Laity is Ecclesiastical; and because the Precept is
Eclesiastical, therefore the Church has Power to Ordain the Communicating of
the Laity under one or both kinds; which is as like to be true as this, because
the Father begets the Son, therefore the Son begets the Father; and because the
Mother brings forth the Daughter therefore the Daughter, brings forth the
Mother; and all this Teaching and Concluding divested of its impertinent Words
and Tautologies, and put into a proper and fit Dress, is but one pitiful
Doctrine, That the Catholic Church has always taught that Christ did not give
any Command for the Communicating of the Laity in both kinds, but left it to
the Ordering and Appointment of the Church, according as exegencies and
occasions fell out, and according as She judges most expedient for the
Receivers, and most conducing to Reverence toward the Sacrament; for which
these Reasons are given, because there is as much in one kind as in both; and
because our Savior Christ himself, and also his Apostles did Administer the
Sacrament to the Laity under one kind. Now, to prove that this has been always
taught by the Catholic Church, and that in Teaching this, the Catholic Church
has taught nothing but Truth; and to prove that there is as much in one kind
as in both, and that Christ and his Apostles did Administer the Sacrament to
the Laity in one kind, there is not one Syllable produced; the Reader must take
all this upon his own bare word: But if he believe it to be true, he is as
careless in employing of his Faith, as a Prodigal is of his Purse; for there is
not one word of Truth to be found in it. And to make this plain to the view of
every one, I shall propound these following Quaeries?

1. What is that Catholic Church, which has always Taught that there is no
Divine precept for the Laity to Communicate under both kinds? If it be all the
Members of the Church, they were not all Teachers; if the Leaders and Doctors
of some particular Ages, they were not always in the World to Teach; if the
Leaders and Doctors of every Age, I hope he will admit our Savior Christ and
his Apostles, and several Ancient* Fathers into the number of the Leaders and
Doctors of the first Ages: And where did our Savior Christ or his Apostles, or
which of the Ancient Fathers did Teach this Doctrine, That there is no Divine
Precept for the Laity to Communicate both kinds?

2. Who taught the Catholic Church to teach this Doctrine; is it of God, or of
men? if it be of men, it is like unto the Author, deceitful and lighter than
vanity; if it be of God, where, and to whom was it revealed? it is very
necessary make this inquisition, because there are many Doctrines obtruded by
the Roman Leaders upon the common people, under the name of the
Catholick-Church, which are nothing but the mere fictious of erring and
deceitful men.

3. Who did invest the Church with power to ordain and appoint the Layety to
communicate under one kind? if our Savior Christ, let his Commission be
produced; where did he speak to any Church under Heaven? saying expressly or
implicitly, Take thou power to do as thou please in Administering the
Sacrament to the Layety, if there be any Text of Scripture sounding to this
purpose, why does he not quote it? if there be none, how can he prove that the
Church has this power? That Church which presumes to do this without a
Commission from Christ, is an impudent usurper for invading and assuming the
Royal Prerogative, which is pertinent and peculiar only unto Christ; and an
absolute Tyrant in hindering the common people from the use of that liberty;
which by the appointment and institution of Christ, they are privileged to
enjoy.

4. What does this Gentleman mean? when he says that there is as much
contained, under one kind, as under both; if as much of the institution? this
cannot be; h^ confesses, and it cannot be denied, that our Savior did
institute both kinds; if as much of the body and blood of Christ? he should
first prove that the body and blood of Christ is really and properly in the
Sacrament, otherwise this is as much as nothing at all; for it is visible to
him that is not wilfully blind, that the real and proper body and blood of
Christ is not there, and it is utterly incredible that the glorious body of
Christ should be subjected and debased to the licentious disposing of a mortal
sinful man; if as much of the representation? how can a Wafer cake, or a peace
of bread represent and signify the effusion of that precious blood, which was
abundantly shed for the redemption of the World? if as much of the efficacy?
why did the Apostle Paul? 1 Cor. 10. 16. and how could he vent that expression,
attributing and appropriating different effects to the differing kinds, the cup
of blessing (says he) which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of
Christ? the bread which we break is it not the Communion of the body of Christ?
Alexander Hales one of his own Doctors delivers an opinion quite contrary unto
him affirming that there is not as much in one kind as in both, Licet (says
he) illa sumptio, quae est in accipiend^ sub una specie, sufficiat, tamen illa,
quae est sub duabus, est majoris meriti, Alex. Hal. 4. quaest 53. m. 1.
although that order of receiving the Sacrament, which is under one kind be
sufficient, yet the other which is under both kinds is of greater merit; and
farther he says, Sumptio sub Vtraque specie, quem ad mod^^ sumendi tradidit
dominus, est majoris efficaciae, and majoris complementi, the receiving under
both kinds, which order the Lord delivered is of greater efficacy and greater
fullness.

5. Where did ^our Savior administer the Sacrament to the Laity in one kind?
his breaking of bread at Emaus was not with the Laity, b^^ with two Disciples;
nor is it to be understood of the Sacrament, but of common bread, th^^ ^^
Gregory understood it, Mensam (says he) ponunt, panes cibosque offerunt, and
deum, quem in scripturarum expositione non cognoverant, in panis fractione
cognoscunt, Greg. in Evan. hom. 23. they spread the table, and bring forth
bread and meat, and they knew that God in breaking of bread, which they knew
not in expounding the Scriptures; Widefred a Doctor of the Roman Church was of
this opinion, Hoc dico (says he) quod non habetur ex textu, vel ex glossa,
Luke 24. ^el per antiquos doctores, quod ille panis, quem Christus fregit post
Resurrectionem fuit consecratus ^el Sacramentalis, Wid. con. Wick. this I say,
it cannot be gathered neither by the text of St Luke; nor by the gloss, nor by
the ancient Doctors, that the bread which Christ brake after his Resurrection
was the consecrate or Sacramental bread.

6. Where and when did the Apostles administer the Sacrament unto the Laity in
one kind? If those Texts of the Acts of the Apostles are to be understood of
the Sacramental bread, Act. 2. 46. and 20. 7. it is evident that the Apostles
and the Laity did receive after the same manner, for they all met together to
break bread, and will the reflector say that the Apostles themselves did
receive in one kind? it is certain that they had a precept from our Savior to
receive the Sacrament in both kinds, could they so suddenly forget the command
of their Master, and violate his sacred institution? and did they do that which
the present Romish Church does account sacrilege ^o the Priests to do? unless
he do affirm these things, he must acknowledge that by breaking of ^ead the
whole Sacrament is to be understood, that they did both break the bread and
divide the ^up, and that this is the meaning of the Words is cleared by a like
Text, where, the Apostle Paul speaks of the Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11. 33. and by
eating he means both eating and drinking, as is evident by the foregoing
verses, in which the Apostle does mention the whole institution of Christ, and
enjoins both eating and drinking; in the Gospel according to St. Luke we read
of our Saviors eating of bread in a Pharisees House, Luke 14. 1. by which we
must understand feasting, as is evident by some following Contexts; surely if
this Gentleman shall say? because there is mention made only of bread, not a
word of me^ and drink, that our Savior was entertained with nothing but bread,
it was a very slender, and dry Feast.

7. What are those exigences and occasions that have fallen out to move the
Church to appoint the Layety to Communicate in one kind, as most expedient for
them, and conducing to the reverence of the Sacrament? if there we^ any, why
did not the reflector declare them that it might be seen that he had not a
purpos^ to feed the Reader with an empty sound of vai^ words? if there were
none (as I am sure the^ was none of weight to counterpoise and excuseth^ breach
of Christ's institution) it is a great sham^ besides an Heinous sin to deceive
the Read^ with feigned pretenses: as for those exigences an^ occasions that
have been invented by the Ro^ Doctors, such as these, the Wine will sour, the
liquour may be shed, in some countries it is hat^ to be gotten, some men have
Beards, and so^ have Palsies, the Layety must not touch the (...) and the
dignity of Priests and laymen wo^ be all one, are not fit to be named among
C^stians, who should prefer that obedience wh^ they do owe unto the precepts
and Institution^ their Lord and Master Christ Jesus, before their own base
private and carnal ends.

8. How can it be expedient for the Layety to Communicate in one kind, yet as
the practice of the Roman-Church does declare, always necessary for the
Priests to receive both kinds? as there is but one Ld one Faith, one Baptism,
so there is but one Institution of the Lords Supper, one Christ the Author of
that Institution, of whom the Layety do stand in as much need, and in whom they
are as much interested as the Priests; is it not always as necessary for the
Layety as it is for the Priests to receive the sign and Seal of that precious
effusion, which was made for the Redemption of the world in which they are as
much interested as the Priests.

9. How can it be conducing to irreverence in the Layety, but to reverence in
the Priests always to receive the Sacrament in both kinds? may not a Lay person
be duly qualified and fitted to receive the Sacrament as well as the Priests?
if not, he is not to receive it in any kind; but if he be, he can always
receive it with reverence in both kinds, as well as the Priests.

It is not the Catholic Church that any time, but the Pope's creatures, that
of late days have taught those gross untruths, that are visible to every one
that will open his eyes to see, and that they are such I shall prove by these
following arguments; first, Christ did institute the Sacrament for the Layety,
or he did not; if he did not, what have they to do with it? it is not any
particular man, or any society of men that can give them a title to the use of
it; he only that conferrs the inward grace, can institute and appoint the
outward and visible sign and Seal, and bestow a title and privilege to use it
if he did institute the Sacrament for the layety, it was in both kinds that he
made this institution.

Secondly, The Layety are as much concerned and included in the end of the
Sacrament, as the Priests are, that is the remembrance of Christ, therefore as
much concerned and included in Christ's command, do this, eat this bread, and
drink this cup in remembrance of me.

Thirdly, The Corinthians were not all Priests, and that which the Apostle Paul
received from Christ concerning the Sacrament, was Christ's own institution;
now it is as clear as the sun, that the Apostle received the institution in
both kinds, and accordingly gave the Corinthians an Injunction to receive in
both kinds, but let a man (says he,) examine himself, and so let him eat of
that bread, and drink of that cup.

Fourthly, if the Sacrament be entire in one kind, two kinds are not necessary
to the integrity of it, and then the reflector must say, that our savior did
institute that which is needless, Frustr a fit per plura, ^uod potest fieri per
pauciora, if one hand can do the work, it is needless to use two; but I suppose
he will not charge this upon our Savior, that he did institute that which is
needless, therefore the Sacrament cannot be entire in one kind: Pope Gelasius
says, Divisio unius ejusdem^ue mysterii sine grandi sacrilegio pervenire non
potest, de con. did. 2 comp. that the division of the same mystery cannot be
done without great sacrilege and to receive in one kind is to divide the
mystery; any Durandus tells us, In multis lccis communicatur cum pane and vino,
id est, cum toto sacramento Dur. l. 4. c. 24. in many places they communicate
with bread and Wine, that is with the whole Sacrament, where we must conclude
that it was the opinion of Pope Gelasius and also of Durandus, that the
communion in one kind is but the half Sacrament, and consequently that it is
not entire in one kind.

I have dwelt too long upon the confutation of a rude heap of vain and empty
words; for a conclusion of this particular, I shall desire the reader to take
notice; first, that this Gentleman says that the expression imputed to St.
Gregory implies nothing of a command, or of a necessity of receiving the
Sacrament under both kinds, without which the Sacrament would not be entire;
and yet he says afterward that whenever Pope Gregory, or any other of the
Fathers speak of the Layety receiving the Sacrament under both kinds, they
speak of such times in which the Church so appointed and commanded the
administration of it.

What must be done to reconcile these dissenting expressions, either he must
say that the command of the Church is a mere nullity, and there is no necessity
to obey it, or that the report of Pope Gregory and other ancient Fathers
disanulls the command of the Church, and renders it unnecessary to be obeyed,
or when the Church Commands the administration of the Sacrament in both kinds,
she commands more than is necessary to be done, when he writes again, he will
tell me which of these assertions he will choose to maintain, sure he will not
make choice of maintain, sure he will not make choice of the last, and say that
the Church can be guilty of so great an error, as to command more than belongs
unto the integrity of a Sacrament; and then it cannot be entire when it is
administered in one kind; unless he will say that the Church has Power to make
the Sacrament entire in one kind, or entire in both kinds as she pleases; and
it is the same Sacrament still, whither it be delivered in one kind, or both
kinds, which is as much as to say that the Church has Power to make two to be
no more than one, and one to be as much as two; that she can make that body
which wants a leg or an arm, as perfect as that body, which has both legs and
arms; that maintaining the corporal prefence, she has power to dilate and
extend the body of Christ as he pleases; for when the Sacrament is administered
in both kinds, his body according to that opinion, must be more dilated and
extended; unless he will say that then his blood is separated from his body,
his body being contained under one kind, his blood under the other, which (I
suppose) he will not do, because his blood cannot be separated from his body;
and when it is administered in one kind, it must be more contracted, it is much
to ascribe this hideous power to an unknown Church.

Secondly, that he says that the administration of the Sacrament sometime in
one kind, sometime in both kinds proves and confirms the Authority of the
Church; and a little before he told us, that the authority and Power of the
Church makes it to be sufficient and Lawful to administer either in one kind or
both kinds; it is very charitably and gratefully done by two cripples to help
one another over the style; he should first prove that the Church has power
and authority to command this twofold and different administration, otherwise
it is so far from proving the Power and authority of the Church, that her
precept for admininistring, and the practice of the People in receiving in one
kind, is an obstinate rebellion against Christ, by a wilful violation of his
sacred institution.

Concerning the Merit of Good Works.
IT seems that this Gentleman was not acquainted with Pope Gregoryes writings,
because he wanted the direction of a particular quotation, and then how durst
he build upon Pope Gregoryes opinion and charge me with falsification; some
persons (I perceive) are so confident, that they will take upon them to shoot
beyond the Moon, though it be out of a worm eaten and rotten bow; but to help
his weakness, and to free my self from that odious imputation, which, had it
been just, would have been the strongest argument in all his book, let him
search into the ninth Book of Gregoryes morals upon Job. 11. C. where he will
find these words, Si ad opus virtutis excrevero, ad vitam, non ex meritis, sed
ex venia convalesco, if I do increase in virtue, I grow unto life not our of
merit, but by pardon; and in the exposition of the first penitential Psalm he
will find this expression, Non de meis meritis confidens ut me salrum facias
supplico, sed de sola misericordia tua praesumens impetrare, quod non de meis
meritis spero, I entreat to be saved, not confiding in my own merits, but
presuming to obtain that out of mercy only, which I do not hope for out of
merit; what can be more plain and positive against the merit of good Works?

The Doctrine of the Roman Church is this, that good works are meritorious, and
the very cause of Salvation, so far that God should be unjust, if he rendered
not Heaven for the same, and sometimes it is delivered thus, all good works
done by Gods grace after the first Justification, be truly and properly
meritorious, and fully worthy of everlasting life, and that thereupon Heaven is
the due and just stipend Crown or recompense, which God by his justice owes to
the Persons so working by his grace, for he renders or repayeth heaven as a
just Judge; and not only as a merciful giver, and the Crown which he pays is
not only of mercy or favor, but also of justice.

And although he has tempered the Doctrine of the Roman Church here to an
inferior allay, and says that the opinion of Pope Gregory is very agreeable
unto it, (in which he observes his accustomed method of proving, presuming
himself to be a man of such great credit and trust, that he leaves all to be
taken for truth upon his own bare word) yet he has mist it so much in the
cooking, that (as Elisha's guests said of the pottage) there is mors in olla,
death in the pott, and it is no more agreeable to Pope Gregoryes Doctrine than
darkness is to light.

Because his words are very remarkable I must crave leave of the Reader to
repeat them here, the Catholic Church (says he) teaches that our best works
in this state of corrupted nature, as they are ours precisely are not
meritorious of a reward from God, because we can do no good thing our selves as
of our selves, but our sufficiency is all from God, yet as proceeding from the
grace of Christ working in us, and with us, and elevated by his merits and
promises, he has promised a reward to them, and made them worthy of a reward.

Observe first, this Gentleman speaks of the best works of man in the state of
corruption, which he passes under a double consideration, either as proceeding
from a man's own self, or as proceeding from the grace of Christ, working in him
and with him; now he says that the best work of man in the state of
corruption, as proceeding from himself are not meritorious of a reward, because
^e can do no good of himself, his sufficiency being from God; but the best
works of man in that state as proceeding from the grace of Christ, working in
and with him are elevated by Christ's merits and promises, and made worthy of a
reward; this is the sense of his words if there be any sense to be found in
them.

And is this the Doctrine of the Roman Church, that is like unto a confused
Chaos, compounded of nothing but repugnancies and inconsistencies? by the best
works of man in the state of corruption he must understand good works, or else
he speaks not to the question, and it is strange that good works should proceed
from man in that state, works cannot be good, unless they have these three
ingredients, rectus, recta, recte, first the person that does them must be
rectus, truly Godly, Secondly, he must do recta such things as are agreeble to
the ^le. Thirdly, he must do them recte, in a right manner, the deeds of
Hypocrites cannot be said to be good, though they have never so great an
outward show of goodness, a bad tree cannot bring forth good fruit; and it is
strange likewise that the grace of Christ should work in and with man in that
state; certainly they are regenerated in and with whom the grace of Christ does
work, God will not cast his pearls unto swine, and give his Childrens bread
unto dogs; and it is as strange that the work of man in that state should be
elevated by the merits of Christ, the benefit of his merits being applied only
to them that are regenerated.

If he had spoken of the best works of man in the state of regeneration, they
would be acknowledged to be good in some Measure, and then his term of
elevation might pass so far as to render them acceptable unto God, for it is
the merits of Christ that makes the good deeds of the regenerate to be
acceptable to him; but to say that they are made worthy, of a reward, this
cannot pass, I have told him already that the glory of meriting belongs only
unto Christ; and that glory which belongs peculiarly unto him, he will not give
unto Saints or good Works, or any thing else, in relation to which his pen has
been altogether tongue-tyed and stands as mute as a fish; it is for the sake of
the merits of Christ that the good works of the righteous will he rewarded, and
not for the sake of any merit, that is given to be in their good works.

Observe secondly, what agreement there is between Pope Gregory's Doctrine, and
the Doctrine of the present Roman Church; Pope Gregory speaks of himself as in
the state of regeneration, Si ad opus virtutis excrevero, if (says he) I do
increase in virtue, and in that state he disclaims and renounces all merit,
relying wholly upon the mercy of God for life and Salvation; in his book of
morals he expresses himself thus, Si de his divinitus discutimur, quis inter
haec remanet salutis locus, quando and mala nostra pura mala sunt, and bona
quae nos habere credimus pura bona esse, nequaquam possunt, Greg. mor. l. 35.
c. 16. if God shall strictly examine us, what hope of Salvation is there for
us? when as our evil deeds are simply evil, but our good deeds which we suppose
we have, cannot be simply good; and farther he says, Sciunt quippe sancti, qua
omnis humana justitia injustitia esse deprehenditur, si divinitus districte
judicetur, Greg. mor. l. 21. c. 15. the Saints know that all man's
righteousness is found to be unrighteousness, if God do strictly Judge it.

If Pope Gregory had maintained the Doctrine of the present Roman Church he
must have used another kind of dialect, and expressed himself after this
manner, if I do increase in virtue, I am fruitful in good works, which do merit
at the hands of God, and growing in them, I grow by them unto eternal life, my
good deeds are elevated by the merits and promises of Christ so high, that they
are made worthy of a reward, therefore I need not to fear the strict
disquisition of the great Judge, but may trust to the merit of my good deeds
for obtaining eternal Salvation, but there is not the least sound to this
purpose, the contrary being expressed, that it was mercy not merit, pardon not
good deeds that was the ground of his hope, and the Rock of his Salvation.

I have not the Centurists to search into; but this I will say that Pope
Gregory is so positive and plain in his expressions, that if the Centurists do
charge him with an error in this point, it must be because they mistook the
meaning of his words, or else they must make him not only to contradict
himself, but also to incur a more shameful and hateful contradiction, that is
to the sacred Scriptures, to the clear dictates of reason and to the opinion of
several ancient Fathers.

First to the sacred Scriptures; our Savior tells us that when we have done
all those things, which we are commanded to do, we must say, that we are
unprofitable servants, Luke 17. 10. and the Apostle Paul teaches us, That by
grace we are saved, through faith and that not of our selves: it is the gift of
God, not of works, lest any one should boast, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. and speaking of
the different lotts that will fall to the sons of men, he shows that there will
be a direct contrariety in the manner of their seizure and possession, one lot
being by merit, the other by grace, The wages (says he) of sin is death, but
the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6. 23.
David had the approbation to be a man after Gods own heart; and Job was
commended as a star of the greatest magnitude, shining with the light of good
works more than others, yet neither of them stood upon his tiptoes, to ask God
to deal with him according to the rule of his justice, and to pay a reward due
unto him by merit; but David prays, Enter not into Judgment with thy servant,
O Lord, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified, Psalm. 143. 2. and
Job asks how can man be just with God, if he will contend with him, he cannot
answer him one of a thousand, Job 9. 2. and farther says, That though he were
righteous, yet he would not answer him, but would make suppl^cation to his
Judge, Job. 3. 15. it is true the good man Nehemias prays to be remembered
according to his good deeds, but for a grant of his petition, he grounds his
hopes, not upon good works, but up on Gods goodness, not upon merits, but upon
mercy, and spare me (says he) according to the multitude of thy mercys, can the
same subject include contrarys? can a fountain send forth ^eet waters and
bitter, or fire be hot and cold? ^ is certain that the best man in the world,
has ^he merit of death in him for the wise man says, That there is not a just
man upon earth that does ^ood, and sins not, Eccl. 7. 20. and can there be
the merit of life in him too? Our savior that knew best, how man should make
his addresses unto God, and accordingly gave Direction to his ^isciples (who
being to act and suffer and dye in their masters cause, if there could be any
merit ^n any, must have a portion of the largest size) ^aught them not to ask a
debt due unto merits, but the pardon of their sins: certainly this Gentleman,
to keep peace in the House must renounce the opinion of merit, or else he must
throw the use of his Pater Noster out of his doors, for these two cannot
without continual jarring dwell both together under one roof.

Secondly to the clear dictates of reason, that informs us that there cannot be
any merit in the performance of an obliged duty, a debtor cannot merit at the
Hands of a Creditor by paying of a due debt besides man has nothing of his own
wherewith to discharge that debt, what has he that he has not received, and
if he has received it, why should he glory as if he did not receive it?
Farther the Coin that he pays in discharge of this debt is notaltogether pure
metal, but mixed with some dross, perfection is not in this life, the best
deeds of the best men have many failings adhering to them; moreover there is no
due proportion between all man's good deeds (be they never so many) and eternal
life, for if the fufferings be not, much less are the actions of this life,
worthy to be compared unto the glory that shall be revealed in us. Now merit
requires with an absolute necessity (without which it cannot be) that there be
a due proportion between good deeds, and the reward, and that the good deeds be
pure, without any sinful mixture, and that they be a man's own, and that they
be likewise free, without the obligation of a previous duty.

To remove all these obstacles the reflector supposes himself to have a ready
and powerful engine, good deeds (says he) are elevated so much by the merits
and promises of Christ that they are made worthy of a reward; but before he had
laid down this bold and groundless assertion, he should first have proved, that
the glory of meriting, which belongs only unto Christ, is given to created
natures; this I deny, and this he will never be able to prove. Secondly, he
should have proved that good works are capable to receive this merit; surely
that which is a duty, and impefect, and not a man's own, and bears no suitable
proportion unto eternal life, cannot be capable to receive any such thing.
Thirdly he should have considered, that this is to divide man's Salvation
between Christ and good works, to say that the merit, which is pretended to be
in good works, flows from the merits of Christ, will not excuse this gross
absurdity, these two being indifferent subjects, and different in themselves,
and the gaining of eternal life is attributed by the Romanists to the one as
well as to the other. Fourthly it is as incongruous and absurd to say, that
though Christ has merited eternal life for us, yet we must by good deeds merit
it likewise at the hands of God, as it is to say that we have a large
inheritance freely bestowed upon us, which was purchased with a large sum, and
yet we must purchase ^ our selves to, with the payment of one small ^enny;
which is not our on^ Fifthly, though the Romanists do affirm that this is
serviceable to set forth the sufficiency of the merits of Christ, yet really it
does produce the contrary effect, detracting abundantly from it. If Christ's
merits be sufficient, there is no need that good works should be meritorious,
but if that be needful, then his merits are not sufficient; Sixthly, to
maintain this he must say that the merits of Christ gives unto man ability to
satisfy for his sins; for meriting a reward does necessarily pre-suppose
satisfaction for sin, if there be any wrong done (as he knows that this is done
by every one, every one being ^ sinner) the person meriting must be a person
satisfying, otherwise there will be no obtaining by way of merit; now I hope he
will not say that Christ gives unto man ability to satisfy for his sins, for to
say this is to deny the sufficiency of that satisfaction which was paid by
Christ; Seventhly, to say that the merits of Christ gives unto man's good deeds
to merit a reward, is in effect to say that Christ gives unto man by his good
deeds to ^o be his own Savior, and his own Redeemer; for the reward which as
the reflectour says, the merits of Christ gives unto man's good deeds to merit,
what is it but eternal salvation, that is a freedom from all evil, and a
perfect fruition of happiness, which is the Inheritance that Christ purchased
by the redemption which he wrought; now if it be given to man's good deeds to
merit this Salvation, it must be said that it is given to man by his good deeds
to be his own Savior, and his own Redeemer, and how Blasphemous this is, and
how abominable it should be unto all Christians ears, every pious Christian is
able to determine.

Thirdly, to the opinion of several ancient Fathers, Vix mihi suadeo (says
Origin) quod possit ullum opus bonum esse, quod ex debito remunerationem Dei
deposcat, cum etiam hoc ipsum, quod aliquid agere possimus, vel cogit are, vel
proloqui, ipsius dono, and largitione facimus, Orig. l. 4. 1 Epist. ad Romans 4 I
can hardly believe that there can be any good work, which may require the
reward of God by way of debt, seeing this very thing it self, that we can do,
or think or speak any thing, we do it by his gift and largess, Quis nostrum
(says Ambrose) sine divina potest miseratione subsistere? quid possumus dignum
praemijs facere coelestibus? quis nostrum ita assurgit in hoc corpore ut animum
suum elevet, quo jugiter adhaereat Christo, quo tandem hominum merito defertur,
ut haec corruptibilis caro induat incorruptionem, and mortale hoc induat
immortalitatem, quibus laboribus, quibus injuris possumus levare nostra
peccata, indignae sunt passiones hujus temporis ad superventuram gloriam, non
ergo secundum merita nostra, sed secundum misericordiam dei, coelestium
decretorum in homines forma procedit, Ambr. 6. in Psalm. 118. Octon. 20. which
of us can subsist without the mercy of God? what can we do worthy of the
heavenly reward? which of us does rise up so in this body that he does elevat^
his mind in such sort as he may continually adhere unto Christ? by what merit
of man is it granted that this corruptible flesh should put on incorruption,
and this mortal should put on immorality? By what labors, or by what endurng
of Injuries, can we abate our sins, the sufferings of this lif^ are unworthy
for the glory that is to come, therefore the form of heavenly decrees does
procee^ with men, not according to our merits but accordin^ to Gods mercy;
Augustine says, Pro nihile fal^os faci^eos, quid est pro nihilo salvos facies
eos? nihil invenis in i^s unde salves, and tamen salves, quia nihil (invenis
unde selves, and multum invenis unde damnes,) Aug. de ver. 6. Apost. Ser. 5.
for nothing thou shall save them; what is meant by these words for nothing thou
shall save them? this is the meaning, thou find nothing in them, wherefore
thou should save them, and yet ^hou savest them, but thou find much;
wherefore thou should condemn them; St. Bernard expresses himself thus,
Meritum meum misera^^nes domini, non sum ego inops meriti, quamdiu ille non est
inops miserationum, si miser ationes ejus multae, multus ego sum in meritis,
hoc totum est hominis meritum, si totam suam spem ponat in domino; Ber. in
Psalm. qui. Hab. my merit is the mercy of God, so long as God is not poor of
mercy, so long cannot I be poor of merit, if his mercys be great then am I
great in merits; this is the whole merit of man, if he put his whole affiance
in God.

Contrary to all this the Romanists do tell us, that they have the Scripture,
and reason, and the ancient Fathers on their side; first for the Scripture, in
it (say they) eternal life is termed a reward, and this reward is promised to
persons that do perform good deeds, and is said to proceed from justice; good
deeds will be mentioned when the sentence of absolution shall be pronounced to
the righteous by the great Judge at the last day; but all this speaks nothing
to their purpose, unless they can prove that nothing can be termed a reward, or
be promised, or said to proceed from justice, but what is premerited by the
receiver, which will never be done by them: Suppose a Servant so much obliged
to his Master for former favors, that he did owe himself, and all that he
could do, yea more than he was able to perform, and his Master should bespeak
him after this manner, thou know that thou art so much obliged to me, that
should thou strain thy ability to the utmost, thou could not make any
proportionable retribution, yet however be thou painful and Faithful in my
service, and I will endow thee with greater Favors, and advance thee to an
higher Preferment, than thou do yet enjoy; Well, the servant observes his
Master's command, and the promise is performed, in this case can the servant be
said to merit at the hands of his Master: The weakness of all such objections
as these produced by the Romanists from the holy Scripture is clearly
demonstrated by that learned prelate and primate of Ireland James Usher, whose
excellent words for the greater Satisfaction of the Reader, I shall make bold
to insert here.

Neither do we therefore take away the reward, because we deny the merit of
good works, we know that in keeping of God's Commandments there is great
reward, and, that unto him that sows Righteousness, there shall be a sure
reward, but the question is, whence he that sows in this manner must ex^e^t
to reap so great and so sure an harvest? whither from God's Justice? which he
must do if he stand (as the Jesuits would have him do) upon merit, or from his
mercy, as a recompense freely bestowed out of his gracious bounty, and not in
justice due for the worth of the work performed, which question we think the
Prophet Hosea has suffciently resolved, when he bids, Sow to our selves in
Righteousness, and reap in mercy, Hos. 10. 12. Neither do we hereby detract any
whit from the truth of that Axiom, that God will give every man according to
his works; for still the question remains the very same, whether God may not
Judge a man according to his works, when he sits upon the throne of grace,
as well as when he sits upon the throne of justice, and we think here that
the Prophet David has fully cleared the case in that one sentence, With thee,
O Lord, is mercy, for thou rendrest to every one according to his Work, Psalm.
62. 12.

Originally therefore, and in it is self, we hold that this reward proceeds
merely from God's free bounty and mercy; but accidentally in regard that God
has tied himself by his word and promise to confer such a reward, we grant
that it now proves in a sort to be an act of justice, even as in forgiving of
our sins, Joh. 1. 9. (which in it self all men know to be an act of mercy) he
is said to be faithful and just, namely in regard of the faithful performance
of his promise, for promise we see amongst honest men is counted a due debt,
but the things promised being free, and on our Part altogether undeserved, if
the promiser did not perform, and proved not to be so good as his word, he
could not be said to do me wrong properly, but rather to wrong himself, by
imparing his own credit; and therefore Aquinas himself confesses, Non sequitur
quod deus efficiatur nobis debtor simpliciter, sed sibi ipsi in quantum
debitum est, ut sua ordinatio impleatur, Thom. 1. 2. quest 14. art. 1. ad. 3.
That God is not hereby simply made a debtor to us, but to himself in as much as
it is requisite that his own ordinance should be fulfilled; Now because the
Lord has made a promise of the Crown of Life to them that love him, therefore
St. Paul does not stick to attribute this unto God's justice, Henceforth (says
he) is laid up for me the Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous
Judge shall give me at that day, and not only to me, but also to all them that
Love his appearing; 2 Timothy 4. 8. Upon which place Bernard in his Book of Grace
and Free Will, says most sweetly, Est ergo quam Paulus expectat corona
justitiae, sed justitiae dei non suae, justum quippe est, ut reddat quod debet,
debet enim quod pollicitus est, and haec est justitia dei, de qua praesumit
apostolus, promissio dei, Bern. l. de. gra. and lib. arb. That therefore which
Paul expects is a Crown of Righteousness, but of God's Righteousness, not his
own, for it is just that he should give what he owes, and he owes what he
has promised, and this is the Righteousness of God, of which the Apostle
presumes, the promise of God. Thus far that learned Prelate; to which I shall
add that expression of St. Gregory expounding those words of the Psalmist, Make
me to hear the voice of thy loving kindness betimes in the morning; Si ill^
(says he) sanctorum faelicitas misericordia est, and non meritis acquiritur,
ubi erit quod Scriptum est, and tu reddes unicuique secundum opera sua, si
secundum opera redditur, quomodo misericordia estimabitur, sed aliud est
secundum opera reddere, and aliud est propter ipsa opera reddere, Greg. 7.
Psalm. pen. If the happiness of the Saints proceed from mercy, and is not
acquired by merits, where will that be which is written, Thou shall render to
every one according to his Work, if it be ren^red according to Works, how will
it be esteemed a mercy, but it is one thing to render according to Works,
another thing to render for the Works; and Farther I shall add this being that
Christ is the Altha and Omega, the foundation and Top-stone of Man's Salvation,
for it is he that bestows a ^itle to it, and the possession of it, and a
capacity ^o receive it, and all this proceeds merely from ^his bounty and
grace, and being that there are so many plain texts of Scripture proving
positively that eternal life is the gift of God, and what can be more Free than
gifts? It is strange that the Romanists should attempt to conlude the merit of
good works from texts of Scripture, that make not the least mention of any such
thing; what is this? But wilfully to shut their eyes against the Light of the
shining Sun, and to stumble at Noon day.

Secondly, for the reasons that are produced by the Romanists to prove the
merit of good works, they are so miserably infirm if not Blasphemous, that the
mention of them is a sufficient confutation; it is more honorable to have
eternal life by merit, than by gift, thus Bellarmin and Durandus, Absit (says
Tapper) ut justi vitam aeternam expectent, sicut pauper eleemosynam, multo
namque gloriosius est, ipsos quasi victores and triumphatores eam possidere,
tanquam palmam usis sudoribus debitam, Tap. art. lev. tom. 1. art. 9. God
forbid that the just should expect eternal life, as a poor man does alms; for
it is much more glorious to possess it as Conquerours, and Triumphers, as a
Palm due unto their labors; but the Reader may easily Judge how contrary this
is to that poverty of Spirit, which (our Savior says) will be rewarded with
the possession of eternal Happiness, Blessed (says he) are the poor in Spirit,
for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven; Math. 5. 3. And to the Doctrine of the
Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 2. 8. 9. Romans 3. 27. Telling us that by grace we are
saved, through Faith, and that not of our selves, it is the gift of God, not of
works, least any one should boast, and that all boasting is excluded by the Law
of Faith, but the fairest reason in their flock, as having the most plausible
outside is this, That the Doctrine of merits is effectual to promote the
Practice of piety, stirring up Christians to be abundant in bringing forth the
fruit of good deeds, who (say they) will be negligent in the work of the Lord?
while they are assured that it is given to their good deeds to merit the reward
of eternal life, whereas on the contrary, to deny this merit is the high way to
negligence and idleneses: In answer to which I ask the Romanists, whether to
know that God's goodness is so great, and his bounty so large, that he will not
suffer the good deeds of the Righteous to pass unrewarded, and that he is truth
it self, and has promised that a cup of cold water given unto a Disciple in
the name of a Disciple will not lose it is reward, be not as powerful to provoke
Christians to be fruitful in good Works? we say in opposition to them, who will
not make this seeding, while he is assured of reaping a plentiful harvest? who
will not employ the utmost of his care and pains in performing good works,
while he knows that though he shall not be rewarded for any merit that is in
them, yet he shall be rewarded according to the measure of them? The Apostle
Paul made use of this inference as effectual to persuade the Romans to this
practice, saying wherefore my bloved Brethren be ye steadfast, unmovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as you know that your
labor will not be in vain in the Lord, he does not say, for as much as you
know that there is merit given to be in good works.

And I ask them whether the immense favors, and unspeakable mercys, wherewith
God has ^evented man, be not powerfully obligatory to ^ain Christians to the
strictest care and pains ^f obedeince? The Prophet David was of this opini^n,
therefore he expresses himself thus, Bless th^^ the Lord, O my soul! and all
that is within ^, bless his holy name, Bless the Lord, O my soul! ^^d forget
not all his benefits, Who forgiveth all ^ine iniquities; who heals all thy
diseases, Who redeemeth thy life from destruction: who Crowns ^^e with loving
kindness and tender mercies; Psalm. ^03. 1. 2, 3. And the Apostle Paul was of
this opinion, therefore does he put the Romans in ^ind, not of any merit that
is in good works, ^ut of those mercies that God poured down upon them: I
beseech you (says he) by the mercies of God that you present your Bodies a
living ^acrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service,
and this working the mercies of God had upon Polycarpus, who when he came to
suffer (being tempted to save his life by denying Christ,) did not say by my
sufferings I shall merit, but expressed himself thus, I have served Christ
these fourscore years, and he never armed me, and shall I now deny and
blaspheme my King and Savior.

And farther I ask how agreeable this reason is to that method of obedience
which our Savior prescribed to his followers, wherein he showed what must be
the Root and ^ise of it, and without which there can be no sincerity of
obedience performed, if ye love me (says he) keep my commandments; this grace
is the principle which actuates the Children of God to obey, and by the working
of this, they would be stirred up to obey, though there was no future
retribution to be made, a dutiful Child will observe his Fathers command,
though there be no inheritance or portion to be bequeathed as a legacy unto
him, because he is a Child, and because he loves his Father; according to this
is that excellent saying of Gregory Nazianzen, Si servus es, time plagas, si
mercenarius tantum specta mercedem, at si supra hos es filius reverere tanquam
patrem tuum, benefacto quia pulchrum est obsequi patri, and quamvis nihil aliud
futurum, tamen vel hoc ipsum erit merces tua, fecisse quod gratum est patri, If
thou be a bond-slave then fear the whip; if thou be an hireling, then look only
for thy reward, but over and besides these, if thou be a child, then reverence
God as thy Father, do well because it is good to obey thy Father, yea and
though thou shall have nothing else, yet even this shall be thy reward, that
thou have been obedient to thy father, Gre. Naz. de sanc. ba.

But what if I can prove that to act upon the ground of merit, and to expect to
receive the Kingdom of Heaven as a debt due for the work done, is to pollute
the deeds, and to hinder them from passing in the number of good works, then
certainly their great reason falls to worse than nothing, and I think to find
this no hard task to undergo, I have told the reflector already that to
attribute merit unto good works, is to ascribe unto them that glory which
belongs only unto Christ, and it is to detract from the sufficiency of the
merits of Christ, and a corrupt fountain can send forth no waters but such as
are corrupt, a bad Tree can bring forth nothing but bad Fruit; but to prove
this farther, he that acts upon the ground of merit, slights the glory of God,
which should be the end of all man's actions, and undervalues the favors and
mercies of God, which should bind Christians to use their utmost endeavors in
^ing the work of the Lord; and distrusts the ^unty and goodness of God, which
is the rock ^ which man must build the hope of his Salva^on; and makes himself
the end of his actions, ^ho is not to live unto himself, and whose way ^
exaltation is to exalt God, and to debase and ^y himself. It is true, there is
a reward for the ^ighteous, unto which they may have some re^ect, to encourage
them against those difficultys ^ad sufferings which they will meet with in the
^orld, while they are passing on in the service ^f God, as the Apostle said
concerning Moses, he esteemed the reproach of Christ greater Riches ^han all
the treasures of Egypt, for he had respect unto the recompense of the reward;
but yet they must not make meriting that reward, the ground and end of their
actions, for that work cannot be reckoned in the number of good deeds, which ^s
^ainted with slighting God's glory, and under^aluing his mercies, and
distrusting his bounty and goodness, and with making man's self the end for
which it is to be done.

Let not the Romanists now say, that I should not have divided between these
things, but that a Christian may look upon merit as the ground and end of his
actions, and yet (notwithstanding this) advance the glory of God, and be
stirred up ^o act by the influence of favors, and may build upon the bounty
and goodness of God, and deny himself and all his performances; for they may as
well and truly say that man can serve two Masters, and worship God and Mammon,
Christ and Belial, and divide the glory of his Salvation between God and the
merit of his works. It is a remarkable saying of St. Bernard, Si nos pueril
animositate gratis salvari nolumus, merito non salvamur, dignatio locum non
habet, ubi fuerit presumptio dignitatis, If out of a Childish animosity we will
not be saved gratis, we are worthily not saved, dignity has no place, where
there is a presumption of dignity; Bern. in dedic. Eccl. ser. 5. And I will say
that he which shall be privileged to chant out the laudatory Song of the
Saints in the world to come, must begin it in this world, and say, Not unto us,
Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name be the praise, for thou art worthy to
receive glory and honor, and power, for thou have created all things, and for
thy pleasure they are and were created.

Thirdly, as to the ancient Fathers, which the Romanists do pretend to be on
their side; it is granted that the term merit has been frequently used by
them, but to save their credit, that they may not be charged with Blasphemy,
and barbarism, and contradiction, to and among themselves, we must not say that
it was used in the same sense with the present Roman Church. Ignatius (as the
Romanists do quote him) says, Give me leave to become the food of beasts, that
I may by that means merit and Win God, Igna. Epist. ad. Romans Epist. ad Romans 8.
18. This in the Romish sense is contrary to the expression of the Apostle Paul,
who tells us that the sufferings of this life are not worthy to be compared
unto the glory that shall be revealed in us; and this is contradicted by St.
Chrysostom, saying, Although we did dye a thousand deaths, although we did
perform all virtuous actions, yet should we come far short of rendering any
thing worthy of those honors, which are conferred upon us by God, Christ. de.
compu. ad stel. tom. 6. edit. Savil. p. 157. And St. Gregory vents this
expression, Paulus cum redemptoris ^^ men in terra conaretur extinguere, ejus
verba de ^lo meruit audire, Paul when he went about to ex^inguish the name of
our redeemer merited to hear ^is words from heaven; this in the Romish sense is
^eer barbarism if not Blasphemy; Greg. mor. in Job. 9. 17. And St. Ambrose
uses this expression Omnia quae patim^r minor a sunt, and indigna, quorum
prolaboribus tanta rependatur futurorum merces bo^rum, quae revelabitur in
nobis, cum ad dei imagi^^m reformati gloriam ejus facie ad faciem aspicere
^eruimus; All those things which we suffer are too little and unworthy for the
pains whereof there should ^e rendered to us so great reward of good things to
come, as should be revealed in us, when we being reformed according to the
image of God we shall merit to see his glory face to face, Amb. Epist. 22. This
in the Romish sense is a manifest contradiction; the like may be said of
several other Fathers; wherefore to ^ave their credit, it must be said that the
term merit was used by them in a sense far different from that of the present
Roman Church; and Indeed this is cleared against all contradiction by the
learned Primate of Ireland, Ans. to. Mal. p. 499. Merits (says he) in the
writing of the Fathers do ordinarily signify nothing but works, and to merit
simply to procure or obtain, without any relation at all to the dignity either
of the person or the work, and therefore as Tacitus writes of Agricola, Tac. in
vit. Jul. Ag. That by his virtues he merited (that is to say incurred) the
danger of Cajus Caesar; so St. Augustine says, that he and his fellows for
their good doings at the hands of the Donatists, instead of thanks merited the
flames of hatred; on the other side, the same farther affirms that St. Paul
for his persecutions and blasphemys merited, Aug. con. pen. 3. 6. Aug. de.
pred. and gre. (That is found the grace to be named a vessel of election; and
methinks the Romanists should be easily perswad^ to believe this, by the
interpretation of the texts of Scripture, where there is any thing o^
worthiness mentioned, the meaning of which is ^o be understood by other texts
of Scripture, as the 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5. That you may be counted worthy, of the
kingdom of heaven; and Luke 20. 35. But they that shall be counted worthy to
obtain the other wor^^; Revelations 3. 4. And they shall walk with me in white
for they are worthy; these texts of Scripture are produced by the Romanists to
prove the merit of good works, but how impertinently any one may judge, for the
worthiness that is spoken of i^ of persons, not of works, and what this
worthine^ is, let the Apostle Paul interpret, Ephesians. 1. 6. wherein he has made
us accepted in the beloved, and Coloss. 1. 12. who has made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light; from these texts we must
conclude that the worthiness spoken of in the forementioned texts, i^ nothing
but an acceptance in the beloved, and a meetness to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light; and why should not the lathers, where they
speak of merit in relation ^o the Kingdom of Heaven, be interpreted after the
manner.

Thus the Reader may see that there is noth^^g in the ancient Fathers, or in
the holy Scriptures, a in the dictates of reason sounding to this purpo^ that
man's good deeds are elevated by the mer^^ and promises of Christ so high, that
they are made worthy of a reward, but what is altogether contrary, that there
is not any merit either by acquisition or by gift in the best deeds of the best
of the sons of men: for a conclusion of this particular, I shall leave it to
the Judgment of any humble and ^ious person, that prize^ ^^ his Savior's
glory, and earnestly desires his own Salvation; to determine whither the sons
of men, who are vile and sinful dust and ashes, whose sanctification is
imperfect in the world, and whose best deeds have many failings adhereing unto
them, who are so much obliged by God, that though they had ten thousand lives
to lose, and would be content to shed every drop of blood that is in their
veins in defense of his cause, yet they would but perform their bounden duty,
and fall infinitely short of rendering a retribution proportionable to that
loving kindness, which God has expressed unto them. Can (...) in their
addresses to his glorious Majesty, with greater safety to themselves, and
suitableness to their wanting and miserable conditions build upon their own
good deeds, to be rewarded according to that merit, which (as this Gentleman
pretends,) is in them, whether that merit be by acquisition or donation, or lay
themselves low in the dust, to acknowledge their own worthlesness, and
unworthiness, and to shelter themselves under the wings of mercy, humbly
imploring the bounty of God in Christ for the Free gift of life and Salvation:
Waldensis one of the great Champions of the Roman Church, having considered,
the matter on every side, at l^ast determines it thus, Quid dignum facimus ut
participes coelestibus fieri inveniamur? apostolo dicente, existimo quod non
sunt condignae passiones hujus temporis ad futuram gloriam, quae revelabitur in
nobis, reputo igitur saniorem Theologum, fideliorem Catholicum, and scripturis
magis concordem, qui tale meritum simpliciter abnegat, Wald. cont. Wick. Romans
8. What worthy thing do we that we may be found in the fellowship of the
heavenly Spirits? the Apostle says, I judge that the sufferings of this life
are not worthy of that glory that shall be revealed in us, therefore I take him
to be the sounder divine the faithfuller Catholic and more agreeable to the
holy Scriptures that utterly denies all such kind of merit: and Bellarmin,
another of their great Champions determines it after the same manner, though
he had streined his invention to Coin arguments, and written much to establish
the Romish Doctrine of merit, yet upon better consideration, with this
conclusion throws down all that he had builded before, saying, Propter
incertitudinem propriae justitiae, and periculum inanis gloriae, tutissimum est
fiduciam totam in sola dei misericordia and benignitate repo^ere, Bell. 5. de.
just. 7. Because of the incertainty of man's Righteousness, and the danger of
vain glory, it is the safest way to repose the whole trust in the bounty and
mercy of God; and there was great reason that the great Cardinal after all his
strayings should return at the last into this safe way. I have showed in my
reply how destructive it is to instill the Doctrine of merit into the common
people, which this Gentleman thought fit to pass by in silence, thereby (as I
conceive) yielding a free and a full assent to the truth of it; and I can
confirm the destructiveness of it farther by this passage, of which there were
many witnesses; ^n the beginning of the rebellion in Ireland, there was an
Irish Captain taken in the Pale, who being brought to the City of Dublin, and
having the sentence of death pronounced against him, was accordingly guarded to
the gibbet to be hanged; while he stood upon the ladder, he used several
Prayers, which (to the outward appearance) were servent and wholesome, being
directed, not to ^aint or Angel, but to God that hears Prayer; but upon the
instant of his turning off the Ladder, he poured out with his last Breath this
last and unsavory Ejaculation: Lord I hope that thou will accept of this my
Suffering, as a full satisfaction for ^ll my Sins, and so passed to Eternity:
Now let any prudent man, that is sollicitous for his future Salvation,
determine whether the Opinion of Merit be not destructive unto Souls, while it
is thus apt to persuade frail man in the time of his great need to forsake the
saving Rock of Christ's Righteousness, on which only he is to build, for the
obtaining of Mercy, and to rely upon the broken Reed of the merit, of his own
Actions or Passions.

Concerning the Worship of Images.
ONe Quotation passes without exception; yet had it been in his Power, it had
not passed without a wilful per(...); but let him stretch^ until the words do
drop asunder, yet he cannot* force it to a compliance with the Doctrine of
present Romish Church: Pope Gregory reproves Serenus the Bishop of Marsilia for
breaking and defacing of Pictures, and that upon this ground, because Pictures
(as Gregory Conceited) might in some measure supply in Illiterate persons the
defect of Reading the Scriptures; thus he speaks, Nam quod Legentibus
Scriptura, hoc idiotis praestat Pictura cernentibus, What the Scriptures do
afford unto those that can Read, the Picture affords unto those that see and
cannot Read: But he Commends Serenus for forbidding the Adoration of Pictures,
and gives these Reasons for it, Because that which is made with Hands is not to
be Worshipped, and it is written, Thou shall Worship the Lord thy God* and him
only shall thou serve: And besides he gives this advice unto Serenus, Et si
quis Imagines facere voluerit minime prohibe, adorare vero Imagines omnibus
modis devita: Forbid not the making of Images, but avoid all kind of Worshipping
of Images.

The Doctrine of the present Romish Church* (as it is delivered by the Council
of Trent) Teaches that the Images of Christ, and of the Virgin Mother of God,
and other Saints, are chiefly to be had in Churches, and retained, and that due
Honor and Worship is to be given unto them, or as it is delivered by this
Gentleman, That it is good and Lawful and Profitable to keep Holy Pictures and
Images of Christ, and of his Saints, and to set them up in Churches, to give
them a Relative Honor.

This being the Doctrine of the present Roman Church, certainly the Power,
which this Gentleman has over his obliging Friend, and all his Followers is
very great; he can persuade them to believe that it is clear day, when dark
night, otherwise he would not be so Confident as to say, Now let the Reader
compare the words of Pope Gregory with the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, and
tell us wherein they are opposite: Pope* Gregory forbids the yiedling of any
kind of Worship to Images; the Doctrine of the Roman Church tells us, that
there is a Worship due, and commands it to be given unto them; Pope Gregory
allows the use of Pictures only for the sake of Illiterate persons, and only
for this end, ^t they might see on the Walls, what they could ^^ Read in the
Scriptures; the Doctrine of the Ro^an Church imposes the use of Pictures upon
those ^at are Literate, and can Read Scriptures, strictly ^orbidding them the
use of the Scriptures; that ^^ed (chiefly) used by the Council of Trent, ^ a
word of Remark, there is thus much includ^d in it, let the Scriptures be thrown
out of doors, ^d let the use of Images be retained in the church, let not the
Laiety, that are able to Read, ^e in any wise permitted to converse with the
Scriptures, but let them be kept to the use of ^ictures, for their better
Instruction and Edifica^on, together with the payment of an Holy Adoration,
this is the very Doctrine of the present Roman Church: And now the Reader
having viewed the Comparison between this Doctrine and Pope Gregory's words,
may tell ^e Reflector truly, that there is as great an opposition between them,
as there is between Truth and Error, and the Temple of God and Ido^atry.

But for the Reader's greater satisfaction, I ^all examine the Arguments that
are used to ^rove their pretended agreement: Pope Gregory allows, (says the
Reflector) of the use of Pictures as Pious and Profitable, and all the use for
which ^e allows them is this, to be mute Instructors unto ^he Ignorant, that
are not able to Read the Scriptures, Frangi non debuit (says he) quod non ad
adorandum in Ecclesiis, sed ad instruendas solummodo (...)tes fuit nescientium
collocatum: That ought not ^o be broken, which is not set up in the Church to
be Worshipped, but only to instruct the minds of the Ignorant, Greg. lib. 9.
Epist. 9. And he tells Serenus that the Abuses of Pictures are to be taken
away, and these abuses are the yeildings of any kind of Worship unto them:
Hence this Gentleman concludes, that the Doctrine of Pope Gregory i^ agreeable
to the Opinion of the present Roman Church, because it forbids the giving of
Divine Honor unto Pictures, and only commands a Relative and Inferior respect
or Honor agreeable to the Objects, which they do represent.

A strange inference, let the Reader take it in short thus, Pope Gregory
forbids the Worshipping of Pictures after any manner; therefore he agrees to the
Doctrine of the present Roman Church, which commands Images and Pictures
chiefly to to be set up and Worshipped with an Inferior and Relative Worship;
this is a strain of Logic, unknown to former Ages, and far above the hight
that Pope Adrian, and the second Council of Nice did fly; God took Clay and
made man after his own Image and Likeness: Therefore (says Pope Adrian) we must
set up Images in Churches, as we have heard, so have we seen, and God is
Marvelous i^ ^is Saints: And no man lights a Candle, and puts it under a
Bushel, Adr. Epist. Syn. Therefore (say the Bishops in the Council of Nice)
there must be Pictures to look upon, and the Church must be Decked with
Pictures, and Pictures must be set upon the Altar: Con. nic. It is an high
proof of a notable Faculty, to draw serviceable Conclusions from impotent
premises; but much more (as this Gentlemen does) to make one contrary to bring
forth another.

But while he shows his Activity in pleading for the Worship of Images and
Pictures, he proceeds in his accustomed practice of Contradiction to himself:
The Images (says he) of Christ and his Saints are Holy, yet the Worship that is
to be given ^to them is not Divine; And yet it must be agree^ble to the Objects
which they represent.

I would know what Holiness this is, that is ^scribed unto Images: Pope
Gregory, though he ^ote two Epistles to Serenus concerning Images) ^t did not
in either of them give this high Title ^o those Deaf and Dumb Idols; if it be
an Inherent Holiness that the Reflector speaks of, it is strange that this
Holiness should be in a senseless Stock or Stone; if it be Institutive, where
is there a Precept, or a President in Holy Scripture for Sanctifying of Images,
and setting them apart for Holy ends and uses: And if Images be Holy, and must
be Worshipped, certainly the Worship that is to be given unto them, must be
suitable, that is an Holy Worship; therefore I would know what Holy Worship
there is, that is not Divine, and I suppose that he will acknowledge that the
Worship which is most proper and agreeable unto Christ is Divine, therefore the
Worship that is to be given to his Image, must be Divine, because it must be
agreeable to the Object, which it represents. Besides when he Prays to a
Saint, the Worship that he performs unto that Saint is Divine, for Prayer is an
act of Divine Worship, and I ask whether the Worship be agreeable to the Saint
or not? If not, he is Erroneous in his Devotion, and sins in Praying to a wrong
Object; if it be, he must Pray to the Picture of a Saint, because it must have
that Worship which is agreeable to the Object, which it represents; and thus we
find by this Gentleman's Discourse, that there is a Worship which is Divine and
not Divine, that by the present Roman Church is Allowed and Commanded to be
given to Pictures.

Nor does he contradict himself, but he endeavors to bring Pope Gregory under
the same guilt, making his Practice to contradict his own Expressions and
Opinion; though Pope: Gregory has delivered himself plainly and positively,
forbidding all kind of Worship to be given unto Images: Yet the Reflector is
confident to say, That the Pope had a special Devotion, and Reverence toward
them: But his Arguments run very low, having a strong smell of his much
frequented Logic: And verily I must say, that his Faculty is admirable in
making any kind of Premises fruitful to bring forth serviceable Conclusions.

Mr. Bale, (says he) Reprehends Pope Gregory, for that he suffered the Image of
the Blessed Virgin to be carried about: Osyander affirms that Austin obtruded
Images upon the English Churches: And Doctor Fulke confesses, that Pope
Gregory allowed of Images; for which very point Cab^^ affirms, that he was
not taught in the School of the Holy Ghost: Hence the Reflector concludes, that
Pope Gregory had a special Devotion and Reverence toward Pictures.

I have not these Authors to peruse, therefore I cannot examine the Truth of
the Quotations, but supposing this, I will ask him how agreeable his
Expressions here, charging Pope Gregory with a special Devotion and Reverence
toward Images and Pictures, are unto some former Expressions used by him; he
has told us that the words quoted by me out of Pope Gregory against Image
Worship (and sure Pope Gregory did not say one thing, and practice a contrary)
do agree to the Doctrine of the Roman Church, forbidding all Divine Honor to
be given to Images and Pictures, ^nly allowing them a Relative or Inferior sort
^ Honor or Respect: I always thought a spe^ial Devotion and Reverence to be of
an high ^ing, no less than Divine, and not to be ran^ed under a low and
inferior sort of Honor or Respect: But let the force of the words be what they
will; I will tell him, that by special Devotion and Reverence toward Images
and Pictures, be must needs understand the Worship of Images and Pictures, or
else his Conclusion is not ad ^em, but sick of Impertinency; and who will not
laugh at the Unity and Weakness of that Deduction; what, did Pope Gregory
Worship every thing that he allowed to be used, and that he permitted to be
carried about, and that Austin obtruded upon the English Churches? He then did
Worship Pots, and Cups, and Vestments, and other Utensils, and might have vyed
with the Heathens, for the number of those Idols, which he did Worship.

Pope Gregory has told him again and again, that the end for which he allowed
the use of Images was not to be Worshipped with any kind of Worship, but only to
Instruct the Ignorant, that could not read the Holy Scriptures; and if Austin
obtruded them upon the English Churches, it was only for this end, otherwise he
acted contrary to the Doctrine of his Master; and if Pope Gregory permitted the
Image of the Blessed Virgin to be carried about, it was only for this end; And
though this was the only end for which Pope Gregory allowed the use of Images
and Pictures, yet was he justly reprehended by Calvin, because this was not the
method of Instruction that was prescribed by God to be used for Edification;
when our Savior gave that Commission unto his Disciples, saying, Go and Teach
all Nations, he did not enjoin them to carry Images about with them, to commend
unto the Ignorant people for this end; and the Apostle Paul tells us; That
Christ gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and Evangelists, and some
Pastors, and some Teachers for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of
the Ministry, for the Edifying of the Body of Christ: He does not tell us that
he gave Images and Pictures for that purpose; and he affirms besides; That
Faith comes by Hearing of a Preacher, not by seeing of a Picture: That
knowledge which is necessary unto Eternal Salvation cannot be imparted by Dumb
and Dead Pictures and Images, but by declaring those precious Truths that are
delivered in the Holy Scriptures.

Now let us observe, first how Partial this Gentlemen is in his dealing between
the Sacred Scriptures, and his adored Images and Pictures: he has declaimed
against the use of the Holy Scriptures, and thrown them quite out of the doors
of the common people, only for the abuse of them: But here he will not have the
use of Images and Pictures cried down, though they be abused, but reasons
favorably in their behalf; For if (says he) a good thing should be taken away
for the abuse of it, we should have very few good things left: It seems that he
takes Pictures and Images for good things, while he has an hard Sentence to
pass against the Holy Scriptures; for if he take them likewise for good things,
why did he not reason as favorably for them? I perceive that he knows how to
scatter Favors, or to deal Blows for his own greater advantage; and as Malice
will not forget the Carriage of an Enemy, so Gratitude will be mindful of the
Courtesy of a ^riend. The Sacred Scriptures are utterly against ^is Church and
Religion, therefore deals he this hard measure unto them; but Images and
Pictures are Superlatively Serviceable for the advancing of their Interest,
therefore does he bestow this high respect upon them: But the mean while, he
that extolls the merits of good works, as elevated by the Merits of Christ, to
make man worthy of a Reward, deserves little at the Hands of God, for
preferring those Senseless Stocks and Stones, that have Eyes but cannot see,
and Ears but cannot Hear, unto an higher Favor, than he can find in his Heart
to bestow upon those Holy Writings, that contain the saving Truths, which God
has vouchsafed to impart unto his People.

Secondly, that he says, The present Roman Church teaches, that it is good and
lawful, and profitable to set up Images in Churches, and to give them a
Relative Honor: But where is the proof of all this? Has the Roman Church
Taught this, and has she not produced some clear evidence to prove, that by
this Doctrine she has taught nothing but Truth? Is it good, and is there no
rule for its goodness? Lawful, and no Law for it? Profitable, and no profit
flowing from it? If there be any, which is not mentioned? Must we receive all
this for certain Truth, upon the bare word of the Roman Church? But what if God
does Teach the contrary, whether is to be believed, God or the Roman Church?
Let this Gentleman look upon the second Commandment, which some of the Roman
Writers have expunged out of the Decalogue, and he may Read that the Worship of
Images and Pictures is strictly forbidden: Thou shall not make to thy self any
Graven Image, nor the Likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above, or in the
Earth beneath; thou shall not bow down to them, nor Worship them, Exodus c. 20.
And let him peruse that Text which is quoted by Gregory against the Worship of
Images and Pictures, Thou shall Worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve, Math. c. 4. v. 10.

These Commands do forbid the yiedling of any kind of Worship to Images and
Pictures; otherwise the contrary to them in express terms may be lawfully
observed: And we may say, though God has commanded that thou shall Worship and
serve him only, yet thou may not Worship and serve him only, but thou may
Worship Pictures and Images, to wit, with a Relative Worship; though God has
commanded that thou shall not make any Graven Image, thou shall not fall down
and Worship them, yet thou may make Graven Images, thou may fall down and
Worship them, to wit, with a Relative Worship, and what kind of Laws would
these be? How much obliging to God's People, and how likely to be observed? Can
a Law oblige, and is it likely to be observed, when it is not sufficiently and
clearly propounded, when it admits of a double construction, and the meaning of
it is not understood? God has no where made any special Provisoes for the
limitation and Restriction of these Laws, and said provided that these Laws be
not to be understood to be against that Relative Worship, which is to be given
to Images and Pictures.

I shall let the Reflector have a further view of the nature of Image Worship,
according as it is set forth in Holy Scripture; he may Read, That C^^sed is the
man that makes a Graven or Molten Image an Abomination to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 27.
15. And Confounded be all they that serve Graven Images, Psalm. 97. 7. The
Prophet Habakkuk terms Images, A Teacher of Lies, Hab. 2. 18. And the Prophet
Jeremiah, A Doctrine of Vanities, Jer. 10. 8. These Texts do likewise tell us,
that no that no kind of Worship is to be given to Images and Pictures;
otherwise as I said before, the contrary to them may be truly affirmed and
justly maintained; and so the propounding of them would be nothing but a
puzling of the Understanding, no direction to the Will; and instead of being a
Light unto our Feet, and Lanthorn unto our Paths, would be (as the Pillar of
the Cloud was unto the Egyptians) utter Darkness to distract and Trouble us in
the choice of our way: Let not the Reflector now say, (as some Romanists have
done) that these Commands and Texts were only Obligatory to the Jews, not
pertinent to Christians; for he may as truly say, that the Love of God and the
Love of our Neighbors, is not pertinent unto Christians, our Savior having
told us expressly, That on these two hang all the Law and the Prophets.

What if to give this Relative Worship to Images and Pictures be to Commit the
Heinous sin of Idolatry? What is Idolatry but the Worshipping of an Idol? And
what are the Images and Pictures that are Worshipped by the Romanists but Idols?
Certainly that must be Idolized, to which that Worship is given, which is due
only unto God; and it is as certain that this is done to Images and Pictures by
the Romanists, the best Learned among them, who knew best the Constitution of
the Romish Religion, and endeavored with their whole might to maintain the
pretended Truth of it, have determined that the Image and Picture is to have
the same worship given unto it, which is to be given to the prototype, thus
Aquinas, Ozorius, and others; and that manner of Image worship, which is
prescribed by the Council of Trent speaks no less, Honos (says the Council) Qui
jis exhibetur, refertur ad prototypa, quae illae representant, it a ut per
imagines quas osculamur, and coram quibus caput operimus and procumbimus,
Christum adoremus, and sanctos, quorum illae similitudinem gerun^, veneremur;
The honor which we give to Images, is related to the prototypes, which they do
represent, so as that by the Images which we kiss, and before which we uncover
our head, and bow down, we adore Christ, and worship the saints, whose likness
they bear; and is any other worship but that which is highest fit to be
transfered and presented unto Christ.

But the reflector thinks to avoid this Charge by saying that the Doctrine and
the practice of the Roman Church is to forbid all Divine honor to be given to
Images; while with the same breath he affirms the quite contrary thing, Joining
with the Romish Doctors, and the council of Trent in qualifying of
Image Worship, the relative (says he) honor that is to be given to Images is
to be agreeable to the objects which they represent; and what worship lower
than divine, what worship but the highest can be agreeable unto Christ? If the
reflectors words do admit of any such thing as sense, this must be it, that the
worship which is to be given to Images, must be the same kind with that which
is given to the prototypes? The same kind of worship is to be given unto the
Image of Christ, which is given unto Christ: As to instance in outward worship,
we must fall down, we must cast our selves upon our bended knees unto Christ,
and this must be done to the Image of Christ, because it must have that worship
given unto it, which is agreeable to the object represented by it. And as so
with inward worship, Christ is to be loved, and feared, and our joy, and our
trust, and our hope is to be reposed in him, all this is likewise to be done to
the Image of Christ, that is also to be loved and feared, and our joy and our
trust and hope is to be reposed in it. Because it must have that worship given
unto it, which is agreeable to the object, which it represents; let the
reflector sort this worship into degrees as he can, and tell (if he can) what
degree it is that makes an inferior, and what degree a superior worship, and
prescribe how to distinguish between them; this is certain that by his
assertion the same kind of worship is to be given to the Image of Christ, which
is given unto Christ, otherwise the worship that is given to his Image, cannot
be agreeable unto him, there being a special kind of Worship pertinent and due
unto him.

But this matter is put quite out of doubt by the notorious practice of the
Romanists; as Samuel said unto king Saul, denying his guilt of sparing the best
of the Amalakites cattle, what means this bleating of sheep in my ears, and
this lowing of oxen which I hear; so I may say to the Romanists, while they
deny their guilt of Idolatry in worshipping of Images and pictures, what means
their wearing and carrying of Crucifixes and pictures about with them? What
means their setting them up about their beds, and in their Chambers and
Closets, and what means their burning of incense, and killing, and uncovering
the head, and bowing the knee used to them, and all this is done in obedience
to the dictates, and in reference to the exercise of their Religion; and what
means their praying to Images and pictures? The cross is on good friday
invocated after this manner, O cr^x! ave spes unica! hoc passionis tempore,
auge ^lis justitiam, re^sque dona veniam? Which is englished thus, all hail o
cross, our only hope in this time of the passion, in faithful people grace
increase, to sinners grant remission; and in one of their prayer books we find
a prayer entitled thus, a prayer to the Image of the body of Christ, which
runs in these words, O maker of heaven and earth, King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords which of nothing did make me to thy own simlitude and likeness, etc.
and what is this but to imitate the practice of that Idolater which the wise
man speaks of, saying, he is not ashamed to speak to that which has no life,
for health he called upon that which is weak, for life he prays to that which
is dead, for and he humbly beseeches that, which has least means to ^el^.

What if Images and Pictures be not capable to receive any kind of worship? Is
there any capacity in a stock or a stone? There may be an outward position used
to it, as overlaying with gold or silver, beautifying with colors, decking
and adorning with precious Jewels, Rich Garments, according to the fancy of
the cunning artificer, or Idolatrous worshiper, but there can be no reception
made by it, nor is it sensible of any thing that is done unto it; the comfort
of a Christian depends upon his experiences of this, that the worship which he
performs is wel-pleasing unto God, and God is not defective to his own servants
in testifying this, but lets them feel it by that ^ which he di^^ills into
their Souls, Refreshing ^ Cheering their Hearts, after they have de^tly
performed their Religious Duties: But ^ do the Romanists know that their
Praying ^ Prostrating, and Becking, and Becking, and Bowing, and ^ning Incense
to Images and Pictures is accep^e and well pleasing unto them? To testily ^ do
they give any outward Sign or Token, ^ moving their Lips, or Nodding their
Heads, ^ pointing with their Fingers? No, let the Ro^^sts perform never so many
Acts of Submission ^ Service to their Images and Pictures, let them ^ill, or
Cry, or Shout never so loud, (as it was ^h the Idolatrous Baalites) there is
neither Voice, ^ any to Answer, nor any that regards: The ^oression of the
Psalmist, displaying the Stu^y of Idolaters, and vanity of Idols, is deser^lly
applied to their Images and Pictures, that ^ Worshipped with an Inferior and
Relative ^orship; The Idols of the Romanists, Are the ^icks of men's Hands, they
have Mouths but they ^iak not, Fyes have they, but they see not, they ^e Ears,
but they hear not, neither is there any ^iath in them.

What if Christians by yiedling any kind of ^orship unto Images and Pictures do
put off ^eir Humanity, and make themselves more ^p^d than Bruit Beasts, even as
Stocks and Stones? ^he Psalmist tells us, That they that make Idols ^e like
unto them; and so are all they that put their ^rust in them, and this is
acknowledged by one ^ the greatest Champions of the Roman Church, ^er^n says,
The act of submission can only in rea^n be directed to an Object, which we
conceive our ^uperior, or endowed with some more Excellency No man submitting
to a lower than himself, mu^less to an Irrational or inanimated Creature; a^
whosoever should yield a submission upon this score ^ servitude, should
prevaricate from Reason, a^ commit a kind of Superstition and* Idolatry in ^
knowledging a Superiority where it is not due* V^ Rule of Faith, p. 110. Now
what Superiority o^ Excellency is there in an Image or Picture abov^ man, it is
not the matter, which is Paper, ^ Cloth, or Wood, or Stone, or it may be
Si^ver, or Gold, that is above man, nor is it the Figure, which it receives
from the Artificer; for there is no cause that can produce an effect, tha^ is
Superior unto, and more excellent than i^ self, nor is there any excellency
derived unto ^ from the Prototype, that can dart no excellen^ into a Stock or
Stone, that is capable to receiv^ none; so that all its excellency must reside
in the imagination of the Worshipper, and then it ca^ be nothing, but what is
Imaginary: It is acknowledged by the Council of Trent, That Images ^^ not to be
Worshipped for any Virtue or Divinity the is believed to be be in them; and then
according t^ the assertion of Ver^on, To Worship them is to pr^varicate from
reason, and become more stupid tha^ the Bruit Beasts.

What if the Decrees of Councils and Emperors be contrary to the Worship of
Images an^ Pictures? The Council of Eliberis Decreed thus* Placuit Picturas in
Ecclesiis esse non debere, ne (...) colitur aut adoratur in parietibus
depingatur; W^ think it good that there be no Pictures in the Churches* least
the thing that is Honored or Adored, b^ Painted on the Walls: Con. Elib. Can.
36. To avoid the force of this Decree, it is but a pitifu^ shift that is used
by the Romanists, saying, Tha^ ^^e Council was held in Persecuting times, and
the ^alls in the Churches, then being but slender, were ^bject to ruin by
Moisture and other Incommodities, which was the reason that the Council forbad
the ^aking of Pictures upon Walls, lest they should be ^^^faced by the violence
of the Persecutors, or by the ^^ines of the Walls; but did not forbid the
making (...) Pictures and Images to be set upon Altars, and to (...) kept in
other convenient places: It is plain that it ^as not the Locality, or placing
of Pictures, against which the Council did Decree, but the ^eing of Pictures,
in reference unto Worship; and ^^at for this reason, because that, which is to
be ^he Object of Adoration and Worship, is not to ^e Pictured upon Walls, there
to be Worshipped; and if not upon Walls, then certainly not after any other
manner: Melchior Canus, Can. Loc. Theol. ^ 5. c. 4. makes no such simple
Evasion as this, (...) takes the boldness positively and plainly to charge the
Council not only with Impudency, but also with Impiety, for establishing that
wholesome Decree: The Council of Ments Decreed, That when Images happen to be
be abused by the People, they should be notably altered, or utterly abolished:
The Emperors Valens and Theodosius gave out this general Proclamation, Cum sit
nobis cura diligens, etc. For as much as we have a diligent care in all things
to maintain the Religion of the most high God, therefore we suffer no man to
Fashion, or Grave, or Paint the Image of our Savior Christ, either in Colors,
or in Stone, or in any other kind of matter; but wheresoever any such Image
shall be found, we command it to be taken down, assuring our Subjects, that we
will most strictly punish all such as shall presume to attempt any thing
contrary to our Decree and Commandment, P. Crin. l. 9. c. 9.

To plead the second Council of Nice decreeing the contrary, will not serve the
Romanists to resist the force of the forementioned Decrees; let any rational
person determine, whether is most consonant to the rule of Christianity, and
therefore most obliging to obedience, a Decree that is conformable to the
command of God, and the current of the Holy Scriptures, or a Decree that runs
in a direct opposition to both: Yea, let the Romanists themselves determine,
whether that Council is to be obeyed, that purposely to act in opposition to
the Council of Constantinople, which had Decreed against the Worship of Images,
was summoned near 800 years after Christ, and that by the instigation of the
Empress Irene, an Heathen Born, and a most wicked Woman, who taking her own
Natural Son Constantinus, pulled out his Eyes, only because he would not
consent to the Idolatrous use of Images: Besides, a Council that founded its
Decree upon Ridiculous grounds and motives, because the Prophet David vents
these Expressions, Exalt ye the Lord our God, and Worship before his Footstool,
and adore ye in his Holy Hill; and O Lord! all the Rich of the People shall
Pray before thy Countenance, Nice con. act. 2. and 4. Therefore it was
concluded, that an Image is better than Prayer, and Images are to be
Worshipped, and an Anathema was denounced against all those that should refuse
to pay this adoration: Because it Decreed after this manner, it was rejected as
a Pseudo-synod, and its base Decree opposed as repugnant to the Doctrine of the
Church of God, by the Princes and Bishops of England first, and by Charles the
Great afterward, and by the Bishops of Italy, France and Germany, which by his
appointment were gathered together in the Council of Franckford. What if the
Ancient Fathers have delivered ^ Opinion contrary to the Worship of Images? ^,
Clemens Alexandrinus writes thus? Nobis ^e vetitum est artem fallacem exercere,
non fa(...)m, Inquit Propheta, cujusvis rei similitudinem, ^e plainly forbidden
to use this deceitful Art of ^ing or Graving, Clem. Alex. prot. ad gent. ^ the
Prophet says, Thou shall not make the ^ess of any thing: And Lactantius says,
Non est ^m quin nulla est Religio ubi simulachrum est; ^ of doubt wheresoever
is any Image, there is no ^gion, Lact. div. Inst. l. 2. c. 19. Origin writes ^
this manner, Celsus objicit nobis, quod non habe^ altaria and imagines, Celsus
objecteth us against ^we have neither Altars nor Images, Orig. con. Cells.

And Arnobius says unto the Heathens, Ac^tis quod non habemus Imagines and
altaria, You ^se us that we have not Images and Altars: ^ob. cont. gent. l. 2.
Epiphanius the Bishop of ^as entering into a Church, and finding there a ^l
hanged up, with the Image of Christ, or ^e Saint painted on it, Tore it
asunder, be^e it was done contra Authoritatem Scriptura^, Contrary to the
Authority of the Scriptures: ^d further he says, Hujusmodi vela contra Re^mem
nostram veniunt, Such Veils are contrary to ^ Christian Religion: And again,
Haec Scrupulo^ (says he) indigna est Ecclesia Christi and populis ^ tibi
crediti sunt; This Superstition is unmeet for ^ Church of Christ, and for the
people that is com^ted unto thee. Epip. Epis. ad Jor. Epis. Dier.

What if the invention of Image and Picture ^orship came from Heathens and
Infidels, that ^ew not God? Gregorius the Bishop of Neo-Cae^ia tells us, That
gentilitas inventrix and caput est ^ginum, Heathenism was the Head and deviser
of Images Conc. Nic. 2. act. 6. and Eusebius speaki^ of the Image of Christ and
of Peter and Paul sa^ Hoc mihi videtur exgentili consuetudine observat^ quod
ita soleant illi honorare, quos honor dig^ duxerunt, this seems to be the
observation ^ heathenish custom, for with such Images they used ^ honor them,
whom they thought worthy of hono^ Eusebius. l 7. c 17. St. Augustine writing
against Ac^ mantus expresses himself thus, Simulant se faver^ simulachris,
quod propterea faciunt ut miserrimae ^ vesanae suae sectae, etiam paganorum
conciliant be^ volentiam, they would seem to favor Images, wh^ things they do,
to the intent to make the heathens to the the better of their most miserable
and lewd sect; Au^ cont. Adia. 13. Lactantius writes of the heathen^ Verentur
ne religio vana sit, si nihil videant qu^ adorent, they are afraid (as also the
Romani^ are) that their religion shall be but vain, if the sea nothing that
they may worship; Lact. l. 2. c. 2. from all this which has been said, it must
be conclu^ed contrary to the reflector's assertion, and the Doctrine of the
Roman Church, that the wo^ship of Images is not good but evil; not lawful^ but
unlawful, not profitable, but destructive to the worshippers.

It is strange that the reflector (having attempte^ to prove the Romish
Doctrine in the rest of the controverted particulars,) should pass this by, an^
leave it to be taken up by the reader without an^ color of proof; does he
think that all other persons are like unto his obliging Friends, a^ seduced
followers, to deny the exercise of the^ reason and sense, and to become so
sottish an^ stupid as to perform acts of submission and worshi^ to a stock or a
stone, or a piece of painted cloat^ or paper, only because the present Roman
Church ^s that this is good, and profitable, and lawful ^ be done? Or was he
not able to contribute the ^p of one argument to make his Doctrine more ^lable
to the understanding? Or did he conceit as it is), so palpably false, that no
covering ^ld avail to keep the erroneousness of it from the ^ of the diligent
observer? Or was he afraid to ^age so far in the behalf of his holy mother,
^owing that hard undertakings put the actors ^on hard shifts, necessitating
them to a faulty ^nagement, which instead of being a supporter ^a bad cause,
brings it unavoidably down upon ^ir own heads? Which of these reasons had ^
greatest influence upon him, I will not deter^ne, but this I will say, that had
he undertaken ^ proof of it, it is very probable that he would ^e done, as he
has frequently done, and ^t is as Children always do, by meddling with edg^
tools.

To prove Lead to be Gold, or the Devil to be ^ real Saint, ^s a task beyond
the possibilty of per^mance, wherefore it was politickly done to ^s by this
Doctrine, after this manner: For this ^ing true, that God's commands, and the
cur^nt of the Scriptures, and the degrees of Councills, ^d Emperors, with the
opinion of the anti^t Fathers, are against the worshipping of Images ^d
pictures, and being they are incapable to ^ceive any kind of worship, and it is
in humanity ^d Idolatry to give them any kind of religious ^orship, and
likewise because this dirty puddle ^th issued from the unclean fountain of
heathe^m and paganism; the present Roman Church in^ad of saying that the
worship of Images and ^ctures is good and profitable and Lawful, should ^ave
said that it is utterly unlawful, being an heinous sin, fatal, and deadly to
the actors it.

But what the reflector has left undone, so^ Romanists have attempted to
perform, an Id^ (say they) is the Image of a feigned deity, or ^ Image
worshipped as a God, or with that worship which is due only unto God, but the
Images and Pictures, the are worshipped by the Romanists, are representations ^
real beings, nor are they worshipped as Gods, or wit^ the worship due unto God,
but with an inferior wor^ship, which is not terminated in them, but referre^
to the objects represented by them; and that it i^ Lawful to worship them after
this manner, they prove thus, Images (say they) do represent heavenly things,
and God commanded two Cherubins t^ be made of beaten gold, and to be set on
both side^ the ark, and promise to speak from the middle of the Cherubins;
besides our savior approved the making and exalting the Brazen Serpent, by
which the Israelites were healed in the desert. And owns it to be an Image and
figure of himself ^xalted on the cross; and to prove that it is good and
profitable to worship them, they tell us that they are serviceable to restrain
man's thoughts from wandering, to stir up devotion and reverence in him, making
him mindful of God, and keeping him intent upon the exercise of religious dutys.

This account of Image worship do I find compiled in a Romish Catechism, set
forth with approbation, and sent to a Protestant, by Mr. H. L. upon the errand
of delusion; which persuades me to believe that here we have the Doctrine of
Image worship represented in the fairest dress, and supported with the
strongest arguments that Romish art can use; in answer to which, first I must
tell the Romanists that they are defective in Numbering of Idols, and
consequently in reckon^g the kinds of Idolatry; an Image worshipped ^th any kind
of religious worship is an Idol, ^ough it be a representation of a real being,
and ^ough the worship be referred unto the proto^pes; And to worship God after
that manner is to ^mmit the heinous sin of Idolatry; this very Idola^y is
forbidden in the Second commandment of ^e moral Law, Thou shall not make to
thy self any ^even Image, nor the likness of any thing that is ^ heaven above
or that is in the earth beneath, or that ^in the water under the earth, thou
shall not bow down ^y self to them, nor worship them.

It is replied by the Romanists, that this is not ^ particular command, but
only an explanation of ^e first; but how groundless and false this plea is,
^easily discerned; and that it is a distinct com^andement from the first,
cannot (with any ^olour of Truth) be denied, the first showing ^he object that
is to be worshipped, that is the true God, and forbidding the worship of any
other God; and the Second showing how the true God is to be worshipped, and
forbidding to worship ^im by pictures and Images, surely the Romanists will
acknowledge God and Christ to be in heaven and the Images of things in heaven,
as well as things on Earth are forbidden to be made and wor^hipped.

The Children of Israel might have pleaded to excuse themselves from the guilt
of Idolatry, as the Romanists now do, when they worshipped the golden calfe,
they might have said, that it was not the representation of a feigned deity,
but of the true God; and the worship which they gave unto it, was not
terminated in it, but refered to the prototype; for this was really their case;
they said these be thy Gods O Israel, which brought thee out of the land of
Egypt; Exodus c. 32. v. 4. Can any man think that they, who not long before had
chanted out a song of praise and thanksgiving unto the true God for the
destruction of Pharaoh and his host, whereby they were delivered out of the
oppressive and tyrannical hands of the Egyptians, saying, I will sing unto the
Lord for he has triumphed gloriously, the Horse and the Rider has he thrown
into the Sea, should so suddenly forget the Lord their deliveret, and be so
stupid as to ascribe their deliverance unto a calf, which a little before hung
by parcells in their ears, and which was made before their eyes? wherefore the
meaning of the expression must be this? O Israel this is the representation of
thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt; And that the worship
which they gave unto it, was referred unto the true God, is confirmed beyond
all contradiction by the following verse, And when Aaron saw it, he built an
altar before it, And Aaron made proclamation, and said to morrow is a feast
unto the Lord; he did not say to morrow is a feast unto the Calf.

Jeroboam might have excused himself and the ten Tribes after the same manner,
and said that the Calves which were set up in Dan and Bethel, were
representations of that God which was worshipped at Jerusalem, and that the
worship which was performed unto them, was referred unto him; it is evident
that those Calves were set up to prevent the Israelites from going to Jerusalem
to worship, and Jeroboam said, If this People go up to do Sacrifice in the
House of the Lord at Jerusalem, then shall the heart of this people turn again
unto the Lord, even to Rhehoboam King of Judah. Whereupon the King took
Council, and made ^ Calves of Gold, and said unto them, it is too (...)h for
you to go up unto Jerusalem; Jeroboam did ^ttend that he and the Israelites
might worship ^od nearer home, by a Relative worship, for it ^as said of the
Calves (as of Aaron's Golden ^alf) These be thy Gods, O Israel, which brought
^ee out of the Land of Egypt; and Jeroboam and ^e Israelites could not be so
senceless as to think, ^at the Calves newly made and set up, were ^he Author of
that deliverance, which was ^rought some hundreds of years before.

Several likewise of the Heathens might have ^cused their Idolatry after this
manner, Cicero ^lls, Nemo unquam tam fatuus fuit, qui saxum aut ^pidem Jovem
esse credidit, None ever was so void ^f sense as to believe a Stone to be
Jupiter; and the Inhabitants of Lystra, when they saw Paul and Barnabas heal
one that was a Cripple from his Youth, said, The Gods are come down to us in
the likeness of men, Acts 14. 11. they supposed their Gods to be in Heaven,
whose Images and Statues they worshipped upon Earth; it is acknowledged by the
Apostle Paul, Acts 17. 23. that the Athenians worshipped the true God, and it
is evident that this worship was performed by the use of Statues and Images.

Secondly, I ask the Romanists how these things do hang together, that God's
worship is not given to his Image, and yet that the worship which is given to
it, is referred unto him? will they refer that unto God which is not his? how
then can they think to find acceptance? and how dare they pretend to worship
God after this manner? The offering of strange Fire cost Nadab and Abihu dear,
even the loss of their precious lives. Besides, how can these contradictory
pleas excuse them from the guilt of Idolatry? when they do worship the Image of
God by Thurification and kissing, and uncovering the head, and bowing the knee,
whether are these outward acts of submission and reverence part of God's
worship or not? if not, God is not worshipped by them, and consequently the
Romanists are gross Idolaters in directing their worship to mere liveless
Stocks and Stones; but if they be, then are the Romanists confessed Idolaters
in giving that unto Stocks and Stones, which is due only to God.

Thirdly, I ask them what strength is to be found in this inference, Images are
representations of Heavenly things, therefore they are to be worshipped? Are
all such Representations to be worshipped? why then was not the Tabernacle and
the Temple worshipped by the Jews, they were representations of heavenly
things? and why are not the Heavens worshipped by Christians, the Psalmist
tells us that the Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows
his handy work? why is not the Sun, the Moon, and all living Creatures; yea,
every Shrub and Herb worshipped, the Poet telling us (and that nothing but
Truth) Presentem refert quaelibet Herba Deum? The inference which they draw
from the Cherubims, and the Brazen Serpent is as weak and ridiculous; the
Romanists will never prove that these things were set up and commanded to be
worshipped, the contrary being expressed in the holy Scripture, that when the
Israelites fell to worship the Brazen Serpent, by burning of Incense unto it,
their carriage was so offensive and abominable, that it was broken in pieces by
the Godly King, Hezekiah, for which act he had this approbation, That he did
that, which was right in the sight of the Lord.

Fourthly, I will tell them that they are very forgetful of holy Duties, and
very backward in the performance of them, if they stand in need of the monition
of Images and Pictures; and if they must have such senceless admonitors, why
must they be of their own making, will not such as are God's own handy work
serve their turn? But to infer hence that those admonit(...) are to be
worshipped with a relative worship, is a strain of Logic that requires
admiration; what goodly conclusions will this antecedent bring forth, their
Ghostly Fathers (the Priests) do (as they say) put the common people in mind,
and do stir them up to the performance of holy Duties, therefore they are to be
worshipped with a relative worship; every provident and indulgent Parent is
careful to do this unto his Children, therefore he is to be worshipped with a
relative worship; yea, every part of the visible Creation may and ought to be
improved to this behoof, therefore every part thereof is to be worshipped with a
relative worship.

He that is convinced with such silly Arguments as these, that the worshipping
of Images and Pictures is good and lawful and profitable, has his
understanding totally eclipsed; that he sees nothing as it is in it self, but
takes every thing upon trust, as it is represented by the present Roman Church,
though the nature of it be quite contrary.

That kind of worship can never be good and lawful and profitable, that is
First, not derived from the fountain of goodness; where did God ever enjoin or
approve of the worshipping of Images and Pictures? He has strictly forbidden
the making, and frequently prohibited and punished the worshipping of them; but
never did he give the least hint of an injunction, or the least sign of
approbation for this worshipping of Images.

Secondly, That was never used by any of the Primitive Christians; which of
those mentioned in Scripture, that were first Converted unto the Christian
Faith, did ever observe this practice? we read* of their meeting together to
hear the Word of God, and to pray unto him, and to praise him for his
blessings; but never of their meeting together to worship Images and Pictures.

Thirdly, That is not conformable to that manner of worship, which was
prescribed by our Savior; God (says he) is a Spirit, and is to be worshipped
in Spirit and in Truth; to worship God by Images and Pictures, is not to
worship him in Spirit and in Truth.

Fourthly, That is not agreeable to that walking, which was used by the choice
Saints and Servants of God, while they were in the World; We walk (says the
Apostle Paul) by Faith, and not by sight, and our conversation is in Heaven; to
walk by the sight of a Picture, is not to walk by Faith; and to converse with
Pictures, is not to have our conversation in Heaven.

Fifthly, That is a scandal and reproach unto Christianity, giving occasion of
offense unto Jews and Turks* in the second Council of Nice, where the
worshipping of Images and Pictures was decreed, several Bishops Assembled there,
did acknowledge that the use of Image and Picture-worship among Christians kept
the Jews and the Sar^cens (whose Religion was the same with that ^f the Turks,
at a greater distance from the pro^ession and practice of the Christian
Religion.

Sixthly, That is nearly allied to that manner ^ worship, which was used by the
Heathens, for which we have the Testimony of Ludovicus Vives, ^ho, having
compared the worship, that is given ^y the Romanists to Images and Pictures,
with that which was used by the Heathens to their Sta^ues, affirms that the
only difference between them ^as in the change of some names and Titles; the
Romanists do worship their Images and Pictures by burning of Incense, and
uncovering the head, and bowing, so did the Heathens their Statues; and
Arnobius tells us that one main ground and ^^d for which Statues were
worshipped by Heathens was, Non quod es, aurum, argentum, and si^^les statuarum
materiae dii sunt, sed quod per eas ^^ invisibiles honorentur, and colantur;
Not because the Gods are Brass, Gold, Silver, and like unto the ^atter of
Statues, but because the invisible Gods ^ay be honored and worshipped by them;
this very ground and end is pretended and pleaded for ^mage and Picture-worship
by the Council of Trent, Imagines (says that Council) Christi etc. The Images
of Christ, and of the Virgin Mother of God, and other Saints, are specially to
be had, and kept in Churches, and due honor and worship is to be given unto
them; not because any Divinity or virtue is believed to be in them, for which
they are to be worshipped, etc. but because the honor which is given unto them
is referred to the Prototypes, so that by the Images which we kiss, and before
which we do uncover our Heads, and bow down, we do adore Christ, and worship
the Saints, whose likeness Images do bear; never was issue more like unto its
Parent, than the worship of Images and Pictures used by the Romanists is like
unto the worship that was used by the Heathens, so that it may be truly said,
the one is the Mother, the other is the Daughter.

Seventhly, That endangers the damnation of the common people, by drawing them
to gross and downright Idolatry; Polydor Virgil speaks to this purpose, Multi
sunt (says he) saltem rudiores, qui ligneas, saxeas, marmoreas, aeneas, item
in parietibus pictas imagines colunt, non ut figuras, sed perinde quasi aliquem
sensum ipsae habeant, quippe eis magis fidunt, quam Christo ipsi, aut aliis
d^vis quibus dicati fuerunt; In the Church of Rome there are many who worship
Images of Stocks, Stones, Brass, or painted on Walls, not as Figures, but even
as if they had some sense in them, and who put more trust in them, than in
Christ himself, or in the Saints to whom they are dedicated. To the same
purpose George Cassander speaks, Manifestius est, (says he) quam ut verbis
explicari debeat, imaginum and simulachrorum cultum multum invaluisse, and
affectioni seu potius superstitioni populiplus satis indultum esse, ita ut ad
summam adorationem quae vel a paganis suis simulacris exhiberi consuevit, etc.
It is more clear than needs many words to declare it, that the worship of
Images and Statues is gone too far; and too much liberty given to the devotion,
or rather superstition of the People, so as it came to the very height of
worship, which even Pagans do give unto their Idols.

To conclude this particular, because it is affirmed that the Worship which is
due unto God, is not to be given to his Image, and yet the Worship which is to
be given to his Image must be agreeable to him; for the preventing of a
mistaken and Erroneous Devotion, and that the precious ^ouls of Christians may
not be split upon the ^estructive Rocks of Idolatry, by directing unto God the
Worship, which is to be given only to ^is Image, or on the contrary by
directing to his ^mage the Worship that is to be given only unto ^im; I would
have the Reflector to fasten some ^ote or Mark of Distinction, upon the
Relative Worship, which (he says) is to be given unto ^ages, that the common
people may know how ^ discern (if there be any difference) betwixt it, ^d the
terminative and absolute Worship which ^o be given unto the Prototypes; and
until this ^ done, (which will never be done) let their ^mmon people be
strictly restrained (according ^ the advice of Pope Gregory) from giving any
and of Worship unto Images and Pictures: ^ely the Roman Leaders should watch
carefully ^ver their people, to be tender of the welfare of ^eir Souls, for
which end they should be urgent ^ pressing them to observe the advice of the
A^ostle Paul, and likewise of the Apostle John, ^lee from Idolatry, and my
little Children keep ^ur selves from Idols, Amen.

Concerning the Popes Supremacy.
TO be Head of the Catholic Church, is a Prerogative that is peculiar unto
Christ; The Husband (says the Apostle Paul) is the Head of the Wife, as Christ
is the Head of the Church: He only is capable to receive it, and he only has
Power and Ability to execute the Offices that do belong unto it; what is vain,
sinful, mortal man, that he should have this capacity and ability attributed
unto him? He cannot protect, and support, and nourish, and govern himself, he
cannot give motion, and sense, and life unto himself, much less can he do these
things for the Church of Christ: Besides, when our Savior was about to leave
the World, he did not tell his Disciples, that he would send a visible
Vicar General to supply his Room, But his Holy and Invisible Spirit to comfort
his people, and to lead them into all Truth: Nor did he appoint any such Vicar,
when he sent his Ambassadors and Ministers to plant and gather his Church, but
he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers; and his Kingdom being not of this World, but Spiritual,
and his Church a Mystical Body, a visible Corporal Head is no more suitable,
and agreeable to it, than an Head of Clay or Straw is unto a Body that is
framed of the most Refined Silver, or purest Gold: All this makes it plain to
every one that is not wilfully blind, that the Title of Supremacy does not
belong unto the Pope of Rome.

Yet the Reflector strives to prove the contrary, and that St. Gregory (being
Pope) assumed that Title as his own undoubted Right, derived to him by
Succession from St. Peter: But mark what he says, ^reating upon the Communion
in both kinds; Though I should bring a thousand clear undeniable Testimonies
out of St. Gregory, witnessing that the Laity ^^d received in both kinds, it
would be nothing to the purpose, unless I had first proved that the Sacrament ^
not entire except it be Administered in both kinds. What, are the Assertions of
the Pope made to no purpose? Is he the Head of the Church, and the ^ock upon
which the Church is built as the Suc^essor of St. Peter, and yet his Assertions
of no ^orce to prove a Position to be Catholic Doctrine, ^nless a precedent
proof be made for his Assertions? ^s there any man, or Society of men more to
be Credited than the Head of the Church? Is there any man, or Society of men
higher than the highest? Certainly the Headship that he claims for the Pope is
of the same composition with Childrens Babes, made up of nothing but Clouts, or
else he has got some Elixar as precious as the Philosophers Stone, by the
touch of which all his Assertions are converted into Aphorisms, though they be
mere contradictions in themselves. This being observed, I proceed to examine
how he maintains the Supremacy that he claims for the Pope.

The Title of Universal Bishop in common reason should Tantomount to that
Title, which was given by Clement to James Bishop of Jerusalem, Episcopus
Episcoporum, Bishop of Bishops, what Engines are there to be use ^o rack it, to
signify only one particular Bishop, excluding all others from the Dignity of
Bishops? Two dissenting terms of different significations cannot import the
same thing, and Universals do not exclude, but include particulars; it is a
pitiful shift to avoid the force of Pope Gregory's Testimony, by sheltring
himself under a Nonsensical distinction, and mark how he proves the several
Members of this distinction.

For the first he quotes Pope Gregory, but as Millers commonly take their Toll,
it is with some Addition; and (as some Litigious persons do win their Trials at
Law) by teaching the Witnesses to speak more than they know: These Words ( as
if there were no other Apostle but himself) are not Pope Gregory's; who would
think that the man that has been crying out against me, and charging me with
falsifying and wresting Pope Gregory, should make himself guilty of this
shameful addition; and who would think that he should be thus grossly Injurious
to Pope Gregory, to charge him with an Expression that contains in its self a
manifest contradiction? If Peter was the Prince of the Apostles, it was
impossible that any Title of Universality should exclude the other Disciples
from an Apostolic Dignity; if there had been no other Apostles, how could he
be Prince of the Apostles? And who would think that he should speak thus
contemptibly of the Power of Christ? It is certain that Christ did ordain other
Apostles besides St. Peter, and it was impossile to render that undone, which
Christ had done, it was impossible that any Title that was given to St. Peter
should divest them of that Apostolic Authority which was given to them by
Christ: Because this Gentleman is resolved to be dishonest in his carriage for
the maintaining of his Religion, I would advise him to settle himself for some
term of years in a College of Jesuits, that he may be instructed how to set a
better Varnish upon his Dishonest practices, that they may not appear so gross
and notorious (as they are) to the view of the World.

I can direct him to a Quotation more seeming for his purpose, without any
Additional Sophistication or Corruption; Pope Gregory uses this Expression,
Triste tamen valde est, ut patienter feratur, quatenus despectis omnibus,
praedictus frater, and coepiscopus meus solus conetur appellari Episcopus, It
is very sad that it should be suffered patiently that my fore said Brother and
Fellow Bishop despising all others, should endeavor to be called the only
Bishop, Greg. l. 4. p. 34. But what service can he make of this Expression? Can
he infer hence that Pope Gregory rejected the Title of Universal Bishop, only
as it did Unbishop all others? He may as rationally and firmly conclude, that
he rejected the Title of Universal only as it did Unpatriarch all the rest of
the Patriarchs, because he says, Sed nullus unquam decessorum meorum hoc tam
prophano vocabulo uti consensit, quia videlicet si unus Patriarcha universalis
dicitur, Patriarcharum nomen ceteris derogatur: None of my Predecessors ever
^eilded to use this Profane Title, because if one be called Universal
Patriarch, the name of Patriarchs is taken from the rest, Greg. l. 4. Epist.
36. Or he may as probably infer that Pope Gregory rejected the Title of
Universal only as it did Unpriest all others, because he says, Sed nullus eorum
unquam hoc singularitatis vocabulum assumpsit, nec uti consensit, ne dum
privatum aliquid daretur uni, honor debito sacerdotes privarentur universi:
But none of them ever assumed or consented to use this Title of singularity,
le^t, while a private Title be given to one, all the rest of the Priests should
be deprived of the Honor that is due unto them, Greg. l. 4. Epist. 38. And can
we think that Pope Gregory rejected the Title of Universal only in this sense,
as it did Unpatriarch all, and Unpriest all but one.

His Words must be taken in this sense; it is very sad that it should be
suffered patiently that my Brother and Fellow Bishop despising all others,
should endeavor to be called the only Bishop of highest Power and Dignity, not
admitting any other to be equal to himself; agreeable to this sense he has
several plain and positive Expressions: What will thou Answer (says he unto
John Bishop of Constantinople) unto Christ* the Head of the Church at that day
of Judgment, who endeavourest to subject all his Members to thy self by a Title
of Universality, Greg. l. 4. Epist. 32, and 38. And further he says, He strives
to ascribe all unto himself; and all the Members of Christ, that are united to
one head by the loftiness of a Pompous Title.

It is evident that Pope Gregory rejected the Title of Universal Bishop, in
that sense in which it was offered to him; and his Predecessor by the Council
of Chalcedon, and in which it was usurped by John Bishop of Constantinople; he
writes to the Emperor Mauritius, and to Eulogius Bishop of Alexandria, and to
Anastasius Bishop of Antioch, and likewise to John Bishop of Constantinople to
this purpose; Sicut enim veneranda vestra Sanctitas novit, mihi, per Sanctam
Chalcedonensem Synodum Pontifici sedis Apostolicae, cui (disponente deo)
deservio, hoc Vniversitatis nomen oblatum est, sed nullus unquam decessorum
meorum hoc tam prophano vocabulo uti consensit, etc. Your Holiness knows that
this Universal Title was offered by the Council of Chalcedon to me the Bishop
of the Apostolic See, which by God's providence I do serve; but none of my
Predecessors did ever yield to use this Profane Title; far be it from a
Christian mind, for any one to assume that Title to himself, by which he may
seem in the least measure to diminish the Honor of his Brethren, Greg. l. 4.
Epist. 32, and 36, and 38. And can we think that the Bishops assembled in the
Council of Chalcedon would bestow a Title that would Unbishop themselves; or
that the Bishops Assembled at Constantinople would consent unto John Bishop of
Constantinople in the Usurpation of that Title, which would cast themselves
down from their Office and Dignity.

While he says that Pope Gregory rejected the Title of Universal Bishop only as
it did exclude all others from the Dignity of Bishops, observe how consistent
he is with himself; in his Conclusion he vents this Expression, To bring which
about he will make Pope Gregory to Vnpope himself, a shrewd displeasure I
promise you, and far more Cruel than John Bishop of Constantinople, who opposed
Pope Gregory; for though he stood in contention with Pope Gregory, yet he never
endeavored to make him act this Cruelty upon himself: It is notoriously known
that the ground of their contention was the Title that John usurped, and Pope
Gregory rejected as Proud, P^ophane and Blasphemous; and this Gentleman
confesses that the rejection of this Title made by Pope Gregory, and the
Usurpation of it made by John did not Unpope Pope Gregory, and if it did not
Unpope him, it did Unbishop him, and if it did not Unbishop him, it did not
Unbishop others; and then by his own Confession Pope Gregory did not reject the
Title of Universal Bishop, only as it excluded others from the Authority and
Dignity of Bishops.

Secondly, Let us see how he proves the second Member of his distinction; he
quotes the 62 Epistle of the fourth Book, though there be not so many Epistles
in it; if he had found such a fault to object against me, he would have made
great work with it, but I shall pass it as a mistake of the Transcription: In
the Epistle written to John Bishop of Syracusa the words are to be found; but
as Ahimaas delivered his Message to King David, breaking off his Tale before
the end, so this Gentleman quotes Pope Gregory; the words that declare his
meaning are deceitfully kept from the sight of the Reader; the words of Pope
Gregory are these, Nunc autem idem Primas aliquae de suo consilio loquitur, and
valde dubium est utrum pure an certe, quia a coepiscopis suis impetitur modo
talia loquatur, nam quod se dicit sedi Apostolicae subjic^, si quae culpa in
Episcopis Invenitur, nescio quis ei Episcopus subjectus non sit, c^m vero culpa
non exigit, omnes secundum rationem humilitatis sunt aequales: Now the same
Primate speaks some things concerning his own advice, but it is very doubtful
whether sincerely or certainly, because he is earnestly desired by his Fellow
Bishops to* speak such things unto us, for in that he says that he is subject
to the Apostolic See, if there ^e any fault to be found in Bishops, I know not
^y Bishop that is not subject unto it; but when a fault does not require it,
all according to the rule of Humility are equal, Greg. lib. 7. Epist. 65. ind.
2. These words instead of proving his Assertion, do directly prove the
contrary; Pope Gregory does not declare himself to be Supreme, and above all
others, but acknowledges in others an equality to himself, if there were any
fault to be found in Bishops, he says the faulty Bishops were subject unto him,
but how? not as Bishops, but as criminous, to be admonished, and reprehended
and censured by him; which subjection was not an Argument of any Supremacy in
him; equals (if there be any faulty) are subject to be admonished and
reprehended and censured by one another. The Apostle Peter was admonished, and
reprehended, and censured by the Apostle Paul; but I suppose that the reflector
will not conclude thence, that Paul had a Supremacy above Peter; but Pope
Gregory says plainly, That if there were no fault to be found in Bishops, all
were equal.

If Pope Gregory did claim a supremacy above all, he speaks very much below
himself, when he made application to the Emperor Mauritius calling him Lord
and Master, and professing his humble submission to him with his cap in his
hand, Vobis obedientiam prebere desidero, I desire to yield obedience to your
self, Greg. 4. ep. 32. ind. 1. 3. And he forgot himself very much when he writ
unto Cyprian the deacon concerning the choice of a Bishop in the Room of
Maximianus, after this manner, Si autem mea voluntas ad hanc electionem
quaeritur, and si fieri potest ut eligatur, cred^ quod apta valde persona
inveniatur, if my opinion he required concerning the choice, and if John the
archdeacon be chosen I believe a very fit person is found Greg. 4. ep. 19.
ind. 13. And he a bridged his own power, and speaks very much against himself,
when (writing to Eulogius Bishop of Alexandria) he abhorred the word of
command, Sicut jussistis, (says he) quod verbum jussionis peto a meo auditu
removere, quia scio qui sim, and qui estis, loco enim fratres estis, morilus
patres, non ergo jussi, sed quae vtilia visa sunt indicare curavi. As you have
commanded, pray let me not hear of this word of command, for I know who I am,
and who you are, in place you are brethren, in manners you are farthers,
therefore I did not give any command, but only have taken care to show you what
I conceived to be profitable; Greg. 7. ep. 30. ind. 1. If he had been supreme
and head of the Church, doubtless he would have remembered himself, and observed
the frequented style of some of his successors, Sic volo sic jubeo, Commanding
all Bishops and Kings and Emperors to observe his dictates, and to obey his
Commands, as this Gentleman knows very well, he that is above all, should
command all, but it is certain that Pope Gregory never soared so* high, nor did
any Pope of Rome justly claim that high and aspiring title of supremacy.

And while this Gentleman says, that Pope Gregory does in the Epistle that is
quoted, cite the Council of Chalcedon and the canons for the title of supremacy
as due unto St. Peter and his successors the Popes of Rome, there is not one
word ^ Truth spoken by him; first, there is not one ^on cited by Pope Gregory
to that purpose nor ^^ does he cite the counsel of Chalcedon for that ^d; his
words are these, which do speak the ^^e contrary things, (...)te pro beati
Petri Apostolo^ principis honor per(...)er and am Chalcedonensem ^odum romano
pontifici obl^tum est, sed nullus (...)am eorum hoc singularitatis vocabulum
assumpsit, ^uti consensit, Truly for the honor of blessed ^eter Prince of the
Apostles this title was offered ^ the reverend council of Chalcedon to the
Popes ^ Rome, but none of them assumed it, or con^nted to use it; he does not
say that the council ^d decree it to the Pope as his due, but only ^f^red it as
a free gift, but none of the Popes of ^^me assumed it, or consented to use it,
and it is ^range that the Popes of Rome would not con^nt to use that title, if
it was a due belonging unto them.

To show farther that this Gentleman has spok^n contrary to his own knowledge,
and wilfully charged Pope Gregory with that which was never owned by him, let
us observe what he writes in the 32 epistle of that Book which is quoted, Pope
Gregory's words are these, Sicut enim veneranda vestra sanctitas novit, mihi,
per Chalcedonensem synodum pontifici sedis apostolicae, cui, deo disponente,
deservio, hoc vniversitatis nomen oblatum est, sed nullus unquam decessorm
meurum hoc tam prophano vocabulo uti consensit; for your holiness knows that
the title of universality was offered by the council of Chalcedon to me the
Pope of the apostolic see which (by Gods providence) I do serve, but none of
my predecessors consented to uses is profane titl^ He terms that title which
was offered unto hi^ by the council of Chalcedon a profane title, an^ we may
think it wonderful that a prophan^ title, should belong unto St. Peter, and
tha^ Pope Gregory should m(...)ain it to be his due, ^ we may not admire that
^^ should be claimed b^ the late Popes of Rome, as a due belonging unto them.

Secondly, The title of Supremacy was not due unto St. Peter, for the
Apostolical Office was the highest that was instituted in the Church, and this
Office was given to the rest of the Disciples, as well as to St. Peter; and by
the Command o^ Christ, Mat. 10. all the Disciples were to have an^ equal care
over the whole Church of God, which they practiced not only by applying
themselves to the Ministry of the Word, but also by a joint concurrence in
appointing and ordering of Deacons, Acts 6. and our Savior told them
positively, that there should not be any inequality amongst them in respect of
power and dignity, but if any one of them (out of ambition) should exalt
himself above the rest, the ambitious aspirer would have so much more cause to
humble himble himself, by how much his ambition transported him to act contrary
to his Master's approbation, Matthew. 20. 25, 26. Peter never assumed this Title,
Acts 8. 14. but subjected himself to be sent to Samaria by the vote of the
Apostles; and when a Controversy arose concerning Circumcision, he did not
take upon him the power of determining, but it was done by the common suffrage
of the Apostles and Elders, James (not Peter) pronouncing the definitive
sentence, Acts ^3. Besides, Peter did not look upon Paul ^s inferior, but gave
unto him the right ^ of fellowship, and styled himself (...) ^ow Presbyter;
Gal. 2. 9. and farther I will that if Peter was head over James, it was
pre^rously and injuriously done of Paul to prefer ^ention of James before that
of Peter, 1 Pet. ^ and if Peter was head over Paul it was pre^ptuously and
rebelliously done of Paul to ^stand and censure his superior; the subject
^liged to obey or to suffer, not to resist, Gal. ^ and 2. 11. that hand and
foot forgets its ^y that spurns and strikes at the head; and if ^ was Superior
unto Paul, how could it be ^ Paul should have (if not greater yet) as ^t a
charge committed unto him, as was unto ^^* Paul's words are plain, that the
Gospel of ^ uncircumcision was committed to him, as Gospel of the Circumcision
was committed to ^r, Gal. 2. 7. Add to this that Peter failed ^e than any of
the rest of the Disciples; he sin^ by curiosity, by unbelief, by prohibiting
the ^on of Christ, by ambition, by a preposte^s Zeal, by denying and
forswearing his Man; and after he had received the gifts of the ho^ Spirit, he
sinned by dissimulation, for which he as reprehended by the Apostle Paul,
telling him at he did not walk uprightly according to the ^^h of the Gospel.

The Commission of teaching all Nations, and ^rgiving of sins was given to the
rest of the Apo^les, as well as to St. Peter; Go (says our Savi^ur to his
Disciples) and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and
of Son, and of the Holy Ghost; and whosoever's s^^ remit, they are remi^ted,
and whoever's sins he ^tain, they are retained, John 20. 23. and tho^ our
Savior spoke these words, Feed my She and feed my Lambs, directly unto Peter,
yet the did not invest him with any new or greater d^nity than he had before,
but only restored h^ to his former station, which he had deserved forfeited by
forswearing his Master; and the words were spoken likewise intentionally to ^
rest of the Disciples, or else we must say that teach his people is not to feed
his Sheep, to feed ^ Lambs; St. Augustine says, Cum Petro dicitur ^ omnes
dicitur, amas me? pasce oves meas; When ^ was said unto Peter it was said unto
all, Love the me, feed my Sheep, Aug. de Agon. Chr. c. 3* and what though our
Savior did say unto ^ter, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I w^ build my
Church, and the Gates of Hell shall ^ prevail against it. Our Savior did not
say the Peter was this Rock, nor does the Metaphor signify any thing of
Dominion, Monarchy, or S^premacy; but Duration, Solidity, Constancy, a^ such
like; which could not be derived from St. Peter; he being a frail mortal man,
could not be t^ stability and strength of the Church, by reason ^ which the
Gates of Hell should not prevail against it, it is well known that the Gates of
Hel^ did prevail against him, to draw him to an A^juration of his Master; and
being that he could not secure himself, how could he secure the Church of God;
besides, the Church that was to be built, was to be presented a glorious
Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle, or any such thing, ^o be holy and without
blemish; which holy ^ing could not be raised upon a crazy and ^^ Foundation.

^oreover, If Peter was the Head and the ^^, by virtue of that expression, how
could ^ that the Apostles afterward should quar^ about precedence, not knowing
that their ^ter had before past his promise thereof unto ^ Peter? and then
there was two visible Heads ^ Rocks actually in being together, and ^ Church
should have been termed after^ds the Body and Spouse of Peter, and the ^ostle
Paul should have planted the Churches ^^ St. Peter; then there should have been
^e medium, by which the Church was to ^ joined unto Peter, and he should have
term^ himself the living Stone, upon which the ^ly Stones are built up unto a
Spiritual ^ouse; but the Church was never a Monster ^ two Heads, nor was it
ever termed the bo^ or Spouse of Peter but of Christ; nor did ^ul plant the
Churches upon Peter but upon ^rist; nor was there any medium by which ^e Church
was to be joined unto Peter, by ^ith we stand, says the Apostle Paul, by Faith
^e Church is joined to the Head and Rock, ^t Peter is not an object of Faith;
nor did Peter term himself the living Stone, but says ^at Christ is the living
Stone, upon which ^he lively Stones are built up unto a Spiritual House.

The words were spoken upon that Confession, which was made by the Apostle
Peter, Thou art Christ the Son of the Living God; Matthew. cap. 16. verse. 15. and
verse. 20. whi^ was not Peter's Confession only, but also t^ Confession of all
the rest of the Disciples; o^ Savior propounded this question unto all, Wh^
say ye that I am, and Peter Answered for al^ all knew him as well as Peter did,
and all were i^vested with the same Power, which was giv^ Peter upon this
Confession, Whatsoever ye she bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, a^
whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth shall be loosed ^ Heaven, Matthew. c. 18. v.
18. Joh. c. 20. v. 2* Wherefore it must be concluded, that thoug^ the Name of
Peter only was mentioned when the words were spoken, yet all the Disciples we^
concerned in the words that were spoken; as Peter made a Confession in the
behalf of all, ^ our Savior upon that Confession spoke tha^ which pertained
unto all, and then by tho^ words Peter was no more privileged to be ^ Rock
than the rest of the Disciples were; agre^able to this is the Expression of the
Apostle Pau^ And are built (says he) upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being ^ chief corner Stone, Ephesians. c. 2. v. 20.
which is lik^wise the Opinion of Origin, Petra est (says* he quicunque est
Discipulus Christi, etc. He is the (...) whosoever is the Disciple of Christ,
and upon such ^ Rock all Ecclesiastical Learning is built, Orig. ^ Math. Tract.
If thou think that the wh^^ Church is built only upon St. Peter, what the
will thou say of John the Son of Thunder, and ^ every of the Apostles, shall we
dare to say, the the gates of Hell shall not prevail only against Peter, or are
the Keys of the Kindom of Heaven given only unto Peter: And St. Augu(...) ^,
Petrus pro omnibus dixit, and cum omnibus ^epit, Peter spoke for all the rest,
and received ^h all the rest, August. in Joh. Tract. 11. and ^.

This Gentleman certainly will not have the ^e to reject his sometime extolled
founda^n, that is, Pope Gregory, but rely upon his ^erpretation for the sense
of those words that ^re spoken to St. Peter, he tells us, that Christ ^mself
was the Rock, of which he spoke, and ^oves it by the Testimony of the Apostle
Paul, ^ope Gregory's words are these, Hinc namque Apo^^s dicit fundamentum
aliud nemo potest ponere ^^er id quod positum est, quod est Jesus Christus,
hinc ^e dei and hominum Mediator ad Apostolorum prin^em ait, tu es Petrus, and
super hanc Petram aedi^bo Ecclesiam meam, ipse enim est petra a qua pe^s nomen
accepit, and super quam se aedificaturum ^cclesiam dixit: Hence the Apostle
says, any other ^undation can no man lay, than that which is laid, which is
Jesus Christ; hence the Mediator between God ^d man said unto the prince of the
Apostles, thou art ^eter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church, ^ he is
the Rock from which Peter took his Name, ^d upon which he said he would build
his Church, ^^eg. in 5. Psalm. pen. 1 Cor. c. 3. v. 11. And ^urther Pope Gregory
says, Nam quod in hac vita ^llis adversitatibus frangenda sit, nullis
persecu^onibus superanda, ipse super quem aedificata est ^identer ostendit, cum
ait portae inferi non prae^lebunt adversus eam: For that the Church in this
life is not to he broken with any Adversities, ^r overcome with any
persecutions, he upon whom the Church is built does plainly show, when he says,
the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; the interpretation that is made
by other ancien^ Fathers agrees unto this; Gregory Nissenus says Tu^es Petrus,
etc. Thou art Peter, and upon the Rock will I build my Church, he means the
confession of Christ, for he had said before, tho^ art Christ the Son of the
ever living God, Greg^ Niss. in Test. Delect. ex vet. Test. So says St.
Hillary, Haec est una foelix fidei petra quam Petrus ore suo confessus est;
This is the only blessed Rock of Faith that Peter confessed with hi^ mouth,
Hill. de Twin. l. 2. so likewise Chrysostom, Super hanc petram, id est in hac
fide and confessione aedisicabo ecclesiam meam; Upon this Rock, that is to say,
upon this Faith, and this confession I will build my Church, Chrysostom. in
Matthew. Hom. 55. And likewise St. Augustine, Petra erat Christus super quod
fundamentum etiam aedificatus est Petrus: Christ was the Rock upon which
foundation also Peter himself was built, Aug. in Matthew. Sermon. 13.

These Titles that were given to the Apostle Peter by Pope Gregory terming him
the Prince of the Apostles, and ascribing unto him a Principality over the
whole Church, cannot prove any Superiority in Peter over the rest of the
Apostles; for First, Our Savior did never invest him with those Titles. And
Secondly, It is evident that Pope Gregory ascribed as high Titles unto the
Apostle Paul, calling him the Head of the Nations, and attributing to him a
principality over the whole Church, Greg. in 1. Reg. l. 4. c. 5. Chrysostom
terms Paul, The Master of the World; and Paulo (says he) tribuitur Cura omnium
Ecclesiarum, non unius vel duarum vel trium sed omnium quae sunt in toto orb;
unto Paul the charge of all the Churches is committed, not of one, or two, or
three Churches, but of all the Churches that be in the World, Chrysostom. in Genesis
Hom. 7. and Hom. 11. and in Joh. Hom. 11. If Chrysostom spoke truth, and
Gregory did not contradict himself, the Apostle Paul was as much Head, and had
as great a Principality over the whole Church, as the Apostle Peter had;
agreeable to which, is the Judgment of St. Cypri^n: Hoc (says he) erant alii
quod Petrus, pari confortio praediti and honoris and potestatis; the rest of
the disciples, were even the same that Peter was, endued with the like
Fellowship both of honor, and also of power, Cyp. de simp. Prel. And this was
the Opinion of St. Ambrose; Inter Petrum and Paulum quis ^ui praeponatur
incertum est; between Peter and Paul, whether ought to be preferred before
other is uncertain. Amb. Sermon. 66.

Thirdly, How can the Popes of Rome be said to be Peter's Successors? It is
uncertain whether ever Peter was at Rome; his Charge and Commission was to go
and teach all Nations, not to seat or settle himself in any particular City;
and he was specially appointed to be the Apostle of the Circumcision, to preach
unto the Jews, as Paul was specially appointed to be the Apostle of the
Uncircumcision, to preach unto the Gentiles: To this purpose there was a
Covenant made between James, Cephas, John, Paul, and Barnabas: When (says the
Apostle Paul) James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be Pillars, perceived the
Grace that was given unto me, they gave me the right hand of Fellowship, that
we should go unto the Heathen, and they unto the Circumcision, Gal. 2. v. 9.
The Fourth year after the Death of Christ, the Apostle Peter was at Jerusalem;
about thirteen years after the Apostle Paul conferred with him there, and
afterward he was at the Synod, when the controversy about Circumcision was
determined; he preached the Gospel in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and
Bithinia, he lived and preached in Babylon; all this while we do not read that
ever he was at Rome; that Paul was there, is evident from the Holy Scripture,
but to prove Peter's being there, there is not one syllable in Holy Scripture
to be found.

If Peter was at Rome, it is strange that in all those Epistles that Paul writ
from Rome; and in that Epistle which he writ to Rome, wherein he makes mention
of several Friends and Servants of God, there is no mention made of the name of
Peter: where was Peter when Paul made mention of Aristarchus, Marcus, and
Justus, and says of them, that they only were his Fellow-workers unto the
Kingdom of God? Col. 4. v. 11. Paul was at Rome then, but certainly Peter was
not there, otherwise without doubt Paul would have reckoned him in the number
of his fellow-workers: And where was Peter, when Paul said that at his first
appearance before Nero, no man stood with him, but all men forsook him? 2 Timothy
4. v. 16. Must we say that Peter was fled from Rome? certainly, had Peter been
there, he would have stood with Paul. These things cannot consist with that
Relation which is made by Hieronimus, that Peter went to Rome in the second
year of Claudius, and sat there five and twenty years; nor also with that
other story, that both Peter and Paul suffered Martyrdom in the same place, at
the same time, and under the same persecuting Emperor: against these Reports,
we shall oppose the Testimony of that ancient Father, Irenaeus, that Linus was
the first Bishop of Rome, and after him succeeded Anacletus, and in the third
place the Succession fell to Clemens, not mentioning Peter's being there, and
denying that he was the first Bishop that was seated there.

But however, if Peter was at Rome, and the first Bishop that sat there, this
cannot make all the Popes of Rome to be his true and lawful Successors: I ask
the Romanists, in what all the Popes of Rome succeeded him? It was not in his
Apostolical Office; none of the Popes of Rome were immediately called by
Christ, or extraordinarily gifted; none of them were endowed with the power of
working Miracles, or ever went into all the Earth to Preach the Gospel unto
every Creature. It was not in purity of Faith and Doctrine: Peter never was a
Schismatic, or Heretic; Zepherinus was a Montanist, Marcellinus an Idolater,
Liberius an Arrian, Vigilius an Eutychian, Honorius was condemned for an
Heretic by the sixth Council of Constantinople; Peter never maintained the
Doctrines of Pennances, Indulgences, Purgatory, Worship of Images, Invocation
of Saints, private Mass, ^al^e Communion, etc. It was not in Holiness of Life;
Joh^ the VIII. was a Woman Pope, and brought forth a spurious Issue as she was
going in public Procession through Rome; Sylvester the II. Benedict the IX.
John the XX. Gregory the VII. were manife^ Conjurers, and had their Familiars:
It was not in Humility, in executing of his Ministry: We read in Scripture,
that Peter journied from J^pa to Caesaria (probably on Foot, for I do not think
that any of the Apostles were Horsemen) to preach the Gospel; and forbade
Cornelius to Worship him, and suffered patiently the reproof of his Brethren,
and exhorted all to be subject unto the Ordinances of Man, for the Lords sake*
to the King as Supreme, and unto Governors* as sent for the punishment of
Evildoers: an^ he exhorted Servants to be obedient unto the^^ Masters; but we
do not read that ever he dispensed with the Laws of God, or denied to subject
himself unto the reproofs of Men, saying; nemine reprehendi aut judicari debet,
nec aliquis di^re potest quid facis; That he was not to be reprehended, or
judged, or contradicted by any. We do n^ read that ever he wore the Emperial
Robes, ^ was carried in Pomp and State upon Men's shoulders, or that he
Excommunicated and Depose^ Emperors, or that he trod upon the Necks ^ Kings,
or had Princes to hold his Stirrup, ^ lead his Horse, to kiss his Feet; or that
he di^ dispose of Crowns, or absolve Subjects from their ^aths of Allegiance,
or stirred them up to Re^el and Destroy their liege Lords; all which the ^e
Popes of Rome have done.

If the Romanists do say, that all the Popes of (...)e are Peter's Successors
in person and place: I ^swer, that a personal and local Succession is not
^fficient to make a true and lawful Successor; ^e Scribes and Pharisees sat in
Moses Chair, yet ^hey were Thieves and Robbers, and the Apostle ^aul told the
Ephesians, that after his departure ^any Wolves would enter in amongst them,
^ot sparing the whole Flock: Annas and Cai^^s succeeded Aaron, yet I hope the
Romanists ^ill not say, that these were true and lawful ^uccessours: Ambrose
tells us, Non habent haeredi^em Petri, qui fidem Petri non habent. They have ^t
the Inheritance of Peter, that want the Faith of ^eter, l. 1. de Paen. And
Gregory Naziansen speaks ^o the same purpose, Qui eandem fidem profitetur,
^jusdem quoque Throni particeps est, qui autem con^rariam fidem amplectitur,
adversarius in Throno quoque censeri debet, atque hic quidem nomen, ille vero
^em ipsam, and veritatem habet Successionis: He that professes the same Faith,
partakes of the same Throne, but he that Embraces the contrary Faith, is to be
accounted an adversary to the Throne; and truly the one has but the name, the
other the thing it self, and the truth of Succession. Orat. in laud. Atha. The
Canon Law says, Multi Sacerdotes, and pauci Sacerdotes, multi nomine, pauci
opere; videte ergo quomodo sedeatis super Cathedram, quia non Cathedra facit
Sacerdotem, sed Sacerdos Cathedram, non locus sanctificat hominem, sod homo
locum; Many Priests, and few Priests; many in name, but few in deed; take heed
therefore how you sit in the Chair, because it is not the Chair that makes the
Priest, but it is the Priest that makes the Chair, it is not the Place that
sanctifies the Man, but the Man sanctifies the place.

Because the Romanists do build so much upon this Succession from St. Peter,
and would have the Popes of Rome to be his true and lawful Successors, to
conclude thence that the Pope is the Head of the Church, and do make this a
chief Article of their Faith; affirming peremptorily, That to be within the
compass of his Jurisdiction, to be obedient unto him, is absolutely necessary
to Salvation, I would have the Romanists to tell me, which was Peter's
Successor, when Urban the VI. chosen by the Italians, and Clement the VII.
chosen by the French, the one sitting at Rome, the other at Avignion, thundered
out their Bulls of Excommunication, the one against the other; and when tria
teterrima hominum monstra, as Platina terms them, Three most wicked Monsters of
Men, to wit, Benedict IX. Sylvester III. and Gregorius VI. were all Scrambling
about the Tripple Crown; and when the Council at Constance sat, in which three
Popes, Benedict XIII. Gregory XII. and John XXIV. were deposed, and when the
Roman Chair was void, not only for some days or months, but for the space of
many whole years? Surely it will be a two-handed labor to determine who, and
where, Peter's true and lawful Successor was during these forementioned
Revolutions; and consequently who, and where the Head of the Church was: If
there was a time when the Church had more Heads than one, then it was a
Monster; if there was no Head at any other time, then there was no Church, the
Church was dead, for it cannot live without an Head; and then the Roma^ists
wanted one prime Article of their Faith, they could not believe him to be the
Head of the Church, that was not in being, and for several years whosoever died
was necessitated to be damned, because there was no Papal Jurisdiction to live
under, and no Pope to obey; the Romanists are forced to swallow these
Positions, while they do maintain the Pope to be the Head of the Church by
Succession from St. Peter.

Fourthly, If the Popes of Rome might be said to be St. Peter's true and lawful
Successors, yet the Title of Supremacy was not due unto them; if it was not
due unto St. Peter, it is certain that it was not due unto them; but for a
farther proof of this, if it was their due, how could the Council of Chalcedon
offer it to Pope Gregory, and his immediate Predecessor, as a free-gift? Did
Pope Gregory and his Predecessor want their due, until the Session of the
Council of Chalcedon, or did the Council of Chalcedon offer that unto them
which they had before? And how could the Council offer that as a free-gift, (as
Pope Gregory terms it) which was a Due belonging unto them? And how could that
be a Due belonging unto them, which is unlawful to be used? Pope Gregory tells
us plainly, That the Title of Supremacy, which was the matter of contention
between him and John Bishop of Constantinople, and which was offered to him and
his Predecessor, by the Council of Chalcedon, was contrary to the Rules of the
Gospel, and to the Decrees and Canons of the Church: Greg. l. 4. Epist. 32. and
34. and 36. And I hope this Gentleman will grant that it was therefore unlawful
to be used.

But for a farther discovery, let us inquire into the practices of former Ages,
and see whether they did yield any such thing as the Title of Supremacy to the
Bishops of Rome, as a Due belonging unto them; several Popes have been
Excommunicated, several deposed; Appeals unto Rome were strictly forbidden by
the first Council of Nice: Con. Nic. can. 5. By the Council of Tola in Spain,
Con. Tol. Can. 17. By the Council of Melevitan, Con. Mel. Can. 22. The third
Council of Carthage did Decree, That the Bishop of the first See should not be
called the Chief of Priests, or the Highest Priest, or by any other like Name,
but only The Bishop of the first See, Con. Car. can. 26. The Council of Nice,
did make this Decree, Antiqua consuetudo servetur per Egyptam, Lybiam, and
Pentapolim, ut Alexandrinus Episcopus horum omnium habeat potestatem, quia and
Vrbis Romae Episcopo parilis mos est: Let the, ancient Custom be kept thoughout
Egypt, Libia, and Pentapolis, that the Bishop of Alexandria have the
Government over all these, for the Bishop of the City of Rome has the like
order, Con. Nic. can. 26. The Council of Chalcedon, did Decree, That the
Patriarch of Constantinople should have as high and as great Privileges as the
Pope of Rome had, Con. Chal. Act. 6. Emperors have exercised the Power and
Authority of Summoning and Confirming General Councils, and the Pope with his
Hat in his Hand and his Knee in the Dust, has supplicated the Emperor to
employ his Authority in calling of Councils: To this purpose Pope Leo writ unto
the Clergy and People of Constantinople, Exposcite ut petitioni nostrae qua
plenariam indici Synodum postulamus clementissimus imperator dignetur annuere:
Make your request that the Emperorurs Majesty would vouchsafe to grant my
humble Petition, wherein I besought him to Summon a general Council. I could
instance in several other particulars, but these may serve to let this
Gentleman see that the practice of former Ages did not acknowledge any
Supremacy to belong unto the Popes of Rome.

How can this Title be derived unto them, if this Gentleman shall say, that it
was settled by our Savior upon St. Peter in order to Succession, that
whosoever should be seated in his Chair, was to be immediately possessed of it,
as his own undoubted inheritance lineally and legally descending upon him;
First I say, that it has been already demonstrated, that our Savior never
invested St. Peter with a greater dignity and power than he gave to the rest of
his Disciples. Secondly, I ask how it came to pass, that the Primitive Ages
were altogether ignorant of this Deed of Entail? Had the Bishops assembled in
the Council of Chalcedon known it, they would not have been so simple as to
offer it freely unto the Pope upon this ground of Succession from St. Peter, it
is folly in the abstract to pretend to bestow that as a free-gift, which is
passed before as an unquestionable inheritance. Thirdly, To say this, is a
Blasphemous detraction from that special providence, and tender respect, which
Christ bears unto his People; several Popes have been wicked Heretics;
several extremely Vicious, several Illiterate, several have climbed up into the
Papal Chair by indirect and wicked means; some by Symony, some by Sedition,
some by Tyranny, some by Deceit, some by Murder; of Bonniface VIII. it is said,
Intravit ut vulpes, regnavit ut Lupus, mortuus est ut Canis: That he entered
into the Popedom as a Fox, he reigned as a Wolf, and died as a Dog, Char. sum.
p. 432. It is reported of Silvester the II. Pontificatum malis artibus adeptum
male amisit: That he obtained and lost the Popedom by wicked means, Char. sum.
p. 415. and 416. Can we think that our Savior foreknowing these things, would
make this provision for his Church, to settle the Supremacy to be possessed,
and leave his Church, which he purchased with his dearest Blood, to be ruled
and instructed in the great concern of Salvation, by such misshapen and filthy
Creatures; experience tells us, that if the Eyes be blind, the whole body is in
darkness, and if the head be diseased, the body languisheth; and Pope Gregory
affirms, that one reason why the Title of Supremacy was to be rejected, was
this, Si unus Episcopus vocatur universalis, universa Ecclesia corruit, si unus
universus cadit, If one be called Universal Bishop, in the fall of that one,
the whole Church is ruined, Greg. l. 6. Epist. 24.

Now let us admire the Candor, and the Confidence of this Gentleman, how
little the one, and how great the other is, in saying, that Pope Gregory pleads
his own Right, and that the Title was due only to himself, as being chosen Head
of the Church, and Successor of St. Peter, and that he complains grievously of
the Injuries done unto him by John Bishop of Constantinople, in usurping the
Title of Universal, and robbing the Popes of Rome of it; how could John Bishop
of Constantinople rob the Popes of Rome of that which they never had? Pope
Gregory tells us plainly, that none of his Predecessors ever consented to use
that profane Title of Universal^, and speaking to the Emperor Mauritius, he
says; Nunquid specialem injuriam vindico hac in re piissime domine, nunquid
propriam causam defendo, and non magis causam omnipotentis dei, and causam
Vniversalis Ecclesiae? Do I defend my own Cause, or vindicate my own Injury in
this thing, and not rather the cause of the Omnipotent God, and of the
Universal Church? Greg. l. 4. Ep. 32. And in the same Epistle he says farther;
Quia vero non causa mea, sed dei est, and quia non solus ego, sed tota turbatur
Ecclesia, quia venerandae Synodi, quia ipsa domini nostri Jesu Christi mandata
superbi and pompatici cujusdem Sermonis inventione turbantur: Because it is not
my own Cause, but Gods, and because not only my self, but the whole Church is
troubled, by reason that the wholesome Laws, the reverend Synods, and the
commands of the Lord Jesus Christ, by a proud and pompous Title are violated:
He says expressly, That it was not his own cause that he defended, but the cause
of God, the cause of the whole Church; and then it must be the cause of all the
Patriarchs, and of all the Bishops, and of all the Priests, and of all the
Members of the Church; because John, Bishop of Constantinople, (as Pope Gregory
says) did endeavor (as all the late Popes of Rome have done) to subjugate all
those unto himself, which belong only to one Head, which is Christ: Pope
Gregory's words are these: Ita ut universa sibi tentet adscribere, and omnia
quae soli uni capiti coherent, videlicet Christo, per elationem pompatici
Sermonis ejusdem Christi sibi studeat membra subjugare: He strives to ascribe
all unto himself; and all the Members which do agree in one only Head, to wit,
Christ, he endeavors to subject unto himself, by the elation of a pompous
Title, Greg. l. 4. Epist. 36. And farther, if Pope Gregory had pleaded his own
Cause, and complained of any Injury done unto himself, more than unto others;
he would not, as he did, blame Eulogius, Bishop of Alexandria, for ascribing
unto him the Title of Universal, as it was offered unto the Pope by the Council
of Chalcedon, forbidding the use of it in relation to himself, or unto any
other, Greg. l. 7. Epist. 30.

I have written more largely in Confutation of this unjust Claim, which is made
by the late Popes of Rome to the Title of Supremacy, because it is (as some
Romanists do affirm) the very Pinnacle of the Romish Temple, that which is
cried up, and contended for, and exposed most to view, on purpose to serve (as
a great Sea-mark) to direct unwary and unskilful Passengers to steer their
course into the Romish harbor; and as some do say, it is the foundation stone,
upon which all the Romish Structure is erected: whither should the Members
resort, but where the Directive Faculty resides, and that is in the Head? And
why must the Saints be invocated, and Images Worshipped, and the dead be prayed
for, and the rest of their Superstitious and Idolatrous Opinions be embraced
and practiced, but because they are dictated by the Head, and the Pope (as is
affirmed by the Romanists) is that Head? which being disproved, it is evident
that the Headship which is claimed, is nothing but a mere ignis fatuus, to draw
the ignorant and unwary out of the way; and the foundation being shaken and
destroyed, the whole building falls to the ground; the Dictates of the Pope,
that are not expressed in the Holy Scripture, nor necessarily and by good
consequence deduced thence, have no more Truth in them, than there is in this
position, That the Pope is the Head of the Church; and there is no more Truth
in that, than there is in this, That every particular Patriarch, or every
particular Bishop, is the Head of the Church.

For a Conclusion, I shall desire the Reader to take notice, what Pope it was
that first usurped the Title of Supremacy, and at whose hands he received, and
by what means he attained this great Dignity: It was Boniface the III. who with
much labor and difficulty, and bribery, procured a Grant of it from that
Tyrannical Usurper Phocas; who being a Soldier, rebelled against his Master,
the Emperor Mauritius, Abb. Vsp. in Mau. and most cruelly and wickedly put him
him to Death, the manner of which was this: First he commanded forth the
Emperors Sons, and caused them to be Slain, and afterward the Empress, the
Emperor all the while lamentably beholding that sad spectacle, and pouring out
his Complaint unto God, saying, Lord thou art just, and just is thy Judgment.
Last of all he acted the like Butchery upon the Emperor, laying him, his Wife,
and Children, all together on an heap, Car. in chro. Greg. l. 11. Epist 1. jud.
6.

During the Reign of this bloody Usurper, God seemed utterly to withdraw his
Blessings from the Empire; France, Spain, Germany, Lombardy, and the greatest
part of the East fell from it for ever; after he had Reigned a while, and
committed sundry Murders, with many other great mischiefs, the People laid
violent hands upon him, and slew him, and cast his dead Body into the Fire;
lo, this was he that first advanced the Bishop of Rome to be Head of the
Universal Church.

Concerning the Conclusion.
THE Bragadoshia in Plautus, who boasted of his ^onquests obtained over half
the World, in the space of three days, was not comparable to this Gentleman
for Martial Exploits; here he cries out Io triumph, telling the World how
invincibly he has behaved himself, and what an undoubted Victory he has
achieved over an impotent and contemptible Enemy; his conquering Arms (as he
presumes) has dealt such fatal and destructive blows, that I must be
constrained to betake my self unto a shameful flight, or else defend my self by
quibbling and cavelling, which is equally shameful; and then what impartial
Judge is there, that shall deny to set the Garland on his head, and to Crown
him with those due praises which his great Valor has merited by his worthy
Achievement.

But if he would not be offended, I would tell him that great Performances are
visible to the Eye, therefore if there had been any such guilt in him, he would
not have needed (as King Saul did) to blow the Trumpet, saying, Let the Hebrews
hear; but he knows very well that saying and doing are two things, and the
failing of the one (for some show of credit) must be supplied by excess in the
other; being conscious of the defect of his deeds, it was very requisite to
blow high with his words, to deceive his obliging Friends, and Ignorant
followers into a false conceit that something is done by him, though there be
nothing to be seen.

He will say that I do quibble and cavil, if I do ask him, first, what evidence
he has produced to prove that the greatest part of the controversy between my
adversary and me (excepting the testimonys of Pope Gregory) does only concern
Historical reports, and in what particular he has touched upon the quaeries,
which I propouned to my adversary; the Historical reports do not amount to the
one half of the controversy, which is obvious to every eye; and the touch
which (he says) is made upon the quaeries, is no where to be found, unless in
his own phansy, or it may be, it was sometime existing in his appetite, the edg
of which was turned and dulled with fear, he might have an earnest desire to
touch upon them, but it is very visible to the reader that he durst not come
near them.

Secondly what fabric he has erected upon that foundation, which he terms
somewhat more certain, that is the testimony of Pope Gregory? Instead of
building upon it, he has razed it quite, and laid aside not only Pope
Gregory's, but also all the ancient fathers, by saying (as he does) treating
upon the communion in both kinds, That unless I do produce a command or show a
necessity for receiving the Sacrament in both kinds, without which it could not
be entire, I shall say nothing to the purpose, though I shall produce a
thousand clear and undeniable testimonys out of Pope Gregory, or any one else,
witnessing that the laity had received under both kinds.

Thirdly, what arguments he has used to prove that my expressions concerning
Augustine the Italian Monk do not hang together? May he not be supposed to be
instrumental in converting of the Saxons, and notwithstanding be charged with
those faults, of which Historical writers do report him to be guilty? Our
Savior says that many will plead for themselves at the last day; saying, Lord
have we not Prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out Devils, and in thy
name done many wonderful works, which notwithstanding will be answered with a
revera nescio vos, verily I know you not; if he was a Monk of great virtue, yet
questionless, he had failings as well as others; and if he was proud and
ambitious and cruel, yet he might be an Instrument in the hand of the supreme
agent for the conversion of Pagans. I hope this Gentleman will not ascribe the
power and efficacy of conversion to the instrument, but will acknowledge that
it resides in, and Issues from the supreme agent.

Fourthly, where are those evident proofs to be found which are taken out of
St. Gregory, by which he has cleared his opinion and proved that in the
particulars mentioned, he does agree with the Doctrine of the Roman Church, and
directly oppose the Doctrine of the Church of England? There is not one proof
produced by him out of this ancient Father in relation to any particular,
excepting only two concerning the Pope's supremacy, the one made with a
shameful addition, the other with a deceitful mutilation.

Fifthly, what are the names of those Protestant writers, by whose confession
and testimony he has showed that the Doctrine and belief of Pope Gregory in
every one of the particulars, was agreeable to the Doctrine of the Roman
Church? There is not one Protestant writer quoted by him in relation to most of
the particulars, as to the canon of the Scripture, the sufficiency of the
scripture, the reading of the scripture the communion in both kinds, the Pope's
supremacy; and those, that are quoted by him in relation to the rest, speak not
one word directly to any particular, therefore what they say (as I have showed)
is nothing serviceable for the Romanists; excepting only the centurists, who
speak to good works, unto which an answer has been given.

Sixthly, what ground he has for those hideous conclusions which he maks
against me, saying my method has been inconclusive; my arguments weakness of
reason, and my reason inconsequent; and what reason he had to charge me with
open contradictions, wrested interpretations, and inexcusable falsifications,
and pusling the reader with worcester(...)-cavils, and exceptions? And I must ask him
where those numerous faults, and many errors, that he objects against me in
the general, are to be found? And why they are lapped up from sight in a cloud
of generals, and not any one mentioned in particular.

I have seen two Champions marching toward the field, the one who was the
challenger, filling the air with a loud Robustious noise, and loading the
other with many bitter invectives, threatening to cut collops of flesh out of
his body in satisfaction for the Injury, that was done, whereas by the evidence
of several witnesses there was no occasion of offense given; the other passed
along without making many words, only he protested that there was not any
Injurious carriage used by him; but being that the challenger was so hot and
heavy in his ex^lamations and invectives, he was content to run the hazard of a
duel, to prove his own Innocence, and to try, whether the Challenger's sword
was as sharp as his tongue.

When the rampant gallant perceived that he could not by his thundering words
frighten the other to a submission, he was easily persuaded to let the quarrel
fall, without any farther decision, and both retreated without bloodshed. From
the observation of all this, I drew these conclusions, that great brags are no
certain signs of true valor, nor high words demonstrative arguments of great
performances, nor confident accusations an evidence of guiltiness in the person
accused: I leave the reader to determine how like this Gentleman is unto that
rampant gallant; and will now perform my promise to acquaint the reader with
those several letters, which passed betwixt me and Mr. H. L. the first of
which (being occasioned as I have already showed) was to this following purpose.

The first Letter witten to M. H. L.
SIR,
I am informed, that you have a purpose to vindicate the person concerned in my
Papers, upon condition that I would mention any particular controverted point,
wherein he has not given a full satisfaction to me: I suppose his long and
last silence is a tacit acknowledgment, that he has failed in all his
undertakings, therefore you may choose what particular you please to insist on:
If you can prove that I have in any particular contradicted either Scripture,
Reason, or the Ancient Fathers; or that I have Coined any Historical Report,
you will oblige me to rest,

Yours Samuel Felgate.


Mr. H. L's Answer.
SIR,
AT my coming to Stoniherst, I found a Letter of yours, which had laid there
for some time expecting my return, wherein you tell me that you hear, I have a
purpose to Vindicate the person concerned in your Papers: Truly Sir, why I
should put my self upon the Vindication of one, whom I neither know in Person
or in Quality, I cannot give any Rational account; for if the person concerned
thought himself not at all obliged, nor it worth his labor to proceed any
further in it; I hope no one in reason can expect it from me.

The cause I am always ready to Vindicate, when in reason and discretion it is
required, and to endeavor your satisfaction as much as possibly I can, if I
find you desirous to receive it: But because Disputes are subject to many
affected mistakes, Mis-interpretations of the sense, Wordish Cavils and
Quibbles, too much below a man, much less a Scholar, the one often times
wilfully framing a quite different sense from what the other intended, by which
means the thing in Controversy is industriously rendered more difficult, and
obscure than before, by crowding in a number of words, so to pusle and amuse
the weaker sort of people, with petty exceptions, and mere Cavils: I would have
you therefore to believe, that I am as far from seeking to concern my self in
any thing that looks like unto a personal Quarrel, or has so much of the place
of an endless contest as your has, as I was at first from desiring your
Papers, otherwise than that hearing of your Challenge, and Resolution to Print
them, in case I did not Answer them, I conceived my self obliged both in
Civility and Charity to save you both the Labor and Charges, although I am not
ignorant that new Opinions (though never so weak, and untrue) rather gain than
loose repute and strength by opposition, because what they want of in Truth and
Reason, they are but too apt to be supplied with by Passion. Sir, I say not
this for that I conceive there is any thing in your Written Book, which has so
much as the appearance of a real difficulty, but because I have not the Itching
Humor of Scribbling and entering into Disputes, where nothing but Quibbles,
Animosities, Heats and Passions are likely to be the Issue in a wilderness of
such Talk, and wilful affected mistakes; for I do not see what other can be
expected from your method and way of proceeding by any Discreet and Impartial
Considerer of your Papers, but that instead of bringing your Controversy to an
end, you will render it more confused and endless than you found it. And really
Sir, should I find you so moderate and sincerely disposed, as to oblige me to a
little further pains in Studying your satisfaction either in these particulars,
or any else; I assure you, I should be so far from doing it to make you an
Adversary, that I would not so much as think of it with any other intention,
but to make you more a Friend, and to convince you likewise how much I am.

Your Cordial Wellwisher and Servant. H. L.


S. F's Reply.
YOu Charge my Papers, and you double your Charge, with a tendency to
Confusion, and endless contests, and with a guilt of Personal Quarrelling,
therefore you will not write against them: Besides, you add this reason,
because disputes are subject to affected mistakes, Mis-interpretations of
sense, Wordish Cavils and* Quibbles, and as Glorying in the strength of this
reason, you make a Repetition of it with some. Addition, saying, That you have
not the Itching* Humor of Scribbling and entering into Disputes, where nothing
but Quibbles, Animosities, Heats, Passions, are likely to be the Issue in a
Wilderness of such Talk, and wilful and affected mistakes: It seems this Charge
is likewise brought against my Papers, otherwise there can be no Validity in
your reason; for if my Papers be not stained with that Guilt, you may attempt
the confutation of them without the danger of those formidable Inconveniences.

Pray Sir, let me ask you why you did not express some reason for your Charge?
It may be supposed that my Antagonist and you sucked both one Milk, because you
are so much alike in charging, and it is well if you prove not both alike in
carrying on your Charge: After I demanded a reason of his Charge, I heard not
from him since unto this day; and now I demand a reason likewise for your
Charge, but do fear that I shall never hear more from you.

And while you bring this Injurious Charge against my Writings, how much you do
reflect against my person, I leave to your own Judgment to determine; Writings
are Judices animi as much as any thing, I must then be a Scribler, a Quibbler,
addicted to affected Mistakes, Mis-interpretation of Sense, Wordish Cavils,
Personal Quarrels, confused and endless Contests, and therefore not fit to live
in any Christian Society: But my comfort is that your Sayings are not Oracles;
you Talk of Discretion and Moderation, but you do but Talk of it, I find
nothing of the practice of it here.

If Composition of your Religion be like unto an Old Ruinous Fabric, that the
more you s^ir to support it, the liker it is to fall upon your Head; you are
highly to be commended for your Policy in using this groundless excuse, and
injurious Charge to be the reason of making an Evasion; (...) is commonly the
weak refuge of a fainting Cause, but it bespeaks contrary to your promise; the
Faithfulness of my Intelligencer is not to be distrusted, who told me what I
gave you to understand in my Letter.

And being that you have taken so much liberty to represent me to my self
without reason out of my Papers, be not offended, if I take some liberty to
represent you to your self out of your Letter, with reason, though I dare not
presume to determine of the end you aim at in writing of it, because you seem
to me Penelopes Telas texere, to do and undo: Yet I dare affirm,

First, That you have an admirable Faculty of Division, you can separate
between those things that are of so near a concern and so strictly conjoined,
that it is impossible to make a separation between them; you can vindicate the
Cause, and do nothing for the person maintaining that Cause, for thus you
express your self, The Cause you are ready to vindicate, though why you should
vindicate the person, you can give no rational account: Truly the Person and
the Cause are equally and jointly concerned in my Papers, it was the person
maintaining that Cause, or the Cause maintained by that person (take whether
Expression you please) against which I did write.

Secondly, That you are the ablest Champion for your Religion, that ever I yet
heard of, if you once betake your self unto your Weapons, you can strike, all
that is said against it, dead a^ one Blow, you can as easily confute all other*
Writings, as you have confuted mine: My Writings are Scriblings, Quibblings,
full of Animosities, Heats, Passions, therefore not fit to be represented to
the Credit of any Reader, and needs not any further confutation.

Thirdly, Though you be an able Champion, yet you are Faint-hearted, pray
pardon the Expression, and do not impute unto me contradiction, you may be Able
and Faint-hearted too, but for different respects; Able for the reason
expressed before, Faint-hearted because you are Frightened with a shadow; though
(as you say) there be not the least appearance of a real difficulty in
confuting my Papers, yet you will not meddle with them, for fear of being
Assaulted with affected Mistakes, Mis-interpretation of Sense, Wordish Cavils
and Quibbles.

Fourthly, Controversies must not be ended, because the exercise of reason must
not be used to end them, for what are Disputes, but a tossing of Arment against
Argument, and a comparing Reason with Reason, and these conflicts must not be
attempted for fear of Quibbling, Cavilling^* Affected Mistakes, etc. and thus
siding and taking of Parties must be done likewise without the use of Reason;
well were it for you, if all the World were of this Opinion, it may be they
would be of your Religion, though they could show no reason for it.

Fifthly, Whatsoever New Opinions do arise, they are like to stand as they are,
because it is not fit, that they should be opposed, for fear they should gather
strength by opposition, and least Passion should overturn both Truth and
Reason.

It may be that you will say, this is Scribbling and ^ibbling, but I assure you,
it is nothing but ^wing apt and fit Conclusions from premises ^pressed in your
Letter, and fairer dealing than ^^ afforded unto me; you are not assaulted
se^ly and invisibly, but have reasons given for ^ery Blow that is offered, by
which you are fairly ^amed to ward and defend your self, if you can; ^t you
striking invisibly at me, you wounded ^e out of my Writings, and no body can
tell ^t a reason for it.

To say that there is a shorter and surer Tract ^ walk in, for finding out the
Constitution of our Religion, than by Austin the Monk, and ^e Ancient
Britains, to wit, the Doctrine of christ, and his Apostles delivered in the
Sacred ^riptures; and to say that there is not merit in ^y man, because God
gives not this prerogative ^ meriting to any mere man; and to say that neither
Angels, nor Saints are to be invocated, because God only is to be Worshipped,
is not to ^crible or Quibble.

These are Positions laid down in my Papers, without the mixture of Heats,
Passions, Animosities, or respect to personal Quarrels, and may be disputed
without Contests, likely to be drawn out ^o^ the Age of Methuselah: From which
holds my Antagonist (as you say) thought not fit, nor worth the labor to
attempt to drive me, if my desire be not discreet, yet it is real; be pleased
to pick out the best Weapons that you have, wherewith to do that which he has
left undone; and I assure you, you shall find me more moderately disposed in
defending my self, than you have been in Writing to me, and to be thus Engaged
with you, will oblige me to return your Cordial wishes, and to profess my ^ to
be yours.

S. F.


Mr. H. L's Second Letter.
SIR,
WHat I write to you was in a Friendly an^ Civil manner (since you had
concerne^ me with your Papers) to inform you what ^ thought of the
Inconclusiveness of your method and way of proceeding in your Disputation, an^
how unlikely it was to answer either the expectation of your self or others,
and not out o^ any design or intention to charge you with* ^ guilt of personal
Quarrelling, nor with those other Faults you lay to your own Charge, but a^ you
may take liberty to say what you please o^ your self, so you have the same
Privilege o^ clearing your self when you have done, provided you make me not a
party.

Indeed I said in general terms, That Disputes of that nature were subject to
Heats, Mistakes, Animosities, etc. And being that enough had been said of those
matters by so many of the most extolled Champions on both sides, I could not
see any reason, why I should trouble my self with Answering over again, what
has been so fully Answered before; and for you to Hammer still upon the same
matter, and make no further a progress, than you are likely to make, were but
to trouble the World with a noise, which ^ey are already sick of, and their
Ears Loath ^en to Nauseousness.

But if I speak before in general terms of the ^conveniencies that such like
Disputes are subject ^, and expressed an unwillingness of entering in^ such a
fruitless and endless contest, as in all ^obability it must appear to whosoever
does ^t consider either your way of handling the ^atter, or of treating your
Adversary, and therefore for a long time suspended my Resolutions: You have now
by your last Letter abso^tely determined me not to meddle any further, ^^cause
you have convinced me that this of ^ours will be such an one, and that rather
than ^ll of a contest, you will Critically take Excep^ons against every word in
a Letter; for in your ^nswer to mine, as long as it is, there is nothing ^lse
but Cavils and Exceptions, and such truly ^s are unbecoming any man; and if I
find so much of this in your Letters, what measure might I have expected, if I
had entered into the Lists, engaged with you in a serious and formal Disputation.

Because I delight not in Reading, much less in the Rehearsal of such stuff,
I Will give you only an Instance of this your dealing with me out of your own
Letter, that even your self may judge, whether I have not reason to decline all
occasions of Cavilling, since I see that if I set Pen to Paper, though in a
Civil Letter, they are unavoidable; for you tell me in your Letter, That I have
an admirable faculty of Division, and can separate between those things, that
are of so near a concern that it is impossible to separate between them,
because I can maintain the Cause, and do nothing for the person concerned in ^
Cause.

What a new found impossibility is this? ^ own words in my Letter to you were
the^ You tell me that you hear, I have a purpose to V^dicate the person
concerned in your Papers: Trul^ Sir, why I should put my self upon the
Vindication of one, whom I neither know in Person nor in Quality, I cannot give
any Rational Account; for i^ the person concerned thought himself not at all
obliged, nor worth his labor to proceed any further in it; I hope no one in
reason can expect it from me, the Cause truly I am always ready to Vindicate,
when in reason and discretion it is required, and to endeavor your
satisfaction as much as possibly I can, if I find you desirous to receive it;
but because Disputes are subject to Mistakes, etc. Thus far my own words, now
let any one Judge from hence, if you were not disposed to Cavil, why you should
be thus highly offended with this way of expressing my self, or how you can
possibly gather from hence, That I have such an admirable faculty, etc. For if
they be be two real Entities or things, as certainly they are, and your own
words import no less, what great art is there required to divide between them,
for if they be two according to reason, they must needs be divisible, or which
is all one, capable of being divided; so as with all the art you have, you can
neither clear your self of contradiction, not from a groundless exception.

Besides how can I in prudence undertake to vindicate a person, when I was not
assured that there was any such one in being, for you possibly might have
created an Antagonist in your own fancy, to have quelled him when you had done,
or at least thereby to set your self on work, and by that means engage some
body in the de^ence, and had I committed a mistake upon such a fiction, you
would certainly have made very great use of it, and as you accuse me now of
slowness, and faint-heartedness, because I will not put my self without
necessity upon the vindication of a person, whom I know not, so in that case
you would have accused me of to much forwardness in the behalf of one that had
only a chimericall being in your fancy, for I see one had need of Argus his
eyes.

But supposing the reality (as I did) me thinks in reason you should rather
have approved of my expression, because thereby I gave you to understand that I
would neither write in vindication of your adversary, nor in opposition to ^our
self, either of which would have savoured of a personal quarrel, but only in
vindication of the cause, if it might possibly contribute to your satisfaction;
for if any body hereafter should find so little to do as to take where I leave,
yet I am confident at least they would be so wife as to pass by without notice
all the exceptions you have made against my letter, and only concerned
themselves in what is substantial, and not exceptious and cavilling, which only
relates to the person, not the cause.

The rest of your exceptions against my letter are just like unto this and
would afford me abundance of matter, but I am weary of them, and therefore
resolved to let them pass, that I may rest quiet, and therefore I shall desire
to be excused, if you expect any farther from me, than that I subscribe my self.

Your loving Friend H. L.


S. F's Answer.
SIR.
I have now a little leisure to bestow in perusing of your letter, and to tell
you that by encountering with a daring enemy, whose strength (as it appears)
ly's not in his rational deductions, but in his confident assertions, it is my
misfortune to be (as sometime Jonathan the son of Saul was) cast upon a
necessity of climbing up between two rocks, and my credit must suffer wreck, if
I lean to the right hand or to the left; if I pass by your letter, without
taking notice of it, I must pass in the world for a great caviller; if I except
against any thing expressed in it, I must expect to have the same Ignominious
title fastened upon me, what must I do to escape this impending destruction? If
you be a second Pyhagoras, I know that you expect to have all your assertions
to be taken for axioms because of an ipse dixit; if not, I appeal to the
Judgment of the world to determine whether is the greater caviller, he that
imputes inconclusiveness, and confusion and endless contests to my writings,
and shows no reason for it; or he that excepts against your expressions, and
shows a reason for every exception that is made.

I cannot believe but you are a man subject to failings as well as others, have
you any letters patents to empower you to tell another man of his faults, and
to privilege you against hearing of your own, that ^^ou must not be told them?
Or do you take me to be under confession, that I must acknowledge the errors
that you do Injuriously lay to my charge, while I must not mention the
solaecismes that are justly chargeable upon you? I do not apprehend any such
duty incumbent upon me, but that I may take as much liberty to except against
your letters, as you have taken to except against my writings; and which of us
has most tru^^ and reason on his side will be determined, when your letters
and my writings are exposed to the public view; be pleased to tell me what
comparison there is between too much, and much less, your expression in your
former letter is this, too much below a man, much less a scholar, which I would
have told you of before, had I been addicted to cavilling, as you report me to
be, and whereas you say that I concerned you with my papers, I utterly deny it,
it was your great Bragg made to Mr. Waddington that wrought this concern,
whereof I acquainted you in my first letter, which is discovered to be but like
unto a flash of Lightning, as suddenly extinguished as it was inflamed; if you
be infallible, I must acknowledge your Friendly manner of writing, and how just
that measure is, which your thoughts do proportion unto me; but if not, be
pleased to know, that he cannot be counted a Friend, that conceals the reasons
of his thoughts; for who can tell but his reasons may be light, therefore his
thoughts Injurious, and if so, instead of a real Friend he is a real enemy,

What your design was in using those general terms (howsoever you seek to cloud
it, is as clear as the light; did you write pertinently or impertinently? If
impertinently the greater shame for your self; if pertinently, the faults
mentioned are charged upon my writings; the conclusion you drew was this, you
would not write against my prayers; the medium used was this, disputes are
subject to affected mistakes misinterpretation of sense, wordish cavills and
exceptions* (...) if you be a Logitian, you will help this enthymema to be a
complete syllogism, and then the dimsighted will see clearly, that you did
shoot at my writings, and in them at me.

Whither the whole matter treated on by me, has been hammered by the greatest
Champions on both sides, I question, yet however this is but a pitiful argument
to persuade you to desist from writing; by the same reason Door Pierce might
have spared his pains of preaching before the King, and the English Apostate
Cressy his pains of answering Doctor Pierce, and that author who confuted him
his farther pains, for the matter disputed between them was hammered again and
again, I know not whither so far as you express concerning my writings, that is
to sickness and nauseating, unless it be unto them that have very squeasy
stomachs, that are sick of, and nauseat at any thing that is written against
them; if you cannot endure the iterated noise of these hammers, you must
forsake the tenants that uphold your Religion, and if you standing upon those
Giants shoulders cannot see a little farther than they did, nor can afford any
thing of your own for the upholding, and maintaining of your Religion, your
eyes are very dim, and your head is very empty.

To pass by your witty ( if) supposing that which was really done before, and
your great knowledge of that which concerns a man; methinks you are very soon
and easily determined to the shame of your profession, (if you do esteem your
Religion to be true) while you suffer a thing called cavilling to have this
influence over you; do you not know that the greatest sufferings should not
determine a Christian to fail in maintaining of the truth.

In the next place your reason runs so low, that it was wisely done to make
your confidence blow high, that the sound of your great words might be
serviceable to supply the Emptiness of your Arguments, otherwise the man that
never langhed before, would smile in his sleeve to hear the relation of them:
Your first, argument is founded upon two real entityes; to complete it, you
must either say that all two real entityes are divisible, or some two real
entityes are divisible, if you say the first, you are required to prove what
you say, what art have you to divide between the divinity and humanity of
Christ; If you say the second, then I say, a Particularibus nihil concluditur,
and I would have you to prove that the person and the cause are two of these
some; they are relative entityes, and the Logitian tells you that Relata sunt
simul natura, What art have you to divide between such? Can you divide between
the father and the son as they are relatives? Certainly if there be a
paternity, there must needs be a filiation; and if there be a filiation there
must needs be a paternity; and what is done for the one is done for the other;
if you prove the one to be legitimate, you prove the other to be legitimate;
and if you prove the one to be noble, you prove the other to be noble, thus the
person and the cause being relatives, if you vindicate the cause, you will
vindicate the person maintaining that cause, and if you vindicate the person
maintaining that cause, you will vindicate that cause; but why do I trouble my
self with that wounderfull argument, it being an Antipodes to the things in
question; the question is not whether the person and the cause be divisible,
but whether you can divide between them, being that you undertook to answer my
papers; and you may as well say that frigidity is calidity, and divisibility is
Indivisibility, as take upon you to do this, open your eyes, and look upon my
expression; I told you that I heard, you had a purpose to vindicate the person
concerned in my papers; it is not a person divided from my papers, but a person
tied to my papers, and so to the cause controver^ed between us by the knot of
concern, which you will find an old found impossibility to unty, unless you
will send your discourse to rove beyond the Moon, and yet you tell me
learnedly, why you should Vindicate the Person, you can give no rational
account, but his cause you are ready to vindicate.

Your Second argument grounded upon a supposition is Cousin-german* to the
first, being as tuneable to the thing in question as an harp is to an harrow,
you are not to speak of a person without any relation to the cause, but
concerned in the cause, and thus much might serve to resist the fierceness of
it, but yet to answer yours with other suppositions first, suppose I should say
that you were very hard set for an argument when you used this, if the
foundation be sandy, the superstructure falls, if your supposition be false,
the argument builded upon it, of its self goes to ruin.

Secondly, Suppose it be true that I feigned an Antagonist, do you think that
in vindicating that Antagonist, you would have vindicated only a chimericall
being? Will you believe your own eyes? Did you not see a real writing; and
sure you will not say that a real writing did proceed from a Chimaera, a real
effect must needs have a real cause, therefore this feigned Antagonist must
not be a Chimaera, but a real writer, and all that you can say of him is that
he was a counterfeited Friend to the cause, masked under a feigned name.

Thirdly, Supposing the impossibility that you speak of, that a person may be
vindicated without relation to any cause, this certainly is an impossibility,
for there must be a cause in which to vindicate the person, otherwise the
vidication will be an effect of a wonderful Artificer, that can build an house
without a foundation, what assurance would you have for the reality of the
person; a writing under hand is not sufficient to work this assurance, and all
other assurances being to pass unto your understanding by the conveyance of the
outward senses, are as liable to exception and doubtfulness as the assurance of
a real writ^ng, it remains therefore that you cannot be assured at all; truly,
because you cannot vindicate a person but it must be in relation to some cause,
nor a cause but you must vindicate some person, for want of that prudential
assurance, which you do speak of; I believe that you will be so prudent, as not
to undertake the vindication of the Cause, or the person concerned in my
Papers; nor of any other person or cause whatsoever, where you are like to meet
with opposition.

Fourthly, To Answer the reason you do give, why I should rather approve of
your Irrational Expression, than except against it: Suppose I should say that
the Cause in Controversy is maintained by all the Papists in England, and if
you do vindicate the Cause, you vindicate all those persons; why then must my
Antagonist be excluded, he being a Papist, and in England? And how if I say,
that in vindicating that Cause, you would oppose all the Protestants in
England, how must I be excluded out of the compass of that opposition, being a
Protestant?

Because you say, That Exceptions and Cavilling relate unto the Person, not the
Cause, which must not be mentioned to avoid personal Quarrelling: I shall make
one Supposition more, Suppose a man (as it might be your self) bringing Halting
and decrepit Arguments to maintain the Tenants of your Religion; the Faults of
his Arguments must not be mentioned, for to do this would be but Captiousness,
and Cavilling and Personal Quarrelling: What then, it seems his Arguments must
pass as without fault, that i^ substantial; and thus your Religion must be
upheld with Halting and Decrepit Arguments: When you have Besotted the World
into this Opinion, and peswaded all to the practice of it, I presume you will
be a Writer of Controversies: If the rest of my Letter be like unto this,
against which you have directed all your Forces, you are to be commended for
being weary and desiring to be at rest: Abner was weary of Fighting with Joab,
when he cried out, Shall the Sword devour for ever; but I suppose you know the
reason of it.

Now if you be like unto your quondam self, I expect to receive a Furious
Charge of Cavillation, but am content to stand out the Storm, and (if you
please to heed me) will give you the reason, why I Fight you after this manner:
Truly Sir, you look so contemptibly on my Papers, that I apprehended you to be
some Goliath, that Scorns to enter the Lists with Punyes, and I have made use
of this Sling, and this Stone, (that which you call Cavilling) to keep you at
greater distance, lest coming within the compass of your mighty Spear, I mean
your invinceable Arguments, I had been crushed to pieces.

But in earnest, do you think that there is any of your Writers that can Teach
his Pen to Write beyond Exceptions? Or must not Exceptions be made, when there
is just Cause for it? Let me beg one Favor at your Hands, be pleased to leave
Shuffling and fall to Argument, that I may see some such exact piece dropped from
your Pen, and then do not doubt but your Antagonist will fairly lay down his
Arms, and in Testimony of Submission to your great Judgment, will sit at your
Footstool: Besides, you shall be cried up Sapientum Octavus by him who
Subscribes himself,

Your Friend, S. F.


NOw (Christian Reader) it is not my purpose to imitate the Reflector's dealing
with thee, which I may assimilate to the practice of some Fencers, who though
they be foiled upon the Stage, yet afterward do pass through the Streets with
Drums Beating, and Swords Brandished, making a Glorious show as if they had
won the Prize: I will not endeavor to prepossess thee with a large Harangue in
Relation to that which I have written; here is presented to thy view the best
Stuff that some Roman Leaders could afford toward the upholding of the Romish
Temple; what it is, whether Tall Cedars, Stately Oaks, Polished Stones, and
Refined Gold and Silver, or Materials of an Inferior and base mixture, Tinn,
Lead, Straw, and Peacocks Feathers, I leave to thy own Judgment to determine; I
shall only mind thee of that great necessity that lies upon thee, to have the
eyes of thy understanding Enlightened with true knowledge, that thou may be
able to judge and discern for thy self between Good and Evil, Truth and
Falsehood: He that is Blind, and therefore needs to be led by the Hand, or to
follow the conduct of a String, his walking is Slow, Unsteady, and Dangerous;
thou must be Saved by thy own Faith, and as Faith without Works is but a
destructive presumption; so Faith without Knowledge is a groundless confidence:
Thou art now in the Wilderness of Sin, and should be on thy Journey toward
the Land of Canaan, therefore thou art to be choice of thy way to walk in, thy
guide to direct thee in that way, thy Light to follow that direction: Let
Christ be thy way, his Spirit thy guide, and the Holy Scripture (which is the
word of Truth) thy Light; so shall thou pass on with Comfort and Safety, and
shall arrive at the promised possession in the end; all which that thou may
do, I commend thee to the saving help of thy ever Blessed Savior, concluding
all in that advice to thee, and Prayer for thee; consider what has been said,
and the Lord give thee understanding in all things.

POSTSCRIPT.
HAving examined the Reflections, and showed what Stuff they afford for
public view; I can easily conjecture what Stormy weather I shall have, and
what a blustering return will be made by the Reflector, or some other daring
Champion that shall engage himself in the Quarrel.

When the Romanists are Distressed for want of Arguments, not finding any thing
of weight to plead for themselves, (which is their constant and woeful fate) it
is their common practice (as the Reflector has done) to (...) out (...) an
inundation of words, and to swell into the highest considence of boasting,
exclaiming against their Adversaries for unhandsome and Injurious dealing,
charging them with Mis-interpretation, False Quotations and Corruptions, and
accusing them as guilty of Immodest Reviling, and Exasperating Language; and
all this is done purposely to set a glittering show upon their own
performances, to deceive the common people into a persuasion that they are no
less then Conquerors.

In this Case, the defense that I shall make for my self shall be this: First,
if any Champion shall fall into the temperate, and petulant humor of boasting;
he is required not to hide himself under a Cloud of Generals, but (that I may
know where to find him) to set down the particular grounds and reasons, whence
his vapors do arise; otherwise the Intelligent Reader will Judge his boasting
to be like unto Cardinal Campegios great Flourish with his Twenty Gilded
Sumpters in Henry the 8. time, which made a glorious show outwardly to the
Beholders; but being by accident Overturned in Cheapside, discovered nothing
within, but Old Rotten, Moldy Shoes, and Boots, and Musty Marrow Bones.

Secondly, My greatest Ability, and Industry not reaching to the possession of
most of those Ancient Fathers, which I have Quoted, I must confess that the
Quotations were taken at the second Hand, but from Approved Authors of the
Protestant persuasion, and from such Romish Authors as are placed in the
highest rank among the Romanists; and I am ready to justify my proceeding in
this, that I have Charged nothing upon the Fathers, but what they have pressed
themselves, and in that sense, for which I have quoted them.

Thirdly, If I do not judge Partially, I think I have not given any immodest
Reviling, or exasperating Language, only I have used some similitude to
illustrate the Truth; and why should not that kind of Illustration be used,
when nothing but Truth is spoken; if by mine own practice I should in any
respect imitate a Tailor, or a Cobbler, or a Tinker, I should not suffer my
Choler to Swell, for being minded of that resemblance: But were it so, that I
had been guilty of some sore biting Expressions, and Reflections; I am indebted
to the Romanists, more than my Ability can reach, or my will is inclined to
repay: Should I dip my Pen in Vinegar, or write Characters with Gall and
Wormwood, mingled with drops of Blood, yet I should not repay in that measure,
which they have meted unto me.

Courteous Reader,
BEcause I have spoken (in my Preface) concerning the Alienation of the
Churches Revenues, to justify what I have said, be not offended, if I request
thee to step aside, (if it be not too great a digression) and spare some time
to Read the two following Letters, with the subsequent Observations, in which
thou may see something that is very remarkable, (which would have passed for
a wonder in the days of our Forefathers) how the office and duty of Patronage
is performed by one that claims that right as an Appendance to his Inheritance:
The one written by himself to justify his Title to some Church Revenues in his
possession, the second written ^n Answer to the first.

The First LETTER.
Honored Sir,
WHat Mr. F. has now said to you he has told me an hundred times, and has
run about the Country these ten years, complaining that I detain his right,
though he has not one Syllable to say for himself, but the report of two or
three Women, who tells him that they have known the Rent of ten shillings paid
to Vicar R. out of this Tenement, but upon what account they know not; what Mr.
W. has said to him about it* he has given three times as much to us under his
Hand and Seal, contradicting every Syllable that he affirms to him; and this
Mr. W. could not do out of fear, because he was possessed of the Vicaridge a
long time before, and he then up and we down; but to set this aside,
endeavoring to satisfy Mr. F. I got Mr. H. to give him a meeting, whose
Father has been knowing in our Family above threescore years, several men in
Mitton, older than those women he speaks of, and never an one of these knows,
or ever heard that this Tenement belonged to any but my Ancestors; it was never
found in the Bishop's Records, nor in any writings that belong to the Church,
that it was given to any Vicar of our Parish, it has no marks of the Glebe
Land, for it ever paid Tithes and Taxes formerly. I suppose, these Arguments
are as good as any he brings; yet nothing will satisfy him, but what is more
than necessary; must a person produce his writings, because another says he
will have his Estate; let those bring something more sufficient than a bare
Story; otherwise I believe you cann^t think it convenient that Persons should
show their writings up on every slight demand. What if in these times some
writings concerning those Lands should be lost; will not a continual and quiet
poslession for fourscore years give me right of the thing, for any thing that
he has to say against it, but that I must show my Writings; let him show what
is more weighty and better than our constant possession; and then I will show
what as shall be more authentic than his, or otherwise submit; let him go to
Suit when he pleases; those that are concerned in the Estate will suffer
wrong; I do solemnly protest, as I am a Christian, that I never saw Line or
Scrole, or Word that gave him one Grass (...) more than he has: and this I
imagine is sufficient to satisfy any reasonable person; hoping it will do you,
and then it is all I desire, and that I may be esteemed as truly I am,

Honored Sir.

The Answer.
Honored Sir,
I Have seen yours, sent to Mr. P. and do wonder that you would write such
stuff to a Gentleman of great esteem in his Country; I shall make this fair
motion, let the Controversy between you and me be determined by your own
Letter, if all that you have spoken in it be pertinent and true, I will submit;
if otherwise, in reason you should yield unto me, because it is a summary of
the best Arguments you can use in your own behalf, to prove your possession to
be just, and any claim injurious.

That I have complained, adds nothing to your Title, nor can it be imputed to
me as a faulty will you strike, and have me to be (as a Stock) not sensible of
your blows. I have complained, and will complain, unless you do restore to the
Church what is violently and injuriously detained from it; let me ask you this
Question, Whether the Rent of seven Shillings nine pence for the Touchnoughs,
and of ten Shillings per annum for Wamsleys Tenement was a right to the Church
or not? if it was, why should it not belong to the Church still? if it was not,
how came it to pass that the Vicars received it? as sure as you can prove your
^^me to be R. S. I can prove this, I have not only two or three women, but also
all the Ancient men in the Town to Swear that the said Rent was paid to the
Vicars upon this very account, because it belonged to the Church.

But to speak more particularly to Wamsleys Tenement, how came it to pass that
Vicar K. got Widow Wamsley the possession of it, when it was in Controversy
between her and A. I. it seems that your Grandfather had nothing to do with it
then; and how came it to pass that Vicar R. received the Rent of it during his
Life? It is well known, and (if need be) it will be proved by Oath, that your
Grandfather never paid the Twenty Marks per annum unto Vicar R. which is due
unto the Church; and would your Grandfather de^ain that was a right unto the
Church, and let Vicar R. receive that which did not belong unto it?

As to your Release, that Mr. W. was up and you down, when it was signed, it is
not material; nor was he possessed of the Vicaridge a long time before, he
being presented in 48, and your Release was signed in 49. but to let this pass,
I will tell you, that if your Title was good, you needed no Release; and being
bad, his Release does not strengthen it; this is a thing that was never heard
of before, that a rich and powerful Patron should want a Release from a poor
Vicar, to confirm his Title to an inheritance; surely this must be a pitiful
confirmation. Mr. W. is ready to confirm his Testimony by Oath, which is ten
times more forcible than your Release. Besides, to tell you upon what account
the Release was given, and that he was not Vicar, when he signed it, because he
wanted institution and induction; therefore it signifies no more for you, than
if Tom. T. had signed it; but it speaks strongly on my side, that the Vicar had
some Title to the Tenement, otherwise it would not have been required; I
suppose you will not require Tom. T. to sign you a Release of your Demesne.

If Mr. H. and Mr. C. and several men in Mitton, elder than my Witnesses will
affirm that the Tenement always belonged to your Ancestors I will quit my
claim; why will you write after this manner? you your self will acknowledge
that the Rent of it was paid to Vicar R. during his Life, and that none of your
Ancestors had possession of it before he died.

If your next allegation be true, you may (upon the same ground, take from me
all that I have) it is not to be found in the Bishops records, or any writings
that belongs unto the Church, that any Glebe was given to any Vicar; the Glebe
^^ given to the Church, and that the Touchnough's and Wamsley's Tenement was
settled on it for the use of the incumbents, is as clear as the light, otherwise
the Vicars could not have received the Rent; nor could the Marks of Glebe be
stamped upon them, (as will be proved by oath; though you have told Mr. P. that
Wamsley's Tenement never had any such marks.

As for your argument of fourscore years possession, it cannot pass; it is not
much above threescore years since the first Lease of the Touchnough's was made
to old Brook; and not much above thirty years since Vicar R. Dyed; but let us
suppose it to be, as you would have it, (though we should not make suppositions
contrary to the known truth) I will tell you, that without a restriction, it is
but a shameful argument, A Theif had the possession of an honest man's Purse for
fourscore years, therefore he had a better title to it than the owner: The
Lawyers do tell you that Prescriptio temporis non tollit bonum titulum, And I
am sure that prescription will not hold in the least measure to detain from the
Church that which once belonged unto it; wherefore it was necessary that you
should show your deeds; and if you be what you protest your self to be, you
will do this, not only to promote this good end, the keeping of peace, and
preventing of troublesome Suits, but also for the sake of your own credit; that
if your deeds do give you a right to what you do possess, it may appear to the
world contrary to tradition, that there has not been any wrong done unto the
Church; if your deeds do not give you a title to the Glebes, your prescription
is but a continuance, and therefore all aggravation of the wrong that is done,
your supposition of having lost some of your deed^ cannot be made, for it is
not long since they were carried to York by H. K. And since that time there
have been no troubles to endanger the loss of any.

That you never saw any line, or scorle, or word, that gives me one grass chire
more than I have, (I believe) is the truest expression in all your letter; but
will you protest as a Christian that you have seen writings, that gives unto
you, what you detain from the Church; the stress of the business lies here,
whether your ancestors did buy of Borgan any thing more than the tithe; if
they did purchase any Glebe lands I will sit down, and be quiet; but if none,
why should you possess any.

Sir I hope you will pardon my boldness, and tediousness; I have been speaking
in my own defense, and not injuriously unto you; I will only admonish you to
take heed of meddling with Church Lands; you know how it fares with Brook's
offspring for his sacrilegious carriage in Joining with your Grandfather to
take from the Church the Touchnoughs, not any of his line is like ever to Enjoy
the Tenement again; whereas had he Continued a tenant to the Vicar, they could
not have been Dispossessed, while they Paid the accustomed fine, and the
ancient Rent; and it has not fared much better with the Wamsteys, thus God
punishes the Iniquitys of the Fathers upon the Children; I would not have it to
be so with you; my desire is that you and your Posterity may flourish, and that
I might have a Friendly arbitration and Composure; that the Controversy being
determined, I may be excused from a Connivance at that, which (my own Judgment
tells me) is horrid Sacrilege; but if all my Importunitys and Entreatys be
utterly rejected; so that to recover the Rights of the Church, there is no
remedy; but I must Dash my self against the Rock of a powerful and inflexible
Patron; the world shall know more then ever it knew yet (and no more then shall
be Confirmed by the Oath of credible Witnesses) to determine whether you be as
you Pretend to be (that is) Conscionable and Peaceable, until you condescend to
my earnest entreaties, that you are so qualifyed, cannot be presumed by.

Honored Sir Yours.


Observe 1. THe Office and duty belonging to a Patronage (as the Notation of
the Word does tell us) is to be an Advocate, to plead in the behalf of the
Church, when necessity requires; to protect and defend the Church, to provide
for it, to cherish and nourish it, to take care that its Endowments be not
alienated or diminished; in a word (according to the expression of the Prophet
Isaiah, to be a nursing Father, and a nursing Mother unto it; if all this be
not done, but the contrary acted, the Title is grossly misapplied and abused,
The Fox can never be said to have a Patronage over the Pullen, nor the Woolf
over the Sheep.

2. According to this, the practice of former Generations has been conformed:
that their Zeal and Piety, and Charity did Endow the Church with a Competency
of Glebes, Rents, Tithes, and Revenues, is clearly demonstrated by the Records
of Ordination, by the large bounds of the Parish, the several Chapels within
its bowels, the largeness of the Mansion House that was erected for the use and
benefit of the incumbent; which though it be in a great part demolished, and
the remaining part sits Solitary, mourning in ragged, clouted, and tattered
Garments, yet there are some Ruins and Rubbish, some Patches and Pieces
visible, to prove that it was sometime Handsomely, Splendidly, and Richly
Attired.

3. To prevent (if it was possible) the Rapine of future Ages, our Religious
Ancestors did settle and secure the Churches Endowments with the strictest Tie
and Knot that their discretion could invent, their Charters and Deeds of
Dedication and Donation running in this Tenor (with dreadful Anathema's and
Execrations) Let his Name not, and his memory perish from the face of the
Earth; Cursed let him be in his Person, Estate and Posterity; Cursed let him be
in this World, and in the World to come, that shall attempt to alienate or
diminish any part of that which is dedicated and given to the Church's use.

I do not doubt but there are many worthy Persons in the Nation, who wish well
unto the Church, earnestly desiring its Prosperity, whose Zeal and Piety; and
Bounty leads them to tread in, the steps of their Religious Ancestors, and
therefore are so far from thinking to alienate or diminish, that they take care
and contrive to augment the Churches Revenues.

But Observe 4. How contrary to this, is the practice of that Patronage which
is concerned in* the forementioned Letters; O tempora, O mores, times and
things are changed, and some persons degenerated from former Generations; where
the stately Oak did stand, comes up the unprofitable Shrub; and where the
fruitful Vine did flourish, springs the Bramble and Thorn; covetous, grasping,
preying persons possess the room of those that cherished and nourished the
Church under their wings, and fed it abundantly with the milk of their own
Breasts.

Truth may be spoken without just occasion of offense, and nothing shall be
declared, but what is confirmed by Tradition, living Testimony, and too
sensible, and very woeful experience; greatness and riches are not warranted to
do evil, more than the lowest degree of poverty; and when the Church cries out
for help to be vindicated and free from Rapine and Spoiling, the Tongue is not
to be struck dumb with fear, sin is to be reproved though it dwell in a
Mannor-house.

The Church is like unto the man that Travailed from Jerusalem to Jericho;
those two Fatal Enemies and Grand Robbers (Sacrilege and Simony) have stripped
her, wounded her, and left her half dead, and there is none that takes pity
upon her, to bind up her wounds, to pour in Oil and Wine, and to take care for
her Recovery: The Mother Churches that sit under the Wings and Patronage of the
Pious and Learned Bishops are (according to the Gracious Command of our Dread
Sovereign) largely and competently augmented in their Revenues: But the Mother
Church that lies under the pressure of a Popish Patronage, continues Mourning
in its Forlorn and Languishing condition.

To know more particularly by what sad fate and method the Church was brought
thus low; observe 5. That the Patronage concerned in the Letters, is so greedy
to swallow the Churches Revenues, that (having the Advowson of a considerable
Benefice) it required for a presentation no less than two parts of three to be
paid yearly during the Incumbents Life; but this kind of Trading being
rejected, afterward a Gobbet of a Thousand Pound was contracted to be paid,
and had been (without stop or strain) swallowed, had not the tediousness of
bartering afforded a Gentleman opportunity to step in upon another's account,
and to carry the Benefice away from the Bartering Merchants: But to speak
nearer to the concern of the Letters, this Patronage having purchased a great
part of that large Portion which was in the possession of the Abbot and Covent
(as Tithes small and great) and (as it is reported) the Easter Book, at a low,
inconsiderable, and shameful rate; that Fat Morsel did not Satiate the Hungry
Maw, but there was a continual Gaping and Snatching at that Portion which
always belonged to the Church, so that for several turns upon a Vacancy, there
was not any presentation made, but what was obtained by a previous Simonia^^
Contract; one piece after another was Snipped off by consent, sometime the
whole Glebe was passed off for a Presentation, sometime the yearly St^pend; one
Incumbent does that, for which he repented all the days of his Life,
complaining that if he stayed upon his Incumbency, he should never see the Face
of God with joy; another passes away Twenty Marks per Annum; and though some of
those Morsels were Vomitted up, and returned to the Church again, yet there has
been such Snipping and paring made, that (as appears by the Records of
Ordination,) almost the one half of the Gleab is Alienated, and Devoured, and
Posseson being gotten, it is kept more firmly than the Hawke does Grasp the
Captived Bird, or the Spaniard Sticks to his Usurped Possession.

Several Addresses have been made with much importunity, begging earnestly (for
peace sake) this reasonable Condescension, (the best method for deciding of
Controversies) that two or four indifferent and Discreet persons might be
Selected to view the Writings, hear the Pleas, and consider the Evidences on
both sides, and according to the best weight to sway the balance, that if it
appear to them (which is apparent unto all) that there is Injury done unto the
Church, they might order a proportionable Reparation to be made; but the
inflexible Patronage (confiding not in the strength of its Cause, but the
weight of the Purse) has utterly rejected all Addresses, and will hearken to
no proposalls; only that tedious and Chargable method of the Law (which is most
in use for ending of Controversies) must be used, which the Indigent Incumbent
is not a^^e to manage.

Is it not strange that the Patronage (but that it is Romish) should thus
forget its Office and Duty, to act quite contrary to the import of the word;
that instead of a Nursing Mother, it should become a Cruel Stepdame, and
instead of a Liberal Benefactor, an Unsatiable Devourer, practicing contrary to
the Law of God, and the Light of Nature, and doing that which is abhorred by
such as have no other conduct but the Glimmerings of innate and naked Reason,
violating the Will and Testament of the Dead, and Converting what was given by
Zealous Donors for the advancement of Piety, to Secular (if not to Profane)
uses: And is it not strange likewise that a purchase of large Revenues
comparatively for (almost) nothing, should not satisfy the Appetite of the
Patronage, but it must be so greedy as to Prey upon the Patrimony of the Church.

And in this Case is not just that the Law of Retaliation should be put in
Execution, that the Patronage might receive according to that measure which it
has meted; not only to be forced to restore the Revenues, which have been
Sacrilegiously and Simoniacally alienated from the Church, and to repair the
loss of the mean profits, but also to be compelled to sit down as content with
an equal Alienation from its shameful purchase: Nay, because the Patronage
required two parts of three for a Presentation, is it not justice and equity
that it should be compelled to be content with one part of three as sufficient
for its purchase, especially considering that a valuable consideration was not
paid for the tenth part of the Revenues which are possessed.

Christian Reader, I will trespass upon thy patience no longer, but begging thy
Pardon for that I have put thee to the trouble of Reading this Sad (but true)
Narrative, I shall conconclude all with that Pathetical expression of the
Psalmist, which (I hope) may without just occasion of Offense (I am sure
justly) be used: By the waters of Babylon I sat down and wept, when I
remembered thee O Zion.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
EPist. p. 4. l. 24. for penny, read Penury, p. 5. l. 10. f. either side, r.
every side, in the beginning of the answer to the Queries, f. you, r. more than
you, p. 31. l. 28. r. mark I beseech you, p. 40. l. 20. r. if they did dispute,
p. 41. l. 8. r. fore, p. 61. l. 16. r. nomerit, p. 79. l. 4. r. earthly Prince,
p. 82. l. 11. r. professed silence, l. 33. r. receipt, p. 86. l. 30. r. served as
well, p 88. l. 3. r. as for the Turks, l. 6. for but from the, r. and the, p.
90. l. 29. dele but on the contrary, p. 96. l. 4. r. his the same, p. 97. l.
31. r. non canonicis, p. 99. l. 11. r. till by the, p. 100. l. 22. r. and also,
p. 102. l. 4. r. Ecclesiastical understanding, p. 107. l. 28. r. then as if at
Easter, p. 120. l. 7. for enquire, r. enquirer, p. 125. l. ult, for dapers, r.
papers, p. 127. l. 31. dele great, p. 130. l. 9. dele not, l. 18. for speak,
r. speaks, p. 131. l. 4. for weakness, r. weakest, p. 133. l. 5. dele but, p.
136. l. 8. for drofesseh, r. profess^th, p. 139. l. 22. for between that, r.
between the, p. 139. l. 23. for protested, r. professed, p. 140. l. ult. for
travelers, r. traveller, p. 141. l. 10. for in, r. into, p. 142. l. 18 for so,
r. see, p. 143. l. 20. for is by, r. is used by, l. 31. for fictious, r.
fictitious, p. 144. l. 1. for prepossesseth, r. propossessed, p. 203. l. 33. r.
Judicare non audeamus, l. 34. for liber, r. libere, p. 219. l. 12. for
moderate, r. modern, p. 282. l. 28. for any, r. and, l. 32. for where, r.
whence, p. 282. l. 28, and 29. dele sure he will not make choice of maintain,
p. 296. l. 25. for except, r. expect, p. 301. l. 28. for root and use of it, r.
root and rise of it, p. 302. l. 7. for benefacto, r. benefacito, l. 22. for
reasons, r. reason, p. 307. l. 3. for prized r. prizeth, l. 16. dele they, l.
29. for least, r. last, p. 308. l. 2. for the fellowship, r. in the fellowship,
p. 309. l. 18. for persuasion r. perversion, p. 312. l. 16. for hight, r.
height, p. 315. l. 12. for unity, r. van^ty, p. 323. l. 33. for Vernon, r.
Veron p. 324 l. 24. for Vernon, r. Veron, p. 327. l. 3. dele and, p. 330. l.
16. for promise, r. promised, p 335. l. 9. for admonitions, r. admonitors, p.
341. l. 33. for use do, r. used to, p. 348. l. 17. for farthers, r. fathers, p.
360 l 3. for false, r. half, l. 24. r* a nemine, p. 366. l. 20. for passed, r.
possessed, p. 381. l. 2. for composition, r. if the composition, an^ l. 8 for
this is r. which is, p. 383. l. 25. for drawn out of, r. drawn out to* p. 385.
l. 3. for but if I speak, r. but if I spoke, p. 389. l. 10. for most truly, r.
most truth, p. 390. l. 9. for due, r. now, p. 394. l. 32. for that in
substantial, r. that is substantial, p. 397. l. 26. for prove out, r. pour out,
p. 398. l. 10. for temperate, r. intemperate, l. ult. for pressed, r.
expressed, p. 399. l. 10. for sore biting, r. sour biting, p. 401. l. 12. for
^^ffer wrong, r suffer we wrong, l. 14. for grass here, r. grass chire, ^ 11.
l. 19. for is not just, r. is it not just?


