A DEMONSTRATION, THAT, Hen. Meriton, John Meriton and Lau. Park, Priests, Of
the County of Norfolk, in Confederacy with Francis Bugg, were The CHALLENGERS;
And not the QUAKERS.
F. BUGG, their Mercenary Agent, Printed a Challenge upon the Quakers, bearing
Date, the 3d. of August, School. in which he says, Friends, you cannot but
remember your Ancient Practice in going into the Churches, disturbing the
Established Ministers, your Challenging them into the Field, to Dispute with
you: But behold! Here is a Change with you. We may now Challenge you, and
Charge you again and again; Fearfulness does Surprise you, that you dare not
appear; but remember it is a sign you cannot defend your Errors, and that your
Innocence is not Triumphant, as G. Whitehead boasts: Let this Charge and
Challenge therefore be a Touchstone to try your Sincerity, and let it be a
Monument of your Cowardice and Insincerity for ever.

Now, whether the Three Persons above named, who did so publicly Espouse F.
B's Charge and Challenge be not Included in the We Expressed in the above
Recited Challenge: Let their following Actions demonstrate.

For upon the 28th Day of the Month called August last, L. Park wrote a Letter
to S. Cater, a Minister among the Quakers, with the said Printed Challenge
enclosed; acquainting him, the said S. Cater, That he, the said L. Park, and F.
Bugg, and Four more (Six in all) would make good the Charge, therein contained,
and that they had agreed upon Time and Place, viz. The Third of October next
(says he) if you will meet us with the same Number, at Ten of the Clock in the
Forenoon, of that Day, in Dereham Church; or if that place Offend you, at any
other Place within the said Parish of West-Dereham; and you are desired to
resolve us in 14 Days time, that we may rely upon it.

And further, to show the Industry and Officiousness of the Three Priests
before named, to Push on the said Challenge, and to Urge our Acceptance
thereof, and to come forth on the Third of October next after: The following
Certificates may fully Evince.

This is to Certify, That on or about the 28th Day of the Month called August,
School. John Meriton and Lau. Park came, with F. Bugg, accompanied with several
of the Inhabitants of West-Dereham, to the House of William Phillips (Tho.
Becket's Wife being there) and did leave a Printed Charge and Challenge (with
F. Bugg's Name thereto) against the People called Quakers; and soon after, upon
the same day, Samuel Chicko, one of the Inhabitants of West-Dereham aforesaid,
brought a Paper in Writing to the said Tho. Becket's Wife, wherein was Proposed
a Meeting to be upon the Third of October next following, in West-Dereham
Church, and that they would be Six of them, and would allow us the like Number,
to Debate the Matters contained in the said Printed Challenge. Witness our
Hands, William Phillips, Mary Becket.

This is to Certify, That upon or about the 30th Day of the Month called
August, School. Hen. Meriton and John Meriton came, with F. Bugg, to the House of
John Hubbard, in Stoak, and there did urge again the said Matter, of a Public
Meeting, in the Presence of, John Hubbard, Daniel Phillips, Edward Plumstid.

And the same day, the aforesaid Priests, with F. Bugg, went to the Crown-Inn,
in the said Town of Stoak; and one or more of them, would have had the
Innkeeper Post up the said Charge and Challenge, which the said Innkeeper
refused to do: This he affirmed in our Presence, John Gurney, Joseph Hadduk,
Gilbert Low.

By all which it manifestly appears, that the said Priests, with F. Bugg, were
the Aggressors, and Challengers, and not the Quakers.

Wherefore let all Sober and Moderate Persons Judge, whether we could do any
less, than Appear and Defend Our Selves, against their false Charge;
considering how they Dared us to Come forth and Charged us with Fearfulness and
Surprise, if we did not; and said, Let it be a Monument of your Cowardice and
Insincerity for ever.

John Feddeman.


