The Eternal Joys of God's Presence.

A SERMON Preached at the TEMPLE-CHURCH UPON All-Saint's Day.

Printed at the Request of the Treasurers and Benchers of those Two Honorable
Societies.

By HENRY FELTON, L. L. D. Rector of Melford in Suffolk, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for Tim. Goodwin at the Queen's-Head against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet, 1699.

PSALM XVI. 11. -- In thy presence is fullness of joy; at thy right hand are
pleasures for evermore.
THE Desire of Joy and Pleasure is that which exciteth and inspiriteth all the
Actions and Endeavors of Men: All our Contrivings, all our Undertakings spring
out of, and center in this one Desire of attaining that wherein we may find Joy
and Contentment. Not only all Vices, but all Virtues too, are fed and supported
by Pleasure; though the Pleasures of the one and the other are infinitely
different. It Is not Riches, but a certain Pleasure which a low earthly Mind
takes in an Object so conformable to it, that feeds Covetousness: It Is not
Honor that properly feeds Ambition, but a bewitching Pleasure an Airy Mind
takes in soaring aloft. As for Sensuality, and all the several Ways of it;
what are they else but a professed Service, or rather Vassalage of Pleasure?
Briefly, Every particular Vice has some particular sinful Pleasure that
begets it.

And as Vice deriveth its Being and Maintenance from Pleasure, so does Virtue
too. In the way of Piety and Religion, what is it else that strengthens and
cheereth up Devotion to work through the Difficulties of it, but an internal
Pleasure, tasted here in the sweetness of a good Conscience, and in the
transporting Hope of the full Joys and eternal Pleasures hereafter? Since then
the whole World saileth by the Compass of Delight, shaping their Courses for
Joy and Pleasure; and the greatest part, for want of a clear believing
Apprehension of those full Joys unto which Man was made, fasten, and rest
themselves upon the poor, empty, momentary and unsatisfactory Delights which
are here to be enjoyed; Is it not a matter worthy of our best Labor, to call
my own and your Thoughts as it were into the Mount, to contemplate, and
consider unto what exquisite Joys, and high Delights, Man is created? That we
may the better know how to set our Affections upon Things above, and not upon
Things on the Earth; These are momentary, those eternal; These are
unsatisfactory, those are Fullness of Joy. In thy presence, says the Royal
Prophet, is fullness of joy; at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

From which Words, these Two Propositions may naturally and easily be deduced.

I. That there are full satisfying Joys and everlasting Pleasures attainable by
Men. II. That these Joys and Pleasures are in the Presence, or at the Right
hand of God.
Which Two Points I shall first endeavor to explain and prove; and then, in
the Third place, I will describe to you the Nature and Excellency of those full
Joys, so far as God has been pleased in his Holy Scriptures to reveal them to
us.

I. That there are full satisfying Joys and eternal Pleasures attainable by
Men. This is one of the main Principles of all Religion. We see that the first
Article of our Christian Faith, is to believe that there is a God who made all
things; and the last, to believe, that there is an everlasting, or complete
eternal Happiness to be attained of Man. Which Two Points are the Alpha and
Omega of all Religious Faith, and true Religion; and without a firm settling of
these Two in the Heart, it is impossible that any Spark of Devotion, or the
least Mite of Godliness should be kept alive: If either of these fail, all is
lost. The Holy Scriptures therefore, are so plain and full in the declaration
of this Truth, That God has prepared full and eternal Joys in his Presence for
the Righteous, that we need not cite any particular passage for the proof of
it; for the whole Body both of the Law and Gospel, stand upon this bottom. The
Sum of the Law lies in this Covenant, Do this, and thou shall live; i. e. Thou
shall live Eternally: And the Sum of the Gospel in this; Believe in the Lord
Jesus, and thou shall be saved. The Eternal Life and Salvation of Man is
therefore not only a Principle taught in the Law and the Gospel, but also a
Precognitum, or thing necessarily pre-supposed by them both.

Though the Arguments from the Sacred Scriptures be very plain and full in this
matter; yet seeing there are many who break the Bonds of God asunder, and cast
away the Cords of Christ from them; I mean, slip themselves out of the Ties of
Holy Scripture by an unaccountable sort of Deism, or Atheism; It will be
necessary (for their better satisfaction) to evince and illustrate the Truth of
it in their own way; which I shall endeavor to do by Two Arguments drawn from
the Dictates of Reason; which if they be not demonstrative, yet carry with them
such a strength of Probability, as may make the most Rational Man doubt or
fear, that he does not only offend against Christian Faith, but even against
Right Reason, in seeking wholly the vain and empty Pleasures of this World,
without having any regard to those full and perfect Joys which are at God's
Right hand.

The first Argument from Reason to prove that there is a Condition of full Joys
and eternal Pleasures attainable by us Men, may be taken from the natural
Desire and Appetite which is in all Men.

All Men that have the actual Use of their Reason, have an earnest Desire of
such an Estate of Happiness as may fully satisfy them, and endure eternally.
This Desire is natural to Man; for else how should it be in all Men? It is a
Desire likewise agreeable to Right Reason, for it tends to the Perfection of
the Creature, and the Glory of the Maker to make it so.

Now is it probable that God should frame the Hearts of all Men so desirous of
a thing, that no Man can or shall ever attain unto? We see, that if Man begets
a Child, if possible he be able, he will provide to fill the Belly of it: If we
that are Evil are so careful to provide for that which we beget; were it not
then a strange thing in God (be it spoken with all humble Reverence of the
Divine Majesty) that he should create and infuse such a desire of eternal
Happiness (as certainly this Appetite in all Men is of God's begetting) and not
provide wherewith to satisfy this Desire?

Besides, we may observe, that the Great and Wise Creator of all things, has
utterly abhorred Vacuity and Emptiness in all his Works. The vast Channel, the
Abyss of the Sea, is a fathomless Gulf for Depth, and an immeasurable Extent
for Circumference, yet God has provided Waters enough to fill it; The Space
between Heaven and Earth is infinitely large and wide, yet God has provided
wherewithal to fill it; The craving Appetites and Stomachs of all Men, all
Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, Things creeping, etc. require an infinite quantity of
Nourishables for their Food, yet God has provided wherewith they all may be
filled: The Desire and Appetite (if I may so call it) of the Angels must needs
aim at high and transcendent Matters; such poor Trifles, as make up our
Delights here, fashionable Dresses, Recreations, bodily Pleasures, etc. are
nothing unto them; yet God has provided somewhat to satisfy and fill them; for
otherwise those heavenly Spirits could not be Blessed. In like manner, though
the Desire of Man toward a complete and eternal Happiness seems to be very
high and vast, yet he that fills the vast Sea; he that fills the endless
Gulphs of Hunger both in Man and Beast; he that fills the capacious
Comprehensions of the Angels, it is easy for him to satisfy and fill this
Appetite of Man.

And it is somewhat absurd, according to the Dictates of Right Reason, to think
that of all his Creatures, God has created only the Reasonable Soul of Man for
a perpetual Emptiness, and has ordained no Object to fill and satisfy it; as
it is plain he has not in this World: And therefore we have good Reason to
believe, that he has prepared for it full satisfying Joys and eternal
Pleasures in another; the transporting Expectation of which, is the only true
satisfying Pleasure it can enjoy in this Life. That the Pleasure of Riches,
Honor, or bodily Pleasures, bear no proportion to it, every Man's own
Experience may convince him. No! they are so flitting and uncertain, so empty
and unsatisfactory, so mixed and alloyed, that the most improved Enjoyments of
them are rather Vanity and vexation of spirit, as the Wiseman speaks, than any
true, solid, or satisfying Delights. But,

2. The Second Reason which we shall use to prove the propounded Truth, is
this: If there be no Fullness of Joys and Eternal Pleasures in the Presence of
God, which Man should seek as his End, and may attain as his perfect Happiness;
then the Reasonable Soul of Man seems to be no better than a Servant or Slave
to his Sensual Part; and those Advantages and Excellencies which we have above
the Beasts, are but as Drudges for that part which we have in common with them.
For if the Soul of Man has not the Eternal Delight and Contentment of a
Supernatural Life with God for her utmost End; then of necessity she must stoop
down to this as her main End, and seek the best Delights this World afford,
without Thought or Regard of any other.

And what then serves our Reason for, but that we may with a little more
neatness, curiousness, and stateliness, do the very same things which the
Beasts do? i. e. Eat, drink, sleep, play, beget our like, please our Senses,
and the like: Yea (which is worse) what does our Reason serve us for, but to
furnish us with such means and devices, whereby we may become more brutish than
the Beasts themselves? And this we see plainly by Experience in such Persons,
who have cast off the Belief and Care of Heavenly Happiness. What does their
height and strength of Wit and Parts serve them for, but as a help to wade
farther and deeper into the Mud of Sensuality, than the Beasts can do?

And indeed, if there be no Supernatural Life for Man, who can blame them for
so doing, or seeking the best Delight and Contentment of this Natural? But is
it possible that the Reason of Man should digest such a Baseness as this, that
she is for nothing else, but for a Slave and Vassal for the Sensitive Part?
Nothing (methinks) is more incongruous to Reason, than to think, that the
Divinae aurae particula, the Soul, should be given us only to serve such mean
Purposes as these. Are the Rich and Noble Endowments of it, capable of no
better employ, than to cater exquisitely for the Body? They who can entertain
such unbecoming Thoughts of the Excellencies of their own Nature, show that
their own Follies have brought a greater degeneracy upon them, than the Curse
inflicted upon Adam's Fall. We may reasonably conclude then, That those
Excellencies which Man has above other Creatures, were not given him to be the
Vassals of Sensuality; but as Advantages, as Aids to raise him to the
Blessedness of a Supernatural Life with God.

But it may be said, That the Reasonable Soul of a Man has in this Life an
high Flight, and an excellent Delight in the Raptures and Sweetness of
Contemplation; and besides, in many Men does manage Great and Noble Works about
Governing and Ruling; and therefore though it should have no Supernatural
Happiness Eternal in another Life, yet it cannot be said to be wholly a Servant
and Drudge for the Sensual Part.

But to this it may be answered, First, That the Speculations and
Contemplations of the Reasonable Soul are all Essays, and, as it were,
Flutterings toward her last Perfection, which end in the Contemplation of God.
And if we set aside, or deny her such an End, then all her Acts, which are
merely Speculative, and not profitable for this Life, are no better than
unprofitable Ramblings, and wild Vagaries, doing more hurt to the Life of Man,
by wasting it in the pursuit of Shadows and Fancies, than they can any ways do
good; and are more foolish and vain, than any other Works wherein she is
employed for the Service of this Life, and may in truth be counted as part of
her Weakness and Vanity, rather than her Felicity. Though indeed, if we think
of them (as we ought) that they are as steps of Progress to a higher
Contemplation of God, then they are otherwise.

2dly. As to the Works which the Reason of Man does in well-governing and
settling such great Bodies of Society, as Empires and Kingdoms, they are indeed
great, admirable, and noble: If they be considered as referring to a Twofold
End; the One, that Men may lead a godly and an honest Life; the Other, a quiet
and peaceable One. Both which Ends are briefly expressed by St. Paul, 1 Timothy 2.
2. and are such as all Governments take upon them. Now so far as the Work of
Governing tends to uphold Religion, as a way for Men to raise themselves to
an Eternal Happiness, so far the Reason of Man therein is a Servant to a divine
and heavenly End: But if we set aside this noble and glorious End, and propound
no other, but that Societies of Men may live quietly and peaceably, orderly and
safely together in this World; then all the Contrivances of Government, and the
Acts of the Rational Soul about it, are but Services to the Sensitive Part of
Man.

For what then are they else, but agreed and settled Provisions, that every Man
may Eat and Drink in quiet, Sleep, Walk, Ride, Play, Enjoy his Pleasures
without any unjust disturbance of the Idle and Malicious. In conclusion
therefore, this seems necessary to be granted, That either the Reasonable Soul
of Man serves to raise him to some happier End than we see in this Life; or
else all her noblest Acts and ingenious Devices, are but Services for the
Contentment of the Sensitive Part, or (which is worse, and must be affirmed of
Acts merely Speculative) are vain, frivolous, and to no purpose.

Thus Reason and Scripture unitely conspire to assure us of the Certainty of
this most desirable Truth, That there are Joys, full-satisfying Joys, and
eternal Pleasures attainable by Men. Which was the First Proposition I proposed
to speak to.

The Second is, That these Joys and Pleasures are in the Presence of God, or at
his Right hand. Before I enter upon the Proof of this, it will be necessary to
explain what is meant here by the Presence of God, and his Right hand. The
Presence of the Face of God (as the Original signifies) has diverse
Significations in Scripture, but they may all be reduced to these Four:

1. It signifies the visible Sacred Assemblies of the Church of God on Earth;
in which, because God is present after an especial manner, they are therefore
called his Presence. As the King, who is Lord and Owner of the whole Court, yet
has one Room especially for his Chamber of Presence; so God, who is Lord of
the whole World, has his Church, and specially the visible Assemblies of it,
for his Chamber of Presence. So the Word is taken, Psalm. 42. 2. My soul
thirsts for God, for the living God: when shall I come and appear before God;
or, in the presence of God? The Original has the same word that is used in my
Text, which we translate before the Face of God, or, in the Presence of God, i.
e. in his Holy Temple.

2. It signifies the Almighty Power, or the All-viewing Sight of God, Psalm.
139. 7. Whither shall I fly from thy presence? i. e. From thy Power, and from
thy Sight.

3. The Special Favor and Grace wherewith God loves his Elect. So Psalm. 51.
11. Cast me not away from thy presence; i. e. Cast me not out of thy Favor and
Love.

4. It signifies that Communication of himself face to face in Glory, whereby
God for ever makes Blessed the Holy Angels and Saints in Heaven; which is
called by Divines, the Beatifical Vision; and by St. Jude, the Presence of
Glory. Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you
faultless before the presence of his glory, etc. St. Jude, v. 24. And in this
sense we must understand the Presence of God in my Text. The Perfection of our
Heavenly Happiness is well expressed by St. Paul, and expounds this of David's.
David's Phrase is, In thy presence is fullness of joy. St. Paul's thus: But now
we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face, 1 Cor. 13. 12. i. e. When
we shall see God, not as now through a Glass darkly, but our Face, as it were,
to his Face, our Presence in his Presence. It Is of this the Royal Prophet here
speaks, In thy presence is fullness of joy. So much for the Exposition of the
first word, Presence.

The Right hand of God, is another Metaphor, whereby the same thing is
expressed to us. This word also is used in Scripture to signify many things,
but ususally these Three:

1. The great and mighty Power of God. So Psalm. 89. 13. Strong is thy hand, and
high is thy right hand; i. e. Great and Wonderful is thy Power.

2. The Sovereign Dignity and Prerogative of Honor, Glory and Power, unto
which God has advanced the Human Nature of Christ above the Angels, and every
Creature. So Ephesians. 1. 20. And set him at his own right hand in heavenly places,
far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, etc.

3. The happy Estate and Condition in which God shall settle his Elect Children
at the last day. So Matt. 25. 33. where it is said, That God shall separate the
godly from the wicked, as a shepherd divides the sheep from the goats; and he
shall set the sheep on his right hand, and the goats on the left: i. e. He
shall settle the one in an Estate of Everlasting Joys and Happiness, but send
the other into a Condition of unspeakable Grief and Misery. And in this sense
we must take the Right hand of God in this place. So then, the Scripture it
self does sufficiently explain what we may here understand by God's presence,
and his Right hand: i. e. The immediate Society of God in a Beatifical Vision
of his Glorious Excellency, and the Happiness thereby arising to such Beholders
of God.

Having thus explained these Two Terms, I will proceed to the Proof; That the
full Joys and eternal Pleasures of Man consist in the Presence, or blessed
Fruition of God. As this is the Doctrine of David in this place and elsewhere;
so is it likewise of St. John, as appears by the Description he gives of the
Blessedness of the Citizens of the Heavenly Jerusalem, Rev. 22. 4. They shall
see the face of God, says he: and v. 5. The Lord God gives them light, and
they shall reign for ever and ever. And to this purpose are those words of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 36. 8, 9. They shall be abundantly filled with the fatness of
thy house, and thou shall make them drink of the river of thy pleasures: For
with thee is the fountain of life, and in thy light shall we see light. Thus
St. John likewise in the forementioned Description of the Heavenly Jerusalem,
uses the same Metaphor: He showed me a pure river of waters of life, clear as
crystal, proceeding out of the Throne of God and the Lamb, Rev. 22. 1. Which
metaphorical Expressions do admirably and elegantly set forth both the Fullness
and Purity, as well as the Perpetuity and Eternity of those Pleasures which
arise unto us from the Vision of God. The Pleasures of a Man which the
Creatures afford him, are like Plashes and Puddles, mixed, shallow, and of
short Duration; but the Divine Joys issuing from the Fruition of God, are like
a great River, clear and unmixed, deep and profound, without overflowing, full
and perpetual.

As the Scriptures are express in this matter, so Natural Reason dictates the
same thing. For if there be no uniting or concentring of all Good, any other
way, but only in God; for he that has God in possession, has in him all Good,
which can be desired: As he being entirely and infinitely perfect, can want
nothing to make himself more happy; so he that enjoys him can want no manner of
thing that is Good; and therefore his Heart must needs be filled, because it
has no farther progress of Desire: But there is no other Good, or uniting
together of Good, but only in God, in which there is not some Want; and
therefore cannot yield a Fullness of Joy and Contentment. As for instance;
Health is a great Blessing, but yet in Health there may be a want of Riches:
Riches are a comfortable Blessing, but yet in them there may be a want of
Wisdom; in Wisdom a want of Honor, in Honor a want of Strength; in Strength a
want of Beauty; in Beauty a want of Virtue; in Virtue a want of Perfection. But
suppose all these, or more than all these, were united in one Person, yet there
is one thing wanting that makes them imperfect and unsatisfying; and that is,
the want of Perpetuity and Eternity. Now all Good things meet in God. And so
firm and immutable is all Good in him, that it cannot be server'd from him; so
Eternal, that even Eternity it self can never waste, or wear out. When Man's
Heart, therefore, shall be enlarged to comprehend God, and enjoy him, then
shall he have all Good whatsoever, and a perfect Happiness made sure to him for
all Eternity. Our Reason then must conclude thus much, That either Man has no
Fullness of Pleasure, or of necessity this must be it, To enjoy the Beatifical
Vision or Presence of God.

Besides, we may observe in Nature, that the Rest of all things is no where
else, but in their proper place; when they have attained to the Center of their
Motion, they rest and move no farther, as if they were fully satisfied. Now as
gross and massy Bodies, whose proper Motion is to descend, have their Center
below, i. e. the Earth: So pure and immaterial Spirits (such as the Soul of Man
is) whose proper Motion is to ascend, have their Center above, which is God.
Beyond this Center they cannot move; in this they rest. When therefore the
Souls and Spirits of Men shall have attained unto God, and shall adhere and
cleave unto him; then, and not elsewhere, shall they have perfect Rest, and
full Contentment. To this purpose is the Common, but Excellent Saying of St.
Austin, Fecisti nos ad Te (Domine) and inquietum est cor nostrum donec
requiescat in Te; Thou have made us (O Lord) for thy self, and therefore our
heart is never lodged at rest until it come to Thee, and rest in Thee.

Since, therefore, Reason and Revelation, Philosophy and Scripture do so well
agree, in establishing this great Fundamental Article of our Faith, I need not
trouble you or my self with any farther Proofs of it; but shall briefly
enquire, what these Full Joys are, and wherein they do consist.

In doing this, I shall not pretend to give you an exact Idea or Description of
them; that is a Task and Province fit only for an Angel, or a glorified Spirit:
All I aim at, is to give you such an account of them, as God has thought fit
to impart to us Mortals in the Scripture; which though it falls short of the
Things themselves, yet is doubtless the best and the utmost that our narrow
Capacities can bear; but such as may inflame our highest Endeavors after the
Enjoyment of them, and such as will satisfy our most extravagant Desires.

The Scripture leads us Two ways to some kind of Comprehension of our Future
State of Happiness: Per fiam Negationis, and per viam Eminentiae, as the
Schoolmen speak; By the way of Negation, and by the way of Eminence. By the way
of Negation, i. e. by denying all such things to be in our Future State of
Happiness, which we find any ways troublesome or burdensome to us. Thus they
speak plainly, That there shall be no Hunger or Thirst, Rev. 7. 16. That there
shall be no more Sorrow nor Tears: God shall wipe away all tears, v. 17. That
there shall be no more Corruption, no Mortality: For this corruptible shall put
on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality, 1 Cor. 15. That there
shall be no Power of a second Death, Rev. 20. 6. No Death, no Crying, no
Sorrowing, no Pain shall accompany us in our Future State of Happiness. Here,
like little Ants, we crawl and creep up and down this Molehill of Earth, each
of us with our Burden on our Shoulders; but there all our Burdens shall be
taken off. Here Hunger, and Thirst, and Provision for these, is one man's
Burden: Here Sickness and Craziness, Gout or Stone, is another man's Burden;
but there all these things shall be done away: Here unruly Lust is another
man's Burden, but there the Fuel and Life of it shall fail: Here Sin and Death
are the common Burdens of all Mankind, but at God's Right hand there shall
neither be Sin, nor Death, nor Fear of either. In a word; whatsoever here does
pain, perplex, hinder, or any way discontent or vex us, shall in the State of
Full Joys be removed far from us. This is one way by which the Scripture
teaches us to know something of our Future Happiness.

The other is by way of Eminence, i. e. by comparing our Blessed State to the
most eminent and glorious Things, which by Sight or Experience we have ever
known. Thus to excite our Desires and Longings after it, the Scripture sets it
out to us, by such glorious Metaphors as these. Sometimes the Metaphor of
shining like the Sun is made use of. Then shall the righteous shine forth as
the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, Matt. 13. Sometimes the Metaphor of a
Kingdom: Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you,
Matt. 25. Sometimes that of a Crown; You shall receive a crown of glory, 1 Pet.
5. Of sitting upon a Throne; Ye also shall shall sit upon twelve Thrones,
judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, Matt. 19. Of a Marriage Feast: Blessed are
they that are called to the Marriage-supper of the Lamb, Rev. 19. These are
glorious Similitudes indeed, and as expressive of the thing as our weak Natures
are capable of. For the greatest visible Brightness in Heaven, is the shine of
the Sun; the greatest Luster on Earth, is the Honor of a Kingdom; the Royalest
Ornament of a King, is his Crown; the most Majestical Seat of a Crowned Head,
is his Throne; the most exquisite Rejoycings, are commonly at King's
Marriage-Feasts. Thus Heaven and our Future Joys are represented to us by such
things as are in greatest Esteem, and thought most desirable by us; That our
weak Understandings might raise themselves from thence to some high Thoughts of
our future Perfection. But after all, we must own they are but poor and faint
Resemblances of those Full Joys and Eternal Pleasures which are at God's Right
hand: Whereas then, the greatest Brightness of Heaven, and the highest Luster
of Glory, Honor, Majesty, Mirth and Joy that is on Earth, stand but as Shadows
in Scripture, to set forth the Eternal Pleasures of Heaven; how should we poor
Mortals be able to conceive them rightly, or express them fully? St. Austin in
one of his Epistles tells us, That on the very day St. Jerome died, he being in
his Study with Pen, Ink, and Paper, about to write to him concerning the Joys
of Heaven, suddenly he saw a Light breaking into his Study, and this Voice he
thought he heard: O Austin! what do thou? do thou think to put the vast Sea
into a small Vessel? When the Heavens shall cease from their continued Motion,
then shall thou be able to understand what the Joys of Heaven are, and not
before, unless thou come to feel them as now I do. No; there is but one way
of understanding them perfectly, and that is by attaining them. This the
Blessed Saints and Martyrs, whom we this Day commemorate, have long since
experienced. And this way, I humbly beseech God, to bring both you and me with
them (one day) to a full and perfect understanding of them.

And that he may the better do this, give me leave to Apply what has been said
in few words, and so conclude.

If then God has provided for us Full Joys and Eternal Pleasures in another
Life, which exceeds both our Power to express, and our Hearts to conceive; is
it not our bounden Duty to render Him all the Honor and Praise due unto his
Name? For they that know his Name, will put their trust in him. Let this first
of all excite our Hearts to praise and magnify God for his infinite Goodness
and Love to Mankind, that he has ordained so happy an End, and such
transporting Joys for us poor Mortals, as the Eternal Fruition of Himself.
Lord! what is Man that thou should exalt him above the other Works of thy
hands, and so far too as to make Thy self the Inheritance of his Rest, and the
Substance of his Triumphant Joy! Is there any greater Happiness that thou
could have given him, than that thou should give him thy self for his
Happiness? Is there any surer than that which is founded upon thy Immutability
and Eternity? What could thou have done more for thy Creatures? How then can
we do less than exalt and magnify thy infinite Goodness, Mercy and Bounty to us
for ever? As thy Love is inexpressibly Glorious in giving thy Son for our
Savior, so is it also in making thy self our Salvation and Felicity.

2. Let us settle our Thoughts and Endeavors upon this as our main End, to
seek seriously these Full Joys and Eternal Pleasures of Heaven. We would all
willingly (I make no question) have such Contentment and Full Joys as may last
for ever: But are we in good earnest? Let us seek them where they may be found.
You have heard already, and your own Experience sufficiently witness the Truth
of it. The Joys and Pleasures of this World do all come far short of this
Contentment; Where then must we seek them but in the Bosom of the Father, where
only true, Transporting and Everlasting Joys are to be found? It Is true indeed,
God has been pleased to put a Touch of Delight and Pleasure into these inferior
Things, the better to quicken the Spirits of Men for the necessary Actions of
this Life. And Christian Piety allows us the use of them, if we would but keep
her Rules and Measures in the Enjoyment of them. And thus (if God sees it so
fit) I could wish you your Parts in both. But yet I humbly and earnestly
entreat you, Do not lose the one for the other; the Eternal for the Momentary,
the Satisfactory for the Unsatisfactory. As a Merchant who Loads himself here,
and sets out for the East Indies, sets down beforehand what Ports and Havens
(God blessing him) he will make for; yet, by the way, he may perhaps touch in
upon this or that Coast for fresh Water, or other Refreshments, and barter away
there some small Trifles. So I would persuade you to do; Let this be your
best-resolved Conclusion, That Heaven, and the Full Joys thereof, shall be the
Port and Haven which you will make for: As for Earthly Delights and Pleasures,
you may touch in upon them by the way, as for fresh Water, or other
Refreshment, but barter away only some small Trifles for them; Let not your
best Loading, your precious Souls, go in Exchange for them. Thus may you taste
the Delights of this World here, and be filled with the Full Joys of Heaven
hereafter.

3. And Lastly; Let us be careful to walk in the Way which may bring us to
these Full Joys and Eternal Pleasures of Heaven; and what that Way is, St. Paul
tells us: It is to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present World, looking for the blessed hope and
the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, Tit. 2.
This is what I principally aimed at this day, by setting before you the Joys of
Heaven as powerful Motives to stir you up unto a Holy, Religious Life on Earth,
as the necessary Condition of enjoying them in Heaven. Others may have set
before you the Terrors of the Lord, Death and Hell, to persuade you to the same
thing; but I have set before you Life and Heaven, choose whether you will: But I
know your Choice; you had rather have Life than Death; rather enjoy a
Fellowship with God and his Holy Angels in the Pleasures of Heaven, than a
Partnership with the Devil and his Angels in the Torments of Hell. But choose
this, I beseech you, not like Fools, who choose the End, neglecting the
necessary Means; but, like Rational Creatures, choose the Means, together with
the End, and for the End-sake. As you desire the Eternal Joys of Heaven, so
enter into the Right way which may bring you surely to it; and that is, to fear
the Lord. The fear of the Lord tends to life; and he that has it, shall
abide satisfied with it, Prove. 14. 23. He that tells us, In thy presence is
fullness of joy; at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore; Tells us
likewise, The upright shall dwell in thy presence, Psalm. 140. 13. It Is the
Upright and Godly shall dwell in the Presence of God's Favor here, and in the
Presence of his Glory hereafter. Let us therefore walk Uprightly both with God
and Man, that we may in some measure feel the Presence of God here in Divine
Comforts and Consolations, as Tastes and Assurances of the Full Joys of Heaven
that await us. When our Blessed Lord shall come with this Euge, Well done thou
true and faithful servant, receive the Kingdom prepared for you. That this may
be the happy Condition of all here; Let us humbly beseech God to give us Grace
so to follow thy Blessed Saints in all Virtuous and Godly Living, that we may
come to those Unspeakable Joys which thou have prepared for them that love
Thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord: To whom with the Father and Holy Ghost, be
ascribed all Power, Praise, and Thanksgiving, now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

