PHILANTHPOPIA Or, A holding forth of Universal immunitie in exercise of
Christian Religion, expressed in a Letter to a Person of Condition.
September 18 1659 Sir,
BY this ensuing discourse, you will see my judgment. It Is true, I do it
currente calamo, in more haste, then the gravity of your question merited; but
that is to the manner. I am very positive, even in my most examinate
reflections, as to the matter, to assert liberty of Religion to all Christians,
which therefore I call, as you see in the Title.

I see it much ventilated amongst our wisest modelers of the Oeconomicall part
of our purchased liberty in Religion, whether it consistts with a conscientious
and well regulated Commonwealth, to give restraint in order to any parties
professing Christianity? Whence, upon your commands, I take pen and put to
paper, dipped in ink, without the too too ordinary contemperature of gall, as
the subject requires; religion, if true, being always animated with charity.

I profess in the first place, that as to those whom we call Papists and
Prelatists, my education has so prevented all foreign tinctures, that I am not
capable of any further affection, then what the purity of Christian religion
avoweth and obliges. And therefore prescribing to my self those narrow, yet
sanctified bounds, I presume to offer these motives of liberty, as they relate
to all, not seeing, how we can exclude any, by the principles of Christianity
and reason.

First, I consider that Religion is a habit or virtue, which has God for its
immediate object, by which we are inclined to perform our duties in Divine
worship, being a species of justice whose formal reason, or essential
consideration (acording to Logicians language) consists in rendering to each one
valewably as the commutative, or at least proportionably, as the distributive,
what is due. Whence to very many of our learned men, it seems to follow, that
Religion is not within the vierge of humane cognizance, since both parties
concernd (God being above all laws) are not liable to our Tribunals.

Secondly, neither does the restrictive, or rather declarative term Christian
added to religion, enlarge the bounds of humane cognizance, as to this
particular, except some Divine delegation may be produced by an authentical
Instrument, which hitherto I do not hear is pretended to, by our modern rigid
Censurers out of holy Scriptures, which only can secure the attempt from high
presumption, acording to our Principles.

The great Cleark Erasmus, though a Papist (whom I willingly name in this
business, not only for the eminency of his learning, but for the great esteem
our Country had of his judgment, as Sr. Thomas More witnesses in his Defense
against Dorpius) surviving til these fires began to kindle, took an easy
occasion to show the barrennes of holy Writ, as to this particular: and
withal, how much he recounts a great Pulpitmans applying S. Paul's heretioum
hominem devita, shun an heretic to take them off their life's, that is, to put
them to death. Thus zeal not regulated, turns to folly: For the Apostle gives
not the least hint for it, as the text speaks, and he shows.

Thirdly, our blessed Lord himself gave his great Commission, to the Apostles
in this form Mat. 28. 19. Go teach all nations etc. And the Apostle 2. Tim. 2.
24. as it were commenting upon it, says: The Servant of the Lord must not
strive, but be gentle to all men, apt to teach, forbearing in meekness,
instructing those that are contrary minded, if God peradventure will giae them
repentance to the acknowledgment of the truth. Where both texts directs all
Christian procedure in Religion, to be by teaching, not domineering, or lording
over Consciences. Whence surely in order to us, who justly pretend highest
reverence to holy Scripture, this plea will stop all unlawful invasions, and
unjust usurpations of Gods prerogative in punishing for Conscience.

Fourthly, upon this Divine and Apostolical sanction, it is evident, (as our
learned men observe) that the primitive times (by which we have always desired
to modelize our forms of Government, as to matter of Religion) did not at all
use violence to Consciences. Insomuch that Cyprian Ep. 62. puts the difference
betwixt the Synagogue, and the Christian Church in this, that then by a
corporeal, now only by a spiritual sword, contumacy is punishable. And hence
380. Years after Christ, Idacius Clarus a Spanish Bishop, was severed from
Christian communion, for having incited the Magistrates against Priscillian,
though an Arch-heretick. It is also observable, that the Arians, who were
indeed Antichristian, under Constantius, are known to be the first introducers
of sanguinary, and other compulsive Decrees upon Consciences in order to
belief. With all which is consistent, that if any under color of Religion
shall disturb the peace, they justly loose this immunity, as reason
demonstrates and all antiquity confirms.

Fifthly, Peradventure some would urge the Papists just forfeiture of these
Christian Rights of religious immunity by their particular demerits in the
Gun-powder-treason. As to this, Christianity compells me, to vindicate the body
of them from the least guilt init; since K. James himself (who was very privy
to the intriegues of that State-prodigie) in his Proclamation presently
declared them innocent. And indeed Aristotle's, and much more Christian Schools,
would condemn it as a great Solaecisme, if they should conclude all of us
guilty of every horrid crime, which some few Protestants, to their perpetual
ignominy, are known to have perpetrated, or upon such too too remote Titles
should deprive us of our Christian rights, and conscientious liberties, since
as each one carries the guilt of his own crime, so the punishment according to
all Law.

Sixthly, whereas further may be objected, the cruelty of the modern Spanish
inquisition, and of the Prelatique High Commission. It is easily retorted by
them both: why should we embrace, what we dislike in them? except we will hear
from the Prophet, Videbas furem, and currebas cum eo: you saw a thief and did
run with him; that is, to steal with him. Shall we erect again pecuniary and
coercive courts of Conscience, which we pulled down, as being against the nature
of Conscience which is only subject to Gods Court of Justice, as we justly
alleged, when it related to our own liberties of Conscience? As for the
Inquisition, we all know, it was introduced to rid the country of Moors and
Jews, which only by the faggot could be consumed: we are not also ignorant that
it is not introduced as matter of faith amongst them, neither is it universally
received. France abhors all violence in this kind, Germany, Flanders, Poland,
and many other parts do not admit it. Must Spain only, and only in this,
direct us? Gregory Nazianzen in his fourth oration, when Orthodox Christians
had by Julians death obtained the worlds Sovereignty (which is our case) very
piously persuades the Magistrates, not to turn the points of their swords
against even Infidels, which they had cruelly sheathed in our hearts. He gives
the reason, Ostendamus quod illos Doemones doceant, quod rursum Christus nos
erudiat: Let us show them that the Devil taught them those cruelties, and
Christ our meekness. Hence in Q. Mary's days, the learned person of that age
Alphonsus a Castro, though a Papist, preached at White Hall in presence of K.
Philip against our home severities, as our famous Mr. Fox assures us: and the
late Archbishop learned Doctor Laud after S. Augustine, did not hold a
gallows to be a fit argument for conversion of misunderstanding Souls, as he
persuaded the King, who was therefore wholly against it, as he declared upon
all occasions. And he who was, and is celebrated as the wisest of our
Protestant Princes, has in print disowned all co^rcion in this kind, as K.
James in his Apology to Christian Princes. And indeed though by suggestion of
some intemper^te spirits, there has been too too much severity used, such as
was old Cecil, who made marginall notes upon Julians Gests (the Grand Apostate
and subdolous persecutor of Christians) as his Directory for proceeding in
matter of religion against Papists: yet in all times the most eminent and
conscientious persons of Church and Commonwealth amongst us, have disclaimed
and blushed at our severe laws against religion: which have made us an obloquy
to all our n^ig^bours, even to our brethren the Hollanders, whose Christian
policy even beyond envy flourishes at Amsterdam, and other places, with
exemplar piety and freedom. And in the combustion, betwixt the Arminians and
Gomarists they experienced a happy effect of this universal immunity. For even
the Papists, who were very numerous, (and surely are so here, if we involve all
of that judgment, more then is easily conceived) assured the Magistrates, that
their Religion obliged them, to be faithful to the Superiors, and that
accordingly they would stand by them against whomsoever. Upon which ground the
wisest people in the World the old Romans offered to the Jews, though a
conquered Nation, their liberties of religion, as their own historians, to
their honor, declare, and they had answerable effects, as also now we see in
France, where our Religion is happily tolerated, with what fidelity the King of
France serves himself in places of chiefest trust in the wars, of the most
eminent professors of our Religion, and in like manner the King of Pole and
others. Whence we must confess that in the judgment of all parties,
Soul-immunity connaturally inferrs a conscientious fidelity; and therefore it
cannot produce less effects here of loyalty in all who shall by abolishment of
compulsive laws as to conscience find the comfort of the freedom, where
gratitude in all ingenious natures freed from bondage, will imprint indelible
characters of duty to be transmitted even to posterity.

Seventhly, It Is true that the posterior Romans, the dregs of the old Heathens,
who like the Jews measured all things by the test of temporal blessings,
objected the ill success of the Empire, to be from the liberty of Christianity;
which moved Orosius by S. Augustines command to write his histories, as
testimonies of Gods blessings: And it gave occasion to S. Augustine himself to
enrich the World with his Books Of the City of God, upon the same design, and
to show ill successes to have come from themselves. In the same manner we know,
that some ill natured and froward Persons have so far envyed their Neighbors
freedom in matters of Conscience, that, like those old Heathens, they would
injuriously impute our present miseries to this freedom; whereas unquestionably
the want of universal immunity, or rather the violent restraint of tender
consciences, stroke the first fire of all our combustions, as no Englishman
can be ignorant who has been contemporary to them. The best remedy will be
(since as nature teaches contraria contrariis curautur,) by a contrary
applycation of tenderness, which will sincerely unite all affections, as
amongst the old Philosophers, who though differing in their Tenets, concerning
God and his worship, yet out of their several Schools, in mutual civil
offices obliged each other.

Eighthly, if we further consider this business, as we are Englishmen, that is,
true Patriots, having an eye upon our relations abroad, we cannot but take
notice of both our powerful neighbors interessed in it, who though out of
present exigencies of State they may dissemble the sense they have of our
persecuting their Religion: yet since William whom we call Conqueror his
triumphs, our country has sadly experienced in each of them, when not joined
(as now they easily may be) their power and readiness to attaque and invade us,
sometimes as Principalls, other times as Auxiliaries to our damage by Sea and
Land upon far less pretenses, especially when (as is customary amongst
bordering enemies in military policies) they could work fit opportunities, by
sementing, or fomenting our home-divisions, which a fraternall tenderness to
each other, in point of Religion, above all other ties, (and now in our Nation,
then in any other, as experience shows) would effectually prevent, and secure
us far otherwise, then the old Roman walls against the Picts, or our dancing
and daring bulwarks against Julius Caesar and others, which as we know,
sometimes failed us.

Ninthly. Again, if as prudent and provident persons we look upon the sequel
of this business, as it relates even to a selfness, this little world of ours,
for these last hundred years, having experienced almost incredible vertiginous
revolutions in matter of Religion, prudent self-seeking will teach us, to
provide for the like vicissitudes, by leaving lenitives to Posterity; that in
case our own Issue shall differ in opinion, from the future prevailing
Doctrines (for among so many Sects, none of us can tell, which shall last get
and keep the Chair) they may serve as Preservatives of their estates and
persons, even in these religious epidemicall diseases.

Tenthly, as concerning our old weather-beaten exception against the Papists
acknowledgment of a foreign power in spirituals; Besides that it carries the
answer to it self, being in Spirituals, and therefore as we must confess, not
apt to disturb our external peace, it is also antiquated by public consent
of all parts, even where the Papal power is most predominant, the actual
coexistency of both swords by daily experience being rendered clear to our
senses. We must acknowledge public truths: As for example even in Italy, as in
the case of Parma and Modina, though little Princes, they had no difficulty
with their popish subjects, to maintain their temporal right, against the
Popes pretenses* Venice* with high opposition in the Magistrate, and signal
allegiance in the subjects, Ecclesiastical and civil, France Spain, and
Germany give daily instances of their security, in their subjects allegiance,
against whatsoever specious titles. And even at home under Henry the 8th. in
those too too high contests betwixt him and Pope Clement, and under Q.
Elizabeth after Pope Pius his censures, and in 88. it is confessed, that none
gave greater satisfaction in point of allegiance to our Princes, then the
Papists. Particular Tenets are like opinions, which touch only speculation,
and are circumscribed to the Schools, not allowed as to practice. So that all
parties would now deride us, if we would seem to put weight on so stramineous a
foundation, against so great a good, in order to the public, as liberty of
Conscience.

Lastly, All which considerations duly weighed, will enforce us to conclude,
that they must justly be presumed to be enemies of our countries happiness, and
of the supreme government, who by persuading enforcement of conscience, would
endeavor foverely to kindle disaffections to Superiors, in all those whom they
desire to be severely handled for religion, and in all foreigners who will be
concerned in this common cause, which by all laws (as themselves heretofore,
when they were under the lash have pleaded) should be most free, and in which
all men are justly most tender

You may please to accept this in complyancewith the respect I have to your
command: The cause is common, and therefore I willingly obey you, soule-liberty
being the highest interest of mankind, and has the greatest influence on the
prosperity of our own nation, and even of each particular person. Our bodies
and fortunes are subject to higher powers upon just exigencies, the soul only
to God; which, if free, we all meet in our most affectuous orizons for the
public concern: and therefore all good Patriots desire with you not to have it
captivated, nor to see others contristated for want of enjoyment of every ones
due right in this their dearest interest, which is also the only aim of

Your most obliged Servant. T. F.


