Concerning Ministers made by the will of man.
A Paper concerning such as are made Ministers by the will of man, and an
exhortation to all sober minded people to come out from among them.

What ministry is that which is upheld by a Law given forth in man's will
contrary to the Law of God, if it be not Antichristian? and whether or no their
Ministry was from God that haled out of the Synogoues, o^ those that were
haled? And whether Paul's Ministry was not according to what you now
persecute, who went into the Synagogues to reason with them, after the same
manner as we do now, who received not his Ministry from man, neither had
it by man, though he was brought up at the feet of Gamaliell, he counted that
which he learned there, as dung and dross, in comparison of the excellency of
Jesus Christ; and now with the Same light, your form of prayer, and form off
preaching without the power, it is as dross and dung to me, and to all that
live in the life, who know Christ to be the high Priest over the household of
God, whose Government is on his shoulders, who will not acquit the wicked,
neither shall the evil doer escape his hand; for the hand of the Lord is
streched out, and by the bareing of his arm are we Saved from all our
trangressions, which by no other means could be done; for when I wallowing in
my blood, and no eye pitied me, nor none could cure my disease, when I went
through the vale of misery, in the cloudy and dark day, when no light appeared,
then was I following men, but darkness was over the whole earth in me, which
was my great sorrow, but sometimes hope was an anchor, that it should not be
always so, but when the flood came I was as one overwhelmed with sorrow, for
all my actings, and my prayers returned in vain; while I was acting for life,
the living suffered in me, which groaned for deliverance, and the groans of
that was heard, and not my prayers, then the Son of Righteousness appeared to
me, with healing under his wings, then he rent the vail, and uncovered all that
I had done, and showed me the book wherein all my actions were set down, that I
had acted against him ever since I was a child, and indeed I could read in it,
and knew what was written there, then was the acceptable year of the Lord God,
and the day of vengeance to the ungodly in me, then was the vials of the wrath
of God powered forth upon me without mixture, and indeed it was given me to
drink deeply but I desired that I might be spared, but it was to let me see
that I had Sinned against God, and I should be^r his indignation, until he did
plead my cause, for I was condemned, but the Blood of the Son of God ransomed
me and brought me into freedom, which by no other means could be done; then he
showed me his doctrine, and writ his Law in me, and placed his word in my
heart, which is an everlasting witness for himself, and against all the world,
that their deeds are evil, who by his power has shaken, and caused all my
bones to tremble, and to stagger like a drunken man, but the remainder of
himself could not be Shaken, for he was stricken, and by his stripes were we
healed, and by his light we see all hirelings, and persecutors to be out of his
doctrine; therefore we deny them; So all people who fear God come out from
among them (least you

M. F.

London, Printed in the 4th. month 8th. day for M. W. 1659.


