A SERMON Preached before the LORD MAYOR And Court of Aldermen, AT GVILD --
HALL Chapel, July the 18th, 1686.

By JAMES FEN, M. A. And Vicar of Goudhurst in Kent.

LONDON: Printed by J. Darby, for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1686.

TO THE Right Honorable Sir Robert Geffery, Lord Mayor of the City of London,
And to the Court of Aldermen.
Right Honorable,
THE Controversial has so prevailed over the Practical Divinity, that the
generality of Men are more studious to defend an Opinion, than to live well;
and please themselves more in the bare Notion of Religion, than the Practice of
it. So that now serious Exhortations to Piety, and to a Religious Life, are
become highly necessary.

Of this Nature is the following Discourse; The Design whereof is, only to
persuade, that Men would endeavor, by an holy Conversation, to adorn the
Christian Faith, which in words they dispute up, and pretend so much Zeal for;
and that they would manifest the Reality of their Belief of another World, by
their Victory over this.

That God would be pleased, not only to protect Ye from the Adversity of this
World, but also to enable Ye to despise and live above its Prosperity; as it is
the Subject of the Sermon, so it is of the Prayer of,

Right Honorable, Your most humble, and most obedient Servant, JAMES FEN.

A Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor at Guild Hall Chapel.
1 JOHN 5. part of the 4th Verse. -- This is the Victory that overcomes the
World, even our Faith.
NO sooner was our Savior come into the World, but the Devil had his Agents
ready, either totally to stifle the belief of him, or else to blast the Fruits
of that Belief, good Works, and a holy Conversation. Among the latter of these
were a sort of Men, who to the profession of Christianity, joined a Life, which
a sober Heathen would have blushed at; for being by the Gospel freed from the
burdensome Ceremonies of the Law, they thought they had nothing more to do,
but to give themselves over to all manner of Licenciousness, to carry on a free
Trade, hold an open Correspondence with the Vanities of the World, serve God
and Mammon too.

They thought that an empty belief of the Joys of Heaven, would at last carry
them up thither, though in the mean time they minded Earthly Things, glued
their Affections to this World, and walked in those Ways which lead to the
bottomless Pit.

To such Believers as these, who had nothing to distinguish them from Infidels
but the rehearsal of their Creed, St. John applies himself in this Epistle, and
tells them, That if they do believe that the Son of God came into the World to
save Sinners; if they do believe that he has freed them from Misery, and
purchased Heaven for them, they must then evidence the Truth of this Belief by
their Heavenly Conversation, and by living as becomes those, who do indeed
expect to be partakers of the Glorious Inheritance of the Saints in Light: Nor
must they now concern themselves with the World any farther, than to look upon
it as an Enemy, and to fight the good Fight of Faith against it. And to show
that this is a Thing of Weight and Moment, and to engage their utmost Strength
and Policy in this Spiritual Expedition, he uses words, which imply the beating
of the Brain, the stretching of the Nerves and Sinews, he speaks of Victory and
Overcoming.

This is the Victory (says he) which overcomes the World, even our Faith.

From these words we may observe;

I. What Faith the Gospel requires; not a Notional or Speculative, but an
Active, Practical Faith, implied in this word Victory; which is a thing not to
be expected without Industry and Action. II. Consider we the Thing conquered;
and that is, the World; where I shall show what is meant in this place by the
World, and how Faith overcomes it. III. The Time when we must engage against
the World; and that is expressed in the Present Tense, Overcomes; it is not
enough that we have once opposed the World, or do design it; but it must be our
present constant endeavor, to complete and maintain the Victory. And lastly; I
shall make some Reflections upon these Particulars, by way of Conclusion.
I begin with the First; viz. What Faith the Gospel requires; not a Notional or
Speculative, but an Active, Practical Faith, implied in this word Victory;
Victory being a Thing not to be expected without Industry and Action.

And therefore it is sad to consider how Men content and delude themselves with
a mere Historical belief of the Gospel, without regard to the Precepts of it,
and think they can go an easier way to Heaven than what Christ has appointed.
They extol and cry up Faith, as if the very name of it was sufficient to carry
them into Abraham's Bosom, but in the mean time, suffer the Obedience and Work
of Faith, to lie grovelling in the Dust, and trampled under Feet. For alas! what
is the Faith of too many, but either a bare not denial of those Truths recorded
in Scripture concerning the Son of God; or a receiving Christ only as a
Savior, without respect to him as Lord; or else a presuming upon his Mercy, to
pardon the neglect of that Service, which they cannot but acknowledge as a most
reasonable Tribute for what he has suffered and done for Sinners.

Thus instead of Humility, Patience, Temperance, Charity, Self-denial, subduing
the World, etc. Men lay all their Hopes upon an idle lazy Faith, to the great
prejudice and undermining of our Duties, both toward God and Man.

But if we look into Scripture, we shall meet with several places which enjoin
Piety and good Works, as Conditions of Salvation altogether as necessary and
indispensable as Faith is; and if we weigh those very Texts which the
Solifidian produces in vindication of his Justifying Faith, we shall find that
they imply those Religious Actions which such a Faith obliges to.

For can we believe that Christ was sent from God to be our Redeemer, and our
Lord, and not yield that Obedience which is due to him as such, by submitting
to his Will, and observing all that he has commanded us: For at the Day of
Judgment, when Christ shall summon us before his Tribunal, we must be judged
and sentenced, not only by our Belief, but by our Actions; and not the knowing
of our Master, but the doing of his Will, must then plead for us: And therefore
our Savior foretold the Jews, that they would come unto him at the last Day
with, Lord, Lord, in their Mouths, boasting their Belief and Knowledge, but
because he should find their Faith void of Works, he beforehand pronounced
their Doom; Depart from me, ye Cursed: for I was an hungered, and ye gave me no
Meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no Drink: I was a Stranger, and ye took me
not in: Naked, and ye clothed me not: Sick, and in Prison, and ye visited me
not. Therefore depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels. Mat. 25. 41, 42.

So that having briefly put you in mind, that the true Christian Faith rests
not in a bare Speculation, but proceeds to Work and Action, still breathing and
reaching after Victory; let us in the next place consider, what it is that our
Faith does overcome; and that is, the World; this is the Victory that overcomes
the World.

And that we may the better understand how Faith overcomes the World, let us
see first how the World assaults us: It assaults us two ways, on the right hand
by Prosperity, on the left by Adversity. Sometimes it draws its Forces into
open Field, displays its bloody Colors, marches against us with the fiery
Trial of Affliction, it handles us roughly, shakes and gripes us severely: But
when by its Threats, and open Hostility, it cannot prevail, it retreats to its
Policy, makes use of mild and gentle Stratagems, lays an Ambush of its
counterfeit Glories, and offers to give us all, if we will fall down and
worship.

But Faith on the other side, withstands the World these two ways: 1. By
patiently suffering its Adversity. 2. By resisting and despising its Prosperity.
So that Faith overcomes the World;

1. By patiently suffering its Adversity. Adversity is so terrible, so dreadful
to those, whose Hopes are only in this World, that to avoid the stroke of it,
they willingly undergo the greatest hardship; they rise up early, and sit up
late; contrive and plod; labor and toil for more gain and profit, denying
themselves the enjoyment and comfort of what they already have; and, in
contradiction to our Savior, take too much thought for to morrow.

Nor is this Fear of Adversity, the Spring and Source of this immoderate and
unchristian care only, but also of that Injustice* Oppression, Deceit, Perjury,
and of all those other Vices which with worldly Men are in so great repute; let
but the least storm of Adversity begin to arise, and presently, to secure
themselves, they venture upon any Sin: and if at last the Cloud does overtake
and fall upon them, like forlorn Creatures, they despond; cause their Burden to
sit uneasy by impatience, and increase its weight by struggling under it: Their
mean Condition, which is already miserable, they make more miserable by
discontent, which turns that little Bread they have into a Stone, and their few
small Fishes into Scorpions.

Nor do they stop at this, but, as the Apostle expresses it, fight against God
himself, murmuring and repining at his wise Providence and Government of the
World, calling his Goodness and Justice into question; opposing their own
corrupt Desires to his most Sacred Will, accounting any state of Life better
than what their Heavenly Father knows to be best, and is pleased to place them
in.

Thus does the World, through fear of Adversity and Impatience under it, lead
unbelieving and earthly-minded Men into Captivity, and erect its Trophies over
them: and no wonder it so easily subdues them, for, in the Psalmist's words,
These are the Men who took not God for their strength, Psalm. 52. 7.

And as Infidelity thus yields; so on the other side, Faith overcomes the
World amidst all its Frowns and cross Events, by a serene submission to the
Divine Will. Faith takes out the Sting of Adversity; sweetens its Gall and
Wormwood; makes its Yoke light and easy, by having its Eye fixed upon God, whose
Goodness, as at first, 'twas pleased to make us, so still delights to preserve
us; whose Wisdom knows well how to order all Things to the best for them that
trust in him; and whose Power would never suffer any Evil to approach us,
unless for our greater Good some way or other. 'Twas this Faith instructed St.
Paul, in whatsoever state therewith to be content, and to know how to want, as
well as to abound: For he was persuaded, That neither Sword, nor Famine, nor
Pestilence, nor any other thing could separate him from the Love of God; though
he might be deformed with Poverty, mangled with the Sword, defaced with
Sickness, yet God's Love would own him in the most contemptible shape or habit;
and so long as he was God's Favorite, it troubled him not though the World
frowned.

Such a Faith, such a Belief in a Deity, supported the wiser sort of Heathens
in their Straits and Difficulties; who readily submitted to the Will of the
Great Governor of the World, and repined at nothing that seemed good unto him.

The many Examples of this nature, which we meet with among the Ancient
Philosophers, may serve to fortify us against the greatest Adversities, and
teach us not to grieve or murmur at God's dealing with us, considering we are
his Creatures, and his Will the Law we must be ruled by.

This one Consideration alone, that God gave us our Being, and therefore we
ought to be subject to his Government and disposal of us; is enough to engage
our Patience under his afflicting Hand, who has been pleased to place us upon
the Stage of this Life, cheerfully and obediently to act our Part, not dispute
it. This is our Duty as we are Men, as we are Creatures. But then as
Christians, as Believers, when we have an Eye to the Recompense of Reward in
the Life to come, and begin to recollect with our selves that we were made, not
only to obey God here, but to enjoy him hereafter; no affliction then can any
longer seem grievous, which yields such Fruit of Righteousness to them that are
exercised thereby, as St. Paul speaks in his Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 12.
11.

Set before ye therefore the glorious Company of Prophets and Apostles, the
noble Army of Martyrs, but above all looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher
of our Faith; and see how all these, for the Joy that was before them, endured
their Cross, and sundry kinds of Death, and are now set down upon the Throne at
the right Hand of God.

When St. Paul began to meditate upon the eternal Weight of Glory, presently
his Affliction was but light, 'twas then but for a moment; Our light
Affliction, says he, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding, and an eternal weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17.

So that however rigid and severe the World may be to us now; unwilling to
allot us any Portion here below but mournful Golgotha, unwilling to allow us
Property in any Element besides the Waters of Marah; grudging us the very Air
we breath in, unless so much as may furnish us with Sighs; yet let this Faith
and Belief comfort us, viz. that there is a Life to come will make amends for
all our Sorrows here; and when we shall once enter into the promised Land,
and take possession of those vast Regions of Bliss, we shall be for ever out
of the reach of any more Storms, taking our Rest and happy Repose upon a calm
and serene Eternity; where we shall have nothing more to do, but to receive
Blessings, and sing Praises to the God that gives them.

And therefore when the World assaults us with Adversity, to force us to
stoop and yield, Faith on the other hand, teaches and enables us to oppose and
overcome it by reasoning thus: Alas! why should we do any thing unlawful, and
sin against our Conscience, to avoid Poverty, or Trouble, or what Man can do
unto us? If the whole World conspire, it can make us miserable but for a time;
and at last it can but take away our Life; and when this is done, we shall be
out of its reach for ever. The Evils of this Life can follow us no farther than
the Grave; they can never come near the Soul, to destroy the least Ingredient
of its happiness: and so long as that is safe and well, we are happily provided
for. But if we cast off the Fear of God, and make him our Enemy, we are undone
for ever, for he can punish us everlastingly.

Away therefore all ye vain Cares and Discontents at what befalls us here; We
will not fear what the World can do unto us, but we will take the surest
course to secure our selves from Misery; We will fear God, and set him always
before us, who, after this transitory Life is at an end, if we now displease
him, can make us miserable for ever.

This is the first way whereby Faith overcomes the World, viz. by patiently
suffering its Adversity.

2. Faith overcomes the World, by resisting and despising its Prosperity.

If we consider the things in themselves, which furnish this World for our
Delight and Service, we must pronounce what once the great Creator did of them,
Behold, all very Good. But alas! by our too much admiring this Goodness, we
turn it into Vanity; and what was at first bestowed upon us for our Comfort,
through our own folly becomes vexation of Spirit: We provoke our Heavenly
Father to send a Curse upon his very Blessings, whilst we pay that adoration to
them, which is due only to the Giver: God has been pleased to become the Author
of our Comforts; he has made all things about us useful, glorious, and
beautiful, to engage our Gratitude, and win our Love to himself; but we,
ungrateful and unkind, forsake the Maker, and fall in love with his Creatures;
set them up as our chief End and Happiness, which ought only to be used in way
to it.

We pursue the Pleasures and Profits, court the Honors of this World, because
we propound these to our selves as the greatest and highest Good.

Upon this Mistake we are so perpetually busy and restless, and so wholly taken
up with the beloved Vanities here below, that Heaven, Eternity, and God
himself, are seldom thought on: We study and contrive, labor and contend for
this World, and care not what becomes of us in the next, so we can but thrive
and prosper here.

Thus the false Beauties and Glories of the World, like Gloworms which shine in
the dark, having once dazzled our Eyes, we follow Shadows for the substantial
Good, and stoop to the lure of every Trifle. Like perpetual Inhabitants of
these lower Regions, we mind things that are only present, and live as if we
had never heard of Death, or a Life to come.

Now the God of this World having blinded our Minds, and holding us fast bound
in these Chains of Darkness, leads us in triumph, exercises a Dominion over us,
and begins to command; to command our Time, scarce allowing us a few Minutes
for our Devotions: For how often are our Prayers either totally forgotten, or
else wilfully laid aside upon the account of a little worldly Business, an idle
Visit, or perhaps some worse Diversion. And when we do enter into our Closet,
as our Savior enjoins us, to perform our Religious Duties, the World follows
and commands us there too; it commands our Thoughts, bidding them come to this
sinful Object, and they come; go to that Vanity, and they go. It takes
possession of the whole Soul, engages all that is Spiritual to it self, and
affords us nothing for God but bodily Service, which the Apostle tells us
profits little: we bend indeed the Knee to God, but worship Mammon.

This is the deplorable condition of earthly-minded Men, who so eagerly covet
the Things of this World, that they can relish nothing that is heavenly: they
loath the Celestial Manna, the Joys of the heavenly Canaan, and will run after
the Garlic, the Onions, and the Trash of Egypt.

The World has totally subdued and conquered them, uses them as its Slaves and
Vassals; exacts all their Cares* their Industry and Affections, as its proper
Tribute; and through a seeming Paradise, leads them into perpetual Bondage.

But now see how Faith obtains the Victory, and triumphs over the World, by a
pious contempt of all its Glories. It looks through their Paint and Varnish,
and finds them to be but of a fading, perishing Constitution, not worthy we
should lavish out our Thoughts and Desires upon them.

It considers Man too, tho Lord of all below, to be but a poor mortal Creature,
of a dependent Being, each moment more and more mouldring into Corruption, and
hasting into his native Dust. Upon the belief and consideration of this, see
what a Note of ignomy David sets upon the worldly Man's Prosperity, he compares
it to nothing better than to a Dream, and to the Image of things; Psalm. 73. 20.
As a Dream when one awaketh; so, O Lord, when thou awakest thou shall despise
their Image. Though these Men may think themselves truly happy; yet when Death
shall stir up and awake their Soul, they will then find themselves naked and
poor, and their earthly Possessions no more able to help them, or supply their
Wants, than are the imaginary Riches of a Dream.

And in Psalm 39. 6. he tells us, That Man walks in a vain shadow, and
disquieteth himself in vain: he heapeth up Riches, and cannot tell who shall
gather them. As if he had said, The continual trouble Men put themselves to, in
increasing their Possessions, will avail them but little in the end; for they
must die, and leave what they have hoarded up to they know not who: for they
are not sure what manner of Person their Heir may prove, or what may befall him,
or who shall enjoy their Wealth when they are dead. And therefore it is in vain
for Mem to break their Rest, and disquiet themselves about Things of so great
uncertainty; for, says the Psalmist, He heapeth up Riches, and cannot tell who
shall gather them.

Agreeable is this to what our Savior said to the covetous Man, Luke 12. 20.
Thou Fool, this Night shall thy Soul be required of thee; and then whose shall
all these things be? Though Men may flatter themselves with Provisions for this
World, and Goods laid up for many Years, and bid their Soul take its ease, yet
one time or other Death will seize upon them, and strip them of all they placed
their trust and delight in here.

An Instance of this we have, Luke 16. 24. in the Rich Man, who being in Hell,
cried unto Abraham for a drop of Water; and to send to his five Brethren to
forwarn them, lest they also come into the same place of Torments.

Before whilst he was in this World and fared deliciously every day, he had a
great Retinue, a great Company of Attendants about him, Friends and Servants at
his command, happy he, who could be at his beck and run at his appointment. But
what is the end of this Pomp and Grandeur, we read in the following Verses;
that the Rich Man died, and became destitute and forsaken of all his former
Attendants; and therefore he was fain to cry unto Abraham, and himself deliver
his own Message. Before he had a numerous train of Servants about him; he could
then say to them, Run and speak to this great Person, run and speak to that;
but now he has not a Servant at command, not one to send to Abraham, he is
forced to speak and cry himself; He cried, and said, Father Abraham, do you
send unto my Brethren, (he is forced now to borrow a Messenger; do you send,
etc.) lest they come into these Torments.

Where now are his Parasites and Flatterers, his Guests that daily feasted and
made merry with him at his Table? Where are his five Brethren now to divert him
in his Sorrows, not one of all these near him, he is left alone; no Companion
besides his Sins, the bitter remembrance of his false Pleasures, and his grim
and frightful Executioners and Tormenters, the Devil and his Angels.

In this lamentable Example of this once great and prosperous, but now wretched
Man, we may see how sad a thing it is, not to be convinced of the Vanity of the
World, till it is experienced in the Flames of Hell.

And therefore the Sacred Writers, both of the Old and New Testament, insist
much upon this Subject, putting us in mind of the instability of earthly
Things, and instructing us to live above them.

The Prophet Esai proclaims all Flesh to be but Grass, Chap. 40. 6. Solomon
compares the Comforts of the World, to the crackling of Thorns under a Pot,
Eccles. 7. 6. St. Paul tells us, That the Fashion of the World passes away, 1
Cor. 7. 31. What we translate Fashion, is in the Greek (...), and signifies a
Figure, an Apparition, a Pageantry, that makes a little show and is soon gone;
and therefore he would not have us be too anxious or sollicitous for the World,
but to use it with that indifferency and moderation as if we used it not.

And having himself this mean opinion and low esteem of the World, he tells us
what was his behavior and carriage toward it; Gal. 6. 14. The World is
crucified unto me, says he, and I unto the World. Give me leave briefly to
explain these Expressions: The World is crucified unto me: i. e. I bear as
great a contempt and hatred to the World, as Men usually do to those notorious
Villains who are crucified, and whom all good Men hate and are ashamed of: or
else thus; The World is as loathsome and ignominious a thing to me, as the
execrable and noisome Carcass of a Malefactor hanging upon the Cross or Gibbet.

And then for those other words, I am crucified unto the World; they signify as
much as if he had said As a dead Man is not taken with, or sensible of the most
flattering Objects; so all the most pleasant and beautiful things of the World
cannot allure me, I am even as a crucified dead Man in regard of them, and take
no notice of them, they are not able to tempt or move me: For when a Servant or
a Slave is dead, we have no more power over him; he is gone into another World,
and we can no longer command or force him to obey us as before. And therefore
when St. Paul says, I am crucified unto the World, his meaning is* that now his
Conversation is in Heaven, the World has as little dominion over him, as a
Master has over his crucified departed Servant, who can no longer obey or do
him service.

Let this in short suffice for the Exposition of this Scripture, The World is
crucified unto me, and I unto the World.

And though the Vanity and Vexation which attends the best condition here, be
in it self sufficient to wean us from the World; yet certainly the Hope of
Glory, and the Joys of Heaven, must much more stir up in us a religious disdain
of all that flatters and allures us here: and therefore St. Paul gives the
Reason why Believers do not concern or busy themselves for the World, viz.
because they aimed at a Crown of Glory, 1 Cor. 9. 25. The ambitious Men of the
World, like those in the Olimpick Games, strive for a fading and corruptible;
but we, says he, for an incorruptible Crown of Glory. And if the Greatness of
this Crown, and the Comforts of it, are able to raise us above the World; St.
Paul tells us, they are so great that they cannot be uttered, they are
unspeakable, 2 Cor. 12. 4.

Rhetoric uses to magnify Things, and by Hyperboles, to make them greater than
they are; but the greatest Eloquence comes short in expressing the Glories of
Heaven: when the Apostle endeavors to speak of them, he is struck with silence,
They are Things, says he, which cannot be uttered. And, 2 Cor. 9. he says, It
cannot enter into the Heart of Man, to conceive the Things which God has
prepared for them that love him. By the Heart in this place, are understood the
Thoughts and the Desires.

1. As to the Thoughts; though the World be of an immense and vast greatness,
yet the Thoughts, in one moment, can run over it all. Suppose ten thousand
Worlds, yet we may imagine ten thousand more, and in an instant comprehend the
Glories of them in our Thoughts: nothing can set bounds to our Thoughts and
Imaginations; propose the greatest Riches, Pleasures, Honors, yet we can
imagine greater still. And then,

2. As to our Desires; give all that is desirable in the World, yet we can wish
for and desire far greater; nothing that is in this World can limit our
Desires. Nevertheless, though the Thoughts, and Imaginations, and Desires of
the Heart, be of so great power and extent, yet they can never comprehend the
Glories of Heaven: for, says the Apostle, they have not, they cannot enter into
the Heart; they are greater than we are able to imagine, they are larger than
our Desires.

The Soul in this imperfect state of Flesh, is too weak to bear that exceeding
weight of Glory that shines in Heaven in its full luster. If God should let
down but one ^ay of that Glory upon us now, it would not comfort and enlighten,
but only dazzle and astonish the Beholder: we must first be received into
Heaven, before we can be qualified for the greatness of the Joys there.

And yet Men live so carelessly, so little mind or concern themselves for
Heaven, as if the Blessings which God has promised to bestow upon us there,
were not worth the enjoyment, not worth the looking after.

But true Believers, when they are tempted to desire, or to covet the Glories
of this World, check those vain Motions, by arguing with themselves thus: The
Glory we expect in Heaven, will outshine all these; we will not therefore
neglect the Joys Above, for any thing that seems great or glorious here. It Is
below us to think upon the World, this is a Subject for a Turk, or Barbarian,
and such as know not Christ. A Believer has a nobler Theme for his Thoughts to
work upon; he is thinking of the Unity of the ever-glorious Trinity; he is
meditating upon the Privileges of Angels, who are admitted to stand about the
Throne; he is meditating upon the Spirits of Just Men made perfect, and that we
also shall be like them.

This is a Subject fit for them who profess the Belief of another World, and do
indeed look for the blessed Hope, and glorious Appearance of the great God, and
our Savior Jesus Christ; as St. Paul's words are in Titus 2. 13.

I come now to the third general Head of my Text, and that is, The Time when we
must set our selves against the World, expressed in the Present Tense,
Overcomes: It Is not enough that we have once opposed the World, or do design
it, but it must be our present constant endeavor, to complete and maintain the
Victory.

He is no true Soldier, who does but begin to prepare for the War, when the
Trumpet is sounding the Retreat: And it is too late to arm our selves against
the World, when the time of our Departure is at hand, and the Night come when
no one can work; When, as Solomon expresses it, the Keepers of the House shall
tremble, and the strong Men shall bow themselves, Eccles. 12. 3. when the
vigorous Spirits shall be wasted, and nothing left but the dregs of Life; not
strength enough to bear up under the Infirmities of decrepit Age; or to support
us under the sad Reflections upon an ill-spent Life, under the horrors of
dying, and the fearful looking for of Judgment to come.

Can we imagine that the settled Conquest, and undisturbed Dominion, which all
our Life long the World has had over us, can be cast off and overthrown, with
our faint last Breath, with a few sighs and groans upon our Deathbed? Which
very sighs too, it is to be feared, proceed not so much from a real enmity to
the World, as from a grief that we can no longer enjoy the Pleasures of it, and
yield our selves its Servants as before.

And yet how are the thoughts of this great and necessary Victory laid aside to
the very last Minutes, as if the pale, ghastly, frightly looks of a dying Man,
could in a moment daunt and put to flight our Spiritual Adversaries.

And therefore St. Paul puts us upon another course, in order to our Victory
over the World; he advises us to arm our selves betimes, and to stand always
upon our defense; Ephesians. 6. 13. Take unto you (says he) the whole Armor of
God, that ye may be able to withstand in the Evil Day. In the Evil Day, ( i.
e.) in the dangerous and perilous time of our whole Life; because the World,
all our Life long, continually assaults us with its Temptations, that we might
become its Prey: therefore the Apostle gives us such a strict charge to arm our
selves, and to be always prepared to oppose the World.

It must be our present Work and Business, we must not defer or put off this
Victory over the World till we come to die: No! it is expressed in the Present
Tense, that Faith overcomes the World now, and is always in Arms against it.

So that the design of the Apostle, in exhorting us to take to our selves the
whole Armor of God, is to instruct us, that we should be always prepared, and
in continual readiness to resist the World: and when we shall have put on the
whole Armor of God, and done what we can to arm our selves against the World,
lest we should despair of victory, our Savior gives us encouragement from his
own conquest over the World: John 16. 33. Be of good cheer, (says he) I have
overcome the World: As if he had said, when I command ye to subdue the World, I
put ye upon no more than what I have performed my self: And now the Conquest
cannot seem impossible or difficult to you, since I your Leader have shown you
the way; I have already overcome the World, and left it to you but a maimed
Enemy.

But besides all this; if we do but implore Relief from Heaven, and pray unto
the Lord of Hosts to aid our own Endeavors, and to help our Infirmities, he
will give us the assistance of his mighty Spirit, and we shall be more than
Conquerors, as St. Paul speaks Romans 8. 37.

He says we shall be more than Conquerors; i. e. we shall win a greater
Victory, and more renown, than all the ambitious and vainglorious Men of the
World, though they subdue Kingdoms; we shall merit more true applause, than do
your hot, fiery, furious Spirits, and in plain terms, murderers of this Age,
who upon the least Punctillio, and scarce discernable Point of Honor, (as they
call it) pride themselves in stabbing, wounding, killing one another; who
forget their Baptismal Vow, of fighting under the Banners of Christ, the Prince
of Peace and Love, and live as if they had solemnly been baptized into the
bloody Service of the Devil, who is a murderer from the beginning: such as
these are but poor unhappy Conquerors, and triumph only in their own slavery,
and subjection to their unruly Passions.

So that true Believers, who overcome the World, if compared to these, may well
be styled more than Conquerors; their Victory is of a higher nature; they bear
about with them in their Bodies, not the Wounds and Marks of their injured and
provoked Brother, but the Marks of the Lord Jesus; their boasting is, that they
have lost a right Hand, and a right Eye, in the Service of Christ; that they
have overcome the Pride of the World by their Humility; its Luxury, by their
Temperance and Sobriety; its Covetousness, by their Liberality; its Malice,
Hatred, and Revenge, by their Charity and brotherly Love.

Such a Victory as this, will make us more than Conquerors, as the Apostle's
words are; and will be rewarded with Peace of Conscience through the whole
course of Life, with Comfort in the hour of Death, and with eternal Rest in
Heaven.

I come now to a Conclusion, by making some Reflections upon the Particulars of
my Text.

I have put you in mind, that the true Christian Faith, is not a bare Notional
or Speculative, but an Active, Practical Faith, implied in this word Victory,
etc.

1. That this Faith overcomes the World two ways.

1. By patiently suffering its Adversity. 2. By resisting its Prosperity.
III. I have spoken concerning the Time when we must set our selves against the
World, and that is expressed in the Present Tense, Overcomes, it must be our
present constant endeavor to oppose the World.

And now, if our Faith must be Practical and Active, what remains, but to frame
our Lives answerable to our Faith; seriously considering what it is we say when
we rehearse the Articles of our Creed: Do we not then solemnly profess, that we
believe there is a God who made us, who sent his Son into the World to redeem
us, and at last to be our Judge; from whose Tribunal we must go to the place,
either of everlasting Happiness, or endless Misery.

And if we really believe all this, What manner of Persons ought we to be, in
all holy Conversation and Godliness, looking for, and hastening to the coming of
the Day of God? 2 Pet. 3. 11.

St. John tells us, in 1 Epist. 3. 2. that when Christ shall appear, we shall
be like him: but then he adds, Verse. 3. that every one who has this Hope in
him, to be like God, purifies himself, even as he is pure: He must keep himself
from the pollutions of the World, and from all filthiness of the Flesh and
Spirit.

Suppose it were possible for us to draw aside this Veil of Flesh, and take a
view of the worldlings Soul now, as it is daily mudling up and down the World,
hugging (as it were) each piece of Dunghill, saluting every fulsom Object,
rolling it self in the Dirt and Mire, Can we imagine such a Soul as this in the
least fit for Heaven, where nothing enters in that defiles; fit to associate
with those clean Inhabitants above, and to stand in the presence of an holy
God? No! St. James tells us, That pure Religion, and undefiled, which must
render us acceptable to God, is to keep our selves unspotted from the World.

And to this end, that we may overcome the World, and live above it, I advise
unto frequent Meditations upon our Divine Original; that we are descended of
the Father of Spirits; that we are of the same Family with Angels and
Archangels, related to the Cherubims, and near allied to the Eternal King: And
shall we now degenerate, and so live, as if we had no Relations, no Alliance,
but, as Job speaks, Corruption for our Father, and the Worm for our Mother, and
for our Brother?

So that if we do believe and expect an Inheritance incorruptible, that fades
not away, an House not made with Hands eternal in the Heavens; let us set our
Affections upon those Things Above, and not on Things on the Earth; let our
Conversation be in Heaven, from whence we look for the Savior: and then the
same Jesus, who is now the Author of our Faith, will be the Rewarder of it.

Which Rewards, God for his own Mercies, and for his Son's sake, be pleased to
bestow upon us all.

Amen.
FINIS.

