THE MAXIMS OF THE SAINTS EXPLAINED, Concerning the Interior LIFE.

By the Lord ARCHBISHOP of CAMBRAY, etc.

To which are added, Thirty-Four ARTICLES, By the Lord ARCHBISHOP of PARIS,
the Bishops of MEAUX, and CHARTRES, (that occasioned this Book,) also their
Declaration upon it. Together With the FRENCH-KING's and the ARCHBISHOP of
CAMBRAY's Letters to the POPE upon the same Subject.

LONDON, Printed for H. Rhodes, at the Star, the Corner of Bride-Lane in
Fleet Street, School.

THE PREFACE.
I Always was of Opinion, Men ought both to Speak and Write concerning the
internal Life, with all the moderation imaginable, and though the same includes
nothing but what is clearly conformable to the immutable rule of Faith and
Evangelick Obedience; yet to me it appears very manifest, that this matter
requires a kind of secret and wary management: the generality of Readers are
not at all prepared for such strong sort of Readings: Its the way to expose the
most pure and Sublime part of Religion to the derision of of profane Spirits,
in whose sight the mystery of Christ Crucified, is no other than a
Stumbling Block of Offense, and mere folly: This is to commit the ineffable
secrets of God in the heart, to the hands of the most unthankful and most
unexperienced Men, who are not capable of any benefit or edification thereby:
On the other hand, it is to lay snares for all those that are uncredulous and
discretionless, in order to fall to illusion; for they presently imagine
themselves to be in all those states that Books represent unto them, and from
thence become visionaries and unteachable; whereas, if they should be kept in
ignorance of all those states which are above theirs, they could not fall upon
those ways of disinterested Love and Contemplation, but by the sole attraction
of Grace, without their imaginations, heated with reading, having any share
therein. Hence it is, that I am persuaded Men should be as silent as possible
in this matter, for fear of overexciting the Curiosity of the generality of
Mankind, who have neither experience nor a sufficient light of Grace to examine
the works of the Saints; for the Carnal Man can neither discern nor taste of
the things of God, such as are the internal ways spoken of. But seeing this
part of Curiosity for some time past is become in a manner universal; I think
it will be as necessary to speak, as it might have been wished Men would have
held their Tongues.

My Design in this Treatise, is to explain the experiences and expressions of
the Saints, in order to prevent their being exposed to the scorn and derision
of wicked Men; but at the same time I would lay open to mystical Men, the real
meaning of these holy Authors, to the end, the true value of their expressions
may be made known unto them. When I speak of holy Authors, my meaning is, to
confine my self to those that are Canonized, or whose memories have a sweet
smelling savor in all the Church, and whose Writings have been so solemnly
approved of without any Contradiction: I speak of no other than those Saints
who have been Canonized or admired by the whole Church, for having themselves
practiced, and caused their Neighbor to practice a kind of spirituality, that
is scattered up and down through the body of their Writings. Its undoubtedly
unlawful for us to reject such Authors, or to accuse them of innovating any
thing against the course of Tradition.

I am about to show how far these holy Authors have been from injuring the rule
of Faith, and favoring illusion; I shall make appear to our mystical Men that
I shall detract in nothing from all that which is Authorized by the Maxims and
experiences of those Authors who are our pattern: I shall engage them into a
belief of what I say, when I show unto them the exact bounds these same Saints
have set us, and beyond which it is not allowable for us to go. The mystical
Men of whom I am speaking, are neither those Fanatics nor Hypocrites, who
conceal the mystery of iniquity under the notion of perfection: God forbid,
that I should direct the word of truth to those Men who do not carry the
mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience, they deserve no other then Indignation
and horror: I speak to the plain, open-hearted, and teachable mysticks; they
ought to know that illusion continually follows the most perfect ways. Those
execrable Men the false Gnostics, from the very beginning of Christianity, had
a mind to mix themselves with the true Gnostics, who were Contemplative Men,
and the most perfect among the Christians: the Begardians, have in a false
disguise imitated the Contemplative of these last Ages, such as St. Bernard,
Richard and Hugh de St. Victor. Its an Observation of Bellarmine, that the
expressions of mystic Authors have been often critisiced upon, after an
equivocal manner. It frequently happens, (says he,) in his Book, de Script.
Eccles. that the expressions of those who have written of mystic Theology,
have been condemned by some, and practiced by others; because they are not
taken by every body in the same sense. Cardinal Bona, in his Compendium, says
also, that those who are taken up with pas sive Contemplation are less able to
expres themselves, but more excellent in matters of practice and experience: In
short, there is nothing so hard as to give a right understanding of those
states which consist in such simple and nice Operations, that are so far
abstracted from sense, and to set always in the right place all the correctives
that are necessary to prevent illusion and to explain strictly the true System
of Theology. This is that which has given Offense to some Readers of mystical
Men's Books, and has drawn diverse others of those Readers into Illusion; while
Spain in the last Age was full of so many Saints endued with wonderful Grace;
the Illuminates were discovered in Andalouzia, who brought the greatest Saints
to be suspected of unsincerity. Then it was, St. Theresa, Balthazar Alvarez,
and the Blessed John de la Croix, took upon them to justify their Conduct and
Innocence. Rusbrok whom Bellarmine calls a great Contemplative and Taulere that
Apostolic Man so famous throughout Germany, have been Vindicated, the one by
St. Dennis le Chartreaux, and the other by Blosius. Neither has St Francis de
Sales, been free from being contradicted, the Critics having been unable to
discern how to join exact and strict Theology with that light of Grace that is
most eminent: So it is, that the Chaff oftentimes hides the good Corn, and the
purest Authors concerning the Internal Life, stand in need of an explanation,
^^^st some expressions taken in a wrong sense should alter the purity of the
Doctrine.

These Examples should make mystical Men sober and wary, if they are humble and
teachable, they should leave not only Doctrinals to the entire decision of the
Pastors of the Church, but also the choice of all those terms that are proper
to express them by: St. Paul would rather never eat meat than Offend the least
of his Brethren, for whom Christ died. How can we then be tied to any
expression that gives Offense to a weak Soul? Mystical Men therefore should
take away all equivocal terms, when they know the same are abused, in order to
corrupt the soundest Doctrine. Let those who have spoken after an improper and
exaggerated manner, and without precaution, explain their meaning, and suffer
nothing to be wanting for the edification of the Church; let those who have
been erroneous as to main Doctrinals not content themselves with condemning the
Errors* but let them confess they have believed them, and give the Glory to
God; let them not be ashamed that they have erred, as being what is natural to
the race of Mankind; but let them humbly confess their Errors, since they
remain to be no longer theirs, after they have made an humble Confession of
them. Its in order to distinguish Truth from Falsehood in so nice and important
a matter, that two great Prelates have Published Thirty-Four Articles, that in
substance contain all the Doctrine of the internal life; and I have no other
design in this undertaking, than to give a larger Explanation of the same.

All these Internal ways have a tendency to pure or disinterested Love. This
pure Love is the highest degree of Christian perfection: It is the end or
boundary of all the ways known unto the Saints. Whoever allows of nothing
beyond that, contains himself within the bounds of Tradition. Whoever exceeds
this bound is already out of the way. If any one should doubt of the Truth and
perfection of this Love, I make an offer of showing an universal and clear
Tradition for it, from the times of the Apostles to that of St. Francis de
Sales without any interruption; and I will thereupon publish, when I am desired
to do it, a Collection of all passages out of the Fathers, Schoolmen, and holy
mysticks, who unanimously speak of it. It will appear from this Collection,
that the Ancient Fathers spoke as vigorously to the matter as St. Francis de
Sales, and that they for the disinterest of Love, have made the same
Suppositions concerning*Salvation, that our disdainful Critics so much laugh
at, when they meet with them in the Writings of the Saints of the last Age:
Even S. Augustine himself, whom some have taken to be an Opposer of this
Doctrine, has taught it as much as any other. It Is true, indeed, the main
Thing is to explain this pure Love aright, and to mark out the exact Bounds,
beyond which its Disinterest could never go: The Disinterest thereof, can never
exclude the Will from loving God without Bounds, neither in regard to the
Degree, nor the Duration of that Love; This can never exclude a Conformity in
us to the good Pleasure of God, who not only wills our Salvation, but would
have us will it with him for his Glory. This Disinterested Love, is always tied
to the written Law, performs entirely the same Acts, and exercises the same
distinct Virtues, as Interested Love does, with this only Difference, that it
does exercise the same in a simple and peaceable Manner, and such as is
disengaged from every Motive of Self-Interest.

This holy Indifference that is so much praised by St. Francis de Sales, is
nothing else but the disinterest of this Love, which is always indifferent, and
without any interested Will for itself; but the same is always determined to,
and positively wills all that God would have us do, according to his written
Law, and that by the Attraction of his Grace.

In order to the attaining to this State, our Love must be purified, and all
our internal Trials, are but the purification of it; even Contemplation itself,
that is of a most passive Nature, is nothing else but the peaceable and uniform
Exercise of this pure Love; We cannot insensibly pass from Meditation, wherein
we perform methodical and discursive Acts, into Contemplation, whose Acts are
simple and direct, but in proportion to our passing from interested to
disinterested Love. This passive State, and Transformation, together with the
Spiritual Marriages, and essential or immediate Union, are no other than the
entire Purity of this Love; the Habit whereof, without being ever either
invariable, or exempted from venial Sins, very few Souls are endued with. I do
not speak of all these different Degrees, that are so little known to the
Generality of the Faithful, but because they are Consecrated to us, by being
made use of by a great many Saints whom the Church has approved off, and have
in these Terms explained their Experiences; neither do I relate them for any
other end, than to explain them with the strictest Precaution. Finally, all
these internal Ways tend to pure Love, as to their End; an habitual State
whereof, is the highest Degree attainable in the Pilgrimage of this Life; it is
the Foundation, and the top Stone of the whole Building: Nothing can be rasher,
than to oppose the Purity of this Love, that is so worthy of the Perfection of
our God, to whom all is due, and of his Jealousy, which is a consuming Fire.
But again, there is nothing can be so rash, as to go about to take away from
this Love, the reality of its Acts, in the Practice of distinct Virtues, by a
Chymerical refining of it. Lastly, It will be no less dangerous, to place the
Perfection of the Internal Life, in some mysterious State, beyond the Bound
fixed to it of an habitual State of pure Love.

It Is in order to prevent all these Inconveniences, that I have taken upon me
to treat of the whole Matter in the following Articles, that are digested
according to the various Degrees that have been remarked unto us, by Mystical
Men, in the Spirittal Life.

Every Article will consist of two parts, the first will be the true one, which
I shall approve of, and which shall contain all that is Authorized by the
Experiences of the Saints, and pursuant to the sound Doctrine of pure Love. The
second shall be the false part, where I shall exactly explain the very Place
where the Danger of Illusion lies; and as I shall give an Account also of what
is exorbitant in every Article, I shall qualisie the same, and censure it
according to the strict Rules of Theology.

And thus the first part of my Articles will be a Collection of exact
Definitions of the Saints Expressions, in order to reduce them all to an
uncontestable meaning, that can neither be liable to any Equivocation, nor
alarm the most timorous Souls. It will be a kind of Dictionary for Definitions,
in order to know the exact meaning of every Term: These Definitions together,
will make up a plain and complete System of all the Internal Ways, including a
perfect Unity, seeing the whole thereof will be clearly reduced to the Exercise
of pure Love, that has been as vigorously taught by all the Fathers, as by the
more modern Saints.

But on the other hand, the second part of my Articles will show all the
Consequence of false Principles, that tend to create the most dangerous
Illusion, against the Rule of Faith and good Manners, and that under a show of
Perfection. I shall endeavor in each Article, to point at the Place where the
Equivocation begins, and to censure all that is ill, without in the least
diminishing the Authority of the Saints Experiences. If our Mystical Men would
give me Ear without prejudice, they would quickly apprehend what my Meaning is,
and that I take their Expressions in a just extent of the true Sense of them:
I Will even refer it to their own Judgment, if I do not explain their Maxims,
with much more Exactness than most of them have hitherto done; because I have
made it my principal Business to give their Expressions clear and exact Ideas,
and such as are Authorized by Tradition, without weakening the Foundations of
the Things themselves: All good Mystical Men, who love nothing but Truth, and
the Edification of the Church, ought to be satisfied with this Plan: I could
have added hereunto a great many formal Passages out of the Ancient Fathers, as
well as School-Doctors, and Mystical Saints; but this Undertaking would engage
me into such Lengths, and innumerable Repetitions as frightened me from it, for
the Reader's sake: this is that which has caused me to suppress the Collection
of those Passages, which I had already digested and set in Order. I do suppose,
without any more ado, this Tradition to be constant and decisive; and I have
confined my self to set forth here a clear System, and such as is agreeable to
Theological Definitions: Though the Dryness of this Method looks like a great
Inconvenience, yet it is less than that of a tiresome Length.

I have no more to do, than to practice this Plan, that I have given an
Explanation of: I look up unto God, and not my self, for Strength to do it, who
is pleased to make use of the vilest and unworthiest Instruments: My Doctrine
ought not to be mine, but that of Christ, who sends forth Pastors; be it far
from me, to say any thing of my self; may I not prosper, if while I am engaged
in instructing others. I be not my self the most teachable, and most submissive
Child of the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church.

I shall begin my Work, with making a plain Exposition of the different Senses
that may be given to that we call, The Love of God; in order to give a clear
and distinct Understanding of the State of the Questions belonging to this
Matter; then will the Reader meet with my Articles, which approves of what is
true, and condemns every thing that is false, in each particular relating to
the Internal Life.

The INTRODUCTION.
WHen I consider the many Differences that have happened from Time to Time,
between not only particular Persons of the Roman Communion, but even whole
Societies; particucularly between the Dominicans and Franciscans, and the
Jesuits, and almost all Others, about Matters of Faith, and other Religious
Tenets, I cannot but admire at the Boldness of some of those Gentlemen, who
make their Unity to be a token of their Infallibility, and the divided Opinions
of the Protestants, an evident Mark of the Falsity of their Belief: But surely,
it is now high time they should give over that fantastic Argument, since these
sort of Dissentions are more rife among themselves, than any other Community in
the World; and they may have Work enough to do, to turn their Pens that way,
especially since Quietism, and some other Opinions, in Consequence of it, has
taken such Root amongst them, that even some of those who are reckoned the
Pillars of the Church, seem to be as good as open Favorers of it, and would
draw, if it were possible, his Holiness himself, to be of the same Sentiments,
and so to turn all at once Heretic.

But among all those who have more openly espoused these new Opinions, is the
Lord Archbishop of Cambray, a Person of that Learning and Consideration in his
Country as to have been entrusted by the French King his Master, with the
Education of the young Princes, the Dauphine's Sons. But how this Eminent
Person came thus to expose himself will be somewhat worthy of our enquiry,
before we proceed to give an Account of the opposition he has met with, and
other consequences that have attended the Publishing of his Book, which is now
presented to the English Readers View, that he may pass his Censure also
thereupon.

There are but a few people that have not heard of Molinos, and his Doctrine of
Quietism, some years since broached at Rome, and what industry was used by the
holy Fathers Inquisitors, to ruin both him and it; But how rigorous soever
they showed themselves against the Author, they have not yet been able to
suppress his Opinions, which not only have still a being and considerable
Fautors amongst them in Italy, but the same or something very like it, which we
may call Semi-Quietism, upon the same account as some Ancient Heretics were
distinguished with the name of Semipelagians, has been able to make its way
through the snowy Alps, and enter into the Kingdom of France, and agreed so
well since with the Soil of that Country, that it will not be quickly rooted
out.

The Rulers of the Gallican Church began to be sensible pretty early, of this
supposed growing Evil; but the occasion of their taking a more public notice
of it, was, a certain Woman's putting out a Pamphlet, called A Short Method,
etc. and dispersing some other Papers, savouring very much of Quietism, whom to
reclaim from her error, they took care to appoint three Counselors to
admonish and instruct her, and to them the Archbishop of Cambray was added for
a fourth: But which way things came to pass, and what success soever the first
three might think they had upon the Woman, its likely she brought over the
fourth to the Opinion, (or somewhat that was near it, if he were not so before)
She was accused of being guilty of; But this did not appear at present.
However, some of the Clergy thought it high time to bestir themselves in the
matter; and particularly the Archbishop of Paris, the Bishops of Meaux and
Chartres, did believe the foundation of their Church to have been so far struck
at by such proceedings that they framed thirty four Articles, on the 16th and
26th of April, 1695. wherein they set forth what every Christian ought to
believe and act, and what to reject, as erroneous and noxious to the Souls of
Men; Hereupon, the Archbishop of Cambray, led by what fate I know not, took
upon him to compile this Work, Entitled, The Maxims of the Saints Explained,
and therein to give a more full Explication of the said thirty four Articles,
but did it in such a manner, as allarmed the whole body of the French Clergy,
but more particularly, the Authors of the said Articles, who with diverse others
failed not to make Complaints thereof to the King, and at the same time to
importune him to commit the said Work to Examination. The Archbishops of
Rheims and Paris with the Bishop of Meaux, an implacable Enemy to Cambray, were
the persons appointed for it, the effect whereof was the putting out of their
Declaration, upon the same Subject wherein they fully set forth their
sentiments in relation to it. And as these Prelates distinguished their Zeal in
this manner, against this Semi-Quietism; the Bishop of Noyon, about the same
time, in his Pastoral Letter, written in the Form of a Preservative, to keep
the Clergy, and Faithful of his Diocese, in the holy Exercise of a solid and
real Piety, against the pernicions Maxims of Quietism, sets himself against
Quietism, in all the Branches of it: But though he would have the Quietism he
darts his Thunder at, to be not that of Molinos, but this new sort of
Semi-Quietism; yet when he comes to a kind of an Explanation of it, he
confounds the new Quietism with the old, seeing that in respect to the
Opinions, which he looks upon to be most monstrous, he imputes what Molinos
taught, to those against whom he writes; of which take this one taste, What an
Abomination is it (says the Bishop) to set up Vices in the place of Virtues,
and to pretend, that shameful Falls are the Steps by which to ascend to the
Glory of a perfect Union with God. Now this is Molinos himself, that has
occasioned this Exclamation, who says in direct Terms, That we ought not to
afflict, or disturb our selves, when we fall into any Defect; but to rise up
and go on, and set our selves to Exercises of Piety, as if we had never fallen:
Would you not take him to be a Fool, says he, who contending for the Prize of a
Race, and happening to stumble in the midst of his Carier, should lie upon the
Ground, to no other end, than to bewail his Fall? You would rather say to him,
Rise, Friend, and without loss of time, set thy self a running again; for he
that gets up quickly, and pursues his Race, is like one that never fell: So
that it is manifest from hence, in short, that the French Prelates do not well
understand what they write against; but that there is something in it tending
to invalidate Penances, and put Auricular Confessions out of Fashion, which has
brought so much Grist to the Romish Mill, is what they seem to be very
apprehensive of.

But the Clergy, notwithstanding all their 'fore-mention'd Endeavors for the
Suppression of this new Doctrine, finding it to spread itself more and more,
among all Ranks and Orders of Men, as well Ecclesiastics as Laics, they
thought it high time to transfer the Accusation to the Court of Rome, with all
the aggravation of the Archbishop's of Cambray's Crime, and Heresy,
imaginable; and because they would not fail to make sure work of it, they
engaged the French King so far on their side also, as to get him to write to
the Pope, to induce him in Confirmation of the Censures of the Clergy of
France, to condemn the Archbishop's Book; who, on his own part also, being not
ignorant of these Proceedings against him, and not to be wanting to his own
Defense, thought it no less proper to write to his Holiness upon the same
Subject: But though the Bishop has used as much Caution as Submission in that he
wrote to the Pope, yet you will find in another of his Letters to a Friend,
that he is the same Man still.

But how violent soever the Archbishops accusers appeared against him, both in
France and Rome, the Pope kept a soft pace, till such time as having received
the Archbishops said Letter, he was pleased to appoint seven Commissioners to
Examine his Book, viz. the Master of the Sacred Palace, His Holiness his
Confessor, and a Jaccbin; Father Marsouiller, a Frenchman of the same Order,
the Proctor-General of St. Augustine-Friars, Father Gabriel, of the Mendicant
Order; Father Miri, a Benedictine; Father Grenelli, a Franciscan; and Father
Alfaro, Jesuit. These were to make their Report to the Congregation of the holy
Office, in order to their farther proceedings thereupon: But whither it were
that these Gentlemen could not understand the Bishops Gallimaufry of notional
speculations, or what shall I call it, or what ever else was in the wind, they
did nothing in it, and the matter at last came before old Infallibility
himself, and his Sacred College of Cardinals: But after all this, and the
continual Solicitations of the Jesuits and some great Prelates, there are some
months now elapsed and nothing done in it; and by any thing that hitherto has
appeared to the contrary, they are so far from coming to a final decision
either in favor or against the said Book, as when they first began. To enter
upon an inquiry into the Doctrine and notions contained in this Treatise, will
not be proper for me in this place, that being entirely left to the judgment of
every one that has an inclination to peruse it: It remains for me therefore to
say; that as it as stirred up the Curiosity of all sorts of persons abroad to
make an inspection into these tenets, so it has done mine, to engage me in a
more particular inquiry into the rise, and progress, as well as the dislike of,
and opposition made against them.

AN EXPLANATION Of the Diverse Loves Which may be had for GOD.
1. WE may love God not for the sake of himself, but for some other good things
depending on his Almighty power, which we hope to obtain from him. Such Love as
this had the Carnal Jews, who observed the Law in hopes only of being
recompensed with the dew of Heaven and the fertility of the Earth. This love is
neither Chaste nor Filial, but merely Servile; or rather, to speak properly, who
loves so, does not love God but his own dear Self, and seeks entirely for
himself, not God, but what comes from him.

2. We may have Faith and not one degree of Charity with it. We know God to be
our only happiness, that is to say, the only Object, the sight whereof can
render us happy. Now should we in this slate love God as the only instrument to
be made use of for to work our happiness, and because we are not able to find
our happiness in any other object: should we look upon God as a means of
felicity, and refer it purely to our selves as to its ultimate end, this would
be rather a self-love than a love of God; at least, it would be contrary to
order, as respecting God as an object or instrument of our felicity, both to
our selves and our own happiness. And though by this love we should seek for no
other reward but God alone, yet would it prove wholly mercenary and of mere
concupiscency. That Soul (as says S. Francis of Sales in his Book of the love
of God, Lib. 2. c. 17.) which should love God only out of love to her self, by
establishing the end of that love she bears to God in her own convenience,
alas! would be guilty of an extreme Sacrilege........ That Soul which loves
God only for her own sake, loves her self as she ought to love God, and loves
God as she ought to love her self: Which is as much as if one should say, the
love I bear to my self is the end for which I love God; so that the love to God
be depending, subordinate, and inferior to self-love.... which is an
unparalleled impiety.

3. We may love God with a love of hope, which love is not entirely selfish,
for it is mixed with a beginning of love to God for himself, only our own
interest is the chief and predominant motive. S. Francis of Sales (love of God,
Lib. 2. c. 17.) Speaks thus of this love. I don't say however that it returns
so fully upon us as to make us to love God only for our sakes..... There is a
great deal of difference between saying; I love God for the good things I
expect from him: and this expression, I love God only for the good things I
expect from him. This love of God is so called because the motive of
self-interest is yet predominant in it: It Is a beginning of Conversion to God;
but not yet the true righteousness of this hopeful love. S. Francis of Sales
(love of God, Lib. 2. c. 17.) Spoke thus, Sovereign love is only in Charity;
but in hope love is imperfect, as not tending into the infinite goodness as it
is such to us.... Though in truth none by that love alone can either observe
the Commandments of God, or have eternal life.

4. There is a love of Charity which is yet allayed with some mixture of
self-interest, but is the true justifying love; because the disinteressed
motive is overruling in it: to which S. Francis of Sales Speaks in the last
cited place. Sovereign love is only in Charity. This love seeks after God for
himself, and prefers him before anything whatsoever without exception.

By reason only of that preference (...) capable to justify us: And it
prefe(...) less God and his Glory, both to us and our interests than to all
other Creatures besides. The reason why is this: because we are no less vile
Creatures and unworthy to compare our selves with God than the rest of created
beings. God who did not make us for the other Creatures, has not likewise made
us for our selves, but for himself alone.

He is no less Jealous of us than of the other external objects which we may
love. To Speak properly, the only thing he is Jealous of in us is our selves;
for he clearly sees that it is our selves, whom we are tempted to love in the
enjoyments of all external objects. He is not liable to mistakes in his
Jealousy, and the love of our selves is the center of all our affections.
Whatsoever does not proceed from the principle of Charity, (as S. Austin so
often says,) is of cupidity. And it is the destruction of that very love, the
root of all vices, which is precisely the aim of God's Jealousy. While we have
yet but a love of hope whereby self-love does preponde are against the Glory of
God, the Soul is not satisfied yet. But when disinteressed love or of Charity
begins to turn the scale and to prevail against self-interest, then a Soul that
loves God is truly beloved of him. Nevertheless, this true Charity is not yet
entirely pure that is without any mixture: but the love of Charity prevailing
over the interessed motive of hope, that state is termed a state of Charity.
The Soul then does love God for the sake of him and for her self, but so as to
love chiefly the Glory of God, not seeking her own happiness, but as a means by
her related and subordinated to the ultimate end, namely, the Glory of her
Maker. Nor is it necessary that this prefering of God and of his Glory to us
and our interests, be always explicit in the righteous Soul. We are assured by
faith that the Glory of God and our felicity are inseparable one from another,
it is enough if this so just and necessary preference be real, but implicit in
the occurrences of life. There is no need of its becoming explicit but in the
extraordinary occasions of trial from God in order to purify us from our
dross. But then he would give us both light and courage proportionate to the
trial, to carry us through it, and to make us sensible in our hearts of that
preference. Now to dive for it scrupulously at another time, in the bottom of
our hearts would rather prove prejudicial and dangerous.

5. We may love God with a love of pure Charity, and without any mixture of the
motive of self-interest, Then it is that we love God in the midst of troubles
and adversities, so that we should not love him more even when he fills our
Souls with comforts. Neither fear of punishments, nor desire of rewards have
any share in this love; God is no more beloved either in regard of the merit or
perfection, or for the happiness which is found in loving him. We would love
him as much, though by an impossible supposition he should know nothing of his
being beloved, or would render eternally unhappy those who had loved him.
Nevertheless, we do love him as the supreme and infallible happiness of those
who are faithful to him; we love him as our personal good, as our promised
reward, as our all; but no more with that precise motive of our own happiness
and recompense. Thus much did S. Francis of Sales, with the most exactness
express (love of God, Lib. 2. c. 17.) in these Words: It Is a very different
thing to say, I love God for my self; and saying, I love God for the sake of my
self..... for the one is a holy affection of the Bride... and the other a
downright impiety, etc. He Speaks again thus in another place: The purity of
love consists in not willing any thing for ones self, in looking on nothing but
the good pleasure of God, for which one would be ready to prefer eternal
torments to glory. The Soul disinteressed in pure charity expects, desires,
hops in God as her good, her recompense, as that which is promised her and is
entirely for her self. She will have him for her self, but not for the love of
her self. She will have him for her self that she may conform with the good
pleasure of God who will have it so for her self. But she will not have him for
the love of her self, because she is no more acted by her own interest.

This is pure and perfect love, which works the same acts as mixed love in all
the same virtues; with this one difference only, that it drives out fear with
all vexatious troubles, and is even free of all the solicitude of interessed
love.

Now, I declare that to avoid all sort of equivocation, in a matter where it is
so dangerous to make any, and so difficult not to mistake; I shall always
exactly observe the same names which I will assign to these five kinds of love
for a better distinction.

1. The love of the carnal Jews, for the gifts of God distinguished from him
and not for himself, may be called merely servile love. But because we shall
have no need to speak of it, I shall say nothing of it in this work.

2. That love wherewith God is beloved as the means and only instrument of
felicity, which is referred absolutely to ones self as to the ultimate end, may
be termed mere concupiscential love.

3. That love in which the motive of our own happiness prevails yet over that
of God's Glory, is called love of hope or hopeful love.

4. That love in which charity is yet mixed with a motive of self-interest,
related and subordinate to the principal motive, and to the ultimate end which
is the pure glory of God, should be called love of charity mixed. But because we
shall have occasion to oppose very often this love to that which is called pure
or wholly interessed, I shall be obliged to give to this mixed love the name of
interessed love; as being indeed yet allayed with a remnant of selfish
interest, though it be a love of preference of God to ones self.

5. The love to God alone, considered in it self, and without any the least
mixture of an interessed motive either of fear, or of hope, is the pure love or
perfect charity.

ARTICLES.
1. ARTICLE, True.
MERE concupiscential or wholly mercenary love, whereby nothing should be
desired but God; God, I say, for the only interest of ones own happiness, and
because we should think to find in him the sole instrument of our felicity,
would be a love unworthy of God. For one would then love him as a Miser does
love his Money, or as a voluptuous Man his pleasure: So that one would referr
only God to ones self as a means to its end. This overturning of order would be
according to S. Francis of Sales (love of God, Lib. 2. c. 17.) a Sacrilegious
love, and an unparalleled impiety. But this mere concupiscential or wholly
mercenary love ought never to be confounded with that love, which by Divines is
called of preference, which is a love of God mixed with ourself-interest, and in
which the love of our selves is found always subordinate to the principal end,
which is the glory of God. Love merely mercenary is rather a love of ones self
than of God. It may indeed prepare one for righteousness in this, that it
counterpoises our passions, and renders us prudent in discerning where our true
good does lie: But it is against the essential order of a creature, and cannot
be a real beginning of true internal Justice. On the contrary, Preferential
Love though selfish, may justify a Soul, if so be that our own interest be
referred to it, and subordinate to the Predominant love of God, and provided
his glory be the principal end thereof, so that we do not prefer with less
sincerity God to our selves, as to all other creatures. This preference ought
not however to be always explicit, provided it be real: for God who knows the
clay whereof we are formed, and pitieth his own Children, does not require at
their hand a distinct and unfolded preference, but in those cases wherein he
gives them by his grace the courage to go through those trials in which this
preference must needs be explicit.

Speaking thus we recede in nothing from the Doctrine of the holy Council of
T^ent, which has declared against the Protestants, that Preferential Love, in
which the glory of God is the principal motive, to which that of our own
interest is referred and subordinate, is not a Sin. It condemns (Sess. 6. Chap.
11.) those who affirm, that just Men do sin in all their works, if besides
their principal desire that God be glorified, they cast one eye also upon the
eternal reward to spur their laziness and encourage themselves in running the
race. This is to Speak as S. Francis of Sales, and the whole School of Mystical
Men.

I. ARTICLE. False.
ALL interessed love or mixed with any self-interest concerning our eternal
happiness, though referred and subordinate to the principal motive of the glory
of God, is a love unworthy of him, whereof the Soul ought to be purified as of
a true spot or sin. It is not even lawful to make use of mere concupiscential
love or merely mercenary to prepare sinful Souls to their conversion,
suspending thereby their passions and ill habits, in order to put them in a
condition to hearken peaceably to the words of faith.

To speak after that rate is to contradict the formal decision of the holy
Council of Trent, declaring that mixed love wherein the glory of God is the
predominant motive is no sin. This moreover is to contradict the experience of
all holy Pastors, who see often solid conversions prepared by a Concupiscential
love and a fear merely servile.

II. ARTICLE. True.
THere are three different degrees, or three habitual states of Just Men upon
the Earth. The first have a Preferential Love for God, since they are Just, but
this love though principal and predominant, is yet mixed with fear for their
self-interest. The second are much more in a Love of preference: but this love,
though chief and overruling is yet mixed with Hope for their interest, as it is
their own. Therefore S. Francis of Sales says, (love of God, Lib. 9.) That
holy Resignation has yet selfish desires, but subordinate. These two loves are
included in the fourth which I have called (V. page 10.) an interessed love in
my definitions.

The third incomparably more perfect than the two other sorts of Just Men, have
a fully disinteressed love, which has been termed pure, thereby to intimate,
that it is without mixture of any other motive than that of loving only in
himself and for himself, the sovereign beauty of God. This all the Ancients
have expressed, by saying that there are three states: The first of Just Men,
whom fear acted yet by a remnant of a slavish mind. The second is of those who
hope yet for their own interest by a mixture of a mercenary spirit. The third
is of those who deserve to be called Sons, because they love the Father without
any self-ended motive, either of hope or of fear. This the Writers of the last
Ages have precisely expressed the very same under other equivalent names. They
have divided them into three states. The first whereof is Purgative life, in
which we do combat vices with a love mixed with a motive interessed with fear of
eternal torments. The second is illuminative life, wherein we do acquire
fervency of virtues by a love yet mixed with a motive interessed for celestial
happiness. Finally, the third is contemplative or unitive life, in which, we do
remain united with God by the peaceable exercise of pure love; in which last
state one never loses filial fear, nor the hope of the Children of God, though
he has parted with all interessed motives of hope and fear.

Fear is brought to perfection by purifying it self; it becomes a delicacy of
love, and a filial reverence in peace. And it is then that chaste fear which
remains for ever and ever. Likewise hope far from being lost, is perfected by
the purity of love, and then it is a real desire, and a sincere expectation of
the fulfilling of the promises, not only in general and in an absolute manner,
but also of the accomplishment of the promises in us and for us according to
the good pleasure and will of God: nay, by the only motive of his good
pleasure, without any intermixture of our own interest. This pure love is not
yet satisfied with desiring no other recompense but God himself. A slave
entirely mercenary, who should have a distinct faith of revealed truths, might
be willing to have no other reward but God alone, because he would know him
clearly as an infinite good, and as being himself his true recompense, or the
only instrument of his felicity. This mercenary Man in the life to come would
have nothing but God alone, but he would have God as Beatitude objective, or
the object of his Beatitude, to refer it to his formal Beatitude, namely, to
himself, whom he would make happy, and constitute himself as his ultimate end.
On the contrary, whosoever loves with a pure love, without any mixture of
self-interest, is acted no more by the motive of his interest. He wishes
Beatitude to himself, only because he knows that God will have it so, and will
have every one of us to desire it for his own glory. If by an impossible
supposition, by reason of the promises which are merely free, God would
annihilate the Souls of Just Men at the moment of their separation from the
body, or deprive them of the fruition of himself, and keep them eternally under
the temptations and miseries of this life, as S. Austin supposes it; or even
make them to suffer far from him, all the pains of Hell during all eternity, as
it is supposed by S. Chrysostom, after S. Clement, the Souls of this third
state of pure love, would not love or serve him with less fidelity. Once more
it is true, that this supposition is impossible, upon the account of the
promises, because God has given himself to us as a rewarder: We cannot any
more separate our happiness from God, beloved with final perseverance: but
those things which cannot be separated in respect of the object, may happen
really to be so in respect of the motives. God cannot fail of being the
felicity of the faithful Soul; but she may love him with so much impartiality,
that the enjoyment of a beatifying God increases not in the least the love she
has sor him without minding her self, and that she would love as much though
he were never to be the cause of her happiness. Now to say that this
abstraction of motives is but a vain subtilty, is to be ignorant both of God's
jealousy, and of that of the Saints against themselves: It is to give the name
of subtilty to the nicety and perfection of Pure Love, which the tradition of
all Ages, has put in this abstraction of the motives.

This way of Speaking is precisely conformable to the whole general tradition
of Christianity, from the most Ancient Fathers to S. Bernard, to all the most
famous Scholastic Doctors, from S. Thomas to those of our Age; lastly, to all
those Mystical Men who have been Canonized or approved by the whole Church in
spite of all the contradictions they have suffered. Nothing in the Church is
more evident than this tradition, and nothing would be more rash than to oppose
it, or to endeavor to shift it off. This supposition of the impossible case
here mentioned, far from being an indiscreet and dangerous supposition of the
Mysticks, is on the contrary formally in S. Clement of Alexandria, in Cassian,
in S. Chrysostom, in S. Gregory of Nazianzen, in S. Anselm, and in S. Austin,
who have been followed by a great number of Saints.

II. False.
THere is a love so pure that it rejects that recompense which is God himself,
so that a Man will not have it any more in himself and for himself, though we
are taught by faith that God will have it in us and for us, and commands us to
will it as he does for his own glory.

This love does carry its impartiality so far even as to consent to hate God
eternally, or to cease from loving of him; or else it tends to the destruction
of filial fear, which is nothing else but the niceness and delicacy of a
Jealous love; or it aims to the exstinguishing in us all hope, forasmuch as the
purest hope is a peaceable desire to receive in us and for us the effect of the
promises in conformity to the good pleasure of God, and for his pure glory,
without any mixture of self-interest; or else it tends to the hating of our
selves, with a real hatred, so that we cease from loving in our selves, for
God's sake, his worth, and his image, as we love it out of charity in our
Neighbor.

The speaking at this rate is to give with a horrid Blasphemy, the name of pure
love to a brutish and impious despair, and to the hatred of the work of our
Creator. It is by a monstrous extravagance to affirm That the principle of
conformity with God makes us contrary to himself. It is a going about by a
chimerical love to destroy love it self. It is to put Christianity out of the
hearts of Men.

III. ARTICLE. True.
SOuls must be left in the exercise of love, that (4. Love, See page 8.) which
is yet mixed with the motive of interest as long as the power of grace shall
leave them in it. One ought also to reverence these motives scattered through
all the Books of holy Scripture, in all the most precious monuments of
Tradition; and in all the Prayers of the Church. We ought to make use of these
motives to repress passions, to consolidate virtues, and to disintangle our
Souls from all things of this present life.

However this love though less perfect than that which is fully disinteress'd
has nursed up in all ages a great number of Saints, and greatest part of holy
Souls do never attain in this life the perfect impartiality of love; you
disturb and cast them into temptation if you take from them the motives of
self-interest, which being subordinate to love, serve to hold them up, and to
animate them in dangerous occasions. It would be to no purpose, and
indiscretion to propose them a more elevated love, which is out of their reach,
as having neither internal light nor the power of grace for it. Nay, those who
begin to have some knowledge and foretaste of it, are yet very far from having
the reality of it. Finally, those who have attained its imperfect reality, are
very far yet from having the uniform exercise of it turned into an habitual
state.

What is essential in the direction is to follow only grace step by step, with
extreme patience, precaution, and niceness. We ought to confine our selves to
God's working, and never speak of pure love but when God by internal unction
begins to open the heart to that word, so hard to Souls, yet selfish, and so
apt to scandalize them or to cast them into trouble. Nay more than that, we
ought never to substract from a Soul the support of interessed motives, when
they begin with the power of grace to instruct her in pure love. 'Twill be
enough if upon certain occasions we show her how amiable God is in himself, but
never to dissuade her from taking hold on the support of mixed love.

To Speak thus, is to Speak as the spirit of grace and the experience of
internal ways will always make one Speak; It Is to caution Souls against
illusion.

III. False.
INteressed love (See page 8.) is mean, gross, unworthy of God, which generous
Souls ought to scorn and despise. Have must be made to put them out of conceit
with it, that they may aspire from the beginning to an entirely Disinteressed
Love.

The motives of the fear of Death, of God's Judgments, and of Hell belonging
only to slaves, ought immediately to be banished. We ought to take from them
the desire of their heavenly country, and to cut off from them all the
interessed motives of hope. After having made them to relish the fully
disinteressed love, we ought to suppose that they have attraction and grace for
it; they ought to be removed from all practices which are not in the whole
perfection of that love entirely pure.

To Speak at this rate, is to be ignorant of the ways of God and of the
operations of his grace. They will have the spirit to blow where they list,
whereas, it blows where it lists. They confound the degrees of interior
life. They inspire Souls with that ambition and spiritual avarice spoken of by
the blessed John of the Cross. They remove them from the true simplicity of
pure love limited to follow grace, and never offering to prevent it. They turn
to slight the foundations of Christian Justice, I mean that fear which is the
beginning of wisdom, and that hope whereby we are saved.

IV. ARTICLE. True.
HOpe in the habitual state of purest love, far from being lost, is perfected
and keeps its distinction from charity. 1. The habit thereof infuses into the
Soul, and is conformable there to the producible acts of that virtue. 2. The
exercise of that virtue remains always distinguished from that of charity: the
reason of which is this. It is not the diversity of ends that causes the
diversity or specification of virtues. All virtues ought to have but one end,
though they be one from the other distinguished by a true specification. S.
Austin (de moribus Eccl. l. 1.) assures, that charity it self is the active
principle of all virtues, and takes diverse denominations suitable to the
objects it is applied to. S. Thomas says, that charity is the form of all
virtues, because it exercises and refers them all to its end, which is the
glory of God. S. Francis of Sales, who has excluded so formally, and with so
many repetitions all interessed motives, from all the virtues of perfect Souls,
has followed precisely the steps both of S. Austin, and of S. Thomas, whom he
cites. They have all followed the universal tradition which constitutes a third
degree of Just Men, who do exclude all interessed motives from the purity of
their love. It Is then certain that one ought not any more to seek in that state
for hope exercised by an interessed motive: otherwise this would be a pulling
down with one hand what has been raised with the other; a making ones sport
with so holy a tradition; an affirming and denying at the same time one and the
same thing; and a seeking for the motive of self-interest in an entirely
disinteressed love. We ought then to remember well that it is not the diversity
of the ends or of the motives which makes the distinction or specification of
virtues. What causes this distinction is the diversity of formal objects. To
the end that hope may remain truly distinguished from charity, it is not
necessary they should have different ends: on the contrary, for to be good,
they ought to refer to one and the same end. It Is enough if only the formal
object of hope be not the formal object of charity. Now so it is, that in the
habitual state of the most disinteressed love, the two formal objects of these
two virtues are very different; therefore these two virtues do conserve in that
state a distinction and true specification in the strictest Scholastical sense.
The formal object of charity is the goodness or beauty of God taken simply and
absolutely in it self, without any Idea relative to us. The formal object of
hope is the goodness of God as it is good for us and of a difficult
acquisition: Now it evidently appears, that these two objects taken in the most
abstracted sense and Formal Conception are very different. Therefore the
difference of the objects conserve the specific distinction of these two
virtues. It Is certain that God as he is perfect in himself, and without any
respect to me; and God as he is my happiness which I endeavor to acquire, are
two formal objects very different. There is no confusion on the part of the
object which specifies these virtues; but only on the part of the end, and that
confusion ought to be there: and it alters in nothing the specification of
virtues. The only difficulty remaining now is to explain how a fully
disinteressed Soul can will God as it is her good. Is not this, will they say,
a falling from the perfection of ones disinteressment, a going back in the way
of God, a coming again to the motive of self-interest, contrary to all that
tradition of the Saints of all ages, who do exclude from the third state of
Just Men all interessed motives? It is an easy matter to answer, that pure
love never hinders us to will, and causes us even to will positively all that
God is willing that we should will. God will have me to will God, as he is my
happiness and reward. I will him formally under this Notion: but I will him not
by that precise motive that he is my good. The object and the motive are
different; the object is my interest; but the motive is not interessed, since
it regards nothing but the good pleasure of God. I will that formal object, and
in this reduplication, as speak the School: but I will it by pure conformity to
the will of God, who makes me to will it. The formal object is that of the
common hope of all Just Men, and it is the formal object by which virtues are
specified. The end is the same with that of charity; but we have seen that the
unity of end never confounds the virtues. I may without doubt desire my
supreme good, as it is my reward, and not that of another, and desire it in
conformity to God who will have me to desire it. Then I desire that which is
really, and which I know is the greatest of all my interests, without being
determined to it by any interested motive. In this state, hope remains
distinguished from charity, and does not alter or diminish the purity or
impartiality of her state. This is by S. Francis of Sales explained, in these
words, according to Theological strictness: (Love of God, Lib. 2. c. 17.) It is
a very different thing to say, I love God for my self; and to say, I love God
for the sake of my self -- the one is a holy affection of the Bride -- the
other is an impiety that has not the like, etc.

To speak so, is to conserve the distinction of Theological virtues in the most
perfect Estates of the inward Life, and consequently to depart in nothing from
the Doctrine of the holy Council of Trent. It Is to explain at the same time the
tradition of the Fathers, of the Doctors of the School, and of Mystic Saints,
who have supposed a third degree of Just Men, who are in an habitual state of
pure love without any motive of interest.

IV. False.
IN this third degree of perfection, a Soul wills not any longer her Salvation
as her Salvation, nor God as her supreme good, nor reward as reward, though God
will have her to have this will. Whence it is, that in this state one is not
any more able to do any act of true hope distinguished from Charity; that is to
say, that one cannot any more desire nor expect the effect of the promises in
and for himself, even for the glory of God.

To Speak at that rate, is to place our perfection in a formal resistance of
the will of God, who wills our Salvation, and will have us to will the same as
our own recompense. And this is at the same time to confound the exercise of
Theological virtues against the decision of the Council of Trent.

V. ARTICLE, True.
THere be two different states of righteous Souls. The first is that of holy
Resignation. The resigned Soul will, or at least would have several things for
her self, by the motive of her own interest. S. Francis of Sales says, (Love
of God, Lib. 9.) That she has yet selfish desires, but that they are
subjected. She submits and subordinates her interessed desires to the will of
God, which she prefers before her interest. Thereby this Resignation is good
and meritorious. The second state is that of holy indifference. An indifferent
Soul wills not any longer any thing for her self-interest. She has no
interested desires to submit, because she has no more interrested desire. It Is
true, that there remains in her still some inclinations and unvoluntary
repugnances which she submits; but she has no longer any voluntary and
deliberate desires for her own interest, except in those occasions wherein she
does not faithfully cooperate to the fullness of her grace. This indifferent
Soul, when she fulfilleth her grace wills not any thing more but as God makes
her to will it by his attractive power.

She loves it is true, several things besides God, but she loves them only for
the sole love of God, and with the love of God himself; for it is God that she
loves, in all whatsoever he causes her to love. Holy indifference is nothing
but the impartiality or disinterest of love, as holy Resignation is nothing but
interessed love, which submits self-interest to the glory of God.
Indifference reaches as far and never farther than the perfect disinterest of
love. As that indifference is love it self, it is a very real and positive
principle. It is a positive and formal will, which causes us to will or desire
really all the will of God known to us. It is not a dull unsensibleness, an
internal unaction or non-willing, a general suspension, or a perpetual
equilibrium of the Soul. On the contrary, it is a positive and constant
determination to will and not to will any thing, as Cardinal Bona does express
it. One wills nothing for himself, but every thing for God: We desire nothing
in order to be perfect or happy, for our own interest, but we will all
perfection and blessedness as far as it pleases God to make us, desire these
things by the impression of his grace, according to the written Law, which is
always our inviolable rule. In this state we desire no longer Salvation as our
own Salvation, as an eternal deliverance, as a reward of our merits, or as the
greatest of our interests: But we will it with a full will, as the glory and
good pleasure of God, as a thing which he wills, and will have us to will for
his sake.

'Twould be a manifest extravagancy to refuse out of a pure love, to desire
that good which God will do to us, and commands us to desire. The most
disinterested love ought to will what God wills for us, as that which he wills
for others. The absolute determination to will nothing would be no longer a
disinterest, but the extinction of love which is a desire and true will: it
would be no longer holy indifference; for indifference is the state of a Soul,
equally ready to will or will not, to will for God all that he wills, and never
to will for ones self, what God does not declare that he wills: Whereas, that
nonsensical determination not to will any thing, is an impious reluctance to
all the known will of God, and to all the impressions of his grace. This
equivocation in saying, that one does not desire his Salvation, is easy to be
resolved. We do desire it fully as the will of God. To reject it in this sense
would be a horrid Blasphemy, and we ought always thereupon to Speak with a
great deal of precaution. It is true, only as we do not will it as it is our
recompense, our good and our interest. In this sense, S. Francis os Sales has
said, (Second Conversation) That if there was a little more of God's good
pleasure in Hell, the Saints would exchange Paradise for it. And in other
places too, (Conv. p. 182.) The desire of Eternal Life is good, but he makes us
to desire nothing else but God's will. (Conv. 368.) Could we serve God without
Merit, we should desire to do it. He says elsewhere, (Love of God, Lib. 9. c.
11.) Indifference is above Resignation, for it loves nothing but for the will
of God: So that nothing moves an indifferent heart in presence of God's will.
-- An indifferent heart is as a Wax-Ball in the hands of his God, in order to
receive in like manner all the impressions of his Eternal good pleasure. It Is a
heart without choice, equally disposed to every thing, without any other object
of his will but the will of his God; who does not set his love upon the things
which God wills, but in the will of God who wideth them. In another place he
says, Speaking of S. Paul, and of S. Martin, (Ibid.) They see Paradise open
for them; they see a thousand miseries and labors upon the Earth; the one and
the other is indifferent to their choice, and nothing but the will of God can
give the counterpoise to their hearts. He says afterward, (Ibid.) Should he
know that his Damnation were a little more pleasing to God, than his Salvation,
he would leave his Salvation and run to his Damnation. He Speaks also thus, in
another place; (3 Discourse,) It is not only requisite that we should rely
upon Divine Providence concerning temporal things, but much more for what
belongs to our Spiritual life and perfection. He says elsewhere, Whither it be
in interior or exterior things you ought to will nothing but what God shall
will for you. Lastly, He says in another place. I have almost no desires, but
if I was to be Born again, I would have none at all. If God should come to me,
I should go to him also: if he would not come to me, I should hold still and
not go to him. The other Saints of the last Ages who are authorized by the
whole Church, are full of such and the like expressions, which are all reduced
to this saying, that one has no longer any self and interested desire, neither
about merit, perfection, nor eternal happiness.

Thus to Speak, is to leave no equivocation in so nice a matter, where none
ought to be suffered; it is to prevent all the abuse which can be made of the
most precious and most holy thing which is upon the Earth, I mean pure love;
it is to Speak as all the Fathers, all the chiefest Doctors of the Schools and
all mystical Saints do.

V. False.
HOly indifference is an absolute suspension of the will, an entire non-willing
an exclusion even of all disinterested desire. It goes beyond the perfect
disinterest of love. It does not desire for us those eternal goods, which by
the written Law we are taught God will give us, and which he wills we should
wish to receive in us and for us, by the motive of his glory. All even the most
disinterested desire is imperfect. Perfection does consist in not willing any
thing more whatsoever, in not desiring any more, not only God's gifts but also
God himself, and in leaving him to do in us what he pleases, by not intermixing
on our side any real or positive will.

To Speak at this rate, is to confound all ideas of humane reason; It is to put
a chimerical perfection in an absolute extinction of Christianity, and even of
humanity. One cannot find terms odious enough to qualify so monstrous an
extravagance.

VI. ARTICLE. True.
HOly indifference, which is nothing else but the disinterest of love, is so
far from excluding disinterested desires, that it is the real and positive
principle of all those disinterested desires which the written Law commands us,
and also of all those grace does inspire us with: After this manner did the
Psalmist express himself to God; All my desires are set before thine eyes. The
indifferent Soul not only desires fully her Salvation, as it is the good
pleasure of God; but more than that, perseverance, the amendment of her faults,
the increase of love by the means of grace, and generally without exception all
spiritual and even temporal good, that is within the order of providence, a
preparation of means both for ours and our neighbors Salvation. Holy
indifference admits, not only distinct desires and express demands, for the
accomplishment of all the will of God known to us; but also general desires for
all the will of God which we do not know.

To Speak thus, is to Speak conformable to the true principles of holy
indifference, and to the sentiment of Saints, all which expressions, if well
examined, both by what precede and what follows, are reduced without*
difficulty to this explication that is pure and sound according to the faith.

VI. False.
HOly indifference, admits of no distinct desire, nor of any formal request,
for any good either spiritual or temporal, what relation soever it has either
to ours or our Neighbor's Salvation. We ought never to admit of any of those
pious and edifying desires which may inwardly work upon us.

To Speak at this rate, is to oppose God's will, under thepretence of purer
conformity to it; it is to violate the written Law, which commands us to
desire, though it does not command us to form our desires in an interested,
unquiet manner, or such as is always distinct. It Is to extinguish true love by
a nonsensical resinement; it is to condemn with Blasphemy both the words of
Scripture and the Prayers of the Church, that are full of requests and of
desires. It Is an excommunicating ones self, and putting himself out of a
condition of being ever able to pray, both with heart and mouth in the
congregation of the faithful.

VII. ARTICLE. True.
THere is never a state of indifference, or of any other perfection known in
the Church, that gives to Souls a miraculous or extraordinary inspiration. The
perfection of interior ways does consist only in one way of pure love, whereby
God is beloved without any interest, and of pure faith, where one walks only in
darkness, and without other light but that of faith it self, which is common to
all Christians. This obscurity of pure faith admits of extraordinary light.
It Is not but God, who is the master of his gifts, may give Raptures, Visions,
Revelations, and internal communications. But they do not belong to that way of
pure Faith, and we are taught by the Saints, that then we ought not to stop
wilfully in those extraordinary lights, but to pass them over, as says the
Blessed John of the Cross, and dwell in the most naked and dark Faith. Much
more ought we to take heed not to suppose in the ways we have spoken of, any
miraculous or extraordinary inspiration which indifferent Souls do guide
themselves by. They have for their rule nothing but the precepts and counsels
of the written Law, and the actual grace which is ever conformable to the Law.
As to the precepts, they ought always to presuppose without wavering or
reasoning, that God never forsakes any unless forsaken first; and consequently,
that grace always preventing does inspire them continually to the
accomplishment of the precept when it ought to be accomplished. So it is their
work to cooperate with all the power and strength of their will, that they may
not come short of grace by a transgression of the precept. As for those cases
in which counsels are not turned into precepts, they ought without doing
violence to themselves to produce acts either of love in general, or of certain
distinct virtues in particular, according as the internal attraction of grace
inclines them to some rather than to others, as occasion requires. What is very
certain, is that grace prevents them in respect to every deliberate action;
that this grace which is the internal breathing of the Spirit of God, does
inspire them thus upon every occasion; that this inspiration is nothing but
that which is common to all Just Souls, and which never exempts them in the
least from the whole extent of the written Law; that this inspiration is only
stronger and more special in Souls elevated to pure love, than in those who are
acted only by interested love; because God communicates himself more to the
perfect than to the imperfect. So when some mystical Saints have admitted into
holy indifference inspired desires, and rejected the others; we must take heed
not to think that they would exclude the desires and the other acts commanded
by the written Law, and admit none but those that are extraordinarily inspired.
This would be a Blasphemy against the Law, and raise above it a Fantastical
inspiration. The desires and other inspired acts mentioned by those Mysticks,
are either those commanded by the Law, or those approved by the Counsels, and
which are formed in an indifferent and disinterested Soul, by the inspiration
of ever preventing grace, without the mixture of any interested eagerness to
prevent grace. So that all is reduced to the letter of the Law, and to the
preventing grace of pure love, to which the Soul does cooperate without
preventing it.

To Speak thus, is to explain the true sense of good mystical persons; it is to
take away all equivocations which may seduce the one and offend the other; it is
to precaution Souls against whatsoever is suspected to be illusive; it is to
keep up the form of Sound Words, as S. Paul does recommend it, (2 Timothy C. I. V.
13.)

VII. False.
SOuls dwelling in an holy indifference have no regard for any, though a
disinterested desire, which the written Law obliges them to form. They ought to
desire nothing more but those things which a miraculous or extraordinary
inspiration moves them to wish without any dependency from the Law; they are
acted and moved by God, and taught by him in every thing, so that God alone
desires in them and for them, and they are in no need to cooperate with it by
their free will. Their holy indifference eminently containing all desires
dispenses with them from forming ever any. Their inspiration is their only
rule.

To Speak at this rate, is to elude all Counsels under pretense of fulfilling
them in a most eminent manner; it is to establish in the Church a sect of
impious Fanatics; it is to forget that Christ Jesus came upon the Earth, not to
dispense with the Law or to lessen the authority of it, but on the contrary, to
fulfill and perfect it: so that Heaven and Earth shall pass away before the
Words of our Savior, pronounced for the confirmation of the Law shall pass.
Finally, it is to contradict grossly all the best mystical Writers, and pull
down from top to bottom their whole system of pure Faith, manifestly
incompatible with all miraculous or extraordinary inspiration, which a Soul
would voluntarily follow as her rule and support for dispensing with the
fulfilling the Law.

VIII. ARTICLE. True.
HOly indifference which is never any other but the disinterest of love,
becomes in the most extreme trials what the holy Misticks have called
abandoning or giving one self up; that is to say, that the disinterested soul
gives her self up totally and without any the least reserve to God in all her
own interest; but she never renounceth either love nor any of those things
wherein the Glory and good pleasure of her beloved are concerned. This
abandoning is nothing else, but that abnegation or renounciation of ones self,
which Jesus Christ requires of us in the Gospel; after we have forsaken all
outward things. This abnegation of our selves is only pointed against our
self-interest, and ought never to hinder that disinterested love, which we owe
in our selves as to our Neighbor, for God's sake. The extreme trials wherein
this abandoning is to be exercised, are the temptations whereby our Jealous God
will purify love in hiding from it all hope for its interest even eternal.
These Trials are represented by a very great number of Saints, as a terrible
Purgatory, which may exempt from the Purgatory of the other world, those Souls
who suffer it with entire Fidelity. Only mad and wicked Men says Cardinal
Bona, will deny their belief of those sublime and secret things, and despise
them as False, though not clear, when they are attested by Men of a most
venerable Virtue, who speak by their own experience of God's Operations in
their hearts. These trials are but for a while, and the more true souls are in
them to Grace by leaving themselves to be purified from all self-interest by
Jealous love, so much the shorter are these trials. It Is ordinarily the secret
resistance of the Souls to grace under specious pretenses; it is their
interested and eager endeavor for retaining these sensible supports wherefrom
God is willing to deprive them, which render their trials both so long and so
painful: for God never makes his Creature suffer, to make him suffer without
fruit. It is with a design only to purify the Soul, and to overcome her
resistances. Those Temptations whereby love is purified from all self-interest,
are in nothing like to other common Temptations. Experienced Directors can
discern them by certain tokens, but nothing is more dangerous, than to take the
common Temptations of beginners for trials, tending to the entire purification
of love in the most eminent Souls. This is the source of all illusion: This
causes deceived Souls to fall into hideous and dreadful Vices. These bitter
trials are not to be supposed to be but in a very small number of pure and
mortified Souls, in whom Flesh has been a long while already entirely brought
under the Spirit, and who have solidly practiced all the Evangelical Virtues.
They ought to be docile, so as never wilfully to strain at any of those hard
and abject things which may be commanded them. They ought not to fall in love
with any comfort or freedom; they should be taken off from all things
whatsoever, and also from the way that teaches them this freedom; they should
be ready for all the practices that are laid upon them; they are to stick
neither to their kind of Prayer, nor to their Experiences, nor to their
Readings, nor to those persons they have consulted formerly with trust and
reliance. One ought to have had the Experiment that their Temptations are of a
different nature from the common Temptations in this, that the true means to
still them, is, not to be willing to find a known Prop to Self-interest.

To speak thus, is word for word, to repeat the Experiences of Saints, as they
have related them themselves. It Is, at the same time, to prevent those very
dangerous Inconveniences, one might fall into by Credulity, should one admit,
too easily, in matter of Practice, these Trials, which happen but very seldom;
by reason that few Souls have attained that Perfection, where nothing remains
to be purified, but some Remnants of Interest, mixed with Divine Love.

VIII. False.
INternal Trials take away, for ever, both sensible, and visible Graces: They
suppress, for ever, the distinct Acts, both of Love and Virtue; they put a Soul
into a real and absolute Impotency, to discover herself to her Superiors, or to
obey them in the essential Practice of the Gospel; they cannot be discerned
from common Temptations: It Is lawful, in that State, to abscond from Superiors,
to substract one's self from the Yoke of Obedience, and to seek, both by Books,
and Persons, of no Authority, the Helps, and Lights, one stands in needs of;
even, notwithstanding, the Prohibition of our Superiors.

A Director may suppose one to be in these Trials, without having tried before,
the bottom of the Soul, upon her Sincerity, Docility, Mortifications and
Humility: He may immediately put that Soul upon purging her Love from all Dross
of Interest, in the Temptation, without causing her to do any interested Act,
to resist the Vehemence of pressing Temptation.

To speak at this rate, is to poison our Souls; it is to take from them the
Arms of Faith, necessary to resist the Enemy of our Salvation; it is to confound
all the Ways of God; it is to teach Rebellion, and Hypocrisy, to the Children
of the Church.

IX. ARTICLE True.
A Soul, who in these extreme Trials, gives herself up to God, is never
forsaken by him: When she asks in the Transport of her Grief, to be delivered,
God does not deny to hear her; but because he is willing to perfect her
Strength in Infirmity, and that his Grace is sufficient to her for it: She
loses in that State, neither the real and complete Power, within the Line of
Power, for to fulfill really the Precepts, nor that of following the most
perfect Counsels, according to her Calling, and present Degree of Perfection,
nor the real and internal Acts of her Free Will, for that accomplishment: She
loses neither preventing Grace, nor explicit Faith, nor Hope, as it is a
disinterested Desire of the Promises; nor the Love of God, nor the infinite
Hatred of Sin, not so much as venial, nor that inward and momentous certainty,
that is necessary for the Rectitude of the Conscience: She loses nothing but
the sensible Relish of Good, but the comfortable and affecting Fervency, but
the eager and interested Acts of Virtues, but the After-certainty, that comes
by an interested reflection, bearing to itself a comfortable Witness of its
Fidelity: These direct Acts, and such as escape the Reflections of the Soul,
but which are yet very real, and do conserve in her all the Virtues without
spot, are, as I have already said, that Operation called by S. Francis of
Sales, the Edge of the Spirit, or the Top of the Soul: This State of Trouble,
and Gloominess, which is only for a while, is not even in its own Duration,
without peaceable Intervals, in which some Glimpses of very sensible Graces,
appear like Lightning in a dark stormy Night, which leave no sign of themselves
behind.

To speak thus, is to speak equally conformable, both to the Catholic
Doctrine, and to the Experiences of Mystical Saints.

IX. False.
IN these extreme Trials, a Soul without having been before unfaithful to
Grace, loses the true and full Power of persevering in her State: She falls
into a real Impotency, to fulfill the Precepts in those Cases, where Precepts
are urging. She cease to have an explicit Faith, in Cases where Faith ought
to act explicitly: She cease to hope, that is to say, to expect, and to
desire, even in a disinterested manner, the Effect of the Promises in herself:
She has no longer the Love of God, perceptible, or imperceptible: She has no
more a Hatred to Sin: She loses not only the sensible and reflective Horror of
it, but also the most direct and intimate Horror of the same. She has no more
that intimate and momentous Certainty, which can preserve the Rectitude of her
Conscience, in the very Moment of her Action. All the Acts of those Virtues
essential to the internal Life ceases, even in their most direct, and less
reflected Operation, which is according to the Language of Mystical Saints, the
Edge of the Spirit, and the Top of the Soul.

To speak at this rate, is to annihilate Christian Piety, under pretense of
perfecting it. It is to make the Trials designed to purify Love, an universal
Shipwreck of Faith, and of all Christian Virtues: It Is to say, that the
Faithful nourished with the Words of Faith, ought never to hear, without
stopping their Ears.

X. ARTICLE True.
THE Promises of Eternal Life, are merely free: Grace is never due to us; or
else it would not be Grace. God never owes to us, in a strick Sense, either
Perseverance to the Death, nor Eternal Life after the Death of the Body: He is
not so much as indebted to our Soul, to give her Existence after this Life; he
might let her drop into her Nothing again, as it were, by her own Weight:
Otherwise he should not be free in respect to the Duration of his Creature, and
it would become a necessary Being. But although God never owes any thing to us,
in a strict Sense, he has been pleased to give us Rights grounded on his
Promises, merely free: By his Promises he has given himself, as a Supreme
Blessedness, to a Soul faithful to him, and persevere to be so. It is then true
in this sense, that any supposition tending to the believing ones being
excluded from Eternal life by Loving God, is impossible, because God is
faithful in his promises: He wills not the Death of the Sinner, but rather that
he may live and be Converted. Thereby it is certain that all the Sacrifices
which the most Disinterested Souls make usually concerning their Eternal
Blessedness are conditional. They say: my God, if by an impossibility thou
would condemn me to the Eternal Torments of Hell without losing thy Love, I
should not Love thee the less for it. But this Sacrifice cannot be absolute in
an ordinary state. In no other case but of the last trials, this Sacrifice
becomes in a manner absolute. Then a Soul may be invincibly persuaded with a
reflex persuasion, and which is not the intimate bottom of Conscience, that she
is justly reprobated by God. In this state did S. Francis of Sales find himself
in the Church of of S. Stephen des Grez. A Soul in this trouble finds herself
contrary to God, in respect to her former infidelities, and by her present
obduration. She takes her bad inclinations for a deliberate will, and sees not
the real acts of her Love and of her Virtues, which by reason of their
simplicity do escape her reflections. She becomes in her own eyes covered with
the lepro^sie of Sin, though it is only in appearance and not real. She can not
bear with her self. She is offended with those who are willing to quiet her and
take away from her that kind of persuasion. It matters nothing to tell her of
the precise Doctrine of Faith, in regard to the will of God of saving all Men,
and the belief we ought to have, that he is willing to save every one of us in
particular. This Soul does not doubt of the good will of God, but believes her
own bad, because she sees nothing in her self by reflection but the apparent
evil which is external and sensible, and that the good which is always real and
intimate, is by God's jealousy continually taken from before her eyes Nothing
in this involuntary and invincible trouble can recover her, nor reveal to her
in the bottom of her self what God is pleased to conceal to her. She sees God's
Anger swollen and hanging over her head as the billows of the Sea, ready to
drown her; then it is that the Soul is divided from her self, she expires with
Christ upon the Cross: saying, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? In
that unvoluntary impression of despair, she makes an absolute Sacrifice of her
concern for Eternity, because the impossible case in the trouble and darkness
she is in, seems to her possible and actually real. Once more it would profit
nothing to argue with her, for she is wholly incapable of reasoning, all the
business lies in a conviction which is not intimate, but seeming and
invincible. A Soul in this condition, loses all hope of things for her own
interest, but she never loses in the superior part of her self, that is to
say, in her direct and intimate acts, that perfect hope which is the
disinterested desire of the promises. She loves God more purely than ever, and
is so far from consenting positively to hate him, that she does not so much as
indirectly consent to cease for one instant from loving him, nor to diminish in
the least her Love, nor to put ever to the increase of that Love any voluntary
bounds, nor to commit any fault, though never so venial. A Director may
therefore leave this Soul to make a simple condescension to the loss of her own
interest, and to the just Condemnation she thinks to be under from God, which
serves ordinarily but to quiet her, and to becalm the Temptation designed only
for that effect; I mean for the purification of Love: But he ought never either
to advise or to permit her positively to believe by a free and willful
persuasion, that she is reprobated and ought no longer to desire the promises
by a disinterested motive: He ought yet much less to consent she should hate
God, or cease from loving him, or transgress his Law even by the most venial
faults.

To speak thus, is to speak according to the Experience of Saints, with all the
Precaution necessary for the Conservation of the Doctrine of Faith, and never
to lay open Souls to any Illusion.

X. False.
A Soul in Trials may believe, with an intimate, free, and voluntary
Persuasion, against the Doctrine of Faith, that God has forsaken her, though she
had not forsaken him; or, that there is no more Mercy for her, though she does
sincerely desire it; or, that she may consent to hate God, because God will
have her to hate him; or, that she may consent never more to love God, because
he will no more be beloved by her; or, that she can voluntarily confine her
Love, because God will have her to limit it; or, that she may violate God's
Law, because God will have her to transgress it. In this State, a Soul has no
longer any Faith, or Hope, or disinterested Desire of the Promises, nor any
real and intimate Love of God, nor any, even implicit Hatred of Evil, which is
Sin, nor any real Cooperation with Grace: But she is without any Action,
without any Will, without any more Interest for God, than for herself, without
either reflex, or direct Acts of Virtues.

To speak at this rate, is to blaspheme against what one is ignorant of, and to
corrupt one's self in what one knows; it is to make Souls to be overcome by
Temptation, under pretense of purifying them; it is to reduce all Christendom to
an impious and dull Despair; it is even grossly to contradict all good Mystical
Persons, who do assert, that Souls in that State, show a very lively Love for
God, by their Sorrow for having lost him, and an infinite Abhorrency of Evil,
by their Impatience oftentimes toward those who offer both to comfort, and
reassure them of their good State.

XI. ARTICLE. True.
GOD never forsakes the Just, unless he be forsaken by him: He is the infinite
Good, who seeks for nothing, but to communicate himself: The more one receives
him, the more he gives of himself: Our Resistance only is that which restrains,
or retards his Gifts. The essential Difference between the new Law, and the
old, is, that the latter did not lead Man to any thing that was perfect; that
it showed what was good, but gave not a Power wherewithal to do it, and Evil,
without affording Means to avoid it; whereas the new is the Law of Grace, which
gives both the Will and the Deed, and which commands only, because it gives the
true Power to fulfill. As the Observers of the old Law were assured, that they
should never see the diminution of their Temporal Goods: Inquirentes autem
Dominum non minuentur omni bono. Souls that are true to their Grace, shall
likewise never suffer any dimunition in their Grace, which is always
preventing, and the real Good of the Christian Law: Thus each Soul, that she
may be fully true to God, can do nothing solid and meritorious, but to follow
Grace, without need of preventing it. To be willing to prevent it, is to be
willing to give to one's self, what it does not give yet; it is to expect
something of himself, and his own Endeavor, or Industry; it is a subtle, and
unperceptible Remainder of a Semi-Pelagian Zeal, at the very time when we long
yet for more Grace. One ought, it is true, to prepare himself, for to receive
and invite Grace to himself; but this ought not to be done, without the
Cooperation of Grace it self. A faithful Cooperation with Grace, in the
present Moment, is a most effectual Preparation for receiving, and attracting
of Grace the next Moment. If the thing be narrowly pried into, it is then
evident, that all is reduced to a faithful Co operation of a full Will, and of
all the Forces of the Soul, with the Grace of every Moment's presenting. If all
that could be added to this Cooperation, were rightly taken in its full
extent, it would be nothing but a rash and overhasty Zeal, an eager and
unquiet Endeavor, of a Self-interested Soul; an unseasonable Motion that would
discompose, weaken, and retard the Operation of Grace, instead of making it
both more easy and perfect: It Is even, as if one who is led by another, whose
Impulses he ought to follow, should incessantly prevent his Motions, and at
every Minute turn himself back, to measure that Space he had already run: This
unquiet, and ill concerted Motion, with the Man that principally moves, would
only cumber, and retard the Course of them both: It Is even so with a just Man
in the Hand of God, who moves him without discontinuation with his Grace. All
hasty and unquiet Excitation fore-running Grace, for fear of not acting enough;
all eager excitation, except in case of Command, for to give to one's self, by
an excess of interested Precaution, those Dispositions, which Grace does not
inspire with in those Moments, because it inspires with others less
comfortable, and perceptible; all hasty and unquiet exciting, for to give to
one self, by observable excitation, a more perceptible motion, and whereof one
may be able to bear to himself immediately a more interested Witness, are
defective Motions, for Souls called to a peaceable Disinterest of perfect Love.
This unquiet, and fore-running Acting, is what good Mysticks have called
Activity, which has nothing in common with the Action, and real, but peaceable
Acts, that are essential to cooperate with Grace. When they say, that one
ought no more to excite himself, nor strive, they mean only to remove that
unquiet and hasty Excitation, whereby one would go before Grace, or recall the
sensible Impressions of it, after they are past, or cooperate with it, in a
more sensible and noted manner than is required of us. In this Sense,
Excitation or Activity, ought effectually to be cut off: But if by Excitation
should be meant, a Cooperation of the full Will, and of all the Powers of the
Soul, to the Grace of each Moment; it ought to be concluded, that it is by way
of Faith, that one ought to excite himself every Moment, to fill up all his
Grace. This Cooperation is no less sincere for being disinterested; and for
being peaceable, it is no less efficacious, and the Product of the entire Will:
For being without precipitation, it is no less painful, in relation to
Concupisence, which it overcomes. It is not an Activity, but an Action, which
consists in very real and meritorious Acts. Thus it is, that Souls called to
pure Love, resist the Temptations of the greatest Trials: They fight, even to
the Blood, against Sin; but it is a peaceable Combat, because the Spirit of the
Lord savors of Peace: they resist in the Presence of God, who is their
Strength. They resist in a State of Faith and Love, which is a State of Prayer.
Those who have yet need of the interested Motives of Fear and Hope, ought to
take hold of them, even with a natural eagerness, rather than to expose
themselves to be overcome. Those who find by a repeated Experience, and known
to good Directors, that their Strength lies in an amorous Silence, and their
Peace in the greatest Bitterness, may continue thus to overcome Temptation; and
they must not be disturbed, for they are pained already enough another way: But
should these Souls by a secret Infidelity, come secretly to fall from their
State, they should be obliged to have their recourse to the most interested
Motives, rather than expose themselves to violate the Law, in the excess of
Temptation.

To speak thus, is to speak in conformity to the Evangelical Rule, without
weakening in the least, either the Experiences, or the Maxims of all good
Mystical Persons.

XI. False.
THat Activity which Saints will have us to cut off, is the Action itself of
the Will: She ought not to produce any further Act; she has no longer need to
cooperate with Grace with all her Power, nor positively and fully to resist
Concupiscence, nor to work any internal, or external Action, that is
troublesome to her* It suffices her, to let God work in her, those that flow
as from the Spring, and for which she has not so much as a natural repugnancy.
She has no further need to prepare herself, by the good use of one Grace for a
greater that should follow, and which is, as it were, linked to this first: she
needs only let herself loose, without Examination, to all the Propensions she
finds in herself, without assuming them: She needs no more any Toil, or Labor,
any Violence, any Restraint of Nature. Let her but remain without Will, and
Neuter between Good and Evil, even in the most extreme Temptations.

To speak at this rate, is to speak the Language of the Tempter: It Is to teach
Souls to lay Snares for themselves; it is to inspire them with Indolency in
Evil, which is the height of Hypocrisy; it is to engage them into a Consent to
all Vices, which is no less real for its being indirect and tacit.

XII. ARTICLE. True.
SOuls attracted to pure Love may be as disinterested in respect to themselves
as to their Neighbors, because they never see or desire more in themselves
than in the most unknown neighbor, but the Glory of God, his good pleasure,
and the fulfilling of his promises. In this sense, these Souls are as it were
strangers to themselves; and they Love themselves no farther, but as they do
the rest of other Creatures within the Order of pure Charity. After this wise,
would Innocent Adam have Loved himself only for God's sake. Self abnegation,
and the hating of our Souls recommended in the Gospel, are not an absolute
hatred of our Souls, which are God's Image: For the Work of God is good, and we
ought to Love it for his sake: But we do spoil that work by Sin, and we ought
to hate our selves in our corruption. The perfection of pure Love consists
then in not loving our selves any further, but for God alone. The vigilance of
the most disinterested Souls ought never to be regulated according to their
disinterest: God who calls them to be as freed from themselves as from their
Neighbor, will have them at the same time more watchful over themselves whom
they are entrusted with, and for whom they are responsible, than over their
Neighbor whom God has committed to their charge. They ought even to watch
over what they do every day to their Neighbor, whom Providence has entrusted
to their direction and conduct. A good Pastor watches over the Soul of his
Neighbor without any interest. He Loves in him nothing but God: He has him
never out of sight: He comfort, corrects, and supports him. Thus ought we
to bear up our selves without flattery, and correct our selves without
discouragement. We ought to converse charitably with our selves as with
another, and not to forget our selves but by cutting off the ticklishness and
niceness of self-love; not to forget ones self at all, but in pulling down all
unquiet and interested reflections when we are entirely in the grace of pure
love. But it is never lawful to forget ones self so as to cease watching over
our selves, after the same manner we would watch over our Neighbor if we were
Pastors. We ought even to add this further, that one is not so strictly charged
with the care of his Neighbor as with himself, because it is not in our power
to regulate the internal wills of others as it is of our own. Whence it follows,
that one ought always to watch, incomparably more over himself than the best
Pastor can over his flock. We ought never to forget our selves by abolishing
the reflections that are even most interested, when we are yet in the way of
interested Love. Lastly, we ought not to forget our selves so as to reject all
sorts of reflections as imperfect things: For reflections have nothing
imperfect in themselves, and don't become so often hurtful to so many Souls,
but because Souls sick of self-love turn very seldom an eye upon themselves,
but they do grow impatient and are softened at that sight. Moreover, God
inspires often by his grace the most improved Souls with reflections very
profitable either in respect to his designs in them, or upon his former mercies
which he makes them to celebrate, or their dispositions whereof they are to
give an account to their Director. But finally, disinterested love watches
acts, and resists Temptation more yet than interested Love does. The only
difference is, that the watchfulness of pure Love is simple and peaceable,
whereas that of interested Love, which is less perfect, keeps still some
remains of eagerness and trouble, because nothing but perfect Love drives out
fear with its attendance.

To Speak thus, is to Speak in a very correct manner, which ought to be
suspected by no body, and is conformable to the Language of Saints.

XII. False.
A Soul fully disinterested in her self, does not love her self even for God's
sake. She hates her self with an absolute hatred, as supposing the work of the
Creator not to be good, and she carries thus far her abnegation and
renounciation, enlarging the hatred to her self, even so far as to will
deliberately her loss, and eternal reprobation. She rejects grace and mercy;
wills nothing but justice and vengeance. She becomes so great a stranger to
her self, that she cease to take any further concern either for the good that
is to be done, or the evil to be eschewed. All her desire is to forget her self
in every thing, and loose continually the sight of her self. She is not
satisfied to forget her self in respect to her own interest: She is willing
moreover to forget her self, in relation to the amendment of her defects, and
to the fulfilling of the Law of God, for the interest of his pure glory. She
reckons no longer upon her being entrusted with her self, nor upon watching
even with a simple, peaceable, and disinterested vigilance over her own will.
She rejects all reflection as imperfect, because nothing but merely direct
and not reflex sights are worthy of God.

To Speak at this rate, is to oppose the experiences of Saints, whose most
internal Life has been filled with very profitable reflections made by the
impression of grace; since they have afterward come to know the graces past,
and the miseries from which God has delivered them, that at length they have
given an account of a very great number of things that had happened in them.
This is to turn the abnegation of ones self into an impious hatred of our Soul,
which supposes her to be bad by nature, according to the principle of the
Manicheans, or which overturns the order, in hating what is good, and what God
loves as being his image. This is to annihilate all watchfulness, all fidelity
to grace, all attention to make God reign in us, all good usage of our liberty.
In a word, it is the height of all impiety and irreligion.

XIII. ARTICLE. True.
THere is a great deal of difference between simple and direct acts, and reflex
acts. Whenever we act with a right Conscience, there is in us an inward
certainty that we go right; or else we should act in a doubt, whither we do
well or ill, and so should not practice a downright dealing. But this inward
certainty consists often in acts so simple, so direct, so rapid, so
momentanous, so free from all reflection, that the Soul who knows well that she
makes them in that moment that she makes them, does not find afterward any
distinct, and durable sign of them. Hence it comes that when she will return by
reflection to what she has done, she does not think she has done what she
ought, she disturbs her self by scruples, and is even offended at the
indulgence of her superiors, when they go about to quiet her in respect to
what is past: So God gives her at the instant of the action, by direct acts,
all the necessary certainty for the rectitude of her Conscience; and he takes
away from her in his jealousy the facility of finding again by way of
reflection, and an after-blow that certainty and rectitude: so that she cannot
enjoy it to her comfort, nor justify her self in her own eyes. As for reflex
acts, they leave behind them a lasting and steady Foot-step, which is found
again when we please, and this is the reason why Souls yet interested for
themselves be willing incessantly to form acts that are strongly imprinted and
reflected, to make themselves sure of their operation, and bear witness of it
to themselves: Whereas, disinterested Souls are of themselves indifferent to
perform acts distinct or indistinct, direct or reflex: They make reflex ones
whenever either any Precept may require it, or the power of grace carries them
to it; but they don't look for reflex acts with preference to others by a
trouble arising from a concern for their own security. Commonly in the
extremity of Trials, God leaves nothing to them but direct acts, of which
afterward they cannot perceive any Foot-step; and this causes the Martyrdom
of Souls, while any motive of selfinterest remains yet in them. These direct
and intimate acts without reflection imprinting any sensible Foot-step, are
that which S. Francis of Sales has called the Top of the Soul or Edge of the
Spirit. In these acts it was that S. Anthony did repose the most perfect
Prayer, when he said, Prayer is not yet perfect, when the solitary knows that
be makes a Prayer, (Cassian. conf. 9.)

To Speak thus, is to Speak conformable to the Experience of Saints, without
exceeding the strictness of Catholic Doctrine. It is also to Speak of the
operations of the Soul, in conformity to the ideas of all good Philosophers.

XIII. False.
THere are no true acts besides the reflex ones, which are either felt or
perceived, as soon as we have ceased to perform any act of that kind, we may
say truly, that we perform not one more that is real. Whosoever has not upon
these acts a reflex and durable certitude, has had no certainty in the Action;
from whence it follows, that the Souls who are during their Trials in an
apparent despair, are there in a true despair; and that the doubt wherein they
are after having acted, shows that they have lost in the action the inward
Testimony of Conscience.

To Speak at this rate, is to overturn all Ideas of good Philosophy; it is to
destroy the Testimony of the Spirit of God in us for our Filiation; it is to
annihilate all the internal life, and all rectitude of Souls.

XIV. ARTICLE. True.
IN the last Trials for the purification of Love, a separation is made of the
superior part of the Soul from the inferior; in that the senses and
imagination have no part of the peace and of the communications of Grace, which
God makes often enough both to the understanding and to the will, in a simple
and direct manner, which escapes all reflection. After this manner, Christ
Jesus our perfect pattern, has been happy upon the Cross, so that in the
superior part of his Soul he enjoyed Celestial Glory, while in the inferior,
he was actually a Man of Grief, with a sensible impression upon him of his
being forsaken by his Father. The inferior part did not impart to the
superior her involuntary trouble, nor her painful swoundings. The superior
communicated to the inferior neither her peace nor her blessedness. This
separation is made by the difference of the real, but simple and direct acts of
the understanding and of the will, who leaving behind them no sensible sign,
and of the reflex Acts, which leaving a sensible mark behind them, are
communicated to the imagination and to the senses, which are called the
inferior part, for to distinguish them from that direct and intimate operation
of the understanding and of the will, called the superior part. The acts of
the inferior part in this separation, consist of an entirely blind and
unvoluntary trouble, because all that is intellectual and voluntary belongs to
the superior part. But although this separation taken in this sense cannot be
absolutely denied, the Directors nevertheless ought to take great care never to
suffer in the inferior part, any of those Disorders, which are in a natural
course to be always deemed voluntary, and for which the superior part ought
consequently to be accountable. This precaution ought always to be found in the
way of pure Faith, which is the only one we can Speak of, and in which nothing
contrary to the order of nature is admitted. It Is needless, for this Reason, to
Speak here of diabolical possessions, obsessions, or other extraordinary
things: One cannot absolutely reject them, since both the Scripture and the
Church have acknowledged them: But in particular cases, the greatest caution
ought to be used for to avoid being deceived. Moreover, this matter that is
common to all internal ways, has no particular difficulty to be cleared in it
by the way of pure Faith and of pure Love. On the contrary, it may be asserted,
that this way of pure Love and of pure Faith, is that wherein fewer of these
extraordinary things are to be seen: Nothing diminishes them so much, as not
minding them, and carrying always the Souls to a Conduct that is simple in the
disinterest of Love, and in the obscurity of Faith.

To Speak so, is to Speak in conformity to Christian Doctrine, and to give the
greatest preservatives against illusion.

XIV. False.
IN Trials, a total separation is made of the superior from the inferior
part: The superior is united to God by an union, whereof no sensible and
distinct sign appears at any time, either for Faith, Hope, Love, or any other
virtues: The inferior part becomes in that separation wholly Animal, and
whatever passes in it against the rule of manners is deemed neither voluntary,
nor demeritorious, nor contrary to the purity of the superior part.

To Speak at this rate, is to annihilate the Law and the Prophets: It is to
Speak the Language of the Devils.

XV. ARTICLE. True.
THE persons who are in those rigorous Trials ought never to neglect that
universal sobriety, so often spoken of by the Apostles, and which consists in a
sober use of all the things that are round about us. This Sobriety reaches to
all the operations of sense, of the imagination, and even of the Spirit: It
makes our Wisdom Sober and Temperate: It reduces all to a simple use of
necessary things. This Sobriety implies a continual privation of all the
enjoyments that are only for satisfaction and pleasure. This Mortification, or
rather this Death, tends to cut off not only all the voluntary motions of
nature, corrupted and revolted through the voluptuousness of the Flesh, and the
pride of the Spirit; but also all the most innocent Consolations, which
interested Love does seek with so much eagerness. This Mortification is
practiced with peace and simplicity, without discomposure of mind and sourness
against ones self, without method suitable to ones occasions and needs, but in
a real manner, and without intermission. It Is true, that some persons oppressed
by excessive Trials, are ordinarily obliged by their Obedience to an
Experienced Director, to forbear or lessen certain Corporal Austerities they
have been much addicted to. This Temperature is necessary for the Relief of
their Body, sinking under the Rigor of internal Pains, which is the most
terrible of all Penances. It happens also, often, that these Souls have been
too much in love with these Austerities; and the Repugnancy they felt at first
to obey, in leaving them off in this State of Oppression, shows, that they
stuck a little too fast to them: But it is their Personal Imperfection, and not
that of the Austerities, that deserves the blame: Austerities answerable to
their Institution, are profitable, and often necessary: Christ has given us
the Pattern of them, which all Saints have followed: They bring our revolted
Flesh under; they tend to the Amendment of committed Faults, and do preserve
from Temptations: It Is true indeed, that they don't serve to destroy the Bottom
of Self-love, or Cupidity, but by so much as they are animated by the Spirit of
Recollection, Love, and Prayer: For want of which they would quench the grosser
Passions, and contrary to their Institution, make a Man full of himself; this
would be nothing else, but a Justifying of the Flesh. It is moreover to be
observed, that the Persons that are in this State, being deprived of all
sensible Graces, and from the fervent Exercise of all discernible Virtues, have
no longer any relish, nor sensible fervency, nor noted attraction, for all the
Austerities they had practiced before, with so much Ardor. Then it is, that
their Penance is reduced to bear, in a very bitter Peace, the Anger of God,
which they look for every Moment, and their manifest Despair. There is no
Austerity, or Torment, which they would not suffer with Joy, and Ease, in the
room of this inward Pain; all their inmost Attractiveness is to bear their
Agony, in which they say upon the Cross, with Christ, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me.

To speak thus, is to acknowledge the perpetual necessity of Mortification: It
is to Authorize Corporal Austerities, which by their Institution are very
wholesome: It Is to be willing, that the most perfect Souls should do Penance,
proportionable to the Strength, Graces, and Trials of their State.

XV. False.
COrporal Austerities serve for nothing, but to provoke Concupiscence, and
inspire the Practiser of them, with a Pharisaical Complacency; they are not
necessary either to prevent, or to appease Temptations. Quiet Prayer is always
sufficient for to bring the Flesh under the Spirit. One may wilfully leave off
these Practices, as gross, imperfect, and not convenient for Beginners.

To speak at this rate, is to speak as an Enemy of the Cross of Christ; it is to
blaspheme against his Example, and against all Tradition; it is to oppose the
Son of God, who says, Since the Days of John, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers
violence, and the violent take it by force.

XVI. ARTICLE True.
THere are two Kinds of Proprieties: The first is a sin for all Christians: The
second is not so much as a Venial Sin; but only an Imperfection, in comparison
with fomething that is more perfect; nay, it is not even an Imperfection, but
for those Souls that are actually attracted by Grace, to the perfect
Disinterest of Love. The first Property is Pride: It is a Love of
Self-excellency, as it is one's own, and without any subordination to our
essential End, which is the Glory of God: This Property was the Sin of the
first Angel, who rested in himself, as says S. Augustine, instead of referring
himself to God, and by that simple Appropriation of himself, he did not remain
in the Truth: This Property is in us a Sin, lesser, or greater, according as it
is less, or more voluntary. The second Property, which we ought never to
confound with the first, is a Love of our own Excellency, as it is our own, but
with subordination to our essential End, the Glory of God. We desire to
havenone but the most excellent Virtues; we will have them chiefly for the
Glory of God, but we will have them also for our Merit, and for the Reward that
does attend them. Moreover, we desire them for the very Comfort of becoming
perfect: It is a Resignation, which, as S. Francis of Sales says, Has yet
Self-desires, but they are subjected. Those Virtues that are interested for our
Perfection, and Happiness, are good, because they refer themselves to God, as
our principal End: But they are inferior, in Perfection, to the Virtues
exercised by holy Indifference, and for the Glory of God alone in us, without
any Motive of Self-Interest, either for our Merit, or for our Perfection, or
for our Eternal Reward. This Motive of Spiritual Interest, which remains always
in the Virtues, while the Soul remains possessed with interested Love, is that
which Mystical Writers have called Propriety. It is that which the blessed John
of the Cross calls Avarice, and Spiritual Pride. The Soul, whom they call the
Proprietary One, refers her Virtues to God, by holy Resignation, and in this is
less perfect, than the disinterested Soul, which refers her to God, by holy
Indifference. This Property which is not a Sin, is nevertheless, by Mystical
Men, called an Impurity; not as if it were a Spot in the Soul, but to express
that it is a mixture of diverse Motives, hindering Love from being pure, or
without mixture. They often say, that they find this impurity, or mixture of
interested Motives, in their Prayer, and most holy Exercises: But we ought to
take heed, least we think that they mean then to speak of any vicious impurity.

When it is clearly understood, what Mystical Men mean by Property, it is no
hard matter to understand what is meant by Disappropriation, it is the Operation
of Grace, purifying Love, and making it disinterested in the Practice of all
Virtues. It Is by means of Trials, this Disappropriation is made; it loses
therein, as mystical Persons do say, all Virtues: But this loss is but
seemingly so, and for a limited time. The Foundations of Virtues are so far
from being really lost, that they are rather purified by pure Love; the Soul is
there stripped from all sensible Graces, from all Relishes, from all Easiness,
and from all Fervency, which might both comfort and hearten her; she loses
those Methodical Acts, and such as are excited with Eagerness, for to render to
herself an interested Testimony, concerning her Perfection; but she loses
neither the direct Acts of Love, nor the Exercise of distinct Virtues, in case
of a Command, nor the near hatred of Evil, nor the momentaneous Certainty of
Evil, necessary for the rectitude of Conscience, nor the disinterested Desire
of the Effect of the Promises in her: the appearance alone of her Demerit, is
enough to take from her all discernable Support, and to leave no other Shift
for Self-Interest: Why then should any real Evil be added to it, as if God
could not make his Creature perfect, but by a real Sin? On the contrary, the
Soul, if so be she is faithful in those Trials called Loss and
Disappropriation, suffers no real diminution of her Perfection, but grows
still more and more in the inward Life; in fine, aSoul who purifies herself in
the Experience of her daily Faults, by hating her Imperfection, because
contrary to God, loves nevertheless the Abjection coming to her by it; because
this Abjection is so far from being a Sin, that it is, on the contrary, that
Humiliation which is the Penance and Remedy of Sin itself: She hates sincerely
all her Faults, by how much she loves God in the utmost Perfection; but she
makes use of her Faults to humble herself peaceably, and thereby her Faults
become the Windows of the Soul, through which God's Light does enter; according
to the Expression of Balthazar Alvarez. (In his Life, C. 13.)

To speak thus, is to unfold the true Sense of the best mystical Men; it is to
follow a plain System, which is reduced only to the Disinterest of Love, which
is Authorized by the Tradition of all Ages.

XVI. False.
THE Mystical Property, which is interested Love, is a real Impurity; it is a
Contamination of the Soul: The Virtues of this State are not meritorious; one
must really lose the very Depths of his Virtues; one must cease to produce even
the most intimate and direct Acts of them; one must really lose the Hatred of
Sin, the Love of God, the distinct Virtues of his State, in the Case of a
Command; one ought to lose really the momentaneous Certainty that is necessary
for the Rectitude of Conscience; nay, also the disinterested Desire of the
Effect of the Promises in us. We ought to love our Abjection in such a manner,
that we may love truly our very Sin, because it renders us Abjects, and
contrary to God. Finally, one ought in order, to be entirely pure, to strip
oneself of all his Virtues, and and make to God a disinterested Sacrifice of
them, by voluntary Actions, transgressing the written Law, and incompatible
with these Virtues.

To speak at this rate, is to make a Sin of interested Love, against the formal
Decision of the Council of Trent: It is at the same time, to strip the Souls of
their Robes of. Innocence, and to quench all Graces in them, under the pretense
of a Disappropriation of them: It Is to Authorize the Mystery of Iniquity, and
renew the Impiety of the false Gnostics, who went about to purify themselves
by the Practice of Impurity itself, as we learn it from S. Clement of
Alexandria.

XVII. ARTICLE. True.
THere is but a small Number of Souls, who are in these last Trials, wherein
they make an end of purifying themselves from all Self-interest. All other
Souls, without undergoing these Trials, do yet arrive at several Degrees of
Holiness, that is very real, and pleasing to God: Otherwise one would reduce
interested Love to a Judaical Worship, or such as is unsufficient to eternal
Life, against the Decision of the holy Council of Trent. The Director ought not
to be easily induced to suppose, that those Temptations in which he finds the
Soul to be, are extraordinary Temptations. One cannot be too mistrustful, of an
heated Imagination, and that exaggerates all that she feels, or thinks to feel.
One ought to distrust a subtle, and almost unperceptible Pride, which tends
always to flatter one self, with being a Soul extraordinarily led. Lastly, we
ought to distrust illusion, which creeps in and makes one that after having
begun by the Spirit with a Sincere Fervency, to end in the Flesh: His chief
concern therefore should be, to suppose at the very first, that the Temptations
of a Soul are nothing else but common Temptations, the Remedy whereof is both
internal and external Mortification, with all the acts of fear, and the
practicing of all interested Love. One ought even to stand fast in admitting
nothing beyond this, without an entire conviction, that these Remedies are
absolutely unprofitable, and that the sole exercise both simple and peaceable
of pure Love does better quell the Temptation: Upon this occasion it is that
illusion and the danger of wanderings are in the extreme. When an unexperienced
or too credulous Director supposes a common Temptation, to be an extraordinary
one, for the purifying of Love, he is the ruin of a Soul, he fills her with
her self, and casts her into an incurable and unavoidable indolency of Vice.
To leave inrerested Motives when we have need of them, it is to take from a
Child the Milk of his Nurse, and to deprive him cruelly of his Life, by weaning
him out of Season. Souls who are very imperfect yet and full of themselves, do
often fancy upon indiscreet readings, and such as are disagreeable to their
circumstances, that they are in the most rigorous Trials of pure Love, while
they are yet only in such Temptations as are very natural, which they draw on
themselves by a lazy wandering and sensual Life. The Trials we Speak of here,
are only the Portion of Souls already perfected, both in outward and inward
Mortification, who have learned nothing by premature Readings, but by the sole
Experience of Gods Conduct toward them, who breath nothing but Candor and
Docility, who are always ready to think that they are deceived; and ought to
enter upon the common way again: These Souls do not recover their peace in the
midst of their Temptations, by any of the ordinary helps, at least while they
are held with the Grace of pure Love. Nothing but a faithful cooperation with
the Grace of this pure Love can becalm their Temptations, and thereby their
Trials are distinguished from the common ones: The Souls that are not in this
state, shall infallibly fall into horrid excesses, if you go about to blame
them contrary to their necessities in the simple acts of pure Love, and those
who were under the Attractive Power of pure Love, shall never be pacified by
the ordinary practices of interested Love. Whoever resisted God and had Peace?
But to make a true Judgment of Souls that are so nice, and under such important
circumstances, Spirits ought to be tried to know whither they come from God or
no.

To Speak thus, is to Speak with all the necessary precaution in a matter where
our care cannot be too great, and it is at the same time to admit all the
Maxims of the Saints.

XVII. False.
THe Simple, Peaceable, and uniform exercise of pure love is the only remedy
that one ought to employ against the Temptations incident to every condition.
One may suppose, that all Trials do tend to the same end, and have need of the
same Remedy. All the practices of interested love, and all the acts excited by
this motive are good for nothing but to fill Man with Self-love, and to add to
the Temptation.

To Speak at this rate, is to confound all that which the Saints have so
carefully separated: It is to love seduction and run after it; it is to jogg
Souls into a precipice, by taking from them all the springs of their present
grace.

XVIII. ARTICLE. True.
THe Will of God is always our only rule, and Love is wholly reduced to a Will,
willing of nothing else but what God himself Wills, and makes the Soul to Will.
But there are several sorts of Wills in God, viz. his positive and written
Will, which commands what is good, and Prohibits what is evil. This is the only
invariable rule of our Wills, and of all our voluntary Actions. There is the
Will of God which is manifested to us by the inspiration or attraction of that
Grace which is in all Just Men. This Will of God must always be supposed to be
entirely conformable to the written Will, and it is not lawful to believe, that
it can exact of us any other thing but the faithful accomplishing of the
Precepts and Counsels comprehended in the Law. The Third Will of God, is, a
Will of simple permission, and is that which suffers Sin without approving of
it. The same Will which permits it, condemns it: It does not positively
permit it* but only by giving way to the Commission of it, and not hindering it:
This permissive Will is never our Rule. It would be an impiety to will our Sin,
under pretense that God wills it permissively. 1. It is false that God
wills it. It Is true, only that he has not a positive Will to hinder it. 2.
At the same time that he has not a positive Will to hinder it, he has an
actual and positive Will to condemn and to punish it, as being essentially
contrary to his immutable holiness to which he owes all. 3. One ought never to
suppose God's allowance of Sin, but that after it is unfortunately committed,
and when it cannot be helped, that what is done should be not done: Then we
ought to conform our selves at one and the same time to the two Wills of God:
According to the one, we are to condemn and punish that which he condemns and
would punish, and according to the other, we ought to will the confusion and
abjection of our selves, which is not a Sin, but rather a Penance and remedy of
Sin it self; because this wholesome confusion, and this abjection which carries
in it self all the bitterness of a potion, is a real good which God has been
positively willing to draw from Sin, though he never positively wills Sin it
self. This is to love the Remedy that is drawn from Poison, without loving
Poison.

XVIII. False.
WE ought to conform our selves to all the Wills of God, and to his permissions
as to all his other Wills: We ought therefore to permit Sin in our selves, when
we know God is about to permit it. We ought to love our Sin though contrary to
God, by reason of its abjection, which purifies our love, and takes from us all
pretense and desert of a reward. Lastly, the attraction or inspiration of
Grace, requires from Souls, in order to render them more disinterested for the
Eternal reward, the breaking of the Written Law.

To Speak at this rate, is to Teach Apostasy, and to put the Abomination of
Desolation in the most holy place; it is not the Voice of the Lamb, but of the
Dragon.

XIX. ARTICLE. True.
VOcal, without Mental Prayer, that is to say, without the attention of the
Mind, and the Affection of the Heart, is a Superstitious Worship, which
honors God with the Lips while the Heart is far from him. Vocal Prayer, is
not good and meritorious, but in as much as it is directed and animated by that
of the Heart: It is much better to recite but a few Words, with great
recollection and Love, than long Prayers, with little or no recollection, when
they are not Commanded. To Pray both without attention and Love, is to Pray as
the Heathens did, who thought to be heard for the Multitude of their Words. One
Prays no further than one desires, and one does not desire but by how much one
loves at least with an interested Love. Nevertheless, Vocal Prayer ought to be
respected and consulted, as being good to awake the Thoughts and the Affections
which it expresses, as having been taught by the Son of God to his Apostles,
and practiced by the whole Church in all Ages. To make light of this Sacrifice
of Praises, this fruit of the Lips that does confess the Name of the Lord,
would be an impiety. Vocal Prayer may be troublesome for a while, to those
Contemplative Souls who are yet in the imperfect beginnings of their
Contemplation, because their Contemplation is more sensible and affecting than
pure and quiet. It may be also burdensome to Souls who are in the last Trials,
because every thing in that state disturbs them: But one ought never to give
them for a rule, to forsake without the permission of the Church, and without a
true impotency known to be so by their Superiors, any Vocal Prayer which is
obligatory. Vocal Prayer taken with simplicity, and without scruple, when it is
according to the Command, may well be troublesome to a Soul, in relation to
those things we have already noted: But it is never contrary to the highest
Contemplation. Experience even shows that the most Eminent Souls in the midst
of their most sublime Communications, have familiar Communications with God,
and that they read or recite with a loud Voice, and in a kind of Transport,
some inflamed Words of the Apostles and Prophets.

To Speak so, is to explain the soundest Doctrine with the most correct Words.

XIX. False.
VOcal Prayer, is nothing but the gross and imperfect Doctrine of beginners: It
is entirely unprofitable to Contemplative Souls: They are by the eminency of
their state dispensed with, as to the reciting of Vocal Prayers Commanded them
by the Church, because their Contemplation eminently comprehends what is more
edifying in the different parts of Divine Worship.

To Speak at this rate, is to despise the Reading of the Scriptures; it is to
forget that Christ has Taught us Vocal Prayer, which contains the perfection
of the highest Contemplation: It is to be ignorant, that pure Contemplation is
never perpetual in this Life, and that in its intervals, one may and ought to
recite faithfully the Office which is Commanded, and which of it self is so apt
to nourish in our Souls the Spirit of Contemplation.

XX. ARTICLE. True.
REading ought not to be done either out of Curiosity, or desire of judging of
our State, or deciding it according to what we Read, nor out of a certain
relish of what we call Witty and sublime. We ought not to read the most holy
Books, nor even the Scriptures, but with dependency upon the Pastors and
Directors, who are in their stead. It Is they who are to judge whither each
faithful Christian is prepared enough, if his Heart is sufficiently purified
and Docible for each different Reading: They ought to distinguish the Food that
is agreeable to every one of us in particular. Nothing causes so much illusion
in the interior Life, as the indiscreet choosing of Books. It Is best to Read
little, and make long interruptions by way of recollection, that we may let
Love more deeply to imprint in us the Christian truths. When recollection
causes our Book to drop out of our hands, we must let it fall without scruple:
We shall take it up again time enough afterward, to renew in its turn our
recollection.

Love Teaching by its Unction, surpasses all the rational discourse we can make
upon Books. The most powerful of all persuasions is that of Love: Nevertheless,
we must take in hand again the outward Book, when the inward Book cease to be
open: Otherwise the empty Spirit would fall into a rambling and imaginary
Prayer, which would be a real and pernicious idleness. This would bring a Man
to neglect his own instruction about necessary truths, and forsake the Word of
God, and never to lay solid foundations both of the exact understanding of the
Law, and of revealed Mysteries.

To Speak thus, is to Speak according to Tradition, and to the Experience of
holy Souls.

XX. False.
THe Reading of the most holy Books is unprofitable to those whom God teaches
entirely and immediately by himself. It Is not necessary that such persons as
these should have laid the foundation of common instruction: They need only to
wait for all the light of truth that does arise from their Prayer. As for their
Readings, when they are moved to any, they may choose without consulting with
their Superiors, such Books which Speak of the most advanced states. They may
Read the Books that are suspected or censured by their Pastors.

To Speak at this rate, is to destroy instruction which is the food of Faith:
It is to substitute instead of the pure Word of God, an interior Fanatical
inspiration. On the other side, it is to permit Souls to Poison themselves with
contagious Readings, or at least such as are disproportionate to their true
needs: It is to teach them dissimulation and disobedience.

XXI. ARTICLE. True.
WE ought to distinguish between Meditation and Contemplation: Meditation,
consists in discursive acts that can be easily distinguished, the one from the
other; because they are distinguished by a kind of a noted motion; because they
are varied by the diversity of Objects they are applied to; because they draw a
conviction concerning the truth of the conviction of another truth already
known; because they draw an affection from several Motives methodically
assembled: Lastly, because they are done and reiterated with a reflection, that
leaves behind it distinct Footsteps in the Brain. This Composition of
discursive and reflex acts, is proper for the exercise of interested Love, by
reason that this imperfect Love which does not drive out fear, has need of two
things: One is to recall often all the interested Motives of fear and hope: The
other, to make ones self sure of its operation, by acts well marked and well
reflected: So discursive Meditation is an exercise agreeable to this Love, that
is mixed with interest. Fearful and interested Love could never be satisfied
with forming simple acts in Prayer, without any variety of interested Motives:
It could never be satisfied with doing acts whereof it should never render any
witness to it self. On the contrary, Contemplation is according to all the most
Celebrated Divines, and the most Experienced Contemplative Saints, the exercise
of perfect Love: It consists in acts so simple, so direct, so peaceable, so
uniform, that they have no characters whereby a Soul may distinguish them. It
is the perfect Prayer whereof S. Anthony spoke, and which is not perceived by
the solitary himself who makes it. Contemplation, is equally authorized by the
Ancient Fathers, the School Doctors, and by holy mystical Men: It is termed a
simple and amorous Sight, to distinguish it from Meditation, which is full of
methodical and discursive Acts. When the Habit of Faith is strong, when it is
perfected by pure Love, the Soul who does love God no more, but for himself,
has no further need to seek for, nor to gather interested Motives upon each
Virtue, for her own Interest: Rational Discourse, instead of helping her, is
but Trouble and Labor to her; she is all for Love, and finds the Motive of all
Virtues in it, there being no more for her to do, but one necessary thing: It Is
in this pure Contemplation that one may say with S. Francis of Sales: Love must
needs be very powerful, since it stands by itself, without the Support of any
Pleasure, or of any Pretension. (Love of God, L. 9. C. 21.)

Affecting and discursive Meditation, though less perfect, than pure and direct
Contemplation, is nevertheless an Exercise very acceptable to God, and very
necessary to the greatest part of good Souls: It is the ordinary Foundation of
the Interior Life, and the Exercise of Love for all just Men, who are not
arrived yet, at what we call perfect Disinterest.

It has made, at all times, a great number of Saints: 'Twould be a scandalous
Rashness, to take Souls off from it, under pretense of introducing them into
Contemplation. There is even often in the most discursive Meditation, and much
more in affectionate Prayer, certain peaceable and direct Acts, which are a
mixture of imperfect Contemplation.

To speak so, is to speak conformable to the Spirit of Tradition, and to the
Maxims of Saints, that are most free from Innovation and Illusion.

XXI. False.
MEditation is but a dry and barren Study; its discursive and reflex Acts are
but a Labor in vain, which tires the Soul, instead of nourishing it; its
interested Motives bring forth nothing but an Exercise of Self-love: There is
no going forward that way; good Souls, with all speed, must be taken off from
it, to make them pass into Contemplation, where Acts are quite out of Season.

To speak at this rate, is to discourage Souls from God's Gift; it is to turn
into a slight the very Foundations of the inward Life; it is to go about to take
away what God gives, and to persuade one to reckon rashly upon that which he is
not pleased to give; it is to snatch away the Suckling Child from the Breast,
before he can digest solid Food.

XXII. ARTICLE, True.
A Soul may leave discursive Meditation, and enter into Contemplation, when she
has the three following Marks: 1. When she draws no longer from the
Meditation, that interior Food which she found in it before; but on the
contrary, a mere distraction, dryness, and languor, in her attraction. 2. When
she finds no facility, no occupation, and inward nourishment, but in a simple
and purely amorous Presence of God, whereby she is renewed in all the Virtues
agreeable to her State. 3. When she has neither relish, nor inclination, but
for recollection; so that her Director, who makes a Trial of her, finds her
humble, sincere, teachable, taken off from the whole World, and from herself. A
Soul may by Obedience, that is endued with these three Marks of Vocation, enter
into a contemplative Prayer, without tempting God.

To speak so, is to follow the ancient Fathers, such as be S. Clement of
Alexandria, S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Augustine, Pope S. Gregory, Cassian, and
all the Ascets; S. Bernard, S. Thomas, and all the Schoolmen: It Is to speak as
the most holy mystical Men have done, who are most opposite to Illusion.

XXII. False.
ONE may lead a Soul into Contemplation, without these three foregoing Marks:
It Is enough that Contemplation is perfecter than Meditation, to prefer it
before the other. It Is to amuse Souls, and to make them languish in an
unfruitful Method, if you don't put them at the very first, into the Liberty of
pure Love.

To speak at this rate, is to overturn the Church Discipline; it is to slight
the Spirituality of the Holy Fathers; it is to give the Lie to all the Maxims of
most mystical Saints; it is to precipitate Souls into Error.

XXIII. ARTICLE True.
DIscursive Meditation is not convenient for those Souls whom God draws
actually into Contemplation, by the three Tokens above related, and who would
not return to the discursive Acts, but out of a scrupulous Temper, and with a
desire to seek their own Interest, against the actual attraction of their Grace.

To speak thus, is to speak as the blessed John of the Cross, (in the lively
Flame of Love, Cant. 3.) who only in these strict Circumstances calls
Meditation, a low Means, and dirty Means: It Is to speak, as all mystical Saints
have done, that have been Canonis'd, or Approved by the whole Church, after the
most rigorous Examination.

XXIII. False.
AS soon as one has begun Contemplation, he ought never more to return to
Meditation: This would be a falling back, and to decay. It Is better to expose
one self to all sorts of Temptations, and to interior Idleness, than to
reassume discursive Acts again.

To speak at this rate, is to be ignorant that the passage from Meditation to
Contemplation, is that of interested Love, to pure Love; that this passage is
ordinarily long, unperceptible, and mixed with these two States; as the Shades
in matter of Colors are an insensible passage from one Color to another, in
which both of them are mixed: It Is to contradict all good mystical Men, who say
with Father Balthazar Alvarez, that one ought to take the Oar of Meditation,
when the Wind of Contemplation does not strike into the Sails; it is often to
deprive Souls from the only Food God leaves them.

XXIV. ARTICLE, True.
THere is a State of Contemplation so high, and so perfect, that it becomes
habitual, insomuch, that at any time when a Soul puts herself to actual Prayer,
her Prayer is contemplative, and not discursive: Then she has no need to
return to Meditation, nor to her Methodical Acts. Nevertheless, if it should
happen against both the ordinary Course of Grace, and the common Experience of
Saints, that this habitual Contemplation should absolutely cease, one ought
always to supply the deficiency of it, by the Acts of discursive Meditation,
because a Christian Soul ought never to remain really in Emptiness and
Idleness. One ought even to suppose, that a Soul that should fall from so high
a Contemplation, could not do so, but by some secret Infidelity: For the Gifts
of God, on his part, are never repented of; he forsakes none but those by whom
he is forsaken, and never diminishes his Graces, but to those who diminish
their Cooperation: It Is our only Business, to persuade that Soul, that it is
not God who fails her, but that it must needs be she herself that has failed
God. A Soul of this Rank might also be put again into Meditation by the Order
of a Director, who was minded to try her; but then she ought by the Rule both
of holy Indifference, and of Obedience, to be as contented to mediate, as
Beginners do, as to contemplate with the Cherubims.

To speak so, is to follow the Spirit of the Church, and to prevent all Dangers
of Illusion. It Is to speak as the greatest Saints, whose Books have been, I may
say so, as well Canonised as their Persons.

XXIV. False.
IT IS better to remain in an absolute Unaction, than to take that which is less
perfect, for that which is more perfect: The habitual State of Contemplation is
so invariable, that it ought never to be supposed, that one can fall from it by
a secret Infidelity.

To speak at this rate, is to inspire Men with a rash Assurance; it is to cast
Souls into a manifest danger of going astray.

XXV. ARTICLE. True.
THere is in this Life an habitual State, but not wholly invariable, in which
the most perfect Souls do all their free Actions in the Presence God, and for
his sake, according to the Words of the Apostle, Let all your Works be done in
Charity. And again, Whether you eat or drink, or do any thing else, let it be
done for the Glory of God. This referring all our free Actions, to our only
End, is that perpetual Prayer recommended by Christ, when he will have our
Prayer to be without ceasing; and by S. Paul, when he says, Pray without
intermission: But this Prayer ought never to be confounded with pure and direct
Contemplation; or taken, as S. Thomas speaks, in the most perfect Acts. That
Prayer which consists in a referring to God all our Actions, may be perpetual
in one Sense; that is to say, it may last as long as our free Acts. In this Case
it is never interrupted, but by Sleep, and the other Deficiencies of Nature,
which make all free and meritorious Acts to cease. But pure and direct
Contemplation has not even this kind of Perpetuity; because it is often
interrupted by the Acts of distinct Virtues necessary to all Christians, and
which are not Acts of pure and direct Contemplation.

To speak so, is to take off all Equivocation, in a matter where it is so
dangerous to make any; it is to hinder Mystical People, not well instructed in
the Doctrine of Faith, from representing their State, as if they were no more
in the Pilgrimage of this Life. Finally, it is to speak as Cassian, who says
in his first Conference, That pure Contemplation is never absolutely perpetual
in this Life.

XXV. False.
PUre and direct Contemplation, is in some Souls absolutely perpetual; Sleep
itself does not interrupt it; it consists in a simple and singular Act, which
is permanent, which has no need of ever being reiterated, and subsists always
by itself, unless recalled by a contrary Act.

To speak at this rate, is to deny the Pilgrimage of this Life, the natural
Swoundings of the Soul, and the State of Sleep, wherein the Acts are no longer,
either free or meritorious: It Is at the same time to give way to a
contemplative Soul, to dispense with those necessary Virtues of her State,
which are not Acts of pure and direct Contemplation: It is to be ignorant, that
every Act, both of the Understanding, and of the Will, is essentially
transitory; this is to oblige Men in loving God, during ten Moments, to make
ten successive Acts of Love, one of which is not the other; one whereof should
never follow the other; one of which is so past, that nothing remains of it,
when the other that was not, begins to be. Lastly, It is to speak after a
manner as extravagant, according to the first Principles of Philosophy, as
monstrous according to the Rules of Religion.

XXVI. ARTICLE. True.
DUring the Intervals which interrupt pure and direct Contemplation, a very
perfect Soul may exercise distinct Virtues, in all her free Acts, with the same
Peace and Purity, or Disinterest of Love, whereby she contemplates, while the
Attraction of Contemplation is actual. The same Exercise of Love, which is
called Contemplation, or Quietness, where it remains in its general Scope, and
is not applied to any particular Function, becomes each distinct virtue,
according as it is applied to particular Occasions: For it is the Object, as S.
Thomas speaks, which specifieth all Virtues: But pure and peaceable Love,
remains always the same, as to the Motive in all these different Specifications.

To speak thus, is to speak as the most exact and cautious Schools have done.

XXIV. False.
PUre and direct Contemplation is without any Interruption, so that it leaves
no Interval in the Exercise of those distinct Virtues that are necessary to all
States. All the free Acts of the Life of a contemplative Person, are concerned
in Divine Things, which are the exact Object of pure Contemplation; and this
State does not admit on the side of the Objects to whom Love is applied, any
Distinction, or Specification of Virtues.

To speak at this rate, is to destroy all the most interior Virtues; it is to
contradict, not only all the Tradition of holy Doctors, but also the most
experienced mystical Men; it is to oppose S. Bernard, S. Theresa, and the
blessed John of the Cross, who by their particular Experiences, do limit pure
Contemplation to half an Hour, thereby giving us to understand, that it is
confined to some Bounds.

XXVII. ARTICLE. True.
PUre and direct Contemplation is negative, because it is never voluntarily
conversant about any sensible Image, any distinct and namable Idea, as S.
Dionisius speaks; that is to say, about any particular and limited Idea,
relating to the Divine Nature; but that it passes over all that is sensible
and distinct; that is to say, comprehensible, and limited, to stop only in the
Idea that is purely intellectual, and abstracted from the Being which is
without limits and restriction. This Idea, though very different, from all that
can be imagined and comprehended, is, however, very positive and real. The
simplicity of this purely immaterial Idea, and which has not passed through
the Senses, and by the Imagination, does not hinder, but Contemplation may have
for distinct Objects, all the Attributes of God; for the Essence, without the
Attributes, would be no longer the Essence it self, and the Idea of an
infinitely perfect Being, essentially comprehends in its simplicity, the
infinite Perfections of that Being. This simplicity, does not hinder the
Contemplative Soul to Contemplate even distinctly the Three Divine Persons,
because an Idea let it be never so simple, can nevertheless, represent diverse
Objects really distinguished one from the others. Finally, this simplicity does
not exclude the distinct sight of the Humanity of Jesus Christ, and of all his
Mysteries, because pure Contemplation admits of other Ideas with that of the
Divinity: It admits of all the Objects which pure Faith can set before us: It
excludes nothing in Divine things but sensible Images and Discursive
Operations. Though the Acts tending directly and immediately to God alone, be
more perfect, being taken on the part of the Object, and in a Philosophical
strictness; they are nevertheless as perfect on the part of the pinciple,
that is to say, as pure, and as meritorious, when they have for Objects the
Objects offered by God himself, and wherewith one is conversant, only by the
impression of his Grace. A Soul in this state, considers no longer the
Mysteries of Jesus Christ, by a Methodical and sensible working of the
imagination, to imprint signs of it upon the Brains, and to be comfortably
softened by them: She is no longer Conversant about it, by a Discursive
Operation, and successive Reasoning, to draw conclusions from each Mystery: But
she sees with a simple and Amorous sight, all the diverse Objects as certified
and made present by pure Faith. Thus the Soul can exercise in the highest
Contemplation Acts of the most explicit Faith. The Contemplation of the
Blessed in Heaven being purely intellectual, has for distinct Objects all
these Mysteries of the Humanity of our Savior, whose Graces and Victories they
do sing. So much the more reason there is that the most imperfect Contemplation
of the Pilgrimage of this Life can never be altered by the distinct sight of
all these Objects.

To Speak thus, is to Speak according to all Tradition, and as all good
Mystical Men have been pleased to Speak.

XXVII. False.
PUre Contemplation excludes all image, that is to say, all that Idea which is
even merely intellectual. A Contemplative Soul, admits of no real and positive
Idea of God, that distinguishes him from all other beings. She ought to see
neither the Divine Attributes which do distinguish him from all Creatures, nor
the Three Divine Persons, for fear of altering the simplicity of her sight. She
ought yet less to employ her self about the Humanity of Jesus Christ, since
that is not the Divine Nature; nor about his Mysteries, because they would
multiply too much Contemplation. The Souls that are in this state, have no
further need to think on Jesus Christ, who is but the way to come to God his
Father, because they are already arrived at the end.

To Speak at this rate, is to be ignorant of all that good, Mystical Men
themselves have been pleased to say, of the purest Contemplation: It is to
annihilate Faith, without which, Contemplation it self is annihilated: It Is to
make a chimerical Contemplation, which has no real Object, and cannot
distinguish God from nothing: It is to destroy Christianity, instead of
purifying it: It is to make a kind of Deism, which next moment terminates into
a kind of Atheism, whereby all real Idea of God as distinguished from his
Creatures is rejected. Finally, it is to set up two impious Opinions: The first
is, to suppose, that there is upon the Earth some Contemplative Person, who is
no longer a sojourner, and who has no further need of the way, because he is
arrived at the end. The second is to be ignorant that Christ who is the way, is
no less the Truth and the Life; that he is as much the finisher as the Author
of our Salvation. Finally, that the Angels themselves in their most sublime
Contemplation have desired to see his Mysteries, and that the Blessed Sing
incessantly, the Song of the Lamb before him.

XXVIII. ARTICLE. True.
COntemplative Souls are deprived of the distinct sensible and reflected sight
of Jesus Christ, at two different times; but they are never deprived for ever
in this Life of the simple and distinct sight of Jesus Christ: First, in the
prime fervor of their Contemplation, this exercise is yet very imperfect, not
representing God but in a very confused manner. The Soul being as it were
swelled up with the sensible Pleasure of her recollection, cannot yet be
conversant about distinct sights. These distinct sights would cause in her a
kind of distraction in her weakness, and cast her again into the reasoning of
Meditation, out of which, she is scarcely departed. This impotency of seeing
distinctly Jesus Christ, is not the perfection, but rather the imperfection of
this exercise, for it is then more sensible than pure. Secondly, a Soul loses
the sight of Christ in the last Trials, because God at that time takes away
from the Soul the possession and reflected knowledge of all that is good in
her, to purify her from all Self-interest. In this state of unvoluntary
darkness and trouble, the Soul looses no more the sight of Christ than of God.
But all these losses are but in appearance and transient; after which, Christ
is no less restored to the Soul than God himself. Besides these two cases, the
most elevated Soul may in the actual Contemplation be possessed of Christ, made
present to her by Faith; and in the intervals where pure Contemplation cease,
she is yet possessed of Jesus Christ. It will be found by Experience, that
these Souls which are most Eminent in Contemplation, are those that are most
possessed of him: They Speak with him every Hour, as the Bride with her
Bridegroom: They often see nothing but him in themselves: They bear
successively deep impressions of all his Mysteries, and of all the states of
this Mortal Life. True it is, that he becomes something so intimate in their
Heart, that they use themselves to look on him less as a foreign and external
Object, than as the internal principle of their Life.

To Speak thus, is to repress the most Damnable Errors: It Is clearly to explain
the experiences and expressions of Saints, which Souls given over to illusion
might abuse.

XXVIII. False.
COntemplative Souls have no more any need to see distinctly the Humanity of
Jesus Christ, because they are arrived at the end. The Flesh of Christ is no
more an Object worthy of them, and they know him no more in the Flesh, even as
made present by pure Faith: They are no more possessed of him out of actual
Contemplation, than in pure Contemplation it self. God whom they in supreme
simplicity do possess is enough for them. They ought not to concern themselves
either about the Divine Persons, or the Attributes of the Divine Nature.

To speak at this rate, is to take away the corner Stone: It is to snatch from
the Faithful Eternal life, which consists wholly in knowing the only true God
and Jesus Christ his Son, whom he has sent. It Is to be that Antichrist who
rejects the Word made Flesh: It is to deserve the Anathema pronounced by the
Apostle against those who shall not love the Lord Jesus.

XXIX. ARTICLE. True.
IT may be said that positive Contemplation is infused, because it prevents the
Souls with a sweetness and Peace greater yet than do the other graces which
prevent the common sort of Just Men. It is a grace more freely given than all
the others given for Merit, because it works in Souls the most pure and
perfect Love. But passive Contemplation is neither purely infused, since it is
free and meritorious, nor merely free, since the Soul co-operates with Grace in
it: It is not miraculous, since according to the Testimony of all the Saints it
consists only in an Amorous knowledge, and that Grace without a Miracle is
sufficient for the most lively Faith, and the most purified Love. Lastly, this
Contemplation cannot be Miraculous, since it is supposed to consist in a state
of pure and dark Faith, in which the faithful is not led by any other light but
that of simple revelation, and of the Authority of the Church common to all
Just Men. It Is true, that several Mystical Writers have supposed this
Contemplation to be Miraculous, because in it is Contemplated a Truth, that
has not been received in by the senses and through the imagination. This true
also, that these Writers have acknowledged a bottom of the Soul which did work
in this Contemplation, without any distinct Operation of the faculties. But
these two things had only their Origin from Scholastic Philosophy, whereof
these Mystical Men were preconceited. All this great Mystery vanishes away,
as soon as one supposes with S. Augustine, that we have without Miracle,
intellectual Ideas which have not passed through the senses, and when it is
supposed on the other side, that the bottom of the Soul is not really
distinguished from her powers. Then all passive Contemplation is reduced to
some thing very simple and which has nothing miraculous: It Is a chain-work of
Acts of Faith and of Love, so simple, so direct, so peaceable, and so uniform,
that they don't seem to do more than one only Act, or even that they don't seem
to do any Act at all, but a repose of pure Union. This is the reason why S.
Francis of Sales will not have it called Union, for fear of expressing a motion or
action toward uniting, but a simple and pure unity. Hence it comes, that some
as S. Francis of Assisium in his great Song, have said, that they were able no
longer to perform any acts; and that others as Gregory Lopez, have said that
they did a continual Act during their whole life. Both the one and the other by
expressions seemingly opposite mean the same thing. They do no more any eager
acts and marked by an unquiet motion. They produce Acts so peaceable and so
uniform, that these Acts though very successive and even interrupted, do seem
to them one only Act without interruption, or a continual rest. Hence it is,
that this Contemplation has been called silent or quiet Prayer. Hence it is
Finally, that it has been called passive: God forbid! it should ever be called
so, to exclude from it the real, positive, and meritorious Action of the
Free Will, or the real and successive Acts which ought to be reiterated every
moment. It is called Passive only to exclude the Activity or interested
eagerness of Souls, when they will yet agitate themselves in order to feel and
see their operation, which should be less marked were it both more simple and
more united. Passive Contemplation is nothing else but pure Contemplation: The
Active is that which is mixed with forward and discursive Acts. So when
Contemplation has yet a mixture of interested forwardness, which is called
Activity, it is yet Active* When it has further remains of this Activity, it
is entirely Passive, that is to say, Peaceable and uninterested in its Acts. In
fine, the more the Soul is Passive toward God, the more Active is she in that
which she ought to do: That is to say, that the more she is supple and pliant
to the Divine impulse, the more efficatious is her motion, though without self
agitation: For it is always equally true, that the more the Soul receives from
God the more ought she to restore to him of what she has from him. This ebbing
and flowing makes up all the order of Grace and all the fidelity of the
Creature.

To speak so, is to prevent all illusion; it is to explain the bottom of Passive
Contemplation, which cannot be denied without a notorious rashness, and cannot
be carried further without extremity of danger: It Is to disintricate whatever
the Saints have said in terms, which by the subtilty of some Divines have been
somewhat darkened.

XXIX. False.
PAssive Contemplation is purely Passive, so that the Free Will co-operates no
more therein, with Grace by any real and transient Act. It is purely infused
and entirely a free gift, and without Merit on the part of the Soul. It is
miraculous, and draws while it lasts a Soul from the state of pure and dark
Faith. It is a possession and a supernatural rapture which prevents the Soul.
It is an extraordinary inspiration that puts the Soul out of the common rules.
It is an absolute binding or evacuation of the powers, so that both the
understanding and the will are then in an absolute impotency to any thing,
which without doubt is a miraculous and extatick suspension.

To speak at this rate, is to overturn the System of pure Faith, which is that
of all good mystical Men, and especially of the Blessed John of the Cross: It Is
to confound Passive Contemplation, which is free and meritorious, with gifts
merely free and extraordinary, and which as we are advised by the Saints, ought
never voluntarily to possess us. It is to contradict all Authors, who place
this Contemplation in a free, amorous, and meritorious look; and consequently
in the real but simple Acts of these two Powers: It Is to contradict S. Theresa
herself, who assures us, that the Seventh mansion has none of the raptures,
which do suspend against the order of nature, the operations of the
understanding and of the will. It Is to oppose all the Eminent Spiritual
Persons, who have said that these suspensions of natural operations are so far
from being a perfect state, that on the contrary, they are a sign that nature
is not yet enough purified, and that such effects as these do cease, by how
much the more the Soul is purified and grown more familiar with God, in the
state of pure Faith. It is to confound the trouble which a pure Soul should be
at in making unquiet and reflected Acts for her self-interest, against the
actual attraction of Grace, with an absolute impotency of performing Acts even
by a natural endeavor. A mistake in this matter may be in some an inexaustible
source of illusion, and in others an ill grounded occasion of offense.

XXX. ARTICLE, True.
THE Passive state, whereof mystical Saints have so often spoken, is Passive
only so far as Contemplation is Passive, that is to say, that it excludes not
peaceable and disinterested Acts, but only the Activity, or the Acts that are
unquiet and froward for our self-interest. A Passive state is that wherein a
Soul loving no more with a mixed love, makes all her Acts with a full and
efficacious, but peaceable and uninterested will. Sometimes she makes simple
and indistinct Acts, which are called quietude and Contemplation, and some
other times she makes distinct Acts of Virtues agreeable to her state. But she
makes the one and the other no way equally Passive, that is to say, peaceable
and uninterested. This state is habitual, but not wholly invariable. For
besides that the Soul may fall absolutely from it, moreover, she commits
venial faults in it. This Passive state supposes no extraordinary inspiration:
It includes nothing but a peace and infinite pliantness of the Soul to all the
impressions of Grace. A dry and very light feather, (as Cassian says;) is
carried away without resistance, by the least breath of Wind, and this
breathing carries it all sorts of ways with celerity; whereas, if it was wet
and heavy, it would be by its weight less apt to be moved and carried about.
The Soul in interested love which is the less perfect, has yet a remnant of
interested fear which makes her less light, less pliant and moveable, when the
breath of the interior Spirit carries her: A troubled Water cannot be clear,
nor receive the Image of the nearest Objects; but that which is untroubled,
becomes as a real Looking-Glass; it receives without alteration, all the Images
of diverse Objects, and yet retains none. A pure and peaceable Soul, is the
same; God imprints in her his Image, and that of all the Objects he is minded
to imprint in her. All is imprinted, and all blotted out: This Soul has not
any proper Form, but has equally all those which Grace gives to her; nothing
remains in her, but all vanishes away, as in Water, as soon as God will make
new Impressions: Nothing but pure Love gives this Peace and perfect Docility.
This passive State is not a continual actual Contemplation: Contemplation,
which lasts only for some limited time, makes only part of this habitual State.
Uninterested Love, ought not to be less uninterested, nor consequently less
peaceable, in the Acts that are Distincts from Virtues, than in the indistinct
Acts of pure Contemplation.

To speak so, is to take away all Equivocation, and to admit a State which is
nothing else but the Exercise of pure Love, so Authorized by all Tradition.

XXX. False.
A Passive State consists in passive Contemplation, which is perpetual, and
this passive Contemplation, is a kind of a continual Ecstasies, or miraculous
binding of the Powers, which puts them under a real Impotency of free Operation.

To speak at this rate, is to confound the passive State, with passive
Contemplation: It is to suppose a State of miraculous and perpetual Ecstasies,
excluding all ways of Faith, all Freedom, all Merit, and Demerit; nay,
incompatible with the Pilgrimage of this Life: It is to be ignorant of the
Experiences of the Saints, and to pervert all their Ideas.

XXXI. ARTICLE. True.
THere is in the passive State, a Simplicity and Childhood noted by the Saints;
but the Children of God, who are simple in Things that are good, are always
prudent against any thing that is evil: They are sincere, ingenuous, peaceable,
and without Designs: They don't reject Wisdom, but only the Propriety of
Wisdom: They disappropriate their Wisdom from themselves, as they do all their
other Virtues: They make a faithful Use every moment, of all the natural Light
of Reason, and of all the supernatural Light of actual Grace, to guide
themselves according to the written Law, and a true Decorum. A Soul in this
State, is wise, neither by a forward seeking after Wisdom, nor by an interested
Reflection upon herself, in order to assure herself that she is wise, and to
enjoy her Wisdom as her own: But without minding to be wise in herself, she is
so in God, by admitting wilfully none of the froward and irregular Passions,
either of Humor, or of Self-love; and by making use, without Property, as well
of the natural, as of the supernatural Light of the present Moment. This
present Moment has a kind of a Moral Extension, wherein ought to be included
all those things which have a natural and near relation to the thing, which is
actually in hand. Thus sufficient to the Day, is the Evil thereof, and the Soul
leaves to Morrow, to take Care of itself, because that to Morrow, which is not
yet hers, shall bring with it, if it comes, its Grace and Light, which is the
daily Bread. Such Souls as these do deserve and draw on themselves a special
Care of Providence, under whose Care they live, without a far extended and
unquiet Forecast, as little Children in the Bosom of their Mother. They do not
possess themselves as those who are wise in themselves, against the Prohibition
of the Apostle: But they let themselves to be possessed, instructed, and moved,
upon every occasion, by the actual Grace of God. These Souls do not think
themselves extraordinarily inspired; they think on the contrary, that they may
deceive themselves by Mistakes, which to avoid, they judge almost of nothing;
they willingly receive Correction, and have neither Sense nor Will: These are
the Children whom Christ will have let to come near him: They have with the
Simplicity of the Dove, all the Prudence of the Serpent; but a borrowed
Prudence, which they do no more own, than I do appropriate the Beams of the Sun
to my self, when I walk in its Light: These are the Poor in Spirit, whom Christ
Jesus has declared blessed, and who are as much taken off from their
Perfections, as all Christians ought to be from their Temporal Possessions.
These are the Little Ones to whom God is well pleased, to reveal his Mysteries,
while he hides them from the Wise and Prudent.

To speak so, is to speak in Conformity to the Spirit of the Gospel, and of all
Tradition.

XXXI. False.
REason is a false; we ought to act, and never to consult it; we ought to
trample under foot all Decency, follow without hesitation all first Motions,
and suppose them Divine: We ought to cut off, not only unquiet Reflections, but
also generally all Reflections; not only forward and remote Forecasts, but also
all Foresights. It is not enough, not to be wise in one self, one ought to
abandon one self so far, as never to watch over one self with a simple and
peaceable Vigilance, and not to let fall the eager Motions of Nature, to
receive only those of Grace.

To speak at this rate, is to believe that Reason, which is the first of God's
Gifts, in the Order of Nature, is an Evil, and consequently to renew the
foolish impious Error of the Manicheans; it is to be willing to change
Perfection into a continual Fanaticism, and to tempt God every Minute of one's
Life.

XXXII. ARTICLE. True.
THere is in the passive State, a Liberty of the Children of God, which has no
relation to the unbridled License of the Children of this World: These simple
Souls are no more tormented, by the Scruples of those who fear and hope for
their own Interest. Pure Love gives them a respectful Familiarity with God, as
that of a Bride with the Bridegroom; they have a Peace and Joy full of
Innocence; they take with simplicity, and without hesitation, the needful
Refreshments of Mind and Body, as they would persuade their Neighbors to the
same; they speak of themselves without any positive Judgment, but out of mere
Obedience, and real Necessity, as Things appear to them at that moment; they
speak then of them, either as good or bad as they would speak of another,
without any Headiness in what they think, or any Love for the good Opinion
which their most simple and modest Words might create in them of themselves;
and acknowledging always, with an humble Joy, that if there is any Good in
them, it comes from God alone.

To speak thus, is to relate the Experiences of Saints, without offending the
Rule of Evangelical Manners.

XXXII. False.
THE Liberty of passive Souls is grounded upon an Innocence of
Disappropriation, which makes pure in them whatsoever they are prompted to do,
though never so irregular and inexcusable in others: They have no longer any Law,
because the Law is not established for the Righteous, provided he does
appropriate nothing to himself, and acts nothing for himself.

To speak at this rate, is to forget that it is said, That if the written Law
is not for the Righteous, it is because an inward Law of Love prevents always
the outward Precept, and that the great Commandment of Love contains all the
others: It Is to turn Christianity into an Abomination, and to make the Gentiles
to blaspheme the Name of God; It Is to give up Souls to a Spirit of Falsehood and
of Giddiness.

XXXIII. ARTICLE. True.
THere is in the passive State, a Reunion of all the Virtues in Love, which
never excludes the distinct Exercise of each Virtue: It Is Charity, as says S.
Thomas, after S. Augustine, which is the Form and Principle of all Virtues:
That which distinguishes or specifieth them, is the particular Object which
Love does embrace. The Love which abstains from impure Pleasures is Chastity,
and this very same Love, when it bears Evils, takes the Name of Patience: This
Love without going out of its Simplicity, becomes, by Turns, all different
Virtues; but it admits of none as being a Virtue; that is to say, either
Fortitude, Greatness, Beauty, Regularity, or Perfection. A disinterested Soul,
as S. Francis of Sales, (12. Discourse of Simplicity) has observed it, loves
no longer the Virtues, either because they are handsome and pure, nor because
they are worthy to be beloved, or as beautifying, and perfecting those that do
practice them; or because they are meritorious, and prepare Men for an Eternal
Reward; but only because they are the Will of God: A disinterested Soul, as
this great Saint said of Mother Chantal (Life of Mad. of Chantal, p. 246.) does
not wash away her Faults, for to be pure; and does not adorn herself with
Virtues, for to be beautiful; but for to please her Spouse, to whom if Ugliness
had been as acceptable, she would have loved it as much as Beauty. Then it is,
that we do practice all distinct Virtues, without thinking that they are
Virtues; then we think on nothing every Moment, but to do the Will of God, and
jealous Love causes, at the same time, that we desire no more to be virtuous,
seeing that we are never more virtuous, than when we are no more pleased to be
so. It may be said in this Sense, that passive and uninterested Love, will no
more, even Love itself, as being her Perfection and Happiness, but only as it
is that which God does require of us. Therefore S. Francis of Sales says, that
we return into our selves, loving that Love instead of the well Beloved. (Love
of God, l. 9. c. 9.) This Saint in another place says, that we ought not so
much as to desire the Love of God, as it is our good. Lastly, to give to this
Truth all the strictness that is necessary, this Saint says, that we ought to
endeavor to seek in God nothing but the Love of his Beauty, and not the
pleasure which is felt in the Beauty of his Love. This distinction will appear
subtle to those whom unction has not yet taught; but it is confirmed by the
Tradition of all Saints from the beginning of Christianity, and it ought not to
be despised without making light of the Saints, who have placed the perfection
of a Soul in this so nice a jealousy of Love.

To speak thus, is to repeat what holy mystical Men have said, after both S.
Clement and the Ascetes upon the Cessation of Virtues, and which ought to be
explained with infinite precaution.

XXXIII. False.
IN the Passive slate, the distinct practice of Virtues is out of season,
because pure Love, which contains them all in its quietude dispenses
absolutely with Souls in this exercise.

To speak at this rate, is to contradict the Gospel: It is to lay a stone of
scandal in the way of the Children of the Church: It is to give them the name
of the Living while they are Dead.

XXXIV. ARTICLE. True.
SPiritual Death, whereof so many mystical Saints have spoken after the
Apostle, (who says to the Faithful, ye are Dead,) is nothing but the entire
purification and disinterest of Love; so that the unquietness and frowardness
which do proceed from an interested Motive do not weaken the operation of
Grace, and that Grace does work in a manner entirely free: Spiritual
resurrection is nothing else but the habitual state of pure Love, which we do
ordinarily attain to after the trials designed for its purification.

To speak so, is to speak as the greatest Saints and most cautious mystical Men
have done.

XXXIV. False.
SPiritual Death, is an entire extinguishing of the Old Man, and of the last
sparks of Concupiscency: Then one has no more need even of the peaceable and
disinterested resistency to natural motions, nor of cooperation to any
medicinal Grace of Jesus Christ. Spiritual Resurrection is the entire
consummation of the New-Man in the Age and plenitude of the perfect Man as in
Heaven.

To speak at this rate, is to fall into an Heresy and impiety, which is to the
ruin of all Christian manners.

XXXV. ARTICLE True.
THE state of transformation whereof so many both Ancient and modern Saints
have so often spoken, is nothing but the most Passive state, that is to say, the
most free of all Activity or interested unquietness. The Soul being peaceable
and equally pliant to all the subtilest impulses of Grace, is like a Globe upon
a ground-plot, that has no more any proper and natural Situation, but goes
equally all sorts of ways, and the most insensible impulses is enough for to
move it. In this state a Soul has but one only Love, and knows nothing else
but to Love. Love is her Life, it is as it were her being and substance, for it
is the sole principle of all her Affections. As this Soul gives to her self not
any froward motion, does nothing unseasonably in the hand of God her own
disposer; so she feels no more but one motion, viz. that which is imprinted in
her, even so as a Man carried by another feels no other impulse but this, if so
be that he does not discompose it by a contrary agitation: Then the Soul says
with S. Paul; I live, but it is not I, but Christ Jesus, who lives in me.
Christ does manifest himself in his Mortal Flesh, as the Apostle will have him
to manifest himself in us all. Then the image of God darkened and almost blotted
out in us by Sin, is imprinted again and yields a new similitude which is
called transformation. Then when this Soul speaks of herself by a simple
Conscience, she says with S. Catherine of Genoa: I find no more of my self;
there is no other self in me but God. If on the contrary, she seeks herself by
reflection, she hates herself as being something without God; that is to say,
she condemns the my self, as it is separated from the pure impression of the
Spirit of Grace, as this same Saintess did with horror. This state is neither
fixed nor invariable. It Is true only, that one ought not to believe that the
Soul does fall from it, without any infidelity, because the gifts of God are
without Repentance, and Souls faithful to their Grace shall suffer no
diminution of them. But in short, the least hesitation or the most subtle
complaisance may render a Soul unworthy of so eminent a Grace.

To speak so, is to admit of the terms consecrated both by Scripture and
Tradition: It Is to follow diverse Ancient Fathers, who have said, that the Soul
was transformed and deified. It is to explain the expressions of* the most
authorized Saints. It is to keep up the Doctrine of Faith in its integrity.

XXXV. False.
TRansformation, is a deification of the Soul, real, and by nature, or an
hypostatick Union, or a conformity unto God, which is unalterable, and
dispenses with the Soul from watching over Herself, under pretense that there
is no more in her of any other Self but God.

To speak at this rate, is to utter horrid Blasphemies; it is to be willing to
transform Satan into an Angel of light.

XXXVI. ARTICLE. True.
TRansformed Souls have ordinarily no need of certain orderly Dispositions
either for times or for places, nor express forms, nor methodically set
practices for their interior exercises. The great habit of their familiar
Union with God gives them an easiness and simplicity of amorous Union, which is
incomprehensible to the Souls of an inferior state, and this example would be
very Pernicious to all the other less advanced Soul, which have need yet of
regular practices to support themselves. Transformed Souls ought always, though
without any troublesome rule, one while produce with simplicity indistinct Acts
of quietude or pure Contemplation, and another while distinct, but peaceable
and disinterested Acts of all Virtues suitable to their state.

To speak so, is correctly to explain the expressions of good mystical Men.

XXXVI. False.
TRansformed Souls have no more need to exercise virtues in the abstracted
cases, either of Precept or of Counsel, except at those times they may be in an
absolute emptiness and internal unaction. They need only follow their Palate,
their inclinations, and first natural motions. Concupiscency is extinguished in
them, or in a suspension so insensible, that we ought not to think any more
that it may ever be awakened on a sudden.

To speak at this rate, is to lead Souls into Temptation; it is to fill them
with a fatal Pride; it is to teach the Doctrine of Devils; it is to forget that
Concupiscence is always either acting, or relented, or suspended, but ready to
awake on a sudden in our Body, which is that of Sin.

XXXVII. ARTICLE. True.
THE most transformed Souls have still their free Will, whereby they are in a
Capacity of committing Sin, as well as the first Angel, or the first Man.
Moreover, they have the bottom of their Concupiscence, though the sensible
Effects thereof may remain relented, or suspended, by Medicinal Grace. These
Souls may sin mortally, and go astray in a terrible manner: They commit even
Venial Sins, for which they say unanimously with the whole Church: Forgive us
our trespasses, etc. The least Hesitation in Faith, or the least interested
Return upon Themselves, might drain up their Grace: They ought, in Answer to
the Jealousy of pure Love, to shun the smallest Faults, as all just Men
usually do avoid the greatest Sins: Their Vigilance, though simple and peaceable,
ought to be by so much the more piercing, as pure Love, in its Jealousy, is
more clearsighted, than interested Love, with all its Commotions and Troubles:
These Souls ought never either to judge, or to excuse themselves, unless it be
out of Obedience, and to remove some Scandal, nor justify themselves by a
deliberated and reflected Testimony, though the intimate bottom of their
Conscience, reproaches them with nothing: They ought to be contented to be
judged by their Superiors, and obey blindly in every Point.

To speak so, is to speak according to the true Principles of all Mystical
Saints, and without Offense to Tradition.

XXXVII. False.
TRansformed Souls are not any more free for to Sin; they have no more any
Concupiscence, all that in them is, is Motion of Grace, and extraordinary
Inspiration: They can no more pray with the Church, saying every Day: Forgive
us our Offenses, etc.

To speak at this rate, is to fall into the Error of the false Gnostics,
renewed by the Beggards, condemned at the Council of Vienna, and by the
Illuminated of Andalousia, condemned in the last Age.

XXXVIII. ARTICLE, True.
TRansformed Souls may profitably, and ought even in the present Discipline, to
confess the venial Faults they are aware of in themselves: They ought in
Confession to detest their Faults, condemn Themselves, and desire the Remission
of their Sins, not for their own Cleansing, and Deliverance, but as a thing
which God does will, and which he will have us to will for his Glory: Though a
disinterested Soul does not wash her self from her Faults, now for to be pure,
as we have seen it in S. Francis of Sales; but that she would love Impurity, as
much as Beauty, if it were as acceptable to her Spouse; she knows nevertheless,
that Purity and Beauty are the Delight of her Spouse; therefore she only loves
for his good Pleasure, Purity and Beauty, and rejects with Horror the Ugliness
he rejects. When a Soul is truly, and actually in pure Love, there is no fear
but in the actual Confession of her Sin, she is in the actual Condemnation of
what she has committed against the Well-beloved, and consequently in the most
formal, most pure, and most efficacious Contrition, though she produces not
always sensible Acts of it, in an expressed and reflected Form. If venial
Faults are blotted out in an instant, by the simple reciting of the Lord's
Prayer, as S. Austine assures us in general of just Men, though imperfect: So
much the more are they blotted out likewise, in the transformed Souls by the
Exercise of the most pure Love: It Is true, that one is not obliged to make
equally always frequent Confessions, when the enlightened Director has Reason
to fear, least they should cast one into Despair, or be turned into a mere
Habit, or should become an unlading of the Heart, and an ease for Selflove,
more afflicted for not seeing himself entirely perfect, than faithful, in being
willing to do Violence to himself for his Amendment; or because these frequent
Confessions disturb too much some Souls, and employ them too much about their
State, in some transient Pains; or because they don't see in themselves any
voluntary Fault committed since their last Confession, which may appear to the
Confessor a sufficient Matter of Sacramental Absolution, after they have cast
themselves at his Feet, for to lay their Submission in the Power and Judgment
of the Church.

To speak so, is to speak a Language conform to the Experiences of Saints, and
to the Needs of several Souls, without offending the Principles of Tradition.

XXXVIII. False.
COnfession is a Remedy belonging only to imperfect Souls, and which advanced
Souls ought not to make use of, but for outward appearance, and for fear of
offending the Public; either they never commit any Faults which deserve
Absolution; or they ought not to be watchful with the peaceable and
uninterested Vigilance of pure and jealous Love, to perceive whatever in them
may grieve the Holy Spirit; neither are they any more obliged to Contrition,
which is nothing else but jealous Love hating with a perfect Hatred, whatsoever
is contrary to the good Pleasure of the Well-beloved; nor should they think
themselves guilty of an Infidelity, against the Disinterest of Love, and
perfect Abnegation, should they ask both with Heart and Mouth, the Remission of
their Sins, which God, however, will have them to desire.

To speak at this rate, is to take off from these Souls the true Exercise of
that pure Love of the Supreme Good, which ought to be on this occasion the
actual Condemnation of Evil itself; it is to remove Souls, both from the
Sacraments, and Church Discipline, by a rash and scandalous Presumption: It Is
to inspire them with Pharisaical Pride; it is, at least, to teach them to make
their Confessions, without Vigilance, Attention, and Sincerity of Heart, when
they ask with the Words of their Mouths, the Remission of their Faults: It Is to
introduce into the Church, an Hypocrisy, which makes any Illusion uncurable.

XXXIX. ARTICLE. True.
SOuls in the first sensible Attraction which makes them pass to Contemplation,
have sometimes a Prayet which seems to bear no Proportion with some gross
Faults that remain yet in them, and this disproportion makes some Directors to
judge, that they have not got Experience enough, that their Prayer is false and
full of Illusion, as S. Theresa says it happened to her. The Souls exercised by
extraordinary Trials, show sometimes there upon transient Occasions, an
irregular Spirit, weakened by the Excess of Pain, and a Patience almost
exhausted, as Job did appear imperfect and impatient in the Eyes of his
Friends: God leaves often to even transformed Souls, notwithstanding the Purity
of their Love, certain Imperfections, which proceed more from a natural
Infirmity, than from the Will, and which are according to the thought of Pope
S. Gregory, the contrapoise of their Contemplation, as the pricks of the flesh
were in the Apostle the messenger of Satan to hinder him from growing Proud of
the greatness of his revelations. Lastly, these imperfections which are not any
violation of the Law, are left in a Soul, to the end, that one may see in her
the tokens of the great work which Grace has of necessity made in her. These
infirmities serve to depress her in her own eyes, and to keep the gifts of God
under a Veil of infirmity, which exercises the Faith of that Soul, and of the
Just persons that know her. Sometimes also they serve to draw on her Contempt
and Crosses, or to make her more Docile to her superiors, or to take from her
the comfort of being approved and assured in her way as it happened to the
Blessed Theresa, with incredible pains; Finally, to keep the secret of the
Bride and of the Bridegroom, hidden from the wise and prudent of this World.

To speak so, is to speak conformable to the experiences of Saints without any
offense to the Evangelical Rule, because the Directors who have experience, and
the Spirit of Grace are not without ability to judge of the Tree by the Fruits,
which are Sincerity, Teachableness, and freedom of the Soul, upon the chiefest
occasions. Moreover, there will be still other tokens, which the Unction of
God's Spirit shall give sufficiently to be felt, if the state of each Soul be
patiently looked into.

XXXIX. False.
ONE may reckon a Soul as Contemplative, and even as transformed, though she is
found for some considerable time, negligent of her instruction concerning the
principles of Religion, careless of her duty, wandering and unmortified, always
quick in excusing her own faults, unteachable, haughty, or cunning.

To speak after this rate, is to authorize in the most perfect state the most
dangerous imperfections: it is to cover under the cloak of an extraordinary
state, defects that are most incompatible with true Piety: it is to approve the
grossest illusions: it is to invert the rules whereby Spirits ought to be tried,
to know whither they come from God or no: it is to call evil good, and draw upon
ones self the woes of Scripture.

XL. ARTICLE. True.
A Transformed Soul is united to God, without the interposition of any medium,
three sorts of ways. 1. When she loves God for himself, without any medium of
interested motive. 2. When she contemplates him without any sensible image, or
discursive operation. 3. When she fulfills his Precepts and Counsels, without
any set order of forms, whereby to give to her self an interested witness.

To speak thus, is to express what holy mystical Men would say, by excluding
from this state the practices of Virtue; and this explication is nothing
offensive to Universal Tradition.

XL. False.
A Transformed Soul is united to God without any medium, either by the Veil of
Faith, or the infirmity of the Flesh since the fall of Adam, nor by the
medicinal Grace of Jesus Christ, by whom alone one may in every state go to the
Father.

To speak at this rate, is to renew the Heresy of the Beggards Condemned by
the Council of Vienna.

XLI. ARTICLE. True.
THE Spiritual Wedding uniteth immediately the Bride to the Bridegroom, essence
to essence, substance to substance, that is to say, will to will, by that
entirely pure Love so often mentioned. Then God and the Soul make no more but
one and the same Spirit; as the Bride and the Bridegroom in Marriage are made
but one Flesh. He who adheres to God, is made one and the same Spirit with him,
by an entire conformity of the will which is the work of Grace. The Soul is
then fully satiated and in a Joy of the Holy Ghost, which is the bud of
Celestial happiness. She is in an entire purity, that is to say, without any
defilement of Sin (except those daily Sins which the exercise of Love can
immediately blot out) and consequently she may without Purgatory, be admitted
into Heaven, which no unclean thing can enter into; for Concupiscence which
remains always in this life, is not incompatible with this entire purity, since
it is neither Sin nor a spot in the Soul: But this Soul has not her Original
integrity, being not exempt either from daily faults or from Concupiscency
which are incompatible with their integrity.

To speak so, is to speak with the Salt of Wisdom, wherewith all our Words
ought to be seasoned.

XLI. False.
THE Soul in this state has her Original integrity; she sees God face to face,
she does enjoy him as fully as the Blessed.

To speak at this rate, is, to fall into the Heresy of the Beggards.

XLII. ARTICLE. True.
THE Union called by mystical Men essential and substantial, consists in a
simple and disinterested Love, which fills all the affections of the whole
Soul, and which is exercised by Acts so peaceable and so uniform, that they
seem to be but one, though they be several really distinguished Acts. Several
mystical Writers have termed these Acts essential or substantial, to
distinguish them from Acts that are froward, unequal, and made as it were by
the outgoings of a Love which is yet mixed and interested.

To speak so, is to explain the true sense of mystical Writers.

XLII. False.
THis Union becomes really essential, between God and the Soul, so that nothing
is capable either to break or to alter it any more. This substantial Act is
permanent and indivisible as the substance of the Soul it self.

To speak at this rate, is to teach an extravagancy as much contrary to all
Philosophy, as to Faith, and to the true practice of Piety.

XLIII. ARTICLE. True.
GOD who conceals himself from the Wise and great ones, reveals and
communicates himself to the little ones, and to the simple. The transformed
Soul is the Spiritual Man S. Paul speaks of, that is to say, a Man acted and led
by the Spirit of Grace in the way of pure Faith. This Soul has often both by
Grace and by experience for all things of simple practice in the trials and
exercise of pure Love, a knowledge, which the Learned who have more science and
humane Wisdom than experience and pure Grace, have not. She ought nevertheless
to submit with heart as well as mouth, not only to all the decisions of the
Church, but also to the Conduct of her Pastors, as having a special Grace
without exception to lead the Sheep of the flock.

XLIII. False.
THE transformed Soul is the Spiritual Man of S. Paul, so that she may judge of
all the truths of Religion, and be judged by no body. She is the Seed of God
that cannot Sin. Unction teaches her all; so that she has no need of being
instructed by any body, nor to submit to superiors.

To speak at this rate, is to abuse the passages of Scripture and turn them to
ones ruin. It Is to be ignorant, that Unction which teaches all, teaches
nothing so much as obedience, and suggesteth all truth of Faith and of
practice, only by inspiring the Ministers of the Church with an humble
Docility. In a word, it is to establish in the midst of the Church a Damnable
Sect of Fanatics and Independents.

XLIV. ARTICLE. True.
THE Pastors and Saints of all Ages have used a kind of an Economy and secret
in not speaking of the rigorous trials, and of the most sublime exercise of
pure Love, but to those Souls to whom God had given already both attraction and
light to it. Though this Doctrine was the pure and simple perfection of the
Gospel, noted throughout the whole body of Tradition, the Ancient Pastors
proposed usually to the generality of Just Men, no other than the practice of
interested Love, in proportion to their Grace, and thus gave Milk to Infants,
while they distributed Bread to strong Souls.

To speak thus, is to say what S. Clement, Cassian, and diverse other, Holy
Authors, both Ancient and Modern, do constantly affirm.

XLIV. False.
THere has been in all Ages, among those that live Contemplative Lives, a
secret Tradition, and such as has been unknown, even to the body of the Church
her self. This Tradition, would include secret Opinions, beyond the truths of
universal Tradition; or these Opinions at least would be contrary to those of
the common Faith, and would exempt Souls from exercising all those Acts of an
explicit Faith and dislimited Virtue, which are no less essential to the ways
of pure Love, than to that which is interested.

To speak thus, is to annihilate Tradition, instead of multiplying it. It is
the way to make a sect of secret Hypocrites in the Bosom of the Church,
without her being ever able to discover them, or to free her self from them.
Hereby the impious secret of the Gnostics and Manicheans will be revived, and
all the Traditions of our Faith and Morals undermined.

ART. XLV. True.
ALL the Internal ways that are most eminent, are so far from being above an
habitual state of pure love, that they are but the way to arrive at that bound
of all perfection; all inferior degrees do not come up to this true estate.
The last degree which Mystic Writers call by the name of Transformation, or
Essential Union, without any Medium, is no more than a simple reality of this
love without a peculiar interest. This when true, is the most safe state,
because it is the most voluntary and meritorious of all the states of Christian
Justice; and because it is that which referrs all to God, and leaves nothing to
the Creature. But on the contrary, when it is false and imaginary, it is the
height of illusion. The Traveller after many Fatigues, Dangers, and
Sufferings, arriving at length upon the top of a Mountain, from thence discerns
at a distance his Native City, and the end of his Journey, and all his toils,
he is presently overjoyed at it, believes himself to be already at the very
gates of that City, and that there is nothing now remaining but a little way,
and that very good for him; but as he moves forwards, the lengths and
difficulties which he had not foreseen at first sight, do proportionably
increase, he must be obliged to descend by Precipices into deep Valleys, where
he loses the sight of that City, which he thought he could almost touch. He
must be forced oftentimes to creep up over sharp Rocks, and it is not without
great trouble and dangers that he arrives at last at that City, which he
thought at first to have been so near him, and so easy to come at. It Is the
very same thing with that Love which is entirely disinterested; the first cast
of the Eye discovers it in a wonderful perspective; one thinks he has hold of
it, he supposes with himself that he is already confirmed therein, or at least
that there is between him and it but a short and even space; but the more he
advances toward it, the more tedious and painful he finds the way. There is
nothing so dangerous for a Man as to flatter himself with this pretty Idea or
Conceit, and to believe that he lives in the practice of the same, when it is
not really so. He that makes this Love to be speculative, would fret himself to
a Skeleton, if God should put him to prove how this Love does purify and
realize it self in the Soul. In short, he must have a care of believing that he
has the same in reality, when he only has a view of it, and is charmed with
it. That Soul which dares presume by a decisive reflection that he is arrived
to it, shows by his presumption how remote he is from it; the small number of
those that have reached it, do not know whether they are really so; and as
often as they do reflect upon themselves in relation to it, they are ready to
believe it is not so with them, when their Superiors declare the same unto
them: They speak of themselves as of another person, in a dis-interested
manner, and without reflection, and act with simplicity, by a pure obedience,
according to true necessity, without ever voluntarily judging or reasoning
concerning their state. In short, though it be true to say, that no man can set
exact bounds to the operations of God in the Soul, and that there is none but
the Spirit of God that can sound the depths of this same Spirit; yet it is also
true to say, that no internal perfection can allow a Christian to dispense with
those real acts that are essential to the accomplishment of the whole Law; and
that all perfection reduces it self to this habitual state of sole and pure
love, which effects in these Souls, with a dis-interested Peace, all that which
a mixed love does in others, with some remains of an interested eagerness. In a
word, there is nothing but a peculiar interest that cannot, and which ought not
at all to be found in the exercise of dis-interested Love; but all the rest is
there still in a more abundant manner than ordinarily in just Persons.

For us to speak with this precaution, is to confine our selves within the
bounds set us by our Fathers; this is a Religious observance of Tradition, and
hereby is a relation given, without any mixture of innovation, of the
Experiences of the Saints, and the Language they have used in speaking
sometimes of themselves, with simplicity and pure Obedience.

XLV. False.
TRansformed Souls are capable of judging themselves and others, or to be
assured of their internal Gifts, without any dependence upon the Ministers of
the Church, or else direct themselves without any Character, without an
extraordinary Call, and even with marks of an extraordinary Vocation against
the express Authority of Pastors.

To talk in this manner, is to teach an innovated Doctrine full of
Profaneness, and to attack one of the most essential Articles of the Catholic
Faith, which is that of an entire subordination of Believers to the Body of
Pastors, to whom Jesus Christ said he that hears you, hears me.

The Conclusion of all these Articles.
HOly indifference is nothing else but disinterested Love; Trials are nothing
else but the Purification of it; the abandoning of the same is but its exercise
in Trials. The disappropriating of Virtue, is nothing, besides the laying aside
of all Complaisance, all Consolation, and all Self-Interest in the exercise of
Virtue by pure Love. The retrenching of all activity, implies no more than the
retrenching of all inquietude and interested eagerness for pure Love.
Contemplation is but the plain Exercise of this Love reduced to one simple
Motive. Passive Contemplation is but pure Contemplation without activity or
eagerness. A Passive state, whether it be in a time bounded with pure and
decent Contemplation, or in those Intervals wherein a Man does not at all
Contemplate, does exclude neither the real Action, nor the successive Acts of
the Will, nor the specific distinction of Virtue, as they relate to their
proper Subjects, but only simple activity, or interested inquietude; it is a
peaceable Exercise of Prayer and Virtue by pure Love. Transformation and the
most essential or immediate Union, is nothing but the Habit of that pure Love,
which, of it self, makes up all the internal Life, and then becomes the only
Principle and Motive of all the deliberate a^^ meritorious Acts; but this
habitual State is never fixed, unvariable, nor unliable to be lost. The true
love of that which is right, says Leo, carries in it self Apostolic
Authorities and Canonical Sanctions.

THE Lord Archbishop of Cambray 's LETTER TO THE POPE.
Most Holy Father,
I have resolved, with utmost expedition, as well as with all manner of
submission and respect to your Holiness, to send the Book that I wrote some
time since concerning the Maxims of the Saints, in relation to an internal
Life. It Is a duty which I am obliged to pay, not only to the Supreme Authority,
with which you preside over all the Churches, but also to those Favors you
have been pleased to heap upon me. But to the end that nothing may be omitted
in a matter of such importance, and concerning which, Men's Minds are so tossed
about and agitated, and for removing any Equivocations that might arise from
the diversity of Languages, I have undertaken to make a Latin Version of my
whole Work, to which I apply my self wholly, and will very quickly send this
Translation to be laid down at your Holiness his Feet.

I would to God, most Holy Father, I could, my self in person, bring you my
Book, with a zealous and submissive heart, and then receive your Apostolical
Benediction; but the Affairs of the Diocese of Cambray, during the misfortune
of the War, and the instruction of the young Princes, which the King has done
me the honor to entrust me with, will not allow me room to hope for this
Consolation. And now, most Holy Father, I come to give the Reasons that have
induced me to write concerning the internal Life and Contemplation. I have
observed, That some Persons abusing the Maxims of the Saints, that have been so
often approved of by the Holy See, thought by little and little to insinuate
pernicious Errors thereby, and that others who knew nothing of spiritual
things, turned the same into a Ridicule. The abominable Doctrine of the
Quietists, under the appearance of Perfection, glided secretly into diverse
parts of France, and even into our Low Countries. Several Writings, whereof
some were too Uncorrect, as others might be justly suspected of Errors, stirred
up the indifferent Curiofity of the Faithful against them. Some Ages ago,
diverse mystical Writers arraigning the Mystery of the Faith in a pure
Conscience, had favored the same, yet not knowing the Error concealed under
it; this they did out of an excess of warm Piety, want of precaution in the
choice of Terms, made use of by them, and a pardonable ignorance of the
Principles of Theology. This is that which has inflamed that ardent Zeal of
diverse illustrious Bishops, and this gave them an occasion to Compose Thirty
Four Articles, which they were pleased to draw up and lodge with me. This also
has brought them to Censure certain little Books, some Passages of which being
taken in the sense that does naturally arise from them, have deserved to be
condemned. But, most Holy Father, Men have not removed far from one Extreme,
without falling into another; some persons have taken occasion against our
intention, to Ridicule, as an extravagant Chimera, the pure love of a
Contemplative Life. For my own part, I thought, by taking diligent heed to an
exact medium, it was the way to separate Truth from Error, and that which is
Ancient and Stanch, from what is new and dangerous; this is that which I have
endeavored to do according to my weak Abilities; but to know whether I have
succeeded therein or no, is left, most Holy Father, to your Judgment, and it is
my business respectfully to give ear to St. Peter as living and speaking in
you, whose Faith shall never fail.

I have chiefly applied my self to make this Work concise, and therein have
followed the Advice of very knowing Persons, who have desired that a ready and
an easy remedy should be found out, not only against the Illusion which is
Contagious, but also against the scoffing of profane Persons. Great regard
then was to be had for those Souls that are full of Candor, who being more
simple in that which is good, than precaution'd against Evil, could not discern
that horrible Serpent that was hid under the Flowers; regard also must have
been had to the Contempt of Critics, who would not separate the Ascetick or
studious Traditions and precious Maxims of the Saints from the vile Doctrine of
Hypocrites. Wherefore it has been thought necessary to make a kind of a
Dictionary of Mystical Theology, in order to prevent good Souls from passing
beyond those Bounds set unto us by our Fathers.

I have therefore, in as short a Style as possibly I could, comprised the
Desinitions of those Terms which the Practice of the Saints have Authorized. I
have also employed the weight and authority of a Censure, to endeavor to crush
down a Heresy so full of Impudence; it appeared to me, most Holy Father, as
some sort of undecency, that a Bishop should expose those Monstrous Errors to
the Public, without testifying, at the same time, the indignation and horror
which the Zeal of God's Cause had inspired him with against it. Nevertheless, I
pray God that I may not have lost the sight of my own weaknesses, and spoken
any thing presumptuously.

The supreme Authority of the Holy See has abundantly supplied all my Defects;
the Sovereign Pontiffs, upon a scrupulous examination of all the Writings of
the Saints, which have been Canonized, have, upon all occasions, approved of
the true Maxims of the Ascetick or studious Life, and contemplative Love.
Wherefore having kept close to that immutable Rule, I hope I have without any
danger of going out of the way, fitted up the Articles, which I have asserted
as true ones. As to those false ones which I have Condemned, I have been led
thereunto, as it were, by the Hand; for I have, in every thing, taken the
Solemn Decrees, by which the Holy See has Condemned the Sixty Eight
Propositions of Molino's, for my Model therein. And so having such an Oracle
for my Foundation, I have endeavored to lift up my Voice to speak.

In the first place I have Condemned the permanent Act, which has never any
occasion to be reitterated, as being a Poisoned Spring of Idleness and inward
Lethargy.

In the next place I have Established the indispensible necessity of a distinct
Exercise of every Virtue.

Thirdly, I have resisted a perpetual and uninterrupted Contemplation, which
would exclude Venial Sins; the distinction of Virtue and unvoluntary
distractions, as being incompatible with the Condition of a Traveller.

Fourthly, I have rejected passive Prayer, which would exclude the real
Cooperation of Free Will for the formation of Meritorious Actions.

Fifthly, I have allowed of no other Rest, neither in Prayer, nor in other
Exercise of the Internal Life, save that peace of the Holy Ghost, whereby the
most pure Souls frame their Actions in so uniform a manner, that they appear to
Persons without Knowledge, not as distinct Acts, but a simple and permanent
Unity with God.

Sixthly, For fear that the Doctrine of pure Love, so much Authorized by so
many Fathers of the Church, and other Saints, might serve as an Azilum or
Refuge to the Quietists, I have set my self chiefly to show, that in what
degree of Perfection soever it may be, and how great the Purity of Love
wherewith one is filled, may arrive to, yet he must always retain in his Heart,
the Hope wherewith we are saved, in pursuance to what the Apostle says
concerning Faith, Hope and Charity: Now these three things, Faith, Hope, and
Charity remain, but Charity is the greatest.

We must therefore always hope for, desire and pray for our Salvation, since
it is God's will it should be so, and that he requires that we should will it
for his glory; thus Hope preserves it self in its proper Exercise, not only by
the means of the infused Habit, but also by its own proper Acts, which being
commanded and enobled by Charity, as the Schools phrase it, they are most
absolutely carried to the sublime end of the same Charity, which is nothing
else but the pure glory of God.

Seventhly, This state of pure Charity is not to be found but in a very few
perfect Souls; and that it is there only in an habitual manner. When I say
habitual, God forbid that an unamissible state, or such as is exempted from any
variation should be meant. If this estate be still subject to daily Sins, with
how much more reason is the same compatible with Acts performed from time to
time, which cease not to be good and meritorious, though they may be a little
less pure and disinterested. It Is enough for this State, that the Acts of
Virtue are performed therein very frequently with that perfection that Charity
diffuses there, and with which the same are animated.

All these things are agreeable to our thirty four Articles. I shall join to
the Book which I have published, most Holy Father, a Collection in Manuscript,
of the Sentiments of the Fathers and Saints of the last Age, concerning the
Pure Love, of Contemplatives; to the end that that which is but plainly set out
in the First Book, may be proved in the Second, by the Testimonies and Opinions
of the Saints of all Ages. I entirely submit, Most Holy Father, both the one
and the other Pieces, to the Judgment of the Holy Roman Catholic Church, who
is the Mother Church of all, and has taught all the rest. I devote all that is
mine, and my self, to your Holiness, as a Son ought to do, that is full of Zeal
and Respect toward you. But if my Book in French has been already brought
unto your Holiness, I most humbly entreat you, most Holy Father, to decide
nothing concerning it, 'till such time as you have seen my Latin Version, that
will be dispatched away with all speed. There is nothing now remaining for me,
save to wish a long Pontificate to the chief of Pastors who Rules the Kingdom
of Christ with so disinterested an Heart, and who says, with so much applause
from all the Roman Catholic Nations, to his Illustrious Family, I know you
not. In doing thus daily, I think I seek the Glory and Consolation of the
Church, the Re-establishment of its Discipline, the propagation of the Faith,
the Extirpation of Schisms and Heresies; and lastly, an abundant Harvest in the
Field of the Sovereign Father of the Family. I shall for ever, etc.

The Lord Archbishop of Cambray 's Letter of August the 3d, 1697.
SIR,
BE not concerned for me, the business of my Book is gone to Rome; if I am
under a mistake, the Authority of the Holy See will undeceive me; and this is
that I wait for with a gentle and lowly Mind; if I have illy expressed my self,
they will reform my expressions: If the matter appears to require a more large
explication, that I will readily do by way of Additions. If my Book contains
nothing in it, but what is pure Doctrine, I shall have the consolation to know
exactly what a Man ought to believe, and what to reject. I shall not in this
Case fail to make all those Additions, which, without weakening the truth, will
be conducive to enlighten and edify such Readers as are most subject to take
the allarm. But, Sir, in short, if the Pope condemns my Book, I shall be the
first, God willing, that will condemn it, and put out a Mandate to forbid the
reading of it in the Diocese of Cambray. I shall only entreat the Pope to do me
the favor, exactly to note those passages he condemns, and the sense whereon
he grounds his Condemnation; to the end that I may subscribe thereunto without
restriction, and that I may never run the risque of defending, excusing, or
tolerating the sense its condemned in. Being thus disposed, through the blessing
of God, I am at rest, and have nothing to do but to wait the disposition of my
Superior, in whom I acknowledge the Authority of Jesus Christ to be lodged;
disinterested Love must not be defended but with a sincere disinterest. We have
not to do herein with a point of Honor, nor with the Opinion of the World, nor
yet with that profound humiliation, wherein Nature may fear to meet with ill
success. I think I act with integrity, I am as much afraid of being
presumptuous, and possessed with a base shame, as to be feeble, politic and
fearful in the defense of truth. If the Pope condemns me, I shall be thereby
undeceived, and the vanquished shall reap all the real fruits of the Victory.
Victoria scedet victis, says St. Augustine. But if, on the other side, the
Pope does not condemn my Doctrine, I shall endeavor both by my silence and
respect, to pacify those of my Fraternity, whose Zeal has animated them
against me, by laying a sort of Doctrine to my charge, which I abhor, and
always did, as much as they do. Perhaps they will do me justice, when they see
my sincerity. There are but two things that my Doctrine was intended to
comprehend; the first whereof is, that Charity is a love to God sor his own
sake, distinct from that motive of blessedness that we find in him. Secondly,
that Charity in the life of the most perfect Souls, is that which precedes all
other Virtues, which animates them, and commands the acts so as to make them
bear to its end; insomuch that the Just thus qualified, do then ordinarily
exercise hope, and all other Virtues with all the disinterest of Charity it
self; because this same state of the Soul is not without its exception; being
no other than an habitual one, and not immutable. God knows I have never
intended to teach any thing else that exceeded these limitations. And hence it
is that I have said, in my speaking concerning pure Love, which is Charity, so
far as it animates and commands all other distinct Virtues. Whoever allows of
nothing beyond that, is within the confines of Tradition, whoever passes those
bounds, is already out of the way. I do not think there is any danger that the
Holy See should condemn a Doctrine so well grounded upon the Authority of the
Fathers, of the Schools, and of so many great Saints that the Church of Rome
has Canonized. As for the manner of Expressions contained in my Book, if they
should be any ways prejudicial to truth, for want of being correct, I consign
them to the judgment of my Superior: and I should be very sorry to trouble
the repose of the Church, were there no more in it than the interest of my
Person, and of my Book. These are my thoughts of the matter, Sir, I go for
Cambray, having Sacrificed unto God with my whole heart all that I could
Sacrifice to him thereupon; permit me to exhort you to be of the same mind; I
have introduced nothing that related to Humane Affairs and Temporals into the
Doctrine which I was convinced of the truth of; neither have I forbore to let
the Pope know any of those Reasons that could support this Doctrine. This is
enough, let God do the rest; if it be his Cause that I have vindicated, let us
not be concerned at the intentions of Men, or their proceedings; it is God
alone that is to be looked* to in all this; let us be the Children of Peace,
and Peace will rest upon us; it will be bitter, but the same will be so much
the more pure. Let us not spoil good intentions by an humor, by any Heat, by
any Humane Industry, by any Natural Impression for the justifying of our
selves. Let us plainly give an account of our Faith; let us suffer our selves
to be Corrected if there be need of it, and let us endure Correction, when we
do not even deserve the same. As for you, Sir, you ought to have no other
portion therein, than Silence, Submission, and Prayer. Pray for me that am
under such pressing difficulty, pray for the Church that undergoes these
Scandals; pray for those who rise up against me; to the end that they may be
endued with the Spirit of Grace, in order to undeceive me, if I Am in the
wrong, or to do me justice if I am otherwise. Lastly, pray for the interest of
Prayer it self, which is in danger, and stands in need of being justified.
Perfection is become very suspicious, they are not for removing it so far from
lazy Christians, and such as are full of self. Disinterested Love would appear
to be the Spring of Illusions and abominable Wickedness; they have accustomed
Christians under pretense of safety and precaution to seek after God no other
way than by the motive of their blessedness, and advantage to themselves. Those
Souls that have made most proficiency, are forbid to serve God by the pure
motive, whereby hitherto it has been wished that Sinners themselves would
return from their Errors, I mean the goodness of the infinitely amiable God. I
know that pure Love and abandoning ones self is abused; I know that Hypocrites
overthrow the Gospel under such good names; but pure Love is no less a
perfection of Christianity, and it is the worst of all Remedies to go about to
abolish those things that are perfect, to prevent being abused therewith. God
knows how to make better provision therein than Men. Let us be humble, let us
hold our peace, instead of reasoning concerning Prayer, let us be engaged in
it; in so doing, we shall defend our selves, our strength will consist in our
silence. I am, etc.

Paris, Aug. 3d, 1697.
THE DECLARATION Of the Most Illustrious and Most Reverend Prelates Lewis
Antony de Noailles, Archbishop of Paris, James Benign Bossuet, Bishop of
Meaux, and Paul Godet Desmarais Bishop of Chartres, upon the subject Matter of
a Book Entitled, An Explication of the Maxims of the Saints, concerning the
Internal Life.
AS we have been long since called to bear Witness, it is time at last we should
make answer. The most Illustrious and most Reverend Archbishop of Cambray, as
well in the very beginning as Preface of his Book, called An Explication of the
Maxims of the Saints, etc. has made mention of two of our number, whose
Doctrine and Decisions contained in the Thirty Four Articles, he has only
taken upon him more fully to explicate; and which the third of us by a public
Act has agreed to, and Subscribed.

The same most Illustrious and most Reverend Archbishop, has in the Letter he
wrote to our Holy Father the Pope Innocent XII. grounded what he says upon the
same Articles and Censures of the Bishops against some Books that have been
written; And we were the only three who have thought it our Duty to Censure
those Books, or rather according to the Author's words, certain places in the
said Book.

Nevertheless, they are not some places as the same Author says, that we have
taken upon us to censure, but the greatest part of them; nay and we would have
the whole Books condemned, and the Spirit that runs quite through them.

But as the same Epistle takes notice, our Zeal is not raised against certain
Mystic Persons in former Ages, who labored under a pardonable ignorance of
Theological Dogma's, but our Censures and Articles are levelled at the Quietists
of our own time, who are well known amongst us.

Neither have we recourse to the obvious and natural sense of things, as if
there were some more occult meaning couched under them, which perhaps might at
the same time be tolerated; but we have thought it necessary to expose the
Poison lying hid in those Books.

We know nothing of any bodies taking occasion from our Articles and Censures,
to deride pure Love and Contemplation, as the Illusions of a troubled Brain; as
the said Letter intimates.

It Is also said in the same Letter, That the principal Points which have been
treated on in the Book, having been anew Explained, are found to be conformable
to the said Articles.

This Conclusion, and the intention we find there is, to have what is contained
in the said Book, to be thought agreeable to our Sentiments, we are
necessitated to explain our selves upon this Head, though it is not without
trouble of mind, that we are brought to this Extremity, having before used all
sorts of means to gain the Judgment of our Brother herein; it is pure necessity
that constrains us hereunto, to the end we may prevent the Belief of our
approving this Work; and above all, out of the Fear we are in, lest our Holy
Father the Pope, whom we perfectly honor, and to whom, as to our Head, we are
inviolably united, should be persuaded, that we favor a Doctrine which the
Church condemns.

We shall begin, by showing the Reasons that occasioned the Articles, which the
Book Entitled, An Exposition of the Maxims of the Saints, etc. makes mention
of. There was a certain Woman living amongst us, who having put out a Pamphlet
called, a Short Method, etc. and some others also, and spread up and down
certain Manuscripts of the Quietists, seemed to us to be a leader of that Sect;
she desired she might be allowed three Counselors, with whose Advice she might
acquiesce, the most illustrious Author of this book was added for a Fourth; the
design was to consine her, and those of her Party, within some bounds; to
remove all the subterfuges they had, and to show them from the undoubted
Articles of our Faith, the Lord's Prayer, the Doctrine of the Holy Scripture,
Holy Tradition, and Saints, that their Tenets were condemned to all intents and
purposes, either from their own Nature, or by Councils, and the Apostolic See;
this was the end of the Articles that contained our decisions and Censures; our
business now, is to see whether the said Book did explain and open the same, or
overthrow them.

In the first place, Theological or Divine Hope is taken away in that Book, as
well out of the state of Grace, as within it among the perfect.

And when it is said, that without the state of Grace, before Justification,
one may love God with the love of Hope, in such a manner, that self-love, that
is, the love of our own Interest and Happiness, be the principal Motive of the
said love of Hope, and prevalent above the other motive of love to God's Glory;
it from thence follows, that Hope which depends upon a created good, and self
interest, is no Divine or Theological Virtue, but a Vice; and thence it is,
that that Axiom of St. Augustine is applied, though in a wrong sense: That which
proceeds not from a principle of Charity, proceeds from Concupiscence, and from
that love which is the root of all Vices, and which the Jealous God is so much
set against.

After Justification in a perfect state of pure and dis-interested love, he
admits of Hope that resides in the Mind, but does not move it; because that the
love which is contained in this Hope, is pure, without any mixture of interest,
in respect to fear or hope, and being, as it were, perfect Charity, it excludes
Hope as well as Fear, so that the Soul is not at all excited from any motive,
or upon the account of self-interest, and so those incentatives or motives of
self-advantage, so often inculcated in the Scripture Tradition, and the Prayers
of the Church, are utterly excluded from perfect Minds.

As for the motives of Self-interest, the same is explained in all the passages
of the Book, in such a manner, that the Soul is to retain no mercenary desire,
and not to love God neither for his desert, perfection, nor the good that is to
be found in loving him, nor yet for everlasting Rewards, and it would be
insinuated, that it is the common sentiments of all the Saints, both Ancient
and Modern.

From whence this general Conclusion is made, That this interested Motive is
formally excluded from all the Virtues of perfect minds; an Opinion which is
also attributed to St. Francis de Sales, without using the place where it is to
be met with; though in contrariety to this, there are diverse passages in his
Writings that are quite opposite thereunto.

To the same end tends also what is further said, that we will or love God, as
he is our good, happiness and reward; that we love him formally under this
precision or restriction, but not because of this restriction, and that the
formal Object of our hope is our interest, to wit, God our Good, but that we
have no mercenary motive thereunto; but this is perfect contrariety, to make
that a motive which is no motive, to cut off that hope, which being destitute
of power to move the Soul, has no more in it than the bare name of hope.

By these Propositions, and others also, whereby in retaining the name of hope,
the thing it self is precluded; the sense of our First and Thirtieth Article,
concerning the retaining of the Exercise of hope in every condition, is eluded.

It will signify nothing for a Man to say, that there are other propositions
opposite hereunto, to be found in some places of the said Book. For to be plain
in the matter, the said Book contains things that evidently contradict one
another; for Example, God wills that I should love him as he is my Good,
Happiness, and Reward; very well, but the contrary is repeated again and again,
in these words. It Is certain, we do not (will the love of God (or our
Salvation) as he is the reward of our merits, our salvation, our eternal
deliverance, our good, our interest, and the greatest of them. So manifest a
Contradiction of Propositions and Terms, is sufficient to prove there is Error
in that case, and cannot serve for an Excuse for the same.

Moreover the style of this Book is so perplexed, and the manner of reasoning
used in it so subtle, that they are quite lost, there being many places
therein where the sense cannot be found out without great trouble and vexation
of mind; and this must be the Character of an ill-contriv'd System, and of an
Author that seeks not so much a good temperament of things, as subterfuges and
subtilties.

As for what concerns the desire of Eternal Salvation, the said Author thus
expresses himself. The desire of Eternal Salvation is good, but nothing ought
to be desired saving the Will of God; a Proposition which he attributes to St.
Francis de Sales, though it be not to be met with in any of his Writings.

In the same Book it is also said, that there are two different states of the
Just, one of resignation; wherein mercenary or self-desires are subjected to
the Will of God; another of Holy indifference; wherein the Soul has no
mercenary desire at all, except it be upon such occasions as when it is wanting
to its own grace, and is not fully correspondent thereunto; to which
proposition the forementioned Heads are referred, that Salvation is not to be
desired, as it is our good, our reward, etc.

All these Propositions, as well as those that exclude the desires of Eternal
Salvation, conceived from motives of Hope, as also those others that regard the
indifference of Salvation, are rejected in the foresaid Articles, pursuant to
the Authority of the Holy Scriptures, not only as false, but also as erroneous.

Those same Articles particularly condemn that which is affirmed in the said
Book, that holy indifference admits of general desires, for the accomplishment
of all the hidden will of God; and though the Decrees of ones own and others
reprobation, were contained in this Will, yet his desires are to be so far
extended, as to wish the accomplishment of the same.

Neither is there, as the said Book would insinuate, any room left for
Equivocation, seeing all manner of Equivocation is taken away in the said
Articles concerning the indifference of Salvation, by a clear definition of
indifference, which may appertain to the events of this Life, and sensible
Comforts, but never to salvation, and the means that are conducive thereunto.
The Author, in order to make the Articles to be equivocal, grounds himself upon
this Position, that Salvation is to be desired and wished for as a thing that
God would have; which is right enough, and taken from the very end of Salvation.

But in his Book he expresses himself in an exclusive manner, saying, that the
Soul wills not happiness for it self, but because it knows God wills it;
whereby the immediate and specific motives of hope are cut off, and a way
opened to the pernicious Opinion of indifference; as if salvation was in it
self a thing indifferent, and as if the good that was commanded was not in it
self desirable, but only upon the account of its being commanded and enjoined.

In the mean time the difference that lies between desirable things, because of
the will of God, and those things that are not desirable, but by reason of the
will of God, is set forth by the Author himself, from the very beginning of his
Treatise, in a passage he cites out of St. Francis de Sales. There is a great
deal of difference between these words, I love God for the good I expect from
him; and those, I do not love God but upon account of that good. which shows
what diversity there is often between things that seem to be expressed in very
near the same words.

This indifference to Salvation, which is asserted throughout the whole Book,
gives way to these consequences; that a Soul, in the greatest trials may be
invincibly persuaded that it is reprobated by God; whereby the Sacrifice of
Salvation, which is ordinarily conditional, becomes absolute; an impossible
case appearing, not only as possible, but even as real or actual: And then a
director of ones Conscience may suffer a Soul to take up with a bare acquiesce
with its own just Condemnation, and Reprobation.

Moreover in such a state, it will be to no purpose, nay intolerable to speak
to him of the Rule of Faith, in relation to the goodness of God that is
extensive to all Men, or to offer him Reasons for his satisfaction.

All these things are clearly rejected by the Thirty Four Articles, when an
absolute consent is not allowed of in any probations, or trials: God forbid it
should be so; this is a false pre-supposition, and impossible, that other
Article being premised, wherein all despair is excluded; and much less should
the Director of ones Conscience be allowed to suffer Souls simply to acquiesce
with their own Condemnation, and just reprobation. But on the contrary, he is
required not to suffer any such thing to be. He is so far from being advised
not to preach the goodness of God clearly and distinctly, as the said Book
asserts, that he ought to be ordered, in conformity to St. Francis de Sales, to
assure those afflicted Souls, that they shall never be forsaken of God, and
that his goodness is not only general toward all Men, but that the effects of
the Divine Mercy is more especially extended unto them.

Again, you have in the Articles all Virtues both Divine and Moral, set forth
and distinguished, with their Motives; but in the said Books endeavors are
used to render the distinction there made, obscure, by these words. Pure Love
does of it self constitute the Internal Life, it is the only Principle and sole
Motive thereof, all other Motives are taken away, save only Charity. But the
reason whereby Charity is even made to subsist, seems also to be taken away,
when it is said that this Love becomes by turns to be every distinct Virtue,
but it seeks after no Virtue, as it is a Virtue; and so neither is Faith sought
for as Faith, nor Hope as Hope, nor even Charity it self, which is the life and
form of Virtue, as a Virtue.

And so allowing these Propositions to be true, all Virtues are debased and
thrown out of doors, pure Love will have no other effect than to hinder us to
be studious of Virtue; and no one shall cultivate the same better, than he that
neglects it; which makes way for this extravagant, and to this day unheard of
proposition, that Mystic Saints exclude the practice and acts of Virtue from
this state, which are Paradoxes that divert the Mind from the study of Virtue,
and impose strangely upon Spiritual Persons, and render the very name of Virtue
it self suspicious and odious.

Now we come to another Proposition that is very agreeable to what precedes;
that transformed Souls may and ought according to the present Discipline, to
confess their Venial Sins, to ask pardon for their faults, and to pray for the
Remission of their Sins, not for their own purification and deliverance, but as
it is a thing agreeable to the will of God, which clearly overthrows the right
and intrinsical motive of Repentance, and the same is contrary to our Fifteenth
Article. Besides we cannot allow that the Confession of Venial Sins is to be
referred only to the discipline of the present times.

As for Concupiscence being perfectly routed out of some Souls, though they are
but very few, where the sensible effects thereof are suspended, or else where
the Flesh has been a long time subjected to the Spirit; what the said Book says
in Relation thereunto, is manifestly contradicted by our Seventh and Eighth
Articles taken out of the Councils, whence the Author is brought to such a
pass, as to extenuate the usefulness and necessity of Mortification,
notwithstanding the practice of the Apostles and Saints to the contrary; and
this tends to favor the Doctrine disallowed of in the Eighteenth Article of
our Censure.

As for what concerns Contemplation, we find in the said Book, that when it is
pure and direct, it is not taken up willingly with any sensible imagination,
with any distinct and nameable Idea; that is, with any limited and particular
Idea of the Divine Nature, but that the same is confined to an Idea that is
purely intellectual, and abstracted from an Infinite Being. And thus
Contemplation cannot have the attributes of God, nor the Divine Persons in the
Trinity, nor consequently the Humane Nature of Christ for an Object of its own
choice; but only by the representation which God makes of the same unto him,
and by the instinct and impression of peculiar Grace, because the Mind does not
voluntarily adhere to these Objects; as if neither the goodness of the thing it
self, nor the exhortations of the Holy Scripture, nor the choice of ones own
Will, in conjunction with common Grace, were not sufficient to make a Man seek
after them.

These Principles tend to this conclusion, that Contemplative Souls are in both
Conditions deprived of the distinct view of Christ, and of his presence by
Faith; that is, both in the very beginning of their Contemplations, and in
their Trials; and these Conditions may last a long time.

Neither is the Party afraid to reject the distinct view of Christ to the very
intervals of Contemplation; as if to contemplate Christ, was to descend from
the height and purity of Contemplation, as the Beguardians were wont to say. By
which Proceedings and Subtilties, false Contemplators are furnished with
excuses, who take no delight in our Savior Christ Jesus, and are not freely
carried into a contemplation of him, and who remove the Divine Attributes and
Sacred Persons in the Trinity far from it, and separate distinct Acts of Faith
therefrom, thereby eluding the 1, 2, 3, 4. and 24 Articles.

We read in the said Treatise, that it is never lawful to prevent the work of
grace, and that a Man is to expect nothing from himself by the way of his own
industry and endeavors.

By which Proposition, and all the rest that is contained in the Eleventh
Article of the Book, it appears upon exact examination, that that act of the
free will, which is properly called excitation, is destroyed; those words of
the Prophet David, I will prevent his face, and that other, my Prayer shall
prevent thee, are thrown out of doors, as is also that Maxim of St. Augustine,
whereon the whole dispensation of Divine Grace relies. He cannot be helped on,
unless he endeavor to do something of his own accord: that famous distinction
of Spiritual Men is at the same time destroyed, who by common consent have
distinguished between those acts that are the product of ones own industry and
endeavors, and those acts that are infused motitions which are wrought by
God's act or impulse, without any mixture of a man's effort therewith. These and
the like Propositions, overthrow, or at least obscure the 11. 25. and 26
Articles.

We do in the same Articles reject that continued Act which the Quietists have
introduced into the state of perfection, as being absurd in it self, and
foreign to the Scriptures and Fathers; and the Author rejects the same also
both in his Treatise and in his Letter. Nevertheless he falls into the same
absurdity, by allowing of such still peaceable Acts, that they have nothing
whereby the Soul may be able to make a true distinction of them, they being
such as are disturbed with no manner of joltings, so uniform and so even, that
they seem as much to be no acts at all, as one continued Act during the whole
course of ones Life.

Lastly, we have more particularly taken care in our Articles, lest Christian
Perfection, holiness or purity, or the internal Life should be placed in
passive Prayer* or in other quiet and extraordinary ones of that kind, wherein
all contemplative and formal persons are with us; but on the contrary, the said
Book does assert, that the same Prayer and Contemplation do consist in pure
love, which does not only justify and purify of it self, but consummate,
accomplish and make perfect, and is consequently the last degree of Christian
perfection.

Wherein the Author does extremely err, and not only differs from spiritual
men, but even from himself. He differs from spiritual Persons or Mysticks, who
in persuance to the Authority of St. Theresia, the Expositions of John de
Jesus, and the sentiments of James Alvarez de Paz, who was a follower of them,
and that of St. Francis de Sales and several others, have taught, that either a
person may arrive at a state of perfection without quiet prayer, or that this
Prayer is in the number of such blessings, as seem very much to appertain to
those graces that are purely free; that it is neither of a perfecting nature,
and justifies no man, yea, and that the same may consist with mortal sin. He
differs from himself, in that he asserts every where, That Christian perfection
consists in this sort of Prayer, which is nothing else but a love that is very
pure, and teaches, at the same time, the greatest part of holy Souls, and those
who by a peculiar Title are called Saints, could never attain to this sort of
Prayer, nor consequently to perfection, because they had not the inward light,
nor the advantages of attractive Grace.

From hence he conludes that the Doctrine of pure love, wherein all Evangelick
perfection does consist, and to which all Tradition bears a Testimony, is yet
a mystery, which is concealed not only from Christians in general, but even
from the greatest part of Saints, and that it is the business of a director of
Men's Consciences, to leave the same unto God, and to wait for his opening the
Heart by his internal Unction; as if the word of the Gospel would be of no use
to those who ought to be endued with pure love, as if Unction should exclude
and shut out the good word of Salvation.

From whence it follows, that that command of Christ, Be ye perfect, does not
appertain to the Saints, nor that neither, thou shall love, etc. which derogate
from the perfection of Christian calling.

There is also as much contradiction between these Propositions, That the gift
of pure Love and Contemplation depends upon grace or divine inspiration, which
is common to all that are justified, and that yet there are many Saints to whom
the same is not communicated, and which would be but a trouble and offense to
them, were the same proposed to them.

These things therefore, and those other before mentioned, which run through
the whole Book, are contrary to our Censures and the Thirty Four Articles so
often mentioned; neither are those that follow less opposite to the same
Doctrine, or any more consonant to Truth.

In the first place, although the said Book does in the beginning, and in diverse
other places onwards, make an enumeration of false spirituallizers, (If I may
so call them) whereof he makes the Gnostics of old, the Beguardians in the
middle age, and the late Illuminates of Spain, to be of the number; yet he
makes no manner of mention of Molinos and his followers, nor more particularly
of that Woman upon whose account the Articles were framed; whereas in the mean
time it must be said, that they should have been chiefly spoken of, seeing the
whole Church is filled with the noise their Writings have made, and the
Censures past upon them by the Pope's authority.

To which these Positions must in like manner be added, that the love of pure
Concupiscence, how impious and sacrilegious soever it be, does yet prepare
Sinners for to be justified and converted, though this preparation proceeds from
no other motions than such as are excited by the Spirit, or at least, the
impulse thereof.

That justifying love, whereby a person seeks not its own happiness, but as a
means that does refer unto, and subordinates it self to the last end, which is
God's glory, is in this Book called mercenary, which is contrary to the
judgment of the Schools, and that Axiom of St. Augustine, so well known among
Divines, That we are to deliver our selves according to a known Rule.

That an impossible case, to wit, that a just Soul who loves God even to the
end, should yet be condemned to eternal punishments, is rendered possible; and
that St Francis de Sales seems to have found himself to be in the same state,
tho neither he himself, nor any of those that have writ his Life, say any thing
of it, and that no just Soul can be brought to believe it.

That direct Acts, and such as escape the reflections of the Soul, are the very
same operation of the Soul, which, by St. Francis de Sales, are called the top
of the Soul; though he says nothing of it in all his Writings.

That in these Acts there is a strange and unheard of division of the Soul in
it self to be found; since perfect Hope subsists in the upper part, as the
lower is abandoned to despair; and which is worse, the former is in direct
Acts, and the other in reflex ones, which are in themselves the most deliberate
and efficacious, especially if allowed by the director of the Conscience,
insomuch, that Hope being expelled by reflex Acts, subsists in those that are
direct.

That in this division of the Soul laboring under an unvoluntary impression of
despair, and making an absolute Sacrifice of its own interest for that of
Eternity; it does die on the Cross with Christ, saying, my God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me, as if despairing Souls could expire with Christ, and yet
bewail their state, in being forsaken by him.

That in these last Trials or Experiments, he makes a separation between the
Soul and it self, according to the Example of Christ, who is our pattern,
wherein the inferior part had no Communication with the superior, neither in
its unvoluntary troubles, nor faintings; that in this separation, the motions
of our inferior part are blind, and full of unvoluntary Trouble. As if there
had been such perturbations in Christ, as there are in us; which is an
abominable Opinion, and which the famed Sophronius has condemned as such, with
the approbation of the sixth Council.

As for the Tradition of all ages, which is continually alleged in the said
Book; we may learn what that was from St. Francis de Sales alone, whom the
Author so much insists upon, and tho he be the only Authority almost, cited by
him in his Works, yet he quotes him several times to ill purpose, and that in
relation to very important points, whereon the whole foundation of his Book
depends, which having been showed in some measure, in what has been said
before, we shall now, for brevity sake, pass over, and defer the same, with
diverse other things, to another opportunity, as we shall also consider the
examination of Vocal Prayer, the nature of Contemplation, human Acts, and
Trials; the three Marks whereby Vocation is known from Meditation to
Contemplation. And lastly, several Texts of Scripture, which instead of being
expounded, according to the natural meaning of them, have been made to bear a
new and unheard of Interpretation.

Moreover, we cannot but wonder, seeing this Book treats of the love of such as
are perfect, that yet it takes no manner of notice of a love of gratitude
toward God and Christ our Savior, as if these things were no ways proper to
stir up, and inflame true Charity; or that the same derogated from pure love,
or that such as are perfect, ought to neglect them.

Neither are we less amazed, that in citing the Decree of the Council of Trent,
that defines hope to be in it self good, and agreeable to the state of Saints;
that this which is contained in the same Decree, is omitted, viz. That the most
holy and most perfect, such as David and Moses were, were stirred up by this
motive, as is especially set forth in the same Council, which says, That
eternal life is to be proposed as a Reward to all those that continued in the
performance of good Works to the end, and put their hope in God; and so by
consequence to all the Saints, and such as are most perfect; by which motive
they are not at all made mercenary, but Children, that by the way of Charity,
are aiming at their Father's Inheritance.

Hereunto it must be added, that the Opinions dispersed up and down in this
work, tend (though against the Author's intention) to promote that Notion, that
Vice, by the help of direct Acts, may subsist with the Virtue that is opposite
to it; so as that while the Soul, through an inconsiderate Zeal for the Justice
of God, does acquiesce with the whole secret will of God; it does imprudently
consent to its own entire and absolute Reprobation, and so we shall be brought,
contrary to the Apostles prohibition, to be taken with subtilties and vain
bablings.

Lastly, the groans of the Church, which is but as a sojourner here below, and
longs to return to her own Country, are stifled; St. Paul and the other
Saints, who in their Martyrdom, have been helped up with the hopes they had of
Happiness, and counted the same to be gain, are hereby turned off as mercenary
Souls; but we having the form of sound words, and being desirous to follow the
footsteps of the Saints, do not measure impossible and absurd things with
Christian Piety and Perfection; neither do we believe that some extraordinary
and unusual Affections, which a few Saints have been a little subject to and
that by the by, ought therefore to be presently turned into Rules, and esteemed
as a particular state of Life; we do not call those Wills or Consents, which
are conversant about impossibilities, true Wills and real Consents, but
veleities, as the Schools also term them.

These things therefore we have received from our Ancestors; these are our
Thoughts, and our Will is that all the World may know them. Given at Paris in
the Archiepiscopal Palace, in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand Six Hundred
Ninety Seven, on the Sixth day of August.

Lovis Ant. Archbishop of Paris.
J. Benign, Bishop of Meaux.
Paul, Bishop of Chartres.

DECLARATIO Illustriss. and Reverendiss. Ecclesiae Principum Ludovici Antonii
de Noailles Archiep. Parisiensis, Jacobi Benigni Bossuet Episcopi Meldensis,
and Pauli de Godet des Marais Episcopi Carnotensis. Circa Librum cui titulus
est: Explication des Maxims des Saints sur la Vie Interieure, etc.
JAmdudum in testimonium vocatos respondere tandem nos oportet. Illustrissimus
and Reverendissimus D. D. Archiepiscopus Dux Cameracensis, ab ipso libri initio
cui titulus, Explication des Maxims des Saints, etc. and in ipsa Praefatione
seu Commonitione praevia, duos Avertiss. page xi.
commemoravit ex Nobis, D. Parisiensis. D. Meldensis.
quorum doctrinam ac decreta 34 Articulis comprehensa tantum copiosius
exponenda susceperit. Tertius vero etiam constitutione publica eandem cum illis
sententiam promulgavit.

Idem Illustrissimus ac Reverendissimus Archiepiscopus datis ad S S. D. N. D.
Innocentium Papam XII. literis, iisdem articulis atque Episcoporum adversus
quosdam libellos censuris nititur: tres autem tantum sumus qui eosdem libellos,
eorumve loca quaedam censura notandos duxerimus.

Neque tamen loca quaedam, ut idem Auctor asserit: sed pleraque omnia, ac totos
libellos, ipsumque adeo eorumdem librorum spiritum elisum voluimus.

Neque ut in eadem Epistola scribitur, adversus mysticos aliquot ante actis
saeculis, Theologicorum Dogmatum veniali inscitia laborantes noster zelus
excanduit, sed adversus notissimos nostrae aetatis Quietistas gravissime lapsos
censurae nostrae articulique directi sunt.

Neque confugimus ad obvium naturalemque sensum, tanquam occultior sensus
subesset, qui tolerari forsitan posset; sed venenum libellorum in aperto esse
duximus.

Latet etiam nos, ex articulis censurisve nostris aliquos arripuisse
occasionem, amorem purum, and contemplationem quasi delirae mentis ineptias
deridendi: ut est in Epistola proditum.

In eadem Epistola rursus libri summa exposita, omnia iisdem articulis consona
perhibentur.

Quae cum ita fint, cumque praedictus liber nostra se sententia tueatur, quid
de eo sentiamus promere cogimur: non tamen ad haec extrema dolentes antea
devenimus, quam omnia conati and experti, ut fraternum animum flecteremus:
Omnino necessitati cedimus, ne quisquam in eundem librum consentire nos putet,
ac, quod gravissimum foret, ne S S. D. N. Papa, quem impensissime and
devotissime colimus, cuique ut capiti fide indivulsa adhaeremus, doctrinae quam
Romana improbet Ecclesia, ullo modo favere nos arbitretur.

Ac primum quidem eorundem articulorum quos praedictus liber commemorat, ea
suit ratio. Cum apud nos extaret mulier, quae edito libello, cui titulus, Moyen
court, etc. and aliis ejusmodi, sparsisque MSS. Quietistarum factionis dux esse
videretur: Ea consultores tres D. Paris. tunc Cathalanensis. D. Meldensis. D.
Tronsson totius Sulpitianae Societatis Superior.
dari sibi postulavit, quorum judicio staret. His Illustrissimus auctor quartus
accessit. Itaque animus fuit eam and ejus asseclas quibusdam finibus coercere,
occupare suffugia atque ex certissimis fidei symbolis, ipsaque oratione
Dominica, ac scripturarum. and sanctae Traditionis, Virorumque spiritualium
dogmatibus, propositiones a Conciliis ac Sede Apostolica, vel in se, vel in
ipso font damnatas indicare. Hic ergo nostrorum articulorum ac censurarum
scopus, haec ratio est. An autem hos articulos, atque censuras praedictus liber
extendat and explicet tantum, an vero intervertat, sequentia demonstrabunt.

Imprimis spes Theologica in eo libro tollitur, cum extra statum gratiae, tum
inter perfectos in ipso gratiae statu.

Extra statum quidem gratiae, cum dicitur P. 3. 4, 10.
ante justificationem amore spei ita amari Deum, ut in eo amore amor fui, nempe
proprii commodi seu propriae felicitatis, tamquam motivum precipuum dominetur,
ipsique motivo divinae gloriae praevaleat; unde efficitur, ut spes, motivo
quippe creato seu commodo proprio nixa, non sit virtus Theologica, sed vitium:
Quo etiam sit, ut ei, licet perperam, applicetur P. 5.
illud axioma sancti Augustini: Quod non provenit ex principio caritatis,
provenit ex cupiditate, atque ab amore illo qui fons sit ac radix omnium
vitiorum, eorum scilicet quae in nobis Dei zelantis aemulatio impugnet.

Post justificationem vero in statu perfecto sive amoris puri inducitur P. 10.
15, 16. 65. etc.
easpes quae sit quidem in animo, animum tamen non moveat: In qua P. 8. 17.
quippe amor sit purus, nullo motivo utili timoris aut spei mixtus (tamquam
perfecta caritas spem perinde ac timorem for as mittat:) ita ut anima proprii
commodi ratione aut motivo non excitetur: incentivaque P. 22.
proprii commodi scripturis, Traditionibus and Ecclesiae precibus toties
inculcata perfectis mentibus subtrahantur.

Quae sit autem ratio proprii commodi in toto libro passim P. 7. 37. 87. etc.
, ita explicatur, ut anima nullo jam desiderio mercenario teneatur; neque
meriti, neque perfectionis, neque felicitatis aut mercedis etiam aeternae,
eoque P. 26. 29. 37.
redeat omnis Sanctorum tum antiquorum tum recentiorum sententia.

Hinc universim dictum P. 26.
, omne motivum mercenarium, ab omnibus virtutibus perfectarum animarum excludi:
Quod etiam sancto Francisco Salesio, nullo allato loco, imo contra illius multa
loca imputatur.

Quo etiam spectat illud P. 29. 30.
: Velle nos Deum, quatenus est nostrum bonum, nostra felicitas, nostra merces,
and quidem formaliter sub hac praecisa ratione; sed non propter hanc praecisam
rationem: objectumque formale spei, esse commodum, nempe Deum nobis bonum, nec
tamen ullum esse motivum mercenarium: Quod quidem est pugnantia dicere: motivum
non motivum inducere: spem ipsam elidere, quae movendi animi virtute destituta,
solo spei nomine gaudeat.

His ergo aliisque, dum spei retento nomine, res ipsa tollitur xxxiv art. 1. 31.
, primi, and trigessimi primi articuli exnostris traginta quatuor, de spei
exercitio omni in statu retinendo, sensus ad sidem pertinens eluditur. Neque
obstat, quod his contraria aliis praedicti libri locis posita videantur; Revera
enim hic liber certis clarisque ac ipsissimis verbis dissona affeverat: Quale
istud est: p. 29,
Vult Deus ut velim Deum quatenus meum bonum est, mea felicitas, mea merces:
Recte; at contrarium semel iterumque scribitur his scilicet verbis: P. 34. and
35.
Verum quidem est, nos non velle Deum, ut est nostra merces, nostrum bonum,
nostrum commodum, nostra salus, nostra aeterna redemtio ac liberatio, and
commodorum maximum: Quae sententiarum ac verborum tam aperta contradictio, non
erroris excusatio sed probatio est.

Quin, universim libri stylus ita tortuosus est ac lubricus, ut plerisque in
locis non nisi summo labor certus sensus exsculpi, and eliquari possit: Quod
quidem doctrinae male sibi cohaerentis, neque tam temperamenta quam effugia
quaerentis indicium est.

De desiderio salutis in libro haec habentur: P. 35. 146.
Vitae aeternae desiderium bonum est; sed nihil desiderandum nisi Dei voluntas:
Quae sancto Franc. Salesio imputata, non legimus tamen in hujus sancti libris.

Item in eodem libro habetur: P. 32.
Duo sunt justorum status, alter resignationis, in quo desideria mercenaria
(hoc est salutis aeternae) Dei voluntati submittuntur: alter sanctae
indifferentiae, in quo nullum est penitus mercenarium desiderium: exceptis iis
casibus in quibus anima suae gratiae deest, nec ei toti plane respondet. Quo
etiam referuntur supra memorata P. 35.
, non optari salutem, quatenus est nostra merces, nostrum bonum, etc.

Haec autem omnia de elusis salutis aeternae desideriis, etiam motivo spei
conceptis, ac de salutis indifferentia, in praedictis articulis xxxiv. art. 9.
and 11.
, juxta scripturarum auctoritatem, non modo ut falsa, verum etiam ut erronea
respuuntur.

Quibus vel maxim damnatur illud, quod est in libro positum: P. 40.
Sancta indifferentia admittit generalia desideria omnium latentium voluntatem
Dei: Quibus voluntatibus etiam reprobationis, and aliorum and suae, decreta
continentur: and desiderium ad ea usque protenditur.

Neque quod idem liber infinuat, P. 35.
ullus patet aequivocationi locus, cum in dictis articulis xxxiv. art, 9.
de salutis indifferentia omnis equivocatio sublata sit, clara definitione
indifferentiae, quae ad eventus hujus vitae, solatiaque sensibilia, nusquam
autem ad salutem eoque conducentia pertinere possit.

Ad haec quidem stabilienda, liber huic articulo xxxiv. art. 5.
videtur initi: Optandam and postulandam salutem ut rem quam Deus velit: Quod
est rectissimum, and ex ipso salutis fine repetitum.

At in libro exclusive scribitur; P. 18.
non illam optari, nisi quia Deus velit: Quo and proxima ac specifica spei
motiva detrahuntur, and aperitur via ad pessimam indifferentiae sententiam,
quasi salus res sit ex se se indifferens, nec jussa tamquam per se expetenda
and bona, sed expetenda tantum quatenus jussa.

Quam autem inter se differant res expetenda propter Dei voluntatem, and res
non expetenda nisi propter Dei voluntatem, demonstrat ipse auctor jam inde ab
initio, ex sancto Francisco Salesio haec P. 3. 4. Am. de Dieu live. 2 Chapter 17
referens: Magno discrimine secernuntur ista: Deum amo propter bonum, quod ab
eo expecto: Et, Deum non amo nisi propter istud bonum. Unde liquet, quam in
diversa abeant, quae levi tantum inflexione verborum distare videantur.

Exista salutis quae toto libro passim asseritur indifferentia haec prodeunt:
P. 56, 57. 58.
In extremis probationibus invincibiliter animae esse persuasum se just a Deo
esse reprobatam: Quo statu sacrificium salutis, quod ordinary conditionatum
est, fit tandem absolutum, casu impossibili non tantum possibili, sed etiam
reali seu actuali viso: Et P. 39. 56. 59.
permettente directore, suae justae condemnationi ac reprobationi anima
simpliciter acquiescit.

Quin etiam in eodem statu inutile and importunum judicatur P. 57.58.
, dogma fidei de bonitate divina in omnes effusa huic animae praedicare, aut
rationem ullam in remedium adhibere: Quo nihil est desperatius.

At in praedictis 34 Articulis xxxiv. art, 32.
haec omnia diserte repudiantur, cum in nullis probationibus absolutus
consensus admittatur: absit: sed tantum ex impossibli and praesuppositione
falsa: praemisso alio articulo, xxxiv. art. 31.
in quo desperatio omnis excluditur: ac nedum director sinore permittatur ut
animae suae condemnationi acjustae reprobationi simpliciter acquiescant: contra
prohibetur ne omnino eas acquiescere sinat: quin etiam diserte and clare non a
praedicando divinae bonitatis dogmate abstineri suadetur; ut est in libro
positum P. 57. 58.
imo vero director Eodem art. 31.
jubetur, Francisco Salesio Entret. 5. Live. 3. Ep. 26. Autre Edit. 29.
auctore, afflictam animam certiorem facere, numquam eam esse a Deo deserendam;
quo non modo Dei erga omnes homines bonitas generatim, sed etiam specialis erga
hanc animam divinae misericordiae affectus commendatur.

Ad haec in articulis xxxiv. art. 1, 2, 3. 13.
virtutes omnes tum Theologicae, tum morales cum suis motivis singulae
exhibentur ac secernuntur; at earum distinctionem liber obscurat his verbis:
Purus amor P. 176.
per se totam vitam interiorem constituit; fit que solus totius interioris
vitae unicum principium, unicumque motivum sive incitamentum. Reliqua ergo
incitamenta tolluntur, praeter illa quae sunt solius caritatis: quin etiam sua
caritati ratio adimi videtur, cum dicitur: P. 144.
Hic amor fit per vices quaevis distincta virtus; nullam tamen expetit in
quantum est virtus: sic neque fides ut fides, neque spes ut spes, neque ipsa
caritas, quae vita, and forma virtutum est, ut est virtus, quaeritur.

Hinc omnibus virtutibus suus honos detrahitur his propositionibus: P. 145.
puro amore id effici, ut neque quisquam virtutis studiosus esse velit: nec
quisquam sit virtutis studiosior, quam is qui virtuti non studet. Unde illud
extremum, and hactenus inauditum: P. 164.
sancti Mystici ab hoc statu exclusere praxim, and virtutum actus: quae
paradoxa and animum a studio virtutis avertunt, and imponunt spiritualibus
viris, and ipsum virtutis nomen suspectum invidiosumque efficient.

His consonat istud: P. 155.
animas transformatas ex praesente disciplina venialia peccata confessas,
detestari culpas, and remissionem peccatorum optare, non ut purificationem and
liberationem propriam, sed ut rem quam Deus vult: quod proprium and intrinsecum
poenitentiae motivum obliterat, and articulo xxxiv. art. 15.
nostro XV. adversatur: nec probandum confessionem venialium peccatorum ad
praesentem tantum referri disciplinam.

De concupiscentia P. 49, 50. 154.
in quibusdam animabus, etsi paucissimis, perfect purgata suspensisque ejus
sensibilibus effectibus, and carne jamdiu penitus spiritui subdita; in libro id
asseritur, quod articulo xxxiv. art. 7. and 8.
nostro septimo, and octavo ex conciliis deprompto aperte contra-dicat. Unde
etiam eo auctor adducitur P. 81, 82, 83.
ut mortificationis utilitatem, necessitatemque extenuet, reclamante licet
Apostolo and Sanctorum praxi, faveatque doctrinae articulo nostro xxxiv. art.
18.
XVIII. censurisque proscriptae.

De contemplatione in libro ista P. 120, 121, 122.
promuntur: cum pura and directa est, numquam eam voluntary occupari ulla
imagine sensibili, ulla idea Divinitatis distincta nominabili, hoc est,
limitata, sed tantum plurissima atque abstractissima ratione entis illimitati:
in alia ergo objecta, hoc est in attributa quaevis, personasque divinas, atque
adeo in ipsam Christi humanitatem, non propria electione ferri, sed
repraesentante Deo, nec nisi instinctu and impressione gratiae singularis;
quippe qua animus non voluntary his objectis adhaerescat: quasi non sufficiat
ad haec prosequenda ipsa rei bonitas, ipsa scripturae invitatio, ipsa cum
gratia communi propriae electio voluntatis.

Ex his eo devenitur P. 124, 125.
ut animae contemplativae duobus in statibus Christo distincta viso, ac per
fidem praesente priventur: nempe in ipsis contemplationis initiis and in
probationibus; qui status diutissime protrahi and prorogari possunt.

Nec piget distinctam visionem Christi in ipsa contemplations intervalla
coniicere, quasi Christum contemplari, sit ut Beguardi aiebant Clement ad
nostrum de haeret. in prop. 8.
, a puritate and altitudine contemplationis descendere: quibus argutiis ac
tergiversationibus excusatio paratur falsis contemplatoribus, qui minus
delectentur Christo, nec ad illum contemplandum sponte prosiliant: a divinis
attributis, personisque abstineant: fidei distinctos actus a contemplatione
amoveant, elusis articulis I. II. III. IV. and XXIV. xxxiv. art. 1, 2, 3, 4.
and 24.


In libro scribitur P. 44. 62. 63. 65.
nunquam licitum gratiam praevenire: neque quicquam expectare a se, propriaque
industria and propriis conatibus.

Quibus dictis totoque libri articulo XI. si ea qua par est diligentia
perpendatur, actus liberi arbitrii, qui propria excitatio dicitur, corruit;
excinditur illud Davidicum: Praeoccupemus faciem ejus: and illud: oration mea
praeveniet te: and Augustinianum illud, quo tota divinae gratiae dispensatio
nititur: Nec adjuvari potest, nisi qui aliquid sponte conatur De pecc. mer.
live. 2. chapter 5.
: evertitur quoque solemnis distinctio virorum spiritualium unanimi consensu
secernentium actus propriiconatus, propriaeque industriae ab actibus infusis ac
motibus, sine conatu proprio Deo agente and impellente, impressis: quae and
alia ejusmodi partim evertunt, partim obscurant articulos XI. XXV. XXVI. xxxiv.
art. 11. 25. and 26.


In iisdem articulis xxxiv. art. 19.
rejicitur absurdissimus, and omnibus scripturis Patribusque inauditus
continuus actus, a Quietistis invectus in perfectionis statum: quem actum
auctor in libro Epistolaque respuit. Caeterum in idem incommodum rursus
impingit P. 106. 129. 149. 166.
ipso nomine uniformitatis tam placidae, tam aequabilis, tam nullo successu,
nullo conspicuo discrimine, ut aliis nullus actus; aliis toto vitae decursu
unus idemque continuus actus esse videatur.

Denique illud imprimis nostris articulis xxxiv. art. 22, 23. 29.
cautum erat, ne, quod omnes contemplativi ac spirituales viri uno ore
rejiciunt, Christiana perfectio and sanctitas aut purificatio, aut omnino
interior status in oratione passiva seu quietis, aliisque extraordinariis
reponeretur. At contra in eo totus versatur liber Avert. p. 12. 15. Live. p. 41.
130. 168. 170. 175.
, ut eadem oration, ipsaque contemplatio in purissimo amore consistat, qui non
modo sit per se justificans atque purificans, verum etiam consummans atque
perficiens, ac proinde summa perfectionis Christianae.

Qua in re multum errat, ac non tantum a spiritualibus viris, verum etiam a se
ipso discrepat: a spiritualibus quidem, qui sancta Theresia S. There. Chat. 6.
them. chapter 9. 7. them. chapter 4.
duce, Joanne a Jesu Joan. a. Jesu M. Tom. 2. Theol. Mist. cap. 3.
interpret, Jacobo Alvare Paz Jac. Alv. Paz tom. 3. de contemp. perf. lib. 5.
part. 1. appa. 2. c. 9.
assecla, sancto etiam Francisco Salesio S. Franc. Sal. Ent. 2.
assentiente, aliisque Gerson, de Elucid. sch. Mist. Theol. Consid. 7.
permultis, docent, aut sine oratione quietis ad persectionem posse pertingi,
aut eandem orationem ad illa Charismata pertinere quae gratiis gratis datis
similima videantur, aut nedum perficiens sit atque consummans ne quidem
justificantem esse; quippe quae cum peccato mortali possit consistere. A seipso
autem diffentit quod passim statuat Christianam perfectionem ea in oratione
esse positam, quae nihil sit aliud quam amor purissimus, and tamen simul doceat
Avert. p. iv. live. 22. 23. 108. 168.
plerasque pias animas, atque eos etiam qui singulari titulo sancti
appellentur, ad illud orationis genus, adeoque ad perfectionem pervenire non
posse, cum iis desit lumen interius, and gratiae trahentis beneficium.

Hinc etiam asserit Ibid.
hanc de puro amore doctrinam, quantumvis in ea Evangelii absoluta perfectio
collocetur, ejusque sit testis universi traditio, arcanum esse quoddam non
tantum Christianorum vulgo sed etiam plerisque sanctis occultandum, atque ideo
totum directoris officium eo contineri, ut rem relinquat Deo, expectetque
unctionem quae cor aperiat: quasi verbum Evangelii pure amaturos adjuvare non
debeat, aut ipsa unctio verbum salutis excludat.

Unde consequitur nec ad omnes etiam sanctos pertinere illud Christi
praeceptum, Estote perfecti; imo nec etiam summum illud, Diliges etc. quae
vocationis Christianae perfectioni derogant.

Nec minus inter se pugnant ista; P. 42. 43. 96. 135. 137. etc.
Purissimi amoris, contemplationisque donum pendere a gratia seu afflatu divino
justis omnibus communi; and tamen etiam sanctorum plurimis esse inaccessum,
atque illis offendiculo and perturbationi futurum, si proponeretur. Quae omnia
a nobis inter se conciliari non posse candide profitemur.

Haec igitur and caetera supra dicta que toto libro fusa sunt censuris nostris
ac 34 articulis adversantur; nec minus ab eadem doctrina and a vero aliena sunt
quae sequuntur.

Primum illud, quod in eodem libro Avert. p. vii. ix. Live. p. co.
, and ab initiis and in ipso progressu, semel atque iterum falsorum
spiritualium series referatur, in eaque memoratis vetustissimis Gnosticis, and
in media aetate Beguardis, in Illuminatis Hispanicis series illa constiterit,
nulla* mentione Molinosi facta, nulla asseclarum ejus, nulla praesertim illius
faeminae adversus quam articulos instructos and institutos esse constabat: De
quibus vel maxim agi oportebat, cum eorum libellis, eorumque censuris Romano
Pontifice auctore tota Ecclesia personaret.

Huc accedunt iste propositiones: P. 12, 13, 14.
Quod amor purae concupiscentiae etsi impius ac sacrilegus, ad justitiam tamen
and ad conversionem nem praeparet animas peccatrices: cum reipsa praeparatio
non competat, nisi motibus a Spiritu Sancto saltem impellente excitatis.
Council. Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 6. Sess. 14. cap. 4.


Quod amor justificans, P. 4. 6. 10.
quo propria felicitas ideo tantum requiritur, ut medium ad finem ultimum, Dei
scilicet gloriam relatum, eique subordinatum, toto libro mercenarius vocitetur:
repugnante schola, spretoque axiomate Augustiniano apud Theologos celebrato:
Nobis ad certam regulam loqui fas est.

Quod casus impossibilis, P. 57. 58.
nempe ut anima justa Deum licet usque in finem diligens aeterno tamen
supplicio mulctetur, fiat possibilis, quodque S. Franciscus Salesius P. 56. 58.
sibi in eo statu fuisse visus sit: quod quidem neque ipse tradidit, neque
vitae ejus auctores: nec cuiquam animae justae persuasum esse potuit.

Quod P. 53. 58. 76. 78.
actus directi, and qui animae reflectentis effugiunt aciem, sint illa
ipsissima operatio quam sanctus Franciscus Salesius apicem mentis appellet,
nullo ejusdem Sancti allato testimonio.

Quod in his P. 56. 58. 59.
constituatur illa animae a se divulsae mira and inaudita divisio, qua perfecta
spes in summa part consistat, in inferiori vero desperatio, quodque est
pessimum, illa in directis actibus, haec in reflexis, qui ex sese sunt
deliberatissimi ac efficacissimi, praesertim cum a directore permittuntur, ita
ut spes in actibus directis, etiam a reflexis actibus abdicata, persistat.

Quod in hac divisione animae involuntaria desperationis impressione
laborantis, ac propriam salutem absolute devoventis, eadem anima P. 58.
cum Christo expiret in cruce dicens, Deus, Deus meus, ut quid dereliquisti me?
quasi desperatae animae expirent cum Christo, cum Christo deplorent se esse
derelictas.

Quod in illis extremis probationibus P. 77, 78, 79.
fiat illa separatio animae a se ipsa ad exemplum Christi exemplaris nostri: in
quo pars inferior non communicabit superiori involuntarias perturbationes suas:
quodque in hac separatione, motus inferioris partis nostrae coeci sint, and
involuntariae perturbationis: quasi in Christo, ut in nobis, fuerint
involuntariae illae perturbationes: quod abominandae opinionis esse, probante
Synodo sexta, Conc. 6. act. 11.
Sophronius ille celeberrimus pronuncia vit.

Quod autem in libro assidue inculcatur traditio omnium saeculorum, id quale
sit, ex uno Francisco Salesio aestimari potest: qui cum in eodem libro unus
omnium fere adducatur and in ore habeatur: in eo tamen allegando saepius
aberratur: idque in rebus gravissimis quibus tota libri ratio nititur: quae in
ante dictis ex part indicata, brevitatis causa nunc quidem omitti, and in
aliam occasionem, ut and alia multa differri placuit: quemadmodum, and illa
quae spectant ad orationem vocalem; contemplationis, actuum humanorum, and
probationum naturam, ac tres notas quibus a meditatione ad contemplationem
vocatio dignoscitur, and varia scripturae loca a, nativo sensu ad novum and
inauditum translata. P. 74. P. 93. 95. P. 109, 110. P. 48, 49, 50.


Miramur praeterea altum esse in libro silentium de amore gratitudinis erga
Deum and redemtorem Christum, cum de perfectorum amore agitur; tamquam haec ad
veram genuinamque caritatem inflammandam, and excitandam minime pertinerent,
aut puro amori derogarent, aut a perfectis ea praetermitti oporteret.

Nec minus miramur quod cum in libro P. 13. 14. 30. 92.
laudatum fuerit decretum Concilii Tridentini Sess. 6. chapter 17.
, spem per sese esse bonam, ac bonis congruentem definientis, illud tamen
praetermissum sit ex eodem decreto Ead. sess. 6. chapter 11.
sanctissimos quosque ac perfectissimos, quales fuere David ac Moses, eo
incitamento esse permotos: unde patet quantum auctor a Concilii mente
recesserit, cum praesertim eodem Concilio docente Sess. 6. cap. 11.
omnibus been operantibus usque in finem and in Deo sperantibus, ac proinde
optimo cuique and perfectissimo, vita aeterna tanquam merces proponenda sit,
quo motivo non mercenarii fiunt, sed filii paternae hereditatis ex ipsa
caritate studiosi.

Huc accedit quod dogmata in libro tradita eo tendant (invito licet auctore) ut
actuum directorum beneficio vitium cum virtute opposita stare possit; ut, dum
anima justitiae divinae praepostero studio, omnibus occultis Dei voluntatibus
acquiescit, in plenam and absolutam reprobationem imprudens consentiat, and ut,
quod vetat Apostolus, ad subtilia and vaniloquia deducamur. 2 Timothy 2. 16.


Postremo Ecclesiae peregrinantis atque in patriam suspirantis extinguuntur
gemitus: Paulus and alii inter ipsa martyria expectantes beatam spem atque hoc
lucrum reposcentes inter mercenarios ablegantur. Nos vero formam habentes
sanorum verborum, 2 Timoth. 1. 13.
sanctorumque vestigiis inhaerentes, rebus impossibilibus and absurdis
Christianam pietatem perfectionemque minime metimur. Nec insolitos affectus
quos pauci sanctorum parce transeunterque effuderunt, confestim in regulam and
in vitae statum verti oportere credimus: neque has voluntates consensiones-ve
quae circa impossibilia versantur, veras voluntates consensiones-que, sed
velleitates more scholae appellamus.

Haec igitur vera a majoribus accepimus haec sentimus, haec omnibus testata
esse volumus. DATVM Parisiis in Palatio Archiepiscopali, anno Domini Millesimo
Sexcentesimo Nonagesimo, Septimo, Die vero mensis Augusti sexta.

Ludovicus Ant. Arch. Parisiensis.
J. Benign Episc. Meldensis.
Paulus Episc. Carnotensis.

As the foregoing Declaration makes frequent mention of the Thirty Four
Articles made the 16th and 26th of April 1695. We thought it our Duty to insert
them in this place, as we find them in a Book of the said Lord Bishop of Meaux,
Entitled, Instructions concerning the nature of Prayer.
1. EVery Christian in every Condition, though not every moment, is obliged to
live in an Exercise of Faith, Hope and Charity, and to produce distinct Acts of
them, as they are three several Virtues.

2. Every Christian is obliged to have an explicit Faith, in Almighty God,
Creator of Heaven and Earth, the rewarder of all that seek him; and in his
other Attributes that are alike revealed; and to put this Faith into actual
Exercise, though not every moment.

3. Every Christian in like manner, is obliged to have an explicit Faith in God
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and to act this Faith in every condition, though
not every moment.

4. Every Christian is also obliged to have an explicit Faith in Christ Jesus,
God and Man, as Mediator, without whom he cannot draw nigh to God, and to act
this Faith in every condition, though not every moment.

5. Every Christian in every Condition, though not every moment, is obliged to
will, desire, and explicitly to seek his own eternal salvation, as a thing
which God wills, and which he would have us will for his Glory.

6. God will have every Christian in every Condition, tho not every moment,
expressly to ask of him the forgiveness of his Sins, grace to abstain from them,
perseverance in doing good, the increase of Virtue, and every other thing that
is necessary to Salvation.

7. A Christian in every Condition is to strive against Concupiscence, though not
at all times alike, which does engage him in every Condition, though not every
moment, to pray for strength against Temptations.

8. All these Propositions are according to the Catholic Faith, being expressly
contained in the Apostle's-Creed, and the Lord's-Prayer, which is a common and
daily Prayer to be used by all the Children of God; or else expressly defined by
the Church; as is that of asking forgiveness of Sins, and the gift of
perseverance, and that of striving against Covetousness, in the Councils of
Carthage, Orange, and Trent; as those Propositions that are contrary thereunto,
are formally Heretical.

9. A Christian is not allowed to be indifferent in the matter of his
Salvation, nor in those that tend thereunto; holy Christian indifference
regards the events of this Life (Sin only reserved) and the dispensation of
Comforts, or Spiritual droughts.

10. The forementioned Acts do not derogate from the highest Christian
perfection, and cease not to be perfect, because they are perceivable, provided
Thanks be given to God for them, and that the same be done to his Glory.

11. A Christian is not allowed to expect, that God should inspire these acts
into him by any particular way and inspiration, there is nothing required for
the exciting of them in us, but Faith which makes the Will of God known, as
signified and set forth in his Commandments and the Examples of the Saints, by
supposing always the supplies of his exciting and preventing Grace. The three
last Propositions, are the manifest consequences of the preceding ones; and
such as are contrary thereunto, are rash and erroneous.

12. By the obligatory Acts aforementioned, we are not to understand such Acts
as are methodical and orderly, much less those Acts that are reduced to Forms
and definite words; or troublesome and restless acts; but acts formed with
sincerity in the heart, with all holy sweetness, and tranquillity inwrought by
the Spirit of God.

13. In that Life and Prayer that is most perfect, all these acts are united in
Charity alone, seeing all virtues are animated therewith, and the Exercise of
them commanded by it, according to that of St. Paul, Charity suffers all,
believes all, hopes all, bears all. So much cannot be said of other Christian
acts, whose distinct exercises are exercised and regulated hereby, though they
may not always be sensibly and distinctly discerned.

14. The desire that is to be seen in the Saints, as in St. Paul and others, of
their eternal Salvation, and perfect redemption, is not only a desire or
indeliberate appetite, as the same St Paul calls it; but a good inclination
that we are to form, and freely to operate in our selves, by the assistances of
Divine Grace, as being perfectly conformable to the will of God. This
Proposition is clearly revealed, and the contrary Doctrine Heretical.

15. Its, in like manner, a Will conformable to the Will of God, and absolutely
necessary in every Condition, though not every moment not to will sin, and not
only to condemn Sin, but also to be sorry for the Commission of it, and to
desire the Destruction thereof in us by forgiveness.

16. Reflection upon ones self, upon his Acts, and the Gifts he has received,
which has been practiced throughout by the Prophets and Apostles, in order to
give thanks unto God for his Benefits, and other the like ends, are proposed as
an Example to all Believers, and even to the most perfect; and that Doctrine
which takes these away, is erroneous, and nigh to be Heretical.

17. There are no evil and dangerous reflections, but those wherein a man takes
a review of his actions, and the Gifts he has received, in order to feed
self-love, to seek out a common support, or to take up too much with himself.

18. Mortifications are agreeable to a Christian in every state, and are often
necessary, and to make the same separate from the duty of Believers, under a
pretense of perfection, is openly to condemn St. Paul, and to presuppose an
Erroneous and Heretical Doctrine.

29. Continual Prayer consists not in one perpetual act, which is supposed to
be without interruption, and which also ought never to be repeated; but in a
disposition, and habitual and perpetual preparation to do nothing that is
displeasing unto God, and to do every thing that is pleasing to him. The
contrary Proposition, that would exclude in any condition whatsoever, yea, in a
state which is perfect, all pluralities and succession of acts, is erroneous,
and opposite to the Tradition of all the Saints.

20. There are no Apostolic Traditions but those that are acknowledged for
such by the whole Church, and the Authority whereof is decided by the Councils
of Trent; the contrary proposition is Erroneous, and pretendedly secret
Apostolical Traditions, would be a Snare to the Faithful, and a way to
introduce all manner of evil Doctrines.

21. Dilatory and quiet Prayer, or such as is attended with the simple presence
of God, and all other extraordinary Prayers not excluding passive ones,
approved of by St. Francis de Sales, and other spiritual ones received by the
whole Church, are not to be rejected, nor suspected without great rashness, and
they do not hinder a man from being always disposed to produce all the
forementioned acts in convenient time; but to reduce them to implicit or
apparent acts in favor of the most perfect, under pretense that the love of
God ties them all up to a certain method, is to elude the obligation, and to
destroy that distinction which is revealed by God.

22. Without these extraordinary Prayers, one may become a very great Saint,
and attain to Christian Perfection.

23. To reduce the inward state and purification of the Soul, to these
extraordinary Prayers, is a manifest Error.

24. It Is alike dangerous to exclude the state of Contemplation, the
Attributes, the three Divine Persons in the Trinity, and the Mysteries of the
Incarnation of the Son of God, and more especially, that of the Cross and of
the Resurrection; and all those things that are seen no otherwise than by
Faith, are the Object of a Christians Contemplation.

25. Its not allowable for a Christian, under pretense of passive, or other
extraordinary Prayer, to expect that God, in the Conduct, as well of the
Spiritual as temporal Life, should determine him to every action, by way of
particular inspiration, and the contrary leads men to Illusions, carelessness,
and the tempting of God.

26. Laying aside the circumstance and moments of Prophetical or extraordinary
inspiration; the true submission which every Christian Soul, though perfect, owes
to God, consists in serving him with the natural and supernatural Light, as he
received the same, and according to the Rules of Christian prudence, in
presupposing always that God directs all things in the Course of his
Providence, and that he is the Author of every good Counsel.

27. We ought not to tie up the gift of Prophecy, and much less the Apostolical
state, to a certain state of perfection and Prayer, and to do so, is to bring
in an Illusion, rashness and Error.

28. The extraordinary ways and marks which those that have been approved
Spiritualists, have given concerning themselves, are very rare, and subject to
the Examination of Bishops, Ecclesiastical Superiors and Doctors, who are to
judge of the same, not so much according to Experiences, as according to the
immutable Rules of the Scriptures and of Tradition; and to teach and practice
the contrary, is to shake off the Yoke of Obedience that is due to the Church.

29. If there is, or if there has been, in any part of the World, a small
number of chosen ones, whom God by an extraordinary and particular way of
prevention, best known to himself, stirs up every moment in such a manner, to
all those actions that are essential to Christianity, and to other good works,
whereof there was no necessity of giving them any prescriptions to excite them
thereunto, we will leave them to the judgment of the Almighty, and without
avowing the like states, we do only make this practical Observation, that there
is nothing so dangerous, nor so subject to Illusion, as to guide Souls in such
a manner, as if they had already attained thereto, and that however, it is not
in these sort of preventions that Christian perfection does consist.

30. In all the above named Articles, as to what regards Concupiscence,
imperfections, and principally sin, our meaning is not, for the honor of our
Lord, to take in the Holy Virgin his Mother.

31. As for those Souls whom God is pleased to exercise with Trials, Job, who
is a pattern for such, teaches them to benefit themselves by lucid intervals,
in order to produce the most excellent acts of Faith, Hope and Love. The
Spiritualists teach them to find these in the top or highest part of the Soul.
They are not therefore to be allowed to acquiesce in their apparent damnation,
but their directors, with St. Francis de Sales, are to assure them that God
will never forsake them.

32. It Is well in every condition, and especially in this same, to adore the
vindictive Justice of God, never to wish the exercise of the same upon our
selves, in all its rigor, seeing that even one of the effects of this rigor,
is to deprive us of Love. Christian Abandoning is to cast all our Cares upon
God, to hope in his goodness for our salvation; and as St. Augustine, after St.
Cyprian teaches us, to attribute all to him, ut totum detur Deo.

33. Troubled and truly humbled Souls may also be inspired with a submission
and agreement to the Will of God, though even by a very false supposition,
instead of the eternal good which he has promised the Just, he would detain
them by virtue of his own good pleasure, in eternal torments; and this without
being deprived, at the same time, of his Grace and Love; which is an act of
perfect resignation or self-abandoning, and of a pure love practiced by the
Saints, and which may be useful with that particular grace of God to Souls
truly perfect, without derogating from the Obligation of the other
forementioned Acts, which are essential to Christianity.

34. Over and above which, it is certain that the Perfect, and such as are
Novices, or beginners, ought to be conducted respectively, by different ways,
and that the former have a more full and deeper insight into Christian Truths
than the other.

THE French King's LETTER TO THE POPE.
Most Holy Father,
THE Book written by the Archbishop of Cambray, having for some Months past,
made much noise in the Church within my Kingdom, I caused the same to be
Examined by my Bishops, a great number of Doctors, and learned Religionaries of
several Orders. They have all, as well Bishops as Doctors, unanimously
reported, that it was a very ill and dangerous Book, and that the Explanation
published by the said Archbishop, was unwarrantable. He declared in his
Preface, that his intention only, was to Explicate the Doctrine of his
Brethren, who, after they had attempted by all gentle ways to reclaim him, they
found themselves obliged in Conscience, to put out their Declaration concerning
his Book, and to consign the same into the Hands of the Archbishop of Damas,
your Holiness's Nuncio at my Court, to the end that your Holiness might put an
end to an Affair, that may have pernicious Consequences, if it be not nipt in
the very Bud. I humbly entreat you to pass sentence upon the same Book, and
Doctrine contained therein, as soon as possible, and assure your Holiness, at
the same time, that I shall make use of all my Authority, to put the Decision
you shall make in Execution, and that I am

Most Holy Father, Your very affectionate Servant, LOUIS.
Meudon, Aug. 26. 1697.
THE TABLE.
SEveral sorts of Love wherewith we may love God.
The First Love. 1 The Second. 1 The Third. 2 The Fourth. 3 The Fifth. 5 The
Names of these Five sorts of Love.
1. Of the Carnal Love of the Jews. 7 2. The love of Concupiscence ibid. 3. The
love of Hope. 8 4. Interested Love. ibid. 5. Pure Love. ibid. ARTICLES.
1. Of the love of Concupiscence. 9 2. Three different Degrees of Just Persons
upon Earth. 12 How Fear and Hope purify themselves. 13 The effects of pure
Love. 15 3. Of interested love. It makes a great many Saints. 18 4. How Hope
perfects her self, and keeps her distinction from Charity. 21 How an interested
Soul can Will or seek God as he is her Good. 24 5. The two states of the Just,
of Resignation and Indifference. 26 What holy Indifference is. 27 Passages out
of St. Francis de Sales, concerning it. 29 6. Holy indifference is the real
Principle of the interested desires of the Law and of Grace. 33 7. There is no
state that gives Souls a miraculous Inspiration, wherein consists the
perfection of the internal Life. 35 8. What abandoning ones self is. 39 The
extreme Trials of abandoning. 40 The Souls resistance makes these Trials long
and painful. 40 The diffeeence between common Temptations and the Trials of an
entire purification. 41 9. The state of the Soul that abandons her self to God
in these extreme Trials. 43 The Edge of the Spirit, or Top of the Soul. 44 10.
The Souls absolute Sacrifice of its own Interest to God. 46 11. The difference
between the New and the Old Law. 51 The Soul ought to follow Grace, without
being willing to prevent it. 52 A cooperation with Grace. ibid. Of Activity. 53
12. Of disinterested Souls. 57 An abnegation and hatred of ones self. ib. One
ought always to watch over himself. 58 The difference between the Vigilance of
pure and interested love. 60 13. Simple and direct Acts, and reflex Acts, an
inward certainty. 62 14. The separation of the upper part of the Soul from the
lower, in extreme Trials. 65 How this separation is made. ibid. 15. Universal
Sobriety, Mortification. 68 A temperature of Austerities. 69 The effects of
Austerities. ibid. 16. Two sorts of Proprieties. 71 Resignation. 72 What
mystical Men call Propriety. 73 Disappropriation. ibid. 17. Common and
extraordinary temptations, and the difference between them. 77 18. Diverse sorts
of Wills in God. 81 The permissive Will of God. 82 19. Vocal and mental Prayer.
84 20. Of Reading. 87 A persuasion of the most powerful love of all. 88 21. The
difference between Meditation and Contemplation. 89 22. When Meditation may be
quitted in order to enter upon Contemplation. 93 23. For what Souls
contemplation is not convenient. 95 24. Habitual Contemplation. 96 25.
Perpetual Prayer. 98 26. Interruptions of direct Contemplation. 101 27. Direct
Contemplation is negative. 102 28. How centemplative Souls are deprived of the
distinct views of Christ. 106 29. Of passive Contemplation. 109 Why they call
it the Prayer of Silence, or quietude. 111 30. Of the passive state. 114 31.
The simplicity of the passive state. 117 32. The liberty that is in the passive
state. 120 33. The Reunion of all the Virtues in Love. 122 34. Of Spiritual
Death. 125 35. Of the state of Transformation. 126 36. Of the Internal
Exercises of transformed Souls. 128 37. Transformed Souls may sin. 130 38. And
consequently, they ought to come to Confession. 132 39. The imperfections of
the Soul. 135 40. How a Transformed Soul is united to God. 138 41. Of spiritual
Marriages. 139 42. Of substantial Union. 140 43. The submission of the
Spiritual Man. 141 44. The Economy and Secret of the sublimest Exercise of
pure love. 143 45. All the Internal ways are but the means to arrive at pure
Love. 145 The Conclusion of all the Articles. 149 ADDITIONS.
THE Lord Archbishop of Cambray's Letter to the Pope. 151 A Letter of the same
Person, dated August 3. 1697. 160 A Declaration of Three Prelates, viz. of the
Archbishop of Paris, the Bishop of Meaux, and Chartres, upon the Book,
Entitled, An Explanation of the Maxims of the Saints, concerning the Internal
Life. 166 The Thirty Four Articles of the 16 and 26th of April. 1695. 216 The
French King's Letter to the Pope. 227

FINIS.
Some BOOKS Printed for Henry Rhodes in Fleet Street.
MOnasticon Anglicanum, or, the History of the Abbeys, Monasteries, Hospitals,
Cathedrals, and Collegiate Churchies in England, and Wales; made English from
Sir Will. Dugdale, with Sculptures, Folio, price 10 s.

The New World of Words, or, an Universal English Dictionary* containing the
proper significations of all Words from other Languages; together with the
Explanations of all those Terms that conduce to the Understanding of any of the
Arts and Sciences, viz. Divinity, Philosophy, Law, Physic, Mathematics,
Husbandry. Published by E.P. The Fifth Edition enlarged from the best English
and Foreign Authors: A Work very necessary for Strangers, and our own
Countrymen, for the right understanding of what they Discourse, Write or Read.
Fol. Price 14 s.

Memoirs for the Ingenious, Containing several Curious Observations in
Philosophy, Mathematics, Physic, Philology, and other Arts and Sciences. By
M. de la Crose.

Miscellaneous Letters, giving an Account of the Works of the Learned, both at
home and abroad, in which there is a Catalogue and Idea of all valuable Books.

The New Politics of the Court of France, under the Reign of Lewis XIV;
wherein are to be seen all his Intrigues, in respect to the Potentates of
Europe.

Letters writ by a Turkish Spy, who lived Forty Five Years undiscovered at
Paris, giving an Account to the Divan of Constantinople, of the Remarkable
Transactions in the Christian Courts of Europe, from the Year 1637, to 1682. in
Eight Volumes.

Historical Travels and Voyages over Europe: Containing all that is most
curious in that part of the World, in Four Volumes.

The First Volume of France, containing a Geographical Description thereof: An
Account of its Government, Rarities, and the most Delightful Curiosities,
worthy taking notice of.

The Second Volume of Spain and Portugal, containing a Description of their
Government, Rarities, and the most Delightful Curiosities, worthy taking notice
of.

The Third Volume of Italy, containing its most select Curiosities, the various
Constitutions of Government under several Sovereign Princes and States, their
Strength, Riches, and Revenues, the Customs, Manners, Coins, and Trade of the
People, together with a particular Description of the City of Rome, the
Conclave, the Election of the Pope, and the Promotion of the Cardinals, with
many more new Remarks, Price 1 s.

The Fourth Volume, of Holland, and the rest of the United Provinces,
containing their Description in general; the grounds of their mutual Union, and
altering their Religion; as also their growth under the House of Orange; their
Government, Laws, Policy, Religion, Strength, their Trade to the Indies; their
Fishery and Bank, with a particular Account of the Cities of Amsterdam, Hague,
Rotterdam, 8vo. Price 1 s.


