A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE House of Peers ON December 22. 1680. Being the
Day of Solemn Humiliation.

By the Right Reverend Father in God JOHN LORD BISHOP OF OXFORD.

Printed at the THEATER in Oxford. Anno Dom. 1680.

MAT. 12. 25. Every Kingdom divided against it self is brought to Desolation.
THE words are a maxim, as most positive in the assertion, so universal in the
extent: reading the destiny, and taking in the interests of all Kingdoms
whatsoever. Be it the Empire of Almighty God, or that of the Devil; be it the
pious Government of a rightful Prince, or Tyrannous violence of a Thief or
Robber. The proposition in all cases remains unmoved. Every Kingdom divided
against it self is brought to desolation.

Nay more, it obtains in all Societies of men, for it is added; that every City
or House divided against it self shall not stand.

Our Saviors argument indeed is intended to concluded in the behalf of
rightful Governments, and does it with greater force and evidence because it
reaches to the other, If Satan, says he, cast out Satan he is divided against
himself, how shall then his Kingdom stand? There is, there must be a Beelzebub
a prince of devils even in hell; the region of malice, hatred and rebellion,
must have some peace and order to support it.

Again he adds, How can one enter into a strong man's house and spoil his goods,
except he first bind the strong man, and then he will spoil his house? On this
account it is that the sturdy Thief confederats with others; obeys command,
submits to punishment, defends himself against the Law, by an obsequious
violation of it.

God in the frame of man so built him for society, that no depravation of his
nature or his manners, can blot out the impression. As virtue would
communicate, vice would defend it self; and in no condition is it good for man
to be alone.

We are all born naked and unarmed, needing the assistance of each other; but
wanting strength or weapons to enforce it: but the divine Wisdom has so suited
things, that the strong depends upon the weak, as much as the weak does on the
strong: the rich is assisted by the poor, as the poor is by the rich: the wise
is aided by the ignorant, as the ignorant is by the wise. The Scepter rests
upon the mattock and the spade, and the Throne upon the plough.

The great animal of a Republic has as much consent of parts, as much
dependence of them on each other, as any living creature has. St. Paul at the
12. of the first to the Corinthians excellently describes it. The eye cannot
say unto the hand, I have no need of thee, nor again the hand unto the foot, I
have no need of you, but those members of the body which seem to be most
feeble, are necessary. If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing?
if the whole were hearing, where were the smelling? and if they were all one
member, where were the body? But God has so temperd the parts together, that
the members as they have equal use, so they should have the same care one of
another; and whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one
member be honored, all the members rejoice with it.

The representation of this to the people of Rome, in their seditious departure
from their Magistrates, by Menenius Agrippa; persuaded an immediate submission
and return. I would to God the truth of the Gospel, would have as just an
effect on us, as the fable had with them.

But that rebellion is the sin of witchcraft one would wonder, by what
enchantment men should be persuaded to disturb at once their own and the public
peace; forfeit all the advantages they enjoy in a settled Government, which
cannot be so bad as not to be much better then the confusion which sedition
brings, and run upon that sudden destruction; which, the Wise man says, is
the end of those who are given to change.

War however managed is calamitous enough. When a Kingdom though entire within
it self, is divided against another, it generally is bruised and batterd in the
conflict, so that the Victor when he puts off his Armor has little reason to
boast himself as when he put it on, But there sometimes both parts survive the
quarrel, and the vanquished are advantaged by their misadventure, as the Nations
whom the Greeks and Romans overrun, gained Laws, and Arts and Safety from
their Conquerors; but Civil broils can have no triumph, nothing to balance or
alleviat their mischief.

It Is a sad sight to see a wounded man besmeard with gore, and faint with loss
of blood returning from a Battle; but it is in no proportion so afflictive, as
to see one by phrensy, like the Demoniac in the Gospel, armed against himself,
night and day ranging the mountains and the tombs, crying and cutting himself
with stones, tearing and gnashing with his teeth and pining away, cast sometime
into the fire, and anon into the water to be destroyed: which is the case of a
House, a City, or a Kingdom divided against it self.

And this mischief is the more to be feared and carefully avoided, because it is
almost in every ones power to work it. One single man has skill and strength
enough to embroil a Nation, an Absalom and Sheba did it to Israel, a Graccus a
Sylla and a Marius did it in Rome, and one unquiet Hanno brought Carthage with
the mighty Hannibal, from the height of Empire, to utter desolation. Nay
creatures raked out of the dirt can do this. We all remember what a revolution
a Massaniello lately made in Naples; and our Stories tell us what disturbances
a Straw, a Cade, a Tiler; a Ket, a Simnel have made in this our Country: that I
omit the viler names of this our age.

The beginning of strife, says the Wiseman, is as the letting out of water; a
breach which at first might have bin stopped with a man's hand, suddenly grows
wide, and the torrent rouls upon it, and becoms irresistible. We cannot but
remember how fears and jealousies emproved in this unhappy Country into a
bloody War; and little discontents by specious pretenses divided the Kingdom
against it self, till it verified the assertion in the Text, and ceast to be a
Kingdom, and had not God by miracle interposed, had certainly brought it to
final desolation.

There has, it is true, past an Act of Oblivion of all these things; But sure we
are most unhappy if it take place so far, that we forget what we so lately
sufferd, and repeat those mad Divisions which will most certainly have the same
or worse events, then these they formerly procured.

Were there not that natural connection of things, which makes, as we have seen,
the ruin of Societies necessarily consequent to divisions in them; had we not
fresh experience to back our reasonings: we may consider farther, that God
Almighty having said it, he is concernd in his Veracity to bring his Word to
pass, and rather then fail, interpose his Omnipotence to compass it, and bring
to desolation a Kingdom divided against it self.

And indeed, if we look into the holy Scripture we shall find, that when God
designs a judgment upon a sinful people, this is the means he uses, nay this
is one great part of the infliction.

At the 19. of Isaiah, he threatens Egypt, that he will set the Egyptians
against the Egyptians, and they shall fight every one against his brother, and
every one against his neighbor, city against city, and kingdom against kingdom:
and the spirit of Egypt shall fail in the midst thereof; that he will destroy
its counsel, mingle a perverse spirit in the midst of it, and cause Egypt to
err in every work, as a drunken man staggers in his vomit. So we see in fact,
Jud. 7. and 1 Samuel 14. the Midianites and Philistines, without any previous
discontent or quarrel, fatally engaged; every man's sword turned against his
brother. Which state of ruin the Prophet Jeremy calls, Gods taking away his
peace from a people, even loving kindness and mercies: the giving them the
wine-cup of his fury, which when they have drunk they shall be moved and be mad.

And now it may be seasonable that we bethink our selves, and soberly enquire
how we stand in reference to this great concern; whither we are at peace, or in
that state of ruin which division will certainly infer.

And does not herein our iniquity answer to our face? Is there almost any
conversation but under the terms of Faction and Discord? Does any man escape
the character of Papist, Pensioner, and Courtier on the one hand; or
Common-wealthsman, Traitor, and Fanatic on the other? Are there not almost as
many Religions, Factions and Designs as there are Faces: nay is there not
hazard that there should be more, the same persons in few months running through
several Sects and Parties? Is not the speaking evil of Dignities, and
reproching Things and Persons sacred, become the dialect and language of the
time? Is not all protection and support due from Superiors, and all submission
and industry paiable by inferiors, quite lost among us? Is there any care of
the Public either Interest or Safety? Nay are not all the blessings we enjoy,
forgot and forfeited in the thought of somewhat which we fain would have, or
jealousy that possibly we may lose somewhat that we now possess?

This is evidently our case: and do we not see a writing on the wall, like that
described in the book of Daniel, Mean, Mean, Tekel, Upharsin, that God has
numbered our Kingdom and finished it, that we are weighed in the balance and
found wanting, and that our Kingdom is divided and given unto Strangers? We
need not look out for a master of Magicians to decipher or unfold the writing,
it is so plain that he who runs may read it. This is the Comet that blazes in our
Sky; and threatens Ruin and Destruction to us, beyond the abodings of
Astrology.

The danger then is sufficiently confessed: I wish we were so well agreed upon
the remedy. But as it happens in our bodily distempers, so it fares in this of
the public, every man is a Physician and has somewhat to prescribe.

And first, it is offered as of moment to strengthen our selves by Alliances
abroad. This were indeed of use in reference unto a Foreign enemy; but cannot
obviat the mischief which rises here at home. It Is to like purpose as if for an
Impostume in the brain, or Ulcer in the bowels, the Patient should put a helmet
on his head, or apply a plaster to his breast. Besides, it is not easy to
imagine, that any prudent State will think it worth the while, to join with
them who disagree among themselves.

Secondly, it is suggested that our safety should be provided for by good and
wholesome Laws; which might indeed avail, were we in a temper to obey them. As
the case now stands, a Physician may as well hope to cure his Patient by
writing of long bills, and prescribing several recipes, which will be never
taken or regarded; as we expect advantage from the multiplying of Acts. Ill
manners are commonly said to produce good laws: but we do not find that the
best laws without a vigorous execution; can produce good manners.

But thirdly, there is a sort of men who would commend a more forcible
expedient, the security of a standing Army. Empirics indeed, who to cure an
Ague think it advisable to throw the patient into a Feavor; who tell us that
War is the surest way to keep the Peace. I will not argue how well this method
may agree with the complexions of a more Southern climate, it is enough our
rougher constitutions will never suit with such a medicin.

A fourth proposal is of those who lay all the blame of our divisions on the
male administration of affairs by evil Counselors, and resolve that if these
troublers of our Israel were brought to condign punishment, all would be well
immediately. But the worst ont is, we have a demonstration that this expedient
will not do our work; for that we have often shifted those we have most
complaind of, but still retaind the same complaints. Besides we see that some
of those, who most cried down the evil Ministers as ruinous to the public, and
threw the first stone at them, being got into their room were liable themselves.

A fifth proposal is, that liberal supplies be made to clear the public debts,
and support the Government for its honor and defense. This indeed is most
necessary to be don. But it is fond to think that this can make a cure. The dying
Miser may as well hope for life by applying a bag of money to his heart, as a
sick State expect a remedy from pecuniary supplies. A clock whose movements are
decayed, will not go well though the weights hung at it are of Gold.

But sixthly as a Catholicon and sure reserve, it is proposed, to unite the
disagreeing interests in Religion. A most desirable design indeed, and likely
to be of great effect if it can be compassed. This is a work worthy the counsel
and the care of the great Assembly of the Nation, the legislation of
Parliaments, and sanction of Synods. In this case, most especially, it may be
said, that God stands in the Congregation of Princes, he is a judge among Gods.
And herein the direction of Jehoshaphat 2 Chronicles. 19. will deservedly recur,
Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not for man but the Lord.

Religion like Truth and God himself, can be but one: Even the Garment of our
Savior was so far from admitting a rent, that it was without seam. However
similar bodies are multiplied by being broken into parts; in Christianity,
which is the body of Christ the head, what is divided is destroyed.

The multitude of the first Believers were not only of one heart and one soul,
but came together with one accord into one place; and when the numbers of
Disciples grew too large for such a meeting, their mutual communication with
each other, continued to them still the self same union: and according to the
method of the primitive Church. Totus orbis commercio formatarum, and una
communionis societate concordabat, as says Optatus lib. 2. The whole world was
united by the commerce of credentiall letters, and the fellowship of communion.

Abstractedly speaking, It is the duty of every Christian, to communicate in
holy offices with every Christian; and likewise it is the duty of every one, to
admit all others to the like communion. So that whatever impunity human Laws
may give to separation, they can never make it lawful; it will still be sin though
it have the encouragement of innocence.

Indeed Schism is so severely branded in the holy Scripture, that even they who
place their Religion in separation acknowledge the guilt of it; and lay the
blame of their dissent on those from whom they differ; alleging either the
immorality of their lives, or errors in the Faith: and in fine, resolve their
separation is therefore innocent because it was necessary.

Hence it comes to pass that notwithstanding the strict obligation to an entire
agreement among all Christians; it is not likely, nay not possible to be
obtained: for besides the ready excuse of casting blame on others, and the
perpetual subterfuge, that peace is never to be sought for with the loss of
truth; which makes an outlet for all self opinionated men, who will be sure to
guild their errors with the name of truth, and make up their defect of
knowledge, with abundance of perverseness; there are very many so full of
malice, that nothing is so hateful to them as the name of Peace, so that as
the Psalmist says, if any one speak to them thereof, they make themselves
ready to battle. But over and above all this, there is upon the part of
Almighty God a fatal bar imposd, he having said, there must be heresies in the
Church; and that it is necessary offenses should come, that they who are approved
may be made manifest.

So that they who propose to themselves the uniting either all Christians, or
all Protestant dissenters, or those who ^^ve even the slightest differences
between themselves; will be more happy in the piety of their design, then the
success and issue of it.

To speak distinctly to our present case. Popery in its unhappy additions to
the faith once delivered to the Saints, is a Religion made up of superstition
and cruelty, hypocrisy and profaness, of craft and folly: but yet it has not so
exhausted the whole nature of ill, but that there are several other Sects
pretending to Christianity extremely bad.

And the same principle of duty to Almighty God, that forbids an orthodox Son
of the English Church to communicate with Popery, must also as forcibly oblige
not to communicate with them; and what we do upon just conviction, every
Dissenter is directed to by the sway of his opinion; and will be as little
gratified by the widest and most comprehensive Scheme, if it oblige unto
communion on the terms which it holds forth, without which it does nothing, as
now they are with the established constitution of the Church.

Indeed our Church in reference to the present state of things, has very
rightly by a great wise man bin compared unto a fortified Town, and the several
denominations of dissenters, to so many Villages about her: now in case of an
assault from a common enemy, which God knows lies hard upon us, as it would be
a great imprudence in the Citizens, not to give all encouragement to those
without, to come within the line, and share the safety of it: so twould be
utter madness in the Villagers, to continue still without, or demand that the
walls or works should be demolisht, that they might dwell with better ease, or
more unto their mind.

When Julian the Apostate labored with all his force and skill to extirpate
Christianity, the means he used was to encourage the several Sects of heretics
in their differing ways of worship, as we learn from Ammianus Marcellinus a
Heathen writer in his 22. book. Dissidentes Christianorum antistires cum plebe
discissa in palatium intromissos, monebat ut civilibus discordiis consopitis,
quisque nullo vetante religioni suae serviret, The Emperor calling to him in
his Palace the heads of the divided sects of Christians, both Priests and
People, admonishd them, that laying aside civil discords, every one without
control should exercise his own way of worship. And then adds; that this was
thus diligently don by him, that dissentions being increased by license, be
might from thence forth be secure from danger of the Christians unanimity;
having experimentally found that no wild Beasts are so enraged against one
another, as disagreeing Christians. And we know how this very thing, has bin
from time to time endeavored by the Factors for the Roman Church. And it would
be exceeding strange if the readiest way to bring in Popery, and extirpate the
very being of Christianity, should now be thought a good expedient to promote
the Protestant interest.

The practice of our Neighbor State, is indeed urged to show the safety and
advantage of leaving Religion at large; but it is obvious to see what footing
Popery has thereby got among them; which their public writings fruitlessly
complain of: and what progress other Sects have made, the numbers of Socinians
and Jews, and some of a worse mark, will plainly evidence.

When Christianity was lately under persecution in Japan, there were a sort of
men that answered they were Hollanders, and so escaped the Test. Were we here
professors of that cold complexion; a toleration of all, or possibly of no
Religion, might well consist with peace; especially under the guard of a
Military force, but they little understand the English temper that think the
like indifference will pass with us.

When all is don, there is no possible expedient to heal our divisions, till
there be first procured a mutual desire to have them healed. To this end it
would be of great effect that S. Paul's advice should be considered, That the
strong would not despise the weak, nor the weak judge the strong: that the
knowing would with meekness instruct those that oppose themselves, and the
opposers would lay aside hostility, and receive with meekness the engrafted
word, and grow thereby.

Did men but heartily desire a reconcilement, did they thoroly consider that
the Kingdom as it now stands divided against it self must certainly be brought
to desolation, and that nothing but a closure can avert it, how would those
differences which now appear like mountains, shrink into mole-hills; and that
which we have hitherto taken for a beam in our brothers eye, seem scarce a
mote, and that possibly not in his but in our own? How would the motives of
discord and defiance, with which we have hitherto whet our selves against each
other, put in the balance with our obligations to charity and love, prove light
as air, nay lighter then vanity it self? Good God! we have one Lord, one Faith,
one Baptism, one common Hope, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and
through all, and in us all: and why are we not one among our selves? If we look
down to earth, it is cursed indeed with Thorns and Briers, but made more accursed
by our quarrels and contests: if we look up to Heaven, that wide extent is
capable to entertain us all; there are many Mansions, and those so large as
will not fail to fill the most insatiat desire. No place but hell can give us
countenance for enmity and strife: and yet the Rebel disobedient man will want
a president from thence, for even there the Fiends submit to order and command.

What words shall I take up to enforce upon you a value and desire of peace?
Shall I adjure you by all the charms of love, those holy incantations which
alone can take away the sting and venim of the serpent, and make him innocent
as the Dove? Shall I break out into the rapture of the Psalmist? Behold how
good and joyful a thing it is, brethren to dwell together in unity. It is like
the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down unto the beard, even unto
Aarons beard, and went down to the skirts of his clothing. Where it is it
perfumes the ambient air, refreshes the whole neighborhood; nay consecrates
the man into a Priest, and admits him to the altar of almighty God. It is like
the dew of Hermon that fell upon the hill of Sion. It stoops from heaven in
soft and gentle emanations, with imperceptible steps; but then displaies it
self in drops of moisture impregnated with life and fertilness: the barren
mountains by this culture become fruitful to eternity, for there the Lord
promised his blessing and life for evermore.

Shall I display before your eyes the infinite advantages of Peace, the ease,
the quiet, the contentment of that state, the affluence and plenty which it
brings; all that we toil and labor for, either in our own behalf or our
posterity? Or on the other side shall I describe the horror and confusion, the
rapin violence and blood, which follow strife and discord: call your thoughts
over to the neighboring coasts, harrast by long hostilities and War; or call
you back to the remembrance of your late civil broils, the scars whereof remain
in most of your Estates and Families.

Or shall I warn you of your Potent Neighbor, who as your Arms employed
against his enemies, have raisd him to his present greatness; so now attends
and watches till your Arms employed against your selves, shall raise him higher
yet, and make a ready way unto his farther conquests?

Or lastly shall I lay before you the obligations of Religion, the New and Old
command, the dying Legacy and parting gift of your dear Lord and Master, whose
Gospel is the Word of reconcilement, who himself is love, whose whole design of
life and death was Peace; and therewith tell you of a like Potent Neighbor,
who intends to build his Babel on the confusion of your Tongues, pursue the
Florentine maxim, Divide and Reign; and repete the Roman conquest here, by the
same means the first was made, dum singuli pugnant, universi vincuntur?

If we shall be so false to God and to our selves, to the whole Protestant
cause and name, which rests on us as its defense and bulwark, against the
inundation of Papal Tyranny, which is now ready to devour them; by our
divisions to bring on and entail unto posterity, the servitude of Souls,
Estates and Bodies, the Massacres and Devastations, which those architects of
ruin have long thirsted to effect, and by miraculous providence, bin hitherto
witheld from compassing; we shall, be as the most guilty, so the most wretched
nation in the world.

I am fallen upon atheme on which it were very easy to enlarge, and while I do so
thus in generals, may hope to find a favorable audience. But I come not here
this day, and I presume you do not neither, to trifle with your miseries, skin
ore and palliat your sores: but in the name and the behalf of God, will attemt
to search the ulcer to the bottom, show each man present the plague of his own
heart, the accursed thing that troubles this our Israel, foments our discords
and drives away our peace.

It is a received rule in Physic that the knowing the disease is half the cure,
in reference hereto I shall come to a short issue, and to the question whence
are wars and fightings among us, make a plain answer from St. James, that they
are from our lusts that war in our members.

And first to take the words in their plain and most natural sense, I may use
the reply of Jehu to Joram that asked if it were Peace. What peace so long as
the whoredoms of Jezebel, and her witchcrafts are so many? Can there be peace
in families, when the Whore usurps the place, the affection and support of the
lawful Wife, when lust engages in wild pursuits, in quarrels and expenses, and
wages amidst all a perpetual war in the members?

This is the sin that takes away the heart, brings to a morsel of bread, gives
rotteness to the bones, a reproach and blot unto the name, roots up foundations;
nay as Solomon says, who made the most costly experiment, destroies Kings.
This is the sin which as the Apostle expresses it, takes the members of Christ
and makes them members of an harlot, defiles the temple of God, and then sure
nothing less can be expected, then what the same Apostle infers from thence: If
any one defile the temple of God, him will God destroy.

Look we over the Annals of the World from the beginning of time unto this
present moment, you shall see that there scarcely any where has happened a great
Calamity or fatal Revolution, which has not either bin the immediate effect, or
at least in a great measure the sequel of this sin.

And if ever uncleaness was the complexion of an age, sheltered by impunity and
great example, till it out faced the day, as if it would no more be thought a
work of darkness: but filling up the character the Prophet gives of an
imperious whorish woman, has a brow of brass, and knows no shame, this is the
time. The Princes and the Nobles when they were fed unto the full, then they
committed adultery, and assembled themselves by troops in the harlots houses;
they were as fed horses in the morning, every one neighd after his neighbors
Wife. And shall I not visit for these things says the Lord: and shall not my
soul be avenged on such a Nation as this: Jer. 5. All the former instances of
shameless guilt would be outdon by this one act of impudence, to expect
impunity amidst such provocations.

Next to this lust of the Flesh, we may reckon those which St. John calls the
lust of the eye, and the pride of life, the impotent desire of Riches, Plesures
and Preferment; those certain parents of Faction and Discord, among men.
Besides that wide desires do look for large supplies, which still engage in
eager competitions: as a defeat brings rage and anger, and new contentions and
designs, so a success creates fresh wants, and keener appetites, and yet more
vigorous pursuits; so that whatever happens, there is an endless circle of rage
repining and contest. We lust and have not, says St. James, we kill and desire
to have, and cannot obtain: we fight and war and yet we have not, because we
ask not; we ask and receive not; because we ask amiss, that we may consume it
upon our lusts.

Till this voracious humor is appeasd, till that necessity is the measure of
our wants, and use the rule of our desires, and the providence of God and his
disposal, the certain gage of both; our divisions and hostilities can never
have an end.

But thirdly there is another sort of lust, no less destructive to the
interests of peace then the foregoing; it is that of misguided zeal, which from
the authority of St. Paul I must declare to be as errant sensuality, as is that
of the stews and brothel house. The works of the flesh, says he, are manifest,
which are these; adultery, fornication, uncleaness, lasciviousness, idolatry,
witchcraft, hatred, variance, zeal, which we render emulation, wrath, strife,
seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkeness, revellings and such like.
We might a little wonder to find zeal, which in our world usurps the enclosure
of godliness, placed in so ill company, did we not find the same St. Paul, at
the third of the Philippians acknowledging that by zeal he persecuted the
Church, and so became the chief of sinners.

Indeed, as the Apostle tells us, it is good to be zealously affected in a good
thing, but when it is levened with pride and singularity, when it becomes
embitterd, and is that (...) which St. James complains of, there is nothing in
the world more mischievous then it: if any one think otherwise, let him read
the story of the Zelots in Josephus, he will be abundantly convinced.

This is that diabolical carnality, by which men deflour the Spouse of Christ,
and adulterate the Word of God: the leaders wherein are described by St. Paul
to be traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of plesures more then lovers of God,
having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof; of which sort are
they that creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led
away with diverse lusts. And by St. Jude they are declared to be they who
separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit. The Holy Ghost, in his
first descent came down in Tongues of fire; and the false pretensions to the
Spirit, come with like appearances, even there the tongue is a fire, a world of
iniquity, it sets on fire the course of nature, and is set on fire of hell,
Jam. 3.

Let us not deceive our selves with emty shapes and vain appearances, whatever
habit Concupiscence puts on, tho it transform it self into an Angel of light,
it is still but Lust; and so long as it remains, howere disguised, we shall not
fail of wars and fightings among us. The wicked, says Isaiah, are like the
troubled Sea when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. There is
no peace says my God unto the wicked.

And here it is to be considered that the Apostle does not say, it is the ambition
of the Statesman, the disputing of the Scholar, the faction of the Mechanic,
the oppression of the Rich, or disobedience of the Poor, the dissolution of
this sort of men, or hypocrisy of that, from whence are Wars and fightings;
but says inclusively to all It Is from your Lusts: and till that we do say so
too, till each man speaks it to himself, there will be no removal of the
incumbent judgment, for that there is not an amendment of the provoking guilt.
Let every one sweep before his own door, and then, but not till then, the whole
Street will be made clean.

If then we are in earnest, if really we would have Peace, that there be
henceforth no decay, no leading into captivity, and no complaining in our
streets; we know upon what terms it is to be had. Is it worth the severities of
repentance, the denying of ungodliness and worldly lust, and living soberly,
and righteously, and godly in this present world? Is it worth the putting off
the old man which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, and being
renewed in the Spirit of the mind, so as to put on the new man, which after God
is created in righteousness and true holiness? if it be, behold the purchase
lies before you. Mark the perfect man, says David, and behold the upright, for
the end of that man is peace. Ps. 37. and again; When a man's ways please the
Lord, even his enemies shall be at peace with him. Wash you, make you clean,
put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn
to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the father less, plead
for the widow. Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord: tho your
sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; tho they be red like
crimson, they shall be as wool. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the
good of the land: but if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devourd of the sword,
for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Isa. 1.

Be thou reconciled to the Almighty, he shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea
in seven there shall no evil touch thee: in famine he shall redeem thee from
death, and in war from the power of the sword. Thou shall be hid from the
scourge of the tongue, neither shall thou be afraid of destruction when it
comes. At destruction and famine thou shall laugh, neither shall thou be afraid
of the Beasts of the earth: for thou shall be in league with the stones of the
field, and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee. And thou shall
know that thy tabernacle shall be in peace, and thou shall visit thy habitation
and shall not sin. Thou shall know also that thy seed shall be great, and thine
Offspring as the grass of the earth. Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age,
like as a Shock of Corn comes in his season. Job. 5. Yet more, the transient
Blessings of this world shall be a pledge and antepast of those hereafter; when
the pious soul shall be received into the Regions of eternal peace, when faith
shall cease in vision, hope in enjoyment, and grace be swallowed up in glory.

I have hitherto addressed to every Christian man that hears me this day. But now
I desire in a few words, to apply my self and what has bin now said, to the
Great Audience to whom I am peculiarly sent.

MY LORDS,

You being justly sensible of the Calamitous divisions of these unhappy
Kingdoms, which if not closed must bring it to desolation; and likewise
sensible how unavailable human counsels are to answer such an exigence, have
addressed your selves to him, whose privilege it is, to Counsel the Counselors
and teach the Senators Wisdom: and in a solemn manner, calling to fasting, and
weeping, and mourning, and girding with sackcloth, You design to invite the
Divine pity and compassion; that we repenting of the evil of our doing, the
Lord may also repent of the evil which he thought to do to us, be gracious to
his Land and pity his people, even return and repent, and leave a blessing
behind him.

Tho, as Job expresses it, Affliction rises not out of the dust, neither does
trouble spring out of the ground, yet their relief must grow from thence. When
the soul cleaves unto the dust, and the body is prostrate on it: When sackcloth
is the clothing, and tears are the meat day and night, then is the season for
the Almighty to afford his comforts, and his aids, to lift up those that are
cast down, comfort them that mourn, give beauty for ashes, the oil of gladness
for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness. When the
sentence of excision was pronounced on Nineveh; Yet forty days and Nineveh
shall be overthrown: and they proclaimed a Fast, and put on sackcloth from the
greatest of them, even to the least of them; cried mightily unto God, and
turned every one from his evil way, and from the violence that was in their
hands: God saw their works that they turned from their evil way, and God
repented of the evil that he had said he would do unto them, and he did it not.
Jon. 3.

There is a memorable case in the book of Jeremiah, that the Jews in a great
exigence, after the death of Gedaliah, and the outrages therewith committed,
fearing the anger of the Chaldean Conqueror, applied themselves unto the
Prophet, to enquire in their behalf at the mouth of God; who undertakes the
agency, and assures them that whatever the Lord shall answer, he will declare
it unto them, and keep nothing back from them: And they on the other side
assure the Prophet, by a solemn vow upon themselves, that whether it be good,
or whether it be evil, they would obey the voice of the Lord, that it may be
well with them, when they obeid the voice of the Lord: Yet after all this, when
God had returned the kindest answer imaginable, that they should sit still and
be quiet, and then they should be safe, that they should then be built up and
not pulled down, planted and not plucked up; this his condition they refused, and
thereupon fell under his last and heaviest Judgment. Jerem. 42.

I would not be so uncharitable to suggest that this may be our case; that men
of Birth, of Honor and Religion, when by their solemn Act they have procured a
Fast, to atone the anger of Almighty God, and reconcile them to his favor:
made an appointment that his Messenger should in his name declare his Will, and
thereupon come publicly into his House to hear it; which proves to be no more
then this, That they should live with the dignity of men, and quit their
brutish lusts; should after all, do so false so base a thing, as not act
according to the message they received.

Every one of either House of Parliament, who assented to the Vote for a day of
Humiliation; every man who attends that service, has interpretatively said all
the words that the Jews did to the Prophet, that whether it be good, or whether
it be evil, they would obey the voice of the Lord.

And now lay we our hand upon our heart, and seriously consider the exigence
and the remedy; the engagement here incurred, and the answer we return. What I
have said before, I now repete again; and declare as the messenger of God, in
his Name and in his behalf; that Our Kingdom thus divided against it self will
be brought to desolation. I say also, that Our divisions are from our lusts,
and that only repentance and amendment, can remove either them or the judgments
due unto them. In plain terms I declare, that nothing but our religious
service, can secure our civil freedom: nothing but obedience to the laws of
God, can preserve those of the land: nothing but a reformd life, can continue
to us the reformd religion. In a word, nothing but peace with heaven, can give
us peace and happiness on earth.

I speak unto Wise and Great men; consider what I say, and the Lord give you
understanding in all things.

FINIS.

