THE ADVENTURES OF TELEMACHUS The Son of ULYSSES.

Translated from the French.

LONDON: Printed for Awnsham and John Churchil, at the Black Swan in
Paternoster Row, MDCXCIX.

PREFACE.
THE Original of this Fiece is attributed by the Public Voice to the
Archbishop of Cambray: And certainly it is not unworthy a Person who was
entrusted with the Education of Princes. That Virtue, Wisdom, and Ardent Desire
to procure the Good of Mankind, which are interwoven with the following Story,
show the fitness of the Author for so great a Trust. The Reason he had to
involve his Instructions in Fable, will be obvious to all who shall consider
that as he wrote for Princes, who seldom fail to reject all Precepts that are
not gilded with Delight; so he Lives under a Monarchy that will not suffer
open and undisguised Truth. His Style is Poetical, and Copied from Homer; or
rather from Monsieur de la Valterie's Excellent Version of that Divine Poet,
which is esteemed a Masterpiece in the Kind. How far this Translation has
imitated the Perfections of these Originals, is submitted to the Judgment of
Others.

Lately Printed for A. and J. Churchil,
THE Historical Library of Diodorus the Sicilian. In fifteen Books. The first
Five, contain the Antiquities of Egypt, Asia, Africa, Greece, the Islands, and
Europe. The last Ten, an historical Account of the Affairs of the Persians,
Grecians, Macedonians, and other Parts of the World. To which are added, The
fragments of Diodorus that are found in the Bibliotheca of Photius: Together
with those Published by H. Valesius, L. Rhodomannus, and F. Ursinus. Made
English by G. Booth, of the City of Chester, Esquire in Folio.

THE ADVENTURES OF TELEMACHUS The Son of ULYSSES.
CALYPSO continued Disconsolate for the departure of Ulysses: Her Grief was so
violent, that she thought her self unhappy in being Immortal: Her Grotto was no
more heard ecchoing to her tuneful Voice: The Nymphs that served her, durst not
venture to speak to her: She often walked alone on the Beach, which was covered
with a charming mixture of Green and Flowers quite round the Island: But these
beautiful Walks were so far from asswaging her Grief, that they served only to
awaken the killing Thoughts of Ulysses, whose Company she had so often enjoyed
in those Places: Sometimes she stood still and wept, watering the Banks of the
Sea with her Tears, and always turning her Eyes to that side where she had last
seen Ulysses his Ship plowing through the Waves; when on a sudden she
perceived the broken pieces of a Vessel that was just then split upon the
Rocks, the Oars and Seats of the Rowers scattered here and there upon the
Sands, the Mast, Rudder and Cables floating near the Shore.

Immediately after this, she discovered two Men at a distance, one of them
appearing to be Aged, and the other, tho Young, resembling Ulysses; the same
sweetness and dignity in his Looks; the same noble Mien and majestic Port. The
Goddess presently knew him to be Telemachus, the Son of that Hero. But though the
Deities of this Order far surpass all Men in Knowledge, yet she could not
discover who was the yenerable Person that accompanied Telemachus. For the
superior Gods conceal from the inferior whatever they please; and Minerva, who
in the shape of Mentor, accompanied Telemachus, would not be known to Calypso.

In the mean time Calypso overjoyed at this Shipwreck, that had brought the Son
of Ulysses, and so like his Father, into her Island, advanced toward him; and
without seeming to know who he was; whence had you, said she, the Confidence to
enter my Island? Know, young Stranger, that there are Punishments for all those
that come within my Empire. Under such menacing Language she endeavored to
cover the joy of her Heart, which for all this, appeared in her Face.

Telemachus answered, O whoever you are, whether a Mortal or a Goddess ((...)
by your Looks you should be something Divine) can you be insensible of a Son's
Misfortune, who seeking his Father, and committing his Life to the mercy of the
Winds and Seas, has seen his Ship dashed in pieces against your Rocks? Who, I
pray, replied the Goddess, is that Father you seek? He is called Ulysses, said
Telemachus; and is one of those Kings, who after a Siege of ten Years,
destroyed the famous City of Troy. His Name is celebrated in all Parts of
Greece and Asia for his Valor in Fight, and much more for the Wisdom of his
Counsels: But now he wanders in unknown Seas, and has past most astonishing
Dangers. His Country seems to fly from him: His Wife Penelope, and I, who am
his Son, have lost all hopes of seeing him again. I run the same Hazards he has
done, to learn where he is; but what do I say! It may be he is now buried in
the profound Abyss of the Sea. O Goddess! Pity our Misfortunes; and if you know
what the Fates have done, either to save or destroy Ulysses, disdain not to
instruct his Son Telemachus.

Calypso filled with Amazement and Compassion to find so much Wisdom and
Eloquence in so much Youth, could not satiate her Eyes with looking on him, and
stood for some time silent. At last she said to him; we will inform you O
Telemachus, what has happened to your Father; but the Relation is long, and
it is more than time to repose after all the Fatigues you have endured. Come
into my Habitation, and I will receive you as my Son: Come, you shall be my
Consolation in this Solitude, and I will make you happy, if you know how to be
so.

Telemachus followed the Goddess, who was surrounded by a Crowd of young
Nymphs, and surpassed them all in Stature, as a well grown Oak of theForest
raises his losty Head above the rest of the Trees. He admired the luster of her
Beauty, the rich Purple of her long and floating Robes, her Hair carelessly but
gracefully tied behind her Neck, the Fire that darted from her Eyes, and the
sweetness that tempered this Vivacity. Mentor, with a modest Silence, and
looking toward the Ground, followed Telemachus. Arriving at the entrance of
Calypso's Grotto, Telemachus was surprised to see whatever might charm the Eye,
covered under the appearance of rural Simplicity. There was neither Gold nor
Silver to be seen, no Marble nor Pillars of Stone, no Painting nor Statues. The
Grotto was cut into diverse Vaults within the Rock, which were incrusted with
Shells and Rockwork. The Tapistry was a young Vine, extending its tender
Branches equally on every side. The gentle Zephyrs preserved a refreshing
coolness in this Place, secure from the scorching Heat of the Sun. Springs of
pure Water passed sweetly whispering through the Meadows that were painted with
Violets and Amaranthus, and formed diverse natural Baths as clear and as bright
as Crystal. A thousand Flowers enameled the green Turf that surrounded the
Grotto. There was an entire Wood of those Trees, that bear golden Apples, and
put forth Flowers in every Season, yielding the sweetest of all Perfumes. This
Wood seemed to Crown the beautiful Meadows, and made an artificial Night, which
the Beams of the Sun could not penetrate. Here nothing was ever heard, but the
singing of Birds, or the noise of Waters impetuously precipitating from the
Rocks, and gliding away through the Fields.

The Grotto of the Goddess was on the descent of a Hill, from whence she had a
view of the Sea, one while clear and smooth as Glass, at another time vainly
angry with the Rocks, swelling into Waves, and breaking to pieces against them:
From another side she might see a River, containing many little Islands
bordered with flowering Lime-Trees, and lofty Poplars, that reared their
stately Heads to the Clouds. The several Channels that formed these Islands,
seemed to play and sport between the Banks, some rolling their Waters with
rapidity, others more gently and quietly; and others after many windings,
returning as it were to the Spring from whence they came, seemed unwilling to
leave the charming Place. One might see afar off many Hills and Mountains
hiding their Heads in the Clouds, and forming such odd and unusual Figures as
were very agreeable to the Eye. The Hills that stood at less distance were
covered with Vines, the Grapes of which surpassed the richest Purple in Color,
and could not conceal themselves under the Leaves of the Trees that bowed under
the weight of their Fruit. The Fig Tree, the Olive and the Pomgranat, with all
Kinds of other Trees covered the rest of the Country, and made it one entire
Garden.

Calypso having showed Telemachus all these Beauties of Nature, said to him,
it is time for you to repose, and to change your wet Garments; after which we
will see one another again, and I will tell you some Things that shall affect
your Heart. Having said this, she caused them both to enter into the most
private and retired part of a Grotto, which stood near to that in which she
dwelt. Her Nymphs had taken care to light a Fire of Cedar, which filled the
Apartment with an agreeable scent, and had left all necessary Apparel for the
two Strangers. Telemachus finding that the Goddess had designed him a Tunick of
the finest Wool, and white as Snow, with a Vest of Purple, richly embroidered
with Gold, was, like a young Man, infinitely pleased with this Magnificence;
which Mentor perceiving, he said with a grave and severe Voice, Are these, O
Telemachus, the Thoughts that ought to possess the Heart of the Son of Ulysses?
Think rather to maintain the Reputation your Father has acquired, and to
overcome the Persecutions of Fortune. A young Man who loves to dress like a
Woman, is unworthy of Wisdom and Glory. The Heart that knows not how to suffer
Pain and despise Pleasure, is unfit to possess those glorious Advantages.



Telemachus with a deep Sigh answered, May the Gods destroy me rather than
suffer me to fall under the power of effeminate Pleasures. No! the Son of
Ulysses shall never be subdued by the Charms of a soft and unworthy Life: But
what Favor of Heaven has brought us to this Goddess, or to this Mortal, who
has received us with so much Goodness?

Tremble, replied Mentor, least in the end she overwhelm you with Evil; be more
afraid of her insinuating Charms, than of the Rocks that split your Ship; Death
and Shipwreck are less dreadful than the Pleasures that attack Virtue; be upon
your Guard, and beware of believing any thing she shall say to you: Youth is
full of Presumption and Arrogance, though nothing in the World be so frail; it
sears nothing, and vainly relies upon its own Strength; believing all Things
with the utmost Levity, and without any Precaution. Beware of harkening to the
soft and flattering Words of Calypso, which will slide into your Heart with
Pleasure; fear the concealed Poison, distrust your self, and determine nothing
without my Counsel.

After this they returned to Calypso, who waited for them; and presently her
Nymphs, dressed in white, with their Hair tied up, brought in a plain but
exquisite Repast, consisting of Birds that they had taken with Nets, and of
Venison that they had killed with their Bows. The Wine was sweeter than Nectar,
and flowed from Jarrs of Silver into Golden Bowels, that were crowned with
Flowers. All sorts of Fruit that the Spring promises, and Autumn ripens in
profusion, were brought in Baskets, and four young Nymphs began to Sing. First,
they sung the War of the Gods against the Giants, then the Loves of Jupiter and
Semele; the Birth of Bacchus, and his Education under the care of old Silenus;
the Race of Atalanta and Hypomenes, who was overcome by means of the Golden
Apples that came from the Garden of the Hesperides. Last of all they Sung the
War of Troy, and exalted the Valor and Wisdom of Ulysses to the Heavens. The
chief of the Nymphs, whose Name was Leucothoe, accompanied their sweet voices
with her Lute. When Telemachus heard the Name of his Father, the Tears that
flowed down his Cheeks, gave a new luster to his Beauty. But Calypso perceiving
that he could not Eat, and that he was siez'd with Grief, made a sign to the
Nymphs; and presently they began to Sing the Fight between the Centaurs and the
Lapithae, and the descent of Orpheus into Hell, to recover his dear Eurydice.

When they had eaten, the Goddess took Telemachus aside, and said to him; You
see, O Son of the Great Ulysses, with what savor I receive you into my
Habitation. Yet know, that I am Immortal, and that no Mortal can enter into
this Island without being punished for his rash attempt; nay, even your
Shipwreck should not secure you from the effects of my Indignation, if I did
not love you. Your Father had the same Happiness you now enjoy; but, alas! he
knew not how to use it. I detained him a long time in this Island, and, had he
been contented, he might have lived with me in an immortal Condition: But a
fond Passion to return to his wretched Country, made him reject all these
Advantages. You see what he has lost for the sake of the (...) of Ithaca, which
he shall never see again. He resolved to leave me; he went away, and I was
revenged by a Storm. After his Vessel had served for Sport to the Winds, it was
buried under the Waves. Make a right use of so sad an Example; for after his
Shipwreck, you can neither hope to see him again, nor ever to reign in the
Island of Ithaca. Forget this Loss, and remember you have found a Goddess, that
offers to make you happy, and to present you with a Kingdom. To these Words
Calypso added many more, to show him, how happy Ulysses had been with her. She
related his Adventures in the Cave of the Cyclops Polyphemus, and the Disaster
that befell him in the Country of Antiphates King of the Lestrigons; not
forgetting what happened to him in the Island of Circe, Daughter to the Sun; or
the Dangers he passed between Scylla and Charybdis. She represented the last
Storm that Neptune had raised against him when he left her, and desired to
persuade him, that he had perished in that Shipwreck; but suppressed his
arrival in the Island of the Pheacians.

Telemachus, who at first had too easily abandoned himself to Joy when he found
he was so well received by Calypso, now began to perceive her Artifices, and
the Wisdom of those Counsels that Mentor had given him. He answered in few
Words, O Goddess, pardon my Grief, which at present I cannot overcome; it may
be, hereafter I may have more force to relish the Fortune you offer me: Give me
leave at this time to Weep for my Father; for you know better than I, how much
he deserves to be regretted.

Calypso not daring to press him any farther on that Subject, feigned to
sympathize with him in his Affliction, and to show her self passionately
concerned for the loss of Ulysses; but that she might the better find the way
to his Heart, she asked him in what manner he had suffered Shipwreck, and by
what Adventures he was brought to her Island. The Relation of my Misfortunes,
said he, would be too long. No, no, replied she, I am in pain to know them, and
therefore give me that Satisfaction. After much solicitation she prevailed
with him, and he began thus.

I parted from Ithaca with intention to inquire of those Kings that were
returned from the Siege of Troy, what they knew concerning my Father. The
Lovers of my Mother Penelope were surprised at my departure, which I had taken
care to conceal from them, because I was well acquainted with their
Perfidiousness. But neither Menelaus, who received me with Affection at
Lacedemon, nor Nestor, whom I saw at Pilos, could inform me whether my Father
were still alive. Weary with living always in suspense and uncertainty, I
resolved to pass into Sicily, where I had heard my Father had been driven by
the Winds. But the Sage Mentor who is here present, opposed this rash Design,
representing to me on the one hand the Cyclops, who are monstrous Giants that
devour Men; on the other, the Fleet of Eneas and the Trojans, who were upon
that Coast. The Trojans, said he, are highly incensed against all the Greeks;
but they would take a singular Pleasure to shed the Blood of the Son of
Ulysses: Return therefore to Ithaca, it may be your Father, who is a Favorite
of Heaven, may arrive there as soon as you: But if the Gods have resolved his
Destructino, and he is never more to see his Country, at least it becomes you
to revenge him against his Rivals, to deliver your Mother, and to give such
proof of your Wisdom to all the People of Greece, that they may know you are as
worthy to reign, as ever Ulysses was. This Counsel was useful and honorable,
but I had not Prudence enough to follow it, and heark'ned only to my own
Passion; yet the wise Mentor loved me to such a degree, that he condescended to
accompany me in that Voyage, which I rashly undertook against his Advice.

Whilst he spoke, Calypso looked earnestly, and not without Astonishment upon
Mentor. She thought she perceived something Divine in him, but could not
disintangle the confusion of her Thoughts; which caused her to continue
apprehensive and diffident in the presence of this unknown Person. But fearing
above all Things to discover the disorder of her Mind, she desired Telemachus
to proceed, which he did in this manner.

We had the Wind favorable for some time after our departure for Sicily; but
then, a violent Storm arising, deprived us of the view of Heaven, and involved
us in the obscurity of Night: Yet by some flashes of Lightning, we perceived
other Ships exposed to the same Danger, which when we understood to be the
Fleet of AEneas, we thought them no less formidable to us than the Rocks
themselves. In that Moment I comprehended, though too late, what the Heat of
imprudent Youth had hindered me from considering before. Mentor, in the midst of
this Danger, appeared not only Resolute and Intrepid, but more cheerful than he
used to be. 'Twas he that inspired me with Resolution, and I felt the
extraordinary force of his Encouragements. He gave out all necessary Orders,
when the Pilot knew not what to do. I said to him, my dear Mentor, why did I
refufe to follow your Counsels? Am I not unhappy, to act by my own Advice, at
such an Age, as has no foresight of Futurity, no experience of things past, nor
moderation to govern the present? O! If ever we escape this Storm, I resolve to
distrust my self, as I would my most dangerous Enemy, and to believe you alone
for ever. To this Mentor answered smiling; I shall not blame you for the Fault
you have committed: It Is enough that you are sensible of it, and make it serve
you hereafter to moderate your Desires. But perhaps when the Danger is past,
Presumption will return. We may now be apprehensive, and endeavor to prevent
the worst; but if all we can do, prove ineffectual, we have nothing left but a
generous Contempt. Show your self worthy of such a Father, and let your Courage
be greater than the Dangers that threaten. I was charmed with the sweetness and
magnanimity of the wise Mentor; but I was much more surprised, when I saw with
what dexterity he brought about our Deliverance.

The Trojans were so near, that they could not fail to discover who we were, as
soon as the Light should appear; which Mentor knowing, and in that Instant
perceiving one of their Ships which was separated from the rest of the Fleet,
to be something like ours, except certain Garlands of Flowers that she carried
at her Stern, he hung up the same sorts of Flowers on the same part of our
Ship, and fastened them himself with Ribbons of the same Color with those of
the Trojans. He ordered the Rowers to bow themselves as low as the Oar would
permit, that they might not be discovered by the Enemy. In this manner we
passed through the midst of their Fleet, whilst they shouted for Joy to see us,
supposing we were their Companions, which they thought to be lost. We were
forced along with them by the violence of the Weather for a considerable time;
but at last we found means to keep a little behind, and whilst they were driven
by the Winds toward the Shore of Africa, we exerted our utmost Efforts to make
the nearest Coast of Sicily.

We arrived, as we designed; but that which we sought, proved almost as fatal
to us, as the Fleet we avoided; we found more Trojans, and consequently Enemies
to all Greeks; for old Acestes reigned in these Parts. As soon as we got
Ashore, the Inhabitants, thinking us to be either some other People of the
Island come to surprise them, or else Strangers that designed to sieze their
Country, burnt our Ship, killed our Companions, and reserved only Mentor and me
to be presented to Acestes, that we might inform him of our Designs, and whence
we came. We were brought into the Town with our Hands tied behind our Backs,
and our Death was deferred, only to make us a Spectacle to a cruel People, as
soon as they should know we were Greeks.

We were without delay presented to Acestes, who sat with a golden Scepter in
his Hand, distributing Justice, and preparing himself for a great Sacrifice. He
asked us with a severe Voice, of what Country we were, and the occasion of our
Voyage. Mentor answered, We come from the Coasts of the great Hesperia, and our
Country is not far from thence: By this means he avoided to say that we were
Greeks. But Acestes would hear no more, and taking us for Persons that
concealed some bad Design, he commanded us to be sent into a Neighboring
Forest, there to serve as Slaves to those who looked after the Cattle. This
Condition seemed more terrible to me than Death. I cried out, O King, order us
rather to suffer Death, than to be treated so unworthily: Know, that I am
Telemachus the Son of the wise Ulysses, King of the Ithacians. I seek my Father
in all parts of the World; and if I can neither find him, nor return to my
Country, nor avoid Servitude, take that Life from me, which I cannot bear.
Scarce had I pronounced these Words, when all the People in a Rage cried out,
That the Son of the cruel Ulysses must die, whose Artifices had destroyed the
City of Troy.

O Son of Ulysses, said Acestes, I cannot refuse your Blood to the Ghosts of so
many Trojans, that your Father precipitated into the Waters of the black
Cocytus. You and your Conductor shall die. At the same time an Old Man of the
Company proposed to the King, that we should be Sacrificed upon the Tomb of
Anchises. Their Blood, said he, will be grateful to the Soul of that Hero.
AEneas himself, when he hears of this Sacrifice, will be overjoyed to see how
much you love what was dearer to him than all other Things in the World. Every
One applauded this Proposition, and nothing remained but to put it in
Execution. We were led to the Tomb of Anchises, where two Altars were erected,
and the Sacred Fire kindled. The Knife was brought, we were Crowned with
Garlands, and no Composition would be accepted to save our Lives. Our Fate was
determined, when Mentor calmly desired to speak to the King; and having
received Permission, said, O Acestes, if the Misfortunes of Young Telemachus,
who never carried Arms against the Trojans, may not plead for him, at least let
your own Interest move you. The Knowledge I have acquired to predict the Will
of the Gods, informs me, That before the end of three Days, you shall be
attacked by a barbarous People, who will come down like a Torrent from the
Mountains, to destroy your City, and ravage your whole Country. Hasten to
prevent them, Arm your People, and from this moment begin to secure within
these Walls all the Riches you have in the Fields. If my Prediction be false,
you may Sacrifice us when the three Days are expired; but if on the contrary it
prove true, remember, That no One ought to take away the Lives of those, by
whom his own was preserved. Acestes was astonished at these Words, which Mentor
spoke with more assurance than he had ever found in any Man. I see, said he, O
Stranger, That the Gods who have granted you so small a share in the Favors of
Fortune, have in Recompense given you such Wisdom, as is more valuable than the
highest Prosperity. At the same time he put off the Sacrifice, and issued out
all necessary Orders with the utmost Diligence, to prevent the Attack that
Mentor had foretold. On all sides were to be seen Old Men and Women trembling
for fear, and accompanied with great numbers of Young Children, bathed in
Tears, and retiring into the City. The lowing Oxen and bleating Sheep, left the
rich Pastures and came along in confusion; but their number was too great, to
find places to contain them all. The Noise and Tumult of People pressing to get
in, was such, that no One could understand another. In this Disorder, some took
an unknown Person for their Friend, and others ran, though they knew not whether.
But the Principal Men of the City, thinking themselves wiser than the rest,
suspected Mentor to be an Impostor, who had predicted a Falsehood to save his
Life. Yet before the third Day was expired, whilst they were full of these
Imaginations, a Cloud of Dust was seen rising upon the descent of the
Neighboring Hills; an innumerable Multitude of Barbarians appeared in Arms,
and all those who had despised the wise Prediction of Mentor, lost all their
Slaves and their Cattle. Upon this, the King said to Mentor; I forget that you
are Greeks; our Enemies are become our faithful Friends; the Gods have sent you
to save us; I expect no less from your Valor, than from the Wisdom of your
Words: Hasten therefore to assist us.

Mentor showed in his Eyes a boldness, that was sufficient to astonish the
fiercest Warrior. He takes up a Shield, a Helmet, a Sword and a Lance: He draws
up the Soldiers of Acestes, puts himself at their Head, and advances in good
Order toward the Enemy. Acestes, though full of Courage, could not follow him,
but at a distance, by reason of his Age. I followed him more close. But nothing
can equal his Valor. In the Fight, his Helmet resembled the immortal One of
Minerva. Death flew from Rank to Rank, wherever his Blows fell: As a Lion of
Numidia, provoked by cruel Hunger, falling upon a Flock of unresisting Sheep,
kills, tears, and swims in Blood: Whilst the Shepherds far from assisting their
Flock, fly trembling away from his Fury.

These Barbarians, who hoped to surprise the City, were themselves surprised
and defeated. The Subjects of Acestes were animated by the Example and Words of
Mentor; and felt a Vigor which they thought not to be in them. With my Lance I
killed the Son of the Barbarian King. He was of my Age, but much higher than I
am; for this People is descended from Giants, and of the same Race with the
Cyclops. He despised so weak an Enemy; but I, not at all daunted with his
prodigious Strength, or his fierce and savage Looks, pushed my Lance against
his Breast, and made his Soul gush out at the Wound in a Torrent of black and
reeking Blood. As he fell he was like to crush me in pieces by his Fall. The
sound of his Arms echoed in the Hills. I took the Spoil, and returned to
Acestes with the Arms I had gained from this formidable Enemy. Mentor having
entirely broken the Barbarians, pursued them to the Woods, and cut them in
pieces. This unexpected Success made Mentor to be regarded, as one cherished
and inspired by the Gods: And Acestes from a sense of Gratitude, showed his
Concernment for us if the Fleet of Eneas should return to Sicily. He gave us a
Ship to carry us to our own Country; made us many and rich Presents, and
pressed us to hasten our Departure, that we might prevent any Mischief. But he
would not give us either a Pilot, or Mariners of his own Nation, sor fear they
might be exposed to too much Hazard upon the Coast of Greece. He committed us
to the care of certain Phenician Merchants, who Trading with all the People of
the World, had no occasion to fear, and ordered them to bring back the Ship,
when they had left us safe in Ithaca. But the Gods, who sport with the Designs
of Men, had reserved us for farther Calamities.

The Tyrians by their Insolence had highly provoked the King of Egypt, whose
name was Sesostris, and who had conquered many Kingdoms. The Riches they had
acquired by Trade, and the impregnable Strength of Tire, which stands situated
in the Sea, had rendered this People so Proud, that they not only refused to
pay the Tribute which Sesostris imposed upon them in his ruturn from the
Conquests he had made, but assisted his Brother with Forces, who had conspired
to murder him on the Festival that was appointed to be celebrated on account of
his great Victories. For these Reasons Sesostris resolved to humble them, by
ruining their Commerce at Sea, and commanded all his Ships to seek out and
assault the Phenicians. One of his Fleets met with us, as soon as we lost sight
of the Sicilian Mountains, when the Harbor and Land seemed to fly from behind
us, and lose themselves in the Clouds. At the same time we saw the Egyptian
Ships advancing toward us like a sloating City. The Phenicians perceived, and
endeavored to avoid them, but 'twas too late. Their Ships were better Sailors,
their Mariners more numerous, the Wind favored them, they Boarded us, Took us,
and carried us Prisoners to Egypt. I told them, but in vain, that I was no
Phenician, they hardly vouchsafed to hear me; they looked upon us as Slaves, in
which Merchandise they knew the Phenicians traded, and thought only of making
the best of their Prize. We arrived in the Island of Pharos, and rom thence
were carried up the Nile to Memphis. If the Grief we felt by reason of our
Captivity, had not rendered us insensible to all Pleasure, our Eyes would have
been charmed with the fruitful Country of Egypt, like a delicious Garden every
where Watered with the purest Streams. We could not turn our Eyes on either
side of the River, without discovering many opulent Islands; great numbers of
well situated Villa's; Lands richly covered with a golden Harvest; Meadows full
stocked with Cattle; Laborers bowing under the weight of the Fruits they had
gathered, and Shepherds that made the Eccho's on every side repeat the sweet
sound of their Pipes and Flutes.

Happy, said Mentor, is the People, who are governed by a wise King: They live
in Plenty and Contentment, and love him to whom they owe their Felicity. Thus,
said he, O Telemachus you ought to Reign, and be the Joy of your People. If
ever the Gods give you the Possession of your Father's Kingdom, love your
People as your Children; feel the Pleasure of being beloved by them, and carry
your self so, that all the Tranquillity and Pleasure they enjoy, may lead them
to remember, that they are the rich Presents of a good King: Kings who make it
their only business to render themselves formidable to their own Subjects, and
to impoverish them in order to make them more submissive, are the Plagues of
Mankind. They are perhaps feared, as they desire; but they are hated, detested,
and have more reason to be afraid of their Subjects, than their Subjects have
to fear them.

I answered, alas, Mentor, It Is not now the Question, by what Maxims a King
ought to Reign. We shall never see Ithaca again. We shall never see our Country
or Penelope more; and though Ulysses should return full of Glory to his Kingdom,
he would never have the satisfaction of seeing me there; nor I that of obeying
him, and learning the Rules of Government from him. No, Let us dye, dear
Mentor; for we must have no other Thoughts: Let us dye, since the Gods have no
Compassion for us. As I spoke, my Words were interrupted with sighs. But
Mentor, though he could be apprehensive of approaching Evils, knew not what it
was to fear them when they had happened. Unworthy Son of the wise Ulysses,
cried he, Do thou suffer thy self to be overcome by thy Misfortunes? Know
that you shall one Day see both Ithaca and Penelope. You shall see what your
Eyes have never seen, The invincible Ulysses in his former Glory: He, whom
Fortune cannot Conquer, and who in greater Misfortune admonishes us never to
Despair. O! if he should hear in the Regions, where he is driven by the Winds
and Sea, that his Son knows not how to imitate him, either in Patience or
Courage, such News would overwhelm him with Shame, and prove more heavy than
all the Misfortunes he has yet suffered.

After this Mentor caused me to observe the Fertility and Happiness that was
seen over all the Country of Egypt, which contained Two and twenty thousand
Cities. He admired the regular Government of these Places; the distribution of
Justice, which was every where exercised with great regard to the Poor; the
good Education of Children, who were inured early to Obedience, Labor,
Sobriety, Arts or Learning; the due observation of all the Ceremonies of
Religion, a generous and disinterested Spirit, a great desire of Reputation, an
universal Sincerity in their Dealings with Men, and a just Reverence of the
Gods; which every Father took care to infuse into his Children. He thought he
could never enough admire this beautiful Order. He would often cry out in a
Rapture of Joy, O! how happy is that People, which is thus governed by a wise
King! But yet more happy is that King, who when he has provided for the
Happiness of so great a People, can find himself happy in his own Virtue. Such
a one is more than feared; he is beloved. Men not only Obey him; but they Obey
him with Pleasure. He Reigns universally in their Hearts; and every Man is so
far from desiring his Death, that he fears it above all Misfortunes, and would
readily sacrifice his Life for him.

I heark'ned with Attention to what Mentor said; and as he spoke, I found my
Courage to revive in the bottom of my Heart. As soon as we were arrived at the
rich and magnificent City of Memphis, the Governor commanded us to be sent to
Thebes, in order to be presented to King Sesostris, who being highly incensed
against the Tyrians, had resolved to examine us himself. So we proceeded in our
Voyage up the River Nile, till we came to the famous Thebes, which has a
Hundred Gates, and serves for a Habitation to that great King. This City
appeared to us of a vast Extent, and more Populous than the most flourishing
Cities of Greece. The Orders are Excellent, in all that regards the neatness
and convenience of the Streets, the course of the public Waters; the Baths;
the advancement of Arts and Sciences, and the common Safety. The Piazza's are
adorned with Fountains and Obelisks. The Temples are Marble; of plain, but
majestic Architecture. The Palace of the Prince is like a great City; it is
full of Marble Pillars, Pyramids, Obelisks and vast Statues, with Movables of
solid Gold and Silver. They who took us, informed the King, that they found us
on board a Phenician Ship. For he had certain Hours of every Day, in which he
regularly heard all his Subjects, that had any thing to say to him, either by
way of Complaint or Advice. He neither despised nor rejected any Man, and knew
he was King for no other end, than to do Good to his Subjects, whom he loved as
his Children. Strangers also he received with Kindness, and was always desirous
to see them; because he thought it a useful and advantageous Thing to be
informed of the Customs and Maxims of remote Nations; and this Curiosity of the
King was the principal Cause that we were brought before him. When he saw me,
he was upon a Throne of Ivory, with a golden Scepter in his Hand. He was Aged,
but Comely, full of Sweetness and Majesty. He daily distributed Justice to the
People, with such Patience and Wisdom, as made him admired without Flattery.
After he had spent the whole Day in doing Justice, and taking care of the
public Affairs, he usually passed the Evening in hearing the Discourses of
learned Men, or conversing with the best of his People, whom he knew how to
choose, and admit into his Familiarity. During his whole Life he could not be
blamed for any thing, except for triumphing with too much Pomp over the Kings
he had Conquered, and trusting a Man whose Picture I shall draw by and by. He
was moved with my Youth and my Affiction, and asked me my Country and my Name,
whilst we wondered at the Wisdom that spoke by his Mouth. I answered You have
undoubtedly heard, O Great King, of the Siege of Troy, which lasted ten Years,
and the destruction of that City, which cost so much Grecian Blood. Ulysses, my
Father, was one of the principal Kings who ruined that Place. He now wanders
through all the Seas, without being able to return to the Island of Ithaca,
which is his Kingdom. I seek my Father, and by a Misfortune equal to his own,
have been surprised and taken Prisoner. Restore me to my Father and Country,
and may the Gods preserve You to your Children, and make them sensible of the
Pleasure of living under so good a Father.

Sesostris continued to look upon me with an Eye of Compassion; but being
desirous to know if what I said was true, he referred us to be examined by one
of his Officers, commanding him to inquire of those that took our Ship, whether
we were Greeks or Phenicians. If they are Phenicians, said the King, they must
be doubly punished, first because they are our Enemies, and then, because they
have endeavored to deceive us by a base Falsehood. But if on the contrary they
are Greeks, I will have them to be treated favorably, and sent back into their
own Country in one of my Ships; For I love the Greeks, who have received many
Laws from the Egyptians. I am not ignorant of the Virtues of Hercules, the
Glory of Achilles has reached our Ears, and I admire what I have heard of the
Wisdom of the unhappy Ulysses. I have no greater Pleasure than to assist
unfortunate Virtue.

The Officer to whom the King had referred the Examination of our Business, had
a Heart as Corrupted and Malicious, as Sesostris was Sincere and Generous. The
Name of this Man was Metophis. He endeavored to ensnare us by artificial
Questions; and when he saw that Mentor answered with more Wisdom than I, he
looked upon him with Aversion and Diffidence; for ill Men are always Enemies to
the Good. He caused ut to be separated, and from that time I knew not what
became of Mentor. This Separation was to me, as if I had been struck with
Thunder. Metophis was not without hopes, that by a separate Examination, we
might be drawn to say contrary Things. At least he thought to dazzle my Eyes
with his flattering Promises, and make me acknowledge what Mentor had concealed
from him. In a Word, he sought not to find out the Truth; but by any means to
get a pretense to tell the King we were Phenicians, that he might keep us for
his Slaves.

In effect, notwithstanding our Innocence, and all the Wisdom of the King, he
found out a way to deceive him. Alas! How are Kings exposed? The wisest are
often abused by Men of Artifice and Interest, that are about them. Good Men
retire from Courts, because they are neither Presumptuous nor Flatterers. They
wait till they are sent for; and Princes seldom know how to send for them. On
the other Hand, ill Men are Bold, Deceitful, Impudent and Insinuating; dextrous
at Dissembling, and ready to do any thing against Honor and Conscience, to
gratify the Passions of the Person that Reigns. O! how unhappy is that King,
who is open to the Artifices of bad Men? He is lost if he does not suppress
Flattery, and love those who speak the Truth with Confidence.

These were the Reflections I made in my Misfortunes, when I called to mind the
things that I had heard from Mentor.

In the mean time Metophis sent me toward the Mountains of the Desert with his
Slaves, that I might serve with them to look after his numerous Flocks. Here
Calypso interrupted Telemachus, and said, Well! and what did you then? You,
that in Sicily had preferred Death before Servitude. Telemachus answered, My
Misfortunes increased Daily; I had no longer the wretched liberty of choosing
between Slavery and Death; I was compelled to be a Slave, and to exhaust all
the rigours of Fortune. I had lost all hope, and could not say one word in
order to my Deliverance. Mentor has since told me, that he was sold to certain
Ethiopians, and that he followed them to Ethiopia.

As for me, I arrived in a horrid Desert, where nothing but burning Sands was
to be seen upon the Plains, and Snow that never melted made an eternal Winter
on the tops of the Hills. Only some scattered Pasture for the Cattle was here
and there found among the Rocks. In the midst of these Precipices, the Valleys
are so profound, that the Sun can scarce let fall a Beam upon them. I found no
other Men in these Places than Shepherds, as savage as the Country it self.
There I passed the Nights in bewailing my Misfortune, and the Days in following
my Flock, to avoid the brutal Rage of Buffus, who was chief among the Slaves,
and who hoping to obtain his Liberty, never ceased from Calumniating the rest,
that he might persuade Metophis of his Zeal and Industry in his Service. On
this occasion, Impatience was pardonable. In the anguish of my Heart I one Day
forgot my Flock, and lay down upon the Grass by a Cave, where I expected Death
to relieve me from the Evils I was not able to bear. In that Instant I
perceived the Mountain to tremble, the Oaks and Pines seeming to descend from
the summet of the Hill: The Winds suppressed their Breathing, and a hollow
Voice issuing out of the Cave pronounced these Words. O Son of the wise
Ulysses, thou art to be like him, great by Patience. Princes who have always
been happy, are seldom worthy to be so: They are corrupted by unmanly
Pleasures, and drunk with the Pride of Prosperity. Happy shall thou be, if thou
can surmount these Misfortunes, and always remember thy present Condition:
Thou shall certainly see Ithaca again, and thy Glory shall ascend to the
Heavens: When thou shall command Men, remember that thou have been like them in
Poverty, Weakness and Calamity. Take a Pleasure in being good to them; love thy
People, detest Flatterers, and know that there is no other way to be truly
great, than by Moderation and Fortitude to overcome thy Passions.



These divine Words penetrated to the bottom of my Heart; renewed my Joy, and
revived my Courage: I felt-none of that Horror which makes Men's Hair stand
upright, and chills the Blood in their Veins, when the Gods communicate
themselves to Mortals. I rose from the Ground with Cheerfulness; I fell upon my
Knees; and lifting up my Hands to Heaven, I adored Minerva, who, I doubted not,
had sent me this Oracle. In that Moment, I found my self a new Man; Wisdom
enlightened my Mind; I found a gentle Force restraining all my Passions, and
checking the impetuosity of my Youth. I acquired the Love of all the Shepherds
in the Desert. My Patience, Sweetness and Diligence moved even the cruel Buffus
to relent, who commanded the rest of the Slaves, and had made it his Business
at first to torment me. I endeavored to procure some Books to enable me to
support the tediousness of my Captivity and Solitude; for I was exceedingly
uneasy for want of some Instructions to nourish and sustain the Faculties of my
Soul. Happy, said I, are they, who quitting all violent Pleasures, know how to
content themselves with an innocent Life. Happy are they, who are diverted with
what they learn, and please themselves in enriching their Minds with Knowledge,
wheresoever they are driven by the unjust Persecutions of Fortune! They carry
their own Entertainment with them; and the uneasiness that lies upon all other
Men, even in the midst of the greatest Pleasures, is unknown to those, who know
how to employ themselves in Reading.

These Men are truly happy, whilst I am deprived of this Felicity. Revolving
these Thoughts in my Mind, I penetrated into the thickest of the Forest, and on
a sudden perceived an aged Man holding a Book in his Hand. His Forehead was
large and high, unfurnished with Hair, and somewhat wrinkled: His white Beard
descended to his Girdle: He was tall, and of a majestic Port: His Complexion
was fresh and well Colored. His Eyes lively and piercing. His Voice sweet, and
his Discourse plain, but agreeable. I never saw so venerable an old Man. His
name was Termosiris. He was a Priest of Apollo, and the Temple where he served
was of Marble, dedicated to that God, and founded by the Kings of Egypt in this
Forest.

He accosted me in a friendly manner: We talked together: He related Things
past with such clearness, that they seemed present; but his Relations were
always attended with brevity, and never tedious. He could predict Things
future, by his profound Wisdom, which gave him a thorough Knowledge of Men, and
the Designs the are capable of forming. With all this Prudence, he was Cheerful
and Complaisant; and the gayest Youth does nothing with so much Grace as this
aged Man. He loved those that were Young, if he found them Teachable, and if
they had any taste of Virtue. He soon conceived a tender Affection for me, and
gave me Books for my Consolation: He called me his Son; and I often said to
him, Father, The Gods that took Mentor from me, have pitied my Solitude, and
sent me in You another support. This Man like Orpheus or Linus was doubtless
inspired by the Gods.

He would sometimes read to me the Verses he had made, and give me the most
excellent Compositions of those Poets, who had been the principal Favorites of
the Muses.

When he put on his long Robes of the purest White, and took his golden Harp in
his Hand, the Tigers, the Bears and the Lions came to lie down by him, and
licked his Feet. The Satyrs abandoned the Woods to come and Dance about him.
The Trees themselves seemed to move; and you would have thought that the Rocks
had been touched with the Charms of his sweet Accents, and were going to
descend from the tops of the Mountains. He sung the Grandeur of the Gods, the
Virtue of Hero's, and the Wisdom of those who prefer Glory before Pleasure.

He often told me that I ought to take Courage, and that the Gods would not
abandon either Ulysses or his Son. He exhorted me to imitate Apollo, and
persuade the Shepherds to apply themselves to the Muses. Apollo, said he,
considering with Indignation, that the brightest Days were frequently disturbed
by Jupiter's Thunder, resolved to be revenged upon the Cyclops, who made the
Bolts, took up his Bow, and pierced them with his Arrows. Upon this, Mount Etna
ceased to vomit Cylinders of Fire; and Men no longer heard the terrible Hammers
striking upon the Anvil, and ecchoing in Groans from the Abysses of Earth and
Sea. The Iron and the Brass abandoned by the Cyclopes began to rust. Vulcan in
Fury quits his dreadful Forge, and notwithstanding his Lameness, mounts Olympus
with Expedition; comes covered with black Dust and Sweat into the Assembly of
the Gods, and makes a most bitter Complaint. Jupiter, incensed against Apollo,
drove him from Heaven, and precipitated him down to the Earth. His empty
Chariot performed the usual course of it self, and gave Men Night and Day, with
a regular change of Seasons. Apollo deprived of his glorious Beams, was forced
to turn Shepherd, and keep the Sheep of King Admetus. He played upon the Flute,
and all the other Shepherds came down to the shady Elms and silver Streams to
hear his Songs. To that time they had lived a savage and brutal Life: They knew
only how to guide their Flocks, to sheer them, to draw their Milk, and to make
Cheeses: The whole Country was one frightful Desert.

Apollo in a short time made all the Shepherds acquainted with the Pleasures of
a rural Life. He sung the Flowers that compose the Garland of the Spring; the
beautiful Greens, and the sweet Perfumes of that agreeable Season. He sung the
delicious Nights of Summer, when the Zephyrs refresh Mankind, and the Dews ally
the Thirst of the Earth. He forgot not in his Songs the golden Harvest and
autumnal Fruits, which recompense the Toil of the Husbandman; nor the
Recreations of Winter, when the wanton Youth dance before the glowing Fire. He
represented the Groves and shady Forests that cover the Hills; the hollow
Valleys, and the Rivers that wind themselves about the lovely Meadows. He
taught the Shepherds what are the Charms of a Country Life, when Men know how
to relish the Presents of pure and uncorrupted Nature. The Shepherds with their
Flutes soon saw themselves more happy than Kings, and their Cottages were
filled with variety of innocent Pleasures, no where to be found in gilded
Palaces. Harmless Sports, unaffected Graces, and innocent Joys, accompanied the
Shepherdesses wheresoever they went.

Every Day was a Festival: Nothing was heard but the Singing of Birds, or the
soft whispering of the Zephyrs, as they were playing about the Branches of the
Trees, or the murmur of Waters falling from the Rocks, or Songs that were
inspired by the Muses, and sung by the Shepherds that followed Apollo. This God
taught them also to be victorious in Races, and to pierce the Hinds and Stags
with their Arrows. The Gods themselves became jealous of the Shepherds. This
sort of Life apear'd to them more ravishing than all their Glory. They called
Apollo back again to Heaven.

My Son, This Story may serve for your Instruction, since you are in the same
Condition Apollo was. Manure this uncultivated Ground; make a Desert flourish,
as he did; like him, teach the Shepherds what are the Charms of Harmony; polish
the roughness of their Minds; show them the beauty of Virtue, and make them
feel how sweet it is to enjoy in this Solitude those innoeent Pleasures that
nothing can take away from Shepherds. A Time will come, my Son, a Time will
come, when the Toils and Cares that encompass Kings, will make you regret a
pastoral Life.

Termosiris having said this, presented me with a Flute, so sweet, that the
Eccho's of the Hills, which carried the sound on every side, drew all the
neighboring Shepherds presently about me. My Voice was divinely Harmonious, I
felt my self moved, as by a superior Power, to sing the Beauties that Nature
has bestowed upon the Country. We passed the Days, and part of the Nights in
Singing together. All the Shepherds forgot their Cottages and their Flocks, to
stay with me whilst I gave them Lessons. The savage Rudeness of our Deserts
disappeared all Things seemed to look Gay and Pleasant; and the politeness of
the Inhabitants communicated it self to the Country. We frequently met to
Sacrifice in the Temple of Apollo, where Termosir is officiated as Priest. The
Shepherds went thither Crowned with Laurel, in Honor of the God. We made a
Country Feast; and the most delicious of our Fare, was the Milk of our Goats
and Sheep, with various Fruits, fresh gathered with our own Hands, such as
Dates, Figs and Grapes: Our Seats were the green Turf, and our spreading Trees
afforded us a Shade, more Pleasant than the gilded Roofs in the Palaces of
Kings. But that which above all other Things made me famous among our
Shepherds, was, That one Day a hungry Lion fell upon my Flock; already he had
begun a dreadful Slaughter; I had nothing in my Hand but my Crook, yet I
advanced boldly. The Lion erects his Mane, gnashes his Teeth, unsheaths his
dreadful Claws, and opens his parched and inflamed Throat. His Eyes were full
of Blood and Fire; and he lashed his Flanks with his Tail. I took him by the
Throat, and threw him upon the Ground. The little Coat of Mail that I wore,
according to the Custom of the Egyptian Shepherds, hindered him from tearing my
Body. Thrice I threw him upon his Back, and Thrice he raised himself again,
roaring so loud, that he was heard through all the Forests. At last I threw him
to the Ground, and Strangled him with my Hands. The Shepherds who were
Witnesses of my Victory, obliged me to wear the Skin of this terrible Animal.

The Fame of this Action, and the wonderful alteration that had happened among
our Shepherds, spread through Egypt, and came to the Ear of Sesostris. He was
informed that one of the two Captives, who had been taken for Phenicians, had
restored the Golden Age to his inhospitable Deserts. He resolved to see me, for
he loved the Muses; and his great Soul was affected with whatsoever might be
useful to Mankind. He saw me; he heard me with Pleasure, and discovered that
Metophis had deceived him through Covetousness. He condemned him to a perpetual
Prison, and siez'd his Riches, which he unjustly pofsess'd. O! said he, how
unhappy is the Man, who is placed above the rest of Men! He can seldom see the
Truth with his own Eyes: He is surrounded by those who keep the Truth from
approaching him: Their Interest leads them to deceive him Every one conceals
his Ambition under the appearance of Zeal. They pretend to love the King; but
indeed love only the Riches he can give. Nay, they love him so little, that to
obtain his Favors, they flatter and betray him.



From this time Sesostris treated me with a tender Friendship; and resolved to
send me back to Ithaca, with a powerful assistance of Ships and Troops, to
deliver Penelope from the Persecutions of her Lovers. The Fleet was ready, and
we thought of nothing but Embarking. I admired the strange Conduct of Fortune,
to exalt those on a sudden that she has most depressed. This Experience made me
hope that Ulysses might return at last to his Kingdom after all his Sufferings;
and I thought it not impossible to see Mentor again, though he had been carried
into the farthest parts of Ethiopia. Whilst I delayed my departure to inquire
after him, Sesostris, who was very Aged, died suddenly, and his Death brought
all my Misfortunes back upon me. All Egypt became sensible of this irreparable
Loss. Every Family knew they had lost their best Friend, their Protector, their
Father. The old Men lifting their Hands to Heaven, cried out with a lamentable
Voice, Egypt never had so good a King, and never will have one like him. O ye
Gods, you should never have shown him to Men, or never have taken him away: Why
do we survive the Great Sesostris? The young Men said, The hopes of Egypt are
vanished. Our Fathers were happy to live under so good a King.

Multitudes of People from the remotest Parts, came running to Thebes during
sorty Days. Every one was desirous to preserve the Idea of him; and many to be
buried with him. But their Grief was yet farther aggravated: For they knew that
his Son Boccoris had neither Humanity for Strangers, nor Affection for
Knowledge, nor Esteem for virtuous Men, nor Desire of Glory. The greatness of
his Father had contributed to make him unworthy to Reign. He had been educated
in an effeminate Softness, and brutal Pride. He accounted Men as nothing,
believing them made only to be his Slaves, and himself to be of a Nature
different from them. He thought of nothing but how he might gratify his
Passions; dissipate the vast Treasures his Father had husbanded with so much
Care; oppress the People; satiate himself with the Blood of the Unfortunate,
and follow the flattering Counsels of young Fools, that he kept about him,
whilst he treated with the utmost Contempt all the ancient Sages, who had been
entrusted by his Father. In a Word, he was a Monster, and not a King. All Egypt
groaned under him; and though the name of Sesostris, which was so dear to the
Egyptians, made them support the base and cruel Conduct of his Son: Yet he made
have to Ruin; for 'twas impossible that a Prince so unworthy of the Throne,
should Reign long.

As for me, I thought no more of returning to Ithaca: I was confined to a Tower
that stands by the Sea near Pelusium, where I should have embarked, if
Sesostris had not died. Metophis had been freed from his Imprisonment, and
received into Favor by the new King. 'Twas he that caused my Confinement, to
revenge the Disgrace I had brought upon him. I passed the Days and Nights in
the profoundest Melancholy. All the Things which Termosiris had foretold, and
those that I had heard from the Cave, appeared to me to be but Dreams. I was
ready to sink under the weight of my Grief. I saw the Waves beating at the foot
of the Tower where I was Prisoner. I often employed my time, in observing the
Ships that were overtaken by Storms, and in danger to be split against the
Rocks, upon which the Tower was built. Far from pitying these Men, who were
threatened with Shipwreck, I envied their Condition. In a short time, said I to
my self, they will see an end of all their Misfortunes, or arrive in their own
Country. But, Alas! I can hope for neither. Whilst thus I consumed away in
useless Regrets, I perceived as a Forest of Masts; the Sea was covered with
Ships, and the Winds filled all their Sails. The Waters turned into a Foam
under the Strokes of innumerable Oars. I heard a confused Noise on every side.
I saw one part of the Egyptians upon the Shore, terrified, and running to their
Arms, whilst others seemed going to receive the Fleet, which they saw arriving.
I soon perceived that part of these Ships were of Phenicia, and the rest of the
Island of (...) For my Misfortunes began to render me experienced in every
thing that relates to Navigation. The Egyptians were divided among themselves.
And I doubted not that the foolish King, had by his Violences caused his
Subjects to Revolt, and raised a Civil War. I was Spectator of a bloody Battle
from the top of my Tower.

That part of the Egyptians who had invited these Foreigners to their
Assistance, having favored their Descent, fell upon the other Egyptians, who
had the King at their Head. I saw this King encouraging his Men by his own
Example. He appeared like the God of Battle. Streams of Blood ran down by his
side. The Wheels of his Chariot were died with black, thick and foaming Gore,
and could hardly move, for the numbers of dead Men that lay in the way. This
young King, vigorous of Body, fierce and haughty in his Looks, had Rage and
Despair painted on his Face. He was like a beautiful Horse that has no Mouth.
His Courage pushed him on to Danger; but he had no prudence to moderate his
Valor. He knew neither how to repair a Fault, nor to give the necessary
Orders, nor to foresee the Dangers that threatened, nor to manage his Men to the
best Advantage. 'Twas not, that he wanted Understanding; his Quickness was as
great as his Courage; but he had never been instructed by Adversity. His
Masters had poisoned his good Nature with their Flattery: He was drunk with his
own Power and Felicity: He thought every thing must yield to his impetuous
Desires. The least Resistance put him into a Rage: He consulted his Reason no
longer; his Pride transformed him into a Savage Beast; his natural Goodness
forsook him in an instant; the most faithful of his Servants were forced to fly
from him, and he considered none but those who flattered his Passions. By this
means he always (...) into Extremities, against his true Interest, and made all
honest Men detest his foolish Conduct. His Valor sustained him for a long time
against the multitude of his Enemies; but at last he was born down with
Numbers. I saw him perish; the Arrow of a Phenician pierced his Breast: He sunk
down in his Chariot, and not being able to hold the Reins any longer, he was
overthrown and trampled under Foot by the Horses. A Soldier of Cyprus cut off
his Head, and holding it up by the Hair, showed it in Triumph to the victorious
Army. I shall ever remember, that I saw the Head smeared with Blood; the Eyes
shut and extinguished; the Face pale and disfigured; the Mouth half open, and
attempting to finish some Words it had begun, a fierce and menacing Air, which
Death it self could not efface. This sight will be always before my Eyes to the
last day of my Life. And if ever the Gods permit me to Reign, I Shall never
forget, after this fatal Example, That no King is worthy to Command, or can be
happy in the Possession of his Power, unless he himself be governed by Reason;
and that it is the utmost of all Misfortunes for a Man, who is created for the
Public Good, to govern vast Numbers of Men only to render himself miserable.



Calypso heard with Astonishment these wise Reflections: And that which charmed
her the most, was, to see how the young Telemachus ingeniously related the
Faults he had committed, either through Precipitation, or want of Docility for
the sage Mentor. She was surprised with the greatness and generosity of his
Mind; who accused himself, and made so good use of his own Imprudences, to
become Wise, Sagacious and Moderate. Continue, said she, my dear Telemachus; I
long to know how you left Egypt, and where you found the wise Mentor, whose
Loss was so sensible to you.

Telemachus resuming his Discourse, said; The best of the Egyptians, who were
most faithful to the King, finding themselves overpowered, and the King dead,
were compelled to submit to the rest; and another King called **** was
established. The Phenicians and the Troops of Cyprus departed from Egypt, after
they had made an Alliance with the new King. All the Phenicians that were
Prisoners, were set at Liberty, and I was accounted one of them. I departed
from the Court; I embarked with the rest, and my Hopes began to revive in the
bottom of my Heart. Already a favorable Wind filled our Sails; our Oars cut
the foaming Waves; the vast Sea was covered with our Ships; the Mariners
shouted for Joy; the Shoars of Egypt (...) from us; the Hills and Mountains
diminished; we began to see nothing but the Heavens and the Waters, whilst the
Sun surrounded with sparkling Flames, seemed to rise from the bosom of the Sea;
his Rays gilded the tops the Mountains, which we could still discover upon the
Horizon, and the whole face of Heaven painted with a sable Azur, gave us Hopes
of a happy Navigation.

Though I had been set at Liberty, as one of the Phenicians; yet none of them
knew who I was. Narbal, who commanded the Ship that carried me, asked me my
Name and my Country. Of what City, said he, in Phenicia are you? I am not a
Phenician, said I; but the Egyptians took me at Sea in a Phenician Ship. I have
been a long time Prisoner in Egypt as a Phenician; under that Name I have
suffered, and under that Name I am delivered. Of what Country art thou then,
said Narbal? I am, said I, Telemachus, Son to Ulysses King of Ithaca in Greece.
My Father made himself famous among the Kings, who beseig'd the City of Troy;
but the Gods have not permitted him to return to his Country. I have sought him
in many Climates, and Fortune Persecutes me also. You see an unfortunate
Person, who desires no other Happiness than to return to his Country, and to
find his Father. Narbal looked upon me with Astonishment, and thought he saw in
my Face some Marks of Happiness, that proceed from the favor of Heaven, and
are not in the rest of Men. He was by Nature sincere and generous. He was moved
with my Misfortunes; and put a confidence in me, that the Gods inspired him
with, for my Preservation.

Telemachus, said he, I doubt not the Truth of what you say, neither can I
doubt: The lively Images of Grief and Virtue drawn upon your Face, will not
give me leave to distrust you. I perceive that the Gods which I have always
served, love you, and will have me to love you, as if you were my Son. I will
give you safe and useful Advice, and for my Recompense desire nothing of you
but Silence. Fear not, said I, for I can without difficulty keep any thing
secret that you shall trust to my Discretion. Though I am young; yet I have grown
up in the Habit of not discovering my own Secret, and much more of not
betraying under any pretext the Secret of another. How have you been able, said
he, to accustom your self to keep Secrets in such tender years. I shall be glad
to know, by what means you have acquired this admirable Quality, which is the
Foundation of the wisest Conduct, and without which all other Talents are
Useless.

When Ulysses, said I, departed to assist in the Siege of Troy, he took me upon
his Knees and embraced me (for thus I have been told the Story) and after he
had kissed me in the tenderest manner, he said these Words to me, though I could
not then understand them. O my Son! may the Gods prevent me from ever seeing
thee again; let rather the fatal Scissars cut the Thread of thy early Days, as
the Reaper cuts down with his Sicle the tender Flower that begins to blow; let
my Enemies dash thee in pieces before the Eyes of thy Mother and Me, if ever
thou art to be Corrupted, and to relinquish the Ways of Virtue. O! my Friends,
continued he, I leave my dear Son with you; take care of his tender years; if
you love me, banish all Pernicious Flattery from about him; instruct him how to
overcome his Passions, and let him be like a tender Plant, that Men often bend
in order to make it grow upright. Above all, forget not to render him Just,
Benificent, Sincere, and faithful in keeping a Secret. Whoever is guilty of a
Lie, is unworthy to be accounted a Man; and whoever knows not how to be Silent,
is unworthy to govern.



I am exact in the Repetition of these Words; because care was taken to
inculcate them often into me. My Father's Friends made it their Business to
exercise me early in keeping Secrets. I was yet in my Infancy, when they
trusted me with all the Troubles they sustained, to see my Mother exposed to
the Persecutions of so many that pretended to marry her. Already they treated
me as a Man of Reason and Fidelity. They entertained me privately of the most
important Affairs, and acquainted me with all the measures they took to expel
the Pretenders.

I was overjoyed to be trusted in this manner; I never abused the confidence
reposed in me; I never let fall one single Word, that might discover the least
Secret. The Pretenders often endeavored to make me talk, expecting that a
Child, who had seen or heard any thing of Importance, would not have been able
to conceal it. But I knew how to answer them without lying, and without
informing them of any thing that I ought not to discover.

Upon this, Narbal said to me; You see, Telemachus, the Power of the
Phenicians. They are formidable to all their Neighbors by their numerous
Fleets. The Trade they drive as far as the Columns of Hercules, furnishes them
with Riches surpassing all those of the most flourshing Nations. The great
Sesostris, who could never have subdued them by Sea, did with great difficulty
defeat them by Land with those Armies that had conquered all the East, and
imposed a Tribute upon us, which has not continued long.

The Phenicians found themselves too Rich and too Potent, to wear the Yoke of
Servitude with Patience. Sesostris was prevented by Death from finishing the
War against us. It Is true, we had reason to fear the Event, and that much more
on account of his wisdom than his Power. But as soon as his Power, without his
Wisdom, had passed into the Hands of his Son, we concluded we had no more to
fear.

In effect, the Egyptians have been so far from returning in Arms to make an
entire Conquest of our Country, that they have been constrained to call us to
their Assistance to deliver them from the Fury of an impious and outrageous
King. We have been their Deliverers, and have added the glory of this Action to
the Liberty and Riches of our Country. But whilst we deliver others, we our
selves are Slaves. O Telemachus, beware of falling into the cruel Hands of
Pygmalion our King. He has already died them in the Blood of Sicheus, his
Sister Dido's Husband. Dido, full of Horror and Revenge, is fled from Tire with
many Ships. Most of those who are best affected to Liberty and Virtue have
attended her. She has founded a Magnificent City upon the Coast of Africa, and
called it Carthage. Pygmalion, tormented with and insatiable Thirst of Wealth,
renders himself every day more wretched, and odious to all his Subjects. It Is a
Crime at Tire to be Rich. His Avarice fills him with Suspicion, Distrust and
Cruelty. He persecutes the Wealthy, and fears the Poor. Every thing disturbs
him, affrights him, preys upon him. He trembles at his own Shadow; he sleeps
neither by Night nor by Day. The Gods, to confound him, load him with Treasures
which he dares not enjoy. The things he covets to make him happy, are precisely
those that make him miserable. He regrets whatever he gives; dreads to loose,
and torments himself with Hopes of Gain. He is seldom seen. He shuts himself up
in the remotest parts of his Palace, sad, alone, disconsolate. His Friends dare
not approach him, for fear of being suspected. A Guard, terrible to see, stands
round his House, with Swords drawn, and erected Pikes. Thirty Chambers on a
Floar, with Doors of Iron, and six massy Bolts upon each, make up the dreadful
Apartment, where he hides himself. No one ever knows in which of these Chambers
he lies. It Is said, he never lies in any of them two Nights together, for fear
his Throat should be cut.

He knows no sweet Enjoyments, nor the sweeter Effects of Friendship. If any
one speak to him of Joy, he finds it will not come near him, and refuses to
enter into his Heart. His hollow Eyes are full of a fierce and savage Fire,
incessantly rolling on every side. He is moved at the least Noise; he hearkens
attentively; becomes pale and dejected; and anxious Care sits pictured upon his
wrinkled Face. He sighs; is silent, and groans from the bottom of his Heart. He
is unable to conceal the Remorse that rends his Soul. He relishes not the most
delicious Food. His Children, instead of being the Hopes of his Age, are the
Subjects of his Fear. He looks upon them as his most dangerous Enemies. He
never thought himself secure one Moment of his Life. He preserves himself only
by shedding the Blood of every one he fears.

Foolish Man! who sees not, that his Cruelty which he so much relies upon, will
be his Destruction. Some Domestic Servant, as suspicious as he, will soon
deliver the World from this Monster.

As for me, I fear the Gods, and will be faithful to the King they have given
me, whatever it cost. I had rather die, than take away his Life, or fail to
defend him. For your part, O Telemachus, acquaint him not that you are the Son
of Ulysses; for he would make you a Prisoner, in expectation of a great Ransom,
when Ulysses returns to Ithaca.

When we arrived at Tire, I followed his Counsel, and found every thing he had
said to be true. I could not comprehend how a Man could make himself so
miserable as Pygmalion appeared to be. Surpised with a thing so astonishing,
and so new to me, I said thus to my self. This Man designed to be happy, and
persuaded himself, that Riches and Arbitrary Power would make him so. He does
what he will, and yet is made miserable even by that Power and those Riches. If
he were a Shepherd as I lately was, he would be as happy as I have been: He
would enjoy the innocent Pleasures of the Country, and would enjoy them without
Remorse. He would not fear either Dagger or Poison. He would love Men, and be
beloved by them. He would not indeed be Possessor of those vast Treasures,
which are as useless to him as Sand, since he dares not touch them; but he
would really enjoy the Fruits of the Earth, and suffer no manner of want.

This Man seems to do whatever pleases him; but the Case is far otherwise, for
he does all that his Passions command. He is compelled to follow, wheresoever
his Covetousness and Suspicions lead. He seems to be Master of all other Men;
but he is not Master of himself, and has as many Masters and Tormenters as he
has violent Desires.

Thus I reasoned concerning Pygmalion without seeing him; for he was not to be
seen. Men only see those lofty Towers, that are surrounded Night and Day with
dreadful Guards, where he shuts himself up as it were in Prison with his
beloved Treasures. I compared this invisible King with Sesostris, who was so
good, so easy of Access, so Affable, so ready to hear any Stranger, so
attentive in giving Audience to all Men, and to find out the Truth which is
always concealed from Kings. The good Sesostris, said I, feared nothing, and had
nothing to fear. He showed himself to all his Subjects as to his own Children.
This Man fears all, and has all to fear. This wicked King is always exposed to
the danger of a violent Death, even within his inaccessible Palace, and in the
midst of his Guards. On the contrary, the good King Sesostris was always safe
in the midst of the greatest Numbers of his People, as a gentle Father in his
own House with all his Family about him.

Pygmalion gave orders to send home the Forces of Cyprus, who came to his
Assistance by virtue of an Alliance that was between the two Nations. Narbal
took this Occasion to set me at Liberty. He caused me to be mustered among the
Cyprian Soldiers; for the King was jealous to the last degree. The usual defect
of easy and thoughtless Princes is, to deliver themselves up to the Conduct of
crafty and corrupt Ministers. On the other side, the defect of this Man was to
distrust the most Virtuous. He knew not how to distinguish Men of Probity and
Uprightness, who always act without Disguise. He had never seen an honest Man;
for such will never flatter a corrupted King.

Besides, he had found in all those who had served him since his Accession to
the Crown, so much Dissimulation and Perfidiousness, with so many horrid Vices
disguised, and only the bare Appearances of Virtue, that he looked upon all Men
without Exception, as living under a Mask, and concluded there was no real
Virtue in the World.

But to return to my self: I passed in the Muster for a Cyprian, and escaped
the watchful Jealousy of the King. Narbal trembled for fear I should be
discovered, which would have cost his Life and mine also. He was under great
impatience to see us embarked; but contrary Winds detained us at Tire.

I made use of this time to inform my self of the Manners of the Phenicians, so
famous in all parts of of the known World. I admired the happy Situation of
their City, which is built upon an Island of the Sea. The Neighboring Coast is
delicious and fruitful, abounding in exquisite Fruits, and so covered with
Towns and Villages, that they seem to touch one another. The Air is sweet and
temperate; for the Mountains shelter that Coast from the scorching Winds which
come from the South. The Country is every where refreshed by the North Wind
that blows from the Sea. It lies at the foot of Mount Libanus, which pierces
through the Clouds, and advances to meet the Stars. His Forehead is covered
with an eternal Ice; and Rivers mingled with Snow, fall down like Torrents from
the Rocks that surround his Head.

A vast Forest of ancient Cedars stands near the top, which appear as old as
the Earth on which they grow, and shoot their spreading Branches to the Clouds.
Under this Forest are rich Pastures, leaning on the descent of the Mountain.
Here one may see the bellowing Bulls wandering up and down, and the bleating
Yews with their tender Lambs bounding upon the Grass. A thousand Streams of the
Clearest Water runs down these charming Fields.

Below these Pastures is the foot of the Mountain, which appears like a Garden
on every side. Here Spring and Autumn reign together, and join the Fruits of
the one to the Flowers of the other. Neither the infected Breath of the South
Wind, that parches and burns up all, or the cruel Blasts of the NorthEast, have
ever dared to deface the lively Colors that adorn this Garden. Hard by this
beautiful Coast, an Island rises in the Sea, where the City of Tire is built.
This great City seems to float upon the Waters, and to be Queen of all the Sea.
The Merchants arrive from all parts of the World; and its own Inhabitants are
the most famous Merchants of the Universe.

When Men enter into this City, they cannot think it to be a Place belonging to
a particular People, but rather to be a City common to all Nations, and the
Center of all Trade. Two great Mole's advancing their Arms into the Sea,
embrace a vast Port where the Winds cannot enter. In this Harbor one may see,
as it were a Forest of Masts; and the Ships are so numerous that the Sea which
carries them can hardly be discovered

All the Citizens apply themselves to Commerce, and their vast Riches never
divert them from that Labor which is necessary to increase their Treasure. In
every part of the City one may see the fine Linen of Egypt, and Tyrian Purple,
twice died, and of a noble Luster. This double Tincture is so lively, as not to
be defaced by Time. It Is used upon the finest Cloth, which is to be garnished
with Gold and Silver. The Phenicians maintain a Trade with all People as far as
the Straits of Gades. Nay, they have penetrated into the vast Ocean that
encompasses the Earth. They have made long Voyages upon the Red Sea, and
visited unknown Islands, from whence they bring Gold, and all sorts of
Perfumes, with various Animals no where else to be seen.

I could not satiate my Eyes with the sight of this great City, where every
thing was in Motion. I did not see, as in the Islands of Greece, idle and
inquisitive Persons, going about to hear News in the public Places, and to
gaze upon Strangers as they arrive in the Ports. The Men are employed in
unloading their Ships; sending home their Goods; putting their Magazines in
order; selling their Merchandise, and keeping an exact Account of what is due
to them from Foreigners. The Women are always busy in spinning of Wool, in
folding up the richest Stuffs, and in various Works of Embroidery.

Whence comes it, said I to Narbal, that the Phenicians are Masters of the
Trade in all parts of the World, and enrich themselves at the expense of all
other Nations? You see, said he, the situation of Tire, how conveniently it
lies for Navigation. The Tyrians were the first (if we may believe what is told
us concerning obscure Antiquity) who in a feeble Ship durst commit themselves
to the mercy of the Waves; who subdued the Pride of the Sea; who observed the
Stars, that are so far from the Earth, according to the Knowledge they had
learnt from the Egyptians and Babylonians, and who by these means reunited so
many People, that the Sea seemed to have separated for ever. The Tyrians are
Industrious, Patient, Laborious, Sober and Frugal; exact in their Civil
Government, and united among themselves. No Nation has ever been more constant,
more sincere, more faithful, more honest, and more kind to Strangers. These,
these are the Things that have given them the Empire of the Sea, and all the
Advantages of Trade. If they should fall into Divisions and Jealousies; if they
should emasculate themselves with Pleasures and Idleness; if the principal
Citizens should come to despise Labor and Frugality; if Arts should cease to
be accounted Honorable; if they should violate their Faith with Strangers, and
transgress, though but a little, the rules of free Trade, you would soon see the
ruin of that Power you admire.

But pray, said I, instruct me how I may hereafter establish the like Commerce
in Ithaca. Do, said he, as you see done here: Receive all Strangers kindly; let
them find safety in your Ports, with Convenience, and entire Liberty. Suffer
not your self to be possessed with Covetousness or Pride. The true way to gain
much, is never to desire to gain too much, and to know how and when to lose:
Acquire the love of all Strangers, and suffer small Wrongs from them. Beware of
exciting their Suspicions by insolent Behavior. Be constant to the rules of
Trade: Let them be plain and easy: Accustom your self to observe them
inviolably: Punish Fraud with Severity: Correct the Negligence and Pride of
Merchants, who ruin Trade by ruining themselves, that carry it on: Above all,
never go about to restrain Trade, or govern it by your own Fancy. The Prince
must not intermedle with it, for fear of discouraging his People, who as they
have the Pains, ought to have the Profit. He will find sufficient Advantages by
the vast Riches that will be brought into his Kingdom. Commerce is like certain
Springs; if you force them to alter their Course, you dry them up.

It Is only Profit and Convenience that invites Strangers. If you render their
Trade uneasy and of little Benefit, they insensibly withdraw themselves and
return no more; because other Nations taking advantage of your Imprudence,
invite 'em thither, and accustom them to live without you. I must own that for
some time past the Glory of Tire has been sadly diminished. O! if you had seen
it, my dear Telemachus, before the Reign of Pygmalion, you would have been much
more surprised. You find only the dismal remains of a Grandeur that threatens
Ruin.

Ounhappy Tire! into what Hands art thou fallen? The Sea formerly brought thee
the Tribute of all the Nations in the World. Pygmalion is afraid of all, both
Strangers and Subjects. Instead of opening his Ports with an entire liberty to
all People however remote, he requires constantly to be informed, what number
of Ships arrive, and from what Country; the Names of the Men on board, the
Trade they drive, the nature and price of their Merchandise, and the time they
design to stay. He does yet worse; for he uses all manner of Artifices to
surprise the Merchants, and to confiscate their Goods: He contrives to ensnare
the most wealthy under various pretenses. He burdens the Trade with innumerable
Imposts: He will be a Merchant himself, and all Men are afraid to deal with him.

Thus our Commerce languishes: Foreigners by degrees forget the way to Tire,
which was once so agreeable to them; and if Pygmalion will not alter his
Conduct, our Glory and our Power must in a short time be transported to some
other People, who are better governed, than we are.

I then demanded of Narbal, by what means the Tyrians had rendered themselves
so powerful at Sea: For I was not willing to be Ignorant of any thing that
might contribute to the good Government of a Kingdom. We have, said he, the
Forests of Libanus, which furnish us with Timber for the building of Ships, and
we preserve them with Care for that use. They are never cut but for the public
Service. We have numbers of skilful Workmen, who perfectly understand the
Architecture of a Ship. How came you, said I, to find these excellent Artists.
They grew up, said he, by degrees in the Country. When those who excel in Arts
are liberally rewarded, Men will quickly be found, who shall carry them to the
utmost perfection. For Men of the best Talents and Understanding, never fail to
apply themselves to those Arts that are attended with the greatest Recompenses.



In this City we honor all such Persons as succeed in any of those Arts and
Sciences which are useful to Navigation. We respect a Man that understands
Geometry; we esteem an able Astronomer, and bountifully reward a Pilot who
surpasses the rest of his Profession. We despise not a good Carpenter: On the
contrary, he is well paid, and well used. Men dextorous at the Oar, are sure of
a Reward proportioned to their Service. They are fed with wholesome Provisions;
they are carefully attended when they are Sick; care is taken of their Wives
and Children in their absence; if they perish by Shipwreck, their Family is
indemnified; every Man is sent home to his Habitation after he has served a
cortain Time.

By these means the Tyrians have as many Seamen as they will. Fathers are glad,
to bring up their Children in so good an Employment, and hasten to teach them
in their tender Years to handle an Oar, manage the Tacle, and scorn a Storm.

These Rewards and this good Order leads Men to be useful to the Public
without compulsion: Authority never does well alone; the submission of
Inferiors is not enough; their Hearts must be won, and they ought to find their
own Account in serving the State.



After this Discourse Narbal conducted me to see all the Magazines; the
Arsenal, and the several Trades that serve for the building and equipping of
Ships. I inquired into all particulars, even to the minutest Things, and wrote
down all that I had learnt, for fear of forgetting any useful Circumstance.

In the mean time Narbal, who knew Pygmalion as well as he loved me, was
impatient for my departure, fearing I might be discovered by the King's Spies,
who were about the Town Day and Night; but the Winds would not yet permit us to
imbark. One Day as we stood viewing the Port, an Officer of Pygmalion came up
to us, and said to Narbal, The King is just now informed by a Captain of one of
those Ships which returned with you from Egypt, that you have brought a certain
Stranger who passes for a Cyprian. It Is the King's Pleasure to have him siez'd
and examined, that he may know who he is. And for this You are to answer with
your Head.

In that Moment I was at some distance from Narbal, in order to take a nearer
view of the Proportions which the Tyrians had observed in building a Ship, that
was then almost new, and accounted by reason of this exact Proportion of all
its Parts, the best Sailor that had ever been seen in the Harbor. I asked the
Builder, who he was that had formed the design of that Ship.

Narbal surprised and terrified with this Message, answered; I my self am now
looking for this Stranger, who is of Cyprus. As soon as the Officer was gone
out of his sight, he run to me, and informed me of the Danger I was in. I too
well foresaw, said he, what would happen; my dear Telemachus, we are lost; the
King tormented Night and Day with his Fears, suspects you not to be a Cyprian.
He will have you siez'd, and will take away my Life, if I do not put you into
his Hands: What shall we do? O God! Give us Wisdom, to deliver our selves from
this Danger. I Will bring you to the King's Palace, where you shall affirm that
you are a Cyprian of the City of Amathus, and Son to a Statuary of Venus. I
will declare that I formerly knew your Father; and perhaps the King may let you
depart without farther Examination. I see no other way to save your Life and
mine. I answered, O Narbal, suffer me to perish since Fate has decreed my
Destruction. I know how to dye, and am too much indebted to you, to draw you
into my Misfortune. I cannot persuade my self to speak a Lie; I am not a
Cyprian; I cannot say that I am. The Gods see my Sincerity; It belongs to them
to preserve my Life by their Power. But I will not save it by a Falsehood.

Narbal answered me, This Falsehood, O Telemachus, is in all respects Innocent.
It cannot be disapproved by the Gods; it does no injury to any one; It saves
the Lives of two innocent Persons, and deceives the King, only to prevent him
from committing a great Crime. You carry the love of Virtue too far, and are
too nice an observer of Truth.

But said I, Falsehood is Falsehood still; and on that account unworthy of a Man,
who speaks in the Presence of the Gods, and owes the highest reverence to
Truth. He that offends the Truth, offends the Gods, and injures himself,
because he speaks against his Conscience. Propose no more, O Narbal, that which
is unworthy of us both. If the Gods have any pity for us, they know how to
deliver us. But if they suffer us to perish, we shall fall the Victims of
Truth, and leave an Example to instruct Men to prefer unblemished Virtue before
long Life. My own is already too long, and too unhappy. It Is you alone, my dear
Narbal, that grieve my Heart: Was it necessary that your Kindness to an
unfortunate Stranger should prove so fatal to you?

We continued long in this kind of Dispute; till at last we saw a Man quite out
of Breath running toward us. He was one of the King's Officers, and sent to
Narbal by Astarb'e. This Woman was beautiful as a Goddess: The Charms of her
Face were attended by the finest Wit. She was Gay, Insinuating, Flattering; and
under the appearance of Gentleness, she covered a Heart filled with Malice and
Cruelty. Yet she knew how to conceal her Designs with the profoundest Art. She
had conquered the Heart of Pygmalion by her Wit and Beauty, and by the Charms
of her Voice and Lute: And Pygmalion blind with Love, had abandoned Tapha, his
legitimate Wife.

He thought of nothing so much, as how to content the Passions of the ambitious
Astarbe. The love of this Woman was little less pernicious to him than his
infamous Covetousness. But though he had so great a Passion for Her, she despised
and loathed him in her Heart; yet understood so well how to cover her private
Sentiments, that she seemed to live only for him.

At the same time that she had these Thoughts of Pygmalion, there was in Tire a
young Lydian, called Malachon, of admirable Beauty, but Voluptuous, Effeminate
and drowned in Pleasures. His chief Business was to preserve the delicacy of
his Complexion; to comb his Hair that fell down in Curls upon his Shoulders; to
Perfume; to Dress nicely; to sing amorous Songs, and play upon the Lute. She
loved him, and became furiously transported with her Passion. He despised her,
because he was in Love with another Woman: And besides, he dreaded to expose
himself to the cruel jealousy of the King. Astarbe finding she was scorned,
abandoned her self to Resentment. In her Despair she imagined it possible to
make Malachon pass for the Stranger that the King had demanded of Narbal. In
effect she soon persuaded Pygmalion as she desired, and corrupted all those who
were able to undeceive him. For having no Affection for virtuous Men, whom he
neither knew nor valued, he was always surrounded by such only as were full of
Artifice, addicted to their Interest, and ready to execute his unjust and
bloody Orders. These Men feared the Authority of Astarbe, and helped her to
deceive the King, that they might not offend this haughty Woman, who entirely
possessed his Confidence.

Thus the young Malachon, though known by all the City to be of Crete, passed for
the young Stranger that Narbal had brought from Egypt. He was siez'd, and sent
away to Prison. Astarbe, who feared Narbal might go to the King, and discover
her Imposture, had dispatched this Officer in have, and commanded him to say
these Words: Astarbe forbids you to discover your Stranger to the King; she
requires nothing of you but Silence, and promises to satisfy him concerning
you. In the mean time take care that the young Stranger, who came with you from
Egypt, may imbark among the Cyprians with all expedition, and be no longer seen
in the City. Narbal overjoyed to save his own Life and mine, promised to be
silent; and the Officer pleased that he had obtained what he demanded,
immediately returned to Astarbe with an account of his Commission.

Narbal and I admired the goodness of the Gods, who had rewarded our Sincerity,
and taken such care of those who had hazarded all for the sake of Virtue. We
reflected with Horror upon a King given up to Voluptuousness and Avarice. He
deserves to be deceived, said we, who dreads it so excessively: And he is so
most frequently and grossly; for he trusts not Men of Honesty, but abandons
himself to Villains. He is the only Person who knows nothing of what is doing.

See how Pygmalion is made the scorn of an immodest Woman; whilst the Gods make
use of wicked Men to save the Good, who choose to part with Life rather than
deceive. As we were making these Reflections, we perceived the Wind to turn, and
become favorable to the Cyprian Fleet.

The Gods declare themselves, said Narbal; they resolve to take care of your
fafety, my dear Telemachus. Fly from this unfortunate, accursed Land. Happy he,
that could follow you to the remotest parts of the Earth! Happy, who might live
and dye with you! But my cruel Fate ties me to my unhappy Country. I must
suffer with her, and perhaps be buried in her Ruins. No matter, provided I may
always speak the Truth, and my Heart love nothing but Justice. As for you, O my
dear Telemachus, I pray the Gods, who lead you as it were by the Hand, to grant
you the most precious of all their Gifts, a pure and unblemished Virtue to the
last Moment of your Life. Live; return to Ithaca; comfort Penelope; deliver her
from the Persecutions of her Lovers. May your Eyes see, and your Arms embrace
the wise Ulysses; and may he find in you a Son equal to him in Wisdom. But in
the midst of your Felicity remember the unhappy Narbal, and continue always to
love me.

When he finished these Words, my Tears run down so fast, that I was not able
to answer him: My Sighs, which I drew from the bottom of my Heart, would not
suffer me to speak: We embraced in Silence: He brought me to the Ship. He staid
upon the Shore; and when the Vessel put off, we continued to look upon each
other as long as we could.

Calypso, who all this while had hearkn'd with the utmost Attention and
Pleasure to the Adventures of Telemachus, interrupted the pursuit of his
Narration, that she might persuade him to take some Rest. It Is time, said she,
after so many Toils to taste the sweetness of Sleep: In this place you have
nothing to fear: All that is here is favorable to you: Abandon your Heart to Joy
and Tranquillity, and receive the Favors of the Gods. To Morrow, when Aurora
has opened the golden Gates of the East with her rosy Fingers, and the Horses
of the Sun springing from the briny Main, spread the Flames of Light, and drive
away the Stars before 'em, we will resume the History of your Misfortunes, my
dear Telemachus. No, your Father never equaled you in Wisdom and Courage.
Achilles, who conquered Hector; Theseus, who returned from Hell; the great
Alcides himself, who delivered the World from Monsters, never showed so much
Constancy and Virtue. May the softest and profoundest Sleep make the Night seem
short to you. But alas! how tedious will it be to me? How I shall long to see
you again? To hear your Voice; to make you to repeat what I know already, and
to ask you what I know not? Go my dear Telemachus, with the wise Mentor, whom
the Favor of the Gods has restored to you; go into the Grotto, where every
thing is prepared for your Repose: May Morpheus shed the sweetest of his Charms
upon your falling Eyelids; May he infuse a divine Vapor through all your
wearied Limbs, and send you easy Dreams, which hovering about you may flatter
your Senses with the most delightful Images, and chase away whatever might
disturb your Rest, or awaken you too soon.

The Goddess brought Telemachus to the Grotto, which was separated from her
own, but not less agreeable, nor less rustic. A Fountain of liquid Crystal ran
down in one corner, and sweetly murmuring seemed contrived to invite Sleep. The
Nymphs had prepared two Beds composed of the softest Greens, and had covered
them with two large Skins, the one of a Lion for Telemachus, the other of a
Bear for Mentor.

Before Slumber had closed their Eyes, Mentor spoke thus to Telemachus. The
pleasure of relating your Adventures has carried you too far; you have charmed
the Goddess with the History of those Dangers, from which your Courage and
Industry have delivered you. By this means you have added to the Flames of her
Heart, and are preparing for your self a most dangerous Captivity. How can you
hope she should suffer you to depart from her Island; you, who have charmed her
with the relation of your Story? Affectation of vain Glory has induced you to
talk without Prudence. When will you be wife enough, O Telemachus, never to
speak with Vanity; and when will you know how to conceal what may commend you,
if it be not fit to be said? Others admire your Wisdom at such Years as may
want it without blame. But for me, I can forgive you nothing; I alone know, and
love you enough to tell you of all your Faults, How far do you yet come short
of your Father's wisdom? But, said Telemachus, could I refuse to relate my
Misfortunes to Calypso? No, replied Mentor, 'twas absolutely necessary: But you
ought so to have related them, as might only excite her Compassion. You should
have told her that you had been sometimes wandering in Deserts, then a Prisoner
in Sicily, and afterward in Egypt. This had been enough; and all the rest has
only served to augment the Poison, that has already siez'd her Heart. May the
Gods grant, that yours may be untouched. But what shall I now do, said
Telemachus, in a modest and teachable accent? It Is now in vain, replied Mentor,
to conceal the rest of your Adventures; she knows enough to secure her from
being deceived in that which is to come; any reserve on your part would only
serve to provoke her. Finish therefore your Relation to Morrow; tell her all
that the Gods have done for you; and learn for the future to speak with
Moderation of all Things that may tend to your own Praise. Telemachus kindly
received this good Advice, and both lay down to Sleep.

As soon as Phoebus had shed the first Rays of his Glory upon the Earth, Mentor
hearing the Voice of the Goddess who called to her Nymphs in the Wood, awakened
Telemachus. It Is time, said he, to shake off Sleep. Come, let us return to
Calypso; but beware of the Charms of her Tongue: Never open your Heart to her;
dread the insinuating Poison of her Praises. Yesterday she exalted you above
your wise Father, above the invincible Achilles, or the renowned Theseus, or
Hercules himself, who has obtained Immortality by his glorious Actions. Could
you not perceive the Excess of this Commendation? Or did you not observe what
she said? Know, that she believes it not her self. She only commends you,
because she thinks you weak and vain enough to be deceived with Praises far
exceeding your Actions.

After this Discourse, they went to the place where the Goddess expected them.
She smiled when she saw them approaching, and under an appearance of Joy,
concealed the Fears and Suspicions that disturbed her Heart. For she foresaw
that Telemachus, under the Conduct of Mentor, would escape her Hands, as
Ulysses had done. Go on, said she, my dear Telemachus, and satisfy my
Curiosity. I thought all the Night, I saw you departing from Phenicia, and
going to seek a new Destiny in the Island of Cyprus. Tell me then the success
of this Voyage, and let us not lose one moment. They sat down in a shady Grove,
upon the green Turf intermixed with Violets. Calypso could not refrain from
looking upon Telemachus with Tenderness and Passion; nor see without
Indignation, that Mentor observed her, even to the least motion of her Eyes.

In the mean time the Nymphs stood silent, forming a half-circle, and leaning
somewhat forward, that they might both hear and see with more advantage. The
Eyes of all the Assembly were unmoveably fixed upon the young Man. Telemachus
looking down, and gracefully blushing, thus resumed the Thread of his Discourse.

Scarce had the Breath of a savorable Wind filled our Sails, when the Coast of
Phenicia entirely disappeared from us. And because I was with the Cyprians,
whose Manners I knew not, I resolved to be silent, and to observe all, keeping
my self within the strictest Rules of Discretion, that I might acquire their
Esteem.

During my silence, a soft and powerful slumber seized upon me; my Senses were
ravished and suspended; my Heart was quiet and full of joy. On a sudden I
thought I saw Venus launching down from the Clouds in a Chariot, guided by a
pair of Doves. She had the same shining Beauty, the same lively Youth, and
those blooming Graces that appeared in her, when she arose from the Foam of the
Ocean, and dazzled the Eyes of Jupiter himself. She descended with extreme
Rapidity, placed her self by me, laid her Hand upon my Shoulder, called me by
my Name, and smilling pronounced these Words.

Young Greek, thou art going into my peculiar Empire; Thou shall soon arrive in
that fortunate Island, where Pleasures, Sports and wanton Joys abound. There
thou shall burn Perfumes upon my Altar. There I will plunge thee into a River
of Delights: Open thy Heart to the most charming Hopes, and beware of resisting
the most powerful of all the Goddesses, who resolves to make thee happy.

At the same time I saw Cupid as a Child, gently moving his little Wings, and
hovering about his Mother. He had the tenderest Graces in his Face, and the
Smiles of an Infant; yet there was something so fierce in his Eyes, as to make
me afraid. He smiled when he looked upon me; but his Smiles were malicious,
scornful and cruel. He took the sharpest of his Arrows from his golden Quiver;
He drew his Bow, and was going to pierce my Heart, when Minerva appeared, and
covered me with her immortal Shield.

The Face of this Goddess had not the same effeminate Beauty, nor that
passionate Languishing, which I had observed in the Face and Posture of Venus.
On the contrary, her Beauty was natural, unaffected, modest; all was Grave,
Vigorous, Noble, full of Power and Majesty. The Arrow too weak to pierce the
Shield fell down upon the Ground; Cupid, in a rage, sighed bitterly, and was
ashamed to see himself overcome. Be gone, cried Minerva, rash Boy, be gone;
Thou can Conquer none but the Base, who prefer dishonorable Pleasures
before Wisdom, Virtue and Glory.

At these Words, Cupid, fired with Indignation, flew away; and as Venus
re-ascended toward Olympus, I saw her Chariot and Doves, rolling in a Cloud of
Gold and Azur a long time before she disappeared. When I turned my Eyes toward
the Earth, I could no where see Minerva. Methought I was transported into a
delicious Garden, as Men paint the Elysian Fields. There I found Mentor, who
said to me; Fly from this cruel Country, this pernicious Island, where the
Inhabitants breath nothing but Pleasure. The boldest Virtue ought to tremble,
and cannot be safe but by Flight. As soon as I saw him, I endeavored to throw
my Arms about his Neck and to embrace him; but I found my Feet unable to move;
my Knees sunk under me, and my Hands attempting to lay hold upon Mentor,
followed an empty Phantome that would not be touched.

As I was making this Effort I waked, and perceived that this misterious Dream
was no less than a Divine Admonition. I found in my self a firm Resolution
against the Allurements of Pleasure; a watchful Jealousy of my own Conduct,
and a just abhorrence of the dissolute Manners that reigned in Cyprus. But that
which wounded me to the Heart, was, that I thought Mentor dead; that he had
passed the Stygian Lake, and was become an Inhabitant of those fortunate
Fields, where the Souls of the Just reside. This Thought made me shed a Torrent
of Tears. The Cyprians asked me why I wept. These Tears, said I, are but too
suitable to the Condition of an unhappy Stranger, who has lost all Hopes of
ever seeing his Country more.

In the mean time all the Cyprians that were in the Ship abandoned themselves
to the most extravagant Follies; the Rowers who hated to take Pains, fell
asleep upon their Oars. The Pilot put a Garland of Flowers on his Head; left
the Rudder, and held a vast Flaggon of Wine in his Hands, which he had almost
emptied. He, and all the rest of the Crew, inflamed with the Furies of Bacchus,
sung such Verses in the honor of Venus and Cupid, as ought to be abhorred by
all those who love Virtue.

Whilst they thus forgot the Dangers of the Sea, a sudden Tempest arose: The
Elements seemed to mix; The Winds were let loose, and roared in every Sail: The
Waves beat furiously upon the Flanks of the Ship, which groaned under the
Weight of their Strokes. One while we mounted upon the Back of the swelling
Waters; another while the Sea seemed to steal from under the Vessel, and to
precipitate us into the dark Abyss. We saw the Rocks close by our side, and the
angry Waves breaking upon them with a dreadful Noise. Then I found by
experience the Truth of what I had heard from Mentor, That Men of dissolute
Lives, and abandoned to Pleasure, always want Courage in time of Danger. All
our Cyprians sunk into despair, and wept like Women. I heard nothing but
lamentable Exclamations; bitter Regrets upon the Pleasures of Life; vain and
insignificant Promises of Sacrificing abundantly to the Gods, if they should
arrive safe in the Harbor. No one had sufficient persence of Mind, either to
give necessary Orders, or to work the Ship. In this Condition, I thought my
self obliged to save my own Life, and the Lives of those that were with me. I
took the Rudder into my Hand, because the raving Pilot was utterly incapable of
knowing the Danger we were in. I encouraged the astonished Mariners; I made
them take down the Sails; we sheer'd by the Rocks and Quicksands, and saw all
the Horrors of Death staring us in the Face. At last we arrived in the Island
of Cyprus.

This Adventure seemed like a Dream to all those, who owed the Preservation of
their Lives to my care. They looked upon me with Astonishment. We landed at
Cyprus in the Month of April, which is consecrated to Venus. This Season, say
the Cyprians, is most suitable to this Goddess, because she seems to revive the
whole System of Nature, and to give Birth to Pleasures and Flowers at the same
time.

As soon as I arrived in the Island, I perceived an unusual Sweetness in the
Air, rendering the Body slothful and unactive, but infusing a jovial and wanton
Humor. I observed the Country, though naturally fruitful and delicious, to be
almost every where uncultivated, through the Idleness and Negligence of the
Inhabitants. I saw great numbers of Maids and Women vainly and fantastically
dressed, singing the Praises of Venus, and going to devote themselves to the
Service of her Temple. Beauty, Graces, Joy and Pleasure, were equally apparent
in their Faces and Gesture. But their Graces were too much affected: There was
not that noble Simplicity, nor that lovely Modesty, which makes the greatest
Charm of Beauty. A certain Air of Dissolution; an artful way of adjusting the
Face; their vain Dress and languishing Gestures; their Eyes that seemed in pain
to find out the Eyes of Men; their mutual Jealousy, who should raise the
greatest Passions: In a word, all that I saw in these Women appeared vile and
contemptible to me. By endeavoring to please me immoderately, they excited my
Aversion.

I was conducted to a Temple of the Goddess. She had diverse in this Island; for
she is particularly adored at Cythera, Idalia and Paphos; 'twas to that of
Cythera, I was brought. The Temple is built with Marble; it is a perfect
Peristylium; the Pillars are lofty, and so well proportioned, that they give a
majestic Air to the whole Fabric. At each Face of the Temple stands a Portal
with a large Fronton, on which the most agreeable Adventures of the Goddess are
curiously represented in Basso rilievo
raised Stonework. Great numbers of People are always at the Gate, attending to
make their Offerings. No Victim ever suffers the Knife within the Precinct of
the sacred Ground. The Fat of Bulls and Heifers is not burnt here as in other
Places. No Blood is ever shed. The Cattle to be offered, are only presented
before the Altar; and no Beast may be offered unless it be Young, White,
without defect, and without blemish. They are adorned with purple Fillets
embroidered with Gold; their Horns are garnished with bunches of the most
fragrant Flowers; and when they have been presented at the Altar, they are lead
to a private Place without the Wall, and killed for the Table of the Priests
that belong to the Goddess.

Here also are offered all sorts of perfumed Liquors, and Wines more delicious
than Nectar. The Priests are clothed in long white Robes, with Girdles of Gold
and Fringes of the same. The most exquisite Perfumes of the East are burnt
Night and Day upon the Altars, and form a curling Cloud as they mount into the
Air. The Pillars are adorned with Festons of wreathed Flowers; all the Vessels
for the Service of the Altar are of fine Gold; a sacred Wood of Myrtle
encompasses the Building; none but Boys and Girls of admirable Beauty may
present the Victims to the Priests, or kindle the Fire upon the Altars. But
Dissolution and Impudence dishonor this magnificent Temple.

At first I detested what I saw; but it soon began to grow familiar to me; I
was no longer afraid of Vice; all Companies inspired me with an Inclination to
Intemperance. They laughed at my Innocence; and my Modesty served for Sport to
this dissolute People.

They forgot nothing that might ensnare me, that might excite my Passions, and
awaken in me an Appetite to Pleasure. I found my self losing Ground every day.
The good Education I had received, could support me no longer; all my best
Resolutions vanished away; I wanted Strength to resist the Evil that pressed me
on every side; I grew even ashamed of Virtue. I was like a Man swimming in a
deep and rapid River: At first he cuts the Waters and mounts vigorously against
the Stream; but if the Banks are high and perpendicular, and he finds no place
to rest on either side, he at last tires by degrees; his Force abandons him;
his exhausted Limbs grow stiff, and the Torrent carries him down. So my Eyes
began to grow dim; my Heart fainted; I could not make use of my Reason, nor
call to mind the Misfortunes of my Father. The Dream that showed me Mentor in
the Elysian Fields, utterly discouraged me. An easy and dissolute Languishing
seized upon me; I already began to love the flattering Poison that crept into
my Veins, and penetrated through the Marrow of my Bones.

Yet for all this, sometimes I would Sigh; I shed bitter Tears; I roared like a
Lion in Fury. O! unhappy Youth, said I! O Gods! that divert your selves so
cruelly with the Fate of Men! Why do you cause them to pass through that Age,
which is a time of Folly, and resembles a burning Fever? O! why am I not
covered with Gray Hairs, bowed down, and sinking into the Grave, like my
Grandfather Laertes? Death would be more welcome to me, than the shameful
Weakness I now feel.

Scarce had I uttered these Words, when my Grief began to abate, and my Heart
drunk with a foolish Passion, shook off almost all Shame. After this I found my
self plunged into an Abyss of Remorse. Whilst I was under these Disorders, I
went raving up and down the Sacred Wood, like a Hind that has been wounded by a
Hunter; she crosses vast Forests to assuage her Pain; but the fatal Arrow
sticks fast in her side, and follows her wheresoever she flies. Thus I
endeavored to run away from my self; but nothing could cure my wounded Heart.

In this Moment, I perceived at some distance from me, under the most shady
part of the Wood, the Figure of the Wise Mentor. But his Face was so pale, so
sad, and so severe, that I knew not how to rejoice. Is it you then, O my dear
Friend? My last, and only hope, is it you? Is it you, your self? Or is a
deceitful Image come to abuse my Eyes? Is it you, O Mentor? Or is it your
Ghost, still sensible of my Misfortunes? Are you not among the Blessed Spirits,
that possess the Rewards of their Virtue, and by the Bounty of the Gods enjoy
an Eternal Peace, and uninterrupted Pleasures in the Elysian Plains? Mentor, do
you yet live? Am I so happy to see you? Or is it only the shadow of my Friend?

With these Words in my Mouth, I ran to him so Transported, that I lost my
Respiration. He stood still unmoved, and made not one step toward me. O Gods!
you know with what Joy I felt him in my Arms. No, it is not an empty Shadow; I
hold him fast; I embrace him; my dear Mentor! Thus I cried out; I shed a flood
of Tears upon his Face; I hung about his Neck, and was not able to speak.

He looked sadly upon me, with Eyes full of tender Compassion. At last I said,
alas! Where have you been? To what Dangers have you abandoned me by your
absence? And what should I now do without you? But he without answering my
Questions, with a terrible Voice cried out; Fly, fly without delay: This Soil
produces nothing but Poison: The Air you breath is infected with the Plague:
The Men are contagious, and converse with each other only to spread the fatal
Venom: Base and infamous Pleasure, the worst of all those Evils that sprung
from Pandora's Box, dissolves them in Luxury, and suffers no Virtue in this
Place. Fly; stay not a Moment; look not once behind you, and as you run, shake
off the remembrance of this Execrable Island.

He said, and immediately I felt as it were a thick Cloud dispersing from about
my Eyes, and perceived a more pure and beautiful Light. A sweet and noble Joy,
accompanied with Resolution and Courage, revived in my Heart. This Joy was very
different from that loose and foolish Joy which had Poisoned my Senses. The one
is disorderly and unquiet, interrupted with extravagant Passions and cruel
Remorse; the other is a Joy of Reason, attended with a Heaven of Happiness.
It Is always pure, equal, inexhaustible. The deeper we drink, the more delicious
is the Taste. It ravishes the Soul without the least disorder. I began to shed
Tears of Joy, and found a sweetness in Weeping. Happy, said I, are those Men
who can see the beauty of Virtue! Is it possible to see her without loving her?
Is it possible to Love her without being Happy?

Here Mentor interrupted me, and said, I must leave you; I must depart this
Moment; I may not stay any longer. Where, said I, are you going? Into what
Desert will I not follow you? Don't think you can leave me; for I will rather
Die than not attend you. Whilst I spoke these Words, I held him fast with all
my Strength. It Is in vain, said he, for you to hope to detain me. The Cruel
Metophis sold me to certain Ethiopians or Arabs. These Men going to Damascus in
Syria, on the account, of Trade, resolved to sell me, supposing they should get
a great sum of Money for me of one Hazael, who wanted a Greek Slave to inform
him of the Customs of Greece, and instruct him in our Arts and Sciences.

This Hazael purchased me at a dear Rate. What he has learnt from me concerning
our Manners, has given him a Curiosity to go into the Island of Creet, to study
the Wise Laws of Minos. During our Voyage, the Weather has forced us to put in
at Cyprus, in expectation of a favorable Wind. He is come to make his
Offerings in the Temple; see there, he is going out; the Winds call; our Sails
are aloft; adieu, dear Telemachus; a Slave that fears the Gods, ought
faithfully to serve his Master: The Gods do not permit me to dispose of my
self: If I might, they know it, I would be only yours: Farewell, remember the
Labors of Ulysses, and the Tears of Penelope; remember that the Gods are just.
O Gods, the Protectors of Innocence! in what a Country am I constrained to
leave Telemachus?

No, no, said I, my dear Mentor, it shall not depend upon you to leave me here;
rather Die, than see you depart without me. Is this Syrian Master inexorable?
Was his Infancy nourished by a Tygre? Would he tear you out of my Arms? He must
either kill me, or suffer me to follow you. You exhort me to fly, and will not
permit me to fly with you: I Will go to Hazael; perhaps he will pity my Youth and
my Tears. He loves Wisdom, because he goes so far in search of it; such a one
cannot have a savage and insensible Heart. I will throw my self at his Feet; I
will embrace his Knees; I will not let him go, till he has given me leave to
follow you. My dear Mentor, I can be a Slave with you; I will offer my Service
to him; if he refuses me, it is resolved; I will deliver my self from this
burden of Life.

In this Moment, Hazael called Mentor. I prostrated my self before him; he was
surprised to see an unknown Person in this Posture. What is it you desire, said
he? Life, replied I; for I cannot Live unless you suffer me to follow Mentor,
who belongs to you. I am the Son of the Great Ulysses, the most Wise of all
those Grecian Kings that destroyed the great City of Troy, which was so famous
throughout all Asia. I speak not this to boast of my Birth, but only to inspire
you with some Pity of my Misfortunes. I have sought my Father in all the Seas,
accompanied by this Man, who has been to me another Father. Fortune to make me
completely unhappy, has taken him away from me; she has made him your Slave;
let me be so too. If it be true, that you are a lover of Justice, and that you
are going to Creet to inspect the Laws of the good King Minos, reject not my
Sighs and my Tears. You see the Son of a King reduced to desire Servitude as
his only Refuge. Formerly I would have chosen Death in Sicily to avoid Slavery;
but my first Misfortunes were only the weak Essays of Fortunes Injustice: Now I
tremble, lest I should not be received among Slaves. O Gods! See my Calamity; O
Hazael, remember Minos, whose Wisdom you admire, and who will judge us both in
the Kingdom of Pluto.

Hazael looking upon me with Kindness and Compassion, put forth his Hand and
raised me up. I am not ignorant, said he, of the Wisdom and Virtue of Ulysses.
Mentor has often told me of the Glory he has acquired among the Greeks; and
besides, Fame has not been wanting to spread his Name over all the Nations of
the East. Follow me, thou Son of Ulysses, I will be your Father, till you find
him, who gave you Life. But though I were not moved with the Glory of your
Father, his Misfortunes, and your own; yet the Friendship I have for Mentor,
would engage me to take care of you. It Is true, I bought him as a Slave, but I
keep him as a faithful Friend; the Money he cost, has acquired me the dearest
and most valuable Friend, that I have in the World: In him I have found Wisdom;
I owe all the Love I have for Virtue to his Instructions. From this Moment he
is free, and you shall be so too; I ask nothing of either but your Heart.

In an Instant, I passed from the bitterest Grief to the most lively Joy that
Men can feel. I saw my self delivered from the worst of Dangers; I was drawing
near to my Country; I had found One to assist me in my Return; I had the
Pleasure of being with a Man, who loved me already for the sake of Virtue; in
Word, I found every thing in finding Mentor; and that which endeared my good
Fortune to me, was, that I feared not to lose him again.

In the mean time, Hazael advanced to the Shore; we followed; we Embarked with
him; our Oars cut the yielding Waters; the Zephyrs played in our Sails; gave
Life and easy Motion to the Ship; the Island of Cyprus soon disappeared.
Hazael, impatient to know my Sentiments, asked me what I thought of the Manners
of that Island? I told him ingenuously to what Dangers my Youth had been
exposed, and the Combat I had suffered within me.

He was tenderly moved with my abhorrence of Vice, and said these Words: O
Venus! I acknowledge your Power, and that of your Son; I have burnt Incense
upon your Altars: But give me leave to detest the infamous dissolution of the
Inhabitants of your Island, and the brutal Impudence, with which they celebrate
your Festivals. After this, he discoursed with Mentor of that first Being which
formed the Heavens and the Earth; of that pure, infinite and unchangeable Light
which is communicated to all without any Diminution; of that supreme and
universal Truth which enlightens the Spiritual World as the Sun enlightens the
Corporeal. He who has never seen this Light, said he, is as blind as one born
without Sight; he passes his Life in a dismal Night, like that of those Regions
where the Sun never shines for many Months of the Year; he thinks himself Wise,
and is a Fool; he fancies he sees all, and sees nothing; he Dies without seeing
any thing; at most he perceives only false and obscure Flashes, vain Shadows,
Phantoms, that have no real Being.

Of this kind are all those, who are carried away by sensual Pleasures, and the
Enchantments of Imagination. There are no true Men upon the Earth but those who
consult, love and obey this eternal Reason. It Is she that inspires us when we
think well: It Is she that reproves us when we think ill. Our Reason as well as
our Life is her Gift. She is as a vest Ocean of Light; the Reason of Men is
like little Rivulets emaning from her, which return and lose themselves in her
again.

Though I did not yet thoroughly comprehend the Wisdom of this Discourse, I tasted
nevertheless something in it so Pure and so Sublime, that my Heart grew warm,
and Truth seemed to shine in all these Words. They continued to speak of the
Original of the Gods, of the Hero's of the Poets, of the Golden Age, of the
Deluge, of the first Histories of the World, of the River of Oblivion, into
which the Souls of the Dead are plunged, of the eternal Punishments prepared
for the Impious in the dark Gulf of Tartarus, and of that happy Tranquillity
which the Just enjoy in the Elysian Fields without any apprehensions of Change.

During this Conversation, we saw great numbers of Dolphins covered with
Scales, that seemed to be

of Gold and Azure. They played in the Sea, and lashed the Floods into a Foam.
After them came the Tritons, sounding their wreathed Trumpets made of Shells:
They surrounded the Chariot of Amphitrite, that was drawn by Sea-Horses whiter
than Snow. They cut the Briny Sea, and left vast Furrows behind them. Their
Eyes darted Fire, and Smoke issued from their Nostrils. The Chariot of the
God-dess was a Shell of a wonderful Figure; 'twas more white than the finest
Ivory, and the Wheels were all of Gold. This Chariot seemed to fly upon the
surface of the Waters. A Troop of Nymphs came Swimming behind the Chariot:
Their lovely Hair hung loose upon their Shoulders, floating at the Pleasure of
the Winds. The Goddess had in one Hand a golden Scepter, with which she
commanded the Waves: With the other she held upon her Knee the little God
Palemon, her Son, who hung upon her Breast. Her Face was so bright and so
majestic, that the black Tempests and all the seditious Winds fled from before
her. The Tritons guided the Horses, and held the golden Reins. A large Sail of
the richest Purple hung floating in the Air above the Chariot; a Multitude of
little Zephyrs hovered about it, and labored to fill it with their Breath. In
the midst of the Air Eolus appeared, diligent, restless and vehement; his stern
and wrinkled Face; his menacing Voice, his Eyebrows hanging down to his Beard;
his Eyes full of a dim and austere Fire, dispersed the Clouds, and kept the
fierce Aquilons silent. The vast Whales, and all the Monsters of the Sea came
out of their profound Grotto's to gaze upon the Goddess, and with their
Nostrils made the briny Waters ebb and flow.

After we had admired this wonderful Sight, we began to discover the Mountains
of Creet, though yet we could hardly distinguish them from the Clouds of Heaven,
and flowings of the Sea. Then we saw the summet of Mount Ida, which rises above
all other Mountains of the Island, as an ancient Stag carries his branching
Head above the young Fawns that follow him in the Forest. By degrees we saw
more distinctly the Coast of the Island, representing the form of an
Amphitheater; as we found the Lands in Cyprus neglected and uncultivated, so
those of Creet appeared plentifully covered with all manner of Fruits by the
Industry of the Inhabitants.

On all sides we perceived Towns equalling Cities; well built Villages, and
magnificent Cities: We saw neither Hill nor Vale where the Hand of the diligent
Husbandman was not stamped; the Plow had left deep Furrows in every part;
Thorns, Briars, and such Plants as are a useless Burden to the Earth, are
utterly unknown in this Country. We contemplated with Pleasure the fruitful
Valleys, where Troops of Oxen go lowing in the sweet Pastures, that abound with
Springs of running Water; the Sheep every where Feeding upon the descent of the
Hills; the champion Ground covered with Corn, presented with a liberal Hand by
the bountiful Ceres; in a Word, the Mountains adorned with Vines, and Grapes of
a rich purple Color, promising a plentiful Vintage of the delicious Presents
of Bacchus, which charm the Cares of Men.

Mentor told us he had been formerly in Creet, and informed us of what he knew.
This Island, said he, justly admired by all Strangers, and famous for its
hundred Cities, is more than sufficient to nourish all the Inhabitants, though
they are innumerable; for the Earth never ceases to produce her Fruits if
Industry be not wanting; her fertile Bosom can never be exhausted. The more
numerous Men are in a Country, provided they be Laborious, the greater
abundance they enjoy. They need not be jealous of one another, for this tender
Mother multiplies her Gifts according to the number of her Children, if they
deserve her Favors by their Labor. The Ambition and Covetousness of Men, are
the only Springs of their Unhappiness. They covet all, and make themselves
miserable by desiring what is superfluous. If they would be moderate, and
contented with what is necessary, we should see Plenty, Peace, Union and
Happiness restored to the World.

Minos, the wisest and best of Kings, understood this well. All the admirable
Things you shall see in this Island are owing to the excellency of his Laws.

The Education he appointed for Children, renders their Bodies strong and
healthful. They are accustomed from their Infancy to a plain, frugal, laborious
Life, because Pleasure enervates both the Body and the Mind. No other Pleasure
is ever proposed to them but the acquisition of an invincible Virtue, and solid
Glory. This People do not measure Men's Courage only by despising Death in the
hazards of War; but by the contempt of great Riches, and ignominious Pleasures.
Three Vices are punished here which remain unpunished in all other Nations,
Ingratitude, Dissimulation, Covetousness.

They have no need of Laws to suppress Luxury and dissolution of Manners; for
such Things are unknown in Creet. Every Man Works; yet no Man desires to be
rich. They think all their Labor sufficiently recompensed with an easy and
regular Life, in which they enjoy plentifully and quietly all that is truly
necessary to Men. Costly Furniture, rich Apparel, delicious Feasts and gilded
Palaces, are not permitted in this Country. Their Cloths are of fine Wool,
wrought with Art, and beautiful in Color, but without Embroidery or any other
Ornament. Their Tables are sober; They drink little Wine; good Bread, with
excellent Fruits, and the Milk of the Cattle, make the principal part of their
Meals.

At the most, their Meat is plain dressed, without Sauce or Ragou; and they
always take care to reserve the best and strongest of the Cattle to be employed
in Husbandry. Their Houses are neat, commodious, pleasant; but without
Ornaments. They are not ignorant of the most magnificent Architecture; but
that is reserved for the Temples of the Gods: They dare not live in Houses like
those of the immortal Beings.

The great Riches of this People are Health, Strength, Courage; Peace and Union
in Families; the liberty of all the Citizens; plenty of Things necessary, and a
contempt of those that are superfluous; a habit of Labor, and an abhorrence of
Sloth; a mutual emulation of virtuous Actions; submission to the Laws, and a
reverence of the just Gods.

I asked him in what the Authority of the King consisted? And he answered thus.
The King is above all the People; but the Laws are above the King. He has an
absolute Power to do Good; but his Hands are tied, so soon as he attempts to do
Ill. The Laws entrust him with the care of the People, as the most valuable of
all Trusts, on condition to be the Father of his Subjects. They intend, that
one Man shall serve by his Wisdom and Moderation to make whole Nations happy;
and not that so many Men shall by their Misery and abject Slavery, serve to
flatter the Pride and Luxury of one Man. The King ought to have nothing more
than other Men, except such assistance as is necessary either to the discharge
of his painful Functions, or to imprint on the Minds of the People that Respect
which is due to the Person who is to maintain the vigor of the Laws.

On the other Hand, the King ought to be more sober, more (...) to Luxury, more
free from Vanity, Haughtiness and Ostentation, than any other Man. He is not to
have more Riches and Pleasures, but more Wisdom, Virtue and Glory than the rest
of Men. Abroad, he is to be the Defend of his Country, at the Head of their
Armies; at Home he is to distribute Justice to the People; to make them good,
wise and happy! It Is not for his own sake that the Gods have made him King, but
only that he may be the Man of his People. He owes all his Time to the People,
all his Care, all his Affection; and he is no otherwise worthy of the Crown,
than as he forgets his own Interests, to sacrifice himself to the Public Good.
Minos appointed that his Children should not reign after him, unless they would
reign by these Rules; for he loved his People more than his Family. By this
Wisdom he rendered Greet so powerful and so happy. By this Moderation he has
effaced the Glory of all Conquerors, who make their People subservient to their
Greatness, that is, to their Vanity. In a Word, by his Justice he do served to
be the supreme Judge of the Dead in the Regions below.



Whilst Mentor was speaking we arrived in the Island; we saw the famous
Labyrinth, built by the Hands of the ingenious Dedalus, in imitation of the
great Labyrinth which we had seen in Egypt. As we were considering this curious
Fabric, we beheld the Shore covered with People, and Multitudes pressing
toward a Place that was near the Sea. We asked the reason of their have, and
received this Account from one Nausicrates, a Native of Creet.

Idomeneus, the Son of Deucalion, and Grandson to Minos, wint with the rest of
the Grecian Kings to the Siege of Troy. After the Destruction of that City, he
set Sail, in order to return to Creet; but was surprised by so violent a Storm,
that the Pilot, and the most experienced Mariners in the Ship, gave themselves
for lost. Every one had Death before his Eyes; every one saw the Abyss open to
swallow him up; every one deplored his Misfortune, and had not so much as the
wretched Hopes of that imperfect Rest, which the Souls enjoy, that have crossed
the River Styx, after their Bodies have received Burial. Idomeneus, lifting up
his Eyes and Hands to Heaven, invoked Neptune in these Words. O powerful God!
who command the Empire of the Sea, vouchsafe to hear the Prayer of the
Distressed; if thou deliverest me from the fury of the Winds, and bring me
safe to Creet, the first Head I see, shall fall by my own Hands a sacrifice to
thy Deity.

In the mean time his Son impatient to see his Father, made haste to meet and
embrace him at his Landing; unhappy Youth! who knew not that he was running to
his own Destruction. The Father escaped the Storm, and landed in the Port of
Syria. He gave Thanks to Neptune for hearing his Prayers, but soon found how
fatal they had been to him. A black Presage of his Misfortune made him bitterly
repent his rash Vow. He dreaded his own Arrival; he fixed his Eyes upon the
Ground: He feared to see whatever was dear to him in the World. But the
inexorable Goddess Nemesis, who never fails to punish Men, and especially
haughty Kings, pushed him on with a fatal and invisible Hand. Idomeneus
arrives, hardly daring to lift up his Eyes: He sees his Son: He starts back
with Horror; his Eyes in vain look about for some other Head to serve for his
vowed Sacrifice.

His Son approached, and threw his Arms about his Neck, surprised to see his
Father dissolving in Tears, and making no return to his Tenderness. O my
Father, said he! Whence comes this Sadness, after so long absence? are you
displeased to see your Kingdom, and to be the Joy of Your Son? What have I
done? You turn your Eyes away for fear of seeing me.

The Father overwhelmed with Grief, made no answer. At last, after many bitter
Sighs, he said, Ah! Neptune what have I promised? Restore me to the Winds, and
to the Rocks, which ought to have dashed me in Pieces, and finished my wretched
Life. Let my Son live! O thou cruel God, here, take my Blood and spare his. As
he spoke, he drew his Sword to pierce his own Heart; but those that were about
him staid his Hand. The aged Sophronymus, by whom the will of the Gods is
conveyed to Men, assured him that he might satisfy Neptune without the Death
of his Son. Your Promise, said he, was imprudent; the Gods will not be honored
by Cruelty: Beware of adding to the Error of your Promise, the crime of
accomplishing it against the Laws of Nature: Offer a hundred Bulls, white as
Snow to Neptune; let their Blood stream about his Altar crowned with Flowers;
let the sweetest Incense smoke in Honor of the God.

Idomeneus heard this Discourse, inclining his Head toward the Earth, and
answered not one Word: Fury sat glaring in his Eyes; his pale and disfigured
Face changed Color every Moment, and all his Limbs shook with horror. In the
mean time his Son said to him: My Father, here Lam; your Son is ready to Die,
to appease the God: I die contented, since my Death will have prevented yours.
Strike, O my Father, and suspect not to find in me the least fear of Death, or
any thing unbecoming your Son.

In that Moment Idomeneus transported with Distraction, and possessed by
infernal Furies, surprised all that stood about him with Astonishment. He
thrust his Sword into the Heart of this Youth, and drew it out again reeking
and full of Blood, to plunge it into his own Bowels. But he was once more
prevented by those that were present. The Youth fell down into his own Blood;
the shades of Death hung upon his Eyes; he opened them a little to the Light,
but could not support its Brightness. As a beautiful Lilly in the midst of the
Field, out up from the Root by the Plowshare, lies down and languishes on the
Ground. It receives no more Nourishment from the Earth, and the Springs of Life
are intercepted; yet the snowy White and noble Luster in part remains. So the
Son of Idomeneus, like a young and tender Flower, is cut down in the bloom of
his Age. The Father through excess of Grief is become insensible, he knows not
where he is, nor what he does, nor what he ought to do; he reels to wards the
City and demands his Son.

FINIS.
The other Parts will be Published in a short time.

THE ADVENTURES OF TELEMACHUS The Son of ULYSSES.

PART II, III, IV, V.

LONDON, Printed for A. and J. Chruchill, at the Black-Swan in PaterNoster-Row.
MDCC.

THE ADVENTURES OF TELEMACHUS The Son of ULYSSES. PART. II.
IN the mean time the People being touched with Pity for the Son, and full of
Horror at the barbarous Action of the Father, cry out, That the just Gods have
abandoned him to the Furies; Their Rage furnishes 'em with Arms; They lay hold
of what Weapons come next to hand; Discord breaths a secret Venom into their
Breasts; The Cretans, the wise Cretans forget their beloved Wisdom; They will
no longer acknowledge the Son of sage Minos; Idomeneus' s Friends know not how
to consult his Saftey but by conducting him back to his Ship; They embark with
him, and commit their Flight to the Waves. Idomeneus being come to himself,
returns them Thanks for carrying him away from a Land he (...) besprinkled with
his Son's (...) and which he could no longer inhabit; the Winds waft 'em over
to Hesperia, where they lay the Foundation of a new Kingdom in the Country of
the Salentines.

But now the Cretans being destitute of a King to govern 'em, they resolve to
choose such an one as will keep up the Purity of the established Laws. And these
are the Measures they take for that purpose. All the chief Men of a hundred
Cities are now to meet at one Place; they begin with offering Sacrifices; they
assemble all the most renowned Sages of the Neighboring Countries to examine
the Wisdom of those who shall be thought worthy of Command; they order public
Games, where all the Competitors are to fight; for the Crown is the Prize which
they propose to him who shall excel, both as to strength of Body and endowment
of Mind. They will have a King whose Body must be strong and active, and his
Soul adorned with Wisdom and Virtue: They invite all Strangers to this grand
Assembly. Nausicrates having recounted to us this wondrous Story, cries out,
Haste therefore, you Strangers, to our Assembly; you shall contend with the
Rest, and if the Gods decree the Victory for either of you, he shall Reign in
this Country. We followed him, not out of any desire of being victorious, but
only out of a Curiosity to see an Election so extraordinary.

We arrived at a Place resembling a very large Circus, surrounded with a thick
Wood. The middle of this Circus was an Arena (or Pit) prepared for the
Combatants; it was surrounded by a large Amphitheater of green Turf, whereon
sat in order an innumerable multitude of Spectators. As soon as we came there,
we were honorably received; for the Cretans, of all Nations in the World, are
the most noble and religious Observers of Hospitality; they desired us to take
our Places, and invited us to enter the Lists. Mentor excused himself, upon
account of his Age, and Hasael on the score of his Health. My Youth and Vigor
left me without Excuse; however, I cast a look upon Mentor to discover his
Mind, and I perceived he desired that I should engage: I therefore accepted
their Proposal, and stripped my self of all my Clothes; they poured Streams of
sweet and shining Oil on all my Limbs; and being covered with Dust, I put in
for one among the Combatants. 'Twas said on every Side, that the Son of Ulysses
was come to dispute the Prize, and several Cretans, who had been at Ithaca
during my Infancy, knew me again. The first Exercise was Wrestling. A Rhodian,
about Five and Thirty Years of Age, surmounted all those who dared to encounter
him. He had still all the Vigor of Youth; his Arms were nervous and brawny; at
the least of his Motions you might discover all his Muscles, and he was no less
nimble than strong. He did not think it worth his while to overcome me, and
looking with Pity upon my tender Age, he was about to retire, when I offered to
contend with him. Thereupon we laid hold of one another; squeezed each other
till we were almost out of Breath; clapped our Shoulders and Feet one against
another; distended all our Nerves, and twined our Arms about like Snakes,
either of us striving to lift his Antagonist from the Ground. Sometimes he
endeavored to trip me over by pushing me on the right side, sometimes he
endeavored to bend me on the left: But when he had thus spent himself in vain,
I gave him such a violent Push as made his Back bend, and so he tumbled down on
the Stage; I fell upon him, and though he used all his Strength to get uppermost,
yet I kept him under me without much difficulty: All the People cried, Victory
to the Son of Ulysses, and so I helped the dismayed Rhodian to get up. The
Combat with the Cestus was more difficult: The Son of a rich Citizen of Samos
having acquired a great Renown in this Exercise, all the rest yielded to him,
and I alone offered to dispute the Victory with him. At first he treated me
with such fierce Blows on my Head and Breast as made me spit Blood, and spread
a thick Cloud over my Eyes; I staggered, he pressed me; I was almost out of
Breath, but I was animated by Mentor's Voice, who cried to me, You Son of
Ulysses, will you suffer your self to be vanquished? Anger supplied me with
fresh Strength, and I avoided several Blows which would have crushed me down.
As soon as the Samian had made a false Blow at me, and that his Arm was
stretched out in vain, I surpised him in that stooping Posture, and as he
began to step back, I lifted up my Cestus that I might fall upon him with
greater force; he endeavored to recover, but whilst he was in this
disadvantagious Posture, he gave me an opportunity to throw him down. He had
scarce touched the Ground, when I reached him my hand to raise him; but he got
up by himself, covered with Dust and Blood, full of confusion and disorder, not
daring to renew the Fight.

Immediately after began the Chariot-Races: The Chariots were distributed by
Lot; mine happened to be the worst, both as to the lightness of the Wheels, and
the mettle of the Horses: We started; a Cloud of Dust flew about us that
darkened the very Sky; at first I let all my Competitors go before me; a young
Lacedemonian, named Creantor, cast off all the rest behind him; a Cretan,
Policlete by name, followed him close: Hippomachus, a Relation of Idomeneus,
who aspired to overtake him, giving the Reins to his Horses, who were reeking
with sweat, leaned on their loose Mane, and his Chariot-Wheels turned so very
swift, that they seemed to be without Motion, like the Wings of an Eagle that
cuts the Air. My Horses being animated, and having gathered Breath by degrees,
I outstrip'd most of those who started with so much Fury. Hippomachus, driving
his Horses too fast, the most mettlesome of 'em fell down, and by his fall
deprived his Master of the Hopes of the Crown. Policletes leaning too much upon
his Horses, and having no firm sitting, tumbled down at a Shock, lost his
Reins, and 'twas great luck that he escaped Death. Pisistrates, seeing with
Eyes full of Indignation, that I was got up close to him, redoubled his
Eagerness: Now he invoked the Gods, promising 'em rich Offerings; then he
cheered up his Horses with his Voice: He was afraid lest I should pass between
him and the Meta.
Mark; for my Horses which I spared at first, were now able to beat his; so
that he had no other Hopes left him, than to stop up my Passage: In order to
it, he ventured to break his Wheel against the Mark, and broke it accordingly.
I turned about presently to avoid his broken Chariot, and a moment after he saw
me at the Goal. The People shouted a second time, and cried out, Victory to the
Son of Ulysses, it is He the Gods have destined to Reign over us. In the mean
time the most illustrious, and the wisest among the Cretans, conducted us into
an old and consecrated Wood, remote from the sight of profane Men, where the
old Men whom Minos had established to be the Judges of the Peo;le, and
Guardians of the Laws, assembled us. We were the same who had contended at the
Exercises, no other being admitted. The Sages opened the Books wherein all the
Laws of Minos are collected. As I drew near those old Men, whom Age rendered
Venerable, without impairing the Vigor of their Mind, I felt my self seized
with an awful Respect and Confusion. They sat in order, and motionless in their
Places; their Hair was hoary; some of them had none at all; a calm and serene
Wisdom shined in their grave Countenances; they spoke with Deliberation, and
said nothing beside the purpose; when they happened to differ in Opinion, they
were so moderate in maintaining their Sentiments, that one would be apt to
think that they were all of one Mind. This long Experience of past
Transactions, and their constant Application and Study, gave them a clear
distinct Idea of every Thing: But what most conduced to perfect their Reason,
was the Tranquillity of their Minds, freed from the fond Passions and wild
Caprices of Youth; they were acted by Wisdom alone, and the Advantage they
reaped from their accomplished Virtue, was, that they had such a perfect
Mastery over their Passions, that they enjoyed without trouble the pleasant and
noble Delight of being governed by Reason. As I was admiring them, I wished my
Life were contracted, that I might arrive on the sudden to so valuable an old
Age; I accounted Youth unhappy, for being so remote from that calm and
clear-sighted Virtue. The Chief among those old Men, opened the Volume of
Minos's Laws, which was a great Book usually kept among Perfumes in a golden
Box. All those old Men kissed it with great Respect, for they said, That next
the Gods, from whom good Laws are derived, nothing ought to be more sacred
among Men, than even those Laws themselves which tend to make them Good, Wise,
and Happy. Those who have in their Hands the Administration of the Laws for the
Government of the People, ought themselves to be governed by those very Laws
upon all Occasions: It Is the Law, and not the Man that ought to Reign. Such was
the Discourse of the Sages. Afterward he who presided at the Assembly,
propounded three Questions which were to be decided by the Maxims of Minos. The
first Question was, Which of all Men was most free? Some answered, That 'twas a
King who had an absolute Power over his People, and had conquered all his
Enemies. Others maintained, That 'twas a Man who being never married, traveled
all his Lifetime through diverse Countries, without being ever subject to the
Laws of any Nation. Others fancied, That it was a Barbarian, who living upon
Hunting in the midst of Woods, was independent upon any. Government, and liable
to no manner of Want. Others thought it was a Man newly made Free, who coming
out of a rigorous Servitude, enjoyed more than any other, the sweets of
Liberty. Others at last ventured to say, That it was a dying Man, because Death
freed him from all Troubles; and that all Men had no more Power over him. When
it came to my turn, I was not puzzled how to answer, because I still remembered
what Mentor had often told me: The most free of all Men, answered I, is he who
can be free, even in slavery it self, and in what Condition or Country soever
he be; a Man is most free, when he fears the Gods, and none but them: In short,
that Man is truly free who disengaged from all manner of Fear, or anxious
Desire, is subject to the Gods and his Reason only. The old Men looked upon one
another smiling, and wondered to find that my Answer was exactly the same with
that of Minos.

Afterward, they proposed the second Question in these Words; Which is the
most unhappy of all Men? Every one answered as he thought. One said, It Is a Man
who has neither Estate, Health, nor Honor. Another said, It Is a Man who is
Friendless. Others maintained, That it is a Man who has disobedient, ungrateful,
and unworthy Children. There came a Sage of the Isle of Lesbos, who said, That
the most unhappy of all Men, is he who thinks himself so; for Unhappiness does
not depend so much upon the Things we suffer, as upon our own impatience and
uneasiness which aggravates our Misfortunes. This Speech was highly commended
and applauded by the whole Assembly, and every one thought that this Lesbian
would carry the Prize in thus solving this Question; but being asked my
Opinion, I answered according to Mentor's Maxims: The most unhappy of all Men,
is a King, who thinks himself happy, when he makes all the rest of Mankind
miserable; His blindness makes him doubly unhappy; for not knowing his Misery,
he cannot apply Remedies to it; nay, he fears to be acquainted with it; Truth
cannot pierce through the Crowd of his Flatterers, and reach his View; his
Passions tyrannize over him; he is a stranger to his Duty; he never tasted the
Pleasure of doing good, nor felt the Charms of true Virtue; he is unhappy, and
deserves to be so; his Unhappiness increases daily; he runs to his own Ruin,
and the Gods prepare an eternal Punishment to confound him. All the Assembly
confessed I had overcome the wise Lesbian, and the old Men declared I had hit
upon the true sense of Minos.

The third Question they asked, was, Which of the two is to be preferred,
either a King victorious and invincible in War; or a King less experienced in
War, but able to Rule his People wisely in Peace? The Majority answered, That
the King invincible in War was to be preferred; What are we the better, said
they, for having a King who knows how to govern well in Peace, if he knows not
how to defend his Kingdom when a War comes? For then his Enemies will overcome
him, and make his People Slaves. Others on the contrary maintained, That the
peaceful King was much better, because he would be afraid of War, and
consequently take care to avoid it. Others said, That a conquering King would
consult and advance as well the Honor of his People as his own, and make his
Subjects Masters of other Nations; whereas a peaceful King would sink their
Courage into a shameful Effiminacy. They desired to know my Opinion, and I
answered thus; A King who knows not how to govern, but either in Peace or in
War, and is incapable to rule his People in both, is but a Demi-King; but if
you compare a King, who is only skilled in War, to a wise King, who, without
being acquainted with War, is able to maintain it upon occasion, by his
Generals, I think he is to be preferred to the other: A King whose Mind is
entirely bent upon War, would always be for making War; and in order to extend
his Dominion, and advance his Glory, not care if all his People were ruined.
What are a People the better for the Conquest their King makes over other
Nations, if they are miserable under his Reign? Moreover, long Wars are still
attended with great Disorders; the Conquerors themselves grow loose and
disorderly in those Times of Confusion. See at what a dear Rate Greece has
triumphed over Troy, she was deprived of her Kings for above ten Years; whilst
all is ruined by War, the Laws grow faint, Agriculture is neglected, all Arts
languish and decay; even the best Princes, when they have a War to carry on,
are obliged to commit the greatest of Ills; which is, to tolerate
Licentiousness, and make use of wicked Men. How many profligate Villains would
be punished during the Peace, whose Audaciousness must needs be rewarded during
the Disorders of War? Never had any Nation a conquering Sovereign, but they
must suffer much upon account of his Ambition. A Conqueror intoxicated with his
Glory, ruins as much his victorious People, as the Nations he has vanquished. A
Prince, who wants the necessary Qualifications for Peace, cannot make his
Subjects relish the Fruits of a War happily ended; he is like a Man who could
defend his own Field against his Neighbor, and usurp even that of his
Neighbor himself, but could neither Plow nor Sow his Grounds, and so Reap no
Harvest. Such a Man seems to be born to destroy, lay wast, and turn the World
topsy-turvy, and not to make the People happy by his wise Government. Now let us
consider a peaceful King: It Is true, he is not fit for great Conquests; that is
to say, he is not born to disturb the Tranquillity of his own People, by
endeavoring to subdue those other Nations who are not his lawful Subject; but
he is truly fit to govern in Peace, and is Master of all the Qualifications
necessary to secure and protect his People against their Enemies. For he never
attempts to do any thing that may disturb the public Peace; he is religiously
Faithful in all his Alliances; his Allies love him, they are not in fear of
him, but rather repose an entire Confidence in him. If he happens to have some
stirring, haughty, ambitious and troublesome Neighbor, all the other Kings who
fear that stirring Neighbor, and in no manner distrust the peaceful King, join
themselves in Confederacy with that good King, and keep him from being oppressed.
His Integrity, Honesty, and Moderation make him the Arbiter of all the States
that surround his; whilst the ambitious King, is odious to all the rest, and
ever exposed to their Leagues. This peaceful Prince has the Honor of being, as
it were, the Father and Guardian of all the other Kings. These are the
Advantages he has abroad; those he enjoys at home are still more wonderful:
Since he is fit to govern in Peace, it is certain he governs according to the
wisest Laws; he discountenances Pomp, Luxury, and all those Arts that serve
only to cherish and foment Vice; he promotes and encourages those that are
useful, and can supply Mankind with the real Wants of Life; more particularly,
he causes his Subjects to apply themselves to Agriculture, and by that means,
he procures them Plenty of all Necessaries. This laborious People, plain in
their Manners, and thrifty in their way of living, get an easy livelihood by
Tilling of their Lands, and multiply every day. This Kingdom contains a
numberless Multitude of People, but a People sound in Body, vigorous and
strong; not softened by Pleasures, exercised and inured in Virtue, not addicted
to the Enjoyments of an effeminate luxurious Life; a People that know how to
despise Death, and had rather part with their Lives, than with the Liberty they
enjoy under a wise King, who Reigns only by the Dictates of Reason and Justice.
Let now a neighboring Conqueror attack this People, perhaps he may find them
not so well used to a Camp, ranking themselves in order of Battle, or the
besieging of a Town; but he will find them invincible by their Numbers, their
Courage, their Patience upon hard Duty, their Familiarity with Want and
Poverty, their Resolution and Obstinace in Fights, and their constant Virtue
not to be shaken even by ill Success and Disasters. Moreover, if the King have
not Experience enough to Command his Armies in Person, he will easily find
those who shall be able to Command them, and will make use of them without
losing his Authority. In the mean time his Allies will furnish him with
Supplies; his Subjects will rather die than undergo the Yoke of another unjust
and tyrannical King, nay, the Gods themselves will fight for him. See how many
Helps and Advantages he will find amidst his greatest Dangers: I therefore
conclude, That a peaceful King who is unskil'd in War, is a very imperfect
King, since he cannot discharge one of his most important Functions, which is
to overcome his Enemies; but at the same time, he is infinitely superior to a
conquering King, who wants the necessary Qualifications to govern in Peace, and
is only fit for War. I perceived a great many in the Assembly who seemed to
dislike my Opinion; but however, the old Men declared I had spoken the
Sentiments of Minos. The first of those old Men cried out, I see the fulfilling
of one of Apollo's Oracles, which is known through all our Island: Minos having
consulted the God to know how long his Progeny would Reign, according to the
Laws he had established; Apollo answered him, Thy Offspring will cease to Rule
when a Stranger coming into thy Island, shall cause thy Laws to Reign. We
feared lest some Stranger should come and Conquer the Isle of Crete, but
Idomeneus's Misfortune, and the Wisdom of the Son of Ulysses, who best of any
Mortal understands the Laws of Minos, do plainly discover to us the meaning of
the Oracle; Why do we any longer deferr Crowning of him, whom Destiny appoints
to be our King? Thereupon the old Men went out of the sacred Wood, and the
first of them taking me by the hand, declared to the People, who were impatient
to know the Decision, That I had carried the Prize. His words were scarce out
of his Mouth, when there was heard a confused Noise of all the Assembly, every
one giving a shout for Joy; the Shore and all the Neighboring Hills echoed
with this general Acclamation, Let the Son of Ulysses, who is as wise as Minos,
Reign over the Cretans.

I paused a while, and then making Signs with my hand, I demanded Silence. In
the mean time Mentor whispered me in the Ear: What! will you renounce your own
Country? Will your ambitious Desire of a Crown make you forget Penelope, who
now expects you as her only Hopes, and the great Ulysses, whom the Gods
resolved to restore to his Family? These words went to my Heart, and checked my
Ambition of being a King. But now the profound Silence of this tumultuous
Assembly gave me occasion thus to proceed; Illustrious Cretans, I am not worthy
to Command over you. The Oracle you mentioned, shows indeed that the Offspring
of Minos shall cease to Rule when a Stranger comes into this Island, and causes
the Laws of that wise King to flourish; but it is not said that that Stranger
shall Rule. I will suppose I am that Stranger marked out by the Oracle: I have
made his Prediction good, I am come into this Island, I have discovered the
true Sense of the Laws, and I wish my Explanation may contribute to make them
Reign with the Man whom you shall choose: For my own part, I prefer my Country,
the little Island of Ithaca, before the hundred Cities of Crete, and the Glory
and Wealth of this fine Kingdom. Suffer me to pursue what Fate has destined;
if I entered your Lists here 'twas not with hopes to Rule here, but only to
merit your Esteem and your Pity, and that I might be furnished by you with
Necessaries for my speedy Return into my Native Country; I would rather choose
to obey my Father Ulysses, and comfort my Mother Penelope, than Reign over all
the Nations of the Universe: Oh! Cretans, you see the bottom of my Heart: I
must leave you, but Death alone shall put a Period to my continued Gratitude;
yes, Telemachus will love the Cretans, and be as much concerned for their
Honor, as if 'twere his own, as long as he has Breath. I had scarce done
speaking, when there arose through the whole Assembly a hollow Noise, like that
of the Sea-Waves, which dash one against another in a Storm. Some said, Is this
a God in an humane Shape? Others maintained, They had seen me in other
Countries, and that they knew me again. Others cried, we must force him to
Reign here. At last I resumed my Discourse, and every one was silent in a
moment, not knowing whether or no I was going to accept what I had at first
rejected; in these words therefore I addressed my self to 'em:

Suffer me, Oh! Cretans, to tell you my Thoughts; You are the wisest of all
Nations, but methinks Wisdom requires a Precaution which you seem to have
forgot; you ought to fix your Election, not on that Man who best Discourses
about the Laws, but on him who with a most steady and constant Virtue, puts
them in Practice. For my part, I am young, and consequently without Experience,
exposed to the Violence of Passions, and more fit to be instructed by Obeying,
in order to Command hereafter, than to Command at present: Therefore seek not a
Man that has overcome others in those Trials of Wit and Strength, but one that
has overcome himself; look for a Man that has your Laws deeply engraven in his
Heart, and whose Life is a continued Practice of those Laws; let his Actions
rather than his Words, bespeak your Choice.

All the old Men charmed with this Discourse, and seeing the Applauses of the
whole Assembly still increasing, told me, Since the Gods will not suffer us to
hope to see you Reign among us, at least do us the favor to assist us in the
finding out a King that will govern according to our Laws: Do you know any Body
that can Command with that Moderatiou you speak of? I know a Man, answered I,
to whom I am beholden for all you have admired in me; it is his Wisdom and not
mine that spoke to you; it is he who suggested to me all those Answers you heard
just now.

Thereupon all the Assembly cast their Eyes upon Mentor, whom I showed to them,
holding him by the hand; moreover I told them what care he had taken of me from
my Infancy; what Dangers he had rescued me from; what Misfortunes had besallen
me as soon as I began to neglect his Counsels. At first they took no notice of
him because of his plain negligent Dress; his modest Countenance, his being
silent almost all the while, and his reserved Looks: But when they viewed him
more attentively, they discovered in his Countenance something that bespoke a
firm, noble, and elevated Soul; they took notice of the liveliness of his Eyes,
and how active he was in all his Actions; they asked him several Questions,
which he answered to the Admiration of all; they resolved to make him their
King, but he excused himself without any concern: He told them he preferred the
Sweets of a private Life, before the grand Pomp of a Crown; that even the best
Kings were unhappy in that they scarce ever did that Good they had a mind to
do; and that through Surprise, and the Insinuations of Flatterers, they often
did that Mischief they never intended. He added, that if Slaves be miserable,
the Condition of a King is no less wretched, since it is but servitude in a
disguise. When a Man, said he, is King, he is still dependent upon all those
whom he has occasion for to support his Authority, and make others obey: Happy
is he who is not obliged to Command! It Is only to ones own Country, when she
invests a Man with Power, that he ought to offer the dear Sacrifice of his
Liberty, in order to consult and promote the public Good.

At these words the Cretans, still full of wonder and admiration, asked him,
What Man they ought to choose? A Man, replied he, that is well known to you all,
since you must be governed by him, and such a one as is afraid to govern you.
Whoever desires Sovereignty, is not acquainted with it; and how then will he
perform the Duties incumbent upon his Dignity, if he be a stranger to them? He
courts a Crown for himself, but you ought to endeavor after one who accepts it
only for your advantage.

All the Cretans, being very much surpised to see these two Strangers resuse a
Crown, which a great many others seek after with eager Ambition, they enqui'd
who came along with them. Nausicrates, who had conducted them from the Port to
the Circus, where the Games were celebrated, showed them Hasael, who was come
with Mentor and my self from the Isle of Cyprus; but their wonder still
increased, when they heard that Mentor had been Hasael's Slave: That Hasael
deeply affected with the Wisdom and Virtue of his Slave, had made him his
Counselor and intimate Friend. That, that Slave made free, was the same who
just now refused to be King; and that Hasael was come from Damascus in Syria to
make himself acquainted with the Laws of Minos, so much was his Heart possessed
with the love of Wisdom. The old Men said to Hasael, We dare not to desire you
to Rule over us, for we suppose your Thoughts are the same with those of
Mentor; you despise Men too much to be willing to take upon you the Conduct of
them. Besides, you have so far renounced Riches, and the vain Pomp of a Crown,
that you would not purchase them at the expense of your Liberty, and with the
Fatigue and anxious Cares which are inseparably attending upon Rule and
Government. Hasael answered, Do not understand me, Oh! Cretans, as if I
despised Men. No: I know too well what great and noble Employment it is to make
them good and happy; but that Employment is full of Trouble and Dangers; the
Pomp that attends it has but a false Brightness, which can only dazzle the Eyes
of Vainglorious Men. Life is short; Greatness and Elevation do more provoke
the Passions, than they can satisfy them: My design in coming so far was not
to purchase those false Goods, but only to learn to be easy without them. I
must bid you farewell; I have no other Thoughts than to return to a peaceful and
retired Life, where Wisdom shall fill my Heart, and nourish my Soul; and where
the hopes that result from virtue toward a better Life, shall comfort me under
the Miseries of old Age; if I wish for any thing, it is not to be a King, but
rather never to be parted from those two Men you see here before you.

At last the Cretans (addressing themselves to Mentor) cried out, You, the
wisest and greatest of all Mortals, tell us then who it is we must choose to be
our King, for we will not let you go till you have determined our Choice. To
which he answered, Whilst I was among the Crowd of the Spectators, I took
notice of a vigorous old Man who showed no manner of eagerness or concern; I
asked who he was, and answer was made, he was called Aristomedes: Afterward I
heard some Body telling him that his two Sons were amongst the Combatants, at
which he expressed no manner of Joy; he said, That as for the one, he did not
wish him the Dangers which attend a Crown; and as for the other, he loved his
Country too well, ever to consent that he should be King. By that I understood
that this Father had a reasonable Love for one of his Sons, who is good and
virtuous, and that he did not countenance the other in his vicious Excesses. My
Curiosity still increasing, I enquired into the Life and Conversation of this
old Man; One of your Citizens answered me, He bore Arms a long time; his Body
is covered with Wounds and Scars, but his plain and sincere Virtue, entirely
averse to Flattery, rendered him troublesome to Idomeneus, which is the Reason
that King did not employ him in the Trojan War. He feared a Man who would give
those wise Counsels, which he was not inclined to follow; he was even jealous
of the Honor and (...) which he would infallibly have acquired in a little
time; he forgot all his past Services, and lest him here Poor, and exposed to
the Contempt of those base Men, who value nothing but Riches; but contented in
his Poverty, he lives a pleasant Life in a remote Place of this Island, where
he Tills and Manures his. Grounds with his own Hands. One of his Sons helps him
in his Work, and they are both happy in their mutual Love. By their Frugality
and Labor they have sufficient of all Necessaries for a plain way of Living.
That wise old Man distributes to the Sick and Poor of his Neighborhood, all
that he can spare from his own Wants, and his Son's. He sets all young People
to work, and incourages, admonishes, and instructs them; he decides all
Controversies amongst his Neighbors, and is, as it were, the Father of all
Families. His own Misfortune is, that he has a second Son, who would never
follow his Advice in any Thing: The Father having born with him a long time,
with hopes to reclaim him from his Vices, has at last turned him out of his
House, since which he has abandoned himself to fond Ambition, and all
extravagant Pleasures. This, Oh! Cretans, is what I have been informed; you can
tell whether that Relation be true: But if that Man be such as he is described
to be, what need you celebrate any Games? Why do you assemble so many unknown
Persons? You have amongst you a Man who knows you, and whom you know; one who
understands the War; who has shown his Courage not only against Darts and
Arrows, but against dreadful Poverty, and has despised Riches acquired by
Flattery; one who loves Work; who knows how useful Agriculture is to a Nation;
who abhors Pomp and Luxury; who suffers not himself to be unmann'd by a blind
Fondness for his Children, and loves the Virtue of the one, and condemns the
Vices of the other; in a word, a Man who is already the Father of the People:
This must be your King, if so be you desire to see the Laws of wise Minos
flourish amongst you.

All the People cried out, It Is true, Aristomedes is such as you describe him;
it is he that deserves the Crown. The old Men ordered he should be called; he
was found amongst the Crowd, undistinguished from the meaner Sort; and having
appeared before 'em, clam and unconcerned, they declared to him that they made
him King. He answered, I cannot consent to it but upon these three Conditions:
First, That I shall lay down my Dignity in two Years time, in case I cannot
make you better than you are at present, and that you remain refractory to the
Laws. Secondly, That I shall be free to continue my plain and frugal way of
Living. And Thirdly, That my Children shall have no Promotions; and that after
my death, they shall be treated without any other distinction than according to
their Merit, like the rest of the Citizens. At these words the Air was filled
with joyful Acclamations; the Chief of those old Men who were the Guardians of
the Laws, put the Crown on Aristomedes's Head; and afterward they offered
Sacrifices to Jupiter, and the other great Gods. Aristomedes gave us Presents,
not with that Magnificence which is usual to Kings, but with a noble
Simplicity: He gave to Hasael the Laws of Minos, written with Minos's own Hand;
he likewise gave him a Collection of all the History of the Isle of Crete, from
Saturn and the Golden Age, down to that Time: He sent Aboard his Ship all kinds
of the choicest Fruits that grow in Crete, but are unknown in Syria, and
offered him all the Assistance he had occasion for. Now because we pressed our
Departure, he ordered a Ship to be fitted up, and manned with a great number of
strong Rowers, and armed Men; he gave us withal, changes of Clothes, and all
manner of Provisions. At that very instant there arose a fair Wind for Ithaca;
this Wind being contrary to Hasael, obliged him to stay behind; he saw us go
away, and embraced us as dear Friends, whom he feared he should see no more:
However, said he, the Gods are just; they see a Friendship founded on Virtue
alone; they will one day bring us together again; and those happy Elysian
Fields, where the Good and Just are said to enjoy an eternal Peace after death,
shall see our Souls meet, never to be parted any more. Oh! that my Ashes might
be gathered into the same Urn with yours! As he spoke these last Words, he shed
a Flood of Tears, and his Voice was checked by his deep Sighs: We wept no less
than he, and in this solemn Woe he conducted us to our Ship. As for
Aristomedes, he told us, It Is you made me King; remember what Dangers you have
exposed me to, and therefore require the Gods that they would inspire me with
true Wisdom, and make me as much superior to other Men in Moderation, as I am
above them in Authority. For my part I beseech them to conduct you safe into
your Country, to confound the Insolence of your Foes, and bless you with the
sight of Ulysses, reigning in Peace with his dear Penelope. Telemachus, I give
you a good Ship full of able Mariners and Soldiers, who may serve you against
those unjust Men that persecute your Mother. Oh! Mentor, whose boundless Wisdom
leaves me no room, even to wish you an addition of any Thing: Go both in Peace,
and make each other happy; remember Aristomedes, and if ever the Ithacians have
occasion for the Cretans, depend upon me as long as I have Breath. He embraced
us, and we could not forbear mingling our Tears with our Thanks.

In the mean time the Wind which filled our spreading Sails, seemed to promise
a safe Voyage. And now Mount Ida began to decrease in our sight, and looked
like a little Hill; the Cretan Shore disappeared, and the Coast of Peloponesus
seemed to advance into the Sea to meet us half way: But on the sudden a black
Storm over-cast the Sky, and provoked the boisterousness of the Waves; the Day
was turned into Night, and ghastly Death hovered over us. Oh, Neptune, it is
you, who with your proud Trident, stirred up the Rage of the watery Deep! Venus,
to be revenged upon us, for despising her, even in her Temple of Cythera, went
to that God, and spoke to him full of Grief, and with Eyes dissolved in Tears;
at least, it is what Mentor, who is acquainted with Celestial Things, has
assured me. Oh! Neptune, said she, will you suffer those impious Men to defy
my Power unpunished? The God themselves are sensible of it, and these rash
Mortals have dared to condemn all they have seen in my Island; they pretend to
a Wisdom which is proof against all Passions, and look upon Love as a Fit of
Madness: Have you forgot that I was born in your Dominions? Why do you delay
any farther to swallow up in the deep Abyss of your Kingdom those two Men whom
I abhor? She had scarce done speaking, when Neptune made his boisterous Waves
rise up to the very Skies, and Venus smiled, believing our Wreck inevitable.
Our Pilot being now beside himself, cried out, That he could no longer oppose
the violence of the Winds, which fiercely drove us upon some Rocks; a Gust of
Wind broke our Mainmast, and a moment after we heard the bottom of our Ship
splitting against the pointed Rocks. The Water comes in at several Places; the
Ship sinks; all the Crew of Rowers fill the tempestuous Airwith lamentable
Cries. I embraced Mentor, and told him, Death is come at last, we must embrace
it with Courage; the Gods have delivered us from so many Dangers only to
destroy us this day: Let Us die, Oh! Mentor, let us die; it is a comfort to me
that I die with you; 'twere in vain to contend for our Lives against the Storm.
To this Mentor answered, True Courage finds always some Remedy or other; it is
not enough to expect Death calmly and unconcerned, unless, without being
afraid of it, we use all our Endeavors to avoid it. Let You and I take one of
the Rower's Seats, whilst that Multitude of fearful and troubled Men regret
the loss of their Lives, without using Means to prevent it; let us not lose one
moment to save our selves. Thereupon he took a Hatchet, and cut off the broken
Mast, which, leaning into the Sea, made the Ship heel a-port: The Mast being
thus severed from its Stump, he should it out of the Ship, and leaped upon it
amidst the furious Waves. Then he called me by my Name, and encouraged me to
follow him. And now, as a great Tree, which all the confederate Winds attack in
vain, and which remains unmoved, and fixed to its deep Roots; so Mentor, not
only resolute and courageous, but also calm and undisturbed, seemed to command
the Winds and the Sea. I followed him: For who would not have followed, being
encouraged by Mentor? And now we are a-drift upon the Mast, which we steer
sometimes one way, sometimes another: This Mast proved a great help to us, for
we sat a-stride upon it; whereas had we been forced to swim all the while, our
strength had soon failed us. But the Storm did often over-set that great Tree;
so that being sunk into the Sea, we swallowed great Draughts of the briny
Flood, which run afterward out of our Mouths, Ears, and Noses; and we were
fain to contend with the Waves to get uppermost again. Sometimes also we were
overwhelmed by a Billow as big as a Mountain, and then we kept fast to the
Mast, for fear that violent Push should make us lose our Hold of that, which
was all our Hopes. Whilst we were in that dreadful Condition, Mentor, as calm
and unconcerned as he is now upon this green Turf, told me; Do you think, Oh!
Telemachus, that your Life is abandoned to the Winds and the Waves? Do you
believe they can destroy you unless the Gods have ordered it? No, no, the Gods
overruled and decree all Things, and therefore it is the Gods and not the Sea
you ought to fear; were you in the deep bottom of the Sea, great Joue's Hand
were able to deliver you out of it; and were you on the Top of Olympus, having
the Stars under your Feet, he might sink you to the deep Abyss, or cast you
down into the Flames of black Tartarus. I listened to, and admired his wise
Speech, which gave me a little comfort, but my Mind was not calm enough to
answer him. We past a whole Night without seeing one another, trembling and
half dead with Cold, not knowing whether the Storm would drive us. At length
the Winds began to be pacified, and the roaring Sea was like one who having
been a long time in a great Passion, has almost spent his Spirits, and feals
only a ruffling Motion which draws toward a Calm; thus the Sea grown weary, as
it were, of its own Fury, made but a hollow rumbling Noise, and its Waves were
little higher than the Ridges of Land betwixt two Furrows in a plough'd Field.
In the mean time bright Aurora with her dewy Wings came to open the Gates of
the Sky to introduce the radiant Sun, and seemed to promise a fair Day. All the
East was streaked with fiery Beams; and the Stars which had so long been hid
begun to twinkle again, but withdrew as soon as Phoebus appeared on the
lightened Horizon. We descried Land afar off, and the Wind helped us on toward
it. I felt Hopes reviving in my Heart; but we saw none of our Companions. It Is
probable their Courage failed them, and that they sunk with the Ship. Being
come pretty near the Shore, the Sea drove us against sharppointed Rocks, which
were like to have bruised us to pieces; but we endeavored to oppose to them
the end of our Mast, which Mentor used to as much advantage as a wise
Steers-man does the best Rudder: Thus we escaped those dreadful Rocks, and
found at last a clear and easy Coast, where we swam without any hindrance, and
came at last to a sandy Shore; there you saw us, Oh! great Goddess, who
Reignest in this Island; there you vouchsafed to receive and comfort us.

Telemachus having ended his Speech, all those Nymphs, whose deep Attention had
kept them motionless, with Eyes fixed upon him, began to look upon one another,
and enquire among themselves who those two Men were, of whom the Gods took so
much care. Who did ever hear, said they, such wonderful Adventures? The Son of
Ulysses does already surpass his Father both in Eloquence, Wisdom Valor. What
a Look! What a Beauty! What Gentleness! What Modesty! But withal, What
Nobleness and Majesty! If we did not know him to be the Son of a Mortal, he
might easily pass either for Bacchus, Mercury, or even the great Apollo. But
who is this Mentor, who looks like a plain obscure Man, of mean Extraction?
When one views him closely, there appears in him something above a Man.

Calypso listened to the Discourse with a Concern which she could not well
conceal; her Eyes still wandered from Mentor to Telemachus, and from Telemachus
to Mentor. Sometimes she would have Telemachus begin again that long Story of
his Adventures; then, on the sudden, she contradicted her self; and, at last
rising abruptly from her Seat, she carried Telemachus alone into a Wood of
Myrtles, where she used all her Arts to know from him if Mentor was Deity under
the Disguise of a Humane Shape. Telemachus could not satisfy her; for Minerva,
who accompanied him under the Shape of Mentor, had not discovered her self to
him, because of his youth; she did not yet trust his Secrecy so far as to make
him the Confident of her Designs. Besides, she had a mind to try him in the
greatest Dangers; and had he known that Minerva was his Companion, such a
Support had been able to make him despise the fiercest and most dreadful
Accidents without any concern. Therefore he mistook all along Minerva for
Mentor; and all the artful Insinuations of Calypso could not discover what she
desired to know. In the mean time, all the Nymphs crowding about Mentor, took
great delight in asking him Questions; One of them asked him the Particulars of
his Travels into AEthiopia; another desired to be acquainted with what he had
seen at Damascus; and a third asked him, whether he had known Ulysses before
the Siege of Troy? He answered every one with gentleness and civility; and though
his Words were plain, yet they were not without their Graces. 'Twas not long
before Calipso returned and interrupted their Conversation; and whilst her
Nymphs begun to sing and gather Flowers to amuse Telemachus, she took Mentor
aside in order to make him speak and discover who he was. As the soft Vapors
of Sleep do insensibly glide into the heavy Eyes, and wearied Limbs of a Man
quite spent with Fatigue, with the same gentleness the flattering Words of the
Goddess insinuated themselves in order to bewitch the Heart of Mentor; but she
always found something which baffled her Charms, and disappointed her
Endeavors. Just as a steep Rock, which hides its proud Top among the Clouds,
and despises the Rage of the insulting Winds; thus Mentor unmovable in his
wise Resolutions, suffered himself to be attacked by the inquisitive Calipso;
nay, sometimes he gave her a Glympse of Hope that she might puzzle him with her
Questions, and discover the Truth through his dubious Answers. But when she
thought her self most sure to satisfy her Curiosity, her Hopes vanished away;
what she imagined to hold fast, gave her presently the slip, and a short Answer
from Mentor renewed her Uncertainty. Thus she spent whole days; now flattering
Telemachus, and then endeavoring to take him away from Mentor, whom she hoped
no more to engage so far as to make him discover who he was; she made use of
her fairest Nymph to kindle the Fire of Love in young Telemachus's Heart, and a
Deity more powerful than Calypso, came to her Assistance.

Venus still full of Resentment for the Contempt which Mentor and Telemachus
expressed of the Worship which was paid her in the Island of Cyprus, was enraged
to see that these two rash Mortals had escaped the fury of the Winds and Sea in
the late Storm; she complained bitterly to Jupiter; but the Father of the Gods,
unwilling to let her know, that Minerva, in the Shape of Mentor, had preserved
the Son of Ulysses, told Venus with a smile, That he gave her leave to revenge
her self on those two Men. She therefore leaves the heavenly Mansions; neglects
the sweet Perfumes which are burnt on the Altars at Paphos, Cythera and Idalia;
flies in her Chariot drawn by Doves; calls her Son Cupid, and with a Face full
of sorrow, but adorned with new Charms, she thus speaks to him; Do thou not
see, my Son, those two Men who contemn my Power and thine? Who for the future
will worship us? Go and pierce with thy surest Arrows their insensible Hearts;
come down with me into that Island, where I shall discourse with Calypso. She
said; and cutting the yielding Air in a golden Cloud, presented her self to
Calypso, who at that moment sat pensive and alone on the grassy Brink of a
Fountain, remote from her Grotto.

Unhappy Goddess, said she to her, the ungrateful Ulysses has despised and
abandoned you; his Son still more cruel than his Father, designs to do the
same: But Love himself is come to aid your Revenge; I leave him with you; he
may remain among your Nymphs, as heretofore young Bacchus was bred among the
Nymphs of the Isle of Naxos; Telemachus will look upon him as an ordinary
Child; and not mistrusting him, will soon feel his forcible Influence. She
said; and being got up again into that golden Cloud from whence she was
descended, she left behind her a sweet smell of Ambrosia, which perfumed all
the sacred Thickets around. Cupid remained in the Arms of Calipso, who, though a
Goddess, began to feel a secret Flame glide into her Breast. To ease her self,
she presently gave him to a Nymph who happened to come to her at that instant,
whose Name was Eucharis; but, alas! how often did she repent it afterward? At
first, nothing appeared more innocent, more gentle, more lovely, nor more
graceful than this Child; by his sprightly, flattering, and ever-smiling Looks,
one would have thought he could bring nothing but Delight; but as soon as one
began to trust his fond Caresses, they were found to be full of a dangerous
Venom; that malicious, deceitful Boy never flattered but with a design to
betray; and never smiled but when he had done, or was ready to do mischief. He
durst not come near Mentor, being frighted away by his Severity; besides, he
was sensible that that unknown Man was invulnerable, and not to be pierced by
his Arrows. As for the Nymphs, they soon felt the Flames that were kindled by
this treacherous Boy, but they took great care to hide the deep Wounds which
fester'd in their Breasts. In the mean time Telemachus, seeing that Boy playing
with the Nymphs, he was surpised with his Beauty and Gentleness; he embraces
him; Sometimes he sets him on his Lap, and sometimes dandles him in his Arms;
he feels within himself a secret uneasiness, whose cause he cannot discover;
the more he indulges his innocent Play, the more he is troubled and softened
with hidden desire. Do you see those Nymphs, said he to Mentor? How different
they are from those Women of the Isle of Cyprus, whose very Beauty was
shocking, because accompanied with Immodesty and Lewdness; but these immortal
Beauties display a charming Modesty and Innocence. At these Words he Blushed,
but could not tell why: He could neither forbear Speaking of them, nor go on
with his Discourse; his Words were broken, obscure, incoherent, and sometimes
wild and foolish. Whereupon Mentor told him: Oh! Telemachus, the dangers you
escaped in the Isle of Cyprus were nothing if compared with those you are now
exposed to, and which you are not at all aware of; barefaced Lewdness strikes
us with Horror, and brutish Impudence raises our Indignation, but a modest
Beauty is most dangerous and surprising; when we begin to love her, we fancy we
are in Love with Virtue, and by insensible Degrees we yield to the deceitful
Allurements of a Passion, which we can scarce perceive before it is too fierce
to be extinguished; Fly, my dear Telemachus, fly from those Nymphs who are so
modest and discreet only to decoy you into their Snares; fly from the Dangers
your Youth exposes you to; but above all, fly from that Boy whom you do not
know: He is Cupid, whom her Mother Venus has brought into this Island to
revenge your Contempt of those Rites which are performed in her Honor in the
Isle of Cythera; he has wounded the Heart of Calipso, and made her passionately
in Love with you; he had fired all those Nymphs that are now about him; and
even Telemachus himself: Oh! wretched young Man, you burn without feeling your
secret Flame. Telemachus often interrupted the Discourse of Mentor, and told
him; but why shall we not stay in this Island? Ulysses is certainly dead, and
has been a long time Buried in the Waves; and Penelope seeing that neither he
nor I return home, will never be able to resist so many Lovers; and without
doubt her Father Icarus has by this time obliged her to Marry a new Husband.
Shall I return to Ithaca to see her engaged with another, contrary to the
solemn Faith she had given to my Father? The Ithacians have quite forgot
Ulysses, and we cannot return thither without running upon certain Death, since
Penelope's Lovers are already possessed of all the Avenues to the Port, the
better to make our Destruction sure at our return. Mentor replied: Your
Discourse is the result of a blind Passion, we are wonderfully industrious in
finding all the Reasons which seem to favor it, and with no less care we avoid
the sight of those which condemn it; we employ all our Wit in deceiving our
selves, and stifling those Remorses which give a check to our Desires. Have you
forgot what the Gods have done for you in order to bring you back into your own
Country? Which way did you come out of Sicily? Those Misfortunes which befell
you in Egypt, did they not turn on a sudden to your Prosperity? What unknown
Hand dispelled all those impending Dangers which threatened your Head at the
City of Tire? After so many wonderful Deliverances can you be doubtful of what
the Gods have in store for you? But no, you suppose your self unworthy of their
Favors. For my own part I go out of this Island: But you, oh degenerate Son of
so wise and noble a Father, you may lead here a soft, inglorious Life amongst
Women; and in spite of Heaven do what your Father thought unworthy of him.
These reflecting Expressions touched Telemachus to the very quick; He felt his
Heart relenting at Mentor's Words; His Griefs was attended with Shame; He
feared both the departure and indignation of so wise a Person, as one to whom
he was so very much obliged; but a newborn Passion, with which he was but
little acquainted, made him quite another Man. What, said he to Mentor, with
Tears in his Eyes, Do you reckon for nothing that immortal Life which the
Goddess offers me? No: answered Mentor, I make no account of any thing that is
inconsistent with Virtue, and against the supreme Decrees of Heaven, Virtue
calls you back into your own Country, that you may see and comfort Ulysses and
Penelope; Virtue bids you not to abandon your self to an extravagant Passion:
The Gods, who delivered you from so many Dangers, in order to make your Glory
shine as bright as your Father's, the Gods, I say, command you to quit this
Island. Love alone, that base Tyrant Love, is able to detain you here. Yet,
what will you do with an immortal Life, bereft of Liberty, Virtue and Honor?
Your sort of Life would still be the more wretched, in that it were endless.
Telemachus answered him only with Sighs: Sometimes he wished that Mentor had
forced him away from Calipso; and sometimes he wished that his Departure had
rid him of a troublesome rigid Friend, who ever reproached him with his
Weakness. His Heart was continually in suspense betwixt various Thoughts, just
as the Sea is tossed by contrary Winds, that sport with its inconstant Waves.
He often lay motionless on the Seashore; sometimes in a lonely and gloomy
Covert of a Wood he shed a Flood of bitter Tears, and cried like a roaring
Lion. He was grown Lean; his hollow Eyes were full of a devouring Fire; and by
his pale downcast Looks, and disfigured Face, one could never have thought he
had been Telemachus; his Beauty, his graceful Sprightliness, and his noble
Aspect were fled from him; he was like a Flower which blows in the Morning,
casts forth its fragancy around all the Day, but fades insensibly toward
Night; its fine Colors decay, its Leaves wither, and its fine Top droops, and
bears down the feeble Stalk. Thus the Son of Ulysses was brought to a
languishing and dying Condition.

Mentor perceiving that Telemachus was not able to resist the violence of his
Passion, he thought on a Stratagem to deliver him from so great a Danger. He
took notice that Calipso was desperately in Love with Telemachus, and that
Telemachus was no lest taken with the Charms of the young Nymph Eucharis; for
cruel Cupid, the better to torment Mortals, makes them seldom love the Person
by whom they are beloved. Now upon a Day when Telemachus was to go out a
Hunting with Eucharis, Mentor, in order to raise Calipso's Jealousy, told her;
I find in Telemachus an eager Love for Hunting, which I never perceived in him
before; this Recreation makes him slight all other Pleasures; he only delights
in Forests and wild Mountains: Is it you, Oh great Goddess! who have inspired
him with this Passion? Calipso was touched to the quick with these Words, and
was not able to contain her Resentments. That Telemachus, answered she, who
despised all the Pleasures of the Isle of Cyprus, cannot resist the faint
Charms of one of my Nymphs. How dares one to boast of so many wonderful
Actions, whose Heart is so easily softened by shameful, effeminate Pleasures,
and who seems to be Born only to lead an obscure inglorious Life among Women?
Mentor was not a little pleased to find that Jealousy began to work in
Calipso's Heart, but said no more at that time, for fear she should distrust
him; only he expressed his concern by his sad and downcast Looks. The Goddess
complained to him about all she saw, and renewed her Complaints every Day: This
Hunting-match, of which Mentor gave her notice, began to raise her Fury; she
was told that Telemachus had no other Design in his Sports than to withdraw
from the other Nymphs, in order to entertain Eucharis alone; there was also a
Talk of a second Huntingmatch, wherein she foresaw he would do, what he had
done in the first. But to break Telemachus's Measures, she declared that she
designed to make one amongst them; and then on the sudden being no more able to
contain her Passion, she spoke to him in these Words: Is it thus, Oh young rash
Mortal! that thou art come into my Island to escape the just Wreck which
Neptune prepared for thee, and the Vengeance of those Gods thou have offended?
Did thou come into this Island, which no Mortal ever dares to approach, only
to despise my Power, and the Love I have expressed for thee? Oh! all ye powerful
Deities of Heaven and Hell, hear the Complaints of an unfortunate Goddess: Have
to confound and destroy this perfidious, ungrateful and impious Man. Since thou
art still more cruel and unjust than thy. Father, may thy Sufferings be
likewise more cruel and unpitied than his; may thou never see thy Country
again, that poor and wretched Ithaca, which thou did basely prefer before an
immortal Life; or rather may thou be destroyed in sight of it, in the middle
of the Sea; may thy Body become the Sport of the Waves, and be cast on this
Sandy-shore without any hopes of Burial; may my Eyes see it devoured by
ravenous Vultures; may she whom you Love see it also; yes, she shall see it,
that Sight will break her Heart, and her Despair shall be my Bliss and Delight.

Whilst Calipso was thus speaking her Eyes glowed and sparked with Fire; her
wild, distracted Looks were ever unsteady; her trembling Cheeks were full of
black and blew Spots; her Color changed every moment; her Face was often over
spread with a deadly Paleness; her Tears did not flow so plentifully as before,
their Spring being in a great measure dried up by Rage and Despair; her Voice
was hoarse, trembling and broken. Mentor observed the different Motions of her
Passion, and spoke no more to Telemachus; he used him as we do a Man desperate
ill, and abandoned by the Physicians, and often looked upon him with Eyes of
Pity. Telemachus was sensible how guilty he was, and unworthy of Mentor's
Friendship; he durst not look up for fear he should meet the Eyes of Mentor,
whose very Silence condemned him: Sometimes he had a mind to embrace him, and
confess to him how deeply he was sensible of his Fault, but he was hindered as
well by a mistaken shame, as by a fear of doing more than he intended, to avoid
a Danger which seemed so pleasing to him; for he could not yet be prevailed
upon by Reason to conquer his fond and beloved Passion. The Gods and Goddesses
of bright Olympus were now met together, and with profound silence kept their
Eyes fixed on the Island of Calipso, impatient to know whether Minerva or Cupid
should remain Victorious. The God of Love by his sporting and playing with the
Nymphs had set all the Island on Fire; and Minerva, under the shape of Mentor,
employed Jealousy, the inseparable Companion of Love, against Love himself.
Jupiter was resolved to be only a Spectator of this Contest, and to stand
Neuter betwixt the Combatants. In the mean time Eucharis, who was afraid to
lose Telemachus, used a thousand Arts to keep him in her Chains: And now she
was just ready to go out a second time a Hunting with him; her Dress was
exactly like that of Diana; Venus and Cupid had supplied her with new Charms,
insomuch that her Beauty eclipsed then even that of Calypso her self. Calypso
seeing her afar off, viewed her self in one of her Crystal Fountains, and
being ashamed of her own Face, she run to hide her self into the remotest Part
of her Grotto, and spoke thus to her self. Then it is in vain, I have
endeavored to disturb the Joys of these two Lovers, by declaring that I
designed to be one of the Hunters. Shall I go with them? Shall I be the
occasion of her Triumph, and shall my Beauty serve only to heighten hers? Shall
Telemachus at the sight of my Charms be still more transported with those of
Eucharis? Oh! wretched me! What have I done? No, I Will not go: Neither shall
they themselves go; I know well enough how to prevent them. I Will go to Mentor;
I Will desire him to carry away Telemachus from this Island, and convey him to
Ithaca: But, What do I say? And what must become of forlorn me when Telemachus
is gone? Where am I? Oh! cruel Venus, what shall I do? Oh! Venus, you have
deceived me; what a treacherous Present you gave me! Pernicious Child!
Poisoning Love! I gave the free entrance into my Heart, with Hopes to live
happy with Telemachus, and thou have brought nothing into my Heart but Trouble
and Despair. My Nymphs have rebelled against me, and my being a Goddess serves
only to make my Miseries eternal. Oh! that I could destroy my self to end my
Sorrows! But if I cannot, yet, Oh! Telemachus, thou shall die; I Will revenge thy
Ingratitude; I will strike thy perfidious Heart, and make thy Nymph the Witness
of my just Resentment. -- But, Whither does my raving Passion hurry me!
unfortunate Calipso, why would thou destroy a guiltless Youth, whom thou
have thy self plunged into an Abyss of Misfortunes! I my self have conveyed the
fatal Brand into the chaste Bosom of telemachus: How innocent he was before!
how Virtuous, how much averse to shameful Pleasures! What made me intoxicate
his Heart? -- He would have abandoned me. -- Well! shall he not either leave me
now, or only live to torture me and and make my Rival blessed? No, no: My
Punishment is just. Go, dear Telemachus, go, cross the Seas: Leave Calipso,
whose Life is a Burden to her, and who cannot meet Death to ease her Torments;
leave her disconsolate, covered with shame and full of despair with the proud
Eucharis.

Thus she spoke to her self in her Grotto; but rushing out on the sudden,
transported with impetuous Fury: Oh! Mentor, said she, is it thus you support
Telemachus against the Affaults of Vice, to which he is just ready to yield?
You sleep whilst Love is full awake to undo him. I cannot bear any longer with
that shameful Indifference you show; How can you calmly see the Son of Ulysses
disgrace his Father, and neglect the great Things to which he is destined? Is
it you or me, whom his Parents have entrusted with his Conduct? I endeavor to
find Remedies to cure his distempered Heart, and shall you stand idle and
unconcerned? There are in the remotest Part of this Forest tall Poplars, fit
for the Building of a Ship; there it is that Ulysses built his before he left
this Island: You will find in the same Place deep Cave, wherein are all manner
of Instruments necessary to cut out, and join together all the different Parts
of a Ship.

She had scarce done speaking, when she begun to wish it were in her power to
re-call her Words. Mentor did not lose one moment of time; he went down into
that Cave, found the Instruments, felled the Poplars, and in one day equipped
and fitted up a Ship for Sea; for Minerva's Power and Industry require but very
little time to bring the greatest Works to Perfection. Calypso, in the mean
time was tortured by a cruel anxiety of Thoughts; she had a mind to see whether
Mentor's Work went forward, but could not find in her Heart to leave the
Hunting-match, where Eucharis would have enjoyed the Company of Telemachus in
full Liberty. Her Jealousy never suffered her to lose sight of those two
Lovers; but at the same time, she endeavored to lead the Hunters toward that
Place where she knew Mentor was Building the Ship; she heard the strokes of the
Hatchets, and the Hammers; and every blow she heard, made her quake and
tremble; yet at the same moment, she feared her lest minding Mentor should make
her lose the sight either of a Sign, a Look, or a Wink from Telemachus to the
young Nymph. In the mean time Eucharis said to Telemachus, as it were in jest;
Are not you afraid of being reproved by Mentor for going out a Hunting without
him? Oh! how much you are to be pitied for living under so rigorous a Master,
whose severe Authority nothing can mitigate. He professes himself an Enemy to
all manner of Pleasures, and will not suffer you to enjoy any; he condemns as a
Crime, the most innocent Actions; you might indeed have suffered your self to
be governed by him, when you was not able to govern your self; but after you
have showed so much Wisdom, why should you be used like a Child? These cunning,
insinuating Words went deep into Telemachus's Heart, and filled it with spite
and hatred against Mentor, whose Yoke he was willing to shake off; he feared to
see him again, and was so perplexed that he returned Eucharis no Answer.
Whilst they were a Hunting, every Body was in a continued hurry; but at last,
toward the Evening they returned home through that Part of the Forest near which
Mentor had been working all day. Calypso saw afar off the Ship ready built, and
at that sight her Eyes were overspread with a thick Cloud, like that of gloomy
Death. Her trembling Knees betrayed her sinking Body; a cold Sweat overran all
her Limbs; she let her self fall on those Nymphs that stood about her, and as
Eucharis reached her Hand to support her, she put it back with a dreadful
Frown. Telemachus, who saw that Ship, but did not see Mentor, who was already
gone home, having just finished his Work, asked the Goddess whose that Ship
was, and what she was designed for? She knew not at first what Answer to make,
but a while after she said; I caused her to be built to send away Mentor;
you will not be troubled any longer by that severe Friend who thwarts your
Happiness, and would grow jealous of you, if you should become immortal. Mentor
forsake me! I am undone! cried Telemachus, Oh! Eucharis, if Mentor abandons me,
I have no Friend left but you. Having let these Words fall in the Transports of
his Passion, he saw presently how much his Rashness was to blame, but he was
not at liberty enough to think on their meaning at first. All the Company was
silent and full of surprise: Eucharis blushed, and cast her Eyes down; she
staid behind the rest Speechless, not daring to show her self: Yet whilst her
Face was full of Trouble and Confusion, she felt a secret Joy in her Heart. As
for Telemachus, he could not apprehend himself, nor think he had spoke so
indiscreetly; what he had done seemed to him as a Dream, but such a Dream as
filled him with perplexing and disquieting Thoughts. Calypso, more fierce and
wild than a Lyoness that had her Whelps taken from her, run up and down the
Forest, without knowing whither she was going. At last she found her self at
the Entrance of her Grotto, where Mentor expected her: Go out of my Island,
said she, you Strangers, who came hither to trouble my Repose: A way, with that
young Fool; as for you, imprudent old Man, you shall feel the Power of an
enraged Goddess, unless you carry him away this very moment. I will neither see
him, nor suffer that any of my Nymphs should speak to him, nor so much as look
upon him; I swear by the Stygian Lake; an Oath which makes the Gods themselves
tremble: But know, Oh! Telemachus, that thy Misfortunes are not at an end: No,
ungrateful Wretch, if I turn thee out of my Island, it is only that thou may
become a Prey to new Disasters; then I shall be revenged; thou shall wish again
for Calypso, but all in vain; Neptune, still angry at thy Father, who offended
him at Sicily, and solicited by Venus, whom thou did despise in the Isle of
Cyprus, prepares new Storms for thee; thou shall see thy Father, who is still
alive; but though thou see him, yet thou shall neither know him, nor be known
to him. Thou shall not meet him at Ithaca, before thou have been the Sport of
cruel Fortune; Depart -- may all the Celestial Powers revenge me; may thou
in the middle of the raging Sea, hang Thunderstruck, on the sharp Top of a
Rock, invoking in vain Calypso, whom thy just Punishment will fill with Joy.

Having spoke these Words, her troubled and perplexed Mind was ready to re call
what she had said, and put her upon Resolutions quite opposite to the former;
Love revived in her Heart the fond desire of staying Telemachus: Let him live,
said she, to her self, let him stay here; perhaps, he may at last be sensible
how much I have done for him; Eucharis cannot bestow Immortality upon him, as I
can. Oh! too, too rash Calipso, thou have betrayed thy self by thy rash Oath;
thou art now engaged, and the Stygian Waves by which thou have sworn, leave
thee no manner of hope. These words were heard by no Body; but one might see
the Picture of a Fury in her ghastly Face, and all the pestilential Venom of
black Cocythus seemed to reek out of her Heart. Telemachus was seized with
Horror: She perceived it; for what can be hid from a jealous Lover? And the
Trouble of Telemachus redoubled the Transports of the Goddess. Like a furious
Bacchanal who fills the Air with frightful Roarings, and makes the Thracian
Mountains resound with her Shrieks: Thus Calypso roves about the Woods with a
Dart in her Hand, calling all her Nymphs, and threatening to strike any one that
shall refuse to follow her; frightened by her Threats, they all crowd after her
with speed; even Eucharis advances with Tears in her Eyes, keeping her Looks
fixed at a distance upon Telemachus, but not daring to speak to him any more.
The Goddess shivered when she saw her, and her Fury redoubled when she
perceived that even Grief and Affiction served to heighten the Beauty of her
Rival.

In the mean time, Telemachus being alone with Mentor, he grasps his Knees, not
daring either to embrace him, or look upon him; he sheds a Flood of Tears; he
is going to speak, but his Speech fails him; he knows not either what he does,
what he ought to do, or what he would do. At last, he cries out; Oh! my true
Father! Oh! Mento, deliver me from my Miseries! I cannot leave you, neither can
I follow you; Oh! rid me of my Troubles, rid me of my self; strike, strike me
dead.

Mentor embraces him, comforts him, encourages him, teaches him how to bear
with himself, without indulging his fond Passion, and tells him; Oh! Son of the
wise Ulysses, whom the Gods have loved so much, and whom they love still; it is
out of that love they have for you, that they expose you to those Miseries
which you now undergo; whoever is unacquainted with his own weakness, and the
violence of his Passions, cannot be called wise; for he is still a stranger to
himself, and cannot stand upon his Guard against himself. The Gods have
conducted you, as it were by the hand, to the very brink of a Precipice, to let
you see the immense depth of it, without suffering you to fall into it;
therefore conceive now what you could never have comprehended unless you had
experienced it your self. You have been told of the Treacheries of Love, who
flatters in order to destroy; and who, under an outward sweetness, conceals the
most cruel and unpleasant bitterness; that charming, pernicious Boy is come
hither, attended by charming Smiles, and Graces; you have seen him; he has
robbed you of your Heart, and you your self was pleased with his Robbery. You
labored to find Pretenses to conceal to your self the (...) Wound of your
Heart; you endeavored to deceive me and your self; you was afraid of nothing;
see now what your Rashness is come to; you call upon Death as the only Remedy
to your Ills; the troubled Goddess is like one of the Furies of Hell; Eucharis
is consumed by a Fire a thousand times more cruel than all the racking Pangs of
Death; all those jealous Nymphs are ready to tear one another to Pieces; and
this is the work that Cupid makes, for all he appears so gentle and innocent.
Summon all your Courage to your Assistance; consider how much you are beloved
by the Gods, since they furnish you with so fair an opportunity to avoid Love,
and to return to your dear native Country; Calipso her self is forced to send
you away; the Ship is ready; why should we stay any longer in an Island where
Virtue cannot be safe? As he spoke these last Words, Mentor took him by the
Hand, and pulled him along toward the Seashore. Telemachus followed him
unwillingly, still looking behind him, and keeping his Eyes six'd upon
Eucharis, who went away from him; and though he could not see her Face, yet he
viewed with admiration her fine Hair tied behind with a Crimson Ribband, her
loose Garments playing with the Wind, and her noble, portly Gate; he would fain
have kissed the very Ground on which she went; and even when he began to lose
sight of her, he still listened, thinking that he heard her Voice; although
absent, her living Picture was present to his Eyes; he fancied he spoke to her,
and was in such a perplexity and concern, that he did not mind what Mentor said
to him. At last, when he begun to recover, as if waked out of a profound Sleep,
he said to Mentor, I am resolved to follow you, but I have not yet taken my
leave of Eucharis: I had rather die than thus ungratefully to forsake her;
stay, I beseech you, till I have seen her once more, and bidden her an eternal
Farewell; at least suffer me to tell her; Oh! Nymph! the cruel Gods, the Gods
jealous of my Happiness, force me away from you; but they may sooner put a
Period to my Life, than ever blot you out of my Memory. Oh! Father! either
grant me this last and just Consolation, or kill me now with excess of Grief.
However, think not I will either stay in this Island, or abandon my self to
Love; I have no such Passion in my Breast; I only feel the Effects of
Friendship and Gratitude for Eucharis; I only desire to give her Proofs of it
once again, and after that I Will follow you without delay.

How much I pity you! answered Mentor; your Passion is so very fierce and
violent, that you are not sensible of it; you think you are calm and composed,
and yet you call upon Death; you boast that you are not conquered by Cupid,
when you cannot leave the Nymph you love; you see, and hear nothing but her,
and are blind and deaf to all the rest. You are like a Man who being
lightheaded, through a violent fever, cries he is not sick: Oh! blind
Telemachus, you are ready to renounce your Mother Penelope, who expects you;
Ulysses whom you shall see; Ithaca, where you shall be King; and finally, those
great Honors, and that high Fortune, which the Gods have promised you by those
many Wonders they have done in your Favor; you renounce all those Advantages
to lead an inglorious Life with Eucharis. Will you still pretend that it is not
Love that makes you concerned to leave her? What makes you be willing to die?
Why did you speak with so much Transport before the Goddess? I do not charge
you with dishonest Love, but I lament your Blindness: Fly, Oh! Telemachus, fly;
for Love is a Foe not to be conquered but by Flight; true Courage consists in
flying without any deliberation, or so much as looking behind one, though at the
same time it is with fear and reluctance that one flies. You have not forgot
what care I have taken of you since your Infancy, and what Dangers you have
escaped by my wise Counsels; either be ruled by me, or suffer me to leave you;
Oh! if you knew how much I grieve to see you run on your own Ruin, and how much
I have suffered during the time. I dare not mention to you, the Pains which
your Mother felt when she brought you forth, which are not to be compared with
mine. I held my Tongue; I fed upon my own Grief, and stifled my Sighs only to
give you time to come to your self again, and acknowledge your Error. My Son,
my dear Son, ease my oppressed Heart; restore to me what I hold dearer than my
own Life, restore to me my lost Telemachus; restore your self to your self. If
your Wisdom can surmount your Love, I shall still live happy; but if Love
hurries you away from Wisdom, Mentor can no longer live. Whilst Mentor was thus
speaking, they went on their way toward the Sea; and Telemachus, who was not
yet confirmed enough in his new Resolution to follow him of himself, was yet
willing to suffer himself to be led away without Resistance. Minerva, who kept
still the Shape of Mentor, covering Telemachus with her invisible Shield, and
surrounding him with Beams of Divine Light, made him feel a resolute Courage,
of which he had not been sensible, since his being in that Island. At last they
arrived at a very steep Rock, on the Seashore, which was continually insulted
by the foaming Tide; they looked from thence whether the Ship, Mentor had
built, was still in the same Place, but perceived a very sad Spectacle.

Cupid was nettled to the quick, not only by the unknown old Man's
insensibility, but also by his robbing him of Telemachus; his Rage drew Tears
from him, and made him run to Calipso, who wandered up and down the shady Woods;
she fetched a deep Sigh as soon as she saw him, and felt all her Wounds
bleeding afresh. Cupid told her; You are a Goddess, and yet you suffer your
self to be conquered by a feeble Mortal, who is a Prisoner in your Island! Why
do you let him go? Oh! unlucky Boy, answered she, I will hear no more of thy
pernicious Counsels; it is thou have broke my soft and profound Tranquillity, and
cast me into an endless Abyss of Misery: It Is now past recall; since I swore by
the Stygian Flood to let Telemachus go. Jove himself, almighty Jove, the Father
of the Gods, dares not to break that dreadful Oath: But as Telemachus goes out
of this Island, go thou away too; for thou have done me more mischief than he.
Cupid having wiped off his Tears, with a malicious Smile, told her; Truly, this
is a mighty Business to be puzzled at! Leave all to my Management; keep your
Oath, and do not oppose Telemachus's Departure: Neither your Nymphs nor I have
sworn by the Stygian Flood to let him go; I will inspire them with the Design
of setting that Ship on fire, which Mentor has built in so much have; his
Diligence which filled us with wonder, will be altogether vain; he shall have
reason to wonder himself in his turn, and shall have no means left to draw
Telemachus from you.

This flattering Speech conveyed pleasing Hopes and Joys into the very bottom
of Calipso's Heart, and allayed the wild Fury and Despair of the Goddess, just
as a cooling Breeze, which blows on the grassy Margent of a purling Stream,
refreshes a Flock of Sheep, which was scorched by excessive Heat. Her Aspect
became clear and serene; the fierceness of her Eyes was softened; those black
Thoughts, and carking Cares, which preyed upon her Heart, fled from her for a
moment; she stopped her wandering Course; she smiled; she caressed wanton Cupid,
and by her Fondness prepared new Torments for her self. Cupid highly pleased
with having persuaded Calipso, flew instantly in order to persuade the Nymphs
who were wandering and dispersed up and down the Mountains, like a Flock of
Sheep, which the hungry, ravenous Wolves have frighted away from their
Shepherd. Cupid gathers them together, and tells them; Telemachus is still in
your Hands; haste, and let devouring Flames consume the Ship which the rash
Mentor has built to favor his Escape. Thereupon they take lighted Torches in
their Hands, run to the SeaShore, fill the Air with dreadful Roarings, and toss
about their dishevelled Hair like the furious Priestesses of Bacchus: And now
the greedy Flames devour the Ship, which burns the more fiercely as she is made
of dry Wood, daubed over with Rosin; and a Cloud of Smoke, streaked with
Flames, rises up to the very Skies. Telemachus and Mentor behold this
Conflagration from the Top of the Rock; and as Telemachus heard the Shoutings
of the Nymphs, he was almost tempted to rejoice at it; for his wounded Heart
was not yet well cured, and Mentor perceived that his Passion was like a Fire
not quite extinguished, which now and then breaks through the Ashes that
covered it, and cast forth bright Sparks of Fire. Now, said Telemachus, must I
return to my former Engagements, since we have no Hopes left to quit this
Island. By that, Mentor understood that Telemachus was going to relapse into
his Follies, and that he had not one moment to lose: He espied afar off in the
main Sea, a Ship that stood still, not daring to approach the Shore, for all
Pilots knew that the Isle of Calipso was inaccessible to all Mortals. At that
very instant the wise Mentor gave a push to Telemachus, who sat on the the
sharp end of the Rock, cast him down into the Sea, and threw himself down after
him. Telemachus amazed and stunned by his violent Fall, drunk great Draughts of
briny Water, and was for a while tossed about by the Waves; but at last, coming
to himself, and seeing Mentor, who reached him his Hand to help him to swim, he
thought on nothing but flying from the fatal Island. The Nymphs who expected to
have kept them Prisoners, cried and howled with great Fury, being enraged at
the disappointment. The disconsolate Calipso returned into her Grotto, which
she filled with hideous Roarings. Cupid, who saw his Triumph turned into a
shameful Defeat, shook his Wings, and, through the yielding Air, flew to the
sacred Grove of Idalia, where his cruel Mother expected him. The Son still more
cruel than the Mother, comforted himself with smiling with her at all the
Mischief they had done. As Telemachus went farther off from the Island, he felt
with secret Pleasure both his Courage, and his Love for Virtue, reviving in his
Heart. I am sensible, cried he to Mentor, of what you told me, and which I
could not believe for want of Experience: There Is no other way to conquer Vice,
but by flying from it. Oh! Father! How kind the Gods were to me, when they gave
me your Assistance, though by my Folly I deserved to be deprived of it, and be
left alone to my self. I fear now, neither the Sea, the Winds, nor the Storm; I
only am afraid of my own Passions; but of all Passions, Love is more dangerous
than a thousand Wrecks.

The Ship that stood still, toward which they swam, was a Phenician Bottom
bound to Epirus. Those Phenicians who were Aboard her had seen Telemachus in
his Voyage to Egypt, but could not know him amidst the Waves. As soon as
Mentor came within hearing, he lifted up his Head out of the Water, and with a
strong Voice cried to them; Oh! Phenicians! You who at all times are ready to
give Assistance to all other Nations, do not deny your Help to two Men who
expect their Safety from your Humanity; if you have any Respect for the Gods,
receive us into your Ship; we will go along with you wherever you go: The
Commander of the Ship answered, We will receive you with joy, for we are not
ignorant how we ought to relieve Strangers in your unfortunate Condition; and
so they took them up into their Ship. They were scarce got into her, when their
Breath was quite spent; for they had swam a long while, and struggled with the
fierce Waves. By degrees they recovered their Spirits; they had other Clothes
given them, for theirs were soaked through by asfthe briny Water, which dropped
on every side. As soon as they were able to speak, all the Phenicians crowded
about 'em, desiring to know their Adventures. Among the rest, the Commander
told 'em; How could you enter the Island from which you now came? It is said to
be possessed by a cruel Goddess, who never suffers any Mortal to land there;
besides, it is encompassed by huge craggy Rocks, which are continually insulted
by the wanton Waves, and not to be approached without splitting against them.
You say true, answered Mentor, for'twas by a Storm we were cast upon that
Coast, and our Wreck gave us Entrance into the Island. We are Grecians; the
Isle of Ithaca, which lies near Epirus, (whither you are bound) is our Country.
If you are unwilling to touch at Ithaca, which is in your way, we are contented
to be carried into Epirus, where we have Friends who will take care to furnish
us with all Necessaries for our short Passage from thence to Ithaca; and we
will for ever be obliged to you for the blissful Sight of what we hold most
dear in the World. All this while Telemachus was silent, and let Mentor speak;
for those Faults he had committed in the Isle of Calipso, had made him much
wiser; he distrusted his own self; he was sensible how much he wanted the
prudent Counsels of Mentor; and when he could not speak to him to ask his
Advice, he consulted his Eyes, and endeavored to guess at his Thoughts.

The Phenician Master of the Ship fixing his Eyes upon Telemachus, remembered he
had seen him some where; but 'twas a confused Remembrance which he knew not how
to clear: Give me leave, said he to Telemachus, to ask you whether you remember
you saw me before, for methinks I am no Stranger to your Face, though I cannot
tell where I have seen you; perhaps your Memory will help out mine. Telemachus
answered him with joy and surprise. When I first looked upon you, I was as much
puzzled about your Face, as you are about mine; I Am sure I have seen you: I
know you again, but cannot call to mind, whether in Egypt or at Tire.
Thereupon the Phenician, like a Man who wakes in the Morning, and by degrees
calls back the Dreams of the Night which begun to fly away, cried out on a
sudden; You are Telemachus, for whom Narbal conceived so great a Love, when we
returned from Egypt; I am his Brother of whom he has undoubtedly spoken to you
often, since I left you with him, after the Expedition into Egypt. My Affairs
carried me to the last Extremity of the Seas, into the famous Betica, near the
Herculean Pillars; so that I did but just see you, and it is no wonder I was so
puzzled to know you again at first sight.

I perceive, answered Telemachus, that you are Adoam: I had but a glimpse of
you, but I know you by the Discourse I had with Narbal: Oh! how I am filled
with Joy to hear News from a Man who shall ever be so very dear to me: Is he
still in Tire? Is he no more exposed to the barbarous Treatment of the cruel
Pygmalion? Adoam, interrupting him, said: Know, Oh Telemachus! that Fortune has
entrusted you with one who will take all the Care imaginable of you; I will
carry you to Ithaca, before I go to Epirus, and Narbal's Brother will love you
no less than Narbal himself. Having thus spoken, he took notice that the Wind,
for which he waited, began to blow; whereupon he gave Orders for weighing of
the Anchors, and unfurling of the Sails; which done, the Rowers plied their
Oars amain, and cut the yielding Floods. After that he took Telemachus and
Mentor to entertain them aside: I am going, said he, addressing himself to
Telemachus, to satisfy your Curiosity; Pigmalion is no more, the just Gods
have rid Mankind of him; as he trusted no Man, no Man would trust him neither;
The Good were contented to groan in silence, and fly his Cruelties, without
endeavoring to do him any Mischief; the Wicked thought they had no other way
to secure their Lives, than by putting a Period to his; there was not a Tyrian
but was every Day exposed to fall a Sacrifice to his Distrust; his very Guards
were more exposed than any Body else; for his Life being in their Power, he
feared them more than all the rest of Men, and upon the least Suspicion he
Sacrificed them to his Safety; nevertheless he could not find himself safe any
where, since those who were the Trustees of his Life, being in a continual
Danger, they could not get out of their uneasy Condition, but by preventing the
Tyrants cruel Suspicions, and putting him to Death.

The impious Astarbe, whom you have so of often heard mentioned, was the first
who resolved upon the Death of the King; she was passionately in Love with a
young Tyrian, Joazar by Name, a Man of great Wealth, whom she hoped to place on
the Throne. The better to succeed in her Desing, she persuanded the King, that
the eldest of his two Sons, named Phadael, impatient to wear the Crown had
conspired against his Life; she procured false Witnesses to prove the
Conspiracy, so that the unhappy Father put to Death his innocent Son; the
Second, named Baleazar, was sent to Samos, under pretense of learning the
Manners, Customs and Sciences of Greece, but indeed because Astarbe gave the
King to understand that his Safety required he should be removed from Court,
for fear he should enter into Combinations with the Malcontents. As soon as he
was embarkt, those who commanded the Ship being corrupted by that cruel Woman,
took Measures in order to be Ship-wrack'd in the Night, and having cast the
young Prince overboard, they saved their Lives by Swimming to other Barks that
waited for them. In the mean time Pigmalion was the only Person that was
unacquainted with Astarbe's Amors; he fancied she would never love any Man but
him; and that distrustful Prince, was blinded by Love to such a Degree, that he
reposed an entire Confidence in that wicked Woman. Yet at the same time his
extreme Avarice prompted him to make a way with Joazar (whom Astarbe loved with
so much Passion) in order to seize upon his vast Riches. But while Pigmalion
was tortured by Distrust, Love and Avarice, Astarbe thought it convenient to
put him to Death with all speed. She was apprehensive of his discovering her
infamous Amors with that young Man; and besides, she knew the King's covetous
Temper was by its self sufficient to entice him to exercise his Cruelty upon
Joazar; therefore she concluded she had not one Moment to lose to prevent him.
She saw the chief Officers of his Household willing to embrue their Hands in the
King's Blood; she hoard every Day of some new Conspiracy or other, but she was
afraid of trusting any Body, lest she should be betrayed. At last, she thought
most safe to Poison Pigmalion her self. He was used to Diet by himself with
her, and dressed all his Victuals with his own Hands, not daring to trust any
Body else; he locked himself up in the remotest Part of his Palace, the better
to conceal his Distrust, and that he might not be observed whilst he was
Dressing his Victuals. He deprived himself of all Dainties and Delicacies,
being afraid to taste of any thing that was not of his own Cooking. Thus not
only all manner of Meats dressed by others, but also Wine, Bread, Salt, Oil,
Milk, and all other ordinary Aliments were of no use to him. He lived only upon
Fruit which he gathered with his own Hands in his Garden, or Pulse and Roots
which he had saved. Now his Drink was nothing but Water, which he drew himself
out of a Fountain, which was enclosed within his Palace, and of which he always
kept the Key. Although he seemed to confide very much in Astarbe, yet he used all
possible Precautions against her; he always caused her to taste of every thing
that was served at his Table, that he might not be poisoned without her, and
that all Hopes of surviving him might be taken away from her. But to baffle his
Precaution she took an Antidote, which an old Woman, still more wicked than her
self, and the Confident of her Amors, furnished her with: After that she
poisoned the King with great Assurance in this manner. When they were just
going to sit down to take their Repast, the old Woman, of whom I spoke before,
came on a sudden and made a great Noise at one of the Doors: The King who was
ever in fear of being Assassinated, was presently alarmed and ran to that Door
to see whether it was fast enough: The old Woman retired, the King remained
troubled and speechless, and not knowing what to think of the Noise he had
heard, yet he durst not open the Door to be informed. Astarbe cheered him up,
and with fond Caresses persuaded him to Eat: Now, whilst the King was gone to
the Door, she had Poisoned his GoldenCup, and so when he bid her Drink First,
she obeyed without any Fear, trusting to the Antidote. Pigmalion drunk after
her, and a little while after fainted away. Astarbe, who knew his cruel Temper,
and that he would kill her upon the least Suspicion, begins to rend her
Clothes, tears off her Hair, and bemoans her self in a most hideous manner; she
clasped and hugged the dying King in her Arms, and bathed him with a flood of
Tears; for this cunning Woman had always Tears at Command. At last, when she
perceived that the King's Strength and Spirits were exhausted, and that he was
ready to give up the Ghost, fearing lest, he should recover, and force her to
die with him, she gave over her endearing Fondness, and the tenderest Marks of
Love, and having put on horrid Cruelty, rusht upon him with Fury, and stifled
him. Afterward she plucked the Royal Signet off his Finger, took the Diadem
off his Head, and called in Joazar, to whom she gave them both. She thought all
those who before made their Court to her, would certainly favor her Passion,
and that her Lover would be proclaimed King; but those who had been most
forward in humouring her, were mean and mercenary Souls, and therefore
incapable of a sincere and constant Affection. Besides, they wanted Courage and
Resoultion; they feared the Haughtiness, Dissimulation and Cruelty of that
impious Woman, so that all wished her Death to secure their own Lives. In the
mean time, a dreadful Tumult fills the whole Palace; The King is Dead, the King
is Dead, is the general Cry: Some are frighted; others run to their Arms; all
seem to be in Pain about the Consequence of it, but transported with the News;
busy Fame carries it about upon her Wings through all the great City of Tire;
every Body speaks of the King's being Poisoned but not one is found that is
concerned at it. His Death is at once the Deliverance and the general Comfort
of the People. Narbal deeply affected with so terrible an Accident, deplored,
like a good Man, the Misfortunes of Pigmalion, who had betrayed himself by
committing his Safety to the impious Astarbe; and had chosen to be a dreadful
and fierce Tyrant, rather than the Father of his People, which is a Duty
incumbent on a King. He therefore consulted the good of the State, and hastened
to assemble all good and publick-spirited Men to oppose Astarbe, under whom
they were like to see a more cruel Government, than that to which she had put a
Period.

Baleazar did not Drown when he was cast into the Sea; and those who assured
Astarbe that he was Dead, did it only upon a mere Conjecture: But by the Favor
of the Night, he saved himself by Swimming; and some Cretan Fishermen moved
with Compassion received him into their Bark. He durst not return into his
Father's Kingdom, suspecting, with Reason, that his Shipwreck was contrived by
his Enemies; and fearing no less the cruel Jealousy of Pigmalion, than the
Stratagems of Astarbe, He remained a long while wandering and unknown on the
SeaCoast of Syria, where the Cretan Fishermen had lest him: And to get a
Livelihood he was reduced to the Condition of a Shepherd. At last he found a
way to let Narbal know that he was alive, and what Condition he was in, for he
could not but think his Secret and his Life safe with a Man of his undoubted
Virtue and Integrity. Narbal, tho ill used by the Father, had nevertheless a
Love and Respect for the Son, whose Interest he all along consulted; but he
took care of him only to keep him from being wanting in his Duty to his Father,
and upon that Score he persuaded him to bear patiently with his hard Fortune.
Baleazar had sent Narbal Word, that if he thought it safe for him to come to
Tire, he would send him a golden Ring, upon the Receipt of which he would go to
meet him. Narbal did not judge it convenient to invite Baleazar to come whilst
Pigmalion was alive, for by that means he would have brought both that Prince's
Life, and his own into certain Danger, so difficult a thing it was to avoid
Pigmalion's Suspicions and Cruelty; but as soon as that wretched Prince had
made an end suitable to what his Crimes deserved, Narbal sent the golden Ring
to Baleazar with all speed. Upon the Receipt of it, Baleazar came away
immediately, and arrived before the Gates of Tire, when all the City was in an
Uproar about Pigmalion's Successor. Baleazar was soon acknowledged by the chief
Citizens of Tire, and by the whole People. He was beloved not upon the account
of the late King his Father, who had the universal Hatred, but because of his
Gentleness and Moderation. His very Misfortunes served, in a great measure, to
give a heightening Brightness to all his good Qualities, and to touch all the
Tyrians with a deep sense of Compassion for his past Sufferings. Narbal
assembled the chief Men among the People, the old Men of the City-Council, and
the Priests of the Goddess of Phoenicia. They saluted Baleazar as their King,
and caused him to be proclaimed such by their Heralds; the People answered them
with repeated Acclamations, which reached the Ears of Astarbe, even into the
remotest part of the Palace, where she was locked in with her base and infamous
Joazar. All the wicked Men whom she had made use of during Pigmalion's Life,
had already forsaken her; for the Wicked do naturally hate and fear the Wicked,
and never wish to see them in Authority, because they know how much they would
abuse their Power, and how far they would extend their Violence. As for good
Men, the Wicked think them better for their Turn, because upon occasion they
hope to find in them Indulgence and Moderation. Astarbe had no Body left about
her but the most notorious Accomplices of her enormous Crimes, who were
continually in fearful Expectation of their deserved Punishment. The Gates of
the Palace being broke open, those profligate Wretches durst not make a long
Resistance, and only endeavored to run away. Astarbe, with the Habit of a
Salve, would have made her Escape through the Crowd, but being discovered by a
Soldier, she was presently secured, and 'twas with much ado that Narbal kept
her from being torn in pieces by the enraged Multitude, who began already to
drag her along in the Mire. In this Extremity she desired to speak with
Baleazar, thinking she might dazzle him by her Charms, and amuse him with the
hopes that she would discover some important Secrets to him. At first, besides
her Beauty, she displayed such soft and gentle Modesty as would have melted the
fiercest Anger. She flattered Baleazar with the nicest and most insinuating
Commendations; she represented to him how much Pigmalian loved her; she
conjured him by his Fathre's Ashes to take Pity on her; she invoked the Gods,
as if she had a sincere Adoration for them; she shed Floods of bitter Tears;
she grasped the Knees of the new King, and used all her Artifice to render his
best affected Servants both suspected and odious to him. She accused Narbal of
being entered into a Conspiracy against Pigmalion, and endeavoring to withdraw
the People from their Obedience to Baleazar, in order to make himself King; she
added, that he designed to Poison that young Prince; and invented such other
Calumnies to asperse all the rest of the Tyrians, who were addicted to Virtue.
She hoped to have found the Heart of Baleazar susceptible of the same Distrust
and Suspicions, which she had found in the King his Father. But Baleazar not
being able to bear any longer with the black Malice of that wicked Woman; he
interrupted her, and called for a Guard to secure her. Being sent to Prison,
the wisest old Men were appointed to examine all her Actions: They found with
Horror that she had poisoned and stifled Pigmalion; and the whole Series of her
Life appeared to be a continual Course of monstrous Villainy. They were ready to
sentence her to suffer the Punishment which is inflicted on great Offenders in
Phenicia, that is to be burnt alive by a lingering Fire; but when she saw she
had no manner of Hopes left, she became fierce and mad like a Fury, and
swallowed down a Poison which she used to carry about her with design to make
away with her self, in case they would put her to lingering Torments. Those who
guarded her, took notice that she was in a violent Pain, and offered to give
her ease; but she would never answer their Questions; only by Signs she let
them understand that she would receive no Relief. They mentioned to her the
just and avenging Gods whom she had angered; but instead of showing any Trouble
or Sorrow that might atone for her Crimes, she looked upon Heaven with Pride
and Contempt, as it were to insult the Almighty Powers. An impious Rage
overspread her dying Face; there was not the least remainder of that excellent
Beauty which had been the Destruction of so many Men; all her Graces were
wholly defaced; her faint, hollow Eyes rolled in their Orbits with wild,
staring Looks; a convulsive Motion shook her Lips, and kept her Mouth open in a
hideous manner; all her Face shrivelled and wrinkled, yielded a ghastly
prospect by its continual Distortions; a dead Coldness and Paleness had seized
all her Limbs; sometimes she seemed to gather fresh Spirits, and come to her
self again; but 'twas only a faint struggle of Nature, which spent it self into
hideous Howlings; at last she expired, leaving all the Spectators full of
Horror and Fear. Without doubt her impious Ghost.
Manes went down into those Places of Sorrow, where the cruel Danaids do
eternally draw Water with Vessels full of Holes, where Ixion continually turns
his Wheel; where Tantalus flaming with Thirst, can never catch the wanton Water
that (...) his eager Lips; where Sisyphus vainly rolls up to the Top of a
Mountain a Stone which tumbles down again continually; and where Thitius will
for ever feel a Vultur preying upon his growing Liver. Baleazar being delivered
of that Monster, returned the Gods Thanks by innumerable Sacrifices. His
Conduct at the beginning of his Reign was quite different from Pigmalion's; he
applies himself to the promoting of Trade, which languish'd and decayed more
and more every day; he consults with Narbal about the most important Affairs,
and yet he is not governed by him; for he will see every thing with his own
Eyes; he hears every Body's Opinion, but reserves the deciding Vote to himself;
he is generally beloved by his People, and being Master of their Hearts he
enjoys more Riches than ever his Father heaped up with his cruel and insatiable
Avarice; for there is never a Family but what would part with all they have, if
he happened to be reduced to a pressing Necessity. Thus what he suffers them to
enjoy is more at his command, than if he should forcibly take it from them. He
needs not use any Precaution, or be sollicitous to secure his Life, for he has
still the safest Guard about him, which is the Love of his Subjects; every one
them being afraid to lose him, and therefore willing to hazard his own Life to
preserve that of so good a King. He lives happy with his People, and all his
People live happy under him. He is ever afraid of burthening his People,
whereas they are afraid of giving him too little a share in their Estates. He
lets them live in Plenty, and this Plenty makes them neither refractory nor
insolent; for they are Laborious, addicted to Trade, and steadfast in the
keeping of their ancient Laws pure and entire. Phenicia has now recovered the
height of her Greatness and Glory, and it is to her young King, and to Narbal,
who governs under him, that she owes all her Prosperities. Oh! Telemachus, if
he could now see and embrace you, with how much Joy would he load you with
Presents! What a Pleasure would it be to him to send you back into your own
Country! Am I not then very fortunate in doing, what he would have done
himself, and going to the Isle of Ithaca, and there place on the Thorn the Son
of Ulysses, that he may Reign there as wisely as Baleazar Reigns at Tire?

Adoam having thus spoken, Telemachus highly pleased with his Story, and much
more with the Marks of Friendship he received from him, embraced him with great
Tenderness and Affection; and their repeated Expressions of mutual Kindness
being over, Adoam asked him what extraordinary Adventure had led him into the
Island of Calipso? Telemachus, in his turn, gave him the Story of his departure
from Tire, and his going over to the Isle of Cyprus: He related to him, his
meeting again with Mentor; Their Voyage into Crete; The public Games for the
Election of a new King after Idomeneus's Flight; Venus's Anger; Their
Shipwreck; The kind and joyful Welcome Calipso had made them; The Jealousy of
that Goddess against one of her Nymphs, and Mentor's throwing his Friend into
the Sea as soon as he espied the Phenician Ship.

After they had given each other the respective Stories of their Adventures,
Adoam caused a magnificent Entertainment to be served up; and the better to
express his excessive Joy, he procured all the Pleasures that could be had
whilst they were at Table; during which time they were attended by young
Phenician Boys clad in white; they burnt the most exquisite Frankincense of
Arabia; all the Rowers Seats were filled with Musicians playing on the Flute.
Architoas now and then interrupted them by the sweet Harmony of his Voice and
his Lyre, fit to entertain the Gods at their Revels, and even to please the
Ears of Apollo himself. The Tritons, the Nereids, all the Deities who obey the
Command of Neptune, and the Sea Monsters themselves forsook their watery deep
Grotto's, and came in Shoals round the Ship, charmed by this Divine Melody. A
Company of young Phenicians, of an excellent Beauty, and clad in fine Lawn, as
white as the driven Snow, danced for a long time several Dances of their own
Country; afterward they danced after the AEgyptain manner; and, last of all,
after the Grecian. Now and then the loud Trumpets made the Waves resound with
their Clangors as far as the distant Shore. The dead of silent Night, the
stilness of the Sea, the trembling Light of the Moon which played on the
surface of the Water, and the Azure Blew of the Skies, studded with bright
twinkling Stars, served to heighten the Nobleness and Majesty of the Show.
Telemachus being of a quick and sprightly Temper, easily affected with the
Impressions of sensual Objects, relished all those Pleasures with delight; but
he durst not indulge himself too far in the enjoying of them, since he had
experienced to his Grief and Shame in the Isle of Calipso, how ready Youth is
to be inflamed. He was shy and afraid, even of the most innocent Pleasures, and
suspected every Thing. He looked upon Mentor, and consulted both his Face and
his Eyes to know what he ought to think of all those Pleasures. Mentor was not
a little pleased to see him in that Perplexity, but made as if he did not take
notice of it; at last moved with Telemachus's Moderation, he told him with a
Smile: I perceive what you are afraid of; nay, I applaud your Fear; but
however, you must have a care not to carry it too far. No Man can ever wish
more earnestly than I, that you enjoy those soft and moderate Pleasures that
will leave you the use of your Reason, and can never turn you into a furious
Brute; it is now convenient you should refresh your self after all your Troubles
and Fatigue; relish with a grateful Complaisance to Adoam, all those Enjoyments
he offers you; be merry, Telemachus, be merry and rejoice; Virtue is neither
morose, austere, nor affected: It Is she yields true Pleasures, she alone knows
how to season and temper them, to make them solid and lasting; she knows how to
mix Mirth and Sports with the most important and serious Affairs; she prepares
us for Pleasure by Labor, and refreshes the Hardships of Labor by Pleasure;
Wisdom it self is not ashamed to be gay and sprightly upon occasion. Having
spoke these words, Mentor took up a Harp and touched it with such exquisite
Art, that Architoas stung with Jealousy, let his drop from his Hands, his Eyes
were flaming with spite, his troubled Face turned pale, then blushed, and then
turned pale again; and every Body would have taken notice of his Pain and
Confusion, but that at the same moment Mentor's Harp had ravished into Ecstasy
the Soul of all the Assistants. No Man scarce durst draw Breath for fear of
interrupting the profound Silence, and so losing the least Note of the Divine
Song; all were still in pain lest he should end it too soon. Mentor's Voice had
no effeminate softness, but was flexible, mellow, and strong; and he used it
with such Art, that he humored to admiration every thing he Sung. He at first
rehearsed the Praises of mighty Jove, the Father and King both of Gods and Men,
who with a Nod shakes the whole Universe: Afterward he represented Minerva
coming out of his Head, that is, Wisdom, which that supreme God creates within
himself, and which issues from him to instruct those Men who are willing to be
taught. Mentor sung all those Truths in such divine and lofty Strains, that the
whole Assembly thought themselves transported to the very Top of Olympus,
before the Face of great Jupiter, whose Looks are as pierceing as his Thunder.
Next to that, he sung the Misfortune of young Narcissus, whose being fondly
(...) with his own Beauty, which he was continually viewing in a Fountain,
consumed himself with Grief, and was changed into a Flower that bears its Name.
Lastly, he sung the fatal Death of fair Adonis, whom a fierce wild Boar tore in
Pieces, and whom Venus, being passionately in love with, could never bring to
life again, with all the bitter Complaints she put up to Heaven.

None of those who heard him were able to contain their Tears; and every one
felt a secret Pleasure in Weeping, when he had done Singing. The Phenicians
looked upon one another full of Wonder and Amazement: One said, this is
Orpheus, for thus with his Harp he used to tame fierce Beasts, and draw after
him both Trees and Stones. It Is thus he enchanted Cerberus: suspended for a
while the Torments of Ixion, and of the Danaids; and moved the inexorable
Pluto, to let the fair Eurydice go out of Hell. Another cried: No, it is Linus
the Son of Apollo; to whom some body answered, You are mistaken: this must be
Appollo himself. Telemachus's Surprise was little less than that of the rest,
for he never knew before that Mentor could play on the Harp with so much
Mastery. Architoas, who by this time had concealed his Jealousy, began to give
Mentor those Commendations he deserved; but he could not praise him without
blushing, neither was he able to make an end of his Discourse. Mentor, who saw
what Trouble he was in, began to interrupt him, and endeavored to comfort him
by commending his Music. However, his Praises did not comfort Architoas, for
he was sensible that Mentor surpassed him yet more by his Modesty, by the
Charms of his Voice.

In the mean time Telemachus said to Adoam, I remember you spoke to me of a
Voyage you made into Betica, fince we came away from Egypt; and because Betica
is a Country of which common Fame relates so many incredible Wonders, Vouchsafe
to tell me what we must believe of them. I will be extreme glad, replied Adoam,
to give you Description of that famous Country, which deserves your Couriosity,
and which is much beyond what Fame proclaims about it; whereupon he began thus:
--

The River Betis runs through a fruitful Land, and under a tempered and
ever-serene Sky: The Country has its Name from the River, which discharges its
Waters into the great Ocean near the famous Pillars of Hercules, and about that
Place where the furious Sea breaking through its Banks, divided heretofore the
Land of Tarsis from Great Africa. This Country seems to have preserved the
Delights of the Golden Age; here Winters are Lukewarm, and the fierce Northern
Winds never rage in it; the scorching Heat of the Summer is ever allayed by
refreshing Zephires, which fan the sweltry Air toward Noon; so that the whole
Year is but a happy Hymen betwixt Spring and Autumn, which seem ever to go Hand
in Hand. The Land, both in the Valleys and the Plains, yields every Year a
double Harvest; the Hills are overspread with numerous Flocks of Sheep, whose
fine Wool is a choice Commodity among all Nations of the known World. There are
a great many Mines of Gold and Silver in that happy Country; but its rude
Inhabitants, contented and happy with their Plainness, disdain to count Gold or
Silver among their Riches, and only value what is really necessary to answer
the Wants of Humane Nature. When we first began to Trade with that Nation, we
found Gold and Silver employed among them about the same uses as Iron; as for
example, for Plow-shares, etc. As they had no outward Trade, so they wanted no
Coin; most of them are either Shepherds or Husbandmen; Artificers and
Tradesmen are but few in this Country; for they only tolerate those Arts which
procure the Necessaries of Life; and besides, though most of the Inhabitants
either follow Agriculture, or the tending of Herds and Flocks, yet they are
skilled in those Arts which are serviceable for the support of their plain and
frugal way of living. The Women spin that silky Wool I told you of; and make
extraordinary fine and white Stuffs; they bake Bread; dress Victuals; and all
those Labors are easy to them; for in this Country their ordinary Food is
Fruit and Milk; out of the Leather of their Sheep, they make thin Shoes for
themselves, their Husbands and their Children; they make Tents, some of waxed
Skins, and others of Barks of Trees; they wash the Clothes, keep the Houses in
order, and sweet and clean to admiration, and make Garments for all the Family;
those Garments are easily made; for in this sweet and happy Climate, they only
wear a thin and light Piece of Stuff, neither cut nor sowed; and which, for
Modesty's sake, every one laps about his Body. in long folds, and in what form
he pleases. The Men, besides Husbandry, and the tending of the Herds and
Flocks, have no other Arts to exercise but the Working and Fashioning of Wood
and Iron; and even in (...) they seldom make any use of Fire, unless it be for
Tools necessary for Husbandry. All those Arts which belong to Architecture are
altogether useless to them, for they never build Houses; it argues, say they,
too great a Fondness for the Earth, the building a Dwelling upon it much more
lasting than one self; it is sufficient to have a Shelner against the Injuries
of the Air. As for all other Arts, so much (...) among the Grecians, the
AEgyptains and other civilized Nations, they abhor and detest them as the
Inventions of Pride and Effeminacy. When they hear of Nations that have the
skill of raising magnificent Buildings; and can make Gold and Silver, household
Goods, Stuffs adorned with Imbroidery and precious Stones, exquisite Perfumes,
delicious and dainty Dishes of Meat, and Instruments of Music, whose Harmony
inchants the Soul, they answer in these words; Those Nations are unhappy, thus
to have bestowed so much Time, Labor, and Industry upon the corrupting of
themselves; those Superfluities soften, intoxicate and torment the Possessors
of them, and tempt those that are deprived of them to acquire them by Injustice
and Violence: And how can that be called a Good, which serves only to make Men
wicked? The Men of those Countries, are they more sound, strong and robust than
we? Do they live longer? And are they better united among themselves? Is there
Life more free from Cares, more peaceful, and more jovial and merry? Nay, on
the contrary, they must needs be jealous of one another, devoured by shameful
and black Envy, ever disquieted and tortured by Ambition, Fears and Avarice,
and incapable of enjoying plain, unmixt and solid Pleasures, since they are
Slaves to so many sham Necessaries, on which they make all their Felicity
depend. Thus it is, continued Adoam, that these wise Men speak, who owe all
their Wisdom to their diligent Study of Nature; they have an abhorrence for our
Politeness, and it must be confessed that theirs has something great in their
admirable Plainness; they live all together without dividing the Land; every
Family is governed by its Chief, who is real King of it; the Father of the
Family has the power to punish any of his Children of Grandchildren, that
commits a Fault, but before he inflicts the Punishment, he advises with the
rest of the Family: It Is rare indeed that there is any Punishment; for the
Innocence of Manners, Truth, Honesty, Integrity, Obedience and Abhorrence of
Vice dwell in this happy Place, and it seems as if Astrea, who is said to have
retired into Heaven, lies yet concealed here among these People: There is no
need of Judges amongst them, for their own Consciences Judge'em: All their
Goods are in Common; the Fruits of the Trees, the Grain, Pulse of the Earth,
the Milk of the Herds are so abounding, that a People so Sober and so Moderate
have no occasion to divide 'em; each moving fancily in this happy Country,
carry their Tents from one Place to another, when they have eaten up the
Pasturage, and consumed the Fruits of that part whence they come, so that it is
not their Interest to maintain one against the other; and if they all love one
another with a brotherly Love, which nothing can interrupt, it is the contempt
of vain Riches and of deceitful Pleasures which confirm 'em in this Peace,
Union and Liberty. They are all free, and all equal, and there is no other
difference among 'em than that alone which the Experience of the Grave, old
Men, or the extraordinary Wisdom of some young Men makes, who being
accomplished in all Virtue, equal the old Men: The cruel Outcrys of Fraud,
Violence, Perjury, Lawsuits and Wars are never heard in this Country
cherished by the Gods: No human Blood ever stained this Land, no, not so much
as the Blood of innocent Lambs: When they hear of bloody Battles, devouring
Conquests, of the overthrow of States, which are frequent in all other Nations,
they are Amazed. What, say they, are not Men subject enough to Mortality,
without percipitating one another to Death! Life that is so short seems to them
too long. Are they sent here upon Earth to tear one another in Pieces, and so
make themselves mutually Miserable? Nor could these People of Betica imagine why
those Conquerors, who subjugate great Empires, should be so much admired: What
a Folly it is, said they, for a Man to place his Happiness in governing other
Men, the government of whom is so very troublesome, if they are governed by
reason, and according to Justice: But how can he take Pleasure in governing
them against their Wills? It Is all that a wise Man ought to do, to submit
himself to govern a docile People, of whom the Gods have given him Charge, or a
People who entrent him to be as a Father or Shepherd to 'em; but to govern a
People against their Will, is to make himself most Miserable, to gain a false
Honor for kiiping them in Slavery. A Conqueror is a Man whom the Gods,
irritated against Mankind, have sent upon the Earth in their Wrath, to lay
Kingdoms wast, spread Terrors, Misery and Despair every where, and to make as
many Slaves as there are free Men. Is it not Glory enough to a Man that thirsts
after Fame to rule those with Prudence whom the Gods have put under him? Does
he think that he is not worthy of Praise unless he becomes Violent, Unjust,
Insulting, an Usurper and Tyrannick over all his Neighbors? War should never
be thought on but for the defense of Liberty. He is happy, who being a Slave to
no Man, has not the vain Ambition to make another Man his Slave. Those mighty
Conquerors whom they represent to us with so much Glory, are like those
overflowing Rivers, which appear Majestic, but destroy those fertile Countries
which they should only refresh.

After Adoam had given this Description of Betica, Telemachus, charmed with his
Relation, asked him several particular Questions: Do these People, said he,
drink Wine? They are so far from Drinking it, replied Adoam, that they never
cared to make any; not that they want Grapes, since no Country whatever
produces more delicious; but they are satisfied with eating Grapes as they do
other Fruits; for they dread Wine as the Corrupter of Mankind: It Is a kind of
Poison (say they) which makes 'em Mad; it does not kill a Man, indeed, but it
makes him a Beast: Men may preserve their Health without Wine, whose effect is
to destroy good Manners. Then, said Telemachus, I would fain know what Laws are
observed in Marriages in this Nation. No Man, replied Adoam, can have more than
one Wife, whom he must keep as long as she lives. The Honor of the Men in this
Country depends as much on their Fidelity to their Wives, as the Honor of the
Wives depends in other Countries on their Fidelity to their Husbands: Never
were People so Honest, and so jealous of their Chastity; the Wives here are
Beautiful and Agreeable, but Plain, Modest and Laborious; their Marriages are
Peaceable, Fruitful, and without Blemish; the Husband and Wife seem to be but
one Person in Two different Bodies; the Husband and the Wife share the Cares of
domestic Affairs together, the Husband manages all the Concerns abroad, the
Wife keeps close to her Business at home; she Comforts her Husband, and seems
to be made for nothing else but to please him; she gains his Confidence, and
contributes less by her Beauty than her Virtue to heighten the Charms of their
Society, which lasts as long as they live: The Sobriety, Temperance, and the
Purity of Manners of these People give 'em a long Life, and free from Diseases;
here are Men of an Hundred, and of an Hundred and twenty Years Old, who yet are
Fresh and Vigorous. I would know now, said Telemachus, how they do to avoid
going to War with other People their Neighbors. Nature, continued Adoam, has
separated them from other People, on one side by the Sea, and on the other side
by high Mountains: On the other hand, the neighboring Nations respect 'em for
the sake of their Virtue: Several times the other People falling out among
themselves, have made these Judges of their Differences, and have entrusted the
Lands and Towns, for which they disputed, with them. As this wise Nation has
never committed any Violence, no Body distrusts 'em. They Laugh when they hear
of Kings who cannot govern the Frontiers of their Estates among themselves. Is
it to be feared, say they, that Men should want Lands? There will ever be more
than they can cultivate; as long there remains free Lands, we would not so much
as defend our own against our Neighbors, who would take 'em from us; nor Envy,
nor Pride, nor Falsehood, nor a Desire of enlarging their Dominions, was ever
known among the Inhabitants of Betica; so that their Neighbors never have
occasion to fear such a People, nor can ever hope to make them fear it; which
is the reason that they never molest 'em: These People would sooner forsake
their Country, or would deliver themselves up to Death, than submit themselves
to Slavery: Thus they are as difficult to be Enslaved, as itis for them to
desire to Enslave others. It Is that causes so profound a Peace between them and
their Neighbors. Adoam ended this Discourse, with an Account of the menner of
Traffic between the Phaenicians and those of Betica: These People, Pursued he,
were amazed when they saw strange Men come from so far on the Waves of the Sea:
They received us very kindly, and gave us part of all that they had, without
taking any payment for it; they offered us all that was left of their Wool,
after they had sufficiently provided for their own use, and indeed sent us a
rich Present of it. It Is a Pleasure to them to give their overplus liberally to
Strangers. As for their Mines, it was no manner of trouble at all to have
parted with 'em to us, they made no advantage of 'em; they fancied Men were not
overwise to search with so much Pains in the Bowels of the Earth, what could
not make 'em happy, nor satisfy true Necessity. Do not dig, said they to us, so
deep into the Earth, content your selves with Ploughing and Tilling it, it will
afford you real Goods that will nourish you, you will reap Fruits from it that
are more valuble than Gold and Silver, since Men desire neither Gold nor Silver
only to purchase Necessaries to support Life. We would often have taught 'em
Navigation, and have carried the young Men of their Country into Phaenicia; but
they would never consent that their Children should learn to Live after our
manner. They would learn, said they to us, to have occasion for all those
Things that are merely necessary to us; they would have 'em, and they would
forsake Virtue to gain them; they would grow, like a Man who has good Legs, and
who having lost the custom of Walking, brings himself at last to the sad
necessity of being always carried like a sick Man. Indeed they admire
Navigation, because it is an industrious Art; but they believe it is
pernicious: If those People, say they, have sufficient of what is necessary to
Life in their own Country, What do they seek in another? Are not they contented
with what is sufficient to Nature? They deserve to be Shipwrack'd, for seeking
Death in the midst of Tempests to satiate their Avarice. Telemachus was
ravished at Adoam's Discourese, he was highly pleased that there was yet a
People in the World, who following the true Dictates of Nature, was both so
wise and so happy. Oh, how far different are these Morals, said he, from those
vain and ambitious Manners of those People whom we believe to be the wisest! We
are so vitiated that we can hardly think this so natural Simplicity can be
real. We look upon the Morals of these People only as a pleasant Fable, and we
ought to look upon ours as a monstrous Dream.

Whilst Telemachus and Adoam entertained one another in this manner, negelcting
Sleep, and not perceiving that it ws already Midnight; a deceitful Deity, their
Enemy, led 'em far wide of Ithaca, which their Pilot Achamas attempted to make
in vain. Neptune, although a Friend to the Phaenicians, could no longer endure to
think that Telemachus had escaped the Tempest that had thrown him on the Rocks
of the Isle of Calipso. Venus, who was yet more enraged to see this young
triumphant Hero, who had overcome Love and all its Charms, in the transport of
her Grief left Cythera, Paphos, Idalia, and all the Honors which are paid to
her in the Isle of Cyprus; and could no longer stay in those Places where
Telemachus had despised her Power; but mounts to bright Olympus where all the
Gods were assembled round the Throne of Jupiter. From this Place they behold
the Stars moving under their Feet: Thence they see the Globe of the Earth, like
a little lump of Dirt. The vast Seas seem to them only like drops of Water,
with which the lump of Dirt is a little moistened: The greatest Kingdoms are in
their Sight but a little Sand which cover the superficies of this Dirt: The
innumerable People, and the most powerful Armies, seem but as Ants which
contend with one another for a slip of Grass upon this heap of Dirt. The
Immortals Laugh at the most serious Affairs that disturb foolish Mortals, and
they appear to them like the Sports of Children: What Men call Grandeur, Glory
and Power, seem to the highest Powers nothing but Misery and Folly. It Is in
this Habitation so much elevated above the Earth, that Jupiter has fixed his
immovable Throne. His Eyes pierce into the very Abyss, and look even into the
most secret corners of all Hearts; his soft and serence Aspects disperse
Tranquillity and Joy over all the Universe: On the contrary, when he shakes his
awful Head, he moves both Heaven and Earth: The Gods themselves dazzled with the
Rays of the Glory that surround him, cannot approach him without Trembling; all
the celestial Deities were near him at that Moment. Venus presented her self
with all the Charms which wanton on her beautiful Bosom: Her loose Gown had
more splendour than all the Colors that Iris adorns her self with in the dark
Clouds, when she comes to promise to affrighted Mortals the end of Tempests,
and to proclaim to 'em the return of fair Weather. Her Robe was tied with that
famous Girdle on which the Graces are represented. The Goddess's Hair was
negligently tied behind by a Locket of Gold. All the Gods were surpised at her
Beauty, as if they had never seen her before; and their Eyes were dazzled like
the Eyes of Mortals, when after a long Night, Phoebus returns to enlighten 'em
with his Rays, they look one one another with Astonishment, and their Eyes
returned and fixed always on Venus; but they perceived the Goddess's Eyes were
bathed in Tears, and that a deep Sorrow sat on her Face: Mean while she
advanced toward the Throne of Jupiter with a soft and smooth Pace, like the
rapid Flight of a Bird that cuts the vast Space of the yielding Air: He looked
on her with a great deal of complacency. and smiled kindly on her, and, rising,
embraced her. My drar Daughter, said he, what grieves you? I cannot see your
Tears without concern; fear not to discover your Thoughts to me, you know my
Tenderness and Indulgence. Venus answered him with a soft Voice, but
interrupted with deep Sighs; O, Father of Gods and Men! You who see all things,
cannot choose but know the cause of my Sorrow; Minerva is not satisfied even
with over-throwing the lofty Town of Troy which I defended, and to be revenged
on Paris who had preferred my Beauty to here is but she conducts the Son of
Ulysses, that cruel Destroyer of Troy, over Land and Sea; Telemachus is still
accompanied by Minerva, which occasions that she does not appear here in Place
with the rest of the Deities: She led this young Bravo into the Isle of Cyprus
to affront me, who not only disdained to burn Incense on my Altars, but he has
expressed an abhorrence of the Feasts which are celebrated in honor of me; he
has shut up his Heart against my Pleasures; in vain has Neptune raised the
Winds and the Waves against him at my Request, to punish him. Telemachus cast
by an horrible Shipwreck on the Isle of Calipso, triumphed over Love himself,
whom I had sent into this Island to soften the Heart of this young Greek;
neither the Youth nor the Charms of Calipso, and of her Nymphs, nor the flaming
Shafts of Love could overcome the Artifices of Minerva, she has snatched him
away from that Island: See how I am confounded, a Stripling triumphs over me!

Jupiter to comfort her, said, It Is true, my Daughter, that Minerva defends the
Heart of this young Greek against all the Darts of your Son; and she designs
him more Glory than ever young Man attained to: I am troubled that he has
despised your Altars, but I cannot give him up to your Power; but for the love
of you, I consent that he shall still wander both by Sea and Land; that he
shall live far from his own Country, exposed to all sorts of Miseries and
Dangers, but the Fates will neither suffer him to perish, nor his Virtue to
yield to those Pleasures with which you bewitch Mankind. Be comforted then, my
Daughter, to keep so many Hero's and so many Gods under your Empire. Here, he
smiled on Venus with all the Grace and Majesty of the greatest Deity: A flash
of Light like the most piercing Lightnings darted from his Eyes, and tenderly
kissing Venus, he dispersed an Odor of Ambrosia which perfumed all Olympus.
The Goddess could not but be sensible of this Caress from the greatest of the
Gods; in spite of her Tears and Grief, Joy was visible in all her Face; she let
down her Veil to hide her Blushes, and the Confusion in which she found her
self: The whole Assembly applauded what Jupiter had said; and, Venus, without
losing one moment, hasted to find out Neptune, to consult with him the means of
revenging her self on Telemachus. She repeated to Neptune what Jupiter had said
to her: I knew long since, returned Neptune, the irreversible Decree of the
Fates; but though we cannot swallow up Telemachus in the Waves of the Sea, yet let
us not forget any thing that may make him wretched, and retard his return to
Ithaca; I cant't yield that the Phenician Vessel on which he is Aboard should
be lost; for I love the Phenicians, they are my People; no other Nation in the
Universe cultivates my Empire as they do; it is by their Industry alone that the
Sea is become the means of a Commerce between all the People of the Earth; they
honor me with continual Sacrifices on my Altars; they are Just, Wise, and
Laborious in their Traffic; they disperse Profit and Plenty over all the
Earth: No, Goddess, I cannot allow that one of their Vessels should be wrecked;
but I will make the Pllot lose his Course, and steer wide of Ithaca, whither he
is bound. Contented with this Promise, Venus forced a malicious Smile, and
alighted from her flying Chariot on the flowery Meadows of Idalia, where the
Graces, with Sports and Laughters, expressed their Joy to see her again,
dancing about her, on the Flowers that perfume this charming Abode: And Neptune
immediately dispatched a deceitful Deity, like the God of Dreams, save only
that Dreams deceive but during the time of sleep, whereas this Deity enchants
Men's Senses when they are awake. This mischievous Deity, attended by a vast
multitude of winged Lies and Falsities, which fluttered about him, came to pour
a subtle and enchanting Liquor on the Eyes of the Pilot. Achamas, who was
attentively considering the height of the Moon, the Course of the Stars, and
the Port of Ithaca, whose sharp pointed Rocks he had already discovered near
enough to him; but in this very moment the Pilot's Eyes could discern nothing
truly as it was; another Sky presented it self to him, the Stars seemed as if
they had changed their Course, and were returning back again to their Spheres:
All the Firmament seemed to move by new Laws; the very Earth it self was
altered, and a false Ithaca always in the Pilot's View, to amuse him all the
time he was shearing off from the true one: The more he advanced toward this
deceitful Representation of the Port of the Island, the more this false
Representation deluded him; nor could he imagine what to make of this Retreat:
Sometimes he thought he already heard the noise that is usually made in a Port,
and was strait preparing according to the Orders he had received to go a Shore
on a little Island near the great one, to destroy the Lovers of Penelope, who
had conspired to hinder the return of this young Prince Telemachus: Sometimes
he feared the Shelves which are so numerous on the Shoars of that part of the
Sea, and he fancied he heard the dreadful Roaring of the Waves which break
themselves against these Shelves: Then all on a sudden, he observed that the
Land appeared yet more distant; the Mountains seemed no otherwise to him, so
far off, than as so many little Clouds which sometimes darken the Horizon,
while yet the Sun is set. Thus was Achamas amazed, and the Impression of this
deceitful Deity that had charmed his Eyes, made him sensible that he was
possessed with something more than ordinary, which 'till then he had not
perceived; at the same time (...) he could not believe that he was awake, but
that he was deluded only by a Dream. Neptune in the mean time commanded the
East Wind to blow, in order to drive the Ship on the Coasts of Hesperia: Tho
Wind obeyed him with such a (...) Gale, that the Ship soon (...) at the Port
that Neptune had designed it.

Aurora had already proclaimed the approaching day; already had the Stars,
which fear and are jealous of the Rays of the Sun, hidden their dark Fires in
the Ocean, when the Pilot cried out, I am out of doubt, for we are just upon
the Island of Ithaca: Cheer up, Telemachus! Now is the time that you shall see
Penelope again, and (perhaps) find Ulysses reseated on his Throne. Telemachus,
who was till then, fast locked in the Arms of a profound Sleep, awaking at
these words, rises and comes into the Steerage, embraces the Pilot, and with
his Eyes yet hardly open, steadfastly views the Neighboring Shore, and sighed
when he could not perceive his own Country's Shore. Alas, said he, where are
we! Achamas, you are deceived; you are but ill acquainted with these Coasts so
far distant from your own Country. No, no, replied Achamas, I cannot be deceived
in my Knowledge of the Coasting of this Island: How many times have I come into
your Port? I know it to the very least Rocks in it; the Port of Tire is not
more fresh in my Memory: See that Mountain there that advances, and that Rock
that rises like a Tower! Don't you perceive the Billows that break themselves
against those other Rocks that seem to threaten the Sea by their fall? But
don't you take notice of the Temple of Minerva, that cuts the Clouds? Look you,
there is the House and Castle of your Father Ulysses. Oh, Achamas! replied
Telemachus, I see on the contrary a remote Coast over against me both clear and
even; and I perceive a Town, but not Ithaca. Oh, ye Gods! Is it thus you mock
poor Mortals? Whilst he was speaking these words, all on a sudden the Eyes of
Achamas were cleared; the Charm was ended, and he saw and knew the Shore,
perfectly what it was, and acknowledged his Error.

I am confident, Oh Telemachus! cried he, that some envious Deity has bewitched
my Eyes: I thought I saw Ithaca; the true Prospect of it presented it self
entirely to my view; but at that same moment it vanished like a Dream: I now
see another City, and, doubtless, it is Salante, which Idomeneus flying from,
Crete is building in Hesperia: I perceive rising Walls, which are not yet
finished; and I see a Fort, which is not altogether fortified. Whilst Achamas
was remarking the several Works newly carried on this growing City, and
Telemachus was deploring his Unhappiness, the Wind that Neptune had raised
carried 'em with full Sail into a safe Road, and just by the Port.

Mentor, who was neither ignorant of Neptune's Revenge, nor the cruel Artifice
of Venus, could not choose but laugh at the mistake of Achamas. When they were
in this Road, said Mentor to Telemachus, Jupiter tries you, but will not
destroy you; and only tries you to show you the way to Glory. Think on the
Labors of Hercules. Let your Father's Actions be ever in your Mind. He who
cannot suffer has nothing of Courage. By your Patience and Fortitude, you will
tire that cruel Fortune which takes delight to persecute you. I am less afraid,
for your sake, of the rigorous Treatment of Neptune, than I feared the
flattering Caresses of that Goddess which detained you in her Isle. What do we
stay for? Let us into the Port! These People are our Friends; we are come among
the Greeks. Idomeneus, who has been himself ill treated by Fortune, will have
pity on the Miserable. They presently entered the Port of Salante, where the
Phenician Vessel was received without any difficulty; because the Phenicians
have Peace and Commerce with the whole Universe. Telemachus, with admiration,
beheld this growing City, as it were a young Plant, which having been nourished
by the sweet Dew of the Night, in the Morning feels the Beams of the Sun which
come to imbelish it; it grows, it opens its tender Buds, it extends its green
Leaves, it blows its odoriferous Flowers with a thousand new Colors; every
moment it presents it self to the Sight, a new Luster is found on it; so
flourished Idomeneus's new City on the Sea's side: Each day, each hour it grows
in magnificence; and showed to Strangers afar off at Sea, new Ornaments of
Architecture which reached the very Skies. All the Shore resounded with the
cries of the Workmen, and the blows of Hammers; the Stones were hung up in the
Air by Cranes with Ropes; all the Nobility encouraged the People in their Work,
from the very first peep of day; and the King, Idomeneus, himself giving Orders
throughout all, made the Works advance with incredible Expedition.

The Phenician Vessel was hardly got into Port, e're the Cretans gave
Telemachus and Mentor all the Tokens of a sincere Friendship: They posted away
to give Idomeneus notice of the Arrival of the Son of Ulysses. The Son of
Ulysses! cried he, of Ulysses? The dear Friend of that wise and great Hero; by
whom, at last, we have levelled the lofty Walls of proud Troy even to the
Ground! Bring him to me, that I may show him how much I loved his Father. As
soon as Telemachus was presented to him, said he to him, with a sweet and
smiling Countenance, Though no body should have told me who you are, I am certain
I should have known you; you are Ulysses himself; see his very Eyes full of
Fire, his stedy Aspect! See besides, his Air so cold and reserved, which
covered so much Vivacity and so many Graces. Look! Here Is his obliging Smile
too; his negligent Demean, his soft Speech, plain and insinuating, which
persuaded without allowing time for Suspicion! Yes; you are the Son of Ulysses,
but you shall be mine too; my dear Son! What Adventures brought you on these
Coasts? Is it in search of your Father? Alas! I never heard from him: Cross
Fate persecuted us both; he had the misfortune of being driven from his
Country, and I that of finding mine, filled with Horrors by the Hatred of the
immortal Gods against me. Whilst Idomeneus spoke those words he loo'd fixedly
upon Mentor, as being no Stranger to his Face; though at the same time he was
much perplexed about his Name. In the mean time Telemachus answered him, with
Tears in his Eyes; Oh! King, Pardon my Grief, which I cannot conceal from you,
even at a time when I ought to be full of Joy and Gratitude for all your
generous Favors to me. Your Sorrow for the loss of Ulysses, teaches me how
deeply I ought to be affected by my misfortune in not finding my dear Father;
it is now a tedious while since I have been in search of him through all the known
Seas: The angry Gods will not suffer me to hope, either to see him again, or to
return to Ithaca, where Penelope is daily tortured with a fruitless Desire of
being freed from her troublesome Lovers.

I expected to have found you in the Isle of Crete; I there learnt your cruel
Fate, but little thought of ever touching the Coast of Hesperia, where you have
founded a new Kingdom: But Fortune, who is pleased to sport with us Mortals,
who makes me wander from Place to Place, and keeps me still from Ithaca, cast
me at last upon your Shore; yet of all the Disasters she has exposed me to,
this I could bear with a contented Mind. For, though she drives me away from my
Native Country, yet she brings me acquainted with the wisest and most generous
of all Kings. At these words Idomeneus gave Telemachus a kind Embrace; and
having led him into his Palace, who is that wise old Man, said he to him, who
accompanies you, for methinks I have seen him before: It Is Mentor, replied
Telemachus; Mentor, Ulysses's intimate Friend, who has taken care of me even
from my Infancy, and who best can inform you how much I am beholden to him.
Thereupon Idomeneus made toward Mentor, and shaking him by the hand told him;
You and I have seen one another before: You may remember when you went over to
Crete, and what good Advice you gave me; but at that time I was hurried away by
the heat of Youth, and transported by the Enjoyment of sensual Pleasures; of
that my Misfortunes only have been able to teach me Wisdom. Oh! that I had
believed your Counsels; Oh! wise old Man! But I am full of wonder to find that
Age has made no alteration in you since so many Years; your Face is still fresh
and lively, and your Body strait and vigorous, only your Hair is grown somewhat
Hoary. Great King, answered Mentor, were I a Flatterer, I would tell you
likewise that you still preserve that youthful Liveliness which smiled in your
Face at the Siege of Troy. But I had rather incurr your Displeasure, than speak
against Truth; besides, I find by your wise Discourse that you are averse to
Flattery, and that a Man may be sincere with you without running any Hazard:
Wherefore I must freely own that you are so much altered, that I could scarce
have known you again. I plainly see the cause of it, which is your long
Misfortunes and Sufferings; but the Wisdom you have acquired makes you
sufficient amends for what you have suffered; and a Man ought to be easy and
unconcerned at the Wrinkles of his Face, whilst his Soul is inured to the
Practice of Virtue. Moreover, know, Oh! Idomeneus, that Kings always wear out
faster than other Men: For in Adversity, both the Troubles of the Mind, and
bodily Labors make them look Old before their Time: In Prosperity, the soft
Enjoyments of an effeminate Life waste their Strength yet more than the Toils
of War, and nothing is more hurtful than excess in Pleasure. This is the Reason
why Kings, both in Peace and War, enjoy Pleasures, and are exposed to such
Labors and Hardships as anticipate old Age; whereas a sober, moderate, and
plain Life, free from Disquietudes and Passions, regular and laborious keeps
all the Limbs of a wise Man in a vigorous Youthfulness, which without these
Precautions, flies fast away upon the Wings of Time.

Idomeneus charmed with Mentor's Discourse, had been longer attentive to him,
had they not come to remind him of a Sacrifice that he was to make to Jupiter:
Telemachus and Mentor followed him surrounded by a great multitude of People,
who with great earnestness and Curiosity gazed on these two Strangers: They
said one to another, these two Men are very different; the young one has an Air
admirable and lovely, beyond Expression; all the Charms of Youth and Beauty are
every where dispersed both over his whole Body; but this Beauty has nothing
Languid nor Effeminate; with this tender Flower of Youth, he appears vigorous,
strong and inured to Labor: But this other, tho far older, yet has lost
nothing of his Strength; and tho his Mien is not so majestical, and his
Countenance less pleasant, yet on a nearer view, in his plainness may be seen
the Marks of Wisdom and Virtue, with a surprising Gravity: When the Gods
descended to converse with Mortals on the Earth, undoubtedly they took Figures
like these two strange Travelers.

By this time, they were arrived at the Temple of Jupiter, whom Idomeneus, who
was the Offspring, had adorned with a great deal of Magnificence: He was
environed with a double Row of Pillars of Marble like Jasper; the Chapiters
were of Silver; the Temple was all lined with Marble, with Bass-reliefs, which
represented Jupiter transformed into a Bull, the Rape of Europa, and his
Passage over the Sea into Crete; they seemed to reverence Jupiter, tho he was
in a strange Form: Then the Wisdom and Birth of Minos was to be seen; who there
appeared in the height of old Age, dispensing Laws to his whole Island, which
might make it for ever flourishing. There also Telemachus observed, the
principal Adventures at the Siege of Troy, where Idomeneus had justly acquired
the Glory of a great General. In the Representations of these Combats
Telemachus sought his Father, and found him taking away the Horses of Rhesus,
whom Diomedes had just slain; and in another place contending with Ajax for the
Arms of Achilles, before all the Commanders of the Greek Army; and at last
their coming out of the fatal Horse to destroy the Lives of so many Trojans: In
all these famous Actions Telemachus knew him, of which he had so often heard,
and which Nestor himself had recounted to him. Here Tears presently gushed from
his Eyes, he changed Color, and Grief appeared all over his Face: Idomeneus
perceived it, tho he turned aside to conceal his Trouble. Don't be ashamed,
said Idomeneus to him, to let us see how much you are concerned at the Glory
and Misfortunes of your Father. In the mean while the People came in whole
Crowds under the vast Portico's made through the double row of Columns which
surrounded the Temple. There were two Companies of young Boys and Girls, who
sung Verses in Praise of that God who disperses the Thunder. These Children who
were all chosen out of the most Beautiful, had their long Hair hanging loose on
their Shoulders; their Heads were Crowned with Roses and Perfumes, and were all
Clothed in White. Idomeneus offered an Hundred Bulls to beg a favorable
Success in a War, which he had undertaken against his Neighbors: The Blood of
the Victims reak'd on every side, and was seen to stream over the Goblets of
Gold and Silver. The old Man Theophanes, dear to the Gods, and Priest of the
Temple, during the time of Sacrifice, covered his Head with one end of his
purple Robe; then he consulted the Entrails of the Victims, which were yet
panting, after which, mounting the sacred Tripos; O ye Gods! (cried he) what
are then these Strangers, whom you have sent into these Parts? Without these,
the War lately designed would be dreadful; and Salante would be buried in Ruin,
'ere it were raised on its Foundations. I see a young Hero, whom Wisdom still
conducts -- No Mortal dare say more. -- Here his Looks were wild, and his Eyes
sparkl'd; and he seemed to gaze on other Objects than those that were before
him: His Face was all a-fire: He raged, and grew Distracted; his Hair stood an
end, he foamed at Mouth, and his lifted up Arms were immovable: His Voice was
stronger than any humane Voice whatever; he was out of Breath, and could not
contain the Deity which transported him. O happy Idomeneus, cried he again,
what do I see! What Misfortunes avoided! What soft Peace at Home! But what
bloody Wars Abroad! What Victories! O Telemachus! Thy Labors exceed thy
Father's. The haughty and fierce Enemy grovels in the Dust, under thy Sword;
the brazen Gates and inaccessible Ramparts fall at thy Feet -- O Great Goddess!
That his Father -- O Brave Youth, in time thou shall see -- Here his Speech
failed him, and that Word closed his Mouth, and he continued in Spite of his
Endeavors, in an amazing Silence. All the People were congealed with Fear:
Idomeneus, all trembling, durst not bid him make an end. Telemachus himself
astonished, could hardly understand what he had heard; much ado he had to
believe that so great Predictions. were made of him; Mentor alone was
unastonish'd at the divine Spirit. You understand, said he to Idomeneus, the
purpose of the Gods; that against whatsoever Nation you shall lead your Forces,
the Victory shall be yours; and that you shall own your good Success of your
Arms to your Friend's Son: Be not Jealous therefore, but only make use of what
the Gods now give you by his Means. Idomeneus, being not yet recovered out of
his Amazement, in vain attempted to Speak; his Tongue remained immovable. Says
Telemachus to Mentor; So much promised Glory does not move me: But what can be
the meaning of those Words, Thou shall see again, Is it my Father or only
Ithaca that I shall see? Alas! Why did he not make an end of his Prophecy? He
left me more perplexed than I was before: Oh Ulysses! Oh my Father! Is it then
possible I shall see you again! But I Flatter my self -- Oh! cruel Oracle, thou
take Delight in Sporting with an unfortunate Man; one Word more, and I had
reached the top of Happiness.

Says Mentor to him, Receive with Reverence what the Gods are pleased to
reveal, and attempt not to discover what they intend to keep secret: A rash
Curiosity deserves to be confounded: It Is out of a supreme Goodness and Wisdom,
that the Gods keep weak Mortals in dark Ignorance about their Fates. I own it is
a great advantage to foresee what depends on us, in order to do it well; but
it is every whit as advantageous to be Ignorant of what lies not in our Power,
but entirely depends on Heaven's irreversible Decrees. Telemachus, touched with
these Words, contained himself, tho not without Reluctance. As for Idomeneus,
having recovered his surprise, be begun to return great Jove Thanks for sending
to him young Telemachus, and wise Mentor to make him victorious over his
Enemies. And having made a magnificent Feast after the Sacrifice, he Spoke to
the two Strangers in these Words.

I confess I was but little acquainted with the Art of Governing, when I
returned to Crete, after the Siege of Troy. You know, dear Friends, what
Misfortunes hindered me from reigning over that great Island, since you assure
me you were there after I left it. Yet I am too happy if the cruellest strokes
of Fortune can serve to teach me to be Master of my Passions: I crossed the Seas
like a Fugitive, whom the avenging Gods and Men pursue: All my past Honors and
Glory served only to make my Fall the more ingnominious and insupportable: I
sought a shelter for my houshold-Gods on this desert Coast, where I found
nothing but wild, uncultivated Lands, overrun with Thorns and Briars, covered
with Trees as old as the Earth it self; and huge steep Rocks inaccessible to
all but fierce Beasts, which harbored under them. Yet such was the Extremity
to which I was reduced, that I was glad to enjoy, with a few Soldiers and
Friends who had been willing to accompany me in my Misfortunes, that wild,
savage Land, and make it my Country, having no hopes ever to see again that
fortunate Island, whereof I was born King. Alas! said I to my self, what a
Change is here! What a dreadful Example am I to Kings! What wholesome
Instructions they can draw from my Miscarriages! They fancy there is nothing
they ought to be afraid of because of their Elevation above the rest of Men:
But oh! it is that very Elevation which ought to make them more afraid than
others. I was dreaded by my Enemies, and beloved by my Subjects; I Commanded
over a powerful and warlike Nation; Fame had spread my Renown as far as the
remotest Countries; I reigned in a fruitful and delightful Island; an hundred
Cities paid me a yearly Tribute out of their Riches; my People acknowledged me
to be the Offspring of great Jupiter, and as I was born in their Country, they
loved me as the Grandson of wise Minos, whose Laws make them so powerful and
happy. What could be wanting to my Felicity, except the knowing how to use it
with Moderation: But alas! my own Pride, and the Flattery of others, to which
I listened but too much, have over-turn'd my Throne, and in the like manner will
all Kings fall, who will give up themselves to their own Desires, and the
deceitful Counsels of their Flatterers. In the Daytime I endeavored to put on
a Countenance both smiling and full of Assurance, in order to keep up the
Courage of those who had followed me: Let us build, said I to them, a new City
that will make us amends for all our Losses; we are surrounded by Nations,
whose Example ought to animate us in this Undertaking; we behold Tarentum,
which is rearing up pretty near us, and it is Phalantus, with his Lacedaemonians,
who possesses that new Kingdom; Philoctctes builds another great City on the
same Coast, to which he gave the Name of Petilia. Metapontus is likewise such
another Colony; why then should we do less than those Strangers, who wander
like us, since Fortune is no more cross to us than to them? Whilst with these
and the like words, I endeavored to alleviate the Troubles of my Companions, I
concealed a mortal Grief in the bottom of my Heart; I felt some Comfort at the
withdrawing of the day, when in the gloomy Shade of silent Night, I was at
liberty to lament my wretched Fate; my Eyes became two Streams of continual
Tears, and sweet Sleep had quite deserted my Bed: The next day I resumed my
Toils with unwearied eagerness, and that is the Reason, Oh! Mentor, you found me
so much altered by Age. Idomeneus having thus given Telemachus and Mentor the
Relation of all his Misfortunes, he desired their Assistance in the War wherein
he was engaged; I will, said he, take care that you are safely conducted to
Ithaca, as soon as the War is over; in the mean time I will send out Ships to
the most distant Shoars to learn News of Ulysses; into what Place of the known
World he may be cast, either by the stormy Winds or some angry Deity; I will
bring him back from thence; may the Gods but grant that he be still alive! As
for you, I will send you back into your own Country in the best Ships that ever
were built in the Isle of Crete; they are made of Trees felled on Mount Ida,
where great Jove was born; that sacred Wood can never perish in the Waves; the
Winds and Rocks both fear and reverence it; and even Neptune, though never so
angry, dares not to raise his fierce Billows against it: Therefore be assured
that you will return to Ithaca with ease and safety, and that no cross Deity
shall be able to make you wander on so many Seas any more: The Passage to your
own Island is short and easy; send away the Phenician Vessel that brought you
hither, and think now on nothing but on the Honor you shall reap in settling
Idomeneus in his new Kingdom, and making him amends for all his Losses. It Is by
these Actions, Oh! Son of Ulysses, that you will be thought worthy of your
Father; and though cruel Fate should have already confined him within the gloomy
Kingdom of Pluto, yet all Greece shall have the Pleasure to find him again in
you.

At these words Telemachus interrupting Idomeneus, let us, said he, send away
the Phenician Vessel: Why do we defer any longer to take up Arms, and attack
your Enemies, who are now become ours? Since we were Victorious when we fought
in Sicily for Acestes a Trojan, and an Enemy of Greece; can any one doubt but
that we will show a greater Ardour and Resolution, and be more favored by the
Gods, when we fight for one of those Grecian Heroes, who over-threw Troy, the
City of Priamus?

Mentor, looking upon Telemachus with a serence and composed Countenance, and
perceiving that he burnt with a noble and eager Desire of Fighting, spoke thus
to him: I am very glad, Oh! Son of Ulysses, to find in you so generous and
commendable a Passion for Glory; but remember that the great Renown your Father
got amongst the Grecians at the Siege of Troy, was only by approving himself,
the wisest and most moderate of them. Although the fierce Achilles was both
invincible and invulnerable, although he carried Terror and Destruction
wherever he fought, yet Achilles could not make himself Master of Troy; he
fell before the Walls of that famous City, which triumphed over the Murderer of
Hector; but Ulysses, whose Valor was ever guided by Prudence, carried Fire and
Sword amongst the Trojans, and it is to him the fall of those lofty Towers,
which during ten Years, defied whole Greece, is entirely owing. As much as
Minerva is above Mars, by so much a discreet and provident Valor surpasses a
boisterous, rash and wild Courage: Therefore, let us, First, consider the
Reasons and Circumstances of this War, which is to be carried on: I decline no
Dangers whatsoever, but methinks, Idomeneus, you ought to let us know, First,
whether the War you engage in be just; Secondly, against whom you wage it; and,
lastly, whether your Forces be such, as you may reasonably hope to overcome
your Enemies. Idomeneus replied: At our first landing on this Coast, we found
in it a savage People who lived in the Woods, and fed upon what they killed in
Hunting, and the Mast of Trees; they were frighted at the fight of our Ships
and Arms, and fled to the Neighboring Mountains; but the Soldiers being
desirous to see the Country, as they were in pursuit of some Stags, they met
with those fugitive Savages; thereupon the Leaders of those Savages told them:
We have abondon'd the pleasant Sea Shore, and yielded it to you; we have
nothing left but wild Mountains almost inaccessible, and it is but just you
suffer us to live in them in Peace and Liberty; we have met you wandering and
weaker than we, so that nothing could hinder us from destroying you, and
concealing even from your Companions the knowledge of your Misfortunes; but we
disdain to imbrue our Hands in the Blood of those who are our Fellow Creatures.
Go your ways; remember you are indebted for your Lives to our Sentiments of
Humanity; and never forget that it is from a People whom you call rude and
savage, that you received this Lesson of Generosity and Moderation. Those of
our Men, who were thus dismissed by the Barbarians, returned to the Camp, and
related what had happened to them; our Soldiers were moved at it, and ashamed
that Cretans should owe their Lives to a despicable Company of wild Men:
Thereupon they went out a Hunting in greater Numbers than at first, and
provided themselves with all manner of Arms: 'Twas not long before they met
with the Savages, and fell upon them; the Fight was cruel and obstinate; the
Darts flew on both sides as thick as Hail in a Storm. The Savages were at last
forced to retire to their steep Mountains, where our Men durst not follow them.
A little while after those People sent to me two of their wisest old Men who
came to sue for Peace, and brought Presents to me, which consisted in Skins of
wild Beasts they had killed in Hunting, and several sorts of Fruit which the
Country yields; having delivered their Presents, they addressed themselves to me
in these words: Oh! King, thou see we hold the Sword in one of our Hands, and
an Olivebranch in the other; (for they had both in their Hands) so that you may
choose either Peace or War: We confess we had rather Peace; and it is for that
Reason we are not ashamed to yield to thee the pleasant Seashore, where the
Sun chears the Land with its warm Beams, and makes it produce so many sorts of
delicious Fruits; yet Peace is sweeter and pleasanter than all those Fruits;
and therefore we retired to those high Mountains ever covered with Ice and
Snow, where we never see either the Flowers of the Spring, or the rich Fruits
of the Autumn. We have an abhorrence for that Brutality which, under the fair
Names of Ambition and Honor, lays waste whole Provinces, and spills the Blood
of Men who are all Brothers and Fellow Creatures; if thou art Ambitious of that
false Honor, we are so far from envying thee, that we rather pity thee, and
beg the Gods to keep us from such a wild Fury. If Sciences, which the Grecians
learn with so much study, and the Politeness and Civility which they value
themselves upon, inspire them with nothing but this detestable Injustice, we
think our selves too happy in being deprived of those Advantages; we will pride
in being Barbarians, as long as we are just, human, faithful, disinterested,
contented with little, and despising that vain Nicety which multiplies our
Wants; what we value most is Health, Frugality, Liberty, a sound and vigorous
Body and Mind; the love of Virtue, the fear of the Gods, a kind Nature toward
our Relations, a constant Affection to our Friends, Faithfulness and Honesty
with every Body, Moderation in Prosperity, Constancy in adverse Fortune, a
courageous Boldness in speaking the Truth at all times, and an abhorrence for
Flattery: These are the People whom we offer to thee for Neighbors and Allies.
If the angry Gods blind your Eyes so far as not to let you see your own
Interest, and if thou refusest Peace, thou shall find, but too late, that those
People are most to be dreaded in War, who love Peace out of a Principle of
Moderation.

While those old Men spoke thus to me, I could not keep my Eyes from being fixed
on them; they had long Beards; short hoary Hair; thick Eyebrows; quick and
lively Eyes; a resolute Look and Countenance; plain and ingenuous Manners: The
Furs they wore for Clothes being tied negligently over their Shoulders, one
might see their Arms more nervous and brawny than those of our Wrestlers. I
made answer to those two Envoys, That I was inclined to Peace: We settled
together by mutual Promise, several Conditions, invoking all the Gods to be
Witnesses of our Treaty, and so I sent them back with Presents: But the Gods
who drove me from the Kingdom of my Ancestors, were not yet weary of
Persecuting me: Our Hunts-men, who could not be acquinted so soon with the
Peace we had made, met the same day a great Company of those Barbarians, who
attended their Ambassadors as they returned from our Camp; they attacked 'em
with great Fury, killed many of 'em, and pursued the rest into the Woods: Thus
the War is kindled anew; for those Barbarians think they cannot be safe in
trusting either to our Promises or Oaths; they call to their Assistance the
Locrians, Apulians, Lucanians, Brutians, those of Crotona, Nevitta, and
Brundusium. The Lucanians came with Chariots armed with sharp Sythes. The
Apulians are every one of them covered with the Skin of some wild Beast which
they have killed; they were in their Hands great wooden Clubs full of Knots,
and tipp'd with Iron Spikes; they are almost as tall as Giants, and their
Bodies become so strong and brawny by the laborious Exercises to which they
inure themselves, that their very Looks are dreadful and terrifying. The
Locrians, who are come from Greece, do still retain something of their Origin,
and have more Humanity than the rest, but they add the exact Discipline of the
Grecian Troops to the fierceness and resolution of those Barbarians, and their
hard way of living, which renders them invincible: They have long Swords, and a
sort of light Bucklers made of twisted and woven Osiers, and covered with
Skins. The Brutians are nimble-footed like Bucks or Stage; and when they run,
one can scarce perceive that the tenderest Grass is foiled by their Steps; they
hardly leave any print of their Feet on the Sand; they rush on the sudden on
their Foes, and disappear with the same rapidity. The People of Crotona are
very skilful Archers; it is not common among the Grecians, to see ordinary Men
know how to draw a Bow, as it is among the Crotonians; and if these would
contend in our Games, they would certainly carry the Prizes. Their Arrows are
steeped in the Juice of some venomous Herbs, which are said to come from the
Banks of Avernus, and whose Poison is mortal. As for those of Nevitta,
Messapia, and Brundusium, they are endued only with bodily Strenght, and a rude
and untaught Valor. At the sight of their Enemies, they rend the Skies with
hideous Shrieks; they are pretty good Slingers, and darken the Air with a
Shower of ShotStones; but they fight without order, or minding Ranks. This, Oh!
Mentor, is what you desired to know: You are now acquainted with the Origin of
this War, and with our Enemies. As soon as Idomeneus had given them this
Account, Telemachus being impatient to fight, thought there was no more to do
than to take up Arms; but Mentor stopped him a second time, and spoke thus to
Idomeneus: What Is the reason that the Locrians, who are a People originally
come from Greece, unite themselves with the Barbarians against the Grecians?
How comes it to pass that so many Greek Colonies are in a flourishing Condition
on this Coast of Tamea, without being engaged in the same Wars with you? You
say, Oh! Idomeneus, the Gods are not yet weary of persecuting you; but, in my
Opinion, they have not yet done instructing you: All those Misfortunes you have
undergone, have not taught you yet what you ought to do to prevent a War. What
you did your self relate concerning the Honesty of those Barbarians, is enough
to show that you might have lived in Peace with them; but Pride and Haughtiness
kindle the most dengerous Wars: You might have given them Hostages, and taken
some of theirs; and it would have been an easy matter for you to have sent
some of your Captains along with their Ambassadors to conduct them safe home.
Nay, since the renewing of this War, you ought to have pacified them, by
letting them know that they were attacked through ignorance of the Treaty that
was concluded with them; you should have offered them all the Security they
could possibly demand, and appoint rigorous Punishments for those among your
Subjects, who should break the Alliance. But, pray, what happened since the
beginning of this new War?

I thought, answered Idomeneus, it would have been a base Submission in us to
court those Barbarians, who gathered in haste all those amongst them who were
able to bear Arms, and implored the Assistance of all the Neighboring Nations,
to whom they made us odious. Thereupon I thought it most advantageous for our
Security, to make our selves Masters of certain narrow Passages in the
Mountains which the Enemy kept, which having effected without difficulty, we by
that means put our selves in a Condition of anoying and harasing those
Barbarians. I have caused strong Towers to be built on those Defiles, from
whence our Men may over-whelm with their Darts all those among the Enemy, who
shall attempt to come down from the Mountains into our Country; and at the same
time, by the favor of these Towers we may make Incursions into their Country,
and lay their chief Settlements waste whenever we please. Thus, with Forces
much inferior, we are able to resist that innumerable Multitude of Foes that
surround us. Now things have been carried to that extremity, that it would be a
difficult matter to treat of Peace with them; for we cannot yield those Towers
to them, without laying our selves open to their Inroads, and they look upon
them as Citadels we have raised to bring them into slavery. Mentor replied: Oh!
Idomeneus, you show your self to be a wise King, in that you are willing to
hear undisguis'd Truth; you are not like those weak Men who are afraid of
seeing it, and through their want of Resolution, instead of mending their
Faults, only employ their Authority in maintaining what they have done amiss.
Know, then that this barbarous People gave you an excellent Lesson, when they
came to you for Peace. Was it out of Weakness they sued for it? Did they want
Courage or Assistance to oppose you? You plainly see they did not, since they
are so inured to War, and supported by so many dreadful Neighbors: Why did not
you imitate their Moderation? But a mistaken Shame, and a false Honor have
cast you into this Misfortune. You were afraid of making the Enemy too haughty,
but you did not fear the making of them too powerful by uniting so many
confederate Nations against you, by your proud and unjust Carriage. What are
those Towers, of which you boast so much, good for, unless it be to create
Jealousies among your Neighbors, and reducing them to the Necessity either of
destroying you or themselves, in order to avoid the slavery with which you seem
to threaten them? You reared up those Towers for your Security only, and it is
by those Towers you have brought your self into an imminent Danger. The surest
and firmest Bulwark of a State is Justice, Moderation, Honesty, Plain-dealing,
and the Assurance your Neighbors have that you will never incroach upon their
Lands. The strongest Walls may fall through a thousand unexpected Accidents;
the Fortune of War is capricious and inconstant, but the Love and Confidence of
your Neighbors, who have experienced your Moderation, renders your State
invincible, and deters those Neighbors from attacking it. Nay, suppose an
unjust Neighbor should attack it, all the rest who are concerned in its
Safety, take up Arms presently for its Defense: The Support of so many Nations,
who might have found their true Interest in maintaining yours, would have made
you much more powerful than those Towers, which render your Misfortunes almost
past Remedy: Had you taken care at first to prevent the Jealousy and
Suspicions of all your Neighbors, your new-built City would flourish in a
happy Tranquillity, and you would have made your self Umpire of Hesperia. But
now let us consider which way for the future you can rectify your past Erros;
you told me before that there are on this Coast several Greek Colonies; those
People must needs be disposed to serve you; for sure they have not forgot
either the great Name of Minos, Son of mighty Jove, or your Toils before the
Walls of Troy, where you did so often signalize your self amongst the Grecian
Princes, for the common Cause of all Greece. Why do you not endeavor to bring
those Colonies over to your Party?

They are all resolved to stand Neuter, replied Idomeneus; not but that they
were somewhat inclined to assist me, but the great Noise this City made through
all the Regions about us, deterred them from it. Those Grecians, as well as the
rest, were afraid we had some design upon their Liberty; they thought that
having subdued the barbarous Mountaineers, our Ambition would lead us yet
farther: In short, they are all against us; those very People who declare not
for an open War, yet wish to see us humbled, and the Jealousy of others keeps
us from having any Ally.

Oh! strange Extremity! replied Mentor: Whilst you endeabour to appear
powerful, you destroy your own Power; and whilst abroad you are the Object
both of the Fear and Hatred of your Neighbors, you exhaust your self at home
by the vast Expenses you must needs be at to carry on the War. Oh! unhappy,
doubly unhappy, Idomeneus, whom even this Misfortune has made but half-wise! Do
you still want a second Fall to teach you how to foresee the Dangers which
threaten the greatest Kings? However, trust to my Management, and only let me
know which are those Greek Cities, that refuse to enter into your Alliance.

The Chief of them, answered Idomeneus, is the City of Tarentum; it is now three
Years since Phalantus laid the Foundation of it, having gathered in Cremona a
vast Number of young Men, born of Women who had forgot their absent Husbands
during the Siege of Troy. When the Men came home, their Wives endeavored to
pacify them, by disowning the Faults they had committed in their absence.
These numerous Youths born out of Wedlock, knowing neither Father nor Mother,
abandoned themselves to an unbounded Licentiousness; but the severity of the
Laws having curbed their Disorders, they unanimously submitted to Phalantus, a
bold, dauntless and ambitious Leader, who by subtle Insinuations knew how to
master their Affections. He came to this Shore with those young Laconians, who
have made of Tarentum a second Lacedemon. On-the other side, Philocletes, who
reaped so much Glory at the Siege of Troy, whither he carried Hercules's
Arrows, has raised on this Neighborhood the Walls of Petelia, a City which
though less powerful than Tarentum, is yet more wisely governed. Lastly, we have
near us the City of Metapontus, which the wise Nestor founded with his Pilians.

What! replied Mentor, is Nestor in Hesperia, and could not you engage him in
your Interest? Nestor who saw you so often fight against the Trojans, and who
professed a Friendship for you? I lost that Friend, answered Idomeneus, by the
Artifice of those People, who are barbarous only in Name; for they were so
cunning, as to persuade him, that I designed to make my self master of all
Hesperia. We will undeceive him, answered Mentor: Telemachus saw him at Pilos
before he came to settle his Colony in this Country, and before we undertook
our long Voyages in quest of Ulysses; undoubtedly he will still remember that
great Hero, and the Marks of Tenderness and Affection he gave his Son
Telemachus: But the chief Business is to remove his Distrust. Those Suspicions
you created in the Minds of all your Neighbors, have been the occasion of this
War, and the only way to put a stop to it, is to dissipate those vain Fears:
Once more leave all to my Conduct.

At these words, Idomeneus embracing Mentor, felt a shivering mixed with
Tenderness, and remained Speechless for a while. At last, with a broken Voice,
he uttered these words: Oh! wise old Man, whom the Gods have sent hither to
redress all my Errors; I confess, I would have been angry with any other Mortal
that durst be so free with me as you have been: I own you are the only Man that
could prevail with me to make me sue for Peace; I was resolved either to die,
or overcome all my Enemies, but it is reasonable to believe your wise Counsels,
rather than my Passion. Oh! Telemachus, how happy you are in having a Guide,
that will never suffer you to go astray! Mentor, you may do whatever you think
fit; all the Wisdom of the Gods is in you; Minerva her self could not give more
wholesome Advice: Go, promise, and give any thing that is in my Power; conclude
a Treaty upon what Terms you please; Idomeneus will ratify all you do.

Whilst they were thus discoursing together, there was heard on the sudden a
confused Noise of Chariots, neighing of Horses, hideous Shrieks and Howlings of
Men, and loud Trumpets which filled the Air with martial Clangors: The general
Cry is, The Enemy are come; they have gone a great way about to avoid the
narrow Passages guarded by Towers; here they are, ready to besiege Salanta. The
old Men and the Women are under a deep Consternation: Alas! said they, why did
we forsake our dear Country, the fruitful Isle of Crete, and follow an unhappy
Prince through so many Seas, to founda a City which is now going to be
destroyed and devoured by Flames like Troy? They saw from the Top of their
newrais'd Walls, the Head-Pieces and Shields of the Enemy shine with so much
brightness, that their Eyes were dazzled with it; they saw likewise the
bristling Pikes which ccver'd the Ground as thick as a plentiful Harvest which
Ceres ripens in Sicily during the scorching heat of Summer, to recompense the
Labor of the Husbandman. And now they perceived the Chariots armed with sharp
Sythes, and easily discerned the several Nations that made up their Army.
Mentor, the better to discover them, went up to the Top of a high Tower,
whither Idomeneus and Telemachus soon followed him. He was hardly come there,
when he espied Philoctetes on one side, and Nestor with his Son Pisistrates on
the otehr; for Nestor was easily distinguished by his venerable old Age. What!
cried Mentor, you thought, Oh! Idomeneus, that Philoctetes and Nestor would be
contented to remain Neuter, but now you see they have taken up Arms against
you; and if I am not mistaken, the other Troops which march in such good order,
and with so fierce a Look, are a Body of Lacedaemonians commanded by Phalantus;
all are against you; you have made all your Neighbors your Enemies, though
against your Will.

Having thus said, Mentor comes down in haste from the Top of that Tower, runs
to one of the CityGates toward which the Enemy were advancing, and commands it
to be opened, whilst Idomeneus, surpised with the noble Majesty which
accompanies all he does, dares not so much as to ask him what he means to do.
Mentor beckens with his hand, that no Body should follow him; then makes toward
the Enemy, who wondered to see a single Man coming to them; shows them afar off
an Olive Branch, as a sign of Peace; and being come so near them, that he might
convenienly be heard, he required them to assemble all the Captains; who being
met in an instant, he thus spoke to 'em.

Oh! generous Men, assembled out of so many Nations which flourish in rich
Hesperia: I know it is the common Interest of your Liberty that summoned you
together to this Place; I do highly commend your Zeal, but suffer me to tell
you an easy way to preserve the Liberty and Honor of all your several Nations
without spilling human Blood. Oh! Nestor, Oh! wise Nestor, whom I perceive in
this Assembly! You are not ignorant how fatal War is even to those who
undertake it with Justice, and under the Protection of the Gods; War is the
greatest Evil with which the Gods afflict Mankind; you can never forget how
much the Greeks have suffered during ten Years before unhappy Troy. How many
Divisions have they seen among their Chiefs? What Caprices of Fortune have they
been exposed to? How many of them have fallen by Hector's Sword? What a
desolation has been occasioned in the most powerful and flourishing Cities upon
account of the War, by the long absence of their Kings? At their return home,
some were cast away, and others met a fatal Death in the very Embrace of their
Consorts. Oh! Inhabitants of Hesperia, I wish the Gods may never grant you so
fatal a Victory: I own, Troy is reduced to Ashes; but it were better for the
Grecians, if she was still in her full Glory, and if base Paris should still
gratify his infamous Love with Helena. Oh! Philoctetes, you, who have been so
long unhappy, and abandoned in the Isle of Lemnos, are not you afraid of
meeting with the like Disasters in another War? I know the People of Laconia
have felt likewise the Miseries occasioned by the tedious absence of the
Princes, Captains and Soldiers who went against the Trojans. Oh! Grecians, you,
who came to Hesperia, your coming hither was only a sequel of the Misfortunes
which attended the Trojan War.

The End of the Second Volume.
THE ADVENTURES OF TELEMACHUS The Son of ULYSSES. PART. III.
WHen Mentor had thus spoken he made up toward the Pilians, and Nestor (who by
that time begun to know who he was) advanced to meet and salute him. Oh!
Mentor, said he to him, it is now a long time since I first saw you in Phocis;
but though you were at that time but fifteen Years of Age, yet even then I
foresaw you would be as wise as you have proved to be in your riper Years.
Pray, acquaint me what strange Adventure brought you hither? And what Expedient
you design to propose in order to prevent this War which Idomeneus has brought
upon himself? We are all for Peace; 'twas our common Interest to desire it, but
we could no longer live secure with him; he has broke his most solemn Promises
with his next Neighbors; he has shown to all the rest his ambitious Design of
bringing them under Slavery, and has left us no other Means to defend our
Liberty, than the using our utmost Endeavors to overthrow his new Kingdom.
However, if you can find a way to remove our just Fears, and settle a firm and
lasting Peace, all those Nations whom you see here assembled, will gladly lay
down their Arms, and confess that you surpass us in Wisdom.

Mentor answered: Wise Nestor, you know Ulysses committed his Son Telemachus to
my Charge; this young Man, impatient to know what was become of his Father,
went first to Pylos, where you gave him all the kind Entertainment he could
expect from one of his Father's constant Friends, and then ordered your Son to
conduct him in his Travels through your Country; He afterward undertook great
Voyages; he saw Sicily, Egypt, and the Isles of Cyprus and Crete; at last the
Winds, or rather the Gods, cast him on this Shore, as he endeavored to return
to Ithaca, and we came here in time to prevent the horrors of a cruel War; it is
not Idomeneus, but the Son of Ulysses and my Self, who will answer for the
Performance of all Promises that shall be made to you.

While Mentor was thus discoursing with Nestor, in the middle of the
confederate Troops, Idomeneus and Telemachus, with all the Cretans in Arms,
kept their Eyes fixed on them from the top of the Walls of Salenta; they
observed with great Attention how Mentor's Proposals would be received, and
wished they might have heard the wise Speeches of those two venerable old Men.
Nestor ever had the Reputation of the most Prudent, and most Eloquent of all
the Grecian Princes: 'Twas he, who during the Siege of Troy, allayed and
checked the Passion of fierce Achilles; the haughty Ambition of Agamemnon; the
Pride of Ajax, and the boisterous Courage of Diomedes; soft Persuasion flowed
from his Lips like a stream of Milk and Honey; all those Heroes were attentive
to his Voice, and were silent as soon as he begun to speak: He alone knew how to
appease fierce Discord in the Camp, and tho he began to feel the Infirmities of
feeble old Age, yet his Words were still full of Strength and Sweetness. He
related Things past in order to instruct Youth by his consummate Experience,
and though he was slow of Speech, yet he had a most graceful way of telling a
Story. This old Man, admired by all Greece, seemed to lose all his Majesty and
Eloquence as soon as Mentor appeared with him; he looked decayed and overborn
by Years, whereas Age seemed to bear Respect to Mentor's strong and vigorous
Constitution. The Speech of Mentor, tho plain and grave, carried with it an Air
of Authority which Nestor's Words begun to want; whatever he spoke was Concise,
Pithy, Nervous and to the Purpose; he never used vain Repetitions, nor related
any thing foreign to the Point in Question. If he was obliged to speak often of
the same thing, in order to inculcate it, or to persuade others, he did it with
a new Turn, and enforcing Similes; and accompanied the whole with kind and
complaisant Expressions, adapted to the Wants of others, and fit to insinuate
the Truth of what he said. Those two venerable Men yielded a very moving Sight
to so many assembled Nations; and while the confederate Army that besieged
Salenta, crowded to see them at close view, and endeavored to hear their wise
Speeches, Idomeneus and those about him, with greedy and attentive Looks strove
to discover what their Gestures and Countenance meant. In the mean time
Telemachus, full of Impatience, steals away from that Multitude of People that
surrounded him, and running to the Gate through which Mentor was gone out,
commands it to be opened with an Air of Authority. Soon after Idomeneus, who
thought he was still by his Side, wondered to see him running cross the Fields,
and making toward Nestor. Nestor knew him again, and hastened, tho with slow
Steps, to receive him. Telemachus presently flew to embrace him, and hugged him
a long time without speaking a Word; at last he cried out: Oh! Father, for I
scruple not to call you so, since my Misfortune of not finding my true Father,
and the Kindnesses I have received from you, entitle me to use that endearing
Name. My Father, my dear Father, how blessed am I to see you! And oh! That I
might see Ulysses also! Yet if any thing could alleviate my Sorrow in being
deprived of him, it is certainly the finding in you another Self. At these Words
Nestor was not able to forbear Weeping, and he felt a secret Joy when he
perceived those Tears, which, with a wonderful Grace, trickled down
Telemaehus's Cheeks. The Beauty, Gentleness, and noble Assurance of this
unknown Youth, who without any Precaution, went through so many Enemies, struck
all the Allies with Astonishment. Is not this, said they, the Son of that old
Man who came to speak with Nestor? Yes, without doubt; for they have both the
same Wisdom, tho with the different Characters of Age; in the one she does but
begin to Blossom, whereas in the other she bears a plentiful Harvest of ripe
Fruits. Mentor who saw with Pleasure, with what a tender Affection Nestor had
received Telemachus, made use of that happy Disposition. This is, said he to
him, the Son of Ulysses, so dear to all Greece, and to your self. Oh! Wise
Nestor, I deliver him up to you as the best and surest Hostage for Idomeneus's
Promises. You may easily imagine that I should be loath if the lose of the Son
should follow that of the Father, and that the wretched and disconsolate
Penelope should reproach Mentor with having sacrificed her Son to the Ambition
of the new King of Salenta. With this Surety, who offers himself of his own
accord, and whom the Gods, who are lovers of Peace, have sent to you, I begin
to offer to all these assembled Nations, such Proposals as will establish for
ever a solid and lasting Peace.

At this Word of Peace, a confused Noise began to spread from Rank to Rank; all
those different Nations murmured with Anger and Indignation, thinking so much
time lost, while they delayed Fighting, and that all those Speeches tended only
to allay their Fury, and rob them of their Prey. Among the rest, the Manducians
bore with great impatience, that Idomeneus should ever be in a condition to
deceive them again. Therefore they osten attempted to interrupt Mentor, for
they feared lest his wise Discourse should slacken their Allies; nay, they
began to grow Jealous of all the Grecians who were in the Assembly. Mentor
perceiving this, made it his Business to fortify their Jealousy, the better to
divide the Minds of those different Nations.

I confess, said he, that the Manducians have just reason to complain, and to
demand reparation for the Wrongs they have suffered; but at the same time, it
is not reasonable that the Grecians, who make up the best governed Colonies,
should be suspected and odious to the Natives. On the contrary, the Grecians
ought to be united together, and make themselves respected by others; the only
Thing they must observe, is to be contented with what they enjoy, and never to
encroach upon their Neighbor's Territories. I know Idomeneus has been so
unhappy as to create Jealousies among you, but 'twill be an easy matter to
remove all your Suspicions. Telemachus and my Self will become your Hostages:
We'll answer for Idomeneus's Fidelity, and will remain in your power till he
has faithfully performed all his Promises to you. You are provoked, Oh!
Manducians, because the Cretan Troops have made themselves Masters of your
Mountains by surprise, and that by that means they are able to make Incursions
whenever they please into the Country, whither you did retire, to leave them
the open Country near the Seashore. Upon the whole Matter, those narrow
Passages which the Cretans have Fortified with high Towers full of armed Men,
are the true occasion of this War. Pray, answer me, can you allege any other?
Thereupon the chief of the Manducians advanced and thus spoke.

What Means have we not used to avoid this War? The Gods themselves can Witness
that we renounced Peace, only because it was no longer in our Power to live in
Peace, through the stiring Ambition of the Cretans, and the impossibility of
trusting to their Oaths again; a senseless Nation, who drove us to the hard
necessity of running all Hazards, and seeking our safety in their Ruin; as long
as they keep those narrow Passages, we shall ever be afraid of their Designs of
incroaching upon our Lands, and bringing us under subjection. Had they no other
Thoughts than to live in Peace with their Neighbors, they would be contented
with what we yielded up to them of our own accord, and would not desire to keep
an Entrance into a Country upon which they have no ambitious Design. You are
little acquainted with them, oh! wise old Man, but it has been our Misfortune
to know them too, too well. Cease, cease for the future, oh! thou beloved by
the Gods, cease to put a stop to a just and necessary War, without which a
constant Peace can never be settled in Hesperia. Oh! Ungrateful, treacherous,
and cruel Nation, whom the angry Gods have sent among us to trouble our Repose,
and punish us for our Faults. Yet after you have punished us, Oh great Gods!
You will revenge us too, neither will you be less just to our Enemies than to
our selves.

At these Words all the Assembly was in an Uproar: It seemed as if Mars and
Bellona went from Rank to Rank to kindle in every one's Breast the raging fury
of War, which Mentor endeavored to quench. Whereupon Mentor thus resumed his
Discourse: Had I nothing but Promises to make to you, you might choose whether
you would accept or reject them; but what I offer is real and certain. If you
are not contented to have Telemachus and my self for Hostages, I will cause
Twelve of the most noble and valiant Cretans to be delivered up to you. But at
the same time it is but just that you should give us Hostages also: For though
Idomeneus have a sincere desire for Peace, yet he desires it without Fear or
Weakness; he seeks Peace just as you seem to desire it, out of Wisdom and
Moderation, and not out of a fond Love for a soft and effeminate Life, nor out
of fear at the impending Dangers of War. He is ready either to Conquer or to
Die, but he prefers Peace to the most glorious Victory; he would be ashamed of
being overcome, but he fears the being unjust, and is not ashamed to make
amends for what he has done amiss. Tho he offers Peace with Sword in Hand, he
would not be thought to impose its Conditions with Imperiousness; for he sets
no value upon a forced Friendship. He would have a Peace, wherein all Parties
concerned may find their mutual Satisfaction; a Peace that may remove all
Jealousies, stifle all Feuds and Resentments, and reconcile all Distrusts. In a
Word, Idomeneus has all the Sentiments which, I am sure, you desire he should
have; my chief Business now is to persuade you of his real Intentions, which I
may do with ease, if you will but hear me with animpartial and unprejudiced
Mind. Hear me, Oh! Warlike People; and you, Oh! Wise and united Captains, hear
what I offer to you from Idomeneus: As it not just that he should have a free
Entrance into his Neighbours's Territories, so it were unreasonable that he
should be exposed to the Inroads of his Neighbors; therefore he consents that
those Streights which he has fortified with high Towers, may be guarded by
Troops that shall stand neuter. You Nestor, and you Philoctetes, are born
Grecians, yet upon this occasion you declared against Idomeneus, and so cannot
be suspected of being too favorable to his side. You are moved and animated by
the common Interest of the repose and liberty of Hesperia, and therefore it is
fit you should be the Trustees and Keepers of those narrow Passages which have
occasioned this War. You are as much concerned in hindering the old Inhabitants
of Hesperia from destroying Salenta, which is a new Greek Colony, like one of
those you have founded, as in hindering Idomeneus from encroaching upon his
Neighbors. You ought to keep an equal Balance betwixt both Parties; and
instead of destroying with Fire and Sword, a People whom you ought to Love,
reserve to your selves the Honor of being Judges and Mediators. I know you
would like these Proposals, if you could be sure of the Performance on
Idomeneus's part; as to this, I will give you full Satisfaction: For the
security of both Parties, there will be those Hostages I mentioned before, till
all the narrow Passes be deposited into your Hands. Now when the safety of all
Hesperia, and even that of Salenta and Idomeneus shall lie at your Mercy, will
you not then be contented? Of whom can you be afraid, unless it be of your own
selves? You dare not trust Idomeneus; and yet Idomeneus is so free from any
design of deceiving you, that he is willing to trust you. Yes, he will commit
to your Charge both the Repose, Lives and Liberty of all his People and
himself. If it be true that you only desire an honorable and lasting Peace,
how can you now reject her, when she courts you to embrace her? Once more do
not think that it is Fear that forces Idomeneus to offer you these Proposals;
no, it is Wisdom and Justice which engage him to take these Measures, without
reguarding whether you impute to his Weakness what is the effect of his Virtue.
In his first attempts he is to blame, and he glories in acknowledging his
Faults by obviateing your Demands. It Is Weakness, it is ridiculous Vanity, it is
absolute Ignorance of a Man's own Interest, to hope to conceal his Faults, by
endeavoring to maintain 'em by a fierce Haughtiness. He who owns his Faults to
his Enemy, and who offers to repair 'em, shows by that, that he is become
incapable of committing 'em; and an Enemy cannot be too fearful of so wise and
so firm a Conduct, at least if he does not make Peace: Besure you take good
heed, that in his turn, he does do you no Injury. If you slight Peace and
Justice, which now offer themselves to you, Peace and Justice will take their
Revenge. Idomeneus, who ought to have feared that he should have found the Gods
provoked against him, will now find 'em on his side against you. Telemachus and
my self will Fight for the true Cause; and I call all the Gods both Celestial
and Infernal to witness the Justice of those Proposals that I have now made to
you.

At these words Mentor raised his Arm on high to show to that great multitude
of People the OliveBranch, the Signal of Peace, which he had in his Hand. The
Commanders, who nearly beheld him, were dazzled with the divine Light that
sparkl'd in his Eyes; he appeared with such an Authority, and so awful a
Majesty, as is never seen in the greatest and most illustrious among Mortals.
The Charm of his soft, yet powerful Words, stole away their Hearts: They were
like those enchanting Words, which in the deep silence of the Night, do in a
moment stop the Motion of the Moon and Stars, calm the raging Seas, hush the
Winds and the Waves, and stay the Course of the most rapid Streams. Mentor
seemed in the middle of these furious People, like Bacchus when he was
surrounded by Tygres, which forgeting their fierceness, by the power of his
sweet Words, came and licked his Feet, and owned their Subjection by their
fawning. All this while there remained a profound silence through all the Army:
The Commanders stood gazing on one another, and durst not oppose this single
Man, nor imagine who he was. All the Troops stood motionless with their Eyes
fixed on him, and durst not make the least noise, lest he should have something
more to say, which that might hinder, though they could not imagine that any thing
could be added to what he had said: His Discourse seemed short, and they wished
he had spoken longer. All he had said, remained as it were Engraven in their
Hearts; his Speech made him be loved; his Speech made him believed; every one
was greedily attentive both with their Ears and Eyes, to catch the least
Syllable that came out of his Mouth.

After a pretty long silence, a kind of a soft noise began to spread it self by
little and little on every side, not like the confused noise of People that
begin their Anger with harsh Whispers; but on the contrary, it was a kind and
gentle Murmur. Every one's Face appeared with a pleasant Serenity and a
delightful Softness. The Manducians, so highly enraged, let their Weapons fall
out of their Hands. The rugged Phalantus, and the Lacedaemonians, were amazed to
find their Hearts so softened; and the rest began to look for that haypy Peace
which lately was in view. Philoctetes, whom his own Misfortunes had made more
sensible than the rest, could not restrain his Wars. Nestor not being able to
speak for the transport into which this Discourse had thrown him, tenderly
embraced Mentor, being wholly incapable of uttering one Syllable; and all the
People at once, as if it had been a Signal, cried out, Oh, wondrous wise old
Man! You alone have disarmed us; Peace, Peace, it is Peace we wish for.
Presently after this, Nestor would have harrangu'd 'em; but the Troops were
impatient, and feared that he would only start some difficulty: Once again,
they cried out, Peace! Peace! And they were no way to be silenced, but by
obliging all the Officers of the Army to cry out with them for Peace. Nestor
perceiving that he had not then the liberty to make a regular Discourse, was
contented only to say; You see, Mentor, what the word of a good Man can do:
When Wisdom and Virtue speak, they still all the Passions; our just Resentments
turn into Friendship, and desires of a lasting Peace. We accept the Peace you
offer us; at which all the Commanders held up their Hands in sign of Agreement.
Mentor hasted to the City-Gate to cause it to be opened, and to speak to
Idomeneus to come out of the City without any Precaution. Mean while Nestor
embraced Telemachus with these words; Thou aimable Son of the wisest of all the
Greeks, can you be wiser and happier than He! Have you learned nothing of his
Fate? The Memory of your Father, whom you so much resemble, has helped to
extinguish our Rage. Phalantus, though hard and severe, though he has never seen
Ulysses, cannot but be concerned for his and his Son's Misfortunes. Here
Telemachus was pressed to recount his Adventures, till Mentor returned with
Idomeneus and all the Cretan Youths which attended him. At the sight of
Idomeneus, the Allies felt their Animosity rekindled, but Mentor's words
stifled this Fire, just ready to break out. Why do we delay, said he, the
Confirmation of this sacred Alliance, of which the Gods will be both Witnesses
and Guarantees? May they avenge it, if any impious Wretch dare to violate it;
and may all the horrible Plagues of War (not involving the Faithful and
Innocent) fall on the perjured and execrable Head of that ambitious Man who
shall break the holy Sanctions of this Alliance! May he be hated of Gods and
Men! May he never reap the Fruit of his Perfidy! May the infernal Furies, in
the most hideous Forms, appear and increase his Rage and Despair! May he be
struck dead without any hope of Burial! May his Body be a Prey to Dogs and
Vulturs! May he be in the deep Abyss of Hell for ever, more severely tormented
than Tantalus, lxion, or the Danaids! But no; rather may this Peace be as firm
as the Mountain of Atlas, that supports the Heavens! May all these People
preserve and enjoy the Fruits of it from Generation to Generation! May the
Names of those who shall swear to it be ever mentioned with Love and Reverence,
by the last of of our Race! May this Peace, founded upon Justice and Integrity,
be the Pattern of every Peace hereafter to be made among all the Nations of the
Universe! And may all the People who would make themselves happy by re-uniting,
take Example by those of Hesperia!

At these words, Idomeneus and the other Kings swore to maintain the Peace on
the forementioned Articles. Hostages were given on each side, and Telemachus
would needs be one of the Hostages for Idomenus; but Mentor could not be one of
that Number, because the Allies desired he should continue with Idomeneus, to
give an account of his Conduct, and of that of his Counselors, till the entire
execution of the Articles sworn to. An hundred Heifers as white as Snow were
sacrificed between the Enemy's Camp and the Town, together with as many white
Bulls whose Horns were gilt and adorned with Garlands. The frightful Bellowings
of the Sacrifices that fell under the sacred Knife, resounded over all the
neighboring Mountains; the reaking Gore streamed on all sides; a great
abundance of the richest Wine was poured out for the Libations; the Aruspices
consulted the Entrails yet panting. In these Sacrifices was burned on the Altar
an Incense that ascended like a large Cloud, whose Odor perfumed the whole
Country. While the Soldiers on both sides throwing off the unkind Aspects of
Enemies, began to entertain one another with their Adventures, and already had
left off their Labor, and by degrees tasted the sweetness of Peace: Many of
those who had followed Idomeneus to the Siege of Troy, knew those who belonged
to Nestor which had been engaged with them in the same War, and very kindly
embracing each other, mutually related what had befallen 'em, after they had
ruined that lofty City, the Ornament and Glory of all Asia: And now they lay
down on the Grass, crowned with Flowers, drinking Wine together that was sent
'em out of the Town in large Vessels, to celebrate so happy a day.

Then said Mentor to the Kings; O ye Captains, assembled under several Names
and several Leaders, you shall now be but one People: For thus the just Gods,
Lovers of Mankind, have decreed the eternal Tie of their Concord. The entire
human Race is but one large Family dispersed over the Face of the whole Earth:
All Men are Brothers to each other, and ought to love as such. Cursed are those
wicked Men who seek a cruel Glory in the Blood of their Brethren, which is,
indeed, their own. It Is true, War is sometimes necessary; but it is a shame to
Humanity, that it is inevitable on some occasions. Oh Princes! think not that
it ought to be desired for the acquisition of Glory! True Glory is not to be
found void of Humanity; whoever prefers his own particular Glory to the
Sentiments of Humanity, is a Monster of Pride and no Man, and can never obtain
any other than a false Glory: For true Glory consists only in Moderation and
Goodness. He may be flattered, indeed, to satisfy his foolish Vanity; but if
Men went to speak their real Opinion of him in private, it ought justly to be
said, That he has so much the lefs deserved Glory, as he has sought it with an
unjust Passion: Men ought not to esteem him, because he has so little valued
Men, and has been so prodigal of their Blood through a brutish Vanity. Happy's
that King who loves his People, and is beloved by them; who dare trust his
Neighbors, and who is trusted by them; who, far from making War against them,
prevents any War between them, and gives occasion to all Foreign Nations to
wish themselves as happy as his Subjects in having him for their King! Resolve
then to meet from time to time, O ye Princes of the powerful Cities of
Hesperia, and hold a general Assembly once every three Years, where all the
Kings here present shall concur to continue this Alliance by a new Oath, to
confirm this promised Friendship, and to concert all your common Interests. As
long as you are united, you will enjoy at home in this fine Country both Peace,
Honor and Plenty; abroad you will ever be invincible. It Is only Discord, the
Daughter of Hell, that torments poor distracted Mortals, that has Power to
interrupt the Happiness the Gods do design you. Nestor replied, You see by the
readiness with which we make Peace, how far we are from making War through any
Vainglory, or by the unjust greediness of advancing our selves by the
depression of our Neighbors; but what can we do when we find our selves near a
violent Prince, who knows no Law but his Interest, and who takes all occasions
to invade the Territories of other States? Think not that I speak of Idomeneus:
No; I have no longer such a Thought of him: It Is Adrastus King of the Daunians
from whom we ought to fear all Mischiess: He contemns the Gods, and thinks that
all Men upon the Face of the Earth were born only to promote his Glory by their
Slavery: He will have no Subject of whom he may be both King and Father: He
must have Slaves and Adorers, and will be worshipped as a God. Hitherto the
blind Goddess, Fortune, has favored his unjust Enterprises: We hasted to
attack Salanta to defeat the weakest of our Enemies, who only began to
establish himself on this side, at last to turn our Forces against that other
more powerful Enemy: He has already taken several Towns from our Allies: He has
defeated the Cretonians in two Battles, using all Means whatever to satisfy
his Ambition; Force and Cunning are alike to him, so he can but weaken his
Enemies: He has heaped up a great mass of Treasure, and his Troops are
disciplined and inured to War; his Commanders are Experienced; he is well
obeyed, watching himself continually over all those who act by his Order; he
punishes the least Faults with Severity, and largely rewards the good Services
done him; his Valor sustains and animates the Courage of all his Troops, and
he would be an accomplished King if Justice and Honesty guided his Actions: But
he neither fears the Gods nor the Checks of his Conscience; nor does he value
Fame it self, but looks on it as a vain Phantom, which can affect none but poor
spirited Men; he esteems nothing as a real and solid Good, but the advantage of
possessing great Riches, to be feared and to prostrate all Mankind at his Feet.
Shortly you will find his Army upon our Confines, and if the union of so many
People do not enable us to resist him, we have certainly lost all hopes of
Liberty. It Is therefore the Interest of Idomenus as well as ours to oppose this
haughty Man, who can suffer nothing free in his Neighborhood. If we had been
overcome, Salenta would have been threatened with the same Misfortune. Let us
make haste then all together to prevent it.

Whilst Nestor spoke thus, they advanced toward the Town: For Idomeneus had
invited all the Kings and principal Commanders to enter and pass the Night
there: 'Mean while all the Army of the Allies set up their Tents, and all the
Field was already covered with rich Pavillions of all sorts of Colors, wherein
the wearied Hesperians expected refreshing Sleep. When the Kings and their
Retinue were entered the City, they were amazed to see, how in so little a time
so many magnificent Structures could be raised; and that the hurry of so great
a War had not hindered this growing City from increasing, and from being
beautyfied all at once.

They admired the wisdom and vigilance of Idomeneus, who had founded so brave a
Kingdom, and every one concluded that having made Peace with him, the Allies
would be very powersul, if he entered into a League with them against the
Dauneans. It was therefore proposed to Idomeneus to join with them in it, who
could not reject so just a Proposal, promising'em assistance: But as Mentor was
not ignorant of any thing that is necessary that may make a State flourish, he
was assured that the Forces of Idomeneus could not be so great as they seemed,
wherefore, taking him apart, he thus spoke to him.

You see our care has not been altogether unprofitable to you: Salenta is
guarded from the Misfortune that threatened it: It Is now only in your power to
raise its Glory high as the Heavens, and to equal the Wisdom of your Gransire
in the Government of your People. I proceed to speak freely to you, believing
you would have me do so, and that you hate all manner of Flattery. Whilst these
Kings were praising your Magnificence, I was thinking to my self on the
Rashness of your Conduct: -- At this word Rashness Idomeneus changed
Countenance; his Eyes looked wildly, he colored and was going to interrupt
Mentor, who said to him in a modest and respectful Tone, but free and bold; I
see plainly this word Rashness choaks you, and confess, any one but my self
would hardly have used it; for we ought to respect Kings and humor their
nicety, especially when we reprove'em: Truth alone is enough to offend 'em,
without adding rough Expressions; but I was in hopes that you could have
permitted me to have spoken to you without Lenitives, to let you see your
Error: My Design has been to accustom you to understand how to call Things by
their Names, and to perceive, that when others give you their Advice upon your
Conduct, they never dare tell you all that they Think; and, if you would not be
deceived in it, you should always apprehend more than they will say to you, of
what relates to your disadvantage. For my part, I shall willingly soften my
Words according to your Business. At these Words Idomeneus, who by this time
had recovered of his passionate Disorder, seemed ashamed of his Nicety: You
see, said he to Mentor, what the Custom of being Flattered does. I desire the
welfare of my Kingdom, and there is no Truth, how ungrateful soever, but what I
shall think my self happy to hear from your Mouth: But pity a Monarch, whom
Flattery had poisoned, and who even in his Misfortunes could not, find a Man
brave enough to tell him the Truth. No, I have never found any Body who has
loved me so well as to displease me in telling me the whole Truth. Here the
Tears stood in his Eyes, and he tenderly embraced Mentor. Then said the old
wise Man, it is with Grief that I see my self constrained to tell you some hard
Things; but can I betray you in telling you the Truth? I suppose your self in
my Place; if you have hitherto been deceived, 'twas because you were very
willing to be so; 'twas this made you fear to be advised. Have you sought for
the most disinteress'd People, and who were most likely to contradict you? Have
you made it your Business to choose Men the least found to please you? The most
unbiased in their Conduct, and the most capable to condemn your unjust
Sentiments and Passions? When you have found Flatterers, have you discarded
'em? Have you distrusted your self? No, no; you have not done as those do who
love Truth, and who deserve to know it. Let us see if you will henceforward
have the Courage to act better, and to suffer your self to be humbl'd by the
Truth that condemns you. I said, that what acquires you so great praise,
deserves to be blamed. While you had so many Enemies abroad, who threatened
your Kingdom, yet but ill established, you thought on nothing within your new
City, but to raise stately Buildings in it: It Is this has caused you so many
restless Nights, as you your self have owned to me. You have consumed your
Wealth; you neither thought of increasing your People, nor of Cultivating the
fertile Lands of this side. Should you not have looked upon these two Things as
the two essential Foundations of your Power? To have a great number of able
Men, and Lands well Cultivated to Feed 'em? There ought to have been a long
Peace in these beginnings to favor the increase of your People. You should
have thought of nothing but Husbandry, and the establishment of the most wise
Laws. A vain Ambition has pushed you on to the very brink of a Precipice; and
by laboring to appear Great, you had like to have ruined your true Greatness.
Make have now to repair these Faults; Leave off all your great Works; throw off
all Pride which would ruin your new City: Let your People take their Ease, and
apply your self to settle 'em in Plenty, to facilitate their Marriages. For,
know that you are no longer a King than you have a People to govern; and that
you should not measure your Power by the extent of the Lands you possess, but
by the number of Men, who inhabit 'em, and who are bound to obey you: Make
choice of good Ground, tho but indifferent in extent, and fill it with a
numerous People, Laborious and Disciplined; endeavor to be loved by these
People, and then you will be more Powerful, more Happy, and more Glorious than
all the Conquerors who lay wast so many Kingdoms.

How shall I deport my self then, said Idomeneus, to these Kings? Shall I own
my Weakness to them? It Is true, I have neglected Husbandry and Commerce too,
which is so convenient for me in these Parts, having thought on nothing but to
build me a stately City. Must I, my dear Mentor, dishonor my self before so
many Kings, and discover my want of Power? If I must, I will without any
scruple, whatever it costs me: For you have taught me that a true King, who is
made for his People, and who owes himself wholly to them, ought to prefer the
welfare of his Kingdom to his own Reputation. This Sentiment, replied Mentor,
becomes a Father of the People; it is by this Goodness, and not by the
magnificence of your City, that I percieve the Soul of a true King in you: But
your Honor must be maintained as well for the Interest of your Kingdom: That
shall be my Province, I will therefore go tell these Kings, that you have
engaged your self to re-establish Ulysses, if he be yet Living, or at least his
Son, to Ithaca; and that you will drive thence by force all the Lovers of
Penelope. They must needs consider that this War will require a grcat number of
Troops, and so they will agree that you can afford 'em but small supplies
against the Daunians.

At these Words Idomeneus appeared like a Man eased of a Burden not to be
born. My dear Friend, said he to Mentor, you will thus save my Honor, and the
Reputation of this growing City, whose Weakness you will hide from all my
Neighbors: But what probability is there that I will send forces to Ithaca, to
re-establish Ulysses there, or at least his Son Telemachus, since Telemachus
himself is engaged to go to the War against the Daunians? Don't trouble your
self, Sir, replied Mentor, I Will tell 'em nothing but Truth: The Vessels that
you send to establish your Trade, shall go to the Coast of Epirus, which will
do two Things at one time; one in recalling the foreign Merchants, whom too
great Imposts do estrange from Salenta, to your Coast; and the other in inquiring
News of Ulysses; who, if he be yet alive, cannot be far from those Seas that
part Greece and Italy; and it is certainly reported that he was seen among the
Pheocians: But, if there be no hope of seeing him again, your Fleet will
however do a signal Piece of Service to his Son; for they will spread through
Ithaca, and all the neighboring Countries, a terror of the Name of young
Telemachus, who was thought to be dead as well as his Father: The Lovers of
Penelope will be astonished to hear that he is ready to return with the
Succors of a powerful Allie; The Ithacans will not dare to shake off the Yoke;
Penelope will be comforted, and will ever refuse to make choice of a Husband.
Thus you will serve Telemachus whilst he is in your place, with the Allies on
this Coast of Italy against the Daunians. At these words, Idomeneus cried out,
Happy's the King who is supported by wise Counsels! A wise and faithful Friend,
is more worth to a King than victorious Armies. But doubly blessed is the King
who is sensible of his Happiness, and knows how to profit himself by the use of
wise Counsels: For often it happens, that wise and honest Men, whose Virtue is
feared, are far removed from his trust, that he may give an ear to Flatterers,
whose Treason is never feared. I am my self fallen into this Error, and I will
relate to you all the Misfortunes that have befallen me by a false Friend, who
flattered my Passions, in hopes, that in return, I would flatter his.

Mentor easily made the Confederate Kings understand that Idomeneus ought to
take care of the Affairs of Telemachus, whilst that young Prince went with
them. They were very well satisfied that they had in their Army the Young Son
of Ulysses, and an hundred of the Cretan Youth, whom Idomeneus gave him to
accompany him; they were the Flower of the young Nobility which the King
brought along with him from Crete. 'Twas Mentor who advised him to send 'em to
this War. You must take care, said he, to increase the People during this
Peace; but lest all the Nation should grow soft and effeminate, and be ignorant
of the Art of War; you must send the young Nobility to the Wars abroad, who
will be sufficient to set the whole Kingdom on an Emulation of Glory, or the
Love of Arms, on the Contempt of Fatigues, and of Death it self; in short, on
the Experience of the Military Art.

The Confederate Kings left Salenta, very well satisfied with King Idomeneus,
and charmed with the Wisdom of Mentor. They were very glad that they had got
Telemachus along with 'em; who could not master his Grief when he was to part
with his Friend. Whilst the Consederat Kings took their leaves, and swore to
Idomeneus that they would keep an eternal Alliance with him, Mentor holding
Telemachus locked in his Arms, felt himself bedewed with that young Prince's
Tears. I am insensible, said Telemachus, of the Joy that I am going in quest of
Glory, nothing now fills my Soul but the Grief that I must part from you.
Methinks I see again that unfortunate time when the Egyptains snatched me from
between your Arms, and carried me away from you without giving me the least
hope of seeing you any more. Mentor returned an answer to these words, sweet
and obliging, the better whereby to comfort him: This, said he, is a Separation
far different, this is voluntary and will be short; you go to seek Victory. My
Son, you should love me less tenderly and with a more manly Love. Accustom your
self to my absence; you will not always have me with you: Wisdom and Virtue
rather than the Presence of Mentor, should inspire you with what you ought to
do. Saying this, the Goddess, concealed under the Person of Mentor, covered
Telemachus with her Eyes, and breathed into him the Spirit of Wisdom and
Foresight, undaunted Valor and a sweet Moderation, which are so rarely found
together. Go, said Mentor, into the midst of the greatest Dangers as often as
it is convenient you should go. A Prince dishonours himself much more in
shunning the Dangers of War, than in never going to 'em at all. The Courage of
him who commands others, ought never to be doubtful. If it be necessary that a
People should preserve their General and King, it is the more necessary to 'em
not to see him in an uncertain Reputation of Valor. Remember, that he who
Commands, ought to be a Pattern to all the rest; and his Example ought to
encourage the whole Army. Expose your self then, O Telemachus, and perish in
the Combat rather than expose your self to the Malice of those who could doubt
your Courage! But, on the other hand, seek not for Dangers without advantage;
for Valor can no longer be a Virtue than it is guided by Prudence; otherwise
it is a mad contempt of Life and a brutish Heat. Desperate Valor is ever
uncertain. He who does not command himself in Dangers, is rather Wild than
Brave; it is necessary that he should be beside himself to put himself above
Fear; because he cannot surmount it by the natural Situation of his Heart: In
this Case, if he does not fly, at least he is troubled that he loses the
freedom of his Mind, which would be necessary to him in using opportunities to
rout the Enemy, or to serve his Country; if he has all the Fire of a Soldiet,
he has nor the Discretion of a Captain; and yet more, he has not the true
Courage of a private Soldier; for a Soldier ought to preserve a Presence of
Mind in the Fight, and a Moderation necessary to Obedience. He who rashly
exposes himself, disturbs the order and discipline of Troops; gives an Example
of Rashness, and often exposes the whole Army to great Misfortunes: Those who
prefer their vain Ambition to the safety of the common Cause, deserve
Punishments, not Rewards. Take good heed then, my dear Son! not to seek Glory
with too much impatience! The true Means to find it, is quietly to wait a
favorable Opportunity: Virtue causes her self the more to be feared, by how
much she appears more plain, more modest, and more an Enemy to all Pride. It Is
by degrees that the necessity of being exposed to Danger is increased, and that
new Succors of Foresight and Courage are requisite, which always go together.
For other Matters, remember that you ought never to draw on you the Envy of any
Body. On the other side, be not jealous of the success of others; be sure first
to praise whatsoever merits any thing of Praise; but praise with discretion,
repeating the Good with Pleasure; and think no more of it but with Sorrow.
Ben't positive before the old Commanders, who have gained by Experience that
which it is impossible you should have; harken to 'em with Deference; consult
'em; desire the most able to instruct you, and be not ashamed to own how far
you have improved by their Instructions: In short, never give ear to Discourses
by which your Distrust or Jealousy may be raised against the other chief
Officers; but speak to 'em with frankness and ingenuity: If you think they have
not born themselves well to you, open your Heart to 'em, and explain all your
Reasons to 'em: If they are capable of understanding the Generosity of this
Conduct, you will charm 'em, and you will draw from 'em all that you have
occasion to expect: On the contrary, if they have not sense enough to apprehend
your meaning, you will be informed by your self how unjust they are, and how to
suffer it; and will thence take your Measures to trust 'em no more as long as
the War lasts, and thus will have nothing to accuse your self of: But, above
all things, never tell any Flatterers, who sow Division, the occasions of
Complaints which you believe you have against the Commanders of the Army to
which you belong.

I will stay here, continued Mentor, to help Idomeneus in his Business, to
labor for the Happiness of his People. I will stay for you, O my dear
Telemachus! Remember, that those who fear the Gods have nothing to fear from
Men! You will be present to your self in the greatest Dangers; but know! that
Minerva will never forsake you.

At these words Telemachus thought that he saw the Goddess her self; and he had
certainly known that 'twas she who spoke to him, to inspire him with Bravery,
if the Goddess had not re-call'd the Idea of Mentor; saying, Forget not, my
Son, the unwearied Care I have taken of you in your Infancy, that you might be
as wise and valorous as your Father; do nothing therefore unworthy his great
Example, and of the Principles of Virtue with which I have endeavored to
inspire you!

The Sun was already risen, and gilded the Tops of the Mountains, when the King
came out of Salenta to re-join the Troops. These Troops encamped round the
City, began to March under their Commanders; on every side were seen the bright
Steel of bristling Pikes; the glittering Shields dazzled their Eyes. A Cloud of
Dust mounted up to the Skies. Idomeneus and Mentor conducted the Confederate
Kings into the Camp, which was at a good distance from the Walls of the City.
At last they parted, after having given the Marks of a true Friendship on each
side. The Allies no longer doubted that the Peace would last, now they knew the
sincerity of the Mind of Idomeneus, which was represented to 'em very different
from what it was; for he was Judged of, not by his own natural Inclinations,
but by the Flatteries and unjust Counsels to which he had given himself over.

After the Army was gone, Idomeneus led Mentor into every part of the City, and
the neighboring Country; but Mentor would first see his Naval Forces. Let us
(said he) number your Vessels; let us take an exact account of their Burden,
and how many Sailors you have to Man 'em, either to maintain a War, or to carry
on the Trade of your Subjects, by which your Power is to be measured. Then he
went to see the Port, and aboard every Vessel, informing himself of the
Country, where each of 'em went to Traffic; what Merchandise it carried, what
Goods they took in return; what was the Charge of the Ship during the time she
was at Sea; the Loans that the Merchants made one to another; the Companies
they set up among themselves, to see if they were equitably and faithfully
observed. Finally, the hazards of Ship-wreck, and other Mischances of Trade, in
order to prevent the Ruin of Merchants, who, out of a greedy desire of Gain, do
often undertake more than they know how to manage. He ordained severe
Punishments for all Bankrupts, because their Breaking is always owing to their
Rashness, if not to their Dishonesty: At the same time he made several
Regulations in order to prevent Bankrupts; and to that end he created
Magistrates, to whom the Merchants were to give an Account of their Effects,
Profits, Expenses, and Ventures. They were never suffered to venture another
Man's Estate, nor above half of their own. Moreover they carried on by
Joint Stock, those Undertakings which they could not have managed singly; and
the Bylaws of their respective Companies became inviolable, through the severe
Punishments inflicted on the Infringers of the same. Besides, every one had
full liberty of Trading, and instead of overcharging them with Taxes and
Duties, there was an Encouragement proposed to all Merchants that could engage
any other Nation to trade to Salenta. By this means there was a general resort
of People from all Parts; the Commerce of that City was like the flux and
reflux of the Sea; Riches continually entered into it like rolling Waves, which
are pushed forwards by those succeeding: All manner of Wares were freely
Imported and Exported; whatever they brought in was good for something or
other; and nothing was Exported that did not introduce other Riches in its
Room. Justice alone reigned in the Port among so many different Nations;
upright Dealing, Honesty and Candor, from the tops of those high Towers,
seemed to invite all Merchants from the remotest Parts of the Universe. Every
one of those Merchants, whether he came from the Eastern Shore, where the Sun
rises each Day out of the Bosom of the watery Deep; or whether he came from that
great Sea, where that radiant Planet, weary of its Course, extinguishes its
Fires and goes to rest; every one, I say, lived in Peace and Safety in Salenta,
as if it had been his own Country. As for the inside of the City, Mentor viewed
all Storehouses, Tradesmens Shops, and public Places; prohibited all Foreign
Goods that might introduce Luxury and Effeminacy; and regulated the Apparel,
Food, Household Stuff, State, and Ornament of Houses, according to the different
Conditions and Degrees: He forbad the making and wearing of all Ornaments of
Gold and Silver; and told Idomeneus, I know but one way to make your People
moderate in their Expenses, which is your own Example of Moderation; it is
requisite you should be distinguished by an outward show of Majesty; but your
Guards, and the chief Officers which are about you, will be a sufficient Mark
of your Authority. Be contented to wear a Garment of super-fine Wool died in
Purple; let the Chief Men of your State be clad of the same Wool, and that all
the difference be in the Color; and a thin Embroidery of Gold on the Skirts of
your Robe. Those different Colors will serve to distinguish the different
Degrees, without the expensive help either of Gold, Silver, or Precious Stones.
Regulate those Degrees by Birth and Extraction, and let those be placed in the
first Rank, whose Descent is most Noble, Ancient, and Conspicuous. Those, who
by their Merit shall be advanced to Places of Trust and Authority, will be
contented to come after those Ancient and Illustrious Families, which for a
long time have been in possession of Honor: And such, whose Extraction is not
so Noble as theirs, will easily give place to them, if so be you do not suffer
them to forget themselves in a high and sudden Preferment, and bestow new
Honors and Commendations on those who know how to be moderate in Prosperity.
That distinction which proceeds from a long continuation of Noble Ancestors, is
the least exposed to Envy; next to that, Virtue must be excited and encouraged,
and Men will be ready to serve the State, provided you bestow Crowns and
Statues upon great Actions, which will be a Spring of Nobility for the Sons of
those that have achieved them. Persons of the first Rank, next to you, shall
be clad in White, with a Gold and Silver Fringe on the lower Border of their
Garment, and shall wear a Gold Ring on their Fingers. Those of the second Rank,
shall be clad in Blue, with a Silver Fringe and a Ring, but no Medal. The Third
in Green without Fringe, but with a Medal. The Fourth in deep Yellow. The Fifth
in a pale Red. The Sixth in Grisdelin. The Seventh who shall be the meanest of
the People, in Yellow mixed with White. These are the Colors for the seven
different Degrees of Freemen. The Slaves shall be clad in Dark-brown. Thus
without any expense, every one's Condition shall be distinguished, and all
those Arts shall be banished from Salenta, which serve only to keep up a vain
Pomp, and foment Luxury. All the Artificers who are now employed about those
pernicious Arts, shall either betake themselves to necessary Arts, which are
but few, to Merchandise, or to Agriculture. It shall never be lawful to change
either the Manufactory of Stuffs, or the Fashion of Clothes; for it is a
shameful Thing for Men destined to a serious and noble Life, to spend their
time in inventing affected Ornaments; or to suffer their Wives, in whom those
tristing Amusements are less disgraceful, to be guilty of those Extravagancies.

Mentor, like a skilful Gardener, who lops the useless Branches off the Trees,
endeavored to retrench vain Pomp and Luxury, which depraved good Manners, and
to introduce a noble and frugal Plainness in every thing. He likewise regulated
the ordinary Food both of Citizens and Slaves. What a shame, said he, it is for
the most eminent Men to make their Grandeur to consist in Ragoos and Kickshaws,
by which they effeminate their Minds, and continually impair the health of
their Bodies? Whereas they ought to place their Happiness in Moderation; in
their Authority, which gives them an occasion of doing good to other men; and
in the Fame and Reputation they acquire by their good Actions. Sobriety and
Temperance make the most ordinary Food the most palatable; and with a vigorous
Constitution of Body. procure the most constant Pleasures. Therefore let your
Tables be furnished with the best sort of Meats, dressed without any Ragoos; for
the provoking Men's Appetites beyond the regular craving of their Stomachs, is
but a more refined Art of Poisoning: By that Idomeneus easily understood how
ill he had done, in suffering the Inhabitants of his New City, to soften and
corrupt their Manners, through the Violation of the Laws of Minos about
Sobriety: But wise Mentor put him in mind, That the reviving of those very Laws
would signify nothing, unless his own Example gave them that Vigor and
Authority, which nothing else could procure them. Thereupon Idomeneus regulated
his Table, and ordered that nothing should be served to him besides excellent
Bread, delicious Wine of the growth of that Country, but in small quantities,
with Meat plainly dressed, and such as he used to eat with the other Grecians at
the Siege of Troy. No Person durst to complain of a Law which the King imposed
upon himself, and by that means every body retrenched the profuseness of
Dainties and Delicacies, which they began to introduce in their Meals.

Next to that, Mentor silenced soft and effeminate Music, as tending to
corrupt Youth; and likewise condemned Tavern-Musick, which inebriates the Mind
no less than Wine it self, and is often the cause of Riot and Impudence in
Men's Manners. Thus he confined Music to Festivals within the Temples, to
celebrate the Praises of the Gods, and of those Hero's, who have left us
Patterns of the most excellent Virtues. Nor did he permit any of the great
Ornaments of Architectures, such as Pillars, Pedestals, and Portico's, to be
used any where but in Temples. He made himself new Draughts of a plain and
graceful Architecture, whereby on a small piece of Ground one might build a
pleasant and convenient House for a numerous Family, in such a manner, that it
was exposed to a wholesome Air; that its several Lodgings were independent upon
one another; and that it might easily be kept in Order and Repair at a small
charge. These different Draughts of Houses, according to the number of Persons
in each Family, served to embelish part of the City with little Expense, and to
make it regular; whereas the other Part, which was already built up according
to the Caprice or Vanity of private Persons, though more magnificent, was yet
less pleasant and convenient.

Painting and Carving were Arts which Mentor did not think fit to be laid
aside; however he allowed but few Men in Salenta to profess 'em. He settled a
public School to teach those Arts, and appointed most skilful Masters to
examine the young Prentices. Those Arts, said he, which are not absolutely
necessary, ought not to admit of any thing that is mean or indifferent; and
therefore no young Men should be suffered to learn them, but those whose
promising Genius seems to tend to Perfection: As for others who are Born for
less noble Arts, they will be usefully employed about the ordinary Occasions of
the Commonwealth. The only thing, added he, wherein Carvers and Painters ought
to be employed, is in preserving the Memory of great Men, and their noble
Actions; and for that purpose, Representations and Memorials of what has been
Achieved with an extraordinary Industry, ought to be used in public Buildings
and Tombs. Moreover Mentor's Moderation and Frugality did not go so far, but
that he allowed these great Buildings designed for Horse, or Chariot-Races,
Wrestling, Fights with Cestus, and all other Exercises, which render the Body
both more supple, active, and vigorous. He suppressd a vast number of Merchants
and Shopkeepers, who sold figured Stuffs of remote Countries; Embroidered Works
of an excessive Price; Gold and Silver Vessels with embossed Figures of the
Gods, Men, and Animals; and lastly refined Liquors and Perfumes. He ordered
likewise that the Furniture of every House should be plain, strong, and
lasting. Thus the Salentines who loudly complained of their Poverty, began to
be sensible how many superfluous Riches they enjoyed; but those were deceitful
Riches, which made them really poor; and they only became truly Rich, as soon
as they had the Resolution to dispossess themselves of them. It Is the best way,
said they, to grow Rich, by despising such Riches as exhaust the Nation, and
the reducing all our Wants to the true and necessary occasions of Nature.

Mentor was diligent in viewing the Arcenals and public Magazines, to see that
Arms and all other Things necessary in War were in Order. For, said he, we
always must be in readiness to make War, the better to prevent the Misfortune
of being first Attackt. Now havving found a great many Things wanting every
where, he presently assembled Artificers to work Iron, Steel and Brass: You
might have seen burning Furnaces, and Clouds of Fire and Smoke mounting on high
like those substerranean Fires which are vomited up by Mount AEtna. The studdy
Hammer resounded on the Anvil which groaned under the repeated Strokes; the
neighboring Mountains and Seashore ecchoed to 'em; one would have thought
himself to be in that famous Island where Vulcan cheers up his Cyclopes, and
forges Thunderbolts for the Father of the Gods: And by a wise forecast all the
Preparations for a War were making in a profound Peace. Afterward Mentor went
out of the City with Idomeneus, and found a great Tract of fertile Lands lying
waste and uncultivated; others were manured but by halves through the
Negligence and Poverty of the Husbandmen, who wanted more Hands, and bodily
Strength to bring Agriculture to Perfection. Mentor beholding those desolate
Fields, said to the King: This Land is willing to enrich the Inhabitants, but
the Inhabitants are wanting to the Land, and to themselves. Let us therefore
take all the useless Artificers who are in the City, and whose Trade tends only
to debauch Manners, in order to make them till and manure these Plains and high
Grounds. I own its a Misfortune that all those Men who have practiced Arts
which require a sedentary Life, are not inured to hard Labor; but here is a
Remedy for it: We must divide among them all the Lands void of Inhabitants, and
call to their assistance some of the Neighboring People who will undertake the
hardest Work under 'em, provided they allow them a reasonable share in the
Profits of the Lands they shall begin to Plow. Nay, in time they may enjoy a
proportion of those Lands, and being thus incorporated with your People,
provided they be laborious and submissive to the Laws, they will increase your
Power, and prove the best Subjects. Your City-Tradesmen, now transplanted into
the Country, will train up their Children to Labor, and enure them to the Yoke
of a rural Life, and in process of Time, all the Country round about shall be
stocked with strong, vigorous Men, addicted to Husbandry. Now you need not be
sollicitous about the increase of your People; for they will soon multiply to a
Prodigy, if you encourage Matrimony, which you may do with great ease. Most Men
have an Inclination to Marry, and it is generally Want that keeps them from it.
If you do not over-charge 'em with Taxes, they will live at ease with their
Wives and Families; for the Earth is never ungrateful; She always yields Fruits
to sustain those who cultivate her with Care and Diligence, and only denies her
Benefits to those who refuse to bestow their Labor upon her. The more Children
Husbandmen have, the richer they are, provided the Prince study not to make
them Poor; for their Children, even from their tenderest Youth, begin to be a
help to 'em; the youngest tend the Flocks while they are Feeding; those of
riper Years begin to drive the great Droves of Cattle; and the most aged guide
the Ploughhandle with their Father: In the mean time the Mother and all her
Family Dress a course Meal for her Husband, and her dear Children, against they
come home spent with the Toil of the Day. She takes care to Milk her Cows, and
Streams of sweet Liquor fill her cleanly Pails; she lights a great Fire, round
which the innocent and peaceful Family divert themselves with Singing merry
Lays before they go to rest; she gets ready Cheese, Chestnuts, and Fruits that
look as fresh as if new gathered. In the mean time the Shepherd comes home with
his Flute, and Sings to the Family such new Songs as he learnt in the
Neighboring Villages. The Husbandman comes in with his Plough, and goads along
his wearied Oxen, which walk with slow Steps, and bending Necks. All the
Hardships of Labor end with the Day: The kind Poppies which Morpheus, by the
Command of the immortal Gods, scatters all over the Earth, quiet all black
Thoughts, charm and lull Nature into a soft Enchantment, and every one falls
asleep without forecasting the Labors of the next Day. Happy are those Men who
live without Ambition, Distrust, or Disguise, provided the Gods vouchsafe to
give 'em a good King, who never disturbs their innocent Joys. But what a horrid
piece of Cruelty it is, the wresting from their Hands the sweet Fruits of the
Earth, which they owe to the Bounty of Nature, and the sweat of their Brows,
only to gratify the Pride and Ambition of one single Man! Nature alone, out of
her fruitful Bosom is able to maintain an infinite number of thrifty and
laborious Men; but it is the Pride and luxurious Effeminacy of some Men who
reduce so many others to the dreadful pressures of Poverty.

But what shall I do, said Idomeneus, if those Men whom I disperse about a
fruitful Country, neglect to Cultivate it? Follow, answered Mentor, a Method
entirely opposite to that which is generally used by others. Greedy Princes,
who have no Forecast, make it their Business to lay heavy Taxes on such among
their Subjects, who are most Diligent and Industrious in the improving of their
Estates, because they think they can raise those Duties with more ease; and at
the same time they favor and excuse those whom Sloth and Idleness have
Impoverisht. Invert that bad Method, which over-burdens the Good, encourages
Vice, and introduces a supine Negligence no less fatal to the King, than to the
whole State. Impose Taxes, Fines, nay if need be, more rigorous Penalties on
those who neglect the Culture of their Lands; just as you would inflict
Punishments on those Soldiers who quit their Post in War: Grant Favors and
Exemptions to such Families as multiply; and augment in proportion the extent
of their Possessions. By this means their Families will soon increase, and
every Body will be encouraged to Labor; nay, Husbandry being no longer
attended by so many Hardships, will be so far from being despised, that it will
become Honorable; the Plough, now in esteem, shall be guided by those very
Hands that gained Victories over the Enemies of the Country; and the
Cultivating ones own Lands will be no less creditable, during a happy Peace,
than the securing of the same during the Troubles of War. All the Country will
flourish and smile again; Ceres will be crowned with golden Ears of Corn;
Bacchus stamping the Grapes with his Feet, shall cause Streams of Wine more
delicious than Nectar, to glide down the shelving Hills; the hollow Valleys
shall echo to the rural Consorts of Shepherds, who along the grassy Banks of
purling Brooks shall Sing to their Pipes, both their amorous Pains and
Pleasures, whilst their Flocks dancing to the Harmony, shall crop the Grass
enameled with Flowers, secure from the ravenous Wolves. Will it not be a great
happiness for you, Oh! Idomeneus, to be the Spring of so many Blessings, and to
make so many People live in soft repose under the Shadow of your auspicious
Name? Is not this Glory more affecting and more to be coveted, than that of
laying the World waste, and spreading every where (nay even at home, in the
midst of one's Victories, as well as among the Vanquished abroad) Slaughter,
Destruction, Horror, Conesternation, cruel Famine, and Despair? Oh! Happy the
King, who is so beloved of the Gods, and has so large a Soul as to undertake to
make himself the Delight of his People, and show to all Ages the charming and
wondrous Spectacle of his Reign! The whole Earth, instead of shunning his
Power by Fights and Battles, would prostrate her self at his Feet, to beg him
to Rule over her.

But, replied Idomeneus, when my People live thus in Peace and Plenty,
Pleasures will soon corrupt them, and they will bend against me that very Power
I have put into their Hands. Fear not, said Mentor, any such Inconvenience:
That Is but a vain Pretense to flatter the Prodigality of those Princes, who
over-charge their People with Taxes. Besides, there is a Remedy at hand: Those
Laws we have made for Husbandry, will inure them to a laborious Life; and even
in Plenty, they shall have only Necessaries, because we retrench all Arts which
introduce Superfluities. Nay, that Plenty shall be lessened by the freqent
Marriages, and the great increase of Families: For every Family being grown
Numerous, and possessing but a competent Portion of Land, shall be forced to
bestow continual labor upon the Culture of it. It Is Effeminacy and Sloth which
make the People insolent and rebellious. They shall have Bread, I confess; and
Bread in abundance: But then they shall have nothing but Bread, and the Fruits
of their own Land, gotten by the Sweat of their Brows. To keep your People
within that just Moderation, you must at this very time regulate the extent of
Ground which every Family shall be allowed to possess. You know we distributed
all your People into seven Ranks, according to their different Conditions: Now
you must not suffer any Family, of any Degree, to enjoy more Land than is
absolutely necessary for the Maintenance of those Persons who depend upon it.
This being a standing inviolable Rule, the Nobles shall not be able to purchase
from the Poor: All shall have Lands; but every one shall have but a small
Share, and by that means shall be excited to Cultivate it well. If in long
process of time Lands should grow short here, you might send Colonies abroad,
which would increase the Power of this State. Moreover, I think you never ought
to suffer Wine to be too plentiful in your Dominions; if they have planted too
many Vines, command them to be destroyed; for Wine is a main source of the
greatest Mischiefs among the People; it causes Diseases, Quarrels, Seditions,
Idleness and Sloth, and Disorders in Families. Therefore let Wine be preserved
as a kind of Remedy, or as a choice Liquor, to be emply'd only in Sacrifices,
or extraordinay Festivals; yet think not that you can bring so important a Rule
into Practice, unless you recommend it by your own Example. Furthermore, you
must cause the Laws of Minos, concerning the Education of Children, to be
inviolably observed: To which purpose, public Schools ought to be erected,
where they may be taught to fear the Gods, to love their Country, to reverence
the Laws, and to prefer Honor before Pleasures, and Life it self. You must
appoint Magistrates to oversee the Families and Manners of private Persons:
Nay, over-see them your self, since you are King; that is, the Shepherd of the
People, only to watch Night and day over your Flock. By that means you will
prevent a thousand Crimes and Disorders; and what you cannot prevent, you ought
to punish at first with great Severity; for it is a piece of Clemency, by early
and exemplary Punishments, to stem the Tide of Wickedness. A little Blood
spilled in time, saves the Lives of Thousands, and makes a Prince feared
without using Rigor too often. But what a detestable Maxim is it, to make
one's Safety consist in the oppressing of the People? How barbarous is it, not
to instruct them; not to lead them into the Path of Virtue; not to do any thing
to get their Love; to drive them by Terror to Despair; and finally, to impose
this dreadful Necessity upon 'em, either never to breath in sweet Liberty, or
to shake off a Tyrant's Yoke? What Name can one give to such a Government? Is
this the Way that leads to Honor? Remember, that where ever the Command of the
Prince is most absolute, there the Prince is least powerful. He takes all,
consumes all, and enjoys alone the whole State; but then the whole State is in
a languishing Condition; the Country is uncultivated and desolate; the Cities
decrease, and Trade decays every day. The King, who cannot be a King by
himself, and who is only so by his Subjects, annihilates himself by degrees,
while he annihilates his People from whom both his Riches and Power are
derived; his Kingdom is exhausted of Money and Men, and the loss of these is the
greatest and the most irreparable. His despotick Power makes as many Slaves as
he has Subjects; they all seem to adore him, whereas they only tremble at his
dreadful Looks. But see what will happen at the least Revolution; this
monstrous Power, scrued up to a violent Excess, can hold out no longer, she
finds no Supplies in the Affections of the People, she has wearied and provoked
all the different Ranks of Men in his State, and by that means forces every
Member of that Body to sigh with equal earnestness after a Change. At the very
first blow which is made at her, the Idol is thrown down, and trampled under
Foot: Contempt, Hatred, Fear, Resentment, Distrust; in a word, all the Passions
unite themselves against so odious an Authority. The King, who during his vain
Prosperity, could find no Man that durst speak the Truth to him, shall not find
in his Misfortune any one Man that will either excuse his Follies, or defend
him against his Enemies.

These and the like Discourses of Mentor, having prevailed upon Idomeneus, he
presently distributed the waste Lands among the useless Artificers, and put in
execution what had been resolved before. And now the Fields which had long been
o're-spread with Briars and Thorns, begin to promise plentiful Harvests, and
Fruits till then unknown. The Earth opens her Bosom to receive the cutting
Plow-share, and prepares her Riches to recompense the Labor of the
Husbandman. Hope revives and smiles on every side: You might see both in the
Valleys, and on the Hills, numerous Flocks of Sheep, skipping and bleeting on
the Grafs, and great Herds of larger Cattle, which make the high Mountains
resound with their Bellowings. Those Flocks and Herds fatten in the Fields and
Meadows; it is Mentor who has found the way to procure them, by advising
Idomeneus to exchange with the neighboring Nations all the superfluous Things,
which are now prohibited in Salenta, for those Sheep, Cows, and Oxen, which the
Salentines wanted.

At the same time both the Cities and Villages round about were full of fine
sprightly Youths, who for a long time had languish'd in Misery, and were afraid
to marry lest they should aggravate their Woes: But when they saw that
Idomeneus began to embrace Sentiments of Humanity, and was willing to become
their Father, they were no more afraid of Hunger, nor of the other Plagues with
which Heaven afflicts Mankind. There were heard every where great Shoutings for
Joy; the Shepherds and Plow-men celebrated the Hymeneal Pleasures in their
rural Songs; so that one would have thought, that the God Pan with a Chorus of
Satrys, Fauns, and Nymphs danced to the soft sound of the Flute in the Shady
Woods. All was peaceful and smiling; but 'twas a moderate Joy; and as those
Pleasures served obly to allay the Hardships of daily Labor, so they were more
quick, and more sensible. The Old Men surpised to see what they did not so
much as hope for, during the long series of their Years, wept through an excess
of Joy mixed with Tenderness; and lifting up their trembling Hands toward
Heaven: Bless, said they, Bless, Oh! great Jupiter! the King who resembles
thee, and is the greatest King thou ever made. As he is born for the good of
Mankind, return him all the good we receive from him. Our Great-grand-sons
sprung from those happy Marriages which he encourages, shall be indebted to
him, even for their very Brith; and he will truly be the Father of all his
Subjects. The young Men and Maidens who married together, expressed their mutual
Joys, in singing the Praises of him who was the Fountain of those Joys' every
Mouth, every Heart were continually filled with his Praises. The sight of him
was accounted a great Happiness; his absence a Misfortune; and the losing of
him, had been the Desolation of all Families.

Thereupon Idomeneus confessed to Mentor, that he never felt so trus and sensible
a Pleasure, as that of being beloved, and making so many People happy. I could
not, said he, have believed what I now see: I thought all the Greatness of
Princes consisted only in making themselves to be feared; that the rest of
Mankind were all made for them: And I looked upon it as a mere Fable, whatever
I had heard of those Kings, who were the Delight and Darlings of their People:
I now find the Truth of it, but I must relate to you how, from my tenderest
Infancy, my Mind was intoxicated with the Authority of Kings, which was the
cause of all the Misfortunes of my Life.

Protesilaus, who is something older than my self, was, of all others, the
young Man whom I loved most; his lively and bold Temper suited with my
Inclinations; he insinuated himself into my Pleasures and Diversions; flattered
all my Passions, and gave me a distrust of another young Man, whom I loved
also, and whose Name was Philocles. This Philocles feared the Gods, and had a
great Soul, but full of Moderation: He placed Greatness not in raising, but in
conquering himself, and doing nothing that is Base and Ungenerous. He told me of
my Faults with freedom; and even when he durst not speak to me, his very Looks,
and sed Countenance, gave me susficiently to understand what he had a mind to
reproach me with: I was well enough pleased at first with his Sincerity; and I
often assured him, that I would ever hear him in Confidence as long as I lived.
To secure me against Flatteries, he told me all I ought to do, to tread in the
Footsteps of Minos, and to make my Subjects happy; his Wisdom was not so deep
as yours, Oh Mento! but I now find by degrees, that his Maxims were good. The
cunning Insinuations of Protesilaus, who was Jealous and full of Ambition, gave
me a disgust for Philocles: Philocles being indifferent, and free from towering
Thoughts, suffered the other to get the Ascendant, and contented himself with
telling me the Truth, when I was willing to hear it; for 'twas my Good, and not
my Fortune that he sought. Protesilaus made me insensibly believe, that
Philocles was a morose and proud Censurer of all my Actions; who asked no
Favors of me, because his Pride would not suffer him to be beholden to me; and
that he courted the Reputation of one that is above all Honors that I was able
to bestow. He added, that he spoke as freely about my Faults with other People,
as he did with my self; that he gave sufficiently to understand, what a small
Esteem he had for me; and that his lessening my Reputation, was a Design to
open himself a Way to the Throne, by the show of a rigid Virtue. At first I was
unwilling to think, that Philocles designed to usurp my Crown; for there is a
certain Candor and Ingenuity in true Virtue, which cannot be counterfeited,
and which cannot be mistaken, if considered with attention: Yet I begun to grow
wary of Philocles's Obstinacy in condemning my Weakness. The soft complaisance
of Protesilaus, and his unexhausted Industry in inventing new Pleasures to
entertain me, made me feel more impatiently the Austerity of his Rival. In the
mean time Protesilaus being vexed that I did not believe all he told me against
Philocles, resolved to speak no more to me about him, and to use something
stronger than all his Words to persuade me. Take notice how he completed his
Treachery. He advised me to give Philocles the Command of the Ships which I
sent out to attack those of Carpathia; and to induce me to it, he told me: You
know my Commendations cannot be suspected of Partiality: I own he has Courage,
and understands the War; he will serve you best of any Man, and I easily forego
my Resentments against him, when your Service lies at stake. I was glad to find
so much Honesty and Justice in Protesilaus, whom I had entrusted with the
Administration of my Affairs of the greatest importance: I embraced him
transported with Joy, and thought my self too happy, in having reposed all my
Confidence in a Man, who seemed to be so much above Passion and Interest. But
alas! How much Princes are to be pitied! This Man knew me better than I do my
self. He knew that Kings are generally distrustful, and unattentive:
Distrustful by their continual experience of the Artifice of those corrupt Men
that are about them; Unattentive, because they are hurried away by the Torrent
of Pleasures, and used to have Men, whose Business it is to make Reflections
and Observations for them, without being at the trouble of it themselves.
Therefore Protesilaus easily understood that it would be no hard matter for him
to make me jealous of a Man who would undoubtedly perform great Actions,
especially while his Absence gave him so fair an Opportunity of undermining him.

Before Philocles put to Sea, he foresaw what was like to befall him. Remember,
said he to me, that it shall be no longer in my Power to justify my self; that
my Enemy alone shall have your Ear, and that while I expose my Life for your
Service, I run the hazard of being recompensed with your Indignation. You are
mistaken, said I to him, Protesilaus speaks not of you, as you do of him; nay
rather, he commends you, he has a value for you, and thinks you worthy of the
most important Employments; if ever he offers to speak against you, he shall
lose that Trust I repose in him, therefore fear him not, and only take care to
serve me well. He went away, and I must now confess, he left me in a strange
disorder: I plainly saw how necessary it was for me to have several Persons to
consult with; and that nothing was more prejudicial, either to my Reputation,
or the success of my Undertakings, than the trusting one single Man. I found
that the wise Counsels of Philocles had kept me from committing many dangerous
Faults, into which the Haughtiness of Protesilaus would have hurried me. I was
sensible that Philocles's Mind was adorned with Honesty and equitable
Principles, which I did not find in Protesilaus, whom by this time I had
suffered to assume so peremptory a Tone with me, that I was no more able to
contradict him almost in any thing. I was weary of being continually betwixt
two Men, whom I could not bring to agree together; and this Lassitude and my
Weakness made me choose to hazard something at the Expense of my affairs, that I
might enjoy my self at liberty. I would have concealed from my very self, the
shameful Reason of that Course I had embraced; but that same shameful Reason,
which I was afraid to discover, workt secretly in the bottom of my Heart, and
was the Motive of all I did. Philocles defeated the Enemy, gained a full
Victory, and hastened his Return, in order to prevent the Ill Offices he feared
from his Rival; but Protesilaus, who had not yet deceived me, wrote to him,
that my Desire was, he should follow his Victory, and make a Descent into the
Island of Carpathia; for he persuaded me, I might easily make my self Master of
that Island. But he ordered it so, that Philocles wanted many necessary things
for his Undertaking; and tied him up with such Orders, as occasioned many
Disappointments in the execution of it. In the mean time he made use of a
corrupt and treacherous Servant of mine, who observed every thing I did, and
acquainted him with it, although they seemed to speak seldom to one (...) and
ever to be at odds. This Servant ( Timocrates by Name) came to me one day, and
told me as a great Secret, That he had discovered a very dangerous Business.
Philocles, said he, designs to make use of your Sea-Forces, to make himself
King of the Isle of Carpathia; the Captains of those Troops are his Creatures,
and all the Soldiers are corrupted by his Donatives, and much more by the
pernicious Licentiousness which he allows in them. He is elevated with his
Victory; here is a Letter he writ to one of his Friends, about his Project of
making himself King; so evident a Proof puts the Thing out of all doubt. I
perused the Letter, which seemed to be writ by Philocles; for Protesilaus and
Timocrates, who made this Forgery, had perfectly imitated his Hand. That Letter
cast me into a strange surprise; I read it over and over, and could not be
persuaded it was writ by Philocles, whilst I reviewed in my distracted Mind,
all the sensible Demonstratious he had given me of his (...) he had given me of
his Dsinterestedness and Honesty. However, what could I do? How could I
contradict a Letter, which I acknowledged to be Philocles's Hand? When (...)
perceived I could no longer resist his Artifice, he still carried it on
further: Shall I dare, said he to me, with a (...) Voice, to put you in mind of
a Word in this Letter? Philocles tells his Friends, that he may speak in
confidence to Protesilaus, about a thing which he only marks by a Cipher:
Certainly Protesilaus must be privy to the Design of Philocles; it is
Protesilaus who pressed you to send Philocles against the Carpathians; from a
certain time he speaks no more to you against him as he used to do; nay, on the
contrary, he cries him up, he encourages him upon all occasions, and they often
pay one another civil Visits. Without doubt Protesilaus has taken his Measures
with Philocles, in order to share with him the Conquest of Carpathia: You may
see your self how he put you upon this Enterprise against all Reason, and cares
not to expose all your Naval Forces, to gratify his Ambition. Do you think he
would thus be subservient to Philocles towering Thoughts, if they were still at
odds? No, no; there is no question, but those two Men are reconciled, and have
joined Interests to ascend the Throne together; nay, perhaps to dispossess you
of your own. I know, by speaking thus freely to you, I expose my self to their
Resentment, if, not withstanding my sincere Information, you still leave your
Authority in their Hands; But what care I, as long as I tell you nothing but
Truth?

These last Words of Timocrates left a deep Impression in me: I called no more
Philocles's Treachery into question, and begun to distrust Protesilaus, as one
that was his Friend. In the mean time Timocrates told me continually, if you
stay till Philocles has made himself Master of the Isle of Carpathia, it will
then be too late to put a stop to his Designs; therefore make haste to secure
him whilst he is yet in your Power. I shook with horror at the deep
Dissimulation of Men, and knew no more whom to trust; for having discovered
Philocles's Treachery, I did not see one Man upon the face of the whole Earth,
whose Virtue was able to dispel my Fears. I was resolved to punish that
perfidious Man without delay; but I was afraid of Protesilaus, and knew not
what Measures to keep with him: I feared to find him guilty, and likewise I
feared to trust him. At last, being in this disorder, I could not forbear
telling him that I was grown Jealous of Philocles. He seemed surpised at it,
and represented to me how honest, upright, and moderate his Conduct had been;
he exaggerated his Services; in short, he managed the Matter so well, that I
was persuaded of their Intelligence. On the other side, Timocrates improved
every Circumstance to make me sensible of their good Understanding, and induce
me to ruin Philocles, while it was yet in my Power to secure him. Mark, dear
Mentor! mark the Unhappiness of Princes, and how they are exposed to be made
the Property of other Men, even when they lie trembling at their Feet. I
thought it was a piece of deep Policy, to break Protesilaus's Measures, sending
privately Timocrates to the Fleet with Orders to dispatch Philocles out of the
way. Protesilaus carried on his Dissembling to the last, and deceived me so
much the better, as he looked like one who suffers himself to be deceived.
Timocrates put to Sea, and found Philocles hard put to it at the intended
Descent: He wanted every thing; for Protesilaus not knowing whether the
supposed Letter was sufficient to ruin his Enemy, contrived at the same time
another Plot, to wit, the ill success of an Enterprise which he had so much
cried up, and which would not fail to provoke me against Philocles. This
innocent Man maintained so difficult a War by his Courage, his Policy, and the
Affection the Soldiers had for him. Although all the Army was sensible that
this Descent was rashly undertaken, and would prove fatal to the Cretans; yet
all endeavored to carry it on, as if their Lives and Happiness had depended
upon the success of it; and every one was contented to venture his Life upon
all Occasions under so wise a General, and one who always studied to make
himself beloved. Timocrates exposed himself to an eminent Danger, by attempting
to make away with that Chief, in the middle of an Army who loved him so
passionately; but being blinded by Ambition, he found nothing difficult whilst
he endeavored to please Protesilaus, with whom he expected to share the
absolute Management of Affairs after the death of Philocles. Protesilaus could
not endure a good Man, whose very sight secretly reproached him with his
Crimes; and who, by opening my Eyes, might frustrate all his ambitious Designs.
Timocrates engaged two Captains who were continually near Philocles's Person,
and promised them great Rewards from me: Afterward he told Philocles, That he
came to deliver to him a secret Message from me, which he was ordered not to
disclose but in the Presence of those two Captains. Philocles having locked
himself in with them, Timocrates pulled out a Dagger and stabbed him; but, as
Fortune ordered it, the Blow was slanting, and did not go deep. Philocles, with
undauneed Courage, wrested the Dagger out of his Hand, and used it against him,
and the other two: At the same time he cried out for help; those without run to
the Door, and having broke it open, disengaged Philocles from the Hands of
those three Men, who being presently disordered, had attacked him but faintly.
They were disarmed and seized; and such was the Fury and Indignation of the
Army, that they would have torn them in pieces in an instant, had not Philocles
stopped the Multitude. Afterward he took Timocrates aside, and asked him calmly,
Who had engaged him to commit so black a Deed? Timocrates, who feared Death,
showed him instantly the Order I gave him in writing to dispatch Philocles; and
as all Traitors are Cowards, he bethought himself of saving his Life by
revealing to Philocles Protesilaus's Treachery. Philocles amazed and frighted
to find so much Malice in Men, followed a wise Resolution; he declared to the
Army, That Timocrates was innocent; and having secured him from their Violence,
sent him back to Crete. Afterward he resigned the Command of the Army to
Polimenes, whom I appointed in my written Order, to Command after Philocles was
killed. Last of all he exhorted the Troops to remain faithful to their Duty to
me, and in the Nightime went over to the Isle of Samos in a small Bark. There
he lives retired in peaceful Poverty, making Statues to get his Sustenance, and
abhorring to hear any Body speak of unjust and treacherous Men, especially
Princes, who of all Mortals are the most unhappy and most blind. At these
words, Mentor stopping Idomeneus, Well, said he, Was it long before you
discovered the Truth? No, answered Idomeneus; I found out by degrees the
Artifices of Protesilaus and Timocrates: They fell out a little while after;
for wicked Men are seldom long united. By their Division, I perceived the Abyss
into which they had precipitated me. Well, said Mentor, did you not then
resolve to rid your self of either of them? Alas! Dear Mentor, are you ignorant
how weak and perplexed Princes are? When they have once given up themselves to
Men who have the Art of making themselves necessary, they can no longer hope
for Liberty. Those whom they despise most, are those whom they use best, and on
whom they bestow their Favors; I abhorred Protesilaus, and yet I left all my
Authority in his Hands. Oh! unaccountable Illusion! I was pleased with my self,
because I knew him, but my Weakness would not suffer me to re-take my Power
from him. Besides, I found him easy, complaisant, industrious in gratifying my
Passions, zealous for my Service; in short, I found Reasons to excuse my
Weakness to my self. My being unacquainted with true Virtue, (for want of
choosing good Ministers to manage my Affairs) made me believe there was no such
thing on Earth, and that Honesty was but a mere Chimera. Why, said I to my
self, should I be at the Pains of getting out of the Hands of one corrupt Man,
to fall into those of another, who shall be neither more free from
Self-Interest, nor more sincere than he?

In the mean time the Fleet commanded by Polimenes, returned: I laid aside the
Thoughts of conquering the Island of Carpathia; and Protesilaus could not
dissemble so well, but that I did discover how much he was vexed to hear that
Philocles was safe in the Isle of Samos. Mentor interrupted Idomeneus once
more, and asked him, Whether after so black a Treachery, he had continued
Protesilaus in the Administration of his Affairs? I was, answered Idomeneus,
too great an Enemy to Business, and too much distracted by Pleasures, as to be
able to get out of his Hands. I must have broke the Method I had established
for my own Ease, and given Instructions to a new Minister; this I had not the
Resolution to undertake, and so I chose to wink at the Artifices of
Protesilaus; only I comforted my self, with letting some of my intimate Friends
understand, that I was not unacquainted with his Dishonesty. Thus I thought I
was cheated but by halves, as long as I knew I was cheated. Nay, I now and then
made Protesilaus sensible of my being uneasy under his Yoke; I was often
pleased in contradicting him, in blaming publicly some of his Actions, and in
deciding Matters against his Opinion; but being acquainted with my Supinity and
Sloth, he was little troubled at my Disgusts, and pursued his Point with
Obstinacy. Sometimes he used pressing, imperious Ways, and sometimes supple and
fawning Insinuations. But chiefly when he perceived I was angry with him, he
redoubled his Endeavors to furnish me with new Amusements which he thought
might soften me, or engage me in some Affair, wherein he might be necessary,
and make his Zeal for my Reputation appear: And, though I stood upon my Guard
against him, yet this way of flattering my Passions, did daily ensnare me. He
knew all my Secrets, he comforted me in my Troubles: He made the whole Nation
tremble by the Power he usurped from me: In fine, I could not think of ruining
him, but rather of maintaining him in his Post; I put all honest Men out of
capacity of showing me my true Interest; and after that very moment no Man
durst freely give me his Advice. All Truth was fled far from me; but Error,
which is the forerunner of the fall of Princes, star'd me in the Face, and I
plainly saw how much I was to blame to sacrifice Philocles to the cruel
Ambition of Protesilaus: Those very Men who were most zealous for the
Government, and my Person, did not think themselves obliged to undeceive me.
After so dreadful an Example, I my self, dear Mentor, was afraid lest Truth
should pierce through the Cloud, and reach my sight in spite of all my
Flatterers; for wanting Resolution to follow it, its Light became troublesome
to me; and I was sensible that it would have raised cruel Remorses within me,
without freeing me from so fatal an Engagement. My Easiness, and the Ascendent
which Protesilaus had gained over me, made me almost despair of ever recovering
my Liberty. I was unwilling either to behold my wretched State, or to discover
it to others; for you know, dear Mentor, that the vain Pride and false Glory,
wherein Princes are brought up, will not suffer 'em ever to be in the wrong. To
palliate a Fault, they make a hundred; rather than own they have been deceived,
and give themselves the trouble of forsaking their Error, they will suffer
themselves to be deceived all their Lives long. This is the State of weak and
inadvertent Princes; and it was exactly my own. When it was absolutely
necessary that I should go to the Siege of Troy, at my departure I left
Protesilaus my chief Minister of State, who in my absence ruled with
Haughtiness and Inhumanity: The whole Kingdom of Crete groaned under his
Tyranny; but no body durst tell me how the People were oppressed: They knew
that I was afraid to know the Truth, and that I left all those to the Cruelty
of Protesilaus, who durst attempt to speak against him. But the more it was
concealed, the more violent was the Evil. He constrained me to throw off the
valiant Merione, who had followed me with so much Honor to the Siege of Troy.
At my return he grew jealous of him and of all those whom I loved, and in whom
appeard'd any sign of Virtue. You must know, my dear Mentor, that thence all my
Misfortunes had their rise. 'Twas not so much the death of my Son that caused
the Cretans to revolt, as the Vengeance of the Gods irritated against my
Weakness, and the Hatred of the People which Protesilaus had drawn upon me:
When I spilt the Blood of my Son, the Cretans, now weary of a rigorous
Government, had lost all Patience, and the horror of this Action did only
openly show what had long lain hidden in the bottom of their Hearts. Timocrates
followed me to the Siege of Troy, and by private Letters gave Protesilaus an
account of all that he could pry into. I plainly perceived that I was in
slavery, but I endeavored not to think of it, despairing to remedy it. When
the Cretans revolted at my Arrival, Protesilaus and Timocrates were the first
who fled; and had doubtless left me, had I not been obliged to fly almost as
soon as they. Know, my dear Mentor, that insolent Men in the time of Prosperity
are ever weak, and in disgrace; they grow giddy and faint-hearted as soon as
ever absolute Power forsakes 'em; they are then as abject as they are haughty,
and, in one moment, they pass from one extreme to another.

Said Mentor to Idomeneus, But how comes it then, that knowing these two wicked
Men to the very bottom, you should still entertain 'em near you, as I see you
do? I don't wonder that they followed you, since they could do no otherwise for
their own safety; and I believe that you have been so generous as to give 'em a
Refuge in your new Settlement; but why will you again betray your self to 'em
after such dear experience of them? You don't know, said Idomeneus, how useless
all Experiences are to easy and inadvertent Princes, who live without
Reflection; they are discontented with every Thing, and yet have not the
Courage to redress any Thing. The Habit of so many Years continuance, is as so
many Iron-Fetters that chained me to these tow Men; they beset me every Hour;
and since I have been here, they have put me upon all these excessive Expenses
that you see: They have lost this growing State; they drew this War upon me,
which had inevitably ruined me without you; I should soon have found the same
Misfortunes at Salenta that I felt in Crete; but you have at last opened my
Eyes, and you have inspired me with the Courage which I wanted to throw off
this Slavery: I don't know what you have wrought within me, but since you have
been here, I find my self quite another Man.

Mentor then asked Idomeneus how Protesilaus had behaved himself in this change
of Affairs. No Man with more artifice, replied Idomeneus, since your arrival
here: He has not omitted the least occasion to fill any Soul with unjust
Suspicions. It Is true he said nothing against you, but several others buzzed in
my Ears that these two Strangers ought to be narrowly inspected: One of 'em,
said he, is the Son of the grand Deceiver Ulysses, and the other is a decrepid
Man, and of deep Thought; they are used to wander about from Kingdom to
Kingdom, and who knows but they have hatched some Design against this? These
great Adventurers relate themselves that they have caused great Troubles in all
the Countries they have past through; and ours is but a growing State, and scarce
yet settled, so that the least Commotion may overturn it. Protesilaus said
nothing, but he endeavored to make me perceive the Danger and Extravagance of
all these Reformations that you make me attempt: He attacked me with my own
proper Interest: If, said he, you let the People live in plenty, the'l work no
more, but will grow Fierce, Indocile, and ever ready to Revolt; it is only
Weakness and Misery that makes 'em humble, and that hinders 'em from disturbing
the Government: He has often endeavored to resume his former Authority, to
hurry me away, covering it with your desire of easing the pretense of his Zeal
to serve me. The People, said he, derogate from the Regal Power, and by that
you will do the People themsemlves an irreparable Injury. For there is a
necessity that they should always be kept low for their own quiet and safety.
To all which I answered, That I knew how to keep the People in their Duty to
me, by making my self beloved by 'em, and not remit any thing of my
Prerogative, though I did ease 'em: In short, by giving the Children good
Education, and an exact Discipline to all the People, to keep 'em in a plain
course of life, sober and laborious. How! said I, are not the People to be kept
in subjection without starving'em to death? What Inhumanity is this! what
brutish Policy! How many People do we see governed with a gentle hand, and yet
Loyal to their Princes? That which causes Revolts is the Ambition and
Restlessness of the Grandees of a State, when once they have got too great a
Liberty, suffering their Passions to pass all due Bounds. It Is the multitude of
great and little, who live at Ease, in Luxury, and in Laziness: It Is the too
great abundance of Military Men, who have neglected all useful Employments,
which they should take upon'em in the time of Peace: In short, it is the Despair
of a People ill-treated; it is the Severity, the Haughtiness of Princes, and
their Indulgence of themselves, that makes 'em incapable of watching over every
Member of the State to prevent any Truoble. See here now what causes Revolts?
It Is not the Bread which the Labourer is suffered to eat in Peace, after he has
got it by the Sweat of his Brow. When Protesilaus saw that I was unshaken in
these Maxims, he took a quite contrary course to his former practices, and
began to observe those Maxims he could not destroy: He seemed to Relish 'em, to
be convinced by 'em, and to own himself obliged to me for making 'em so obvious
to him; and obviates all my Wishes to ease the Poor: He is the first that
represents their Grievances to me, and that cries out against extravagant
Expenses; you know your self he praises you, that he seems to have great
confidence in you, and that he omits nothing that may please you. Timocrates
indeed, begins not to stand so well with Protesilaus, and thinks to be
independent on any body but himself: Protesilaus is jealous of him, and it is
partly through their difference that I have discovered their perfidy.

Mentor smiling, replied thus to Idomeneus: What then if you have been so weak
as even to suffer your self to be tyrannized over for so many Years, by two
Traitors, whose Treasons you were acquainted with? Alas! (cried Idomeneus) you
do not know what Men of Artifice can work on a weak Prince, who has delivered
himself up to them, in the management of all his Affairs. I told you besides,
that nevertheless Protesilaus approves all the Projects for the Public good.
Mentor resumed the Discourse with a great deal of gravity, and said, I see but
too well how much the Wicked prevail against the Good, especially among
Princes, of which you are a sad Example: But you tell me, I have opened your
Eyes as to Protesilaus, and yet they are so far shut, as to leave the
management of the Government to this Man who is unworthy to live. Know, that
wicked Men are not incapable of doing good; it is equally the same thing to them
as to do ill, when they can serve their Ambition. It costs 'em nothing to do
ill; because no thought of Goodness, nor any Principle of Virtue does restrain
'em; but just so they do well, because the Corruption of their Nature leads 'em
to it, that they may seem good, so to deceive the rest of Mankind. To speak
properly, they are not capable of Virtue, though they seem to act by its
Principles; but they are capable of adding to all other Vices the most horrible
of all Vices, which is Hypocrisy. As long as you steadfastly resolve to do
good, Protesilaus will be ready to do good with you, to preserve his Authority;
but if he perceives the least lapse from it in you, he will forget nothing that
may make you fall again into your Errors, and freely to resume his natural
Deceit and Ferocity. Can you live in Honor and Quiet as long as such a Man
haunts you Day and Night, and as long as you know the faithful Philocles, poor
and disgraced in the Isle of Samos? O Idomeneus! you know well enough, that the
Bold and Deceitful Men, when present, ensnare weak Princes: And you ought to
add, That Princes have yet another Unhappiness no whit inferior, which is,
easily to forget Virtue, and the Services of a Man at a distance. The Multitude
of Men who crowd on Princes, is the Reason that there is not one among 'em who
can make any deep impression on them; they are not touched but by what is
present, and by that which flatters 'em; all the rest is soon defaced. Upon the
whole, Virtue touches 'em but little; because, Virtue, far from flattering 'em,
contradicts 'em, and condemns their weakness in them. Can we wonder that they
are not beloved, when they do not deserve it, and love nothing but their
Greatness and Pleasures?

After having thus spoken, Mentor persuaded Idomeneus, that he should turn out
Protesilaus and Timocrates, and recall Philocles. That which most stuck with
the King as to this was, That he feared the Severity of Philocles. I must
confess, said he, I cannot choose but be a little fearful of his return, though I
love and esteem him; but I have ever since my Infancy, been accustomed to be
praised. to Courtship, and to Complainsance, which I cannot hope to find from
this Man. Whenever I did any thing that he disliked, his sorrowful Countenance
sufficiently assured me that he condemned me. When he was in private with me,
his Maxims were full of respect and moderation, but harsh.

Don't you see, said Mentor, that Princes who are spoiled by Flattery, think
every thing harsh and austere that is free and ingenuous; they are grown so
nice, that every thing that is not Flattery offends and provokes 'em. But let
us go yet a little further: I grant that Philocles is really Harsh and Austere;
but is not his Austerity better than the pernicious Flattery of your
Counselors? Where will you find a Man without Faults? And ought not you to
fear the Fault of one who tells you the Truth a little too freely? What do I
say? Is not this a Fault necessary to the Correction of yours, and to cure the
loathing of Truth which Flattery has begot in you? You want a Man who loves
nothing but Truth, and who loves you better than you know how to love your
self; who dare, and will tell you unpleasing Truths; who will press upon all
your Retirements; and this necessary Man is Philocles. Remember that Prince is
too happy, when but only one Man of such greatness of Mind is Born in his
Reign, who is the most valuable Treasure of his Kingdom; and that the greatest
Punishment he ought to fear from the Gods, is to be deprived of him, if he
renders himself unworthy, for want of knowing how to make use of him. As to the
Faults of Good Men, he ought to be acquainted with 'em, and nevertheless make
use of their Service: Redress those Faults, deliver not your self blindly up to
their indiscreet Zeal, but favorably hear 'em; honor their Virtue; show the
Public that you know how to distinguish it; and above all, take great care
that you be not like those Princes, who only despising corrupt Men, do not
however fail to employ and entrust 'em, and to heap kindnesses on 'em; and who
pretending to know virtuous Men, give 'em nothing but empty Praises, not
desiring to trust 'em in any Employments, nor to admit 'em into their familiar
Conversation, nor to bestow any Favors on them. Idomeneus then owned, that he
was ashamed he had so long delayed the deliverance of oppressed Innocence, and
the Punishment of those who had abused him: Immediately therefore he gave
private Orders to Hegesippus, who was one of the principal Officers of the
Household, to seize Protesilaus and Timocrates, and to carry 'em guarded to the
Isle of Samos, and to leave 'em there, and to bring back Philocles from that
place of Exile. Hegesippus, surpised at these Orders, could not forbear
weeping for Joy. It Is now this moment, said he to the King, that you are going
to charm your Subjects: For these two Men have caused all your Misfortunes as
well as those of your People: These Twenty Years have all good Men groaned
under 'em; and 'twas dangerous too to be heard to groan; so cruel is their
Tyranny, they oppress all those who endeavor to go to you by any other way but
by them. Afterward Hegesippus discovered a great many Treacheries and Acts of
Inhumanity, committed by these two Men, of which the King never had Information
before, because no body durst accuse 'em: He gave him besides, an Account of
what he had discovered of a Conspiracy against Mentor. The King heard all with
Horror; in the mean while Hegesippus hastened to go take Protesilaus in his
House: It was not so large, nor so commodious, nor so pleasant as the King's,
but the Architecture was of a better Model; and Protesilaus had adorned it with
a great deal of Cost, drawn from the Blood of those whom he had made miserable.
Protesilaus was at that time in a Parlour of Marble near his Baths, lying
carelessly on a Bed of Purple, embroidered with Gold: He seemed weary and spent
with his Labors: His Eyes and Eyebrows discovered an unusual kind of
disorder, and sullen Wildness: The Chief of the Kingdom sat ranged about him
on Carpets, and composed their Looks to those of Protesilaus, which they
observed, even to the twinkling of an Eye: Scarce could he open his Mouth, ere
all of them were ready to extol with Admiration what he was going to say. One
of the principal of the Company repeated to him with ridiculous Exaggerations,
what he had done for the King. Another told him that Jupiter having deceived
his Mother, gave Life to him, and that he was Son to the Father of the Gods.
Among the rest a Poet sung Verses to him, wherein he recited that Protesilaus
being Instructed by the Muses, equaled Apollo in every performance of Wit;
another Poet more Fauning and Impudent, called him in his Verses the Inventor
of the Liberal Sciences, and the Father of the People, whom he made happy; and
described him holding the Horn of Plenty in his Hand. Protesilaus hearkened to
these Praises with a surly Look, distorted and disdainful, like one who knows
well enough that he deserves them, and yet far greater, and who condescends too
much in suffering himself to be praised. There was another Flatterer who took
the liberty to tell him in his Ear some pleasant Thing against the Regulations
Mentor endeavored to establish, at which Protesilaus smiled; and then the
whole Assembly fell a Laughing, tho the greatest part could not yet know what
was said; but Protesilaus resuming his severe and haughty Air, every one of 'em
put on their former dread, and became Silent. These Noblemen often watched the
happy Opportunity when Protesilaus would cast his Eye toward 'em and hear 'em,
appearing mute and disordered, because they had some Favors to beg of him:
Their dejected Postures spoke for 'em, and they seemed as submissive as a
Mother at the foot of an Altar, when she begs of the Gods that her only Son may
be restored to his Health. Every one appeared contented, full of Tenderness and
Admiration of Protesilaus, tho they all had entertained an implacable hatred of
him in their Hearts. In this very Moment enters Hegesippus, seizes his Sword,
and tells him that he is come to carry him to the Isle of Samos. At these
Words, all the Loftiness of Protesilaus fell down like a Rock that breaks off
from the top of a sharp-pointed Mountain: Now he throws himself trembling at
the Feet of Hegesippus; he cries, he faulters, he stammers, he quakes, he
embraces the Knees of this Man, whom not an Hour since he would not vouchsafe
to Honor so much as with a Look: All those who had but just now Worshipped him,
seeing him irrecoverably lost, turned their Flatteries into bitter and pitiless
Mockeries; and Hegesippus would not allow him so much time as either, to take
his last Farewell of his Wife and Family, or to fetch some private Writings; but
all were seized and carried to the King. At the same time too Timocrates was
Arrested, to his great Amazement; for having fallen out with Protesilaus he
thought he could not be involved in his Ruin. They set out then in a Vessel
prepared for that purpose, and arrived at Samos, where Hegesippus left these
two miserable Wretches, and to complete their Misery he left 'em together.
There, with the greatest Rage, they reproached one another with the Crimes they
had committed, which now were the cause of their Fall. They were now past hope
of ever seeing Salenta more, condemned to live far from their Wives and
Children, I cannot say far from their Friends; for they had none. They were then
in an unknown Land, where they had no means of Living but by their Labor: They
who had passed so many Years in Delicacies and Pride, were now, like wild
Beasts, always ready to tear one another a Pieces.

In the mean time Hegesippus inquired in what part of the Isle Philocles dwelt:
He was told that he lived a great way from the Town upon a Mountain, where a
Cave served him for an House. All the Inhabitants spoke to him with Admiration
of this Stranger: Never since he has been in this Isle, said they to him, has
he offended any Body. Every Man wonders at his Patience, his Labor and Peace
of Mind; since, having nothing, he seems always Contented; and tho he be here
far from Business, without Wealth and without Authority, he ceases not however
to oblige those who deserve it, and finds a Thousand ways to do all his
Neighbors some Service.

Hegesippus went up toward this Grotto, which he found empty and and open; for
the Poverty and plain Manners of Philocles, obliged him to no necessity of
shutting his Door when he went out. A Matt of Rushes served him instead of a
Bed: He seldom kindled a Fire, because he never eat any Thing dressed: All the
Summer he lived upon Fruits newly gathered; and in the Winter upon Dates and
dry Figs. A clear Spring of Water distilling from a Rock, served to quench his
Thirst. He had nothing in his Grotto but Instruments necessary for Carving, and
some few Books which he read at certain Hours; not to adorn his Mind, nor to
satisfy his Curiosity, but to instruct him at his spare Hours, and to learn to
be Good. He applied himself to this Art, only to exercise his Body, and to get
a Livelihood, that he might not be beholding to any Person. Hegesippus entering
the Grotto, could not but admire the Works that he had begun; he observed a
Jupiter, whose serene Countenance was so full of Majesty, that he might easily
be known for the Father of the Gods and Men; on another side appeared Mars with
a dreadful and menacing Fierceness: But what was most livelily represented, was
a Minerva, who gave Life to these Arts; her Countenance was noble and sweet,
her Port lofty and free; she was in a Posture so nearly imitating Life, that
one might believe that she would immediately Walk. Hegesippus having delighted
himself with the sight of these Statues, came out of the Grotto, and at some
distance off, under a large Tree, he saw Philocles Reading on the Grass. He
went directly toward him; and Philocles who perceived him, knew not what to
think. Is not that Hegesippus there, said he to himself, with whom I lived so
long in Crete? But what should cause him to come to an Island so far distant?
Perhaps it is his Ghost that after his Death comes from the Stygian Banks.
Whilst he was thus doubting, Hegesippus came so near him, that he could not
choose but know him again and embrace him. Is it then indeed you, my dear and
old Friend? What Danger, what Tempest has thrown you on this Shore? Why did you
leave the Island of Crete? Is it a Disgrace like mine, which has forced you
from your Country to our side? Hegesippus answered him, it is no Disgrace; but,
on the contrary, the Kindness of Heaven that has brought me hither. Then
presently he recounted to him the long Tyranny of Protesilaus and Timocrates,
the Misfortunes into which they had precipitated Idomeneus, the Fall of that
Prince, his Flight to the Coasts of Hesperia, the Founding of Salenta, the
arrival of Mentor and Telemachus, the wise Maxims with which Mentor had
inspired the King, and the Disgrace of those two Traitors; adding, that he had
brought 'em to Samos, to suffer the same Banishment there, which they had
caused Philocles to undergo, and so finished his Discourse in telling him that
he was commanded to bring him to Salenta; where the King, who knew his
Innocence, would trust the management of his Affairs to him, and heap Riches on
him.

Do you see this Cave, said Philocles to him, fitter to hide wild Beasts, than
to be inhabited by Men? Here I have tasted for these many Years past, more
Sweetness and Repose than ever I did in the gilded Palaces of the Island of
Crete. Man deceives me no more, for I Converse with no Man; I hear no more
their flattering and poisoning Discourses; I have no more need of 'em. My Hands
inured to Labor, give me a wholesome Nourishment, sufficient and necessary; I
need no more than this slight Stuff that you see, to cover me; I have no other
Want; I enjoy an undisturbed Rest and a sweet Freedom, of which the Wisdom in
my Books teach me to make a good use. What should I go to seek again among
suspicious, deceitful and inconstant Men? No, no, my dear Hegesippus, envy not
my good Fortune. Protesilaus has betrayed himself, designing to betray the
King, and to ruin me; but, believe me, he has done me no hurt at all: On the
contrary he has done me the greatest Kindness; he has delivered me from the
noise and slavery of Business; to him I owe my dear Solitude, and all the
innocent Pleasures that I have enjoyed here. Return, Hegesippus! Return to the
King, help him to Support the Miseries of Greatness, and do for him what you
would have me do. Since his Eyes, so long shut against Virtue, have at last
been opened by this wise Man whom you call Mentor; let the King keep him near
him. It is dangerous for me after my Shipwreck to quit the Port into which the
Tempest had so happily driven me, and to trust my self again to the Mercy of
the Winds. Ah! How much are Kings to be pitied. Ah! How ought they to be pitied
who serve 'em! If they are Wicked, how many Men suffer by 'em; and what
Torments are prepared for 'em in the darkest Hell? If they are Good, how many
Difficulties have they to overcome! How many Snares to avoid! What Ills to
suffer! -- Once more my dear Hegesippus, leave me in my happy Poverty! --

While Philocles was thus speaking with a great deal of earnestness, Hegesippus
beheld him with astonishment; he had seen him formerly in Crete, during the
time he administered the greatest Affairs of State, lean, languid, and almost
spent, his natural Ardour and Austerity wasting through Care and Pains: He
could not see Vice unpunished without the greatest Concern: He would have
Affairs managed with such an Exactness as is never known; and thus his great
Employments destroyed his weak Constitution: But at Samos, Hegesippus found him
plump and vigorous, for all his Age; his flourishing Youth seemed renewed in
his Face; a temperate, quiet, and laborous Life had, as it were, given him a
new Constitution. You are surpised to see me so altered, said Philocles, then
smiling; but know, it is my Retreat has thus renewed and restored me to perfect
Health. My Enemies have given me what I could never find in the greatest of my
Fortunes: Would you have me then lose the true Good, to pursue the false, and
plunge my self again into my former Miseries? Ah! I beseech you, be not more
Cruel than Protesilaus! At least, envy me not the Happiness that I owe to him!

Hegesippus then urged to him, but in vain, all that he thought might move him.
Are you then insensible, said he to him, of the Pleasure of seeing your Friends
and Relations, who wish and sigh for your Return, and whom the hope alone of
embracing you over-whelms with Joy? You, who revere the Gods, and who love your
Duty, do you think it none to serve King; and to assist him in all the good he
designs, in making so many People happy? Is it permitted that a Man should
abandon himself to a wild and savage Philosophy, to prefer himself to all the
rest of Mankind, and to value his own Quiet more than that of his
Fellow-Citizens? If these be not the Reasons, 'twill certainly be thought you
do it out of spite, that you will see the King no more; who, if he did design
any ill to you, 'twas because he did not then know you. It was not the honest,
the just Philocles whom he would have destroyed; no, 'twas a Man quite
different from him whom he would have punished: But now he knows you, and does
not mistake you for another; he feels all his former Friendship revive in his
Heart: He waits for you; at this very moment he opens his Arms to embrace you:
He is so impatient, he thinks every Hour a Day: And can you be inexorable to
your King, and to all your dearer Friends?

Philocles, who at first, grew tender at the sight of Hegesippus, re assumed
his grave and severe Look, whilst he hearkened to this Discourse, firm as a
Rock against which the Winds fruitlessly contend, and roaring Billows break
themselves; he was still immovable, nor his Prayers nor his Arguments could
penetrate his Heart; but in the moment when Hegesippus began to despair to
prevail on him, Philocles, having consulted the Gods, found by the Flight of
Birds, the Entrails of Victims, and by several Divinations, that he must follow
Hegesippus; wherefore he no longer resisted, but prepared to go; but not
without regret, that he must leave the Desert where he had passed so many
Years. Alas, said he, O my lovely Grotto, must I quit thee! where peaceful
Sleep came every Night to release me from the Labors of the Day! Here the
Destinies, in the middle of my Poverty, spun golden Days. Here, weeping, he
prostrated himself to adore the Nayade who had so long quenched his Thirst with
her clear Flood, and all the Nymphs that inhabited the neighboring Mountains.
Echo heard his mournful Farewells, and repeated 'em to all the Deities of the
Fields. At last Philocles came to the Town with Hegesippus to embark
themselves; not imagining that the miserable Protesilaus, for very shame and
anger, would have seen him; but he was mistaken, for ill Men have no shame, and
can always submit themselves to the meanest things; Philocles's Modesty
concealed him for fear of being seen by this miserable Wretch; fearing, indeed,
to heighten his Misfortune by showing him the Prosperity of an Enemy who was
going to be raised on his Ruins; but Protesilaus eagerly sought Philocles; he
desired he should pity him, and beg of the King that he might return to
Salenta: But Philocles was too sincere to promise him to labor for his being
re-call'd; for he knew better than any Man how pernicious his Return would have
been: But he spoke very courteously to him, and expressing a great deal of
Compassion, endeavored to comfort him, and exhorted him to appease the angry
Gods by a pious Life, and by a magnanimous Patience in his Affliction: And
having understood that the King had taken from Protesilaus all his ill-gotten
Riches, he promised him two things, which at last he faithfully performed: One
was to take care of his Wife and Children, who were at Salenta, exposed to the
fury of the Multitude; and the other was to send to Protesilaus, in this Isle so
far distant, some little Supply of Money to alleviate his Misfortunes.

In the mean time, a fair Wind filled their spreading Sails: Hegesippus, full
of impatience, hastens Philocles; and Protesilaus sees 'em embarked; his Eyes
are fixed and immovable on the Shore; he pursues the Vessel that cuts the
Waves, and which the Wind carries farther and farther each Minute; and when at
last he could see 'em no more, reprints the Idea of them in his Mind: In short,
raging and vexed, and given over to his own Despair, he tears his Hair, throws
himself on the Sand, taxes the Gods with their Severity, and in vain calls on
cruel Death to help him; who deaf to his Prayers, will not vouchsafe to deliver
him out of so great Miseries; nor has he the Courage to give it himself.

In the mean while, this Vessel favored by Neptune and the Winds, soon arrived
at Salenta; and as soon as it was told the King, and they were landed at the
Port, he ran with Mentor toward Philocles, and kindly embracing him, showed a
sensible Concern for having persecuted him with so much Injustice.

This Reception, far from appearing a Weakness in a Prince, was looked upon by
the Salentines, as a great Soul, which raises it self above past Faults, in
freely owning 'em in order to repair 'em. Every one wept for joy to see this
honest Man again, who loved the People, and to hear the King speak with so much
Discretion and Humanity. Philocles received the King's Caresses with great
Respect and Modesty, and was very impatient to be out of the Noise and
Acclamations of the People: He followed the King to the Palace, where presently
Mentor and He were as well acquainted, as if they had lived together all their
Lives long, though they had never seen one another before: For the Gods, who have
denied Eyes to the Wicked to perceive Good, have given Eyes to good Men whereby
they know one another. Those who have any Relish of Virtue, cannot be together
without being united, because they are soon in love with one another. Philocles
begged of the King that he might retire to some Solitude near Salenta, where he
continued to spend his days in Poverty, as he had lived in Samos. The King and
Mentor went daily to see him in his solitary Retreat; where they consulted the
Means to strengthen the Laws, and to lay a solid Foundation of Government for
the Public Good. The two first and principal things they considered, were the
Education of Children, who belong less to their own Parents than to the
Commonwealth, said Mentor: They are the Children of the People, whose Hope and
Strength they are; and it is too late to Correct 'em when they are corrupted;
it is too little to exclude 'em from Employments, when they have made themselves
unworthy of 'em; it is therefore much better to prevent the Mischief, than to be
forced to punish it. The King, aded he, who is the Father of all his People, is
yet more particularly the Father of all the Youth, who are the Flower of the
Nation. It Is the Blossom that prepares the Fruit; let not the King disdain to
watch over 'em, and set Officers to mind the Education of these Children: Let
him see that the Laws of Minos be put in Force, which command, That Children be
brought up in a contempt of Pain and Death; That Honor be placed in a neglect
of Pleasure and Riches; That Injustice, Lying and Effeminacy be accounted
Infamous; That from their tender Infancy they be taught to sing the Praises of
the Hero's beloved of the Gods, who have bravely merited of their Country, and
who have signalized their Courage in Battles: Let the Charms of Music affect
their Souls, to soften and purify their Manners: Let 'em learn to be
Affectionate to their Friends, fathful to their Allies, respectful to the
Nobility, and just even to their Enemies: Let 'em be taught to fear Death and
Torments less than the least thing of their Conscience! If Children are betimes
inspired with these great Principles, and if they are sweetly insinuated into
'em, they will, doubtless, be inflamed with the Love of Honor and Virtue.

Mentor added, That it was absolutely necessary to institute Schools to
accustom the Youth to hard Exercises of the Body, that they may not learn to
grow tender and lazy, which debauches the best Constitution: He farther
advised, That there should be Plays and Shows frequently to animate the People;
but above all, that they should exercise their Bodies, to make 'em active,
supple, and vigorous, adding a Reward to excite Emulation. But what he most
desired, and tended chiefly to the encouraging of good Manners, was that the
People should marry betimes; and their Parents, without any Prospect of
Interest, should leave 'em to choose their Wives, suitable to 'em both in Body
and Mind, with whom they might live continually happy.

The End of the Third Volume.
THE ADVENTURES OF TELEMACHUS The Son of ULYSSES.

PART IV.

LONDON, Printed for A. and J. Churchill, at the Black-Swan in PaterNoster-Row.
MDCC.

THE ADVENTURES OF TELEMACHUS The Son of ULYSSES. PART. IV.
BUT while they were thus laying down the most probable Means to keep their
Youth Chaste, Innocent, Laborious, Tractable, and Ambitious of Renown;
Philocles, who chiefly delighted in War, said to Mentor, In vain do you employ
Youth in all those Exercises, if you suffer them to languish in continual
Peace; where they shall neither have Experience in War, nor occasion to show
their Valor; by this, you will insensibly weaken the Nation, and soften their
Courage: Pleasures will corrupt their Manners, and other warlike Nations will
find it no hard matter to vanquish them; and by endeavoring to shun the Evils
of War, they will fall into a miserable Servitude.

Mentor replied, The Evils of War never fail to drain a Nation, and put it in
danger of Ruin, even while it is most victorious: With how great advantage
soever they begin it; they are never sure to end it, without being exposed to
the most tragical Chances of Fortune. Suppose you engage with never so great a
superiority of Force; the smallest Mistake, a panick Fear, a Nothing, snatches
away the Victory that was already in your Hands, and puts it into those of your
Enemies: And though you should hold Victory chained in your Camp, you destroy
your Self in destroying your Enemies. You dis-people your Country, leave your
Ground uncultivated, interrupt Commerce; nay, which is far worse, you weaken
your Laws, and suffer Manners to be corrupted. The Youth do not any more apply
themselves to Learning; pressing Wants make you give Way to a pernicious
Licentiousness among your Troops; Justice, good Order, everything suffers in
this Confusion. A King who spills the Blood of so money Men, and is the Cause of
so many Miseries to acquire a little Glory, or to extend the Limits of his
Kingdom, is unworthy of the Glory he hunts after, and deserves to lose that
which he possesses, by endeavoring to Usurp what belongs to another.

But after this manner you must exercise the Courage of a Nation in time of
Peace. You have already seen the Exercises of the Body that we have
Established; the Prize that excites Emulation, the Maxims of Honor and Virtue,
with which we season the Minds of Children, almost from their Cradle, by Songs
full of the great Actions of Heroes; add to those Aids that of a sober and
laborious Life. But this is not all: As soon as any of your Allies shall be in
War, you must send thither the flower of your Youth, chiefly those in whom you
shall observe a Warlike Genius, and who are the most likely to profit by
Experience: By this means, you shall preserve a high Esteem amongst your
Allies; your Friendship shall be Courted, and they shall be afraid to lose it:
And without having a War at Home, and at your own Charge, you shall always be
provided with a Martial and intrepid Youth. And although you your selves enjoy
Peace, cease not to treat respectfully those that are Masters of the Art of
War; for the true way to avoid it, and preserve a lasting Peace, is to
Cultivate Arms, to Honor Men excellent in that Profession, and to entertain
those that are trained up to it in Foreign Parts, and who know the Force,
Discipline, and manner of War in Neighboring Countries. You shall be equally
incapable of making War to gratify your Ambition, and of being afraid of it
through Effeminacy: And being in a readiness to undertake it when Necessity
obliges, you can easily find means to prevent it. When your Allies make War
upon one another, 'twill be your part to become Mediator: And thus you will
acquire a Glory far more solid and sure than that of the Conquerors. You shall
gain the Love and Esteem of Strangers, they will all of them stand in need of
you; you will strengthen your Authority over your Subjects: You shall become
the Confident of their Secrets, the Umpire of Treatises, and Master of their
Affections. Your Fame shall fly through the most distant Countries, and your
Name shall be like a most delicious Perfume, that diffuses it self far and
wide. In such a happy State, let a Neighboring People unjustly attack you,
they shall always find you ready to receive them: And what strengthens you
still more, they shall find you beloved by all, and succored by your
Neighbors, who will cheerfully Arm themselves for you; being fully persuaded,
that the public Security depends on the Preservation of you. This is a Rampart
more secure than the strongest Walls, and most regular Fortifications. This is
true Glory.

But how few Kings are there that pursue it? nay rather, how few are there that
don't avoid it? They run after a deceitful Shadow, and leave true Honor behind
them, because they do not know it. Mentor having thus spoke, Philocles looked
upon him with Astonishment; then cast his Eyes on the King: He was charmed to
see how greedily Idomeneus sucked into his very Soul, the Stream of Wisdom which
flowed from the Mouth of that Stranger. Minerva, in the Shape of Mentor, did
thus establish in Salentum, the best Laws, and most useful Maxims of
Government; not so much for the Prosperity of the Kingdom of Idomeneus, as to
give Telemachus a sensible Example of what a Wise Government may do, to make
People Happy, and to secure to a good King a lasting Reputation

In the mean time, Telemachus gave Proof of his Courage in the Perils of War:
And parting from Salentum, made it his chief care to gain the Affection of the
Old Captains, who were Men of tried Experience, and established Reputation.
Nestor, who had formerly seen him at Pylos, and had always loved Ulysses,
treated him as his own Son: He gave him Instructions, enforced with diverse
Illustrious Examples: He related to him the Adventures of his Youth, and the
most remarkable things he had seen performed by the Hero's of the last Age. The
Memory of this sage Old Man, who had now seen Three Ages, resembled an History
of Ancient Times, deeply engraved on lasting Marble or Brass. Philoctetes, at
first, had not the same Affection for Telemachus; the inveterate Hatred which
he bore in his Heart against Ulysses, gave him an Aversion to his Son; and it
was some uneasiness to perceive how much this Youth seemed to be the Darling of
the Gods, who designed to make him equal to those Hero's which had laid Troy in
Ashes: But the obliging Behavior of Telemachus, soon overcame the Resentments
of Philoctetes, and irresistibly forced him to love one who was possessed with
so much Sweetness and Modesty. He often took Telemachus in his Arms, and said
to him: My Son, (for I cannot henceforth forbear calling you so) I must own,
your Father and I did bear a mutual Hatred, for a long time against one
another; and even after we had brought proud Troy to its fatal Period, my Anger
was not asswag'd; and though at first sight, I found it hard for me to love
you; yet that Sweet and Innocent Virtue, and unaffected Modesty with which you
are endued, are not to be resisted. Afterward Philoctetes told him that he
would relate to him what it was that had first kindled his Hatred against
Ulysses.

To begin, says he, my Story a little higher; I accompanied in all his Travels,
the great Hercules, who delivered the Earth from so many Monsters; who in
respect of other Hero's, was as the lofty Oak amidst the tender Roses, or the
Eagle among the little Birds. Both that Hero's Misfortunes and my own,
proceeded from a Passion which is the Cause of the most terrible. Disasters,
Unhappy Love. Hercules was subdued by that shameful Passion, and became the
Spirit of the cruel Boy, Cupid. He could not remember, without Blushing, that
formerly forgetting all his Glory, he had been brought even to handle the
Distaff with Omphale, Queen of Lydia, as if he had been the Weakest and most
Effeminate of all Men. While he was under the Dominion of his blind Passion, a
Hundred times has he owned to me, that this Action had quite tainted his
Virtue, and almost defaced the Glory of all his Labors. Nevertheless he was
caught a second time in the very same Snares that he so much studied to avoid.
Had he been constant, he was once too happy in the love of Deianira, his Wife;
but too soon the Youth of Iola, in whose Face the Graces themselves were
painted, did rob him of his Heart. Deianira, burning with Jealousy, bethought
her of the fatal Garment that the Centaur Nessus had left her at his Death, as
an infallible way to awaken the Affection of Hercules, when he seemed to
neglect her, and love another. But alas! this Garment was full of the venomous
Blood of the Centaur, and of the Darts which had pierced him; for you know that
the Arrows with which Hercules killed the perfidious Monster, had been dipped
in the Blood of the Hydra of Lerna, whence they had drawn so strong a Poison,
that the Wounds they gave were incurable.

Hercules having put on this Coat, was quickly sensible of the devouring Fire
which penetrated into the Marrow of his Bones. Mount Oeta shook, and the
deepest Valleys resounded; the Sea it self seemed troubled at his Groans; which
far surpassed the Bellowings of the most furious Bulls, in their dreadful
Combats. The unhappy Lychas, who had brought him the Garment from Dejanira,
venturing to approach him; Hercules in the extremity of his Pain, whirled him
round, as one does a Stone in a Sling, which he is to throw a great distance.

So Lychas being darted from the top of the Mountain by the powerful Arm of
Hercules, fell amongst the Waves of the Sea, where he was immediately changed
into a Rock, which still retains its Humane shape, and against which the angry
Billows beating, frighten from afar the wary Pilot. After the Misfortune of
Lychas, I judged it not safe to trust my self to Hercules: I began to think now
of hiding my self in the deepest Caverns of the Earth: I observed how easily
with one hand he plucked up by the Roots the lofty Firs, and firm-rooted Oaks;
which so many Years had despised the most impetuous Storms; and with the other,
how he endeavored to pull off the fatal Garment; but to no purpose; for it was
glu'd to his Skin, and as it were, incorporated with his Members, and whilst he
rent it, he tore his Flesh: His Blood flowed in Streams, and moistened the
Earth; till at last his Virtue overcoming his Pain, he cried out, Thou see,
my dear Philoctetes, the Evils which the Gods inflict upon me! they are the
just punishment of my Offenses: I have violated my Conjugal Love: After having
subdued so many Enemies, I have basely suffered my self to be overcome by the
Love of a beautiful Stranger: I perish, and am pleased that my Ruin will
appease the Wrath of the Gods. But alas! my dear Friend, whither do thou fly?
It Is true, the extremity of my Pain has made me commit an Act of Cruelty upon
the unhappy Lychas, for which I abhor my self. He was ignorant of the Poison
which he brought me, and therefore did not deserve what he suffered: But
could thou believe that I should forget the Friendship I owe thee, or that I
would take away thy Life? No sure, I shall never cease to love Philoctetes: I
will breath into his Bosom, my departing Soul, and he shall gather my Ashes.
Where art thou, then my dear Philoctetes, thou only Hope that is left me here
below? At these words I ran toward him, whilst he held out his Arms to embrace
me; but he drew them back, for fear he should kindle in my Breast the same
raging Flame, with which himself was burnt up. Alas! says he, I dare not
embrace thee; the last Consolation is denied me. While he thus spoke, he
gathered together the Trees that he had plucked up, and erected them into a
Funeral Pile, upon the top of the Mountain, which he calmly ascended; he
spreads the Skin of the Nemean Lion, which had so long served him for a Mantle,
whilst he traveled from one end of the Earth to the other, to destroy Monsters,
and free the Unfortunate: And leaning upon his Club, he desired me to set Fire
to the Pile. My trembling Hand could not refuse him this cruel Piece of
Service; for his Life was now so miserable, that it could not any more be
reckoned the Gift of the Gods: Yea, I was not even without Apprehension, but
the excess of his Pain might transport him to do some Action unworthy of that
Virtue which had been hitherto the Admiration of all the World. When he saw the
Flame begin to Catch, he cried out, Now it is, my dear Philoctetes, that thou
have given me a Proof of thy sincere Friendship; for thou love my Honor more
than my Life, and may the Gods reward thee. I bequeath thee what I have most
valuable on Earth; These Arrows which were dipped in the Blood of the Hydra of
Lerna: Thou know that the Wounds they give are incurable; by these thou
shall be invincible, as I have been; nor shall any Mortal ever dare to
encounter thee. Remember I Die thy faithful Friend; and if thou art moved at my
Misfortunes, thou may give me the last Consolation, by promising never to
discover my Death, nor the Place where thou hidest my Ashes. I promised him,
yea swore it. Whilst I watered the funeral Pile with my Tears, a Beam of Joy
appeared darting from his Eyes; but on a sudden he was involved in a touring
Flame, which stifled his Voice, and robbed me of the Sight of him: Afterward I
saw him through the Flames, amidst which he appeared with a Countenance as
serene, as if it had been crowned with Garlands, and covered with delicious and
festival Perfumes in the Company of his Friends. The Fire quickly consumed all
that in him was earthly and mortal; so that there remained nothing of what he
had received in his Birth from his Mother Alcmena; but by the command of
Jupiter, it left untouched that subtle and immortal Substance, that celestial
Flame, which is the true Principle of Life, and which he had received from the
Father of the Gods; with whom he walked along under the gilded Arches of the
glittering Olympus, to drink Nectar: Where they gave him to Wife the lovely
Hebe, the Goddess of Youth, who used to fill Nectar to Jupiter, before Ganimede
was promoted to that Honor. As for the Arrows he left me, with a Design to
raise me above all the Hero's, they have been an inexhaustible Fountain of
Mischief; for shortly after this, the confederated Kings had undertaken to
revenge Menelaus upon the infamous Paris, for the Rape of Helena; and to
overturn the Empire of Priamus. They were informed by the Oracle of Apollo,
that they were not to expect a happy Issue of the War, unless they got the
Arrows of Hercules. Ulysses, your Father, who was always the most clear sighted
and industrious in the Management of all their Designs, took upon him to
persuade me to go along with them to the Siege of Troy, and to bring along with
me those Arrows, which he believed were in my Possession. 'Twas now a long time
since Hercules had disappeared, neither did they talk of any new Exploit of
that Hero: Monsters and Villains began now to show their Heads; the Greeks were
uncertain what to believe: Some said he was Dead, others, that he was gone
under the Northern Bear, to subdue the Segtes; but Ulysses affirmed he was
Dead, and undertook to make me own it. He found me out, when as yet I could not
comfort my self for the loss of the great Alcides: It was not an easy matter to
come at me; for I could not any more endure the Company of Mankind: I would not
suffer my self to be torn from the Deserts of Mount Oeta, where I had beheld
the last Fate of my dear Friend: There I entertained my self with the Image of
that Hero, which was so deeply imprint'd on my Mind, and with Weeping at the
sight of that melancholy Place, which had been the last Scene of his Life. But
soft and powerful Eloquence sat brooding on your Father's Lips; he seemed
almost as much afflicted as my self; he shed Tears; he knew how to gain my
Heart insensibly, and engage me to confide in him; he begat in me a concern for
the Grecian Kings, who were going to Fight in a just Cause, and whose Success
depended on me. Yet he could never tear from my Breast the Secret of the Death
of Hercules, which I had sworn never to reveal; but taking it for granted, he
pressed me to show him the Place where I had hid his Ashes. I was seized with
horror at the Thoughts of such Perjury, in revealing a Secret which I had
promised to the Gods to conceal for ever. But what I durst not violate, I was
tempted to elude; for which the Gods have punished me: I stamped on the Ground
with my Foot in the Place where I had hid the Ashes of Hercules. Afterward I
went to join the confederated Kings; who received me with as much Joy as if I
had been Hercules himself. Passing through the Isle of Lemnos, I had a mind to
show the Greeks an Experiment of what my Arrows could do, and preparing to
pierce a Do, that was skipping through the Forest, heedlessly I dropped the
Arrow, which lighting on my Foot, gave me a Wound which pains me still.
Immediately I felt the same Torments which Hercules had suffered: Night and Day
I filled the Island with my Groans. Black and corrupted Gore issuing from my
Wound, infected the Air, and spread through the Grecian Camp such a Stench as was
able to stifle Men of the most vigorous Constitutions. All the Army were seized
with Horror at the sight of me, and concluded that it was a Punishment
inflicted on me by the Justice of the Gods. Ulysses, who engaged me in this
War, was the first that abandoned me: I have been informed since that he did
so, because he preferred the common Interest of Greece, and the Victory they so
much sought after, to all the Ties of Friendship and private Concerns. It was
impossible to Sacrifice in the Camp; so much did the horror and infection of
my Wound, and the loudness of my Groans disturb the whole Army: But as soon as
I found the Greeks had forsook me, and that even by the advice of Ulysses; this
Artifice seemed to me full of the most barbarous Cruelty and blackest
Treachery. Alas, I was blind and did not see that I had deserved to be hated
by wise and good Men, as much as by the Gods, whom I had offended. I continued,
during this whole Siege of Troy, without help, without hope, or any Thing to
ease my Pain: Excessively tormented, in a desert and savage Island, where
nothing was to be heard but the noise of Billows breaking upon the Rocks. In
this Retirement, I found a hollow Cave within a Rock, which pointed with a
double Head toward the Heavens, and afforded a clear and pleasant Spring. This
Cave was the usual retreat of wild Beasts, to whose Fury I was exposed Night
and Day: My Bed was of Leaves which I had gathered together: All my Utensils
were a Wooden-box, coursely wrought; and some tattered Clothes, with which I
bound up my Wound to stop the Blood, and which I used likewise to clean it: In
this Place forsaken of Mankind, and delivered over to the Anger of the Gods, I
spent my solitary Hours in darting the Pigeons and other Birds that flew about
the Rock: And when I had killed any to satisfy my Hunger, I was forced to
crawl along the Ground, with extremity of Pain, to take up my Prey, and with my
own Hands to dress it at a Fire I had lighted with a Flint; for the Provisions
which the Greeks had left me did not last long. This solitary Life, dreadful as
'twas had seemed pleasant, in so much as it removed me from the Company of base
and deceitful Mankind, if I had not been quite overcome with the extremity of
my Pain, and the continual remembrance of my last sad Adventure. How! said I,
to entice a Man from his Native Country, as the only Person that was capable to
revenge the Qrarrel of Greece, and then to leave him in a desert Island asleep;
for so I was when the Greeks went away. And you may judge of my Surprise when I
awaked, how I wept when I saw their Fleet plough the Deep! Looking about, on
all hands, I found nothing but Sorrow in this horrid and desent Island, where
there are neither Harbor, Commerce nor Hospitality, nor any that land, but who
are driven upon it by Storm: You can hope for no Company but by Shipwreck; and
even such durst not carry me along with them, being afraid both of the Anger of
the Gods, and of the Greeks. Thus ten Years did I suffer Pain and Hunger,
feeding a Wound which devoured me; so that Hope it self was quite extinguished
in my Breast. One day having been in quest of Medicinal Plants for my Wound, on
a sudden I perceived in my Cave a young Man, handsome, of a graceful, but
haughty Mien, and heroic Stature: Methought I saw Achilles; so much did he
resemble him in his Features, Look, and Gate; only the difference of Age made
me understand it could not be he. I obsev'd in his Countenance both Pity and
Confusion: He was moved with Compassion to see with what trouble and slowness I
crawled along: My piercing and doleful Scrieks, which made all the Echo's along
the Coast to ring, melted his very Heart. Seeing him at a distance, O Stranger!
said I, what Misfortune has brought thee into this Island? I know that Grecian
Habit, still so dear to me: O how I long to hear thy Voice, and that Language
that drops from thy Lips, which I learned in my Childhood; and for so long a
time never could talk to any in this Desert. Be not afraid at the sight of so
miserable a Creature, whom thou ought rather to pity.

Neoptolemus had hardly pronounced these words, I am a Greek, when I cried out,
O sweet Word, after so many Years of Silence and Sorrow; O my Son, what
Misfortune? What Storm, or rather what favorable Wind has brought thee hither,
to put an end to my Misery? He answered, I am of the Island of Sciros, whither
I am returning; they say I am the Son of Achilles; thou know whether it be
so or not.

So short an Account did not satisfy my Curiosity. O Son, said I, of a Father
whom I so much loved, the dear Charge of Lycomedes: How came thou hither, and
from whence? He answered me, That he came from the Siege of Troy: Thou were
not, said I, in the first Expedition. Then, said he, where were thou? I
answered him, I see thou art ignorant both of the Name and Misfortunes of
Philoctetes: Alas, how unhappy am I, my Persecutors insult over me in my
Affliction! It increases my Sorrow to think that Greece is ignorant of that
which I suffer. The Atrides have brought me into this Condition, and may the
Gods repay them. Afterward I gave him an Account how the Greeks had left me:
As soon as he had heard the Relation of my Misfortunes, he thus began his own.
After the death of Achilles, said be, (immediately I stopped him, What! Achilles
dead? Pardon me, my Son, if I interrupt your Relation with the Tears I owe your
Father.) Neoptolemus answers, In so doing you oblige me: How I am pleased to
see Philoctetes bewail my Father! and thus he proceeded: After the death of
Achilles, Ulysses and Phoenix sought me out, assuring me, that without me they
could not overthrow the City of Troy. 'Twas no hard task to persuade me to
follow them in this famous War, in which my Grief for the death of Achilles,
and a desire to inherit his Glory, did naturally engage me. I no sooner arrived
at the Camp, than the Army gathered round about me; every one could have swore
that he had seen Achilles; but, alas, he was no more: Young and without
Experience, I could promise my self any thing from those who had bestowed on me
such large Commendations. Immediately I demanded of the Atrides my Father's
Armor; to which they made me this barbarous Reply, Thou shall have all that
belonged to thy Father, except his Armor, which are destined for Ulysses. At
this I fell into a most extravagant Passion, my Grief and Anger knew no Bounds;
but Ulysses calmly told me, Young Man, thou have had no share in the Perils of
this long Siege, and so cannot deserve such a Reward; thou begin'st too soon to
talk haughtily; rest satisfied, thou shall never have the Armor of Achilles.
Thus robbed unjustly by Ulysses, I returned to the Isle of Sciros, less incensed
against him than the Atrides. O Philoctetes, I shall say no more, but may the
Gods always befriend their Enemies.

Then I asked him, how it came that Telemonian Ajax did not hinder such a Piece
of Injustice? He is dead, answered he. Dead, said I, and Ulysses lives and
prospers! Then I asked him News of Antilochus, the Son of sage Nestor, and
Patrocles, the Favorite of Achilles; they are dead too, said he. Then I cried
out, alas, What do thou tell me? Cruel War, it seems, mows down the Good and
lets the Bad stand: Ulysses lives, and Thersytes likewise, no doubt. Is this
the Justice of the Gods? And must we still continue to praise them? Whilst I
fell out in this Passion against your Father, Neoptolemus continued to deceive
me, and added these melancholy Words; I am going, says he, to live contented in
the desert Island of Seiros, far from the Grecian Army, where Evil prevails
above Good: Adieu, I must be gone, may the Gods restore you your Health. Then
said I, O my Son, I conjure you by the Ghost of your Father, by your Mother,
and by all you hold dearest in this World, not to leave me alone in this
miserable Condition. I am not ignorant how troublesome I shall be; but it will
be a shameful thing to forsake me: Tie me to the Prow, or the Stern of your
Ship; throw me into the Pump, or where I shall incommode you the least. None
but great Souls know the Pleasure of being good; don't leave me in a Desert,
where there is not the Foot-step of a Man; carry me either to your own Country
or to Lybia, which is not far from Mount Oeta, and Trachynium, and the
agreeable Banks of Sperchius. Bring me to my Father; Alas! I fear he is dead. I
desired him to send me a Ship; either he is dead, or those that carried the
Message have not delivered it: O my Son, thou art my only Relief; remember the
Instability of humane Affairs: The Happy ought to succor the Unfortunate, and
be afraid to abuse the Prosperity they enjoy. This was the Substance of what
the excess of my Grief made me say to Neoptolemus; which made him promise to
carry me along with him: Then I cried out, O happy Day; O dear Neoptolemus,
worthy of the Glory of such a Father: Dear companions of my happy Voyage, allow
me to bid adieu to this melancholy Abode: See where I have lived and imagine
what I have suffered: I am sure it is what none else could have endured: But
necessity instructed me; Necessity, that teaches Mankind what they would never
learn without her. Those that have never suffered, know nothing: They are
ignorant both of Good and Evil: they are Strangers to Mankind, and Strangers to
themselves. When I had thus spoke, I took my Bow and Arrows; which Neoptolemus
dcsir'd to kiss, being the famous and sacred Arms of the invincible Hercules. I
can deny thee nothing, said I; it is thou, my Son, that restorest to me my Life,
my Country, my decrepit Father, my Friends and my Self: Freely touch these Arms
and boast, That thou art the only Greek that ever had that Honor. Whilst
Neoptolemus entered my Grotto to look on my Arms, I was seized with a cruel
Pain; I was quite distracted, and did not know what I did: I asked a Knife to
cut off my Foot; I cried out, O Death, so much longed for, Why do not thou
come? O dear Youth, burn me to Ashes, as I did the Son of Jupiter. O Earth,
open and receive a dying Wretch, that cannot any more raise himself from thee.
(...) on a sudden, as I used to do, I fell into a deep Swoon: I was relieved by
the Sweat that begun to break out upon me; whilst black and corrupted Gore
issued from my Wound. During my Sleep, it had been easy for Neoptolemus to
have carried off my Arms; but he was the Son of Achilles, and not born to
cheat. When I awaked, I perceived the Confusion he was in; he sighed like one
that was not used to dissemble, or act against his Conscience. Will thou then
surprise me? said I. What is the matter, said he, thou must follow me to the
Siege of Troy. Then answered I, what do thou say? my Son, I am betrayed;
Restore me my Bow; don't rob me of that which is dearer to me than my very
Life. He made me no return, but looked on me calmly and unconcerned. O ye Banks
and Promontories of this desert Island! O ye wild Beasts, and steep Rocks, to
you only I can complain; to you, who are accustomed to my Groans: Must I be
betrayed by the Son of Achilles! Who robs me of the sacred Bow of Hercules, and
would drag me along with him to the Grecian Camp; and does not see that this is
only to triumph over a dead Corpse, a Ghost, a Fantom. Would he had attacked me
in my Vigor, as now he does basely and by surprise! O Son, show thy self like
thy Father, like thy Self. What say thou? Nothing! O dearest Rock, to thee I
return, naked, miserable, forsaken, famished; in this Cave I must pine away,
wanting my Bow to kill the wild Beasts for my Food, or to defend me from their
Fury. What then? But thou, my Son, who do not appear to be so wicked, tell me
what pushes thee on to so black a Villainy! Restore me my Arms, and get the
gone! Then Neoptolemus, with Tears in his Eyes, was muttering to himself, Would
to God I had not departed from Sciros! In the mean time I cried out in a
surprise, What is it I see! Is not this Ulysses? I knew his Voice. He answered,
It is I. If the dark Regions of Pluto had opened, and I had seen the black
Tartarus, which the Gods themselves are afraid to behold, I could not have been
seized with a greater Horror: I cried out, Witness thou Island of Lemnos! O
Sun! do thou look on and suffer this? Ulysses calmly answered, I execute the
Will of Jupiter. Do thou, said I, name Jupiter? See thou there that Youth,
who was not born to deceive, and to whom it is painful to execute thy perfideous
Designs? It Is neither to cheat nor hurt thee, said Ulysses, that we come
hither; it is to deliver thee, to heal thy Wounds, to give thee the Honor of
destroying the City of Troy, and to bring thee back to thy own Country; it is
thy Self, and not I, that art the Enemy of Philoctetes. Then did I breath out
against your Father all that my Passion could inspire me with: Since thou
left'st me forsaken upon this Shore, said I, why will thou not suffer me to
live here in Peace! Go, seek Renown in Battle, and enjoy the Pleasures of Life;
thy good Fortune in the company of thy Companions the Atrides: Don't envy me my
Misery and Pain, why would you carry me off? I am nothing, I am already dead.
Have thou not as much reason to believe now as well as formerly, that my
Shrieks, and the Infection of my Wound will disturb the Sacrifices? O Ulysses!
Author of all my Miseries, May the Gods -- But the Gods are deaf; nay, they
stir up my Enemy against me. O my Country, which I shall never see again! O ye
Gods, if there be any just enough to pity me! Punish Ulysses: Then I shall
believe my self Cured of all my Maladies.

While I thus spoke, your Father calmly looked on me with an Air of Compassion,
far from being provoked; he seemed like a Rock upon the top of a Mountain,
which sports it self with the Fury of the Winds; and lets them spend their
rage, while it continues immovable. So your Father kept silence till my Rage
should be exhausted; for he well knew, that to reduce Men to Reason, we must
not attack their Passions, but stay till they are weakened through weariness. O
Philoctetes, said he, what has become of your Reason and Courage? Now is the
occasion to use it; if you refuse to go along with us, to fulfill the great
purposes of Jupiter concerning your self, farewell; You are unworthy to be the
Deliverer of Greece, and the Ruin of Troy: Continue at Lemnos: These Arms which
I carry off shall give me the Renown that was destined for you. Neoptolemus,
let us be gone, it is in vain to speak to him; our Compassion for one single
Man, must not make us neglect the safety of all Greece.

Then methought I was like a Lyoness about to be robbed of her Young; who with
her roaring, makes the Forests to tremble. O Cave, said I, I shall never quit
thee, thou shall be my Grave! O thou sorrowful Abode! I have now no Hope left
me, nor means of Subsistence; Who will give me a Sword to stab my self? O! if
the Birds of Prey would devour me, they need not any more dread my Arrows? Oh
precious Bow, consecrated by the Hands of the Son of Jupiter! O dear Hercules!
art not thou sensible of this Indignity? thy Bow is not any more in the Hands
of thy faithful Friend, but in the impure and treacherous Hands of Ulysses.
Birds of Prey and wild Beasts, fly no more from this Cave, my Arrows cannot
hurt you; come and devour me! Or thou merciless Jupiter, crush me with thy
Thunder!

Your Father having tried all other means of persuasion, at last, thought it
better to restore me my Arms, and made a Sign to Neoptolemus to give them back.
Then, said I to him, thou show thy self to be the Son of Achilles. Suffer me
to pierce my Enemy to the Heart. And drawing an Arrow against your Father,
Neoptolemus stopped my Hand, saying, Anger clouds your Reason, and hinders you
from seeing the unworthy action you are going to commit: As for Ulysses, he
appeared as unconcerned at my Arrows as at my reproaches. I was sensibly moved
with his Courage and Patience, and ashamed for endeavoring, in the transport
of my Passion, to kill him with the Weapons, which he had caused to be
restored. But as my Resentment was not as yet appeased, I was sorry that I must
owe such a Favor to my Enemy. Know, said Neoptolemus, that the Divine Helenus,
the Son of Priamus, having come out of the City of Troy, by the Order and
inspiration of the Gods, has unridled the Mysteries of future times. The
unhappy Troy, said he, shall fall; but not before it is attacked by him, who
keeps the Arrows of Hercules; nor shall that Man ever be healed till he come
before its Walls, where the Sons of Esculapius shall Cure him. At that instant
I was divided in my Thoughts; I was moved with the Ingenuity of Neoptolemus,
and his Honesty in restoring my Bow; but I could not think of submitting to
Ulysses; the disgrace of which, kept me in suspense. Must I ever be seen again
in the company of Ulysses and the Atrides? What will the World say of me?
Whilst I continued in this uncertainty, on a sudden I heard a more than Humane
Voice; I saw Hercules in a bright Cloud, encircled with Rays of Glory. I easily
knew his Masculine Features, his robust Limbs, and his plain manner; but he
appeared with a Stature and Majesty beyond what he had, when he was Conquering
Monsters upon Earth. He said to me, It Is Hercules whim thou see and hear:
I have quitted the high Olympus, to make known to thee the Commands of Jupiter:
Thou know by what Labors I acquired Immortality: Thou must likewise go with
the Son of Achilles, to trace my Footsteps in the Path of Renown: Thou shall be
Cured, and with my Arrows thou shall pieree Paris, the Author of so much
Mischief. Thou shall send the rich Spoils of Troy to thy Father, on Mount Oeta;
there they shall be placed upon my Tomb, as a Monument of the Victory owing to
my Arrows: And thou, O Son of Achilles! I tell thee, that thou cannot be
victorious without Philoctetes, nor Philoctetes without thee: Go then like two
Lions who seek their Prey together. I will sent Esculapius to Troy to Cure
Philoctetes. Love, and observe Religion; all other things are mortal, but the
Fruits of this endure forever.

When I had heard these Words, I cried out, O happy Day! O sweet Light! that
after so many Years do show thy self at last. I obey; let me salute the
Place, and be gone. Adieu, dear Cave, adieu ye Nymphs of these watery Meadows; I
shall hear no more the hollow noise of these Billows; adieu thou Shore, where I
have so often endured the Injuries of the Weather; adieu ye Hills, where the
Echo has so often repeated my Groans; adieu sweet Fountains, yet who to me
have been so bitter; adieu Lemnos, favor my Departure, since I go where I am
called by the Will of the Gods, and my Friends. So we departed and arrived at
the Siege of Troy; where Machaon and Podalyrus, by the Divine Art of their
Father Esculapius, did cure me; or at least put me in the Condition you now see
me, having recovered my Vigor, though I am still somewhat lame. Paris fell by my
Hand, as a fearful Fawn, pierced with the Arrows of the Hunter. Ilium was
reduced to Ashes; I need say no more, you know the rest. Nevertheless I
retained still some aversion to the sage Ulysses, occasioned by the remembrance
of the Ills that I had endured; and though his Virtue could not appease my
Resentment, yet the sight of a Son, who resembles him so much, and whom I am
forced to love, softens my Heart toward the Father himself.

During the Relation of the Adventures of Philoctetes, Telemachus continued
immovable; and as 'twere, in suspense, with his Eyes fixed on the great Man
that spoke: All the different Passions that moved Hercules, Philoctetes,
Ulysses, Neoptolemus, as they were represented, appeared, each in their turn,
upon the innocent Countenance of Telemachus: During the Relation, he would
sometimes cry out, and interrupt Philoctetes, without thinking; sometimes he
would seem thoughtful, and like one concerned for the sequel of some important
Affair; whilst Philoctetes was describing the Confusion of Neoptolemus, who
could not dissemble; Telemachus seemed to be in the same disorder: And at that
Moment you would have took him for Neoptolemus.

In the mean while, the Confederate Army marched in good Order against
Adrastus, King of the Daunians, an impious Fellow despised of the Gods, and a
Deceiver of Men. Telemachus found some difficulty how to behave himself among
so many Kings, jealous of one another; it behoved him to give none of 'em
ground of suspicion, but to gain the Favor of them all: He was of a good and
honest Disposition, but not very complaisant: He did not trouble himself much
with obliging others; And though he was not covetous of Riches, yet did he not
care to part with them. Thus with a Noble and Honest Mind, he seemed neither
obliging, nor very sensible of Friendship, or the concern others had for him,
nor careful to distinguish Merit. He followed his Humor without reflection; in
spite of Mentor, his Mother Penelope had brought him up in Pride and
Haughtiness of temper, that tainted all his good Qualities. He looked upon
himself as made of other Metal than the rest of Mankind, who seemed to him to
be sent by the Gods, only for his Pleasure and Service, and to make every thing
subservient to him as a Deity. The Happiness of serving him was a sufficient
Reward. Where his Pleasures were concerned, nothing must be impossible; the
most trivial Delays did irritate his eager Temper. Had any one seen him in his
natural Disposition, they would have thought him incapable of loving any thing
besides himself, being only moved by his own Vainglory, and Pleasure: but this
indifference for others, and regard for himself, proceeded from nothing but the
continual transport and violence of his Passions; which his Mother had humored
from his Cradle. He was a remarkable Instance of the Unhappiness of those who
are Highborn: The Serverities of Fortune which he felt in his early Youth, had
not moderated the impetuosity and haughtiness of his Temper: Though destitute,
forsaken; and exposed to so many Miseries, yet he abated nothing of his Pride.
It would raise it self, like a supple Palm, after all Attempts to press it
down. These Faults did not show themselves in Mentor's Company, but daily
decreased; as a fiery Courser, who frisking through the spacious Fields, whom
neither Rocks nor Precipices, nor Torrents can stop, is obedient only to the
Voice and Hand of one Man, who knows how to tame him: So Telemachus, full of a
Noble Ardour, could be kept in by none but the Wise Mentor; one of his Frowns
would immediately stop him in his most impetuous Career: He knew the meaning of
each Look, and at that Moment would summon all his virtuous Resolutions. Wisdom
in an instant, would render his Countenance smooth and serene. Neptune does not
more quickly appease the hideous Tempests, when with his Trident he threatens
the proud Billows.

When Telemachus was alone, all his Passions, that seemed only suspended for a
time, like a Torrent damm'd in, would take their natural Course. He could not
endure the Arrogance of the Lacedaemonians, nor of Phalanthus, who was at their
Head. This Colony, which came with a Design to found the City of Tarentum, was
composed of young Men, who were Born during the Siege of Troy; who for their
illegitimate Birth, irregular Manners, and the Licentiousness in which they had
been brought up, had something about them that was wild and barbarous: They
resembl'd more a Company of Robbers than a Grecian Colony. Phalanthus would
seek out all occasions to contradict Telemachus, despising his Counsels, as
those of a Young Man without Experience; and would make him the Subject of his
Raillery; treating him as if he had been pusillanimous and effeminate: He
exposed his smallest Failings to the Captains of the Army, endeavoring to sow
Jealousy, and to make the haughtiness of Telemachus, odious to all the
Confederate Princes. One Day, Telemachus having taken some Daunian Prisoners,
pretended that they belonged to him, alleging it was he that had defeated that
Party of the Enemies: And that Telemachus having found the Daunians already
beat and put to flight, had nothing to do but give them Quarter, and carry them
along to the Camp. Telemachus on the other hand maintained, that he had saved
Phalanthus from being beat, and obtained this Victory over the Daunians. Both
of 'em pleaded their Cause before the Confederate Kings; where Telemachus was
so much transported with his Passion, that he gave Phalanthus threatening
Language, so that they had gone to Blows, if the Bystanders had not interposed.
Phalanthus had a Brother whose name was Hippias, famous through all the Army for
his Valor, Strength and Address: Pollux, as the Tarentines allege, was not a
better Champion, and he surpassed Castor himself in managing a Horse. He had
almost the Stature and Strength of Hercules, and was redoubted of all the Army,
tho he was more quarrelsom and brutal than brave. Hippias, when he saw with
what Insolence Telemachus had treated his Brother, goes in haste, and carries
off the Prisoners to Tarentum, without waiting for the Sentence of the
Assembly; which somebody having whispered to Telemachus, out he went in a Rage,
foaming like a Bear, pursuing the Huntsman that had wounded him. You might see
him wandering through the Camp, endeavoring to spy out his Enemy, and shaking the
Dart, with which he resolved to pierce him: At last, meeting him, the Sight
redoubled his Rage; he was now no more the wise Telemachus, instructed by
Minerva in the shape of Mentor, but a Madman, a furious Lion. Immediately he
called out, Stay, Hippias! Thou basest of Mortals! I will try if thou dare
rob me of the Spoils of my Victory: Thou shall not carry these Prisoners to
Tarentum; I Will send thee down to the gloomy Banks of Styx. This said, he flung
his Dart, but with so much Fury, that he could not measure his Stroke, and the
Dart missed Hippias. Immediately he puts his Hand to his Sword, whose Handle
was of Gold, and which Laertes had given him when he parted from Ithaca, as a
Pledge of his Love. This Sword had won Laertes much Honor in his Youth, and
was stained with the Blood of many famous Captains of the Epirots, in a War
wherein Laertes was Victorious. Telemachus had hardly drawn his Sword, when
Hippias, taking the Advantage of his own Strength, falls upon him, endeavoring
to snatch it out of his Hand. The Sword was broke betwixt 'em, so they grapled
and closed. They seemed like Two young Lions tearing one another to Pieces;
they dart Fire from their Eyes, they contract themselves, then they stretch,
they stoop, they rise again, they dart themselves, and are all over besmeared
with Blood. Now they come to Handy-blows, Foot to Foot, Hand to Hand, with
their two Bodies so twisted together, that they seemed but one. Hippias, who
was already arrived at Manhood, seemed able to crush the weaker and more tender
Youth of Telemachus, who already found himself out of Breath, and his Legs
begin to fail. Hippias finding him in a staggering Condition, doubled his
Force. There had been an end of the Son of Ulysses, and he had received the
just Punishment of his Rashness and Passion, if Minerva, who in her absence
watched over him, and left him in this Danger only for his Instruction, had not
determined the Victory in his Favor. She did not leave her Palace of Salentum
her self, but sent Iris, the swift Messenger of the Gods; who with nimble Wing,
cutting the spacious Air, and leaving behind her a Tract of Light, which
painted the Clouds with a (...)different Colors; rested at last upon the Shore
where the numerous Army of the Confederates was Encamped. She beheld from afar
the Strife and Ardor of the two Combatants; she trembled at the sight of the
Danger to which the young Telemachus was exposed: And approaching toward him,
involved in a bright Cloud, formed of subtle Vapors, in the very nick of time,
when Hippias redoubling his Force, believed himself Victorious, she covered the
young Charge of Minerva, with the Shield with which the sage Goddess had
entrusted her. Immediately Telemachus, whose Force was quite spent, began to
recover new Vigor, and the more he revived, the more Hippias was disordered:
He felt something, as 'twere Divine, that crushed and confounded him.
Telemachus presses him hard, assaults him sometimes in one Posture, sometimes
in another: He makes him stagger, leaving him no time to recover himself; at
last he throws him, and falls upon him. A lofty Oak of Mount Ida, felled with a
thousand Blows, which make all the Forest ring, does not make a more terrible
Noise in falling: The Earth groaned, and all Things around him trembled at his
Fall. In the mean time, Telemachus, who had recovered his Wisdom with his
Strength, had scarce thrown Hippias, when he begun to be sensible of his Fault,
in attacking thus the Brother of one of the Confederate Kings, whom he came to
Succor. He called to mind, with confusion, the wise Counsels of Mentor; he was
ashamed of the Victory, which he well knew he did not deserve. In the mean
time, Phalanthus transported with Rage, ran to succor his Brother: He had
pierced Telemachus with the Dart which he held, if he had not been afraid at
the same time to wound Hippias, whom Telemachus kept down. In this Condition,
the Son of Ulysses might have easily took away the Life of his Enemy, but his
Wrath was asswag'd: He thought of nothing now but repairing his Fault, by
showing his Moderation: Up he gets, uttering these Words. Oh Hippias! I am
satisfied I have Taught thee not to despise my Youth. Live; I admire thy Force,
thy Strength and Courage: Yield to the Power of the Gods that have protected
me, and let us think of nothing now but of uniting our Force against the
Daunians. Whilst Telemachus thus spoke, Hippias rose up, besmeared with Dirt
and Blood, and full of Shame and Rage. Phalanthus, who could not take the Life
of him who had just now so generously given it to his Brother, was quite beside
himself, and knew not what to do. All the Confederate Kings ran to the Place:
On one side they carried off Telemachus, and on the other Phalanthus and
Hippias, who having now lost all his Courage, durst not show his Face. The Army
could not enough admire how Telemachus, at so tender an Age (wherein Men
usually do not attain to their full Strength) was able to throw Hippias; who
seemed in Strength and Bulk like to those Sons of the Earth, who in former
times durst drive the immortal Gods from Olympus.

But the Son of Ulysses was very far from enjoying any Pleasure in his Victory;
and whilst others could not enough admire him, he retired into his Tent,
ashamed of his Fault, and unable to brook himself. He bewailed his Rashness: He
was sensible how unjust and unreasonable he was in his Passion: He found
something Vain, Silly, and mean in his excessive Pride: He knew that true
Greatness was only to be found in Moderation, Justice, Modesty and Humanity.
This he saw clearly, but durst not hope that ever he should amend after so many
Relapses: He was combating with himself, and you might hear him roar like a
furious Lion: Two Days he continued shut up in his Tent, unable to endure any
Company, and tormenting himself. Alas, said he, dare I ever look Mentor in the
Face? Am I the Son of Ulysses, the wisest and most patient of Men? Did I come
hither to create Division and Disorder in the Confederate Army? Is it their
Blood or that of the Daunians that I ought to have shed? I have been rash; and
whilst I lanc'd my Dart unskilfully, put my self upon unequal Terms with
Hippias, whereby I could expect nothing but a dishonorable Fate. But what
then? I should not have been any more the inconsiderate Telemachus; that young
Coxcomb that does not profit by any Advice; then my Disgrace should have ended
with my Life. Oh, could I hope never to be guilty of that for which I am now so
Disconsolate! I should be still too happy; but perhaps before Night I shall
repeat the same Actions, which at this time fill me with so much Horror and
Shame. Oh fatal Victory! Oh insufferable Applause! Which art nothing but the
bitter reproach of my Folly.

While Telemachus was in this disconsolate Condition, Nestor and Philoctetes
came to wait on him. Nestor had resolved to make him sensible of his Fault; but
this wise old Man finding the Despair the Youth was in, changed his grave
Reproof into Expressions of Tenderness to mitigate his Grief.

The Confederate Princes were put to a stand by this Quarrel: They could not
march their Army toward the Enemy, till they had reconciled Telemachus with
Phalanthus and Hippias: They were afraid every Minute lest the Tarentine
Troops should attack the Hundred young Cretans that followed Telemachus in this
War: All was in Disorder through Telemachus's Fault; and he finding himself the
Author of so much Mischief, both present and to come, gave himself up entirely
to Grief. The Confederate Princes were in a great strait: They durst not march
their Army for fear lest the Cretans and Tarentines should fall foul of one
another; nay, they could not keep them from Quarrelling within the Camp, where
they were carefully watched. Nestor and Philoctetes went backward and forward
incessantly betwixt the Tent of Telemachus and that of Phalanthus, who breathed
nothing but Revenge. Neither the soft Eloquence of Nestor, nor the Authority of
Philoctetes could prevail upon his implacable Spirit; which was still more
provoked by the irritating Discourse of his Brother Hippias. Telemachus on the
other Hand was Mild, but quite overwhelmed with Grief, which refused all manner
of Consolation. This Disorder among the Princes, put all the Troops in a
Consternation. The Camp appeared like a desolate House, after having lost the
Master of the Family, the support of its Neighbors, or the flattering Hopes of
its little Children. During this Disorder and Consternation, on a sudden they
heard the terrible Noise of Chariots, Arms, the Neighing of Horses, and Cryings
of Men: Some as Conquerours, and Hot in the Pursuit; others Flying, Dying or
Wounded: A thick Cloud of Dust covered the Sky and involved the Camp: To this
was joined a stifling Smoke, which thickened the Air; and all were seized with
Terror. It seems Adrastus, who was Vigilant and Indefatigable, had surpised
the Allies; having been advised of their March, and concealing his own. In two
Nights time, with an incredible Expedition, he had marched round an
inaccessible Mountain, of which the Allies had seized all the Avenues: And
being possessed of them, thought they were not only in perfect Security
themselves, but pretended, when they should be joined by the rest of their
Troops, by these Passes, to fall on the Enemy on the other side of the
Mountain, Adrastus, who gave Money with both Hands for Intelligence, had been
informed of this their Resolution; for Nestor and Philoctetes, though otherwise
experienced and wise Captains, were not secret enough in their Counsels. Nestor
in his old Age was too much taken up with the vain glory of recounting his
former Actions: Philoctetes spoke less, but he was hasty; and if you but roused
his active Temper, he would blab out all his Designs. Cunning People, by this
means, found the way to his Heart, and the Key to his most important Secrets:
Only provoke him, then full of Fire, and beside himself, he would break out in
threatening Language; he would brage of sure Means to accomplish his Designs; if
you seemed never so little to doubt of them, he would proceed inconsiderately
to explain them, and to betray the most important Secrets. The Heart of this
great Captain was like a Vessel made of costly Metal, but Leaky. These Villains
that were bribed with the Gold of Adrastus, did not fail to take advantage of
the Weakness of these two Princes. Nestor, they flattered continually with vain
Applause: They put him in mind of his past Victories, admired his Foresight and
Conduct: On the other hand, they laid a Trap for the impatient Humor of
Philoctetes; they talked of nothing to him but Difficulties, Unseasonableness,
Dangers, Inconveniences, and remediless Faults: When he was once heated, his
Prudence forsook him, he was not any more the same Man.

Telemachus, notwithstanding the Faults we have mentioned, was more close: He
had been accustomed to Slavery by his Misfortunes, and the Necessity he was in,
from his Childhood, to hide his Designs from the Lovers of his Mother
Penelope. He knew how to keep a Secret without telling a Lie, and was free from
that reserved and mysterious Air, that is so common to close People. He did not
seem burdened with the Secret which he kept; you found him always easy, free
and open, as one that had his Heart upon his Lips: He would tell you every
thing that was of less moment; but knew how to stop nicely, and without
affectation, at those things which might give any suspicion or broach his
Secret. By this means his Heart was inaccessible, and his best Friends knew but
as much as he thought fit to discover in order to have their good Advice.
Mentor was the only Person for whom he had no Reserve. He had different degrees
of Confidence in his other Friends, according as he had experience of their
Love and Prudence.

Telemachus had often observed that their Counsels were too soon spread over
the Camp: He advertised Nestor and Philoctetes of it; but these two experienced
Captains did not attend sufficiently to so wholesome an Advice. Age is
untractable, Habit holds it, as'twere in Chains, so that its Faults admit of no
Remedy; as full grown Trees, whose rough and knotty Trunks are hardened by
Years, cannot any more be strait'ned, so Men at a certain Age cannot be bent
from these Customs which are grown up with them, and, as 'twere, entered into
their very Marrow. They know them, but too late: In vain they lament; for
tender Youth is the only Age wherein Men have the Power of Correcting their
vicious Habits.

There was in the Army a Dolopian, named Eurimachus, an insinuating Flatterer,
who knew how to accommodate himself to all the Humors of the Princes,
Ingenious and Active to find new ways to please them. Believe him, Nothing was
hard. Ask his Advice, he thought upon what would be most grateful: He knew how
to break a Jest upon the Weak; but complaisant to those of whom he stood in
awe. He could season his Flattery so nicely, as to make it pass with Persons of
the greatest Modesty. He was Grave with the Grave, Cheerful with the Cheerful.
It was easy for him to put himself in all Shapes. Sincere and virtuous Men,
who are always the same, and subject themselves to the strict Rules of Virtue,
can never be so agreeable to Princes, as those who humor their predominant
Passions.

Eurimachus understood the Art of War, was capable of Business, had followed
Nestor as one that was pushing his Fortune, and had got much into his Favor.
He could pump any Secret out of his Hcart, which was vain and subject to
Flattery: And although Philoctetes was more diffident of him, yet his choleric
and impatient Temper gave him the same advantage as his Familiarity with
Nestor: Eurimachus would contradict him, and so by provoking him, would
discover all. This Fellow had received great Sums from Adrastus, to inform him
of the Defigns of the Allies; besides, he had always a certain Number of
Refugees in the Confederate Camp, who were one after another to desert from
thence, and return to his Army: And when Eurimachus had any important Affair to
communicate to Adrastus, he sent off one of these Deserters. The Cheat could
not be easily discovered, because they carried no Letters; and if they were
taken, had nothing about them to make Eurimachus suspected. In the mean time
Adrastus prevented all the Enterprises of the Consederates: A Resolution was no
sooner taken in their Council, than the Daunians did that precisely which was
necessary to hinder the Execution of it. Telemachus was very diligent in
searching out the Cause of this, and striving to excite the Jealousy and
Mistrust of Nestor and Philoctetes; but to no purpose; for they were blind.
Once they had resolved in Council to wait for the numerous Troops that were to
join them; and they had caused to advance secretly in the Night an hundred
Vessels, the sooner to transport their Troops from a rugged Coast where they
were to come, to the Place where the Army was encamped. All this while they
thought themselves safe, their Troops being possessed of the Passes of the
neighboring Mountains, which is inaccessible toward the Apennines. Their Army
was encamped on the River Galesus, not far from the Sea; in a delicious
Country, abounding in Pasturage, and all things necessary for the Subsistence
of an Army. Adrastus was encamped behind the Mountain, which they reckoned he
could not pass; but he understanding that the Confederates were weak, and
expected a great Reinforcement; that the Ships were waiting for their Arrival,
and that the Army was divided by Telemachus's Quarrel with Phalanthus, he
marched round with great Expedition, Night and Day, till he arrived at the
Seacoast; where, at break of Day, he surpised these hundred Vessels. They
being ill guared, he seized upon them without much Resistance, and made use of
them to transport his own Troops to the Mouth of the River Galesus. Afterward
sailing up the River, the advanced Guards believed that these were the Ships
that had their own Troops on Board; and immediately shouted for Joy. So
Adrastus and his Soldiers landed before they were known. They fall upon the
Allies, who mistrusted nothing: They found their Camp entirely open, without
Order, without a Head, and unarmed. He made his Attack on the Quarters of the
Tarentines, where Phalanthus commanded: The Daunians entered there with such
force, that the Lacedemonian Youth being surpised, were not able to resist:
While they were looking for their Arms, in the Confusion they hindered one
another. Adrastus sets Fire to the Camp: It seizes on the Tents, and mounts up
to the Clouds. With its terrible Noise it resembled a Torrent which overspreads
a whole Country, and with its rapid Course, carries it along with it the lofty
Oaks with their deep Roots, the Corn, the Granaries, the Flocks and their
Stalls. The Wind blows the Flame from Tent to Tent, and in an instant, the Camp
looked like an old Forest burnt down by a Spark of Fire. Phalanthus, though
nearest the Danger, could not remedy it: He saw clearly that all the Troops
must perish in this Fire, if they did not make haste to leave the Camp; but he
likewise saw how dangerous such a disorderly Retreat must be before a
victorious Enemy: He began to draw out the Lacedemonian Youth half Armed; but
Adrastus would not give them time to breath. On one Hand a Troop of cunning
Archers let fly a shower of Arrows upon the Soldiers of Phalanthus; on the
other, the Slingers hailed great Stones. Adrastus himself, with Sword in Hand,
marching at the head of a chosen Company of the bravest Daunians, by the light
of the Fire, pursued the flying Troops; mowing down with his Sword what had
escaped the Fire. Though he swam in Blood, he was not satiated with slaughter:
Lions and Tigers, when they worry the Shepherds with their Flocks, fall short
of his Fury. The Troops of Phalanthus faint, their Courage fails them: Pale
Death, led on by an Infernal Fury, with her Head brisled with Serpents, freezes
their Blood in their Veins. Their benumbed Members grow stiff, and their faint
Limbs deprive them even of the Hope of Flight. Phalanthus, whose Shame and
Despair had roused up his small remainder of Courage and Vigor, lifting his
Eyes and Hands toward Heaven, he saw his Brother Hippias fall at his Feet,
under the redoubled strokes of the thundering Hand of Adrastus. There he lay
stretched out, and grovelling in the Dust, with black and boiling Blood, gushing
like a Torrent from the deep Wound of his side: He shuts his Eyes, and his
furious Soul flies out with the last drop of his Blood. Phalanthus besmeared
with his Brother's Blood, and unable to help him, finds himself environed with
a Crowd of his Enemies, who were endeavoring to run him down. His Buckler was
pierced with a Thousand Darts, and his Body wounded in several Places. He could
not rally any more his fleeing Troops; the Gods looked down, and did not pity.
Jupiter amidst the Celestial Deities, beheld from Olympus, the slaughter of the
Consederates. At the same time he consulted the immutable Destinies, and saw
all those Captains whose Thread was to be cut that Day with the fatal Cissars.
All the Gods were attentive to discover his Will by his Countenance; but the
Father of the Gods and Men, told them with a sweet and majestic Voice: You see
to what Extremity the Allies are reduced; you see Adrastus routing the Enemies;
but this Sight is fallacious. Short is the Glory and Prosperity of the Wicked:
The Impious Adrastus, and detestable for his Treachery, shall not gain an
entire Victory. This Misfortune happens to the Allies, only to teach them to
correct their Folly, and keep their counsels more secret. On this occasion, the
Sage Minerva is preparing a new Triumph for her young Darling Telemachus. Here
Jupiter having ended, all the Gods in deep silence continued to behold the
Battle.

In the mean time Nestor and Philoct tes were advertised, that a part of their
Camp was already burnt; that the Flame, pusht on by the Wind, was continually
advancing; that their Troops were in Disorder; that Phalanthus was not any
longer able to sustain the Enemies Attacks. As soon as this fatal News had
reached their Ears, they run to Arms, assemble their Captains, and command them
to retire immediately out of the Camp to shun the Fire.

Telemachus, formerly cast down, and disconsolate, now forgets his Grief; he
puts on his Armor, the invaluable Present of the sage Minerva; who appearing
in the shape of Mentor, made as if she had got them from a curious Workman at
Salentum; but in reality, he caused them to be made by Vulcan, in the fuming
Caverns of Mount AEtna. This Armor was as smooth as Ice, and bright as the
Beams of the Sun. Upon them was engraved the famous History of the Siege of
Thebes: There you might see the unhappy Laius; who being informed by the Oracle
of Apollo, that his Newborn Son should be his Fathers Murderer, delivered the
Child to a Shepherd, to expose him to the Wild Beasts, and Birds of Prey. Then
you might observe the Shepherd carry the Child up the Mountain Citheron,
betwixt Boetica and Phocis, whilst it seemed to cry, as sensible of its
deplorable Destiny. It had in its Countenance, that native Simplicity and
Tenderness, which makes Childhood so lovely. The Shepherd who carrid him up the
hideous Rocks, seemed to do it with Regret, and being moved with Compassion,
the Tears flow from his Eyes: Irresolute and perplexed, he pierces the Child'd
Feet with his Sword, and thrusting in an Ozier Branch, he hang him to a Tree,
neither daring to save him against his Masters Orders, nor to deliver him up to
certain Death. After this he leaves him for fear of seeing the little Innocent
die, which he loved so dearly.

By this time, the Child was ready to perish for want of Nourishment; his Feet
by which he was hung, were Black and Swelled.

Phorbas, a Shepherd of Polybus King of Corinth, feeding his Master's Flocks in
this Desert, heard the Cries of the poor Child: He runs and takes him down,
delivers him to another Shepherd, to carry him to Queen Merope, who was
Childless: She was moved with his Beauty, and from his swelled Feet named him
Oedipus; nurses him as her own Son, believing him sent from the Gods. All these
different Actions were represented in their proper places. Asterwards you saw
Oedipus now grown up, who being informed that Polybus was not his Father,
traveled from Country to Country to discover his Nativity. The Oracle told him,
that he should find his Father in Phocis: Thither he goes: where finding the
People in an Uproar, in the Tumult he killed his Father Laius without knowing
him. After that he appears at Thebes, he explains the AEnigma of Sphinx, kills
the Monster, and espouses Queen Jocasta, his Mother not knowing her, and she
believing him to be the Son of Polybus. This detestable Marriage was followed
by a dreadful Plague, a manifest Sign of the anger of the Gods. Here Vulcan had
taken Pleasure to represent Infants dying in their Mothers Bosom, the People
languishing, and Death and Sorrow painted on their Countenance; but that which
was most frightful, was to see Oedipus, after having for a long time sought out
the Reason of the Wrath of the Gods, discover himself to be the Cause. You
might see upon the Countenance of Jocasta, Shame and Dread, to unriddle what
she was unwilling to know: Despair and Horror upon that of Oedipus. He plucks
out his Eyes, and you see him led about Blind by his Daughter Antigone. He
reproaches the Gods with the Crimes which they had suffered him to commit: Then
you see him enraged against himself, and being unable to endure the Company of
Mankind any longer, he retires, leaving his Kingdom to his two Sons, which he
had by Jocasta, Eteocles and Polynices, on condition that they should reign
each a Year by Turns. But the Discord of the Brothers was more terrible still
than the Misfortunes of Oedipus. Eteocles appears upon the Throne, refusing to
come down to let his Brother take his Place: He again having recourse to
Adrastus, King of Argos, whose Daughter he had espoused, advances toward
Thebes with a numerous Army. Round about all the besieged Town you might see
Battles. Here were assembled all the Hero's of Greece; and the Siege of Troy
did not seem more Bloody.

There you might know the Unfortunate Husband of Eryphile, the famous Diviner
Amphiraus; who foresaw the Fate which he could not avoid. He hides that he
might not be carried to the Siege of Thebes, knowing he was to engage in a War,
from which he should never return. Eryphile was the only Person he durst
confide in; Eryphile his Spouse whom he loved so dearly, and by whom he
believed he was so tenderly beloved, betrayed her Husband Amphiraus, bribed
with a Neck-lace which Adrastus King of Argos gave her. You might see her
discover the Place where her Husband was hid: And Adrastus carrying him to
Thebes against his Will. Quickly after his Arrival, he appears swallowed up of
the Earth; which opens on a sudden to plunge him. Amongst so many Combats where
Mars exercised his Fury, you might observe with horror, that of the two
Brothers, Eteocles and Polynices. There appears something hideous and dismal in
their Looks: Their Criminal Birth seems written in their Foreheads, by which
you might easily judge, that they were devoted to the Infernal Furies, and the
Vengeance of the Gods, who sacrifice them as an Example to all Brethren that
should be born in after Ages: And to show the fatal effects of Discord, which
separates those Hearts that ought to be so strictly united; you might see those
Brothers full of Rage, tearing one another to pieces; each forgetting to defend
his own Life, that he might take away that of his Brothers. They were both
Bloody, dying of mortal Wounds, without the least Abatement of their Fury; both
of 'em fallen to the Ground, and ready to breath their last; yet would crawl
one toward another to have the Pleasure of dying in the last effort of Cruelty
and Revenge. All other Combats seemed suspended at the sight of this. The two
Armies were seized with Horror and Consternation at the sight of these two
Monsters. Mars himself turned aside his cruel Eyes from such a hideous sight.
At last you might see the Flame of the funeral Pile, on which they placed the
two Bodies of these unnatural Brothers. But what was strange to behold! the
Flame parts it self in two, and Death it self could not put an end to the
implacable Hatred of Eteocles and Polynices. They would not burn together, and
their Ashes, sensible of the Mischiefs they had done to one another, would
never mingle. This was what Vulcan with his divine Art, had represented upon
the Arms which Minerva gave to Telemachus.

On the other side of the Shield, was represented Ceres in the fruitful Plains
of Enna, which are situated in the middle of Sicily. There you might see that
Goddess assembling the Inhabitants, who were dispersed up and down to get
wherewithal to sustain Nature, by Hunting, or gathering the wild Fruit, which
had fallen from the Trees. She taught those Savages to till the Ground, and to
draw their Food from its plentiful Bosom. She showed them the Plough, and
taught them to yoke the laboring Ox. You might see the Ground open in Furrows,
clest by the Plow-share; and afterward you might perceive the Golden Harvest,
covering the fruitful Plains; and the Reaper with his Sickle cutting down the
comsortable Fruits of the Ground, and thereby repaying his Labor. Iron,
elsewhere the Instrument of Destruction, was used here only to produce Plenty,
and all sorts of Pleasure.

The Nymphs, crowned with Garlands, dance together on the Banks of a River,
hard by a Pleasant Grove. Pan played on his Flute; the Fawns and wanton Satyrs
frisk at a distance by themselves. Bacchus was likewise represented, crowned
with Ivy, leaning on his Spear, and holding in his Hand a Vine-branch, adorned
with Leaves and Clusters of Grapes; his Beauty was fresh, with something in it
languishing and passionate. In this manner it was, that he appeared to the
Unfortunate Ariadne, when he found her alone and Forsaken, and overwhelmed with
Grief, on the Banks of a strange River. In fine, you might see on all Hands, a
multitude of People; the Old Men carrying the First Fruits of their Harvest
into the Temples; the Young Men wearied with Toil and Labor, returning home to
their Wives, and these going out to meet them, with the young Pledges of their
chaste Love in their Hands. There were likewise Shepherds represented; some
singing, others dancing to the sound of their Reed; all was Peace, Plenty and
Pleasure; and every thing looked smiling and happy. You might see the Wolves
play in the Pastures among the Sheep; and the Lions laying aside their
fierceness, were sporting among the tender Lambs, and the little Shepherd's
Crook equally commanded them all. This lovely piece seemed to bring to mind the
Charms of the Golden Age.

Telemachus having put on his Divine Armor, instead of his own took up
Minerva's dreadful Shield, which she had sent him by Iris, the swift Messenger
of the Gods; Having without his Knowledge carried away his own Buckler, and
left this in its room, which is formidable to the Gods themselves. In this
Condition he ran out of the Camp, to avoid its Flames: He called the chief
Commanders with a strong Voice, which inspired new Courage in their routed
Troops, who had given all over for lost. The Eyes of the young Warrior sparkle
with a divine Fire; he gives Orders with as much Caution, as an old Man ruling
his Family and instructing his Children, but executes them with all the
promptness and vigor of Youth; like an impetuous River, that with its rapid
Motion rouls along, not only its own frothy Billows, but with them the vessels
of greatest Burden that float upon it.

Philoctetes, Nestor, and the Commanders of the Mandurians, and other Nations,
found in the Son of Ulysses certain unaccountable Authority, which they all
found themselves irresistibly obliged to submit to. The Aged trust no more to
their Experience, and Counsel and Prudence forsook the commanders: Jealousy and
Emulation, so natural to Mankind, are quite extinguished in their Minds. They
all keep silence; they all wonder at Telemachus, and stand ready to obey his
Orders implicitly; as if they had been accustomed to do so. He advances, and
from an Imminence observes the posture of the Enemy; and forthwith judged it
necessary, with the utmost expedition, to surprise them in their present
Disorder, while they were burning the Camp of the Confederates. He fetched a
compass with great Expedition, and was followed by the most experienced
Commanders. He attacked the Daunians in the Rear, who doubted nothing of the
Allies being involved in the Flames of their Camp. This surprise put them in
great Disorder, and they fell under Telemachus's Hand, as the autumnal Leaves
of the Forest, when a blustering North Wind, bringing back Winter, shakes all
the Branches, and makes the very Trunks of ancient Trees groan. The Ground all
about was covered with the Bodies of those who had fallen by Telemachus's Hand.
With his own Lance he pierced the Heart of Iphycles, the youngest Son of
Adrastus, who had the boldness to offer him Combat, to save his Father's Life,
who was in danger of being surpised by Telemachus. These young Combatants were
both of them Comely, Vigorous, full of Address and Courage; of the same
Stature, the same Age, had the same sweetness of Temper, and were equally
beloved by their Parents. But Iphycles proved like a full blown Flower in a
Meadow, cut down by the Sith of the Mower. Afterward Telemachus overthrew
Euphorion, the most celebrated of all the Lydians, that came into Etruria. At
last with his Sword he slew Cleomenes, who being lately Married, had promised
his Spouse, to bring her the rich Spoils of the War, or never to return
himself. Adrastus foamed with Rage to see the Death of his son, and of many
other Commanders, and the Victory snatched out of his Hands. Phalanthus, almost
knocked down at his Feet, was like a half-slain Victime, who had escaped the
edge of the sacred Knife, and had fled from the Altar. Adrastus had well nigh
completed the ruin of Lacedemonian Phalanthus, drowned in his own Blood, and
that of the Soldiers that Fought with him. When he heard the shooting of
Telemachus coming up to his relief, in that Moment he gets new Life; and the
Cloud that had already overspread his Eyes is dissipated. The Daunians at this
unexpected Attack, leave Phalanthus, to make head against a more formidable
Enemy. Adrastus seemed like a Tiger, from whom a Body of Shepherds have
snatched the Prey which he was ready to devour. Telemachus sought him out in
the Crowd, endeavoring by one stroke to put an end to the War, by delivering
the Allies from their implacable Enemy; But Jupiter grudged the Son of Ulysses,
so quick and easy a Victory: And Minerva too had a mind to inure him to
Troubles, that he might the better understand how to Reign. Therefore the
impious Adrastus was preserved by the Father of the Gods, that Telemachus might
have opportunity to acquire more Glory, and exercise his Virtue. A Storm
summoned by Jupiter, saved the Daunians; a terrible Thunder proclaimed the Will
of the Gods. You would have thought that the eternal Vaults of the high Olympus
had been ready to tumble down upon the Heads of weak Mortals; the Flashes of
Lightning split the Clouds from Pole to Pole; and from the moment that they
ceased to dazzle the Eyes with their darting Flame, all was overspread with
Midnight Darkness. The Rain falling in great abundance separated the two
Armies. Thus Adrastus took advantage of the assistance of the Gods, without
being moved with a sense of their Power: And for his Ingratitude, deserved to
be kept for a more dreadful Vengeance. He made haste to march his Army between
the Camp that was half burnt down, and a Morass that reached as far as the
River. The Expedition with which he made his Retreat, sufficiently demonstrated
his ready Invention and Presence of Mind. The Allies animated by the Valor of
Telemachus, would have pursued him; but by the favor of the Storm he escaped,
as a swiftwing'd Bird out of the Net of the Fowler. The Allies now thought of
nothing but re-possessing their Camp, and repairing their Damages: In entering
it, they saw the woeful Effects of War; the Sick and Wounded not being able to
crawl out of their Tents, or to save themselves from the Fire, appeared half
burnt, sending up toward Heaven their doleful Shrieks and dying Groans. It
struck Telemachus to the Heart, nor was he able to contain his Tears: Often did
he turn aside his Eyes, being seized with Horror and Compassion: He could not
without groaning, behold these Bodies that remained still alive, and destined
to a long and painful Death. They looked like the Flesh of Victims, roasted on
Altars, whose Smell diffuses it self all a-round. Alas! cried Telemachus,
behold the Mischiefs that attend War! What blind Fury pushes on unhappy
Mortals? Their Days are so short, and the Misery that attends them so great:
Why do they hasten the Fate that is already so near? Why will they add so many
Troubles and Afflictions, to the Bitterness which the Gods have mingled with
this short Life? Men are all Brethren, and yet they tear one another more
cruelly than the savage Beasts. Lions never make War with Lions, nor Tigers
with Tigers, but exercise their Cruelty upon Creatures of a different Kind. Man
alone, in despite of his Reason, does that which Beasts, that are void of it,
would never have done. But still, why such Wars? Is there not Ground in the
World enough to employ the Labor of all Mankind? How much of it lies desert?
More than all Mankind is sufficient to replenish. What is it then that makes
Princes spread the Flames of War over vast Kingdoms and Countries? A false Idea
of Glory, an empty Title of Conqueror. Thus one Man, whom the Gods in their
Anger have sent into the World, render so many Men miserable: To satisfy his
Ambition and Vanity, all must be ruined; all must swim in Blood, be destroyed
by Fire; and those who escape the Fire and Sword, must perish by more cruel
Want. In a word, one Man sports himself with human Nature, involves all in
universal Desolation to gratify his Humor and Vainglory.

What monstrous Ambition is this? Can we sufficiently abhor and detest enough
such Men, who have forgot all Humanity? No sure, so far are they from being
Demigods, that they are to be reckoned below Men: Their Memory ought to be
accursed through all those Ages, in which they thought to have been admired.
Oh! with how much deliberation ought Princes to weigh the War they undertake!
They ought to be just: Nor is that enough, they ought to be Necessary. The
Blood of the People ought not to be spilt, but for their Preservation, in the
greatest Extremity: But the Counsels of Elatterers, a false Notion of
Greatness, groundless Jealousies, and unreasonable Covetousness, covered with
specious Pretexts, do insensibly engage Princes in Wars, which render
themselves unhappy, make them hazard all when there is no necessity, and in the
end prove equally fatal to their Subjects and Enemies. Thus did Telemachus
reason; but he did not rest content in deploring the Miseries of War, but
endeavored to mitigate them. You might see him visiting the sick and expiring
Soldiers in their Tents, scattering Money and Medicines among them, comforting
and encouraging them by his Discourses, which were full of Friendship and
Tenderness, and sending others when he could not visit them himself. Among the
Cretans that were with him, there were two old Men; one of them were called
Traumaphilus, the other Nozofugus: Traumaphilus had been at the Siege of Troy
with Idomeneus, and had learned from the Sons of Esculapius the Divine Art of
curing Wounds: He had an odoriferous Liquor which he injected into the deepest
and most envenomed Wounds, that consumed all the rotten and dead Flesh, without
being forced to make Incisions, causing new Flesh to grow, more sound and more
beautiful than the former. As for Nozofugus, he had never seen the Sons of
Esculapius, but by the means of Meriones, he had procured a sacred and
mysterious Book, which Esculapius had given his Sons: And besides, Nozofugus
was a Favorite of the Gods: He had composed Hymns in honor of the Children of
Latona: And every day sacrificed a white Sheep, without blemish, to Apollo, by
whom he was oftentimes inspired: He no sooner saw a sick Person, than he could
tell by his Eyes, his Complexion, the Disposition of his Body, and the manner
of his Breathing, what the source of the Malady was: Sometimes he would give
'em sudorifick Remedies, which by their powerful Effects did demonstrate, how
much Perspiration increased or diminished, disordered or restored the Machine
of our Body. In languishing Distempers, he gave certain Drinks which by degrees
reestablished the noble Parts, and by sweetning the Blood, renewed the Vigor
of his Patients; but he often alleged, that it was the fault of their Virtue
and Courage that made Men stand in need so often of Medicines. It is a shame,
said he, for Men to have so many Diseases; for good Health is the Product of a
virtuous Life; their Intemperence, said he, changes into deadly Poison that
wholesome Nourishment which was appointed for preserving their Life. Immoderate
Pleasures do shorten Men's days more than the best Remedies can prolong them.
The short Allowance of the Poor preserves their Health, while the Rich deprive
themselves of it by their excess. Those Nourishments that gratify the Palate
most, and which force Appetite, are a poisoning instead of nourishing.
Medicines in themselves are really mischievous and destroy Nature, and ought
only to be used on pressing Occasions; but the Sovereign Remedy that is always
harmless, always useful, is Sobriety, Temperance in all our Pleasures,
Tranquillity of Mind, and Exercise of the Body: This makes the Blood sweet and
temperate, and dissipates all noxious and superfluous Humors. Thus the sage
Nozofugus was less admired for his Medicines than he was for the Diet he
prescribed to prevent Diseases, and render Remedies effective.

These two Men were sent by Telemachus to visit all the Sick in the Army: They
cured many by their Remedies, but many more by the care they took to make them
successful; for they took care to keep them clean, and by that cleanness to
prevent noisome Air; and made them observe an exact Sobriety, and a regular
Diet during their Cure. The Soldiers were all touched with a sense of this
seasonable Relief, and thanked the Gods for sending Telemachus into the
Confederate Army. This is, sure, no Mortal, say they, but some beautiful Deity,
in human Shape; or if he is a Man, he is nearer a Kin to the Gods than the rest
of Mankind, and is sent into the World only to do good. He is more to be
beloved for his Sweetness and Bounty, than for his Valor. O that we could have
such a King! But the Gods have reserved him for a People more happy than we;
whom they mind to cherish, and among whom they will renew the Golden Age.
Telemachus, while he spent the Night in visiting the several Quarters of the
Army to prevent the Stratagems of Adrastus, heard these Commendations, which
had not the least Suspicion of Flattery. As he desired no other, so his Heart
was moved at these, and he found that sweet and pure Pleasure, which the Gods
have joined to Virtue alone, and which ill Men, because they have never
experimented it, can neither conceive nor believe; but could not remain fixed
in this sort of Pleasure; his former Faults came all thronging into his Mind:
He did not forget his natural Haughtiness, nor his indifferent Behavior
toward other Men, and he was secretly ashamed that he was naturally harsh, and
yet seemed so human. He ascribed all the Glory that was bestowed on him, and
which he thought was above his Merit, to the Wisdom of Minerva. It is thou, O
great Goddess, said he, that gave me Mentor for an Instructor, and a Corrector
of my evil Temper: It is thou that have blessed me with Wisdom to make
advantage of my Escapes, and to distrust my self: It is thou that restrain'st
my impetuous Passions; and it is thou that make me sensible of the Pleasure
of relieving the Unhappy: Without thee I should be hated, and deservedly too:
Without thee I should commit irreparable Faults, and be as a Child, who being
insensible of its own Weakness, lets go the hold it hold it had of its Mother,
and falls the very first step that it makes.

Nestor and Philoctetes were amazed to see Telemachus become so gentle, so
courteous, so helpful, and so provident. They were puzzled what to think; they
saw him quite another Man; and that which surpised them more, was the great
care he took about the Funeral of Hippias. He went in Person to bring his
bloody and disfigured Body from the Place where it lay hid under a heap of dead
Men: He shed pious Tears over him, and said, O Shade, thou know now how much
I esteemed thy Valor! It Is true, thy Haughtiness did provoke me; but the heat
of thy Youth was to blame for it; and I am not insensible how much that Age
wants to be excused. We had at last been united in a sincere Friendship; I was
to blame: O ye Gods, wherefore have ye taken him from me!

Telemachus afterward caused the Body to be Washed with an odoriferous Liquor,
and gave Orders concerning the funeral Pile. The lofty Pines, groaning under
the strokes of the Ax, came tumbling down from the tops of the Mountains; the
Oaks, those Ancient Sons of the Earth, that seemed to threaten Heaven; the tall
Poplars, the young Elms with their verdant Tops, and thick leaved Branches; the
Beeches, the glory of the Forest, lay all felled on the River Galesus: There
were they raised into a Pile, resembling a regular Building. The Flame began to
appear, and a Pillar of Smoke mounted up to the Heavens. The Lacedaemonians
marched with a slow and doleful pace, trailing their Pikes, and looking on the
Ground; bitter Sorrow stood painted on their Warlike Countenances, and the
Tears trickl'd down in abundance. After the rest, came the aged Pherecides,
stooping not so much under the great number of his Years, as a load of Grieffor
surviving Hippias, whom he had brought up from his very Infancy: He raised his
Hands, and his Eyes that were drowned in Tears, toward Heaven. After the death
of Hippias, he refused all manner of Food, nor could Sleep shut his Eyelids,
or suspend the smartness of his Pain for a Moment. With a trembling pace he
walked after the Procession, not knowing whither he went; he was speechless,
because his Heart was quite oppressed; his silence was the effect of Despair
and Dejection. But no sooner did he see the Pile kindled, than he cried out in
a fury, O Hippias, Hippias! I shall never see thee again! Hippias is no more,
and yet I live still! O my dear Hippias! it is I that am the cause of thy Death;
'twas I that taught thee to despise it; I believed that thou should have shut
my Eyes, and sucked my last Breath. O ye cruel Gods! Why did ye prolong my
days, only that I might see the death of Hippias? O my dear Child, that I have
brought up with so much care, I shall see thee no more; but I shall see thy
Mother, whom Grief will kill, and who will reproach me with thy Death; I shall
see thy young Spouse beating her Breast, and pulling off her Hair, and I am the
unhappy cause. O dear Shade, call me to the Banks of Styx; for the Light is
hateful to me, and it is thee only, my dear Hippias, that I wish to see.
Hippias, Hippias! O my dear Hippias! I only live now to pay my last Duty to thy
Ashes.

In the mean time, you might see the Body of young Hippias stretched out in a
Coffin adorned with Purple, Gold and Silver; Death that had shut his Eyes was
not able to deface all his Beauty, and the Graces appeared still in his pale
Face; Around his Neck that was whiter than Snow, but now leaning on his
Shoulder, his long black Hair did wave, finer than those of Atis and Ganimede;
but which were now to be turned to Ashes. You might observe in his Side the
deep Wound, through which all his Blood had run out, and which had sent him
down into the gloomy Regions of Pluto. Telemachus, sad and dejected, followed
the Corpse at a little distance, strowing Flowers. When they came to the Pile,
the young Son of Ulysses could not endure to see the Flame seize on the Cloth
in which the Body was wrapped, without shedding fresh Tears. Adieu, said he, O
magnanimous Hippias! For I dare not call thee Friend: Rest in quiet, O Shade,
who have merited so much renown! If I did not love thee I should envy thy
Happiness, who art freed from those Miseries that accompany us and art retired
by the Path of Honor. How happy should I be, if my End were the same! May Styx
never be able to stop thy Ghost; may thy Passage be easy into the Elysian
Fields; may Fame preserve thy Name throughout all Ages, and may thy Ashes rest
in Peace. Scarce had he spoke these Words, which were interrupted with Sobs,
when the Army gave a hideous shout; they were moved with grief for the loss of
Hippias, they were recounting his great Actions; and their Grief for his death,
brought to their Minds all his good Qualities, and made them forget all those
Failings, which the Heat of his Youth, or his bad Education had occasioned: But
they were more moved with the tender Affection that Telemachus had for him. Is
this, said they, the young Greek, that was so Proud, so Haughty, so Disdainful
and untractable? See how gentle, how humane, how kind he is now become! Minerva,
no doubt, who loved his Father so dearly, has had the same Passion for the Son;
doubtless she has bestowed on him the most valuable Blessing that the Gods can
give to Mortals, in affording him, together with Wisdom, a Heart sensible of
Friendship.

By this time the Flame had consumed the Body. Telemachus, with his own Hands,
besprinkl'd the Ashes that were yet smoking, with a Liquor richly perfumed;
then put them into an Urn of Gold, which he crowned with Garlands, and carried
to Phalanthus. He lay stretched out wounded in several places, and in the
extremity of his Weakness, had a glimpse of the melancholy Gates of Death.

Traumaphilus and Nozofugus, whom the Son of Ulysses had sent to attend him,
had tried their utmost skill for his Relief. They had by degrees brought back
his departing Soul; fresh Spirits began insensibly to revive his Heart, and
create a penetrating Vigor: The Balsom of Life gliding from Vein to Vein, had
reached his Heart; a grateful warmth revived his Limbs; but in the very Moment
that the Swooning left him, Grief succeeded; for he began to be sensible of the
Loss of his Brother, which, till then, he had not been in a condition to think
of. Alas! said he, why all this care to save my Life? Had I not better die, and
follow my dear Hippias? I saw him fall hard by me: O Hippias! the comfort of my
Life, my Brother, my dear Brother, thou art now no more! I can hereafter
neither see thee, nor hear thee, nor embrace thee, nor comfort thee in thy
Troubles, nor complain to thee of my own. O ye Gods, Enemies to Mankind! Must I
forever be deprived of Hippias! Is it possible! is it not a Dream? No, it is
real, O Hippias, I have left thee, I have seen thee die, and I must live till I
have avenged thee; I will sacrifice to thy Ghost the Cruel Adrastus, who is
stained with thy Blood.

While Phalanthus was thus speaking, the two Divine Men used their utmost
endeavor to appease his Grief, for fear it should increase his Disease, and
frustrate the Effects of their Medicines: On a sudden he perceived Telemachus,
who came to see him. At first sight, two contrary Passions were struggling in
his Breast; he harbored a Resentment of what had passed between Telemachus and
Hippias; his Grief for the loss of Hippias gave it an Edge; he could not forget
that he owed the preservation of his Life to Telemachus, who rescued him out of
the Hands of Adrastus, all bloody, and half dead. But when he saw the Golden
Urn which enclosed the Ashes of his dear Brother Hippias, he dissolved into
Tears; he embraced Telemachus, without being able to speak: At last, with a
languishing Voice, interrupted with Sighs, he said, O worthy Son of Ulysses,
thy Virtue constrains me to love thee; I owe thee the small remainder of my
Life, and I owe thee also something that is more dear to me: Had it not been for
thee, the Body of my Brother had been a Prey to the Vultures: Had it not been
for thee, his Ghost, deprived of Sepulture, had wandered in a miserable
Condition, on the Banks of the River Styx, continually pusht back by the
pitiless Charon. Must I be so far indebted to one whom I mortally hated? Repay
him, O ye Gods, and deliver me from this Miserable Life. And thou Telemachus,
pay me the last Duty that thou have paid to my Brother, that thy Glory may be
complete.

With these Words, Phalanthus was quite spent, and overwhelmed with excess of
Grief. Telemachus staid by him, but durst not speak, waiting till he should
recover a little strength. Presently Phalanthus having come out of his Fit,
takes the Urn out of the Hands of Telemachus; twenty times he kissed it, and
watered it with his Tears, and said; O Dear, O Precious Ashes! When shall mine
be enclosed in the same Urn? O thou Ghost of Hippias! I will follow thee to the
Shades below: Telemachus shall avenge us both.

In the mean time, Phalanthus recovered daily by the watchful Care of these two
Men, who understood the Art of Esculapius. Telemachus was always by them to
quicken their Diligence for hastening the Cure; and all the Army was struck
with Admiration at his Goodness in releiving his greatest Enemy, more than at
the Valor and Conduct which he showed in Battle, when he saved the Confederate
Army. In the mean time Telemachus gave Proof how indefatigable he was in the
greatest Hardships of War. He slept little, and his Sleep was often
interrupted, either by the intelligence he received, every Hour of the Night,
as well as of the Day; or by viewing all the Quarters of the Army, which he
never did twice at the same Hours, that he might the better surprise those that
were negligent. Oftentimes he returned to his Tent, all over Sweat and Dust.
His Diet was plain, being the same with that of the Soldiers, that he might set
them a Copy of Sobriety and Patience. Provisions being scarce in that
Encampment, he judged it necessary to prevent a Mutiny of the Soldiers,
voluntarily to share with them in their Hardships. His Body was so far from
being weakened by that toilsom Life; that every Day it became Stronger and more
hardened. He began to lose the tender Graces of his Face, which are, as 'twere,
the bloom of Youth; his Complexion grew Browner and less Delicate, and his
Limbs rougher and more nervous.

In the mean time, Adrastus, whose Troops had been considerably wasted by the
Battle, had posted himself behind the Hill Aulon, to wait the coming of some
Reinforcements, and to try whether he could once more surprise the Enemy; just
like a famished Lion, bauk'd of his Prey, returns to the shady Forest, and
reenters his Den, where he whets his Teeth and his Claws, and impatiently
waits for a favorable Minute to destroy the whole Flock.

Telemachus having made it his chief Care to observe a strict Discipline
through the whole Army, he thought of nothing now but putting in execution a
Design which he had already conceived, and which he had concealed from all the
Commanders in the Army. For a long time, during whole Nights, his Head had been
filled with Dreams, that represented to him his Father Ulysses. This Image of
Ulysses used always to return when Night was going away, and Aurora began with
her dawning Light to chase the wandering Stars from the Heavens; and when soft
Sleep began to compose the fluttering Dreams. Sometimes he would fancy that he
saw him Naked in a fortunate Island, on the Banks of a River, in a pleasant
Meadow bedecked with Flowers, and environed by Nymphs, who threw their Garments
on him to cover him. Sometimes he thought he heard him Talking in a Palace, all
glittering with Gold and Ivory, where Men, crowned with Garlands, listen to him
with Pleasure and Admiration. At other times he would appear to him on a sudden
in those Feasts, where Joy shines bright amidst Delights, and where you might
hear the soft Harmony of a charming Voice with a Harp, more melodious than the
Harp of Apollo, or the Voice of all the Muses.

Telemachus awaking, grew melancholy at his pleasant Dream. O my Father! O my
dear Father Ulysses, cried he! The most frightful Dream had been more pleasant
to me. These Representations of Happiness give me reason to believe that you
are already gone down to the abode of blessed Souls, where the Gods reward
their Virtue with eternal Tranquillity. Methinks I see the Elysian Fields. O
how hard a Thing is it to hope no more! What, O my dear Father! Shall I see
thee no more, shall I embrace him no more who loved me so tenderly, and whom I
have sought after with so much Labor and Toil? Shall I never hear Wisdom it
self Speak out of thy Mouth? Shall I never again kiss those Hands, those dear,
those victorious Hands, by whom so many Enemies have fallen? Shall they never
punish the foolish Lovers of Penelope, and must Ithaca for ever be Ruined?

O ye Gods, who are Enemies to my Father, ye have sent me this Dream to deprive
me of all Hope; it is to deprive me of Life. No, I cannot live longer in this
uncertainty. What do I say, Alas! Nothing is more certain than that my Father
is no more; I Will go find out his Ghost in the Shades below. Theseus succeeded
in this Attempt: The impious Theseus, who durst offer Violence to the infernal
Deities! As for me, a pious Motive carries me thither. Hercules has descended
there; I am no Hercules; but it is glorious to attempt to imitate him. Orpheus,
by the relation of his Misfortunes, did sensibly touch the Heart of the
inexorable God, and obtained the return of Eurydice from thence. I have a
juster Claim to Compassion than Orpheus, because my Loss is greater. Who can
compare a young Girl, not singular for her Beauty, to the sage Ulysses,
admired by all Greece? Let us go, let us dye, if it must be so: Why should
Death be so formidable, since Life is so miserable? O Pluto! O Proserpine! I Will
try ever it be long whether ye are as pitiless as ye are called. O my Father!
After all my fruitless Travel over Seas and Land to find you out, if the Gods
deny me the Enjoyment of you on Earth, and in the Light of the Sun, I Will go try
whether you are gone to the melancholy Abodes of the Dead. Perhaps they will
not refuse me a sight of your Ghost in the Kingdom of Darkness. While he was
thus Speaking, Telemachus watered his Bed with his Tears; then he arose, to try
whether by the Light he could mitigate the sharpness of his Sorrow that his
Dream had occasioned; but this was an Arrow that had pierced his Heart, and
which he continually carried about with him. In this Anguish, he essayed to
descend into the infernal Regions, by a famous Place not far removed from the
Camp: It is called Acheron, because in this Place there is a dreadful Cave, by
which you may go down to the Banks of Acheron, a River by which the Gods
themselves are afraid to Swear. The Town stood on a Rock, like a Nest in the
top of a Tree. At the foot of the Rock was this Cavern to be seen, which
fearful Mortals were afraid to approach. The chief care of the Shepherds was to
turn away their Flocks from it: The sulphurous Stams which the Stygian Lake
incessantly cast forth through this Passage infected the Air. Around it grew
neither Herb nor Flower: There no gentle Zephirs fanned the Air: There you
could neither see the blooming Graces of the Spring, nor the rich Blessings of
Autumn: There the Ground was all dry and languishing; and there was nothing to
be seen but a few Shrubs stripped of their Leaves, and the fatal Cypress. All
round for a great way, Ceres denied the Laborers her Golden Harvests: In vain
did Bacchus seem to promise his pleasant Fruits; the Grapes withered instead of
ripening. The Sorrowful Nayades could not make the Water run pure; their
Streams were always bitter and muddy. No warbling of Birds was to be heard in
that Desert, that was all bristled with Briars and Thorns; there was no Grove
to shelter them, they went and sung their Loves in a gentler Air. Nothing was
to be heard there but the croaking of Ravens, and the melancholy Voice of the
Owl: The very Herbs were bitter, and the Flocks that passed that way did not
feed on that pleasant Pasture which used to make them skip: The Bull loathed
the (...) and the Shepherds forgot their Pipe and Flute.

Out of this Cavern, oftentimes, there issued forth a dark and thick Smoke,
which made a sort of Night at Midday. The neighboring People redoubled their
Sacrifices, to appease the Wrath of the infernal Gods; but oftentimes, Men in
the flower of their Age, and in the bloom of their Youth, were the only Victims
which these cruel Divinities, by a fatal Contagion, took Pleasure to Sacrifice.

It was here that Telemachus resolved to find out the way into the black
Habitation of Pluto. Minerva, who always kept a watchful Eye over him, and had
covered him with her Shield, had bespoke Pluto's Favor. Jupiter, at the
Request of Minerva, had given Orders to Mercury (who went down every Day to the
Regions below, to deliver a certain number of Mortals into the Hands of Charon)
to desire the King of Shades that he would allow the Son of Ulysses to enter
into his Dominions.

Telemachus secretly withdrew out of the Camp by Night; he traveled by the
Light of the Moon, and invoked that powerful Deity, who in the Heavens appears
a bright Star in the Night, on Earth is the chaste Diana, and in Hell is the
dreadful Hecate. This Goddess vouchsafed him a favorable Ear, because his
Heart was upright, and because he was guided by the pious Love of a dutiful
Son. Scarce had he approached the entry of the Cave, when he heard the
bellowing of the subterranean Empire. The Earth trembled under his Feet; the
Heavens armed themselves with Lightning and Fire, that seemed ready to fall
down. The young Son of Ulysses was shocked, and his whole Body was bedewed with
a cold Sweat; but his Courage supported him; he raised up his Eyes and his
Hands toward Heaven. Ye great Gods, cried he, I accept this happy Omen:
Complete your Work. This said, he redoubled his Pace, and went forward boldly.
Presently the thick Smoke, which rendered the entry to the Cavern fatal to all
other Creatures that approached it, was dissipated; the poisonous Smell ceased
for a while, and Telemachus entered alone; for what other Mortal durst follow
him? Two Cretans who had accompanied him to a certain distance from the Cave,
and to whom he had entrusted his Design, stood Trembling and half Dead a great
way from it, in a Temple, making their Vows, and despairing of ever seeing
Telemachus again.

In the mean time, the Son of Ulysses, with his Sword in his Hand, plunges
himself in horrible Darkness. Presently he perceived a dim and faint Light,
such as we see in the Night Time on Earth. He observed the airy Ghosts
fluttering about him, whom he warded off with his Sword. Not long after, he
came in sight of the melancholy brink of the marshy River, whose muddy and
stagnant Waters turn in a continual Whirlpool. He discovered upon the Banks of
it an innumerable crowd of departed Souls who had been deprived of Sepulture,
making their fruitless Addresses to the pitiless Charon. This Deity, whose
perpetual old Age made him morose and fretful, returned them nothing but
Threats and Refusals; but at first sight received the young Greek aboard his
Boat. Telemachus had no sooner entered than he heard the mournful Groans of a
certain disconsolate Ghost. What is the cause, pray, said he, of your Misery;
what was you on Earth? I was, replied the Ghost, Nabopharzan, King of proud
Babylon; all the Eastern Nations trembled at the sound of my Name. I made the
Babylonians pay divine Honors to me in a Temple of Marble, where I was
represented by a Statue of Gold; before which, night and day, the most precious
Perfumes of Ethiopia were burnt; none ever contradicted me unpunished; new
Pleasures were daily invented to sweeten my Life; I was then young and
vigorous. What Pleasure was there that I did not taste while I sat on the
Throne? But an ungrateful Woman, whom I dearly loved, convinced me that I was
not a God; she has poisoned me, and I am no more. Yesternight my Ashes were,
with great Solemnity, put into an Urn of Gold; they cried, they tore off their
Hair, and seemed as if they would throw themselves into the Flames of my Pile,
and share in my death: Some are going still to mourn at the Foot of the
magnificent Tomb where my Ashes were laid; but no body does really regret my
Loss: My Memory is abhorred by my own Family, and here below I am already
exposed to the most dreadful Reproaches.

Telemachus, moved at this sight, said to him: But were you truly happy during
your Reign? Were you sensible of that calm and gentle Peace, without which the
Heart remains always, as 'twere, withred and shrunk up amidst the greatest
Pleasures? No, replied the Babylonian, I don't so much as know what you mean.
The Sages boast of this Peace, as the only Good; but for my part, I never felt
it: My Soul was incessantly agitated with new desires, with fear and with hope:
I endeavored to intoxicate my self with the tumultuous Motion of my Passions;
I was careful to entertain this Frenzy, to make it lasting; the shortest
interval of calm Reason had been bitter. Behold, this was the Peace that I
enjoyed; all other seemed a mere Trifle and a Dream; these are the Blessings
that I regret. While the Babylonian was thus speaking, he wept like one of a
mean Spirit, softened by Prosperity, and who had never been accustomed to bear
Misfortunes with Constancy. There were hard by him certain Slaves, who had been
slain to grace his Funeral. Mercury had delivered them to Charon with their
King, and had given them absolute Power over him whom they had served on Earth.
The Ghosts of these Slaves stood now no more in awe of the Ghost of
Nabopharzan; they kept him in Chains, offering him the most cruel Indignities.
One would say to him, Were not we Men as well as you? How came thou to be so
stupid as to fancy thy self a God, and not rather remember that thou were Cast
in the same Mould with other Men? Another insultingly would tell him, Thou
had reason not to pass for a Man, being a Monster, void of all Humanity.
Another would say to him, Well, where are all thy Flatterers now? Thou have now
nothing to bestow, poor Wretch; it is not in thy Power to do any more Mischief;
behold thou art now become a Slave to thy own Slaves. The Gods are slow in
executing Justice, but at length they have done it. At these hard words he fell
flat on his Face, tearing his Hair, in an excess of Rage and Despair. But
Charon called to the Slaves; Pull him by his Chain, raise him up in spite of
his Teeth; he shall not so much as have the comfort to hide his Shame: All the
Ghosts about Styx must bear witness to justify the Gods who suffered this
impious Wretch to Reign so long upon Earth. This is, O Babylonian, but the
beginning of thy Sorrow; prepare thy self to be judged by the inflexible Minos.
Before dreadful Charon had well ended his Discourse, his Boat had touched the
Borders of Pluto's Empire. The Ghosts came all flocking together to view this
living Man, that appeared among the dead in the Boat; but no sooner had the
Foot of Telemachus touched the Land, than they all fled; just as the Shades of
Night are dissipated by the first glimpse of the Day. Charon looking on the
young Greek with a smooth Face, and less fierceness in his Eyes than usual,
said, O Mortal! beloved by the Gods, since thou art allowed to enter the
Kingdom of Night, inaccessible to all living, make have to go where the
Destinies call thee; go through this gloomy Path to the Palace of Pluto, whom
you will find on his Throne; he will permit you to enter those Places, the
Secrets of which he will not allow me to discover. Telemachus forth with
advancing with a swift Pace, was surrounded by multitudes of fluttering Ghosts,
innumerable as the Sands on the Shore; and amidst the hurry of this numberless
Multitude, he was seized with a Divine Horror, observing the profound Silence
of these vast Places. His Hair stood on end, so soon as he approached the
gloomy Abode of the pitiless Pluto; his Knees trembled, his Voice failed him,
and it was with much ado that he could utter these words: You see, O terrible
Divinity! The Son of the unhappy Ulysses; I come to enquire of you, whether my
Father is descended into your Dominions, or if he is wandering still on Earth.

Pluto was seated on a Throne of Ebony; his Countenance looked pale and severe,
his Eyes were hollow and sparkling, his Face wrinkled and threatening: The Sight
of a living Man was as odious to him, as the Light is offensive to the Eyes of
those Creatures that are accustomed to lurk in their Retreats till the approach
of Night. By his side appeared Proserpine, who was his only pleasing Object,
and who seemed in some measure to soften his Heart: She enjoyed a Beauty that
was always fresh; but her Divine Graces seemed sullied a little by something
harsh and cruel that was borrowed from her Spouse. At the Foot of the Throne
was pale and devouring Death, with his sharp-edg'd Sith, which he whetted
incessantly. About him flew, black Cares, cruel Jealousies, Revenges, glutted
with Blood, and full of Wounds; unjust Hatreds, Covetousness, gnawing it self;
Despair, tearing it self with its own Hands; furious Ambition, that puts all in
Confusion; Treason, that feeds upon Blood, and cannot enjoy the Fruits of its
Wickedness; Envy, that darts its deadly Venom all round her, and who frets and
rages when she is unable to hurt; Impiety, that has dug a bottomless Pit, and
desperately thrown her self headlong into it; the hideous Specter; the
Phantomes, that assume the shape of the Dead to frighten the Living; the
frightful Dreams and Watchings that are as tormenting as those. With all these
dire Specter was the haughty Pluto environed, and with these were his Palace
filled. He answered Telemachus, with a hollow Voice, that made the bottom of
Hebrus roar: Young Mortal, said he, thy Destiny has made thee violate this
sacred Refuge of the Ghosts; follow thy Destiny; for me, thou shall never know
where thy Father is; it is enough thou art free to go look for him; since he has
been a King upon Earth, thou have no more to do but to traverse one part of
dark Tartarus, where the wicked Kings are punished; and on the other, the
Elysian Fields where the good Ones are rewarded. But you cannot pass from hence
to the Elysian Fields, till you have gone through Tartarus; make have thither,
and get ye out of my Dominions.

Forthwith Telemachus seemed to fly through those empty and immense Spaces; he
was so eager to know if he should see his Father, and to remove himself from
the Presence of that horrible Tyrant, dreadful both to the Living and Dead. He
quickly found himself on the Borders of gloomy Tartarus; from which there arose
a black and thick Smoke, whose infectious Stink would have brought present
Death with it, if it had reached the Abodes of the Living. This Smoke covered a
River of flaming Fire; the noise of which, resembling that of the most
impetuous Torrents, when they throw themselves down the highest Mountains into
the bottom of a Gulf, struck those almost deaf that entered those dismal Places.

Telemachus, secretly animated by Minerva, undauntedly entered this Abyss; at
first sight he perceived a great number of Men, who had lived in a very mean
Condition, and who were punished for having heaped up Riches by Fraud,
Treachery and Cruelty. He observed there Swarms of impious Hypocrites, who made
a Show of Religion, to serve them for a pretext to cover their Ambition, and to
impose upon the Credulous. These Men who had abused Virtue it self, (the
greatest Blessing that the Gods can bestow) were punished as the most execrable
of all Mankind. The Children who had killed their Fathers or Mothers; the Wives
who had embrew'd their Hands in the Blood of their Husbands; the Traitors who
had abandoned their Party, after they had violated their most solemn Oaths,
underwent a more gentle Punishment than those Hypocrites. Such was the Sentence
of the three Infernal Judges, and this was their Reason: It was, because the
Hypocrites, not thinking it enough to be ill, as the rest of the Wicked, would
pass for good Men, and by their counterfeit Virtue, make People afraid to trust
those that were really so. The Gods, whom they mocked, and made despicable in
the Eyes of Men, take Pleasure to exercise their Power in revenging this
Affront.

Near to these, appeared another sort of Men, whom the Vulgar do not believe
very culpable, but whom the divine Vengeance punishes without Mercy. These are
the Ungrateful, the Layars, the Flatterers, who commend Vice; the malicicious
Censurers, who endeavor to fully the brightest Virtue; in fine, those who have
rashly past Sentence, before they considered things to the bottom, and by that
means wronged the Reputation of the Innocent; but of all Ingratitudes, that is
punished as the blackest which one is guilty of against the Gods. What, says
Minos, one is reputed a Monster, that fails in his Acknowledgments to his
Father, or to his Friend, from whom he has received assistance; and yet Men
glory in their Ingratitude toward the Gods, of whom they hold Life, and all
the Blessings that attend it. Do not we owe our Being to them more than to our
Parents, of whom we are Born? and the more such Crimes go unpunished upon
Earth, the more they become the Object of implacable Vengeance here below.

Telemachus seeing the three Judges sitting to pass Sentence upon a Man, took
the boldness to ask what were his Crimes. Immediately the Criminal taking upon
him to Answer, cried out, I never did any Evil; on the contrary, I placed my
greatest Happiness in doing good: I have always been Generous, Liberal, Just,
Complaisant, what have they then to object? To which Minos answered, we have
nothing to reproach thee with, in respect of Men; but did not thou owe them
far less than to the Gods? Where is then that Justice of which thou bragst so
much? Thou have failed in nothing toward Men, who are indeed nothing
themselves: Thou have been virtuous, but thou made thy Virtue subservient
only to thy self, and not to the Gods who gave it thee: Thou had a mind to
enjoy alone, the Fruits of thy Virtue, and made it center in thy self; thou
have been thy own Divinity; but the Gods, who made all things for themselves,
could not renounce their Right; and as thou did forget them, they will forget
thee, and deliver thee over to thy self: Since for thy self thou livedst and
not for them. Find therefore, if thou can at present, Consolation in thy own
Mind: Lo! thou art now for ever separated from the Company of Men, whom thou
studiest so much to please; thou art now alone with thy self, thy own Idol.
Learn, that there is no true Virtue, without the reverence and love of the
Gods, to whom we owe all: Thy counterfeit Virtue, which for so long has blinded
the Eyes of credulous Mankind, shall be now exposed: Mankind judging of Virtue
or Vice only with respect to his own convenience, is blind both as to Good and
Evil. But here a divine Light repeals their rash Sentences; condemning what
they have admired, and justifying what they have condemned.

At these Words, the Philosopher, as 'twere, Thunderstruck, could not now be
reconciled to himself: The Pleasure which he took formerly in contemplating his
Moderation, Courage, and generous Inclinations, were now turned into Despair.
The sight of his own Heart, so treacherous to the Gods, was now punished enough:
He saw himself, nor could he refrain from the odious sight: He saw the Vanity
of the Opinion of Men, whom in all his Actions, he studied so much to please.
There was a complete Revolution of every thing within him, as if all his Bowels
had been turned topsy-turvey. He was no more the same Man; his Heart failed
him; his Conscience, formerly so peaceable, rises up against him, and
outragiously reproaches him with his sham Virtues, which had not either for
their Beginning or End the Worship of the Gods. He is in Confusion,
Consternation, full of Shame, Remorse, and Despair. The Furies did not torment
him, because it sufficed to let him alone to himself; his own Heart
sufficiently avenged the Gods whom he had contemned: Since he could not shun
himself, he sought out the obscurest Places to hide himself from others: He
courted Darkness, but could not find it; officious Light pursues him every
where. Every where the piercing Rays of Truth revenge his Contempt of her.
What he loved formerly, now becomes hateful, as being the source of all his
endless Miseries. He said within himself, O Fool that I am, I have neither
known the Gods, nor my self; no, I have been ignorant of every thing, since I
never loved the only and true Good: All my Steps have been out of the Way; my
Wisdom was Folly, my Virtue was nothing but an Impious and Foolish Pride, for I
was always my own Idol.

At last Telemachus observed those Kings that were punished for having abused
their Power; on one hand a revengeful Fury presented a Mirror, which showed
them the deformity of their Vices. There they saw, and could not hinder
themselves from seeing their undisguis'd Vanity, greedy of silly Flattery;
their hardheartedness toward Men, for whose Happiness they were made; their
insensibility of Virtue, their fear of Truth, and Inclination for base Men and
Flatterers; their want of Application, their Effeminacy, their Laziness, their
Jealousy, their Pride, their excessive Magnificence, founded upon the Ruins of
their Subjects; their Ambition to purchase VainGlory with the Blood of their
People. In fine, their Cruelty, which seeks out new Pleasures, amidst the Tears
and Despair of so many unhappy Wretches.

In this Mirror, they saw themselves continually, more terrible and monstrous
than the Chimer a that was vanquished by Bellerophon, or the Hydra of Lerna,
that was destroyed by Hercules; yea than Cerberus himself, though he Vomits
from his three gaping Throats black and poisonous Blood, capable to infect the
whole Race of Mortals living upon Earth.

At the same time, on the other hand, another Fury did insultingly repeat the
nauseous Praises that their Flatterers had bestowed upon them while alive; and
presented another Mirror, where they appeared such as they were Painted by
Flattery. The opposition of these Portraits so contrary, was the Punishment of
their Vanity: It was observable that the most wicked of these Kings, were such
as during their Life had received the most magnificent Praises, because the
Evil are more dreaded than the Good; and they exact without shame, the base
Flatteries of the Poets and Orators of their time. You might hear them groan in
their profound Darkness, where they can see nothing but the Insults and
Derisions which they are destined to suffer. They have none about them, but
such as oppose, contradict, and expose them. Whereas on Earth they sported
themselves with the Lives of Men, and pretended that all was made for their
Service; in Tartarus, they are delivered over to the Caprice of certain Slaves,
who make them feel in their turn, the Miseries of cruel Bondage. Their Slavery
is painful, and there remains no Hope of ever being able to mitigate their
Captivity: Under the lash of these Slaves, now become their Merciless Tyrants,
they seemed like the Anvil under the Hammer of the Cyclops, when Vulcan makes
them work in the burning Furnaces of Mount AEtna.

There Telemachus perceived pale, hideous and melancholy Countenances arising
from Black Grief, that gnaws these Criminals: They abhor themselves, and yet
they can no more deliver themselves from this Horror than their very Nature;
they want no other Chastisement of their Crimes, than their Crimes themselves;
which they incessantly contemplate with their most aggravating Circumstances:
They present themselves to them like horrible Specter pursuing them; to defend
themselves from them, they call for a Death more powerful than that which
separated them from their Bodies; a Death that can extinguish in them all Sense
and Thought. They call to the Deeps to swallow them, that they may be snatched
from the revenging Beams of tormenting Truth. But in vain, for they are
reserved for Vengeance, that drops upon them leasurely, and will never be
exhausted. The Truth which they were afraid to see, now becomes their
Punishment; they see it, but whilst it flies in their Faces, the sight of it
puts them beside themselves: It Is like the Thunder, which without hurting the
Outside, penetrates into the inmost parts of the Bowels. The Soul melts in
this revenging Fire, as Metal in a burning Furnace. Its texture is destroyed,
and yet there is nothing consumed: It dissolves it to the very first Principles
of Life, and yet it can never die. They are tied to themselves, and can find
neither Ease nor Comfort for the least Minute. They subsist only by their
revenge upon themselves, and Despair, which makes them furious. Among so many
Objects which made his Hair stand, Telemachus saw several of the Ancient Kings
of Lydia punished for having preferred the Pleasures of a voluptuous Life to
that of Application; which ought to be inseparable from Royalty, in order to
procure the Ease of their People.

The End of the Fourth Volume.
THE ADVENTURES OF TELEMACHUS The Son of ULYSSES. PART. V.
THese two Kings reproached one another of Folly and Stupidity: Says one to the
other who had been his Son; did not I, when I was Old, and near my Death, often
recommend to your Care the reproach of those Mischeifs which my own negligence
had occasioned? The Son replied, O unhappy Father! It Is you that have ruined
me; 'twas your Example that habituated me to Pride, Arrogance and Cruelty to
Mankind. While I saw you Reign in so effeminate a manner, surrounded with
servile Parasites; I addicted my self to the Love of Flattery and Pleasures; I
thought the rest of Men were in respect of Kings, what other Animals are in
regard of Men; I say I thought 'em no better than Beasts, and that no other
account was to be made of them, but only what Service they could render, and what
advantage might be expected from 'em. This I believed, and 'twas you that made
me believe it, and now I endure all these Miseries for imitating your Example.
To these Reproaches they added the most dreadful Curses, and were irritated
with so much Rage, that they seemed ready to tear one another in Pieces.
Besides, round about these Kings, there hovered (like so many Owls in the
Shades of Night) cruel Suspicions, vain Allarms and Diffidences, which revenge
Subjects on their Kings for their Severity. The unsatiable thirst of Riches,
that false kind of Glory which is always Tyrannical, and vile Effeminacy, which
redoubles all the Evils they suffer, without being able to give any true and
solid Pleasure. Many of these Kings were severely punished, not for the Evils
they had done, but for neglecting the Good they ought to have done. All the
Crimes of the People, which proceed from Negligence in the execution of the
Laws, were imputed to their Kings; and on them were all those Disorders charged
which spring from Pride, Luxury, and all other Excesses which throw Men into a
violent State, and tempt 'em to contemn the Laws in quiring Wealth. Above all,
those Kings were treated with extreme Rigor, who instead of acting the part of
good and vigilant Shepherds toward the People, thought of nothing but how to
ravage their Flocks, like so many voracious Wolves. But that which raised the
Consternation of Telemachus to the highest Degree, was to see in this Abyss of
Darkness and Misery, a great number of Kings, who had past upon Earth for
tolerably good Princes, now abandoned to the Pains of Tartarus, for having
suffered themselves to be governed by wicked and designing Men. These were
punished for the Evils they had suffered to be committed by their Authority.
Indeed the greatest part of these Kings were neither Good nor Bad; their
Weakness was so great, that they never had been afraid of being kept in
Ignorance of the Truth, nor ever had a true relish of Virtue, nor took Pleasure
in doing Good.

No sooner was Telemachus got out of these dark Regions, but he felt himself as
much eased as if one had removed a Mountain off his Breast; The sense of this
made him comprehend the Misery of those that were shut up in this dismal Place,
without hope of being ever released. It filled him with Horror to observe how
many Kings were more rigorously Tormented than other Criminals. What, said he,
so many Endeavors, so many Dangers, so many Snares, so many Difficulties in
coming at the Truth, so as to be able to defend ones self against others, and
against ones self, and at last so many horrible Torments in Hell, after such
Agitations, such Assaults of Envy, and so many Crosses in a short course of
Life! O unthinking Man who is desirous of Reigning! And happy he who limits his
Desires to a private and peacable manner of Life, wherein it is less difficult
to be Virtuous. In making these Reflections his Mind was filled with Trouble
and Horror, insomuch, that he fell into a kind of Consternation, which made him
feel something of that Despair which racks those miserable Princes whose
wretched Condition he had been considering. But in proportion to the degrees of
distance he gained in retiring from these sad Territories of Darkness, Horror
and Despair, his Courage began gradually to revive; he regained his Breath as
he went forward, and soon was entertained with a distant view of the mild and
pure Rays of Light that darted from those blessed Regions where the Heroes
reside.

Here dwelt all those virtuous Kings, who had prudently governed Men till that
time. They were separated from other good Men; for as wicked Princes suffered
Torments in Tartarus, infinitely more violent than those of other Criminals of
a low and private Condition; so these good Kings enjoy a Happiness in Elysium,
infinitely exceeding that of the rest of Mankind, who had devoted themselves to
Virtue, when upon Earth. Toward these Kings Telemachus advanced. They were in
odoriferous Groves, on Meadows covered with immortal Green, and always decked
with Flowers; a Thousand little Rivulets watered this happy Place with their
limpid Streams, which refreshed it after a most agreeable manner; an infinite
number of pretty Birds made these Groves resound with their sweet Harmony. Here
they see at once the beautiful Flowers of the Spring growing on the Turf, under
their Feet; and the pleasant Fruits of Autumn hanging on the Trees, over their
Heads. Here the parching Heat of the furious Dog Star is never felt; here the
rough North Wind never dares to Blow, to make 'em feel the rigours of Winter.
Neither War, that thirsts for Blood, nor cruel Envy, that bites with envenomed
Teeth, having twisted Vipers in her Bosom, and wreathed about her Arms; nor
Jealousies, Distrusts, Fears, nor vain Desires, ever approach this blessed
Region of Peace. In this happy Place, the Day nere knows an End; and the Night
with her bloomy Vail is utterly a Stranger here. A pure and insinuating Light
spreads it self round the Bodies of these just Men, and encompasses you with
its Rays like a Garment. It Is not like that which illuminates the Eyes of
miserable Mortals, which in comparison of this is little better than Darkness.
It Is rather a celestial Glory than Light; for it penetrates the thickest
Bodies, after a more subtle manner, than the Beams of the Sun can pierce the
purest Crystal: Yet it never Dazzles, but on the contrary, fortifies the Eyes,
and produces an unspeakable serenity in the inmost recesses of the Soul. It Is
this alone that nourishes those blessed Men, it penetrates 'em, and
incorporates it self with 'em: They See it, they Feel it, they Breath it; it
causes an inexhaustible Fountain of Peace and Joy to spring up in their Souls.
In this Abyss of Joy they plunge themselves, and live in it, as Fishes do in
the Sea; they (...) nothing, they have every thing without having any thing;
for the relish of this pure Light appeases the Hunger of their Souls, all their
Wishes are satisfied, and their fullness raises them above all that which Men
with empty and hungry Minds so earnestly seek upon Earth. All the Pleasures
that surround 'em, are nothing to 'em, because their consummate Happiness which
proceeds from within 'em, leaves 'em void of Sensation, for every the most
delicious Thing they see without 'em. Just as the Gods who are satiated with
Nectar and Ambrosia, would disdain to Feed on those gross Meats which would be
presented you at the most exquisite Treat that Mortals could make 'em. All
manner of Evils fly far away from this place of Tranquillity. Death, Sickness,
Poverty, Pain, Regrets, Remorses, Fears, and Hopes, too (which often cost us as
much as our very Fears) (...) Imaginations, Disgusts, and Vexations can none of
'em find entrance here. The lofty Mountains of Thrace that thrust their Brows
(which have been cove'd with Snow and Ice from the very beginning of the World)
into the Clouds of Heaven, might sooner be over-turn'd from their Foundation,
which is fixed in the Center of the Earth, than the Hearts of these righteous
Men be moved in the least degree; only they pity the Inhabitants of this World
for the Miseries that oppress 'em, yet it is such a sweet and calm kind of
Compassion as cannot in the least alter their immutable Felicity: An everlasting
Youth, an endless Happiness, and a Glory altogether Divine, is conspicuous in
their Countenances; but their Joy has nothing in it that is frothy and
uncomely. It Is a noble Alacrity, sweet and full of Majesty. It Is a sublime Gust
of Truth and Virtue that transports 'em. They are every moment, without
Interruption, in such, a kind of ecstasy of Mind, as that which seizes a tender
Mother at the sight of her beloved Son, whom after a long absence she had given
over for dead. But this Rapture which soon retires from such a Mother's Heart,
never forsakes the Souls of these Men; it never languishes for so much as an
Instant, but always continues fresh and new: They have the Transports of
Inebriation, without the disturbance and folly of it: They entertain one
another with Discourses on what they see and taste: They trample under their
Feet the sweet Delights, and vain Pomps of their former Condition, which they
in some sort bewail: They reflect with Pleasure on those sad, but short Years,
wherein they were obliged to oppose their own Inclinations; and to stemm the
impetuous Torrent of the Persuasions of corrupt Men, to become Virtuous: They
admire the Assistance which was given 'em by the Gods, who conducted 'em, as it
were, by the Hand in the Paths of Virtue, through a multitude of Perils. There
is something Divine, which I know not how to express, that runs incessantly
through their Hearts like a Stream of the Divine Nature it self, and unites it
self to 'em; they see, they taste, they are happy, and feel; they shall always
be so; they all sing together the Praises of the Gods, and all of 'em together
make but one Voice, but one Thought, but one Heart, but one Felicity, which
constantly ebbs and flows, as it were, in these united Souls. While they enjoy
these Divine Raptures, whole Ages glide away more swiftly than Hours do among
Mortals here on Earth; and yet a thousand and a thousand Ages when elapsed,
don't in the least diminish their Happiness, which is always new, and always
entire. They all Reign together; not on such Thrones as may be over-turn'd by
the Hands of Men, but in themselves, with a Power that can never be shaken. For
now they have no more need to render themselves formidable by a Power borrowed
from a vile and miserable People; they no more wear those vain Diadems, under
whose darling Luster so many Fears and melancholy Cares lie hid. The Gods
themselves have with their own Hands placed Crowns of Glory on their Heads, the
beauty of which nothing can ever Tarnish.

Telemachus, who was seeking his Father, and was once afraid of finding him in
these Regions, was so ravished with this Taste he had of Peace, Joy, and
Happiness, that he could have wished to have met him here; and could not choose
but be troubled to think of being constrained himself to return again into the
Society of Mortals. This is the Place, said he, where true Life is to be found,
and as for ours it is but a kind of Death: But that which surpised him with
wonder was, that he had seen so many Kings punished in Tartarus, and so few in
the Elysian Fields: He learned from this, that there are few Kings whose Minds
are firm and courageous enough, to resist their own Power, and to reject the
Flattery of so many Persons, who make it their Business to excite all their
Passions; so that good Kings must needs be very rare; and the greatest part of
'em are so wicked, that the Gods would not be Just, if after having suffered
them to abuse their Power during their Life, they should not punish them
severely after their Death.

Telemachus not finding his Father Ulysses among these Kings, cast his Eyes
about to seek at least the Divine Laertes his Grandfather. While he was
looking round for him, in vain, an old Man, venerable, and full of Majesty,
advanced toward him. His old Age did not resemble that of Men on Earth, when
oppressed with the weight of numerous Years; it only signified that he had been
old before his death; it was a mixture of all the Gravity of old Age, with all
the Graces of Youth; for those Graces revive even in the most decrepid old Men
at the very moment of their entrance into the Elysian Fields. This Person
advanced with speed, and looked upon Telemachus with Complacency, as one that
was very dear to him. Telemachus, who did not know him, was in pain, and his
Thoughts held him in suspense: I forgive thee, O my Son, said the old Man, that
thou do not know me, I am Arcesius, the Father of Laertes; I finished my
Days a little before Ulysses my Grandson went to the Siege of Troy, and thou
wa'st then a little Infant in thy Nurse's Arms. I even then conceived great
hopes of thee, and thou have not disappointed my Expectation; since I see thou
art come down into the Kingdom of Pluto to seek thy Father, and yet the Gods
support thee in this Enterprise. O happy Child, thou art beloved of the Gods,
who prepares for thee a Glory like that of thy Father! And O how happy am I to
see thee again! Leave off looking after thy Father Ulysses in these Regions; he
is yet alive; he is reserved to advance our Family in the Isle of Ithaca; and
Laertes himself, though he stoops under (...) burden of Age, yet sees the Light,
and lives in hope to see his Son return to close his Eyes: Thus Men sade away
like Flowers, which in the Morning blow and display their Beauty, and in the
Evening are withered and trampled under Foot. The Generations of Mortals slide
away like the Waters of a rapid River; and nothing can stop the Course of Time,
which draws after it even those things that seem the most immovable. Thy self,
O my dear Son, my dear Son, thy self, who now enjoy'st a Youth so vigorous and
capable of Pleasures, thou will do well to remember that this gay part of thy
Age is but a Flower that will be almost as soon withered as blown; thou will
see thy self insensibly change; these smiling Graces, and sweet Pleasures, this
Strength, Health, and Gravity will vanish like a pleasant Dream, and will only
leave the sad Remembrance of 'em behind. Languishing old Age, that Enemy of
Pleasures, will bend thy Body double, infeeble thy trembling Limbs, and dry up
that Spring of Joy which now rises in thy Soul, make thee dis-relish what is
present, and fear what is to come, and render thee insensible of every thing
but Pain and Sorrow. This Time to thee seems distant; but alas! my Son, thou
art mistaken, it advances apace, and will soon arrive; that which approaches
with so much rapidity, cannot be far from thee; the present Time flies away, and
is remote already, since it vanishes in the moment we speak of it, and can come
near us no more. Therefore, my Son, never reckon on the present, but bear up in
the rough and difficult Path of Virtue in Prospect of the future. Prepare thy
self by a virtuous Course of Life, and the love of Justice, for a place in the
happy Regions of Peace. Thou art born to Reign after thy Father Ulysses, whom
thou shall at last see Master of Ithaca in a little time: thou art born to
Reign; but alas! my Son, how deluding a thing is Regal Power: If you look upon
it at a distance, you see nothing but Authority, Pomp and Pleasure; but take a
near Prospect, and it appears full of thorny Cares and Difficulties. A private
Man may without dishonouring himself, lead a pleasant and obscure Life, but a
King degrades himself if he prefers an easy and unactive Life to the painful
Offices of Government; he owes himself to all the People he Governs, and he is
never permitted to be his own: His least Faults are of infinite Consequence,
because they occasion national Miseries, and that sometimes for several Ages:
He ought to suppress the Presumption of ill Men, to support Innocence, and
dissipate Calumny. It Is not enough for him to do no Mischief, but he must do
all the Good that is possible for him to do according to the Necessity of the
State. It Is not enough for him to do Good for his own part; he must besides
this, hinder all the Mischief others would do if not restrained. Fear,
therefore, O my Son, fear a Condition so perilous; arm with Courage against thy
Self, against thy Passions, and against Flatterers. In speaking these words,
Arcesius seemed animated with a Divine Flame, and showed Telemachus a
Countenance full of Compassion for the Miseries that accompany a Royal State;
when it is assumed, said he, to satisfy ones self, it is a monstrous Tyranny;
when it is taken up, to fulfill the Duties that belong to it, and to guide
innumerable Multitudes, as a Father governs his Children, it is a pressing
Servitude, which requires an Heroic Courage and Patience. On the other hand,
it is as certain that such as have reigned with uncorrupted Virtue, possess here
all that the Power of the Gods can give, to render their Happiness complete.

While Arcesius expressed himself after this manner, his words entered into the
very Soul of Telemachus, and were as deeply impressed on his Heart, like those
indelible Characters which an expert Artist engraves on Brass, with a design to
have them exposed to the View of all Posterity: His sage Advice passed like a
subtle Flame, and penetrated into the Heart of Telemachus, so that he felt
himself strangely moved and inflamed. Something Divine, which I know not how to
describe, seemed to melt his Heart within him. That which he carried in the
inmost Apartments of his Soul, secretly consumed him; he knew not how either to
contain it, or endure it, or to resist so violent an Impression; it was a sweet
and calm kind of Sorrow; a levity and delightful Sentiment, mixed with a sort
of Torment capable of depriving one of Life.

At length Telemachus began to recover himself, and to breath more freely; he
discerned in the Countenance of Arcesius, a great Resemblance of Laertes; he
thought too he had a sort of a confused Remembrance, that he had seen in his
Father Ulysses, the same kind Lineaments, when he parted for the Siege of Troy;
these Reflections melted his tender Heart, so that Tears mixed with Joy, gently
trickled from his Eyes; he would fain have embraced a Person so dear to him; he
attempted it several times, but all in vain; the empty Shadow still escaped his
Embraces; as a delusive Dream flies from a Man, when he imagines he is
possessed of a real Enjoyment: One while his thirsty Mouth pursues a Stream
that slides away from him; Another while his Lips move to form Words which his
faltering Tongue cannot utter; he earnestly stretches out his Hands, and can
take hold of nothing: Just so it was with Telemachus, who could not satisfy
the tender sentiments of his Soul; he sees Arcesius, hears him, speaks to him,
but cannot touch him. In fine, he asked him, who those Men were, that were
round about him. Thou see, my Son, replied this Grave Old Man, those Persons
who have been the Ornament of the Ages wherein they lived, the Glory and
Happiness of Mankind; thou see the small number of Kings, who have been truly
worthy of Royalty, and have faithfully performed the Function of Godsupon
Earth. These others whom thou see not far from 'em, but separated by the
little Cloud, have a Glory too, but nothing near so great. These indeed are
Hero's, but the Recompense of their Valor, and Military Expeditions, is not to
be compared with that of Wise, Just and Beneficent Kings: Among those Hero's,
thou see Theseus, whose Countenance is somewhat dejected; he has felt the
Unhappiness of having too much Credulity for an Intreaguing Wife; and is still
afflicted for having so unjustly desired of Neptune, the Death of his Son
Hippolitus: Happy had he been, if he had not so easily and readily given way to
the Passion of Anger. Thou also see Achilles leaning on his Spear, because of
the Wound the dissolute Paris gave him on the Heel, which put an end to his
Days. If he had been as Wise, Just, and Moderate as he was Intrepid, the Gods
would have granted him a long Reign; but they had pity on the Phitiotes and
Dolopes, over whom, according to the ordinary Course of Nature, he was to have
reigned after his Father Peleus; and they were not willing to leave so many
People at the mercy of a violent and furious Man, more easy to be provoked,
than the most unquiet Sea is to be moved by a sudden Storm. The fatal Sisters
have cut off the Thread of his Life; he was like a Flower scarce fully Blown,
that is cut down by the rude Plowman, and falls before the end of the Day that
gave it Birth. The Gods were willing to use him only as they do Floods and
Tempests, to punish Men for their Crimes: They employed Achilles to beat down
the Walls of Troy, to revenge the Perjury of Laomedon, and the unjust Amors of
Paris: And after having used him as the Instrument of their Vengeance, they are
appeased; and have refused the Tears of Thesis, to suffer this young Hero any
longer upon Earth, who was fit for nothing but to disturb the World, and to
overthrow Cities and Kingdoms. But do thou observe that other Person who
looks so fiercely? it is Ajax the Son of Telamon, and Cousin to Achilles; to be
sure thou art not ignorant what Glory he acquired in Battle; after the Death of
Achilles, he pretended his Armor ought not to be given to any but himself; but
thy Father did not think fit to give him the precedence; and the Greeks gave
Judgment in favor of Ulysses. Ajax upon this, killed himself in Despair:
Indignation and Despair are still painted on his Countenance. My Son, forbear
to approach him, for he would think thou had a mind to insult over him, on
the account of his Misfortune, which ought to be bewailed. Do thou not see
that he looks upon us with Pain, and rushes hastily into the dark Grove,
because he hates to see us? On the other side thou see Hector, who had been
Invincible, if the Son of Thetis had not been in the World. But take notice how
Agamemnon passes along, still carrying the Marks of Clytemnestra's
Perfidiousness. O my Son, I tremble to think of the Misfortunes of that Family,
of the Impious Tantalus; the Contention of the two Brothers Atreus and
Thyestes, filled that House with Horror and Blood. Alas! how one Crime draws a
multitude of others after it? Agamemnon when he returned at the head of the
Greeks, from the Siege of Troy, had not time to enjoy in Peace the Glory he had
acquired in War; and this is the Destiny of almost all Conquerors. All those
Men whom thou see there, have been formidable in War; but have not been of an
Amiable and Virtuous Disposition, and therefore are only admitted into the
second Mansion of the Elysian Fields.

As for these others, who have reigned with Justice, and had a tender Affection
for their People, they are the intimate Friends of the Gods. While Achilles and
Agamemnon, full of their Quarrels and Battles, still retain their Disquietments
and natural Defects; while they in vain regret the Life which they have lost,
and asflict themselves with the Thoughts of being now Impotent and Vain
Shadows; these Just Men who are refined by that Divine Light which nourishes
'em, having nothing more to desire to make 'em happy, Behold, with compassion,
the uneasinesses of poor Mortals; and the greatest Affairs that agitate the
Minds of Ambitious Men, appear to them like the trifling Play of Children;
their Hearts are replenished with Truth and Virtue, which they draw at the
Fountain Head. They have now nothing more to suffer either from others or from
themselves; no more Wishes, no more Necessities, no more Fears; all is at an
end with them, except their Joy which can never end. Consider, my Son, this
Ancient King Inachus, who sounded the Kingdom of Argos; thou see how full of
Sweetness and Majesty his Old Age appears; the Flowers grow under his Steps; he
treads so lightly, that his walking resembles the flying of a Bird; he holds a
Golden Book in his Hand, and in an Eternal Transport, sings the wonderful Works
of the Gods; from his Heart and Mouth, he Breaths exquisite Odors; the Harmony
of his Lyre and Voice together is capable of Ravishing the Gods, as well as
Men. He is thus rewarded for the Love he bore to the People heaffembled within
the compass of his New Walls, to whom he gave excellent Laws. On the other
side, thou may see amongst those Myrtles, Cecrops the Egyptian, who was the
first King of Athens, a City Consecrated to that wise Goddess, whose Name it
bears: This Cecrops brought wholesome Laws from Egypt (a Country which has been
to Greece a Spring both of Learning and Morality); by this means he polished
the rough Tempers of the Towns of Attica, and united them by the Bands of Civil
Society. He was eminent for Justice, Humanity, and Compassion; he left his
People in great Prosperity, and his Family but in a middle state; he was not
willing to have his Children succeed him in his Authority; because he judged
there were others more worthy of that Trust. I must likewise needs show thee
Ericthon, in this little Valley, who invented the Use of Silver for Money; this
he did with a Design to facilitate Commerce among the Cities of Greece; but he
foresaw the Inconvenience attending this Invention. Apply your selves, (said
he, to all those People) to multiply natural and true Riches in your Dwellings.
Cultivate the Earth, that you may have great plenty of Corn, Wine, Oly, and
other Fruits. Get innumerable Flocks, that may nourish you with their Milk, and
Cloth you with their Wool. Hereby you will put your selves in a Condition
never to be afraid of Poverty: The more Children you have, the richer you will be,
provided you inure 'em to Labor and Industry; for the Earth is inexhaustible,
and augments her Fecundity in proportion to the Number of her Inhabitants, who
take care to manure her. She liberally rewards the Labor of 'em all; whereas
she is tenacious and reserved to them that Cultivate her after a negligent
manner. Endeavor therefore principally to acquire this real Wealth, which
Answers the real Necessaries of Mankind: As for Money, no Account ought to be
made of it any farther than it is necessary, either to carry on such Wars as
you are unavoidably engaged in abroad, or in the way of Commerce, for such
necessary Commodities as are wanting in your own Country; and it were to be
wished that Trasfick were suffered to fall to the Ground, for all such things
as serve only to maintain Luxury, Vanity, and Effeminacy. The Wise Ericthon
would often say, My dear Children, I am much afraid I have made you a fatal
Present, in giving you the Invention of Money: I foresee it will excite
Ambition, Avarice, and Pride; that it will support an infinite number of
pernicious Arts, which only tend to debase and corrupt the meanest of Men; that
it will make you disrelish that happy Simplicity which makes your Lives so very
quiet and secure: In fine, That it will make you despise Agriculture, which is
the support of Humane Life, and the source of all solid Riches; but the Gods
are my Witnesses, that my Heart was upright, when I imparted this Invention to
you, which indeed is useful in it self. But at length when Ericthon found that
Money, as he had foreseen, corrupted the People, he for Grief retired into a
solitary Mountain, where he lived in Poverty, at a distance from Mankind, 'till
he became extreme Old, without being willing to meddle with the Government of
Cities. Not long after him appeared in Greece, the famous Triptolemus, whom
Ceres had taught the Art of Tilling the Ground, and covering it every Year with
a Gilded Harvest. Not that Men were 'till then ignorant of Corn, and the manner
of multiplying it by sowing; but they knew not the Art of Husbandry to that
Perfection, till Triptolemus, sent by Ceres, came with the Plow in his Hand to
offer the Favors of this Goddess to all those Nations who had Courage enough
to overcome their natural Laziness, and to addict themselves to assiduous
Labor. Triptolemus soon taught the Greeks the way of cleaving the Ground with
Furrows, and of rendering her fertile in tearing up her Bosom. The sweating and
indefatigable Reapers, soon made the Ripe standing Corn that covered the
Fields, fall under their sharp Sicles; even the Wild and Barbarous People that
were scattered up and down in the Forests of Epirus and AEtolia, seeking Acorns
for their Food, became civilized, and submitted to Laws, when they had learned
the way of making Corn grow, and of baking Bread. Triptolemus made the Greeks
know the Pleasure of owing their Riches to nothing but their Labor, and of
finding in their own Fields whatever was necessary to render their Lives
commodious and Happy. This simple and innocent Plenty entailed on Agriculture,
made them remember Ericthon's Counsel, so that they slighted Money, and all
Artifical Riches, that become so only by the Fancy of Men, which tempts 'em to
seek after dangerous Pleasures, and divert 'em from Labor, in which they would
find all real Wealth, with Purity of Manners in the full Enjoyment of Liberty.
They were then convinced, that a Fruitful and well Cultivated Field, was the
true Treasure of a Family, that was wise enough to be content to live frugally,
as their Fathers had done before 'em. And happy had the Greeks been, if they
had continued firm and steady in embracing Maxims so proper to render 'em
powerful: Happy Lovers of Liberty and Virtue! But alas! they begin to admire
false Riches, and gradually neglect the true; they degenerate from their once
admired Simplicity. O my Son, thou shall one Day Reign; and then remember to
bring Men back to the Exercise of Husbandry, to Honor that Art, to support
those that apply themselves to it, and neither to suffer the People to live in
Idleness, nor to employ their Time in those soft Arts that uphold Luxury and
Vanity. These two Men that were so wise, when upon Earth, are here cherished by
the Gods themselves: Observe it well, my Son, their Glory as far surpasses that
of Achilles and other Hero's, who have only excelled in Battle, as the
agreeable Spring exceeds the frozen Winter, and as the Luster of the Sun
out-shines the feebler Light of the Moon.

While Arcesius was thus speaking, he perceived Telemachus had his Eyes
continually fixed on the side of a little Wood of Laurel, by a little River,
the Banks of which were painted with Violets, Roses, Lillies, and many other
sorts of odoriferous Flowers, whose lively Colors resembled those that invest
Iris, when she descends from Heaven to bring some Message from the Gods to
mortal Men. 'Twas the great King Sesostris that Telemachus saw in this lovely
Place; he was a thousand times more full of Majesty, than he had ever been when
upon the Throne of Egypt; his Eyes emitted mild Rays of Light, which dazzled
those of Telemachus; any one that saw him would think he were overcharged with
Nectar, the Spirit of the Gods had put him into such a Transport above the
reach of human Reason, to recompense his Virtues. Said Telemachus to Arcesius,
O my Father, I know Sesostris that wise King of Egypt, whom I saw not long ago.
Ay, there he is, replied Arcesius, and thou see by his Example how
magnificent the Gods are in rewarding virtuous Princes: But you ought to know,
that all this Felicity is nothing in Comparison of what was designed for him,
if too great Prosperity had not made him forget the Rules of Moderation and
Justice. The passionate Desire he had to abase the Pride and Insolence of the
Tyrians, engaged him to take their City. This Conquest gave him the Ambition to
attempt the making of others; so that he suffered himself to be seduced by the
vainglory of Conquerors. He subjugated, or to speak more properly, ravaged all
Asia. At his return into Egypt he found his Brother possessed of the Throne,
who by an unjust Government, had altered the best Laws of the Country. These
are the Mischiefs Conquerors bring upon their own States, while they seek to
usurp those of their Neighbors. This is the Injury, a King otherwise so Just
and Beneficent, did to the Laws; and it is this that diminishes the Glory which
the Gods had prepared for him. Do thou not see that other Person, my Son,
whose Wound appears so bright and glorious; it is a King of Caria, named
Dioclides, who devoted himself to Die in Battle for his People, because the
Oracle had predicted that in the War of the Carians and Licians, that Nation
whose King should Perish, should be Victorious. Here is another I would have
thee consider; it is a wise Legislator, who having given Laws to the Nation
under his Conduct, proper to make 'em Virtuous and Happy, made 'em Swear they
would never violate any of those Laws during his Absence; after which he left
his Country, voluntarily exiling himself, and died Poor in a strange Land, by
this means to oblige his People always to observe these useful Laws according
to their Oath. That other Prince, thou see, is the eleventh King of the
Pylians, and one of the Ancestors of wise Nestor: When the Earth was ravaged by
a Pestilence, which covered the Banks of Acheron with a multitude of new
Ghosts, he requested of the Gods that they would suffer him to appease their
Anger, in satisfying by his Death for so many Thousands of innocent Men. The
Gods heard his Petition, and gave him here a royal Grandeur, in comparison of
which all the Pomps of the Earth are but so many vain Shadows.

That old Man, whom thou see crowned with Flowers, is the famous Belus; he
reigned in Egypt, and married Anchinoe, the Daughter of the God Nilus, who
hides the source of his Streams, and enriches the Countries which he Waters by
his fruitful Inundations; he had two Sons, Danaus, of whose History thou art
not Ignorant, and Egyptus, who gives his Name to that considerable Kingdom.
Belus thought himself Richer, by the Prosperity he gave his People, and the
love his Subjects bare to him, than by all the Tributes he could have exacted
of 'em. These Men, my Son, whom thou supposest to be dead, are alive; and that
Life which Men lead amidst many Miseries on Earth, is no better than Death,
only the Names of Things are changed. May it please the Gods to render thee
Virtuous enough to merit this blessed Life, which nothing can ever either end
or disturb. Haste away, it is time to go and seek thy Father; before thou shall
find him, alas, how much Bloodshed shall thou see! But yet what Glory waits
for thee in the Fields of Hesperia! Remember the Counsels of the wise Mentor;
if thou follow'st them, thy Name shall be great among the Nations, and in all
Ages.

Having said this, he presently conducted Telemachus toward the Gate of Ivory,
which leads out of the gloomy Empire of Pluto. Telemachus parted from him with
Tears in his Eyes, without being able to embrace him: Being come out of these
dark Regions, he made what haste he could to return to the Camp of the Allies,
after he had again joined the two young Cretans on the Way, who had accompanied
him very near the Cavern, and had lost their hope of ever seeing him again. In
the mean time the chief Commanders of the Army met together to deliberate
whether they should possess themselves of Venusia. It was an old Fort which
Adrastus had heretofore usurped upon his Neighbors the Appulians. These were
entered into the Confederacy against him, to demand Satisfaction for this piece
of Injustice. Adrastus, to appease 'em, had put this City by way of Caution,
into the Hands of the Lucanians, but had by Money corrupted both the Lucanian
Garrison, and the Person that Commanded it; so that the 'Lucanians had in
reality no more Authority than he in Venusia: And thus the Appulians, who had
consented that the Lucanian Garrison should keep Venusia, were tricked in this
Negotiation: A Citizen of Venusia named Demophantes, had made a private Offer
to the Allies, to deliver up one of the Gates of the City in the Night. This
Advantage was so much the greater, in that Adrastus had sent all the
Ammunition, and Provisions to a Castle near Venusia, which could not defend it
self if Venusia were taken. Philoctetes and Nestor had already given their
Opinion, that such a happy Opportunity ought to be improved; all the Principal
Commanders, swayed by their Authority, and attracted by the Advantage of so
easy an Enterprise, Applauded their Sentiment. But Telemachus at his Return,
made his utmost Efforts to divert 'em from it. I am not Ignorant, said he, that
if ever any Man deserved to be surpised and deceived, Adrastus does, who has
so often dealt fraudulently with every body else. I see very well, that in
Venusia, you will only put your selves in possession of a City that belongs to
you, since it pertains to the Appulians, who are one of our Confederate
Parties: I confess you may do it with the better color of Justice, in as much
as Adrastus, who has put this City as a Pledge in the Hands of others, has
Corrupted the Commander and the Garrison, that he may enter it when he thinks
fit: In fine, I understand as well as you, that if you take Venusia, you will the
next Day be Masters of the Castle, where all Adrastus his Provisions are laid
up, and so may end this so formidable a War in two Days time. But is it not
much better to Perish, than Conquer by such means as these? Is Fraud to be
repelled by Fraud? Shall it be said, that so many Kings who entered into a
Confederacy, to punish the Impious Adrastus for his Guile, are become
fraudulent like him? If'tis lawful for us to do as Adrastus has done, he is not
Guilty, and we are to be blamed to go about to punish him. What has all
Hesperia, which is supported by so many Greek Colonies, and by so many Hero's
returned from the Siege of Troy? Has Hesperia no other Arms against the
Perfidiousness and Perjury of Adrastus, than the practice of the same Vices?
You have sworn by the most sacred Things, that you would leave Venusia in
Trust, in the Hands of the Lucanians: The Lucanian Garrison you say is
Corrupted with Adrastus his Money; I believe it as well as you, but this
Garrison is paid by the Lucanians, and has not refused to obey 'em; it has
kept, at least in appearance, a Neutrality. Neither Adrastus nor any of his Men
have ever entered into Venusia; the Treaty subsists; your Oath is not forgotten
by the Gods; shall we not keep the Promises we have given, but only when we
want plausible pretexts to violate 'em? Shall we not be faithful, and
religiously regard our Oaths, but only when there is nothing to be got in
breaking them? If the Love of Virtue, and the Fear of the Gods don't move you,
be concerned at least for your Reputation, and for your Interest. If you show
the World this pernicious Example of violating your Faith, and breaking your
Oaths to terminate a War, what Wars will you not stir up by your Impious
Conduct? Which of your Neighbors will not find themselves constrained to be
jealous of you on all occasions, and utterly to detest you? Who will for the
future confide in you in the most pressing Exigencies? What Security will you
be able to give, if you should have a mind to be sincere, and when it would be
of great Consequence to you to persuade your Neighbors of your sincerity?
Shall it be a solemn Treaty? when you have trampled such a one under your Feet.
Shall it be an Oath? when it is known you make no account of the Gods, if you
have any hope of gaining an Advantage by Perjury. Peace will give no more
Security, in respect of you, than War; all that comes from you will be received
as War, either secret and dissembled, or open and declared. You Will be looked
upon as their perpetual Enemies, by all who have the misfortune to be your
Neighbors; all Affairs that require Reputation, Probity and Confidence, will
become impossible to you. You will have no Means left to make your Promises
believed: Besides all this, said Telemachus, there is a more pressing Interest
that ought to touch you very sensibly: If you have any Sense and Foresight
left, and that is, that so deceitful a Conduct inwardly attacks the League in
which you are engaged, and will soon ruin it; and thus by your Perjury you will
open away for a Triumph to Adrastus. At these words the whole Assembly was
moved, and asked him, how he durst affirm, that an Action which would certainly
give the Confederates a Victory, could ruin the Confederacy? How, replied he,
will you be able to trust one another, if you once break the only Bond of
Society, and mutual Confidence, which is Faith and Sincerity? After you have
once established it for a Maxim, That the Rules of Probity and Fidelity, may be
broken in Prospect of some great Advantage; How can any one of you put
Confidence in any of the rest? For when this last shall find it very Commodious
for his Interest to falsify his Word, and impose on you, how will you help
your selves? Which of you will not endeavor to prevent the Artifices of his
Neighbor by Tricks of his own? And what will become of the Confederacy, when
by a common deliberation, it is agreed among 'em, that it is lawful to surprise a
Neighbor by such Wiles, and to violate the most solemn Engagements? What
mutual Distrust and Divisions will be among you? And what violent Efforts to
destroy each other? Adrastus will have no need then to destroy you; you will do
your own Business sufficiently, in justifying such Perfidiousness. O wise and
magnanimous Princes! who Command with so much Prudence such innumerable
Multitudes of People, do not disdain to hearken to the Counsel of a young Man:
If you should fall into the most terrible Extremities, into which War sometimes
precipitates Men, you might be relieved by the Vigilance, and the Efforts of
your Virtue; for true Courage never suffers it self to be entirely depressed;
but if ever you break the Barrier of Honor and Fidelity, your Loss will become
irreparable; you will never be able to re-establish either that Confidence
among you, which is necessary to the success of all important Affairs; nor
bring Men back to the Principles of Virtue, after you have taught 'em to
despise 'em. Again, what is it you are afraid of? Have Not you Courage enough to
Conquer without using Deceit? Is not your Virtue in Conjunction with the Forces
of so many Nations sufficient to support you? Let us fight and die, if it must
be so, rather than Conquer by such unworthy means. Adrastus, the impious
Adrastus is in our hands, provided we abhor to imitate his Baseness and
Infidelity.

When Telemachus had finished this Discourse, he found that the charming
Eloquence which had flowed from his Lips, had pierced their very Souls. He
observed a profound Silence in the Assembly: Every ones Thoughts were engaged
in considering, not so much his Person, and the Graces of his Speech, as the
Force of Truth that displayed it self so evidently in the train of his
Reasonings. Astonishment was drawn on their Countenances: At last a low Murmur
was heard to spread it self by little and little among 'em; they looked one
upon another, and every one was loath to speak first: 'Twas expected that the
chief Commanders would declare themselves, and each of 'em felt an uneasiness
in retaining his Sentiments. In fine, the grave Nestor delivered himself in
these words: O worthy Son of the wise Ulysses! The Gods have taught you to
speak; and Minerva, who has so often inspired your Father, has infused into
your Soul that wise and generous Advice you have imparted to us. I don't mind
your Youth; I only consider Minerva in all you have been saying: You have
spoken on the behalf of Virtue; without which the greatest Advantages are real
Losses; without which we may draw upon our selves, the Revenge of our Enemies,
the Distrust of our Allies, the Horror of all good Men, and the just
Displeasure of the Gods; I am therefore for leaving Venusia in the hands of the
Lucanians, and for thinking of no other way of Conquering Adrastus, but by our
Courage. No sooner had he spoken, but the whole Assembly applauded the Wisdom
of his Words; but in giving this Applause, every one turned his Eyes with
wonder toward the Son of Ulysses; and all thought they saw that Wisdom of
Minerva which inspired him, cast a sparkling Glory upon his Countenance.

There was soon raised in this Council of the King's, another Question, in
resolving which, he acquired no less Glory. Adrastus, who was always Cruel and
Perfidious, sent into the Camp a Deserter named Acanthus, who was to Poison the
principal Commanders of the Army. Above all, he had order to spare nothing to
bring about the Death of young Telemachus, who was already become the Terror of
the Daunians. Telemachus, who had too much Courage and Candor to be inclined to
Suspicion, without difficulty, kindly received this Villain, who had seen
Ulysses in Sicily, and gave him an account of the Adventures of that Hero. He
maintained him, and endeavored to encourage him under his Misfortune; for
Acanthus complained, that he was deluded and treated unworthily by Adrastus;
but this was to cherish and warm in his Bosom a Viper full of Venom, that was
ready to give him a mortal Wound. Another Deserter was taken, called Arion,
whom Acanthus had sent back to Adrastus, to acquaint him with the State of the
Confederate Camp, and to assure him that the following day he would Poison the
principal Kings, together with Telemachus, at a Feast which this last was to
make on his Account. Arion being surpised, confessed his Treason; he was
suspected to have Intelligence with Acanthus, because they were intimate
Friends; but Acanthus being a profound Hypocrite, and intrepid, made his
Defense with so much Art, that he could not be convicted; nor the bottom of the
Conspiracy discovered. Diverse of the Kings were for sacrificing Acanthus at a
venture, for the Public Safety. He ought to die, said they; the Life of one
Man ought not to stand in competition with the security of the Lives of so many
Kings. What if one innocent Man perish, when his Death is designed for the
Preservation of such as represent the Gods among Men? What inhuman Maxim,
replied Telemachus, what barbarous Policy is this? Are you then so prodigal of
human Blood? O you that are established the Shepherds of Mankind, and only Rule
over 'em to preserve 'em, as Shepherds do their Flocks. You, it seems, then are
become cruel Wolves instead of being careful Shepherds; at least, you are only
such Shepherds as cut the Throats of their Sheep instead of leading 'em into
good Pasture. According to you, a Man becomes Guilty as soon as he is accused,
and Suspicion makes him deserve Death; the Innocent lie at the mercy of Envy
and Calumny; and according to your increase of this tyrannical Jealousy in
your Minds, we must have more such Victims sacrificed. Telemachus uttered these
Words with such Authority and Vehemence as captivated their Hearts, and covered
the Authors of this so unmanly Advice with Shame and Confusion. In fine, he
softened his words: For my part, said he, I am not so much in love with Life,
as to secure it at that rate; I had rather Acanthus should be Vile and Wicked
than my self; and would sooner choose to die by his Treachery, than put him to
Death by any unjust Sentence, only founded upon Suspicion. But have a little
Patience, O you, who in being established Kings, that is, Judges of the People
under your Charge, ought to know how to discharge the Function with Justice,
Prudence and Moderation; let me examine Acanthus in your Presence. Immediately
he interrogated this Man about his Correspondence with Arion; he pressed him
with an infinite number of Circumstances; he often made him believe he would
send him back to Adrastus as a Deserter that deserved to be punished; that he
might the better make his Observation, whether he were afraid to be sent back
or not; but the Countenance of Acanthus still remained calm and even: From
which Telemachus concluded that Acanthus might not be Guilty: In fine,
perceiving he could not thus draw the Truth out of his Breast, says he to him,
Give me your Ring, for I Will send it to Adrastus: No sooner was the Ring
demanded, but Acanthus turned Pale, and was much embarrassed. Telemachus, whose
Eyes were continually fixed on him, discerned it; he took the Ring; I Will
immediately send this, says he to Adrastus, by the Hand of an intreaging
Lucanian, named Polytropus, with whom you are acquainted; he shall pretend to
be come secretly from you; if we can by this means discover their private
Intelligence with Adrastus, you shall without Mercy be put to Death by the most
cruel Torments; if on the contrary you now confess your Fault, you shall be
pardoned, and we'll content our selves only in sending you into an Island,
where you shall want nothing. Upon this Acanthus corfess'd all, and Telemachus
obtained of the Kings that his Life might be spared, because he had given him
the promise of it; and he was sent to the Islands called Echinades, where he
lived in Peace. Not long after this a Daunian of obscure Birth, but of a
violent and daring Temper, named Discorus, Temper, named Discorus, came in the
Night into the confederate Camp, to make an offer to 'em to kill King Adrastus
in his Tent. He was capable of this Attempt; for that Man is Master of the Life
of another, who puts no Value upon his own. This Person breathed nothing but
Revenge, because Adrastus had taken away his Wife, whom he passionately Loved,
and whose Beauty did not come behind that of Venus her self. He had secret
Intelligence whereby he could find a Way into the King's Tent in the Night, and
could be favored in this Enterprise by several Daunian Captains; but he
thought it necessary for the Confederate (...) to attack Adrastus his Camp at
the same time, that in the noiseand hurry of Action, he might with greater
Facility make his Escape, and carry away his Wife too; and if he could not
compass this last Thing, after he had killed the King, he was content to Die.
As soon as Dioscorus had explained his Design to the Kings, they all turned
themselves toward Telemachus, thereby signifying they desired a direction in
this matter from him. The Gods, said he, who have preserved us from Traitors,
forbid us to make use of 'em; and if we had not Virtue enough to detest the
Treason, our Interest alone would be sufficient to make us reject it; when we
have once authorized it by our Example, we shall deserve to have it turned
against us; and who among us from that Moment will be safe? It Is possible
Adrastus may escape the Blow that threatens him, and may make it fall upon the
Confederate Princes; and then War will become quite another Thing, Wisdom and
Virtue will be of no manner of use, and nothing will be seen but Frauds,
Treasons and Assassinations; I therefore conclude we ought to send this Traitor
back to Adrastus; I cofess the King does not deserve it, but all Hesperia, and
all Greece, who have their Eyes upon us deserve, that we should conduct our
selves so as to gain their Esteem; we owe our selves, and in short we owe the
just Gods such a Testimony as this of our Horror of Treachery. Dioscorus was
immediately sent to Adrastus, who trembled to think of the Danger he had been
in, and mightily wondered at the Generosity of his Enemies; for ill Men know
not how to comprehend what pure Virtue is. Adrastus was obliged whether he
would or no to admire what he saw, but durst not commend it. This noble Action
of the Allies, recalled the shameful Remembrance, both of all his Treacheries,
and all his Cruelties; he would fain have extenuated the Generosity of his
Enemies, yet was ashamed to appear Ungrateful, while he owed 'em his Life; but
Men that are corrupted soon harden themselves against every Thing that touches
'em. Adrastus observing, that the Reputation of the Allies daily augmented,
thought himself obliged to perform some Action against 'em that might make a
Noise in the World; and since he could not do a Virtuous one, he was desirous
at least of obtaining some great Advantage over 'em by Arms, and therefore made
what haste he could to Fight.

The Day of Battle being come, scarce had Aurora opened the oriental Gates to
the Sun in a Path strow'd with Roses, when the young Telemachus, by his early
Care out-stript the Vigilance of the oldest Captains, by throwing off the soft
Embraces of Sleep, and putting all the Officers in Motion; already his Helmet
covered with his floating Hair glittered on his Head; and his Cuirass dazzled
the Eyes of the whole Army; it was the Work of Vulcan, and had besides its
natural Beauty, the Luster of a shining Breast Plate that was placed under it:
He held a Spear in one Hand, and pointed with the other to the diverse Posts
that 'twas necessary to possess. Minerva had filled his Eyes with a divine
Fire, and his Countenance with an awful Majesty, which began already to promise
Victory. He marched, and all the Kings forgetting their Age and Dignity, found
themselves attracted by a superior Power, which obliged 'em to follow his
Steps. Weak Jealousy could enter their Breasts no more. Every thing gives way
to him whom Minerva insensibly Leads by the Hand. His Action had nothing in it
that was Impetuous or Precipitant; he was Mild, Calm, Patient, always ready to
hear others, and to profit by their Advice; but Active, Sagacious, Attentive to
the remotest Exigences, disposing all Things to the best Advantage; not
embarrasing himself with any Thing, nor perplexing others; excusing Faults,
rectifying Mistakes, preventing Difficulties, never requiring too much of any
one, and every where inspiring Freedom and Confidence; if he gave an Order, it
was in the most simple and plain Terms; he repeated it, the better to inform
the Mind of him that was to put it in Execution. He saw by his Eyes whether he
comprehended it aright. He afterward made him familiarly express, how he
understood his Words, and what was the principal Scope of the Attempt. When he
had thus made Proof of the good Sense of the Person he sent, and had made him
enter into his Designs, he never let him go, till he had given him some Mark of
his Esteem and Confidence, to encourage him; so that all he sent from him, were
full of Zeal to please him, and a fervent Desire to succeed in their
Undertakings: But they were not tormented with Fear that he would impute to
them their ill Success; for he excused all Faults that did not arise from an
ill Disposition of Mind.

The Horizon appeared Red, and inflamed with the Sun's MorningRays; the Sea was
filled with the bright Reflection of the rising Day; all the Coast was covered
with Men, Horses and Chariots, all in Motion; which made a confused Noise, like
that of the angry Waves, when Neptune stirs up dismal Tempests at the bottom of
his deep Territories. Thus Mars began by the Noise of Arms, and the dreadful
preparations of War, to sow Rage in every Heart. The Field was full of
bristling Pikes, thick set like a Crop of Corn that covers a fruitful Field at
the time of Harvest; there soon arose a Cloud of Dust, which veiled both Heaven
and Earth from the Eyes of Men; Darkness, Bloodshed, Horror and merciless Death
advanced apace. Scarce were the first Arrows Shot, when Telemachus with his
Eyes and Hands toward Heaven, pronounced these Words. O Jupiter, Father of the
Gods and Men! Behold, behold on our side Justice and Peace, which we have not
been ashamed to pursue: It Is with Regret we Fight; we would willingly be
sparing of humane Blood; we do not hate even such an Enemy as this, tho he is
Cruel, Perfidious and Sacrilegious; Behold, and give a decision between him and
us. If we must Die, our Lives are in our Hands. If we must deliver Hesperia,
and humble this Tyrant, it will be thy Power, and the Wisdom of Minerva, thy
Daughter, that will give us the Victory; and the Glory of it will be due to
you. It Is you that hold the Balance, and regulate the Fate of Battles; we
Fight for you, and seeing you are Just, Adrastus is more your Enemy than ours.
If your Cause prove Victorious, before the end of the Day, the Blood of a whole
Hecatomb shall flow upon your Altars. No sooner had he thus spoken, but he
pushed on his fiery and foaming Coursers into the closest Ranks of the Enemy.
He presently met with Periander the Locrian, covered with the Skin of a Lion
which he had killed in Sicily, when he traveled thither. He was armed like
Hercules, with a prodigious Club; in Strength and Stature he was like the
ancient Giants. When he saw Telemachus, he despised his Youth, and the Beauty
of his Countenance. Is it not, says he, a pretty Business for thee, thou young
effeminate Spark, to dispute with us the Glory of Battle? Go Child, get thee
among the Shades, to seek thy Father; in speaking which Words, he lifted up his
heavy Club, which was full of Knots, and armed with Iron Spikes; it was so big
and long, that it looked like the Mast of a Ship: Every one near was afraid of
being crushed by the fall of it. It most threatened Telemachus his Head; but he
avoided the Stroke, and flew upon Periander as swiftly as an Eagle cuts through
the Air. The Club fell upon the Wheel of a Chariot, near that of Telemachus,
and broke it; in the mean time the young Greek struck a Dart into Periander's
Throat. The Blood that ran bubbling out in abundance from the wide Wound, soon
suffocated his Voice; his furious Horses no longer felt any restraint from his
fainting Hand, but ran madly up and down with the Reins hanging loose upon
their Necks; he soon fell from his Chariot, with his Eyes already closed from
the Light, and pale Death was already painted on his deformed Visage:
Telemachus moved with pity toward him, immediately gave his Body to his
Domestics; and kept the Lyon's Skin together with his Club, as a Mark of his
Victory. After this he sought for Adrastus in the Body of the Army, and in his
way precipitated into Hell a Multitude of Warriors. Hileus, who had his
Chariot drawn by two Courses, like those of the Sun, which were fed in those
vast Meadows which Aufidus Waters. Dimoleon, who formerly in Sicily had almost
equaled Erix in Combat for the embroidered Girdle. Cranter, who had been the
Host and Friend of Hercules, when this Son of Jupiter was going into Hesperia,
where he killed the infamous Cacus. Menecrates, who was said to resemble Pollux
in Wrestling. Hippocon the Salapian, who imitated the peaceful Addresses of
Castor in the management of a Horse. The famous Hunter Eurimedes, who was
always stained with the Blood of Beasts and wild Boars, which he killed on the
Ridges of the cold Appenine, which are covered with Snow; who is said to have
been so dear to Diana, that she taught him her self to handle the Bow.
Nicostrasius who had quer'd a Giant, that vomited Fire in the Rocks of Mount
Gargan. Eleanthus, who was to espouse the Young Pholoe, Daughter of the River
Lyris. She had been promised by her Father, to the Person that should deliver
her from a Winged Serpent, that was bred on the Banks of the River, and would
have devoured her in a few Days, according to the Prediction of an Oracle. This
Young Man prompted by an extraordinary love to her, ventured his Life to kill
this Monster; he succeeded in the Attempt, but could not taste the Fruit of his
Victory; for while Pholoe was preparing for the Rights of Charming Hymen, and
expected Eleanthus with impatience; she was informed that he followed Adrastus
into the Wars, and that the Destinies had cruelly cut off his Days. This News
made her fill the Woods and Mountains near the River with her Groans; she
drowned her Eyes in Tears, and tore off her lovely Hair. She forgot the
Garlands of Flowers she was wont to gather; and accused Heaven of Injustice,
because she incessantly wept Day and Night; the Gods touched with her
Complaints, and moved by the Prayers of the River put an end to her Sorrow; for
she poured out such abundance of Tears, that she was instantly turned into a
Fountain, which running into the Bosom of the River, seeks to join her Waters
with those of the God her Father; but the Water of this Fountain is still
bitter; Grass never grows upon the Bank of it, nor is any Shade to be found on
the sides of it, but that of mournful Cypress Trees.

But to return: Adrastus perceiving that Telemachus spread Terror on every
side, sought after him with the utmost diligence, hoping easily to Conquer the
Son of Ulysses, in an Age as yet so tender. He was attended with Thirty
Daunians, of extraordinary Strength, Dexterity, and Boldness, to whom he
promised very great Rewards, if thy could any way in the World kill Telemachus
in Battle. And if they had met him just at this time of the Fight, without
doubt these Thirty Men, by surroundings his Chariot, while Adrastus would have
attacked him in the Front, would have found no great difficulty in dispatching
him. But Minerva turned 'em out of their way. Adrastus thought he saw, and
heard Telemachus in a low part of the Plain, at the foot of a Hill, where a
great number of Soldiers were closely engaged. Hither he runs, or rather flies,
with an eager Desire to satiate himself with Blood; but instead of Telemachus,
he finds the Aged Nestor, who with his trembling Hand, was throwing Darts at a
venture, though he did little or no Execution: Adrastus in his fury would have
run him through, had not a Troop of Pylians thrown themselves round about
Nestor: A Cloud of Darts then soon obscured the Air, and covered all the
Combatants; nothing was to be heard but the Woeful Cries of dying Men, and the
clashing of the Arms of those that fell in among the Crowd; the Earth groaned
under Heaps of dead Bodies; Torrents of Blood ran on all sides; Bellona and
Mars, together with the Infernal Furies, clothed with Robes all over running
down with Blood, glutted their hollow Eyes with this Spectacle, and incessantly
renewed a Marshal Rage in the Hearts of the Combatants; these Deities, who are
the Enemies of Men, chased far away from both Parties, generous Pity, moderated
Valor, and sweet Humanity. There was nothing among these confused Heaps of Men
enraged one against another, but Slaughter, Revenge, Despair and brutish Fury.
The Wife and Invincible Pallas her self, trembled at the sight, and started
back with horror. In the mean time Philoctetus marched on by degrees, with the
Arrows of Hercules in his Hands, endeavoring to come to the Relief of Nestor.
Adrastus not able to reach the Divine Old Man, had pierced several Pylians with
his Darts, and made 'em lick the Dust. He overthrew Eusilas, who was so swift a
Runner, that he scarce left the print of his Steps upon the Sand, and in his
own Country, outstript the most rapid Streams of the Eurotas, and the Alpheus.
At his Feet fell Entiphon, who was more Beautiful than Hylas, and as violent a
Hunter as Hyppolitus. Pterelas, who had followed Nestor to the Siege of Troy,
and whom Achilles himself loved for his Courage and Strength: Aristogiton, who
by bathing in the Waters of the River Achelous, had friendly received of this
God, the power of assuming all sorts of Forms; in short, he was so supple and
nimble in all his Motions, that he escaped the Hands of the strongest Warriors;
but Adrastus with one thrust of his Spear, deprived him of all Motion, and soon
let out his Blood and Soul together.

Nestor seeing his most Valiant Captains fall by the Hand of Adrastus, as the
gilded Ears of Corn in time of Harvest, fall under the keen Sickle of the
Indefatigable Reaper, forgot his own Danger, and needlessly exposed himself. He
threw away his Old Age, and thought of nothing but how to follow his Son
Pisistratus, in keeping his Eyes intent on him, who on his side was very warmly
engaged, to keep off Danger from his Father. But the fatal Moment was come, in
which Pisistratus was to make Nestor feel how unfortunate a Man may be in
living too long. Pisistratus pushed his Spear with such violence against
Adrastus, that this Daunian Prince must needs have fallen, but that he avoided
the Stroke; and while Pisistratus who was somewhat discomposed by the false
Thrust he had (...) was recovering his Spear, (...) pierced him with a Javesin
in the middle of his Folly. His Bowels immediately began to come out with a
Torrent of Blood. His lively Color vanished like that of a Flower, after the
Hand of some Nymph has gathered it in the Meadow; his Eyes were already almost
extinguished, and his Speech falter'd, when Alisius his Governor, who (...)
near him, supported him just as he was falling, and had only time to (...) him
to his Father, and throw him into his Arms; then he would fain have) spoken,
and have given him the last marks of his tender Affection, but as he opened his
Mouth to speak, he expired.

While, (...) spread Slaughter and Horror round him, in (...) the Efforts of
Adrastus; Nestor held the Body of his Son closely grasped in his Arms, and
filled the Air with lamentable Cries, not being able to (...) the Light any
longer. All unfortunate (...) that I am, said he, that I have been a Father,
and lived so long! Alas! ye cruel Destinies, why did you not end my Life,
either (...) Hunting the (...) Boar, or in my (...) Voyage, or at the first
Siege of (...) Then I should have died with Glory, and without bitterness and
Sorrow. Now I carry with me a (...) despiss'd, and impotent Old. Age I now live
only to suffer (...) and have no other (...)me, but that of Sorrow. O my Son!
my Son! O my dear Son (...) When I lost they Brother (...) (...)wast my (...)
but now I have thee no more, now I have nothing left; nothing can yield me any
Consolation more: All is at an End with me. Hope, the only mitigation of Human
(...) is an Advantage in which I have no Interest. O (...) O (...) my dear
Children, this seems to me the (...) Day wherein I lose you both. The Death of
one opens again the Wound which that of the other had made in the bottom of my
Heart. I shall never see either of you again: Who now shall close my Eyes? Who
shall gather up my Ashes? O Pisistratus, thou did die as well as thy Brother,
a Valiant Man; it is only I that cannot tell how to die. In uttering these Words
he would have pierced himself with a Dart which he held in his Hand, if he had
not been prevented by those that were about him; after which they took from him
the Body of his Son; and this unfortunate Old Man falling into a Swoon, they
carried him into his Tent, when after he had a little recovered his Spirits, he
would have returned into the Battle, which they would by no means suffer him to
do.

In the mean time Adrastus and Philoctetus were searching for each other. Their
Eyes sparkled like those of a Lion and a Leopard, that are seeking to devour
one another in those Fields which Cocyties waters. Menaces, warlike Rage, and
cruel Revenge glitter in their furious Eyes; they bring certain Death wherever
they throw their Darts. All the Soldiers beheld 'em with Terror: And now they
see one another: Philoctetus held in his Hand, one of those terrible Arrows,
which never failed to do Execution in his Hands, and made Wounds that were
incurable. But Mars who favored the Cruel and Intrepid Adrastus, would not
suffer him to die so soon; having a Desire, by his means, to prolong the
Horrors of War, and multiply. Slaughter and Cruelty. Adrastus his Life was yet
owing to the Justice of the Gods, as their Scourge to punish Men, and shed
their Blood. In the very Moment Philoctetus designed to attack him, he was
himself wounded by the thrust of a Spear, given him by Amphimachus, a young
Lucanian, whose Beauty exceeded the famous Niceus, as the Beauty of this latter
gave place to none, but that of Achilles among all the Greeks that ^ Wound, but
he drew his Bow against (...) and sent an Arrow to him that pienc'd his (...)
The Luster of his lovely Black Eyes was instantly extinguished and covered with
the Shades of Death; his Vermilion Lips whose Color excelled that of the (...)
which oising (...)along the Horizon, grew Wan, and a dreadful Paleness (...)
his lovely Cheeks: In a word; his tender (...) dolicate Countenance was all on
a Asudden disfigured. (...) himself could not forbear to pity him. And all the
Soldiers that observed him, could not choose but sigh to see this Young Man
fall, and roll in his own Blood; his Head of Hair, which, for Beauty, might vie
with that of Apollo, all disheveled and defiled in the Dust. Philoctetus having
Conquered Amphimachus, was constrained to retire from the Battle; he lost his
Blood and Strength, and even his Ancient Wound, seemed in the heat of (...) on,
ready to open again, and (...) his Pain; for the Sons of (...) with all their
Divide Art, could not entirely cure it. And now he was just ready to fall among
the Heap of bleeding Bodies, that were round about him; when Archiaamus, the
hold and most dextrous of all the Thebalians that he had brought with him to
Found Philelia, carried him out of the Battle, in the very moment when Adrastus
would have (...) him at his Feet with ease: And now Adrastus finds no farther
(...) none daring to resist or retard his Victory. All fall or fly before him;
and he becomes like a Torrent, which having overflown its Banks, sweeps away
with its fullous Waves, Corn and Cattle, Shepherds and their Cottages together.

Telemachus hears from far the shouts of the Conquerors, and sees. the
Disorders of his Men, who fled before Adrastus, as a Company of timorous Deer,
traverse the vast Plains, Woods, Mountains, and even the swiftest Rivers, when
pursued by the Hunters.

Telemachus sighed; Indignation sparkles in his Eyes; he quits the Place where
he had been so long fighting, with so much Danger, and Glory, and runs to the
Succor of his discouraged Troops. He advances, all besmeared with the Blood of
a multitude of Enemies, whom he had spread upon the Dust. He gives a shout at a
distance, that was heard by both Armies: Minerva had put something
unexpressibly terrible, both in his Eyes and Voice, with which he made the
neighboring Mountains echo. Never did Mars make his own cruel Voice to be
heard louder in Thrace, when he called upon the infernal Furies, War and Death,
to attend him. This shout of Telemachus, inspird the Hearts of his Soldiers
with Courage and Boldness, and fills the Souls of his Enemies with Fear and
Dread. Adrastus is ashamed to feel himself thus disordered. I know not how many
fatal Presages fills him with Terror; and that which animates him, is rather
Despair, than true Valor, which is accompanied with Tranquillity of Mind.
Three times his trembling Knees began to slip away from under him; three times
he stepped back without thinking what he was doing; a faint Paleness and a cold
Sweat ran through all his Limbs; his hoarse and faltering Voice could not
finish any Sentence; his Eyes, full of gloomy Fire, sparkled and looked as if
they would start out of his Head; he seemed agitated by the Furies, like
Orestes; all his Motions were Convulsive; he thought he saw the Gods, irritated
against him; and that he heard a whispering Voice proceeding from the bottom of
Hell, to call him into black (...) every thing made him sensible there was a
(...) and (...) Hand waving over his Head, which was going to (...) its Force,
in (...) him (...) Hope was extinguished at the (...) of his Heart; his
Resolution was (...) and disappeared like the Light of the Day, when the Sun
lies down in the Bosom of the Sea, and the Earth wraps her self in the Shades
of the Night. The impious Adrastus, too long suffered upon the Earth; too long,
if Mankind had not stood in need of such a Scourge, the impious Adrastus, in
sine, draws near his last Hour, he runs like a mad Man to meet his inevitablo
Fare: Horror, cutting Remorse, Consternation, Fury, Rage, and Despair, march
along with him. No sooner does he see Telemachus, but he thinks he sees
Avertius open it self; and the rolling Flames of black Phlegethon ready to
dovour him. He cries out, and his Mouth remain open without being (...) ^ Man
(...) who (...) frightfuli Dream opens his Mouth, and makes attempts no speak
but still wants (...) and seeks it in (...) However, (...) with a trembling and
(...) Hand, throws his Dart at Telemachus; while the latter, intrepid. and calm
as the Minds of the Gods, defends himself with his Buokler; Victory covering.
him with her Wings, seems already to hold a Crown over his Head; a sweet and
orderly Courage shines in his Eyes; one would have taken him for Minerva her
self, he appeared so wise and regular in the midst of the greatest Dangers. The
Dart which Adrastus cast being repulsed by his Buckler, Adrastus made have to
draw his Sword to hinder (...) Son of the Advantage of taking (...) turn to
throw his Dart at him: (...) seeing Adrastus's Sword in his Hand, betakes
himself immed (...) to his own, omitting to throw his Dart. When they were seen
in this Posture of fighting one another hand to hand; all the rest of the
Soldiers laid down their Arms in silence, to look upon 'em with the greatest
Attention, expecting from their single Engagement the destiny of the whole War.
The two Swords glittered like the Lightning which sends forth terrible Claps of
Thunder, they often cross one another, and deal Blows without Execution on
their polished Armor, which resounded with the heavy strokes. The two
Combatants stretch out and recover themselves, stoop down and rise up all in an
instant; and in fine, they fall to grappling: The Ivy that grows at the Foot of
a young Elm, does not more straightly wreath its twining Branches about the hard
and knotty Trunk, till it climbs up to the lostiest Boughs of the Tree, than
these two Combatants Clasp and Lock one another. Adrustus had yet lost nothing
of his Strength, and Telemachus had not mustered all his together. Adrastus
made several Essorts to surprise his Enemy, and over-set him; he endeavors to
seize the Sword of the young Greek, but in vain; while he attempts this,
Telemachus takes him up from the Ground, and throws him flat upon the Sand:
Then this impious Prince, that had always contemned the Gods, manifested an
unmanly fear of Death; he is ashamed to beg Life, yet cannot help signifying
that he desired it; he endeavors to move the Compassion of Telemachus by such
words as these: O thou Son of Ulysses, says he, I now at last acknowledge that
the Gods are Just; they punish me according to my (...) It Is only by Calamities
that the Eyes of Men are opened to see the Truth; I see it, and it condemns me:
But let an unfortunate King put you in mind of your Father, who is remote from
(...) and let the thoughts of this (...) your Heart.

(...) who was holding him under his Knees, and had his Sword already lifted up
to kill him, (...) answered, I desire not (...) but Victory, and the Peace of
the Nations which I came to (...) I have ho (...) in shedding Blood. Live
therefore, O (...) but live to make Reparation for your Faults; (...) all that
you have (...) re-establish Tranquillity and Justice in the Confines of the
great Hesperia, which you have defiled with so many Massacres and Treacheries.
Live and become another Man; learn by your Fall, that the Gods are Just, and
that the Wicked are Miserable; that they deceive themselves in seeking
Happihess, in Violence, Barbarity and Fraud: In short, that nothing is so happy
and sweet as simple and steady Virtue. Give us for Hostages your Son
Metrodorus, with twelve of the principal Nobles of your (...) A those words,
(...) suffers him (...)and gives him his Hand, not, suspecting his (...) for
(...) threw at-him the (...) time a short (...) which he kept (...) was so
(...) and (...) with that force, that it would have (...) Telemachus's Armor,
had it not been made by a Divine Hand; at the same time (...) cast himself
behind a Tree, to avoid the (...) of (...) Upon this, the latter cries out, O
(...) the Victory's ours! This impious Man saves himself. only by his
Treachery; he who fears not the Gods, fears Death; on the contrary, he that
fears them, has nothing else to fear. In uttering these words, he advances
toward the Daunians, and gives a sign to his Men that were on the other side
of the Tree, to cut off the Retreat of the (...) (...) Adrastus fearing he
should be taken, makes as if he would return the same way he came, and went to
fall upon the Cretans, that stood obstruct his Passage; when on a sudden,
Telemachus, swift as the Thunder which the Father of the Gods shoots from high
Olympus upon guilty Heads, falls upon his Enemy; he seizes him with his
victorious Hand, casts him upon the Ground, as the violent North Wind beats
down the tender Ears of Corn that guild the Field He now will hear no more,
though the impious Wretch once again essays to abuse the Goodness of his generous
Mind; he instantly thrusts his Sword into his Bowels, and precipitates him into
the Flames of black Cocytus, a Punishment worthy of his Crimes.

Adrastus was scarce dead, when all the Daunians were so far from deploring
their Defeat, and the loss of their General, that they rejoiced at their
Deliverance, and held out their Hands to the Allies in sign of Peace and
Reconciliation. Metrodorus the Son of Adrastus, whom his Father had educated in
Maxims of Dissimulation, Injustice, and Inhumanity, fled away like a Coward:
But a Slave that was an Accomplice of his Infamies and Cruelties, whom he had
infranchized and loaded with Favors, and in whose hands alone he trusted
himself in his Flight, thought of nothing but how to betray him for his own
Interest. He killed him as he fled, by giving him a Wound in the Back, cut off
his Head, and brought it into the Confederate Camp, hoping to receive a great
Recompense for a Crime that finished the War: But the Act of this Villain was
abhorred, and he put to Death. Telemachus having seen the Head of Metrodorus,
who was a young Prince of wonderful Beauty, and of an excellent natural Temper,
though corrupted by Pleasures and vicious Examples, could not restrain his Tears.
Alas! cried he, here is what the Poison of Prosperity does for a young Prince;
the more Elevation and Vivacity of Mind he has, the more he wanders and becomes
a Stranger to all Sentiments of true Virtue; and now it may be my Condition had
been like his, if the Misfortunes in which I was born and educated, Thanks be
to the Gods, and to the Instructions of Mentor, had not taught me to govern my
self.

The assembled Daunians desired, as the only Condition of Peace, that they
might be permitted to make 'em a King of their own Nation, who might by his
Virtues (...) the Reproach which the impious Adrastus had brought upon the
Crown. They thanked the Gods for having cut off the Tyrant, and came in
Multitudes to kiss the Hand of Telemachus, which had been embrew'd in the Blood
of that Monster; so that their Defeat was a Triumph to 'em. Thus, in a moment,
fell that Power without possibility of Recovery which (...) all the rest in
Hesperia, and made for many Nations, tremble; like those (...) of made Ground
that appear firm and immovable, (...) by degrees are mouldring below for a
great, while the feeble Work of (...) the Foundations is derided; nothing
appears the (...) for it, all is stable, nothing so much as shakes, yet all the
subterranean Props are gradually destroyed to the Foundation, and all on a
sudden the (...) sinks, and opens a prodigeous Pit. Thus an unjust and
fraudulent Power, what Prosperity soever it acquires by its Violences, digs a
Precipice under its own Feet; Fraud and Cruelty gradually undermine all the
firmest Foundations of unlawful Authority. Men admire it, fear it, tremble
before it, till the moment it vanishes; it falls with its own weight, and
nothing can raise it again, because it has with its own Hands destroyed the
true Props of Sincerity and Justice, which attract Love and Confidence.

The chief Commanders of the Army the next Day assembled to grant the Daunians
a King. It was a very pleasant Thing to see the two Camps confounded together,
by so unexpected a Friendship, so that the two Armies now made but one; the
wise Nestor could not assist at this Council, because his Grief, added to his
old Age, had withered his Heart, just as a Storm of Rain in the Evening beats
down a Flower, and makes it languish, which in the Morning while Aurora was
rising, was the Glory and Ornament of the verdant Fields. His Eyes were become
two Springs of Tears, that could not be exhausted; soft Sleep that Charms the
acutest Pains, fled far away from him. Hope, which is the Life of a Man's
Heart, was extinct in him; all Food was bitter to this unfortunate old Man; the
Light was odious to him, his Soul desired nothing but to Die, and plunge
himself into the eternal Night of Pluto's Empire. In vain did all his Friends
speak to him; his sinking Heart was disgusted with all Friendship, as a sick
Man disrelishes the most dainty Meats. To all that could be said to him, to
make the deepest Impression on his Mind, he returned nothing but deep Sighs and
Groans. From time to time he was heard to say, O Pisistratus, Pisistratus,
Pisistratus, my Son, thou call'st me away, I Will follow thee, thou will render
Death sweet to me. O my Son! all the Happiness I now desire, is to see thee
again on the Banks of Styx. He past whole Hours without uttering one Word, but
was still Groaning, and lifting up his Hands and Eyes all drowned in Tears to
Heaven.

In the mean time the Princes being assembled, were expecting Telemachus, who
was by the Body of Pisistratus; he strewn handfulls of (...) upon the Corpse,
to which he added exquisite Perfumes, and poured forth bitter Tears; O my dear
Companion, said he, I shall never forget how I saw thee at Pilos, and how I
followed thee to Sparta, how I found thee again on the Coasts of the great
Hesperia. I owe thee a Thousand and a Thousand kind Offices; I Loved thee, and
thou had a like Love for me; I knew thy Valor, it (...) that of many famous
Greeks. But alas! it is extinguished with thy Glory; 'twas thy Valor that has
robbed the World of that improving Virtue of thine, which would have equaled
that of the greatest Men. Yes, thy Wisdom and thy Eloquence in a riper Age,
would have resembled the like Endowments in the most celebrated Men of Greece.
Thou had already acquired that sweet Insinuation, that could not be resisted
when thou spakest, those natural and lively ways of relating Matters; that
prudent Moderation which is a Charm to appease irritated Minds; that Authority
which proceeds from Prudence and the force of good Counsels. When thou spokest,
every Ear was attentive; all were prepossessed in thy Favor, every one was
willing to find Reason on thy side. Thy Speech that was plain and simple, void
of Pomp, sweetly instilled it self into Men's Souls, like the Dew upon the
(...) Grass. But alas! all those Advantages which we were in possession of a
few Hours ago, are taken away from us for even Pisistratus, whom I embraced
this Morning, is now no more. We have nothing remaining but the sad remembrance
of him. (...) That thou had closed the Eyes of Nestor; and that we had not
all been so unhappy to see thine closed; he would not then have seen what he is
now forced to behold; he would not then have been the most unhappy Father in
the World.

After these Words, Telemachus caused the bloody Wound which was in the side of
Pisistratus to be washed; he ordered him to be laid out upon a purple Bed,
where his Head inclining on his Shoulder with the paleness of Death, resembled
a young Tree, which having covered the Earth with its Shadow, and stretched its
flourishing Boughs toward Heaven, is wounded by the Edge of the Woodman's Axe;
it no longer holds by its own Root, nor by the Earth, that fruitful Mother that
nourishes her Branches in her Bosom; it languishes, its Verdure decays, and
being no longer able to bear up, down it falls; its wide and thick Branches
that lately were as a Veil to obscure the Light of Heaven; now lie extended in
the Dust, withered and dry; it is now no more than a Trunk felled to the Ground,
and spoiled of all its Beauties. Thus Pisistratus being become a Prey to Death,
was now carried away by those who were appointed to lay him on the fatal Pile.
The Flame already began to ascend toward Heaven; a Troop of Pylians with Eyes
dejected and full of Tears, and with their Arms reversed with a slow and
mournful Pace attended him. The Body was soon Burnt, the Ashes put into a
Golden Urne; and Telemachus who took care to have all this performed, committed
this Urne as a great Treasure to Callimachus, who had been Pisistratus his
Governor. Keep safely, says he, these Ashes, the sad but precious Remains of
him you Loved. Keep 'em for his Father, but wait till he recovers Strength
enough to ask 'em before you give 'em to him; that which irritates Sorrow at
one time allays it at another.

At length Telemachus entered the Assembly of the confederate Kings, where
every one kept Silence, in expectation to hear him Discourse; when he perceived
it he blushed, and they could by no means engage him to Speak: The Praises that
were given him by public Acclamations, and above all his late Actions
augmented his bashful Disposition: So that he would have been glad to have hid
himself. This was the first time that he appeared embarrass'd and unsteady; in
fine he desired as a Favor, that they would desist from speaking in his
Praise: It Is not, said he, that I do not love Praises, above all when they are
given by such good Judges of Virtue, but it is because I am afraid of Loving 'em
too much; for they are apt to corrupt Men, they fill 'em with themselves, and
render 'em Vain and Presumptuous. We ought both to merit 'em and avoid 'em. The
justest Praises resemble those that are false and flattering. The most wicked
of all Mankind, the Tyrians are those that have made themselves praised the
most by servile Flatterers. What Pleasure is there in being Praised like them?
Due Praises are such as you will give me in my absence, if I am so happy as to
deserve 'em. If you believe me to be truly Good, you ought also to believe that
I am willing to be Modest, and to be afraid of Vanity. Spare me therefore, if
you value me, and do not Praise me as if I were a Man fond of Praises.

After Telemachus had thus expressed himself, he answered not a Word more to
those that continued to extol him to the very Heavens; but by an Air of
Indifference he soon put a stop to the Enocomiums that were made on him; till
they began to fear they should displease him in commending him. But their
Admiration still increased; every one knowing the Tenderness he had manifested
to Pisistratus, and the care he had taken to render him the last Devoirs; the
whole Army was more touched with the Marks of Tenderness and Generosity of his
Heart, than with all the Prodigies of Wisdom and Valor, that had been shining
so Conspicuously in him. He is Wise, he is Valiant, said they in secret one to
another; he is the Friend of the Gods, and the true Hero of our Age; he is
raised a degree above Mankind: But this is only matter of Wonder, all this does
no more than fill us with Astonishment; he has Humanity and Goodness, he is a
Friend, he is Tender, he is Compassionate, he is Beneficent, and entirely
theirs whom he ought to Love; he is the Delight of them that live with him; he
divests himself of his Dignity, of his Repose, and of his Grandeur: This is
that which makes him useful; this is that which touches Men's Hearts; this is
that which fills us with such tender Affections toward him, and renders us
sensible of all his Virtues. This is that which makes us all ready to Sacrifice
our Lives for him.

These Discourses were scarce finished, when they hastened to speak of the
necessity of giving a King to the Daunians. The greatest part of the Princes
that were in the Council were of Opinion, that it was best to divide the
Country amongst 'em as a Conquered Land; and offered Telemachus the fertile
Country of Arpos, which twice a Year bears the rich Bounty of Ceres, the sweet
Presents of Bacchus, and the ever green Fruits of the Olive Tree, which is
sacred to Minerva. This Land, said they, ought to make you forget poor Ithaca
with its Cottages, and the frightful Rocks of Dulichia, together with the
savage Woods of Zachanthus. Never persist longer to seek your Father, who was
certainly lost in the Waves at the Promontory of Caphaneus, through the Revenge
of Nauplius and the Anger of Neptune; nor your Mother who is long since in the
possession of her Lovers; nor your Country, whose Soil is not favored by
Heaven, like this we now offer you. He patiently heard this Discourse, but the
Rocks of Thrace and Thessaly are not more deaf and insensible of the Complaints
of despairing Lovers, than Telemachus was of all these Proposals. For my part,
replied he, I am not moved either with Riches or Pleasures; what signifies it
to possess a greater extent of Ground, or to Command a greater Number of Men?
One has therewith but the more Perplexity and the less Liberty: Life is full
enough of Miseries, even for the wisest and most regulate sort of Men, without
the additional Trouble of governing other Men, who are Untractable, Unquiet,
Unjust, Treacherous and Ungrateful. If one has a Mind to have Dominion over
Men, out of Self-love, looking at nothing but one's own Authority, Pleasures
and Glory; this is to be Impious and Tyrannical, and become the Scourge of
Mankind. If on the contrary I have a Mind to govern Men only according to right
Rules, for their own Good; I am not so much their Master as their Guardian, I
have nothing but the Trouble of it, which is infinite; and this makes me very
far from desiring to enlarge the Bounds of my Authority. The Shepherd, who
devours not his Flock, but defends it from the Wolves with the hazard of his
Life, who watches over it Night and Day, leading it into fat Pastures, has no
great Mind to augment the Number of his Sheep, and to seize on those of his
Neighbors; this would be but to increase his Trouble. Although I have never
governed, added Telemachus, I have learned by the Laws, and by those wise Men
that made 'em, how toilsom a thing it is to have the Conduct of Cities and
Kingdoms; I am therefore content with my poor Ithaca, tho it be small and mean.
I shall have Glory enough, provided I Reign there with Justice, Piety and
Courage; and indeed I shall Reign there but too soon. May it please the Gods
that my Father may escape the Fury of the Waves, and Reign there to extreme old
Age, and that I may long learn under him to subdue my Passions, and to know the
Art of regulating those of a whole Nation.

Afterward he thus proceeded; Hear, O ye Princes who are here assembled, what I
think I ought to tell you for your own Interest. If you procure the Daunians a
just King, he will govern them Justly; he will make 'em sensible how much it is for
their Advantage, to pursue Faith and Sincerity, and never to usurp upon their
Neighbors; all which they could never come to understand under the impious
Adrastus. As long as they shall continue under the conduct of a just and
moderate Prince, you will have nothing to fear from them; they will owe you
this good King, whom they have received from your Hands; they will owe you all
the Peace and Prosperity which they shall enjoy under his Government. These
People will be so far from attacking you, that they will incessantly bless you;
both the King and People will be the Work of your Hands. If on the contrary,
you resolve to share their Country among you; I Will undertake to predict the
Mischiess that will ensue. These People driven to Despair, will begin a new
War. They will have a just Cause to take up Arms for their Liberty. The Gods,
who are mortal Enemies to Tyranny, will fight for 'em; and if the Gods
intermeddle with the Quarrel, sooner or later you will be confounded, and all
your Prosperity will be dissipated like Smoke. Counsel and Wisdom will be taken
away from your Commanders, and Courage from your Armies, and Plenty from your
Lands: You will flatter your selves, and act with precipitancy in your
Enterprises; you will silence Men of Integrity, when they go about to tell you
the Truth; you will fall on a sudden, and it will be said of you; Are these
then the flourishing Nations that were to give Laws to all the World, and now
they fly before their Enemies? They are the Sport of other Nations, who trample
you under their Feet: This is the Work of the Gods; this is what a People of
Unjust, Proud, and Inhumane Minds deserve. Besides consider, if you attempt to
divide this Conquest among you, you re unite all the Neighboring Nations
against you. Your League formed to defend the common Liberty of Hesperia,
against Adrastus the Usurper, will become odious; and it is you that all the
World will with good Reason Accuse of having aspired to Usurp an Universal
Tyranny. But we'll suppose you should prove Victorious both over the Daunians,
and all other Nations that shall assist 'em; this Victory will destroy you, and
this I Will make out to you. Consider, this Enterprise will dis-unite you all;
for since it is not founded upon Justice, you will have no Rule among you to
bound each others Pretensions; every one will have a Mind that his part of the
Conquest should be proportionate to his Power: None of you will have Authority
enough over all those Nations, to make this Division peaceably; And this will
be the source of a War, of which the Youngest of your Children will not see an
end. Is it not much more eligible to be Just and Regular, than to follow one's
Ambition through so much Danger, and amidst so many inevitable Misfortunes? Are
not profound Peace, the sweet and Innocent Pleasures that accompany it, the
Happiness of Plenty, the Friendship of Neighbors, the Glory which is
inseparable from Justice, the Authority which is acquired, in rendering ones
self by Fidelity and Sincerity, the Arbiter of all Foreign Nations; are not
these, I say, Advantages much more desirable, than the foolish Vanity of
anunjust Conquest? O Princes! Oh Kings! you see I speak to you without seeking
any Interest of my own: Hearken therefore to one who loves you so well, as even
to contradict and displease you, in setting the Truth before you in a clear
Light.

While Telemachus spoke thus with an Air of Authority, which they had never
seen in any other; all the Princes struck with astonishment and in suspense,
admired the Wisdom of his Counsels: There was heard a confused Noise, which
spread it self throughout the Camp, and came to the very Place where the
Assembly was held. A Stranger (say they) is come on Shore on these Coasts, with
a Troop of Armed Men; this unknown Person is of a lofty Mien; every thing in
him appears Heroic; it is easy to discern that he has been long harrass'd with
Sufferings; and that his great Courage has set him above all his Calamities. At
first, the People of the Country who guard the Coasts, would have repulsed him
as an Enemy that was coming to make an Invasion; but after having drawn his
Sword with an Air of Intrepidity, he declared that he knew how to defend
himself if he were attacked, but that he asked nothing but Peace and
Hospitality. Immediately he presented an Olive Branch as a Suppliant; upon this
he was heard; he desired to be brought to those that govern in this part of
Hesperia, and therefore he is conducted hither, to speak to the Assembled Kings.

This Discourse was scarce finished, but this Stranger was seen to enter with a
Majesty that surpised the whole Assembly. One might easily have been induced
to believe he was the God Mars, he was so like him when he assembles his bloody
Troops upon the Thracian Mountains. He addressed himself to them after this
manner.

O ye Shepherds of the People, who without doubt are here assembled either for
the Defense of your Countries against your Enemies, or to make 'em flourish by
your Righteous Laws: Hearken to a Man who has been Persecuted by Fortune. (May
it please the Gods that you never experience the like Misfortune) I am Diomedes
King of Etolia, who incensed Venus at the Siege of Troy; the Revenge of this
Goddess pursues me throughout the Universe. Neptune who can refuse nothing to
the Divine Daughter of the Sea, has delivered me up to the Rage of the Winds
and Waves, which have often dashed me against the Rocks. The inexorable Venus
has deprived me of all Hope of ever seeing again my Kingdom, my Family, and the
sweet Light of that Country, where I first saw the Day at my Birth; no, I shall
never more see what is most dear to me in the World. I now am come, after so
many Ship-wracks, to seek on this unknown Shore, a little Repose, and a safe
Retreat; if you fear the Gods, and above all, Jupiter, who has a respect for
Strangers, and takes care of 'em; if you have any sentiment of Compassion, do
not refuse me in these vast Countries, some spot of Barren Ground, some desert
Shades, or craggy Rocks, that I with my Companions, may Found a City there,
which may be at least, the Melancholy Image of our lost Country. We ask but a
little Ground in a useless place; we'll live in Peace with you in a strict
Alliance; your Enemies shall be ours; we'll enter into all your Interests; we
only desire the Liberty of living according to our own Laws.

While Diomedes spoke thus, Telemachus, who kept his Eyes attentively fixed on
him, showed all the different Passions in his own Countenance. When Diomedes
began to speak of his long Misfortunes, he was in Hope it was his Father. As
soon as he had declared himself to be Diomedes, Telemachus his Countenance
languish'd like a Flower which the Envious North Wind had just withered with
its cruel Blast. The following Words of Diomedes complaining of the Anger of a
Deity, melted him with the Remembrance of the same Disgraces suffered by his
Father and himself; Tears mixed with both Grief and Joy, ran down his Cheeks,
and he instantly threw himself upon Diomedes to embrace him. I am, says he, the
Son of Ulysses, whom you once knew, and who was not unuseful to you, when you
took the famous Horses of Rhesus; the Gods have treated him as well as you
without Pity: If the Oracles of Erebus deceive us not, he is still alive; but
alas! he is not alive to me: I have left Ithaca to seek him; and now I cannot
see either Ithaca or him again: Judge by my Misfortunes, what Compassion I have
for others. The Advantage that is gained by Calamities, is to know how to
sympathize with others in the like Troubles. Though I am but a Stranger here, I
am able, O Great Diomedes (for in spite of all the Calamities that overwhelmed
my Country during my Infancy, I have not been so ill Educated as to be Ignorant
of the Glory you have acquired in Battle) I am able, O Prince most Invincible
of all the Greeks, next to Achilles, to procure you some Relief. These Princes
you see here, are Men of Humanity, without which they know there is no true
Virtue, nor Courage, nor solid Glory. Misfortune adds a new Luster to the Glory
of great Men; they still want something, while they know not what it is to be
Unfortunate. Examples of Patience and Firmness of Mind, are, 'till then,
wanting in their Lives. Suffering Virtue softens all Hearts that have any
virtuous Relish; leave to us therefore the care of consolating you; seeing the
Gods have brought you to us, we receive you as a Present which they make us,
and ought to esteem our selves Happy, that we are in a Capacity to alleviate
your Afflictions.

While he spoke, Diomedes, struck with Wonder, looked intently on him, and felt
a great Emotion in his Heart; they embraced one another, as if they had been
united in the strictest Bonds of Friendship. O Worthy Son of the Wise Ulysses,
said Diomedes, I discern in you the Sweetness of his Countenance, the Grace of
his Discourse, the Force of his Eloquence, the Elevation of his Sentiments, and
the Wisdom of his Thoughts. In the mean time Philoctetus in the like manner
Embraces the Son of Tideus; they related to one another their sad Adventures;
after which, says Philoctetus to him, without doubt, you will be glad to see
the Wise Nestor; he has lately lost Pisistratus, the last of his Children, and
now there remains nothing more to him in this Life, but a Way of Tears to lead
him to his Tomb. Come and try to comfort him; a Friend under the Frowns of
Fortune, is more proper than another to allay the Sorrows of his Heart. They
immediately went into Nestor's Tent, who scarce knew Diomedes, Sorrow had so
depressed his Spirit and Senses. Diomedes presently fell to weeping with him,
and their Enterview served, at first, only to redouble their Sorrow; but by
degrees the presence of this Friend appeased the Grief of the good Old Man; and
one might easily discern, that his Sorrow was in some measure suspended, by the
Pleasure of relating what he had suffered, and of hearing on the other side,
what had befallen Diomedes.

While they thus entertained one another, the Kings assembled with Telemachus,
were examining what they ought to do. Telemachus advised them to give Diomedes
the Country of Argos, and to choose Polydamas for King of the Daunians, who was
of their own Nation. This Polydamas was a famous Captain whom Adrastus,
throught Jealousy, was never willing to employ, left the Success, all the
Glory of which he promised himself alone, should be attributed to the Conduct
of this able Man. Polydamas had in particular often advertised him that he too
much exposed his own Life, and the Safety of his Country in this War against so
many Confederate Nations: He would often have engaged him to keep a more
regular and even Conduct with his Neighbors. But those Men that hate Truth,
also hate such as have the boldness to declare it to 'em; they are not affected
either with their Sincerity, or their Zeal, or their Disinteressedness. A
deceitful Prosperity hardened Adrastus's Heart against his most salutary
Counsels. In not following them he every day triumphed over his Enemies. Pride,
Fraud, and Violence still brought Victory on his side; none of the Misfortunes
that had been so long threatened by Polydamas, befell him. Adrastus laughed at
that timorous Prudence, which is always foreseeing Inconveniences. Polydamas at
length became intolerable to him; he removed him from all Places of Trust, and
left him to languish in Solitude and Poverty. Polydamas was at first overborn
with this Disgrace, but it soon yielded him what he wanted; in opening his Eyes
to see the Vanity of great Fortunes, he became Wise at his own Cost; he began
to congratulate himself on his Misfortunes; he gradually learned to Act, and
live in good earnest, calmly to nourish his Soul with Truth, to cultivate in
himself those secret Virtues, which are even more estimable than those that
make the greatest show and noise in the World. In fine, to know how to live
without Men, He dwelt at the foot of Mount Gargan, in a Desert, where a vaulted
Rock served for his House, a Rivulet that ran down from the Mountain appeased
his Thirst, some Trees that grew there, yielding him their Fruits; he had some
Slaves that cultivated a little Field for him, in which he wrought with them
with his own Hands; the Ground recompensed his Labor with large Increase, not
suffering him to want any thing; he had not only Fruit and Grain in abundance,
but all sorts of fragrant Flowers besides. There he deplored the Unhappiness of
those People that are led to Destruction by the mad Ambition of a tyrannical
Prince. There he every day expected that the just Gods, though patient for a
time, would over-turn the Throne of Adrastus; the more his Prosperity
increased, the more irrecoverable he thought his Fall would prove. For
Imprudence, when prosperous in its failings, and Power when risen to the last
excess of absolute Authority, are the forerunners of the overthrow of
Kingdoms, and their Kings. When he heard of the Defeat and Death of Adrastus,
he manifested nothing of Joy; either for having foreseen it, or for being
delivered from the Power of this Tyrant; he sighed only for fear of seeing the
Daunians in a State of slavery. This is the Man Telemachus proposed for their
King. He had for some time known his Courage and Valor. For Telemachus,
according to the Advice of Mentor, did not cease to inform himself of all the
good and evil Qualities of any Person that was in any considerable Employ, not
only among the Confederate Nations, whom he served in this War, but even among
his Enemies. His principal care was (...) where to discover and examine Men,
who had any particular Talent or Virtue.

The Confederate Princes at first had some reluctance against placing Polydamas
in the Throne. We have had Experience, said they, how formidable a King of the
Daunians is to his Neighbors, when he loves War, and knows how to manage it.
Polydamas is a great Captain, and may cast us into very great Dangers: But
Telemachus replied, It Is true, Polydamas understands War, but he loves Peace;
and these are the two things that ought to be desired in a Prince. A Man who
knows the Miseries, Hazards, and Difficulties of War, is much more capable of
avoiding it than another, who has no manner of Experience in these Things.
Polydamas has learned to relish the Happiness of a quiet Life. He condemned the
Enterprises of Adrastus; he foresaw their fatal Consequences; a weak and
ignorant Prince is more to be feared by you, than a Man who is able to
understand and determine every thing himself. A weak and ignorant Prince can
see nothing but by the Eyes of a passionate Favorite, or a flattering Minister,
who is Turbulent and Ambitious; so that a Prince thus blinded, will engage
himself in War, when he has no mind to it; and you can never know when you are
sure of him, Secause he can never be sure of himself; he will falsify his Word
to you, and soon reduce you to that Extremity, that you will be under a
Necessity, either of ruining him, or of being ruined by him. Is it not more
advantageous, safer, and at the same time more just and noble, faithfully to
answer the Confidence the Daunians put in you, and to give 'em a King worthy to
Command 'em? The whole Assembly was convinced by this Speech; and it was
ordered that Polydamas should be proposed to the Daunians, who expected an
Answer with impatience. When they heard the name of Polydamas, they answered,
We are now well assured that the Consederate Princes will act sincerely, and
make an everlasting Peace with us; seeing they are willing to grant a Man so
Virtuous, and so capable of Governing us, to be our King. If a lewd,
effeminate, and ill instructed Person had been proposed to us, we should have
believed an occasion was thereby sought to destroy us, and to corrupt the Form
of our Government; we should have secretly laid up in our Breasts a lively
Resentment of so severe and fraudulent a Piece of Conduct; but the Choice of
Polydamas discovers to us true Candor: The Confederates, without doubt,
expected nothing of us, but what is just and noble; seeing they allow us a
King, who is incapable of doing any thing against the Liberty and Glory of our
Nation. And we in like manner can protest in the Presence of the just Gods,
That the Rivers should sooner re-ascend to their Sources, than we will cease to
love such beneficial Nations. May our latest Posterity remember the Favor we
receive this day of renewing from Generation to Generation, the Peace of the
Golden Age, in all the Borders of Hesperia.

Telemachus, after this, proposed to give Diomedes the Fields of (...) to found
a Colony there. This new People, says he to 'em, will owe their Settlement to
you in a Country which you don't Occupy. Remember that all Men owe one another
Love, that the Earth is too large for 'em all; that you must have Neighbors,
and it is best to have such as are obliged to you for their Establishment. Be
moved with the Misfortune of a King, who cannot return into his own Country.
Polydamas and he being united together by the Bands of Justice and Virtue,
which are the only durable ones, will preserve you in profound Peace, and
render you formidable to all the neighboring Nations, that may think of
aggrandizing themselves. You see, O Daunians, that we have given you and your
Nation a King capable of advancing its Glory to the Skies: Do you also give a
Piece of Ground that is useless to you, seeing we ask it at your hands, to a
Prince who is worthy of all kind of Relief.

The Daunians replied, that they could refuse nothing to Telemachus, since it
was he that had procured Polydamas to be their King: And they immediately went
to seek for him in his solitary Dwelling, to make him Reign over 'em. Before
they went, they gave the fertile Plains of Arpos to Diomedes, for him to found
a new Kingdom there. The Allies were extremely pleased with it, because this
Colony of Greeks would considerably fortify the Confederate Party, if ever the
Daunians should endeavor to renew the Usurpations, of which Adrastus gave 'em
so ill an Example.

Telemachus, with Teass in his Eyes, took his leave of 'em, together with his
Company, after he had tenderly embraced the valiant Diomedes, the wise and
inconsolable Nestor, and the famous Philoctetes, the worthy Possessor of the
Arrows of Hercules. The brave Son of Ulysses, longed with impatience to see
Mentor again at Salentum, and to embark with him for Ithaca, where he hoped his
Father might by this time be arrived. When he approached Salentum, he was
amazed to see the Country round, which he had left almost quite uncultivated
and desert, manured like a fine Garden, and filled with industrious Laborers;
he knew this must be the work of Mentor. When he entered the City, he observed
there were fewer Artificers for Luxury and the Pleasures of Life; and to make a
great appearance of Magnificence. Telemachus was choked at this, for he
naturally loved all things that carried Pomp and Politeness with them. But his
Mind was soon possessed with other Thoughts. He saw at a distance Idomeneus
coming toward him with Mentor; this instantly moved his Heart with Joy and
Tenderness. And notwithstanding all the Success he had had in the War against
Adrastus, he was afraid lest Mentor should not be well pleased with him; and as
he advanced, he examined his Eyes to see if he could read nothing in 'em that
might occasion him to reproach himself. First, Idomeneus embraced Telemachus as
his own Son; after which Telemachus threw himself about Mentor's Neck, and
wetted him with his Tears. Says Mentor to him, I am well pleased with you; you
have committed great Faults, but they have served to make you know your self,
and to give you a diffidence in your own Performances. Men often derive more
Advantage from their Defects than from their great Actions; for these swell the
Mind, and inspire it it with a dangerous Presumption, whereas a Man's Faults
make him recollect himself, and restore him that Prudence which he had lost in
the time of his good Successes. That which remains for you to do, is to Praise
the Gods, and not to desire the Praises of Men your self; you have done great
Things, but confess the Truth, it is scarce your self that have done 'em: Did
they not enter like something Adventitious that was infused into you? And were
you not capable of spoiling all by your too great Temerity and Imprudence? Do
you not find that Minerva has, as it were, transformed you into another Man
above your self, to perform by you that which you have done? She has held all
your desects in suspense, as Neptune does when he appeases the Tempests and
suspends the irritated Waves.

While Idomeneus was speaking to the (...) who were returned from the War,
Telemachus listened to the wise Counsels of Mentor. After which he looked on
every side with Astonishment, and said, what a Change do I see, the reason of
which I cannot comprehend? Is some Calamity befallen Salentum during my
absence? Whence is it that that Magnificence that reigned in every part of it
at my departure, is not discernible at present? I see here neither Gold nor
Silver, nor precious Stones. The Habit of the People is plain; and the
Buildings that are Erecting are not so magnificent and full of Ornaments; the
Arts languish here, and the City is become a Desert.

Says Mentor, smiling upon him, Have you observed the Conditions of the Country
round about this City? Yes, replied Telemachus, I see Husbandry is in Repute
every where, and the Fields are cleared and manured. Which is best, added
Mentor, a City Proud and Magnificent, with abundance of Gold and Silver, with
the Country round it neglected and barren; or a City mean in its Ornaments and
modest in its Manners, with Fields about it cultivated and fruitful? A great
City of Artificers employed in soft Arts which corrupt the Manners of Men, by
engaging them in a luxurious Course of Life; when it is surrounded with a
Kingdom that is poor and ill cultivated, is like a Monster whose Head is of an
extravagant Size, and whose whole Body is extremely thin and deprived of
Nourishment; so that it bears no proportion to that Head. It Is the number of
People and plenty of Provisions, in which the true Strength and true Riches of
a Kingdom consists. Idomeneus has now a People innumerable and indesatigable in
Labor, who fill the whole Extent of his Country. His whole Country is as it
were but one entire City. Salentum is only the Center of it; the more the
People multiply, the more are the Fruits of Earth multiplied by their Labor;
this so sweet and peaceable Multiplication augments his Kingdom more than a
Conquest. Only those superfluous Arts are rejected in this City, which divert
the Poor from seeking the supply of their real Wants from the Earth; and
corrupt the Rich by casting 'em into a state of Pride and Softness. Thus
Idomeneus is much more powerful than he was when you so much admired his
Magnificence. That dazzling Splendour hid under it a Weakness and Misery, which
would soon have overturned his Empire; now he has a greater number of Men, he
provides for 'em more easily; these Men who are accustomed to Labor and Toil,
and to a generous contempt of Life, by the Love they bear to good Laws, are
always ready to Fight to defend those Lands which their own Hands have
Cultivated. This State, which you suppose under a declension, will soon become
the Wonder of Hesperia. Remember, O Telemachus, that two Things are very
pernicious in the Government of Nations, and sacrce ever admit a Remedy. The
first is an unjust and too violent Authority in Kings; the other is Luxury,
which corrupts the Manners of the People. When Kings accustom themselves to
know no other Laws but their own Will, and to put no restraint on their
Passions, they may do any Thing; but by this Power of doing any Thing, they
weaken the Foundation of their Authority; they have no certain Rule remaining,
nor any Maxims of Government. Every one strives to exceed others in flattering
them. Thus they lose their People, and have nothing left 'em but Slaves. Who
shall tell 'em that bold Truth that may set Bounds to this Torrent? Every thing
gives way to it. The wisest Men fly, hide themselves, and sigh in secret.
Nothing less than a sudden and violent Revolution can bring back this
exorbitant Power into its natural Channel. Nay, oftentimes the Blow that is
designed to regulate it, overthrows it Irrecoverably. Nothing so much menaces a
fatal Fall as an Authority which is pushed too sar; it is like a Bow too much
bent, which at last breaks all to pieces, if it be not slackened. But who shall
dare to slacken this overstrain'd Power? Idomeneus loved Justice with all his
Heart; yet by this so flattering Authority, he had been overturned from his
Throne; and would still have remained under the Power of the same Delusion, had
not the Gods sent me here to undecieve him about this blind and extravagant
Power, which does not agree with the State of Men. Nay, there were some kinds
of Miracles necessary to open his Eyes. The other almost incurable Mischief is
Luxury. As, too great an Authority poisons Kings, Luxury poisons a whole
Nation. It Is commonly said that Luxury serves to Feed the Poor at the charge of
the Rich; as if the Poor could not get their Living more profitably in
increasing the Fruits of the Earth, without rendering the Rich effeminate, by
refining voluptous Arts. Thus a whole Nation accustoms it self to look upon the
most superfluous Things as the Necessities of Life; and new Necessities of this
king are invented every Day. Men cannot tell how to Live without Things that
were quite unknown thirty Years ago; This Luxury they call the Bon gout, the
perfection of Arts. This Politeness of a Nation, this Vice which draws so many
others after it, is commended as a Virtue, and spreads its Contagion down to
the very Mob. The nearest Relations of the King are willing to imitate his
Magnificence, and the middle sort would fain equal those of great Quality; for
who is it that is willing to do himself Justice? The lowest Rank of Men desire
to pass for the middle Sort; and every one does more than he is able, some for
Ostentation, and to make a show of their Wealth; others from a foolish Shame,
and to conceal their Poverty: Even those who are wise enough to condemn so
great a Disorder, are not so wise as to dare to begin to stem the Tide, and to
give contrary Examples. A whole Nation runs to Ruin, all conditions and ranks
of Men are confounded; the passionate Desire of acquiring Riches to support a
vain Expense, corrupts the purest Minds; And nothing is sought for but how to
become Rich. To obtain this End, Men Borrow, Cheat, and use a Thousand unworthy
Artifices: But who shall remedy these Mischiefs? The Relish and Habits of a
whole Nation must be changed, new Laws must be given 'em; and who shall attempt
this? Unless the King be so much of a Philosopher as to know how, by the
pattern of his own Moderation, to cover all such with Shame who love a pompous
Expense; and to encourage the Prudent, who are glad to be authorized in an
honorable way of Frugality.

Telemachus hearing this Discourse, was like a Man just waking from a profound
Sleep. He conceived the Truth of these Things, and they were deeply impressed
on his Heart, by Mentor's Words, as a skilful Statuary cuts whatLiniaments he
pleases on a piece of Marble, so that they gave him Affection, Life and Motion.
He answered nothing, but revolved in his Mind all that he had been hearing. His
Eyes ran over the Things that had been altered in the City; in fine, he said to
Mentor, you have made Idomeneus the wisest of all Kings; I now neither know him
nor his People. Nay, I confess that what you have done here is infinitely
greater than all the Victories we have been Winning. Chance and Strength have a
great share in the Successes of War; and these Successes are always Mischievous
and Odious. But what I see here is all of it the Work of a celestial Wisdom;
all is sweet, all is pure, all is lovely, all discovers an Authority more than
Humane. When Men have a Mind to Glory, why do they not seek it, in thus
applying their Minds to do Good? How little do they understand what solid Glory
means, who hope to acquire it in ravaging the Earth, and pouring out humame
Blood? Mentor displayed a sensible Joy in his Face to find Telemachus so
happilp undeceived about his Achievements and Victories, at an Age in which it
was so natural for him to be intoxicated with the Glory that surrounded him.

After this Mentor added. It Is true, all you see here is good and laudable; but
know that it is possible to do yet better things than those: Idomeneus governs
his Passions, and applies himself to regulate his People, yet he does not fail
to commit a great many Faults still, which are the unhappy Consequences of his
Ancient Mistakes. When Men have a Mind to forsake an Evil, this Evil seems
still to pursue 'em for a long time; Evil Habits, a weak Temper, inveterate
Errors, and almost incurable Prejudices still attend 'em. Happy are they who
have never thus wandered, they may be able to do good, after a more perfect
manner. O Telemachus, the Gods will require more of you than of Idomeneus;
because you have been acquainted with the Truth from your Youth, and have never
been delivered up to the seductions of too great Prosperity.

Idomeneus, continued Mentor, is Wise and Sagacious, but he applies himself too
much to the Detail, and does not enough meditate on the Body of his Affairs.
That Capacity of Governing, which is more than Humane, does not consist in
doing all on's self. It Is a gross piece of Vanity, to hope by this means to
obtain one's end, or to endeavor to persuade the World, one is capable of it.
A King ought to Govern in choosing and conducting those who govern under him; he
is not to descend into every particular Matter; this is to discharge the
Function of those whose business it is to labor under him. He ought only to
take of 'em an Account of these things; and to know enough of 'em, to be able
to enter into the Account with Judgment. There is a wonderful Art in Governing
by choosing, and applying those that are under ones Government, according to
their several Talents; by Judging of 'em, Correcting 'em, Moderating 'em, and
Inspiring 'em with good Conduct. For a Prince to go about to Examine every thing
himself, is to show Distrust, littleness of Mind, and a Jealousy about mean
and minute Matters, which consumes that Time and Liberty of Mind which is
necessary for great Things. To form great Designs, there is need of a free and
sedate Mind; so as to be able to think at one's Ease in an entire disengagement
from all Dispatches of perplexing Affairs. A Mind exhausted by the detail of
Things, is like the Lees of Wine, which is void both of Strength and
Pleasantness. They who govern by the detail, are always determined by the
present, without extending their Views to a distant Futurity; they are always
taken up with the Affair of the present Day, and that Affair alone possessing
them, they are too much impressed by it; for there is no passing a sound
Judgment on Things without comparing 'em all together, and placing 'em in a
certain Order, that their Connection and Proportion may be seen. To omit to
follow this Rule in Government, is to be like a Musician who should content
himself in finding harmonious Sounds, and never give himself the trouble to
Unite and Connex 'em together, to compose sweet and ravishing Music. Or like
an Architect that thinks his business done, provided he heap great Pillars, and
abundance of hewn Stones together, without thinking of the Order and Proportion
of the Ornaments of his Building; at a time when a Parlour is to be made, he
thinks not of making a suitable Stare-case; when he works on the Body of the
Building, he thinks neither of the Court nor the Portal: His Work is nothing
but a confused Collection of Magnificent Parts, which are not made one for the
other; such a Work as this is so far from doing him Honor, that it will prove
a Monument to eternize his Shame; for it shows, That this Workman had not a
sufficient Compass of Thought, to conceive at once, the general Design of his
whole Work; which is the Character of a short-sighted and subaltern Mind. When
a Man is Born with a Genius limited to Particulars, he is only proper to
execute Affairs under another. Make no doubt of it, O my dear Telemachus, the
Government of a Kingdom requires a certain Harmony like that of Music, and
Just Proportions, as well as Architecture. If you please, I will again make use
of the Comparison of these Arts, and make you understand how mean those Persons
are who Govern by the detail. He who in a Consort, sings only some certain
Parts, though he sings 'em perfectly well, is no more than a Singer; he only who
conducts the whole Consort, and at once regulates all the Parts of it, is the
Master of Music. In like manner he that Carves Pillars, or raises one side of
a Building, is but a Carver or Mason; but he only who contrives this whole
Edifice, and has all its proportions in his Head is the Architect; so those who
are laboring and making Dispatches, and do the most Business, are such as
Govern the least; these are but the subaltern Workmen. The true Genius that
conducts a State, is he who while he dies nothing himself, causes every thing
to be done; who Thinks, who Designs, who sees what is future, who reflects on
what is past, who disposes and proportions Things, who makes early
Preparations, who incessantly makes head against, and grapples with the
Obstructions which Fortune throws in his Way; as a Swimmer stems a swist Torrnt
of Water. Who gives attention Night and Day, that he may leave nothing to the
disposal of Chance. Do you think Telemachus, that a great Painter assiduously
labors from Mornning to Night, the most speedily to expedite his Work? No,
this Slavery and Subjection would extinguish the Flame of his Fancy; he would
no longer work from a regular Genius; all must be done with a kind of
Irregularity, and by Sallies, according as his Gust conducts him, and his Mind
excites him. Do you believe that he spends his Time in pounding of Colors, and
preparing of Pencils? No, this is the Business of his Servants, and he reserves
to himself the Business of Thought and Contrivance; he ponders on nothing but
how to make bold Strokes, that may give Sweetness, a Noble Air, Life, and
Passion to his Figures. He has in his Head the Thoughts and Sentiments of those
Hero's he is about to represent. He is transported into the Ages wherein they
lived, and puts himself into all the Circumstances that have attended 'em. To
this kind of Enthusiasm, he must join a sort of Wisdom that must restrain him;
that all may be True, Correct, and one thing proportionable to another. Do you
think, Telemachus, that less Elevation of Mind, and Effort of Thought is
necessary to make a great Prince, than to make a good Painter? Conclude then,
that the Business of a King is to think, and to make choice of others to labor.

Telemachus replied; methinks I comprehend all you have been saying to me; but
if Things were thus managed, a King would be often deceived for not entering
himself into the particularities of Things. No, it is you that are deceived,
replied Mentor, That which hinders a Prince from being imposed on, is the
General Knowledge of Government. Those that have not Principles to guide 'em in
Affairs, and have not a true discerning of the Minds of Men, go always as it
were, groping in the Dark; and it is owing to Chance, if they are not mistaken.
They don't so much as know precisely what it is they are seeking for, norwhich
way they ought to steer: They only know how to be diffident; and they sooner
distrust those that are so Honest as to contradict 'em, than Deceivers that
flatter 'em. On the contrary, they that have Principles of Government, and are
well skilled in Men, know what they ought to aim at, and the Means to attain
it; they know at least in gross, whether the Persons they make Use of, are
proper Instruments for their Designs; and whether they conceive there Intentions
so far as to be able to tend to the end they propose. Besides, seeing they do
not cast themselves into perplexing Details, they have their Minds more free to
discover the Body of the Work at one View, and to observe whether it advances
toward its Principal End; and if they make any Mistakes, at least they can
scarce ever happen to be essential ones. Again, they are above those little
Jealousies, that are Signs of a narrow Spirit, and mean Soul; they very well
understand, that there is no avoiding being deceived in great Affairs; because
it is necessary to employ Men in 'em, who so often prove deceitful. But more may
be lost by that Irresolution, into which Diffidence casts a Man, than would be
lost by suffering one's self to be in some degree deceived. He is very Happy,
who is deceived only in Things of a mean Consideration; great ones will not
fail to come to an Issue, not withstanding that. And it is this only the Mind of
a great Man should be concerned about. He ought severely to repress Deceit,
when it is discovered; but it is necessary to reckon upon meeting with some
Deceit, if a Man would not be really deceived.

In fine, says Mentor to Telemachus, the Gods love you, and prepare you a
Reign, which shall abound with Wisdom. All that you see here is not so much
done for the Glory of Idomeneus as for your Instruction; all these wise
Establishments, that you admire in Salentune, are but the Shadow of what you
shall one Day make in Ithaca, if your Virtues answer the height of your
Destiny. It Is time for us to think of going hence; Idomeneus keeps a Vessel
ready for our Return. Thus Mentor, who regulated the Moments of Telemachus his
Life, to raise him to the highest pitch of Glory, stayed him only so long in
each Place, as was necessary to Exercise his Virtue, and furnish him with
Experience.

Upon this, Telemachus opened his Heart to his Friend, though with some
difficulty concerning an Inclination he had, which made him regret Salentum.
You will blame me, said he, for too easily giving way to some engaging
Impression or other, in the Places through which I pass; but my Heart would
make me continual Reproaches, if I should conceal from you that I love Antiope
the Daughter of Idomeneus. No, my dear Mentor, it is not a blind Passion, like
that of which you Cured me in the Island of Calypso; I know very well the depth
of the Wound Love made in my Soul, in the company of Eucharis; I cannot yet
pronounce her Name, without a sensible trouble; Time and Absence have not been
able to efface it from my Heart. This, fatal Experience has taught me to
distrust my self. But as for Antiope, what I feel on her Account, has nothing
like it; it is not a passionate Love; it is Judgment, it is Esteem, it is a
Persuasion that I should be Happy in spending my Life with her. If ever the
Gods restore my Father to me, and permit me to choose a Wife, Antiope shall be
the Person; that in her which moves me, is her Silence, her Modesty; her
Reservedness, her Labor in working of Wool, and Embroidery, her Application in
the whole Management of her Father's House, since the death of her Mother, her
Contempt of vain and gaudy Trimmings, that Forgetfulness, if not Ignorance of
her own Beauty that appears in her. When Idomeneus commands her to lead the
Dances of the young Ladies of Crete, at the sound of Flutes, one would take her
for a smiling Venus; she is attended with so many Graces. When he carries her a
Hunting with him into the Forest, she appears Majestic and Dextrous at drawing
the Bow, like Diana in the midst of her Nymphs; only her self does not know it,
while all the World admires her. When she enters into the Temples of the Gods,
and carries the sacred Offerings on her Head in Baskets, one would think she
were the Deity that inhabits those Temples. With what Fear, and with what
Devotion have we seen her offer Sacrifices; and avert the Anger of the Gods,
when some Fault was to be expiated, or some unhappy Presage prevented? In fine,
when one sees her with a Company of her Women, holding a golden Needle in her
Hand; one would think Minerva her self were come upon Eaith in a Human form, to
inspire Mankind with curious Arts: She excites others to work; she renders
tedious Labor pleasant to 'em by the sweetness of her Voice, when she sings
all the mavelous Histories of the Gods: She surpasses the most exquisite
Painting by the delicacy of her Embroideries. Happy will that Man be whom
cheerful Hymen shall unite with her! He Will have nothing to fear, unless it be
to lose her, and survive her. My dear Mentor, I here take the Gods to witness,
that I am ready to be gone: I shall love Antiope as long as I live, but she
shall not retard my return to Ithaca one moment. If another should enjoy her, I
should pass the rest of my Days in Sorrow and Bitterness. But in fine, I am
resolved to leave her, though I know Absence may make me lose her. I am unwilling
to declare my Love. either to her, or to her Father; because I think I ought to
mention it to none but you, till Ulysses re-ascend his Throne, and give me his
Consent. You may know by all this, my dear Mentor, how different this
Inclination of mine is from that Passion with which you saw me blinded for
Eucharis.

O Telemachus, replied Mentor, I grant there is a difference. Antiope is mild,
sincere and wise; her hands disdain not to labor; she forefees Things at a
great distance; she makes Provision for every Thing; she knows how to be
silent, and acts regularly without Precipitation; she is continually employed,
but never embarass'd, because she does every thing to good purpose. The good
Order of her Father's House is her Glory, and is a greater Ornament to her than
her Beauty it self, though the Care and Burden of all lies upon her; so that she
reproves, refuses, and spares as she pleases; (things which make almost all
other Women hated) she has rendered her self amiable to the whole House; it is
because they find in her, neither Passion, nor Caprice, nor Levity, nor Humor,
as in other Women: She knows how to make her self understood only with a glance
of her Eye, and every one is afraid to displease her. The Orders she gives are
Expresses, and she commands nothing, but what may be performed; she reproves
with kindness, and even encourages to do well in the time of her Reproof. The
Heart of her Father rests upon her; as a Traveller upon whose Head the Rays of
the Sun have long beaten with violence, takes sweet Repose upon the tender
Grass. You are in the right, Telemachus. Antiope is a Treasure worthy to be
sought for in the remot'st Countries; her Mind is never decked with vain
Ornaments any more than her Body; her Fancy, though full of Vivacity, is
restrained by her Discretion; she never speaks but when it is necessary, and
when she opens her Mouth, soft Language, and the Graces, in their native
Simplicity, flow from her Lips. When she speaks, every body else is silent; she
her self blushes, and could find in her heart to suppress what she was about to
say, when she perceives with what Attention she is heard. For our parts, we
have scarce heard her speak. You may remember, Telemachus, when her Father one
day made her come in, how she appeared with her Eyes toward the Ground, covered
with a large Veil; and only spoke to moderate the Anger of Idomeneus, when he
was about to inflict a rigorous Punishment on one of his Slaves. At first she
took part with him in his Trouble; then she calmed him; at last she made him
understand what might be alleged in excuse of the poor Wretch; and without
letting the King know he was too much transported with Passion, she inspired
him with Sentiments of Justice and Compassion. Thetis when she Caresses old
Nereus, does not appease the Floods with more sweetness. Thus Antiope, without
assuming any Authority, and without making a show of her Charms, will one day
manage the Heart of her Husband; as she now touches her Lyre, when she would
draw from it the softest harmonious Sounds. Once again, I tell you, Telemachus,
your Love to her is reasonable and just, the Gods design her for you. You love
her with a rational Affection; but you must wait till Ulysses grant her to you.
I commend you for not having discovered your Sentiments to her; and know that
if you had by the by taken occasion to let her know your (...) she would have
rejected 'em, and ceased to have had a value for you. She will never promise
her self to any one, but will leave her self to the Disposal of her Father; she
will never be married to any one who does not fear the Gods, and who does not
demean himself according to all the strictest Rules of Decency. Have you not
observed as well as I, that she glances her Eyes less, and inclines 'em toward
the Ground more since our return? She knows all the Successes that has attended
you in War; she is not ignorant of your Birth, or of your Adventures, or of all
that the Gods have conferred on you; and it is this that renders her so modest
and reserved. Come, let us go, Telemachus, let us go toward Ithaca; there now
remains nothing more for me to do for you, but to bring you to your Father; and
to put you into a Condition to obtain a Bride worthy of the Golden Age: If she
were a Shepherdess in the cold Algidus, as she is the Daughter of a King of
Salentum, you would be a very happy Man in the Enjoyment of her.

These words inflamed the Heart of Telemachus, with an impatient desire of
returning into Ithaca. The Vessel was ready, Mentor had taken care to cause it
to be prepared for him presently after his Arrival. But Idomeneus, who could
not without a great deal of reluctance see him prepare for his Voyage, fell
into a mortal Sorrow, and a deplorable Melancholy, when he saw these two
Guests, who had been so useful to him, about to forsake him. He shut himself up
in the most secret Apartments of his House; where he gave vent to his Grief in
sighing and pouring out Floods of Tears; he forgot to Eat, and Sleep could no
longer charm his piercing Sorrows; he consumed and pined away in this uneasy
Condition, like a great Tree, whose Boughs are large and thick, when a Worm
begins to gnaw the Stock of it in those fine Channels, which convey the Sap to
nourish all the Parts of it: This Tree which the Winds could never unsettle,
and which the fruitful Earth was pleased to nourish in her Bosom; which was
never wounded by the Country-man's Axe, cannot choose but languish, while the
cause of its decay remains undiscovered; it is withered and stripped of its Leaves
that were its Glory and Ornament; it has nothing now to show but its Trunk
covered with a Back full of Chaps and Flaws, together with dry and sapless
Branches. Thus was it with Idomeneus in his Sorrow. Telemachus was melted, but
durst not speak to him; he feared the day of his Departure; he sought pretexts
to retard it, and would have continued for a considerable time in this
uncertainty; had not Mentor spoken to him after this manner: I am glad, says
he, to see you so much altered; you were naturally rigid and haughty, not
suffering your self to be moved by any thing but your own Interest and
Advantage; but you are at length become humane; and the experience of your own
Misfortunes makes you begin to Sympathize with others under like Circumstances.
Without this Compassion a Man has neither Virtue nor Goodness, nor Capacity to
govern Men; but you must not push it too far, so as to fall into a weak sort of
Friendship. I would willingly speak to Idomeneus, to engage him to consent to
your Departure; and would spare you the trouble of so perplexing a Discourse;
but I would not have an unbecoming Shame and Rudeness bear the sway in your
Mind; you ought to use your self to mix Courage and firmness of Mind with a
tender and sensible Friendship; you ought to be afraid of afflicting Men
without necessity; you should share with 'em in their Troubles when you cannot
avoid making 'em uneasy; and moderate that Blow the most you can, which it is
impossible for you entirely to spare. It Is to give such an Alleviation to the
Grief of Idomoneus, answered Telemachus, that I should choose to have him know
the time of our departure from your Mouth, rather than from mine. To which
Mentor immediately returned. You are under mistake, my dear Telemachus. You are
like the Children of Kings who are tenderly brought up in Purple; they would
have every thing done after their own Fashion, and would have Nature entirely
yield Obedience to their Humors, and yet have not Courage enough to oppose any
one to his Face. 'This not that they care so much for Mankind; nor that they
have so much Goodness as to be afraid of afflicting them; but all they do is
for their own Convenience. They are not willing to see sad and discontented
Countenances round about 'em: The Troubles and Miseries of Men do not affect
them, provided they are not before their Eyes, or sounding in their Ears; for
Discourses on such Subjects give 'em Trouble and Uneasiness. To please 'em they
must always be told that every thing goes well; and while they are surrounded
with Pleasures, they are not willing to see or hear any thing that may
interrupt their Mirth: If there be occasion to reprove, or correct any one, to
oppose the Pretensions and Passions of a troublesome Man, they will rather give
Commission to another to do it, than speak themselves with a sedate steadiness
of Mind. On such Occasions they would be ready to suffer the most unjust
Favors to be extorted from 'em, and would spoil the most important Affairs,
for want of knowing how to determine against the Sentiments of those with whom
they have to do every Day. This Weakness which is found in 'em, puts every one
upon thinking only how to make an improvement of it. Thy press and importune
'em; they weary 'em out, and succeed in so doing. Again they flatter and extol
'em to the Stars, to insinuate themselves the better; but when they are become
their Confidents, and are placed near 'em in Employs of some considerable
Authority, they lead 'em a great way, they impose the Yoke on 'em, under which
they Groan, and which they would often shake off, but are forced to bear as
long as they live. They are so jealous of their Authority, that they cannot
endure to be thought to be governed by others; but in reality are always under
management; and indeed they know not how to be without it. For they are like
those feeble Vines, which are not able to support themselves, and therefore
always twist themselves about the Trunk of some great Tree. I cannot suffer
you, O Telemachus, to fall into this Fault, which renders a Man so weak for
Government. You who are so tender as not to dare to speak to Idomeneus, will be
no longer touched with his Sorrows, when you are once got out of Salentum. It Is
not so much his Trouble that softens you, as it is his Presence that embarasses
you, Go speak to Idomeneus, and learn on this Occasion to be resolved and
tender at the same time. Let him know the Trouble you feel in parting from him;
but let him know at the same time by the decisive tone of your Voice, the
necessity of your departure.

Telemachus durst neither any longer oppose Mentor, nor go to Idomeneus; he was
ashamed of his Fear, and yet had not the Courage to surmount it; he hesitated,
made a step or two, and then returned immediately to allege to Mentor some new
reason of delay. But Mentor's Look alone deprived him of Speech, and made all
his fair Pretenses disappear. And is this, says Mentor smiling, the great
Conqueror of the Daunians? The Deliverer of the great Hesperia? The Son of the
wise Ulysses, who is to be the Oracle of Greece after him? Who knows not how to
tell Idomeneus, that he can no longer defer his return into his Country, to see
his Father? O ye People of Ithaca, how miserable will you one Day be, if you
have a King whose Mind is under the Dominion of an unbecoming Shame; and who
will sacrifice his greatest Interests to his Weaknesses in matters of the
smallest Consequence! See Telemachus, what a difference there is between Valor
in the Field, and Courage in the Court. You have not feared the Arms of
Adrastus, and yet you are now afraid of the Sorrows of Idomeneus. This is that
which dishonours Princes who have done the greatest Feats; after they have
appeared to be Heroes in War, they show themselves the meanest of Men on common
Occasions, wherein others support themselves with Vigor. Telemachus convinced
of the Truth of these Words, and spurred on with this Reproach, went out
hastily, and would no longer give ear to his Affections. But he was scarce come
into the Room where Idomeneus was sitting with dejected Eyes, languishing and
overwhelmed with Sorrow, but they were both afraid of each other. They durst
not look on one another; they understood one another without saying any Thing;
and each was afraid that the other would break Silence; both of 'em fell a
Weeping, and in fine, Idomeneus pressed with excess of Sorrow, cried out, To
what purpose is Virtue sought after if she so ill requites those that Love her?
After my Weakness is remonstrated to me, I am forsaken. If it be so, I must
e'ne fall back into all my Misfortunes: Speak no more to me of Governing well,
I am not able to do it. I am weary of Men. Whether will you go Telemachus? Your
Father is Dead. You in vain seek after him. Ithaca is become a Prey to your
Enemies, they will destroy you if you return thither; you will find that one or
other of 'em has married your Mother. Continue here, and Reign with me; at
least leave Mentor with me; who is my only support. Speak, answer me, do not
harden your Heart, have pity on the most miserable Man in the World. What do
you say, nothing? Ah! I very well perceive how cruel the Gods are to me; I feel
it even more severely than I did in Crete, when I was so unhappy as to pierce
my own Son.

At last Telemachus answered with a disturbed and timorous Voice, I am not my
own, the Destinies call me back into my Country. Mentor, who has the Wisdom of
the Gods, commands me in their Name to be gone. What would you have me do?
Shall I renounce my Father, my Mother, and my Country, which ought to be dearer
to me than my Life? Being Born to Royalty, I am not destined to a calm and
sedate Life, nor to follow my own Inclinations. Did you not promise me to send
me back to Ithaca? Was it not upon this Promise that I fought for you against
Adrastus with the Confederates? It Is time for me to think of retrieving my
domestic Misfortunes. The Gods, who have given me to Mentor, have also given
Mentor to the Son of Ulysses, to make him fill up the Decrees of the Fates.
Would you have me lose Mentor, after having lost every Thing else? I have now
neither Estate, nor Retreat, nor Father, nor Mother, nor Country to receive
me. I have only a Wise and Virtuous Man left me, who is the most precious Gift
of Jupiter. Judge your self, if I can renounce such a Treasure; and so abandon
my self to my own Conduct. No, I would sooner die. Take away my Life, that does
not signify much, but do not take Mentor from me.

As Telemachus went on to speak, his Voice grew stronger, and his Timorousness
vanished. Idomeneus knew not what to answer, and could not tell how to consent
to what the Son of Ulysses said. When he could no Ionger speak to him, he
endeavored, at least by his Looks and Gestures, to move his Compassion. At the
same moment he saw Mentor appear, who very gravely addressed himself to him in
these Terms. Do not afflict your self; we leave you. But Wisdom which presides
in the Councils of the Gods, will always continue with you. Only believe that
you are very Happy, in that Jupiter has sent us hither to save your Kingdom,
and to reduce you from your Mistakes. Philocles, whom we have restored to you,
will serve you faithfully; the Fear of the Gods, the Relish of Virtue, the Love
of the People, and Compassion for the Miserable, will always Reign in his
Heart. Hark to these, and make use of him with Confidence, and without
Jealousy: The greatest Service you can desire from him, is to oblige him to
tell you your Faults, without any Extenuation. This is that in which the
Courage of a good King consists, to seek true friends, who may point out to him
his own Defects: Provided you have this kind of Resolution, our Absence cannot
hurt you, and you may live happily. But if Jealousy, which insinuates it self
like a Serpent, should again find a Way to your Heart, to make you distrust the
most disinterested Counsels, you are undone. Don't suffer your self weakly to
sink under Sorrow; but strenuously endeavor to follow the guidance of Virtue.
I have told Philocles all that he ought to do for your assistance, and have
cautioned him never to abuse your Confidence in him: I can undertake to answer
for him. The Gods have given him to you, as they have given me to Telemachus.
Every one ought Courageously to follow his Destiny. It Is to no purpose to
afflict your self: If ever you have need of my help, after I have restored
Telemachus to his Father, and his Country, I will come and see you again; and
what can I do that can give me a more sensible Pleasure? I neither seek for
Riches, nor Authority upon Earth; all that I aim at is, to assist such as are
enquiring after Justice and Virtue: And can I ever forget the Confidence you
have put in me, and Friendship you have shown me? At these Words, Idomeneus was
quite altered, and found his Mind appeased, and calm like the Sea, when Neptune
with his Trident, quells the tumultuous Waves, and scatters the blackest
Tempests. There only remained in him a calm and peaceable Sorrow; which was
rather a tender sentiment of Regret, than a lively Passion of Grief. Courage,
Confidence, Virtue, and the hope of the assistance of the Gods began to revive
within him. Well then, said he, my dear Mentor, it seems one may lose every
Thing, and yet not be discouraged. At least, remember Idomeneus, when you are
arrived at Ithaca, where your Wisdom will Crown you with Prosperity: Forget not
that Salentum was your Work, and that you have left an Unfortunate King there,
who has no Hope but in you: Farewell, O worthy Son of Ulysses, I Will no longer
detain you; I am not willing to resist the Gods, who sent me so great a
Treasure. And Farewell Mentor, the wisest and greatest of all Mankind (if
indeed a Human Creature is able to do what I have seen in you, and if you are
not some Deity under a borrowed Form, to instruct Weak and Ignorant Men) Go,
and conduct the Son of Ulysses, who is more happy in having you with him, than
in having been the Conqueror of Adrastus: Farewell both of you, I dare speak no
more, forgive my Sighs; Farewell, live, and be Happy; there now remains nothing
more to me in the World, but the Remembrance that I once possessed you. Oh
pleasant Days, too happy Days! Days which I knew not how sufficiently to value;
Days that have too swistly glided away. You Will hever more return. My Eyes will
never again see what they now behold.

Mentor supposed this Moment to be expired; he embraced Philocles, who bathed
him with his Tears, without being able to Speak. Telemachus went to take Mentor
by the Hand, to take him out of the Hand of Idomeneus; but this last pressing
toward the Door, placed himself between Mentor and Telemachus. He looked upon
'em, he sighed; he began to speak, but his Words were cut off in the midst, so
that he could not finish a Sentence.

Confused Cries were heard on the Shore, which was covered with Seamen; these
fall to handling their Ropes, and spreading their Sales. A favorable Wind
begins to present. Telemachus and Mentor take their leave of the King, who
accompanies them to the Harbor, keeping his Eyes fixed on 'em; and having
weighed Anchor, the Land seems to fly from 'em: The Experienced Pilot
perceives, at a distance, the Leucatian Mountains, whose Head hides it self in
a Cloud of frozen Rhyme; and the Acroceraunian Hills, which still held up their
proud Foreheads to Heaven, though they have been so often torn with Thunder.

During this Voyage, Telemachus said to Mentor; methinks I now conceive the
Methods of Government which you have explained to me, at first, they seemed to
me like a Dream, but by degrees they unfold themselves in my Mind, and present
themselves clearly to me. As all Objects seem clothed with Darkness at the
first glimmerings of Aurora, and afterward seem, as it were to come out of a
Chaos, when the Light that increases insensibly, distinguishes them, and
restores 'em their natural Colors. I am persuaded that the Essential Point of
Government is to discern well the different Inclinations of the Minds of Men;
to know how to make a prudent choice, and apply 'em to Business according to
their respective Talents; but I want to know how to do this. He that knows
this, is able to be well skilled in Men. To this Mentor answered. swer'd. You
must study Men if you would know 'em; you must Converse and treat with 'em.
They that govern ought to treat with their Subjects, to make Proof of 'em by
small Employments, of which they may make 'em render an Account, to try if they
are capable of higher Functions. How, my dear Telemachus, have you learned in
Ithaca so much skill in Horses? It was by often seeing 'em, and by oserving
both their Faults and good Properties, with Men that were experienced in 'em.
Just so you should be so often speaking of the Good and Evil Qualities of Men,
with other wise and virtuous Persons, who have long studied their
Qualifications. You will insensibly learn how they are made; and what you may
expect from 'em. Who is it that taught you how to know Good and Bad Poets? It
was frequent reading, and reflection with snch Persons as had a right Relish of
Poesy. Who is it that acquired for you that Judgment in Music? It was the
same Application of Mind in observing Musicians. How can any one hope to govern
Men well, if he does not know 'em? and how can that be, if he never lives with
'em? To see 'em all in public, is not to live with 'em, for on such Occasions,
there is scarce any thing said on one side or other, but about indifferent
Things, and such as are prepared with Art. The great Business is to Converse
with them in private; to draw from the bottom of their Souls all the secret
Springs that lie concealed there; to handle 'em on every side, and to sound
their Maxims. But to judge well of Men, a Man should begin by knowing what they
ought to be. He should know what true and solid Merit is, that he may discern
those that have it from such as have it not. He ought to have certain
Principles of Justice, Reason, and Virtue, by which to know who are Reasonable
and Virtuous; he should know the Maxims of a good and wife Government, that he
may know the Men that have these Maxims, and those that wander from 'em through
a false Subtilty, In a Word, to take the Dimensions of many Bodies, one ought
to have a fixed Measure; and in like manner to judge well, one ought to have
certain Principles to which all is reducible. A Man ought to know precisely
what is the Design of Humane Life, and what end ought to be proposed in
governing Men. This only and essential (...) is for a Man never to desire
Authority and Grandeur for himself, which only tends to gratify a Tyrannical
Pride, but to Sacrifice himself in the Infinite Cares of Government, to render
Men Good and Happy. Otherwise he gropes in the Dark, and steps at a venture,
through the whole Course of his Life. He goes like a Ship in a high Sea without
a Pilot, which cannot consult the Stars, and to which all the noighbouring
Coasts are unknown, and therefore cannot choose but suffer Shipwreck. Princes
often for want of Knowledge, wherein true Virtue consists, are Ignorant of what
they ought to look for in Men. True Virtue has something Rough, Austere, and
Independent in it, which frights 'em; and so they turn themselves toward
Flattery, and from that time they can find no Sincerity and Virtue; they soon
accustom themselves to believe, that there is no such thing in reality upon
Earth; for though good Men very well know Ill Men, yet these do not know the
Good, and cannot tell how to believe there are any such to be found. Such
Princes can do nothing but distrust every one alike, they conceal themselves,
and shut up their Thoughts, and entertain Jealousy on the slightest Occasions;
they are afraid of Mankind, they fly the Light; and dare not appear in that
posture of Mind that is Natural to 'em. Though they desire not to be known, they
cannot help being discovered; for the malignant Curiosity of their Subjects
penetrates and divines every thing: But they know no body; those interess'd
Creatures that are about 'em, are extremely pleased to see 'em Inaccessible to
others; and delight to blacken, by infamous Reports, all who are capable of
opening their Eyes, and by this means, keep 'em always at a distance from 'em.
They spend their Lives in a Savage and Barbarous kind of Grandeur: While they
are incessantly afraid of being deceived, they are always most certainly
imposed on, and deserve so to be. When one speaks only to a small number of
People, one is engaged to receive all their Prejudices and Passions; one is at
the mercy of Talebearers, a base and malignant Generation of Men, who live upon
Venom, and poison the most innocent Things; that magnify small Matters, and
invent Evil rather than they will cease to do Mischief; that for their own
Interest, play with the diffidence and unworthy Curiosity of a Weak and Jealous
Prince. Inform your self therefore, O my dear Telemachus; inform your self of
Men, Examine them, make them speak of one another; try them gradually; deliver
your self into the Hands of no Man; make improvement of your Experience. When
you have been deceived, as sometimes you may happen to be in your Judgment;
Learn by that not to Judge too hastily of any one, either in respect of Good or
Evil; both are very dangerous: The Evil are too subtle not to surprise the Good
by their false Glosses: Thus your past Errors will instruct you with great
Advantage. When you have found any considerable Talents, and Virtue in a Man;
make Use of him with Confidence. For Men of Honor and Honesty, love to have
their Integrity taken notice of; they value Esteem and Confidence above
Treasures; but take care you do not spoil 'em, by giving 'em an unlimited
Power; many a one might have been Virtuous who is not so, because his Master
heaped on him too much Authority and Wealth. He who is so far beloved of the
Gods, as to find in a whole Kingdom two or three true Friends, that are Men of
solid Wisdom and Goodness, will, by their means, soon find other Persons that
resemble 'em to fill up inferior Places. Thus a Prince, by a few good Men whom
he can trust, learns that which it was not possible for him to discern himself
alone.

But is it advisable, said Telemachus, to Employ Ill Men, when they have good
Parts; as I have so often heard it is? Yes, says Mentor, Necessity often
requires that they should be used. In a Nation that is in a Ferment and
Disorder; there are often found unjust and politic Men in Authority. They have
Employments that cannot be easily taken from 'em; they have acquired the
Confidence of some powerful Persons, who ought to be carefully managed. These
wicked Men themselves must be managed with Caution, because there is reason to
fear 'em, since they are capable of putting all Things in confusion. It Is
proper therefore to employ 'em for a time, but this still with a Design to
render 'em useless by degrees; as for real and intimate Confidence, beware of
ever placing it in them, for they may abuse it, and hold you fast by the
Secrets you have committed to 'em, in spite of all you can do; this is a Chain
more hard to be broken than Fetters of Iron. Make use of 'em for trivial
Negotiations, treat 'em well, engage 'em by their Passions to be Faithful to
you, for you will never hold 'em any other way: But do not bring 'em into your
most secret Deliberations, have some Spring always ready to move 'em at your
Pleasure, but never give 'em the Key of your Heart, and the knowledge of your
secret Affairs. When a State comes to enjoy Peace, and good Order, and is under
the Conduct of wise and good Men that you are sure of; those ill Men that you
were constrained to Employ, will gradually become useless; and then you should
not cease to treat 'em well; for you never ought to suffer your self to be
ungrateful, even to ill Men. But in treating 'em well you ought to endeavor to
make 'em Good; and while you tolerate certain Faults in 'em, which may be
connived at in humane Frailty; those Evils nevertheless ought to be checked
which they would openly commit, if not restrained. After all, there is an Evil
in the very Good that is done by ill Men; and tho this Evil often becomes
inevitable, it is however needful to endeavor to make it cease. A wise Prince,
who is pleased with nothing but good Order and Justice, will in time come to be
able to lay aside corrupt and fraudulent Men. He Will find good Men enough of a
sufficient Capacity to serve him: But it is not enough for him to find good
Subjects in a Nation; it is necessary he should form such himself. This, replied
Telemachus, must greatly embarass one. Not at all, replied Mentor. Your
Application in seeking for able and virtuous Men to raise 'em, excites and
animates such as have Capacity and Courage, so that every one puts himself
forward in virtuous Actions. How many Men are there that languish in an obscure
and unactive Life, who would become great Men, if they were animated to
Business by Emulation, and hope of Success? How many Men are there, who are
Tempted, by their Misery and the incapacity they are in, to raise themselves by
Virtue, to endeavor to advance themselves by Crimes? If therefore you annex
Rewards and Honors to Industry and Virtue, how many good Subjects will conform
themselves? But what a number will you form, in making 'em ascend Step by Step,
from the lowest to the highest Employments? You Will hereby exercise their
Talents, you will try the extent of their Understandings, and the sincerity of
their Virtue. Those that shall be advanced to the highest Places, will be such
as have been brought up under your Observation. You will have traced 'em all
your time; and will judge of 'em not by their Words, but by the whole Train of
their Actions.

While Mentor was reasoning thus, they spied a Pheacian Vessel, that had put in
at a small Island, which was desert and wild, and encompassed with prodigious
Rocks. And now the Winds were silent, even the gentle Zephirs seemed to hold
their Breath; the whole Sea became smooth like a Looking glass; the flagging
Sails could no longer animate the Vessel; the Rowers than were already tired,
now Labored to little Purpose. 'Twas therefore necessary to make Ashore on
this Island, which indeed was rather a huge Rock than a habitable Place. In
other Weather less Calm, there would be no approaching it without Danger. Those
Pheasians who waited for the Wind, appeared no less impatient to continue their
Voyage, than the Salentines. Telemachus advances toward 'em upon this craggy
Shore. He asks the first he meets with, whether he had not seen Ulysses King of
Ithaca in the Palace.

This Person to whom he accidentally addressed himself, was not a Pheacian, but
an unknown Stranger, who had a majestic Air, but sad and dejected; he feem'd
to be deeply musing; and scarce heard Telemachus his Question at first; but at
length he thus answered. You are not mistaken, Ulysses has been recieved by the
King, as he ought to be in a place where Jupiter is feared, and Hospitality
exercised; but he is not here now, and therefore it is to no purpose for you to
seek him here; he is gone to see Ithaca again, if the appeased Deities will at
last suffer him once again to Salute his domestic Gods. This Stranger had
scarce pronounced these Words with a melancholy Tone, but he threw himself into
a little thick Wood that was on the top of a Rock, from whence he viewed the
Sea with a sad Aspect; flying from all the Men he saw, and seeming troubled
that he could not get away. Telemachus looked intently on him, and the more he
looked, the more he was moved and astonished. This unknown Person, said he to
Mentor, has answered me, like one that cannot hear a Man speak to him without
Pain; and seems full of Grief and Anguish. I bewail the Unfortunate, since I am
so my self; and I find my Heart strongly engaged to this Man, though I know not
why. He has treated me rudely enough, and yet I cannot choose but desire he may
see the end of his Troubles. Mentor replied smiling, you see what the Miseries
of this Life serve for; they render Princes Moderate, and sensible of other
Men's Afflictions; when they have never tasted any thing but the sweet Poison
of Prosperity, they are ready to believe themselves Gods; they would have the
Mountains become Plains to satisfy their Humor; they make no Account of Men;
they would even sport with whole Nature; when they hear any one speak of
Suffering, they know not what it means; it is a mere Dream to 'em; they have
never seen the distance between Good and Evil. But Misfortunes alone may give
'em Humanity, and change their Hearts of Flint into Hearts of Flesh; for then
they feel they are but Men themselves, and that they ought to treat other Men
kindly who are like themselves. If a Stranger moves your pity so much, because
you find him wandering on this Shore like your self; how much more Compassion
ought you to have for the People of Ithaca, if ye shall hereafter see 'em
suffer? That People whom the Gods will commit to you, as a Flock to a Shepherd,
will perhaps become Miserable by your Ambition, or Pride, or Imprudence; for
the People seldom suffer but by the Faults of their Kings, whose Duty it is to
watch over 'em, to secure 'em from Misery.

While Mentor was Speaking thus, Telemachus was overwhelmed with Trouble, and
at last replied. If all this be true, the Condition of a King is very
Miserable. He is a Slave to all those he seems to Command; he is not so much
made to Command 'em, as he is made for them; he owes himself entirely to 'em;
he is loaded with all their Cares; he is the Man to whom all the People
together, and every one in particular, has a Right; he must accommodate himself
to their Weaknesses, Correct 'em like a Father, render 'em wise and happy; the
Authority he seems to have is not his own; he can do nothing, either for his
own Glory, or his own Pleasure, his Authority is that of the Laws, he must obey
them to give a good Example to his Subjects: In a Word, he is only the Defender
of the Laws, to make them Reign; he must Watch and Labor to maintain 'em. He
has the least Liberty and Tranquillity of any Man in his Kingdom. It Is very
true, replied Mentor, a King is made King only to take care of his People, as a
Shepherd does of his Flock, or as a Father does of his Family. But, my dear
Telemachus, don't think it hard for him to go through some Trouble to be in a
capacity to do good to so many People. He Reforms ill Men by Punishments,
encourages good Men by Rewards; he represents the Gods, in thus leading all
sorts of Men to Virtue; has he not Glory enough in causing the Laws to be
observed? That of setting himself above the Laws, is but a false Glory, that
produces nothing but Horror and Contempt. If he be given to Vice, he cannot but
be miserable; for he can find no Tranquillity in his Thoughts, no real
Satisfaction; if he be good, he tastes the most pure and solid of all Pleasures
in laboring for Virtue, thereby expecting an eternal Recompense from the Gods.

Telemachus opposed to these Reasons, Man's Ingratitude. What, said he, to take
so much Pains to gain the Love of those Men, who perhaps will never love you,
and to show Kindness to such vile Persons as will perhaps turn the Favors you
confer on 'em against you, to do you a Mischief? Mentor answered, You must
expect to meet with Ingratitude from Men, and yet not cease to do 'em good: You
ought to serve 'em not so much for their own sake, as out of love to the Gods
who command it: The good you do is never lost; if Men forget it, the Gods
remember and reward it: Besides, if the Multitude be ungrateful, there are
always some virtuous Men that will be affected with your Virtue; nay, the very
Multitude, as changeable as they are, do not fail to do some kind of Justice to
Virtue: But would you hinder Men from being ungrateful? Do not endeavor only
to make 'em powerful, rich, and formidable by Arms, and happy by Pleasures;
this Glory and this Plenty corrupt 'em, they will be but the more wicked, and
consequently the more ungrateful; but apply your self to inform their Manners,
and to inspire 'em with Justice, Sincerity, the fear of the Gods, Humanity,
Fidelity, Moderation, and Disinteressedness: In making 'em good, you will hinder
'em from becoming ungrateful: You Will give 'em the true Good, which is Virtue;
which if it be solid, will always engage 'em to him who has inspired 'em with
it. It is to be wondered at, that Men should be ungrateful to such Princes as
never showed 'em the way to any thing but Injustice, Ambition, and Jealousy,
Inhumanity, Pride, and Treachery, against their Neighbors? A Prince ought to
expect nothing of 'em, but what himself has taught 'em. But if on the contrary
he has labored both by his Example and Authority, to make 'em good, he will find
the Fruit of his Labor in their Virtues, or at least he will find enough to
consolate him in his own, and in the Friendship of the Gods. During this
Discourse, Telemachus often turned his Eyes toward the Sea, which began to be
agitated; the Winds stirred up the Waves, and beat 'em against the Rocks, which
were whitened with their Foam. The Ship Sails were immediately swelled with
Wind; a confused Noise of the Seamen was heard on the Shore, occasioned by the
warmth and impatience they were in to put to Sea. That unknown Person with whom
Telemachus had spoken, had been sometime in the midst of the Island, climbing
up to the Tops of the Rocks, and thence viewing all the immense spaces of the
Sea, with a profound dejection of Mind: Telemachus had not lost sight of him,
but continually observed his Motions. In fine, this Man seeing the Vessel he
belonged to ready to sail, descended from those craggy Rocks with as much speed
and agility, as Apollo in the Forests of Lycia, when he has tied up his white
Locks, traverses the Precipices with his Arrows to pierce the Stags and wild
Boars. This unknown Person soon gets aboard the Vessel, which cuts the brackish
Waters, and flies from the Land. A secret Impression of Sorrow seizes the Heart
of Telemachus; he afflicts himself without knowing for what Reason. The Tears
run down from his Eyes, and nothing seems so pleasant to him as Weeping: At the
same time he perceives all the Mariners of Salentum lying upon the Grass, and
in a sound sleep. They were weary and dispirited; and sweet Sleep had
insinuated it self into all their Limbs; the Poppies of the Night were by the
Power of Minerva strewn upon 'em in the middle of the Day. Telemachus was
amazed to see this universal Drowziness of the Salentines; while the Phenicians
were so diligent to make their advantage of a favorable Wind: But he was yet
more engaged in viewing the Phenician Ship, ready to disappear in the midst of
the Waves, than in going toward the Salentines to waken 'em. Something or
other there was that held his Eyes fixed on the Vessel that was already parted,
of which he could now see nothing but the Sails, whose Whiteness he could just
distinguish from the azure Sky. He is so intent, that he does not so much as
hear Mentor speak to him. He is transported beyond himself, in an Ecstasy like
that of the Menades, at the Feast of Bacchus, when they hold the Thyrsus in
their hands, and make their frantic Cries echo on the Banks of the Hebre, and
on Mount Rhodopus and Ismarus.

At last he recovered himself a little from this sort of Enchantment, and the
Tears again began to flow from his Eyes. Upon this, says Mentor to him; I don't
wonder, my dear Telemachus, to see you Weep; the cause of your Sorrow, though
unknown to your self, is not unknown to Mentor. It Is Nature that speaks, and
makes her self felt; it is she that melts your Heart. The Stranger who gave you
such a lively Emotion, is no other than the great Ulysses; he is going to
Ithaca, and is already very near the Harbor, and at last sees again that so
long desired Place. Your Eyes have seen him, as it was formerly predicted to
you, but without knowing who he was. You shall soon see him and know him, and
he shall know you; but now the Gods did not think fit to permit you to know one
another out of Ithaca. His Heart was moved no less than yours; but he is too
Wise to discover himself to any Mortal, in a Place where he might be exposed to
Treachery, and to the Pursuits of Penelope's Lovers. Ulysses, of all Men, his
Heart is like a deep Well, there is no drawing any of his Secrets out of it. He
loves Truth, and never speaks any thing that stifles it; but he does not speak
it but on those occasions, when Convenience and Wisdom require it. He keeps his
Lips always closed up as it were with a Seal, from uttering any useless Word.
How often was he moved in speaking to you? How often did he put a restraint on
himself, that he might not discover himself to you? And what has he not
suffered in seeing you? It was this that rendered him so sad and dejected.

During this Discourse, Telemachus was so melted and troubled, that he could
not hinder a Torrent of Tears from gushing out; his Sighs prevented him for a
time from returning an Answer, At last he cried out, Alas! my dear Mentor, I
found something powerful (which I cannot tell how to utter) in that Stranger
which attracted me to him, and made an Emotion in all my Bowels: Why did you
not tell me before he went away, that it was Ulysses, seeing you knew him? Why
did you let him go without speaking to him, and without signifying that you
knew him? What is the Mystery of this? Shall I always be Unhappy? Will the
provoked Gods hold me still in suspense like thirsty Tantalus, who is amused
and flattered by the deceitful Water, which still glides away from his Lips? O
Ulysses, Ulysses! have you escaped me for ever? Perhaps I shall never see you
more: Perhaps Penelope's Lovers will take him by the Ambushes they prepared for
me. If I had followed him, I had at least died with him. O Ulysses! O Ulysses!
if no Storm dashes you again against some Rock, (for I have every thing to fear
from adverse Fortune) I tremble lest when you arrive at Ithaca, your Lot should
be as fatal as that of Agamemnon at Mycene. But why, dear Mentor, did you envy
my Happiness? I should now have been embracing him, I should have been already
with him in the Port of Ithaca; and we should have fought together to conquer
all our Enemies.

Says Mentor, smiling; It Is to exercise your Patience that the Gods hold you
thus in suspense: You look upon this time as lost; but know that it is the most
useful part of your whole Life; for it exercises you in that Virtue, which of
all others is the most necessary for such as are to Govern. You must be
Patient, if you would become Master of your self, and of others. Impatience,
which seems to be the force and vigor of the Soul, is but a Weakness: He that
knows not how to wait and suffer, is like him that knows not how to keep a
Secret in his Breast; both of 'em want strength and firmness of Mind to
restrain themselves; as a Man who runs along in a Chariot, and has not a hand
strong enough to stop his fiery Coursers when he should; so that they no longer
obey the Bridle, but run down a Precipice, and the weak Man that cannot check
'em is dashed in pieces by the Fall. Thus an impatient Man is hurried along, by
his wild and furious Desires into an Abyss of Miseries; the greater his Power
is, the more fatal is his Impatience to him; he will wait for nothing, he will
not give himself Time to take any Measures; he forces all Things, to satisfy
his Wishes: He breaks the Boughs to gather the Fruit before it is Ripe: He
breaks down the Gates rather than to wait till they are opened; he will needs
Reap, when the wise Husbandman is Sowing. All he does in haste is ill done;
and can have no longer duration than his volatile Desires. Such as these, such
as these are the senseless Projects of that Man who thinks he is able to do
every Thing; and who gives himself up to his Desires to abuse his Power. It Is
to teach you to be Patient, my dear Telemachus, that the Gods exercise your
Patience so much. The Good you hope for shows it self to you, and flies from
you like a fleeting Dream which vanishes as soon as a Man awakes; to show you
that the very Things you think you possess in your Hands, may escape you in an
Instant. The wisest Lessons you can have from the Mouth of Ulysses, will not be
so useful to you as his long absence, and the Troubles you undergo in seeking
him.

Telemachus heard all this with a Mind full of Anguish; he looked upon the Sea,
but could no longer see the (...) Ship: Then he turned his Eyes, flowing with
Tears, toward Mentor who was speaking to him; when all on a sudden he percieved
Mentor take a new Form. The Wrinkles of his Forehead vanished, as the Shades of
Night disappear when Aurora with her rosy Fringes opens the Gates of the East,
and inflames the whole Horizon: His hollow and austere Eyes became Blew and
full of heavenly Sweetness, and shined with a divine Flame; his gray and
neglected Beard disappeared; and noble and majestic Lineaments mixed with
Sweetness and Grace presented themselves to Telemachus his wondering Eyes. He
saw a Woman's Countenance with a Complexion finer than that of a tender Flower
when newly Blown before the Sun. He saw the white of Lillies mixed with the red
of blooming Roses, and an eternal Youth with a simple and unaffected Majesty
flourishing on this heavenly Countenance. The sweet Scent of Ambrosia spread it
self from the flowing Hairs of this glorious Person, whose Garments shined like
those lively Colors with which the rising Sun paints the gloomy Arches of
Heaven, and the Clouds when he has been gilding them. This Deity did not set a
Foot upon the Ground, but lightly glided along through the Air, as a Bird
cleaves it with its Wings. In her Hand she held a glittering Spear, capable of
making the most warlike Cities and Nations tremble. Mars himself would have
been Terrified at it; her Voice was sweet and moderate, but strong and
insinuating; all her Words were so many Darts of Fire, that pierced the Heart
of Telemachus, and made him feel a strange kind of delicious Sorrow. Upon her
Helmet appeared the mournful Bird of Athens; and on her Breast there shined a
formidable Breast Plate. By these Marks Telemachus knew it was Minerva.

O Goddess, says he, it is you then your self who have daign'd to conduct the
Son of Ulysses for his Father's sake. He would have added more, but his Voice
failed him; his Lips in vain endeavored to express those Thoughts, that came
with Impetuosity from his Mouth, and from the very bottom of his Heart. The
Presence of a Deity overwhelmed him; so that he was like a Man in a Dream,
oppressed to that degree, that he loses Respiration, and cannot form a Voice by
all the troublesome Agitation of his Lips.

In fine, Minerva pronounced these Words; O Son of Ulysses, hearken to me this
last time! I never instructed any Mortal with so much Wisdom as I have done
you: I have led you by the Hand through Shipwracks, unknown Countries, Bloody
Wars, and all the hard Adventures that can terrify the Heart of Man; I have by
sensible Experiences, shown you the true and false Maxims by which you may
Reign. Your Faults have been no less useful to you than your Misfortunes; for
where is the Man who can govern wisely, if he has never suffered any Hardship,
or has never gained any thing by his Sufferings, into which his Faults have
precipitated him? You, as well as your Father have filled Sea and Land with
your terrible Adventures. Go, you are now worthy to follow his Steps; there
remains nothing more but an Easy passage for you into Ithaca, where your
Father is this very moment arriving: Go, fight under him with as much Obedience
as the meanest of his Subjects; and thereby give others a good Example. He Will
procure Antiope for your Bride, and you shall be happy with her, for having
sought her for her Wisdom and Virtue more than for her Beauty. When you come to
Reign, make it all your Glory to renew the Golden Age: Hear every body, believe
very few, have a care of believing your self too much; be afraid of imposing on
your self; but never fear to let others see you have been mistaken. Love your
People, forget nothing that may engage 'em to love you. Fear is necessary when
Love is wanting, but it always should be made use of with regret, as violent
and dangerous Remedies are; always consider at a distance, all the Consequences
of what you are about to undertake. Endeavor to foresee all, the most terrible
Incoveniencies; and know, that true Courage consists in discovering all
Dangers, and in despising them, when they become unavoidable. He that is not
willing to see them, has not Courage enough calmly to forbear the sight of 'em.
He that takes a view of them, and avoids all that can be avoided; and breaks
through all the rest without a troublesome Emotion of Mind, is the only Wise
and Magnanimous Man. Avoid Luxury, Pride, and Profusion; let your Glory consist
in sincerity; let your Virtues, and good Works, be the Ornament of the Person,
and of the Palace; let 'em be the Guard to surround you; and let all the World
learn from you, wherein true Happiness consists. Never forget that Kings do not
Reign for their own own Glory, but for the Good of the People: The Good they
do, reaches even to the remotest Ages, and the Evil they do, multiplies from
Generation to Generation, even to the latest Posterity. Fear the Gods,
Telemachus, this Fear is the greatest. Treasure of the Heart of Man; it will be
attended with Wisdom, Justice, Peace, Joy, refined Pleasures, true Liberty,
sweet Plenty, and spotless Glory.

I now leave you, O Son of Ulysses; but my Wisdom shall never leave you,
provided you always remain sensible, that you can do nothing without it; it is
time for you now to go alone. I parted from you in Phoenicia, and at Salentum,
only to use you to be without the Pleasure of my Company; as they wean
Children, when it is time to deprive 'em of Milk, to feed 'em with solid
Aliment. No sooner had the Goddess finished this Discourse, but she mounted
into the Air, and wrapped her self in a Cloud of Gold and Azure, in which she
disappeared. Telemachus sighed, was struck with Wonder, and in an Ecstasy,
prostrated himself on the Ground; he lifted up his Hands to Heaven, and
recovering himself, went to his Company and awakened them, hastened away, and
arrived at Ithaca, where he found his Father with the Faithful Eumenia.

FINIS.

