Nature ^'expresse the symetry of Parts, Made this fair bulk the Magazine of
^orts: Body and mind do answer well his Name ^LER, Comparative to's Bliss
and Fame.


THE LIFE OF That Reverend Divine, AND Learned Historian, Dr. THOMAS FULLER.

Si post Fatavenit Gloria, sic propero, Mart.

LONDON, Printed for J. W. H. B. and H. M. 1661.

To the Reader.
THis reverend person deceased, who while he shined here gave a full Meridian
light to all kind of History, sets with this Shadow in his own, the dark side
of that Lanthorn to himself, whose lucidations had discovered all before it,
and rescued so many brave memoires from the violence of time. Pity it is that
^be excellent persons (for it is their common Fate) should be so neglectfull of
Themselves, while they are so (...) ^le to the world, (...) ^ps all with a care
(...) ^ngratefull return to the Authors of their store and increase.

And as the intrinsecall worth of Diamonds exerts not its luster without a
foyl; so it fares with the most costly and rich shrines of those resplendent
and shining virtues, erected in the memory and fame of worthy men, which are
always showed by Lamp, or some other faecacious and borrowed Light, that only
directs to the solemnity and invites veneration, but cannot contribute nor add
any real aestimate and honor to the Saint himself.

The account of this Reverend Doctor deceased states it self in this Apology:
it pretends not to be any of his least and inconsiderable Relic, and it does
alike justify it self from being his Legend; merely the worth of so deserving
a person, (which no Pen has yet undertook or attempted) for civilities sake,
has obliged this Essay; which to your easiest censure is here submitted.

Vale.

The Life of the reverend and excellent Doctor THOMAS FULLER.
THe ample subject of this incompetent relation is Doctor Thomas Fuller, to
whose dust we do avowedly consecrate this Elogie the Doctor of FAMOUS MEMORY:

He was born at All Wincle an obscure Town in Northamptonshire, some five miles
from Oundle in the year of our Lord 16 -- a place now equalled to, and vying
honor with any seed-plot (in that county) of virtue, learning, and Religion;
and of which hereafter to its glory it shall be said, That this MAN was born
There.

He was the Son of Mr. Tho. Fuller, the Minister of the same Town, a man of a
blameless and as private life, who spent himself in the discharge of his
Pastoral office to which God had called him, without embarquing himself in the
busy controversies of his time, that labored under the fatigues of most
importunate puritanism and pleading popery.

Part of this privacy bestowed it self fruitfully upon the youth of the
venerable Doctor, (who had lost some time under the ill menage of a raw and
unskilful Schoolmaster) so that in a little space such a proficiency was
visibly seen in him, that it was a question whether he owed more to his father
for his birth or education; both which had so happily and so easily concurred,
that he was admirably learned before it could be supposed he had been taught;
and this will seem no paradox to those who knew his felicity of memory which he
owed not to the lubricity of Art, but the certainty of Nature.

Having under this tuition past the just time of Adolescency in those puerile
studies, at twelve years of age, this hopeful slip was translated to
Cambridge, where he first settled in Queens-Colledge, of which a near kinsman of
his Dr. -- was then President. This was a sphere wherein his relucent virtues
and conspicuous abilities had room to exert themselves, so that he filled the
eyes of that University with a just expectation of his future luster.

Here he successively passed the degrees of Bachelor and Master of Arts, with
such general commendation, and at such unusual age, that such a Commencement
was not within memory.

During his residence in this College a Fellowship was vacant, for which the
Doctor became Candidate, prompted thereunto by a double plea of merit and
interest, besides the desire of the whole house; but a Statute of the College
prevailing against them all, which admitted not two Fellows of the said County
of Northampton, the Doctor quitted his pretensions and designation to that
preferment. And though he was well assured of a dispensation, from the strict
limitation of that Statute, to be obtained for him, yet he totally declined it,
as not willing to ow his rise and advancement to the courtesy of so ill a
Precedent, that might usher in more immodest intrufions upon the privileges
and laws of the College.

But this gave him a fair occasion to transfer himself to Sidney College,
whither by some of his choice and learned friends, he had often been invited.
He had not long been here, but he was chosen Minister of St. Bennets parish in
the Town of Cambridge, in whose Church he offered the Primitie of his
Ministerial Fruits, which like Apples of Gold in pictures of Silver (sublime
Divinity in the most ravishing Elegancies) attracted the audience of the
University, by whose dilated commendations, he was generally known at that age
at which most men do but peep into the world.

These his great sufficiences (being now but about the age of twenty three
years) tendered him a Prebendary of Salisbury, and at the same time a Fellowship
in Sidney college. They were both eximious preferments as the times then were,
the estimation of either being equally great mutatis mutaudis; but the Doctors
inclination by assed him to the more active and profitable incumbency, into
which his inbred piety and devotion had from the first of his resolutions
inducted him: Whereupon he retired from that University and betook himself to
the Priestly Function, being thereunto ordained by the right reverend Father in
God the Bishop of Salisbury.

This being the Kings Donation, was some further reason for abandoning his most
pleasant studies and conversation in Cambridge, for that also by the Statutes
of both Universities it is provided, that no person who shall have Ten pound
per annum in the Kings books shall be capable of a Fellowship in either of
them. So providence was pleased to dispose of him in each of these Accademicall
honorary intendments, that his fluent should not run silently in those streams,
contribute only to their Emanations, but with Fame discharge it self into the
Ocean, reciprocate Honor and Desert, with the World.

Having thus lancht and being so furnished he set forth in the course of the
Ministry, exchanging those delightful privacies of his ColledgStudies (which
laid the happy Foundations and beginnings of those Excellent Books, which
successively teemed those productions and propagations of divine Learning and
Knowledge, of which more hereafter,) for the troublesome Cure of a Parish and
importunate Pulpit.

That Prebend of Salisbury was a commodious step to another more profitable
place, which for its vicinity to that Cathedral, and being in the same
Diocese, did easily commend it self, without the aid and instance of the
Patron, or other inducements, to the Doctors acceptance; but yet he did not
over-readily entertain the kindness of the proffer till after a serious
scrutiny of himself and his Abilities to discharge the requisite duties the
place called for; and after a very full and satisfactory enquiry of his
Parishioners.

It was the Rectory of Broad Winsor in Dorsetshire, a place far distanced from
his native Country, and remoter from his University. A Prophet has no Honor
in his own; and therefore it was doubled to him in another. The Accommodation
both in reference to his maintenance and respect from this people was very
noble, and which afforded great expedience to the Doctors other labors, which
were bountifully cherished under the tuition of his Ministry.

After some while employed here in the pastoral Office, the Doctor was desired
by some Friends to dignifie his Desert, with the Degrees, which his Time and
standing by the Rules of the University afforded him: whereunto the Doctor out
of a reverence to his Honorable Cailing was well inclined, and accordingly
prepared for his departure to Cambridge to take the Degree of Batchelour of
Divinity.

Having taken care therefore to supply his place for the time of his absence,
at his setting forth he was acquainted that 4 of his chief Parishioners with
his good leave, were ready to wait on him to Cambridge, to testify their
exceeding engagements, it being the sense and request of his whole Parish; This
kindness was so present and so resolutely pressed, that the Doctor with many
thanks for that and other demonstrations of their Love toward him, gladly
accepted of their Company, and with his customary innate pleasantness
entertained their time to the Journies end.

At his coming to Cambridge he was most welcomly treated and saluted by his
friends and acquaintance, and visited almost by all considerable persons of the
University and Town; especially of his Parishioners of St. Bennet: Fame and
Love vying which should render him most Addresses, to the great delight and
satisfaction of his fellow-Travellers and Neighbors in having a Minister who
was so highly and yet no less deservedly honored, but to the Trouble of the
modest Doctor, who was then forced to busy his invention with Complements, to
which he was most naturally averse.

At this Commencement there proceeded with him in the same Degree of Batchelour
of Divinity three other reverend persons, all with general applause and
commendation; and therefore to do them no wrong must forbear to give the
Deceased Doctor his particular due: Only thus much by the way may be added,
that this Commencement cost the Doctor for his particular the sum of sevenscore
pounds, an evidence of his liberality and largeness of mind proportionable to
his other capacity's, and yet then which nothing was less studied.

At his departure he was dismissed with as Honorable valedictions, and so he
returned in the same company (who had out of their own purse contributed
another addition of honor to that solemnity) to his said Rectory at Broad
Winsor resolving there to spend himself and the time of his pilgrimage amongst
his dear and loving charge.

In the amaenity and retirements of this rural life some perfection was given
to those pieces, which soon after blessed this age (an account of all which is
reserved to the conclufion of these Collections:) from this pleasant prospect
he drew that excellent Piece of the Holy Land, Pisgah sight, and other Tracts
relating thereto; so that what was said bitterly of some Tyrants, that they
made whole Countries vast solitudes and deserts, may be inverted to the Eulogie
of this Doctor, that he in these recesses made deserts, the solitudes of
Israel, the frequented path and track of all ingenuous and studious persons.

But Contemplation and the immurement of his vast spirit, within the precincts
of his Parish, (although both delightful and profitable, those foraign Travels
of his brain above mentioned affording the One, and his pious labors at, home
yiedling the other) grew tedious and wearisom to his active and free Genius,
which was framed by nature for converse, and general Intelligence, not to be
smothered in such an obscurity.

To this inclination also the unquietness and trepidations of those times (then
scared with the news of a war about Religion and reformation which the Scots
pretended) did oversway him. He was very Tensible whither those first
commotions did tend, and that some heavy disaster did in those angry clouds
which impended over the Nation, more particularly threaten the Clergy. He was
then also married unto a virtuous young Gentlewoman, and by her had born there
his eldest son now a hopeful plant in the same College and University where
his Father had his education. These motives concurring with that general fame
and esteem of him, drew him to the consultation of a City life, where both
security, honor, and the advantages of learning did demonstratively promise
the completion of his desires and intended tranquillity, destined already to
some public works which were then in designment.

Removing therefore to London having obtained his fair dismission from that
charge in the Country he continued his pious endeavor of preaching in most of
the voyced Pulpits of London, (being cried up for one of the most excellent
preachers of his age) but most usually in the Inns of Court.

He was from thence by the Master and Brotherhood of the Savoy (as well as
earnestly desired and entreated by that small parish) complemented to accept of
the Lecturers place; which having undertaken after some instance, he^ did most
piously and effectually discharge, witness the great confluence of affected
Hearers from distant congregations, insomuch that his own Cure were (in a
sense) excommunicated from the Church, unless their timous diligence kept pace
with their devotion; the Doctor affording them no more time for their
extraordinaries on the Lords day, then what he allowed his habituated
abstinence on all the rest. He had in his narrow Chapel two Audiences, one
without the pale, the other within; the windows of that little Church, and the
Sextonry so crowded, as if Bees had swarmed to his mellifluous discourse.

He continued here to the great satisfaction of his people, and the
neighboring Nobility and Gentry, till our unhappy unnatural wars had made a
dismal progress through the whole Nation: laboring all that while in private
and in public to beget a right understanding among all men of the Kings most
righteous cause, which through seduction and popular fury was generally
maligned. His exhortations to peace and obedience were his constant subjects in
the Church, (all his Sermons were such Liturgies) while his secular days were
spent in vigorously promoting the Kings affairs either by a sudden
reconciliation or potent assistance.

To this end on the Anniversary day of his late Majesty's inauguration, which
was the -- day of March 1642. he preached at St. Peter's Westminster on this
Text, 2 Samuel 19. 30. Yea let him take all, so that my Lord the King return in
peace. A Theme so distasteful to the ringleaders of the Rebellion (who had on
purpose so scandalously driven him from his Court and Parliament, that he might
never with any pleasure think of returning to them till he had vindicated his
Honor upon the abettors of those Tumults) and so well and loyally enforced by
him, that drew not only a suspicion from the moderate mislead party of
Parliament, but an absolute odium on him from the Grandees and Principals in
the Rebellion.

There were few or none of the Orthodox Clergy then remaining within their
Lines of Communication (new invented Limits for the Cities old Liberties) some
being dead in restraint or through more harsh and cruel dealing, the rest outed
and silenced; so that their inspection and spyall was confined almost to the
Doctors Pulpit as to public Assemblies; where nevertheless he desisted not
nor altered from his main course, the Doctrine of Allegiance, till such time as
the Covenant was obtruded upon his Conscience, and must through his persuasions
be likewise pressed upon his people.

Several false rumors and cavils there are about his carriage and opinion
touching that sacrilegious thing by persons, who were distanced as far from the
knowledge of those passages, as fortunately from being concerned and engaged
within the reach of that snare. 'Twas not only easy but most prudential, for
other Ecclesiastical persons to quit their Livings, who were out of the gripes
and clutches of those ravenous Reformists, in order to keep their conscience
inviolable; but it was difficulty enough of it self for the Doctor to escape
and get out of that place, where the next preferment would have been a Dungeon.

Some velitations, transient discourses he made about that frequent and thumb'd
subject of the reformation, the rather to suspend the busy censures of the
Parliament and their party; wherein, though he seemed to comply, (but as far as
the Rule and Example would allow) and indulge the misapprehension of those men,
yet these his charitable disguises could not obscure him from the severe
animadversions of several Ministers Eminent in those Reforming Times,
particularly Mr. Saltmarsh. The Contest betwixt them is so known in print, that
it will be needless to trouble the Reader with it here. Only thus much by
digression in honor of this venerable Doctor: Mr. Saltmarsh being long since
dead, He has in his Book of the Worthies General of England (of which
hereafter) given him a most Honorable mention, and assigned him the place of
his Birth, Education and Burial, registring him for an Ornament of them all: so
Resplendent and Durable was the Doctors Charity. I may not omit one thing, that
the Doctor in recording and relating of the Death of the said Mr. Saltmarsh,
does passionately reflect on the shortness of his life and the acuteness of
that fever which so violently ended him, reducing and applying it to the
uncertainty of his own state, and we now unhappily see those curious presages
of his Pen verified and accomplished in his most immature and sudden decease.

To return to our Subject, in the beginning of the year 1643. the said Covenant
was generally pressed, and a very great persecution soon after followed it. The
Doctor was settled in the love and affections of his own Parish, besides other
obligations to his numerous Followers; so that the Covenant then tendered might
seem like the bright side of that cloud (promising serenity and prosperity to
him, as was infinuated to the Doctor by many great Parliamentarians) which
showred down after a little remoteness, such a black horrible tempest upon the
Clergy, nay the Church and three Kingdoms. But the good Doctor could not bow
down his knee to that Baal-Berith, nor for any worldly considerations (enough
whereof invited him even to fall down and worship, men of his great parts being
infinitely acceptable to them) lend so much as an Ear to their serpentine charms
of Religion and Reformation.

Since therefore he could not continue with his Cure without his Conscience,
and every day threatened the imposition of that illegal Oath, he resolved to
betake himself to Gods providence, and to put himself directly under it,
waving all indirect means and Advantages whatsoever toward his security. In
order thereunto, in April 1643. he deserted the City of London, and privately
conveyed himself to Oxford, to the no less sudden amazement of the Faction
here, who yet upon recollection quickly found their mistake, then to the
unexpected content and joy of the Loyal party there, who had every day Jobs
Messengers of the plundering, ruins and imprisonments of Orthodox Divines.

Oxford was then the common refuge and shelter of such persecuted persons, so
that it never was nor is like to be a more Learned University, (one Breast
being dried up by Cromwels visitation, the Milk resorted to the other) nor did
ever Letters and Arms so well consist together, it being an accomplished Academy
of Both*

Among the multitude of those new comers like the clean beasts to the Ark, when
the waters increased, the KING (the most excellent intelligent Prince of the
abilities of his Clergy) vouchsafed the Doctor the Honor of preaching before
him in St: Mary's, where with the like moderation he laid open the blessings of
an accommodation, as being too too sensible and that so recently of the
virulency and impotent rage, though potent arms, of the disloyal Londoners,
which as the Doctor then Christianly thought, could not better be allayed then
by a fair condiscention in matters of Church Reformation.

It seems some particulars in that Sermon gave offense to some at Court, as if
the good Doctor were a Lukewarm Royalist, and did not thoroughly own his
Majesty's Cause; which ill grounded conceit, though he were well satisfied in
that his plea for Composure) did not a little trouble him: to explain and free
himself, an opportunity was wanting both of Press and Pulpit, and the hurry of
the War gave not his prejudiced Hearers leisure for his particular vindication.
He resolved therefore strenuously to evince his faithful Loyalty to the King by
another kind of Argument, by appearing in the Kings Armies, to be a Preacher
Militant to his Soldiers:

This Resolution Providence was pleased to favor by an Honorable Friends
recommendation of the Doctor to my Lord Hopton, who was then to choose a
Chaplain. This noble Lord, though as courageous and expert a Captain, and
successful withal, as the King had any, was never averse to an amicable closure
of the War upon fair and honorable terms, and did therefore well approve of
the Doctor, and his desires and pursuit after peace. The good Doctor was
likewise infinitely contented in his Attendance on such an Excellent Personage,
whose conspicuous and noted Loyalty could not but derive the same reputation to
his retainers, especially one so near his conscience as his Chaplain, and so
wipe off that stain, which the mistakes of those Men had cast on him. In this
entendment God was pleased to succeed the Doctor and give him victory (proper
to the Camp he followed) against this first attempt on his Honor.

During the Campania and while the Army continued in the Field, he performed
the duty of his holy Function, with as much solemn Piety and Devotion, as he
used before in places consecrated to Gods Worship; and according to the form
used and appointed by the Church of ENGLAND: In all Emergencies and present
Enterprises, using no other prayers, then what the care of the Fathers of the
Church, had in those miserable exigences newly directed. To this he added
constant preaching on the Lords day, animating in his Sermons the Soldiers to
fight courageously and to demean themselves worthy of that glorious Cause with
which God had honored them.

With the progress of the War he marched ftom place to place, and where ever
there happened for the better acco^modation of the Army any reasonable stay, he
allotted it with great satisfaction to his beloved studies. Those cessations
and intermissions, begot in him the most intentnesse and sollicitous industry
of mind, which as he never used to much recreation or diversion in times of
peace, which might loose and relasch a well disciplined spirit; so neither did
the horror and rigidnesse of the war stiffen him in such a stupidity (which
generally possessed all Learned Men) or else distract him, but that in such lucid
intervals, he would seriously and fixedly come to himself and his designed
business.

Indeed his business and study then, was a kind of Errantry, having proposed
to himself a more exact Collection of the Worthies General of England, in which
others had waded before, but he resolved to go through. In what place soevet
therefore he came, of remark especially, he spent frequently most of his time
in views and researches of their Antiquities and Church-Monuments, insinuating
himself into the acquaintance (which frequently ended in a lasting friendship)
of the learned and gravest persons residing within the place, thereby to
inform himself fully of those things he thought worthy the commendation of his
labors. It is an incredible thing to think what a numerous correspondence the
Doctor maintained and enjoyed by this means.

Nor did the good Doctor ever refuse to light his Candle in investigating Truth
from the meanest persons discovery. He would endure contentedly an hours or
more impertinence from any aged Church Officer, or other superannuated people
for the gleaning of two lines to his purpose. And though his spirit was quick
and nimble, and all the faculties of his mind ready and answerable to that
activity of dispatch, yet in these inquests he would stay and attend those
circular rambles til they came to a point; so resolute was he bent to the
sifting out of abstruse Antiquity* Nor did he ever dismiss any such feeble
Adjutators or Helpers (as he pleased to style them) without giving them money
and cheerful thanks besides.

After the Fight at Cheriton Down my Lord Hopton drew down with his Army and
Artillery to Basing, and so marched that way to Oxford, intending to take up
Winter Quarters as soon as he had consulted with the King, and left the Doctor
in that as courageously manned, as well fortified House, where he had scarce
begun to reduce his marching Observations into Form and Method, but Sir William
Waller having taken in Winchester, came to besiege the Doctors Sanctuary. This
no way amated or terrified him, but only the noise of the Canon playing from
the Enemies Leagure interrupted the prosecution of digesting his Notes, which
trouble he recompensed to them by an importunate spiriting of the Defendants in
their Sallies; which they followed so close and so bravely* suffering the
Besiegers scarce to eat or sleep, that Sir William was compelled to raise his
Siege and march away, leaving above a thousand men slain behind him; and the
DOCTOR the pleasure of seeing that strong Effort of Rebellion in some way by
his means repulsed and defeated, and in being free to proceed in his wonted
intendments.

What time the Doctor continued here is very uncertain; sure we may be he was
not an unemploy'd or an unacceptable Guest to that Loyal Garrison, and that as
Noble and Honorable Marquess the Proprietary of the Place; the Demolishing of
which princely Edifice then standing in spite of their potent Arms, yet
afterward through the Fortune of War being fallen into their hands and razed
by their more impotent revenge, he does heartily lament in his Worthies
General, preferring it while it flourished, for the chiefest Fabric in
Hantshire. This his kindness to the place of his Refuge though no doubt true
and deserved enough, yet no questionless was indeared in him, by some more
peculiar obliging regards and respects he found during his abode there; though
indeed his worth could want and miss them no where.

The next removal of the Doctor, was to his charge in the Army, and his
particular duty of Chaplain to his said Lord. The War was then at its Zenith,
hotter and more dilated, raging every where both in this and the two
neighboring Kingdoms, so that there was no shelter or retirement, which it had
not invaded and intruded into by unruly Garrisons, while the Country became a
devasted Solitude, so that the Doctors Design could proceed no where.

But that fatal War hasting to a sad and miserable end, success not answering
the merit of the Cause, the Kings Field-forces being every where engaged, and
part of the Loyal Army driven into Cornwall, under the Command of that skilful
Captain, the good Doctor took refuge betimes in Exeter, having taken his Conge
and Dismission of his beloved Lord.

Here again he resumed his Task of the aforesaid Worthies, not minding the
cloud impending on that place, nor no way intermitting the Duty of his Calling,
preaching constantly to those truly Loyal Citizens: It is a supernumerary
labor to acquaint the Reader with how great satisfaction and content, that
always and every where being annexed to his meanest endeavors.

During his stay in Exeter, the Queen having been delivered of her last Burden,
(saving her sorrows and distresses) by the Birth of the Princess Henrietta,
the Learned Doctor was preferred to be the Infant-Ladies Chaplain; Her Royal
Fathers intendment being, as he had educated the rest of his Princely, Issue to
have her brought up in the Protestant Religion: To that end, the good Doctor in
regard of his soundness and sincerity in that profession, and eminent famous
Assertion of it, was designed to attend on her, to instill unto her tender mind
(if God had pleased to continue her with safety within the limits of this
Kingdom) the and Belief of the English [Catholique] Church. This for the
present was altogether Honorary and pointed only at his merit, which indeed was
as much as the iniquity of those times would afford to any the most deserving
Personages. But yet the King to signify his approbation of the Doctors
excellent worth by a farther Testimony of it, soon afterward gave him a Patent
for his Presentation to the Town of Dorchester in Dorsetshire, a Living valued
to be worth 400 l. per Annum.

This Royal and bounteous Favor, the Doctor modestly declined, continuing his
attendance on the Princess till the Rendition of the City of Exeter to the
Parliament; Notwithstanding the Doctor accepted not of that other Preferment of
Dorchester; for that London was in his eye, as the most necessary and expedient
place for finishing his aforesaid Book, to which place the Expiration of the
War promised some kind of Access, which since it could not otherwise be, the
Doctor did gladly submit to.

For General Fairfax, having by Treaty reduced and disbanded my Lord Hoptons
Army in Cornwall, came directly back to besiege Exeter, which Garrison upon
consideration that no relief could be expected, and that Resistance would but
defer the resetling of the King and Kingdom, (pressed also by the Enemy as a
cogent argument for their Rendition,) having very Honorable and comprehensive
Articles, both for their Conscience and Estates, delivered up the City to the
Parliament Forces.

In these Articles the Doctor was included, and by the benefit of them, was
without molestation or hindrance permitted to come to the City of London, where
he presently recommenced his laborious Enterprise, and by the additional helps
of Books, the confluence and resort of Learned men his acquaintance to their
sleecing Tyrannical Courts and Committees newly Erected, made such a progress,
that from thence he could take a fair prospect of his whole work.

Upon his first Arrival he came to his own (the Parish of Savoy) but they
received him not, the face of things was so altered; many of his parishioners
dead, others removed, all of them generally so overawed by an Imperious Rabbi
of both Factions, Presbytery and Independency, one Mr. Bond formerly a Preacher
at Exeter, then made by the pretended Powers Master of the Savoy. (The Doctor
and he having countermarched, and changed ground, wherein different seed was
sown of loyal Obedience and treasonable Sedition) that the Doctor might have
said of his parish what a Learned Historian said in another greater Case,
Parochia in parochia quaerenda erat.

But a Living was not the Design of the good Doctor, who knew how incompatible
the Times and his Doctrine must needs be. However as often as he had private
opportunities he ceased not to assert the purity of the Church of England,
bewailing the sad condition, into which the grievous abominable sins of the
Nation had so far plunged it as to make it more miserable by bearing so many
reproaches and calumnies grounded only upon its calamity. But some glimmering
Hopes of a settlement and understanding betwixt the King and the pretended
Houses appearing; the pious Doctor betook himself to earnest prayers and
petitions to God, that he would please to succeed that blessed work, doing that
privately as a Christian, which he might not publicly do as a Subject, most
fervently imploring, in those Families where his person and devotions were
alike acceptable, the blessing of Restoration on this afflicted Church, and
its defencelesse Defendor the King.

That desired Affair went on slowly and uncertainly, but so did not the
Doctors Book, for having recommended the first to the Almighty wisdom, he
stood not still expecting the issue, but addressed himself to his study,
affording no time but the leisure of his Meals, which was short, to the hearing
of News, with which the minds and mouths of men were then full employed by the
changeableness of the Army, who played fast and loose with the King and
Parliament, till in conclusion they destroyed both.

Then indeed such an amazement struck the Loyal pious Doctor, when he first
heard of that execrable Design intended against the Kings person, and saw the
villainy proceed so uncontroulably, that he not only surceased but resolved to
abandon that lucklesse work (as he was then pleased to call it.) For what shall
I write said he of the Worthies of England, when this Horrid Act, will bring
such an infamy upon the whole Nation as will ever cloud and darken all its
former, and suppress its future rising glories?

But when through the seared impiety of those men, that parricide was
perpetrated, the good Doctor deserted not his study alone but forsook himself
too, not caring for or regarding his concerns (though the Doctor was none of
the most providential Husband, by having store beforehand:) until such time as
his prayers, tears and fasting having better acquainted him with that sad
dispensation, he began to revive from that dead pensiveness to which he had so
long addicted himself.

He therefore now again renewed his former study, setting about it with
unwearied diligence. About this time also it happened that the Rectory of
Waltham Abbey being vacant, and in the disposal of the Right Honorable Earl of
Carlisle, since deceased, he voluntarily and desirously conferred it on the
Doctor, and together made him his Chaplain, both which he very piously and
profitably performed, being highly beloved by that Noble LORD, and other
Gentlemen and Inhabitants of the Parish.

About this time also many of the Orthodox Clergy began to appear again in the
Pulpits of London through the zeal of some right worthy Citizens, who hungered
after the true and sincere Word, from which they had so long been restrained;
among the Chief of whom was our good Doctor, being settled Lecturer for a time
at St. Clements lane near Lumbard-street, where he preached every Wednesday in
the afternoon, to a very numerous and Christian Audience; and shortly after
from thence he was removed to St. Brides in Fleetstreet in the same quality of
Lecturer, the day being changed to Thursday, where he preached with the same
efficacy and success.

The Doctor having continued some 12 years a Widdower, the War finding him so,
had the better relisht the loss of his first Wife, by how much the freer it
rendered him of care and trouble for her in those tumultuous times; so as by
degrees it had almost settled in him a persuasion of keeping himself in that
state. But now an honorable and advantageous Match presenting it self, and
being recommended to him by the desires of his noble Friends, he consented to
the Motion, taking to wife one of the Sisters of the right Honorable the
Viscount Baltingtasse; by whom he has issue one only Son now six years old, a
very hopeful Youth; having had by his former wife another Son of the age of 21
years or thereabouts, now a hopeful Student in Cambridge.

In the year 1655 when the usurping Protector had published an Interdict
against Ecclesiastical persons, Schoolmasters and others, who had adhered to
his late sacred Majesty or assisted the present; whereby they were prohibited
to perform any Ministerial Office, teach School, etc. upon several pains and
forfeitures, the good Doctor forbore not to preach as he did before. The
convincing power either of his Doctrine or his worth defending and keeping him
out of the hands of that unreasonable Man.

This unchristian barbarous cruelty of that Trial sorely afflicted the good
Doctor in his first apprehensions of it, though after a little consulration and
the encouragement of Friends, and the strong persuasions of his own conscience
he came to a resolution to do his duty as a Minister of Christ, and leave the
issue to God. But he did not only look upon this prohibition, in general as a
severe punishment inflicted upon the Nation, by removing their Teachers into
Gorners, nay remote corners of the world if they disobeyed that Edict; but in
particular (at first view of it) as some punishment or infliction on himself,
as if God had refused him and laid him aside as not fit to serve him; and this
he referred to his former remissness in the discharge of that high Function
whereunto he was separated and called.

And now did he superabundantly exercise that grace of charity to all persons
distressed and ruined by this sad occasion; what his own small Estate could not
do, he helped out by exhorting and persuading all men of his acquaintance or
Congregation, (for so was the Church of England reduced, even in that to the
form of that Schism that ruined it) or select Auditory; so that what by his
powerful Example and as strong persuasions, he did minister effectually to
their RELIEF.

Not to omit one particular charitable office of this Doctor to the same kind
of Sufferers: from the expiration of the War, he constantly retained one that
had been a Captain in the Royal Army, and whose fortunes and condition could
neither keep him according to that degree, nor sustain or relieve him in any
other. This the good Doctor did out of a Loyal and Honorable sense of such
persons sufferings and contempts far unworthy their Cause or their Desert: and
did therefore allow him 10 l. yearly besides diet and lodging till the Captain
died.

About this time the Doctor became Chaplain to the right Honorable the Lord
Berkley, having quitted Waltham, in lieu whereof this Lord presented him with
the Living of Cranford -- in Middlesex (where his Body is now deposited:) how
infinitely, well beloved he was there needs not be added to those accumulations
of respect he found every where, for fear especially of resuscitating the
recent grief of those Parishioners for his late lamented loss.

He was a little before wooed also to accept of a Living at -- in Essex, which
for some respects he owed the Patron and to employ that rich Talent with which
God had so bountifully trusted him, he undertook, and piously there continued
his Labors till his Settlement at London.

In the Interim came out a Book of Dr. Heylins, called Animadversions upon Mr.
Fuller' s Ecclesiastical History, wherein somewhat tartly (though with that
judicious learning for which that Doctor is most deservedly honored) he tax^
that Book of some Errors, etc. To this the Doctor replied by a Book styled The
Appeal of injured Innocence to the learned and ingenious Reader, being a very
modest but a most rational and polite defense to the aforesaid exceptions
against that elaborate Piece. The Dispute and Controversy was soon ended, the
Oil the Doctor bestowed on this labor, being poured into the fresh Wound of
this Quarrel did so assuage the heat of the Contest, that it was. soon healed
into a perfect amicable closure and mutual endearment.

Indeed the grace that was supereminent in the good Doctor was Charity, both in
giving and forgiving; as he had labored during our civil broils after peace,
so when that could not through our sins be attained, did he with the same
earnestness press the Duty of Love, especially among Brethren of the same
afflicted and too much already divided Church; and therefore was most exemplary
in keeping the band of it himself, though in a matter that most nearly
concerned his credit and fame, the chiefest worldly Thing he studied and
intended.

This constrained retrospection of the Doctors to secure and assist the far
advanced strength of his foremost works, did a little retard and impede the
arriere of his labors, which consisted of the flower and choice of all his
Abilities and wherein his WORTHIES were placed; howbeit this proved but a Halt,
to those encumbrances and difficulties, which he had all along before met, and
soon set that Book on foot again.

This was the last Remora to it* the Doctor going on a smooth swift pace while
all things else were retrograde in the Kingdom through the tyrannical plots
and stratagems of the Usurper Cromwell so as toward the beginning of that
mirabilis Annus 1660. he had it ready for the Press, to which as soon as the
wonders of his Majesty's Restitution was over, (in the thankful contemplation
whereof the good Doctor was so piously fixed as nothing else might presume to
intrude upon his raised gladded spirits) he brought it, taking the auspicia of
that happy and famous juncture of time for the Commencement of this Everlasting
Monument of himself as well, as all other English Noble deceased Persons.

A while before to complete the Doctor's contentment as to his Ministry also,
he was invited to his former Lecturers place at the Savoy, who even from his
departure had suffered under an insufficient or disloyal and malicious Clergy;
and therefore stood in need of an able and dutiful Son of the Church to reduce
and lead them in the right way and the old paths; For this People (his ancient
flock) the Doctor had always a more especial respect and kindness, which was
the rather heightened in him out of a compassion to their state and condition.
Nor did he more tenderly affect them then they universally respect him,
receiving him (as indeed he was) as an Angel of God, sent to minister unto them
heavenly things, in exchange whereof they freely gave him their hearts and
hands.

The Doctor through the injury and iniquity of the times had for near 20 years
been barred of all Profits of his Prebendariship of Salisbury (of which
before,) but upon the return of the King, those Revenues and Possessions so
sacrilegiously alienated from the Church, reverted also to their rightful
Proprietors. This accession and additional Help did very much encourage the
Doctor in the carrying on of his Book, which being large would require an able
Purse to go through with, and he was very sollicitous, (often presaging he
should not live to see it finished though satisfied of his present healthy
constitution) to have it done out of hand; to which purpose part of the Money
accrewing to him from his Salisbury Prebendariship was designed.

He therefore hastened his Book with all Expedition, and whereas he had intended
to continue it but till 1659. and had therefore writ it in such language as
those times of Usurpation (during the most part of which it was compiled) would
suffer such a subject and concerning Matter to be dressed in; he now reviewed it
over, giving Truth, and his own most excellent Fancy their proper becoming
Ornaments, Scope and Clearness. But neither the elevation of the Usurpers, nor
the depression of the Royallists, and the Vice-versa of it did ever incline or
sway him to additions, intercalations or expunctions of persons, whom he has
recommended to the world for Worthies; no such thing as a Pym or Protector whom
the mad world cried up for Brave: Drops of compassionate tears they did force
from him, but his resolute Ink was not to be stained by their black actions. A
Pen full of such, would serve to blot out the whole Roll of Fame.

This constancy of the Doctors to his first model and main of his design does
most evidently argue his firm persuasion and belief of the reviving of the
Royal Cause, since he wrote the most part during those improbable times of any
Restitutions and he had very ill consulted his own advantage if he had not well
consulted the Oracles of God.

As the last felicity of this Doctors life, he was made Chaplain in
Extraordinary to his Majesty, being also in a well grounded expectation of some
present further advancement; but here Death stepped in and drew the Curtain
betwixt him, and his succeeding Ecclesiastical Dignities:

And would a Curtain were drawn here too, that the sad remainder of this Task
were enjoined to the last Trump, when we shall know likewise wherefore God was
pleased to take him from us, and be satisfied with his providence: Pity the
envious should find such an imperfection in him as Death; pity the grateful
should mourn so long and so much for the loss of him, and his most
incomparable Gifts and Endowments, without any redress -- but infandos Fullere
jubes renovare Dolores -- we must continue our discourse though upon a
discontinued subject, and write the much deplored Death of Doctor Fuller*

Having in August returned from Salisbury, whither he went to settle and Let
his Revenue as Prebend of that Deanery, he returned to his Charge at London. It
was a very sickly time in the Country, the distempers most rife were Feavorish
Agues, the disease of which our Doctor dyed; and therefore it was judged, that
he had brought the infection of his disease thence, which broke out violently
upon him soon after his return, (Doctor Nicholas the reverend Dean of Paul's
dying near the same time upon his coming from the same place.) For being
defired to preach a Marriage Sermon on Sunday the twelfth of August for a
Kinsman of his, who was to be wedded the day after; the good Doctor lovingly
undertook it; but on that Sunday dinner felt himself very much indisposed,
complaining of a dizinesse in his Head: whereupon his Son entreated him that he
would go and lie down on bed, and forbear preaching that Afternoon, informing
him how dangerous those symptoms were; but the Doctor would not be persuaded,
but to Church he would go and perform his promise to his Friend; saying, he had
gone up often into the Pulpit sick but always came well down again, and he
hoped he should do as well now through Gods strengthening grace.

Being in the Pulpit, he found himself very ill, so that he was apprehensive of
the danger; and therefore before his Prayer addressed himself thus to his
Congregation. I find my self very ill, but I am resolved by the grace of God to
preach this Sermon to you here though it be my last. A sad presage and more
sadly verified.

He proceeded in his Prayer and Sermon very perfectly till in the middle,
(never using himself to Notes, other then the beginning word of each Head or
Division) he began to falter, but not so much out but that he quickly
recollected himself, and very pertinently concluded. After he had a while sat
down, he was not able to rise again, but was fain to be led down the Pulpit
stairs by two men into the Reading place, He had promised also to Christen a
Child (of a very good friend of his) then in the Church, and the Parent did
earnestly importune him to do it, and the good Doctor was as willing as he
desiring; but the Doctor's son showing him the extreme danger there was of his
Father, he desisted from his request.

Much ado there was to persuade the Doctor to go home in a Sedan, he saying
still he should be well by and by, and would go along with them; but at last
finding himself worse and worse he yielded to go but not to his old Lodgings
(which were convenient for him in the Savoy) but to his new One in
Covent Garden. Being come thither they had him to bed, and presently sent for
Doctor Scarborough, but he being in the Country Doctor Charlton came, who with
the exactest skill and care possible, addressed himself to the recovery of the
Good Doctor. The Disease was judged by him to be a violent malignant Feavour,
such as then raged every where, and was better known by the name of the new
Disease, which like a Plague had swept away a multitude of people throughout
the Kingdom. Therefore Phlebotomy was directed, and some Twenty Ounces of
blood taken from him, and yet nevertheless the Paroxysmes continued, having
totally bereft the Doctor of all sense, so much as to give any the least
account of his Condition; the Physicians Art being at a loss, and not able to
advise any further, against the unsuperable violence and force of the distemper.

Yet in this Sad and Oppressed Condition, some comfortable signs and
assurances were given by the Good Doctor, by his frequent lifting up his Hands
and his Eyes; which Devotion ended in the folding of his Arms, and Sighs,
fetched questionless from a perfect Contrition for this Life* and from an
earnest desire after, and hope of that to come.

Tuesday Aust. 14. the good Doctor gave sad symptoms of a prevailing disease,
and Dr. Charlton despaired of his recovery, his Fever being so fierce and
pertinacious and which resisted all Remedies. As was said almost from the very
first decumbency, which was near as soon as he was ill, his senses were seized
and surprised, with little or no remission of the distemper, which caused him
to talk sometimes, but of nothing more frequently then his Books, calling for
Pen and Ink, and telling his sorrowful Attendants that by and by, he should be
well, and would write it out -- etc. But on Wednesday noon the presages of a
dislodging soul were apparent in him; for Nature being overpowered, the Vitals
burnt up by such a continual Heat; his lamp of life began to decay, his Fever
and strength abating together, so that it pleased God to restore to him the use
of the faculties of his soul, which he very devoutly and thankfully employed,
in a Christian preparation for Death, earnestly imploring the prayers of some
of his reverend Brethren with him, who then were sorrowful Visitors of him in
these his last Agonies, which accordingly was performed, the good Doctor
withal the intentnesse of piety joining with them, and recommending himself
with all humble thankfulness and submission to Gods welcome Providence. Nay so
highly was he affected with Gods pleasure concerning him, that he could not
endure any person to weep or cry, but would earnesty desire them to refrain,
highly extolling and preferring his Condition, as a translation to a blessed
eternity.

Nor would he therefore endure to hear any thing of the world or worldly
matters, for the settling and disposition whereof he had before made no
provision, and was desired by some to give some present direction, for the
better accommodating the several concerns of his Family: but the Doctor totally
rejected any thoughts of those matters, having his mind engaged and prepossest
with things of ravishing and transcendent Excellencies. Even his beloved Bock
aforesaid the darling of his soul, was totally neglected, not a syllable
dropping from him in reference to the perfecting and finishing thereof, which
he had now brought so near to the Birth. Nothing but Heaven and the perfections
thereof, the consummations of Grace in Glory, must fill up the room of his
capacious soul, which now was flitting and ready to take wing to those mansions
of bliss.

For on Thursday morning Aug. 16 1661: this reverend and painful Minister of
Christ Jesus, having finished his Course, and run the Race that was set before
him and fought a good Fight, breathed out his wearied spirit into the hands of
his Redeemer to his own everlasting Fruition and Consolation, but to the
irreparable loss and very exceeding sorrow of all men, to whom Religion,
Piety, Virtue, and super-eminent Learning were ever acceptable. And what ever
the present envious world may think, unprejudiced Posterity will undoubtedly
erect him a shrine, and pay him those justa of Honor and Fame, which to his
Memory most duly and rightly do belong.

After he had laid a while dead, an eruption of blood burst from his Temples,
which was conjectured to have been long settled there, through too much study,
in the methodizing and completing those various Pieces in his WORTHIES
GENERAL, of which he was prophetically afraid he should never live to see the
finishing.

He was buried at the desire and at the Costs of the right Honorable his Noble
Patron the Lord Berkley at his Parish of Cranford in Middlesex, in the Chancel
of the said Church, and attended thither by at least Two hundred of his
Brethren of the Ministry, such a solemn Assembly being searce to be paralleled,
where the reverend Dean of Rochester Dr. Hardy preached his Funeral Sermon;
being a very elegant, and extraordinary patheticall deploration of so great a
loss, which has not yet (though it is hoped and much desired may) pass the
Press; to which Learned Piece with all humble submission be referred the
Praises and Commendations of this Deceased DOCTOR, being thereby so excellently
well transmitted to his Everlasting Rest.

Though we have now brought this Venerable Doctor to his repository, and laid
him in his silent Grave: yet there remain some further offices due to his yet
speaking Virtues and Graces. The smooth and fair Track whereof could not be so
well insisted on in the foregoing considerations of him, as in Via, and that so
salebrose and difficult by the Unevenness and Asperity of the times he lived
in: but do now orderly lead us without any diversion, as he is in Glory, to
the pursuit of his Fame and Memory.

In tendency whereunto it is requisite, to Enliven that Pourtraite of him
prefixed to this Manual, with some of those natural Graces which were
unexpressible in him by the Pencill; withal to show what a convenient
Habitation learning and virtue had chosen, in which nothing could be complained
of and faulted, but that they took it for so short a Term.

He was of Stature somewhat Tall, exceeding the mean, with a proportionable
bigness to become it, but no way inclining to Corpulency: of an exact
Straightness of the whole Body, and a perfect Symmetry in every part thereof,
He was of a Sanguine constitution, which beautified his Face with a pleasant
Ruddinesse, but of so Grave and serious an aspect, that it Awed and
Discountenanced the smiling Attracts of that complexion. His Head Adorned with
a comely Light. - Colored Hair, which was so, by Nature exactly Curled (an
Ornament enough of it self in this Age to Denominate a handsome person, and
wherefore all Skill and Art is used) but not suffered to overgrow to any length
unseeming his modesty and Profession.

His Gate and Walking was very upright and graceful, becoming his well shapen
Bulk: approaching something near to that we term Majesticall; but that the
Doctor was so well known to be void of any affectation or pride. Nay so
Regardlesfe was he of himself in his Garb and Raiment, in which no doubt his
Vanity would have appeared, as well as in his stately pace: that it was with
some trouble to himself, to be either Neat or Decent; it mattered not for the
outside, while he thought himself never too Curious and Nice in the Dresses of
his mind.

Very Careless also he was to seeming inurbanity in the modes of Courtship and
demeanor, deporting himself much according to the old English Guise, which for
its ease and simplicity suited very well with the Doctor, whose time was
designed for more Elaborate business: and whose MOTTO might have been
sincerity.

As inobservant he was of persons, unless business with them; or his concerns
pointed them out and adverted him; seeing and discerning were two things: often
in several places, has he met with Gentlemen of his nearest and greatest
Acquaintance, at a full rencounter and stop, whom he has endeavored to pass
by, not knowing, that is to say, not minding of them, till rectifyed and
recalled by their familiar compellations.

This will not (it may be presumed) and justly cannot be imputed unto any
indisposednesse and unaptnesse of his Nature, which was so far from Rude and
untractable, that it may be confidently averred, he was the most complacent
person in the Nation, as his Converse and Writings, with such a freedom of
Discourse and quick Jocundity of style, do sufficiently evince.

He was a perfect walking Library, and those that would find delight in him
must turn him; he was to be diverted from his present purpose with some
urgency: and when once Unfixed and Unbent, his mind freed from the incumbency
of his Study; no Man could be more agreeable to Civil and Serious mirth, which
limits his most heightened Fancy never transgressed.

He had the happiness of a very Honorable, and that very numerous
acquaintance, so that he was no way undisciplined in the Arts of Civility; yet
he continued semper idem, which constancy made him always acceptable to them.

At his Diet he was very sparing and temperate, but yet he allowed himself the
repasts and refreshings of two Meals a day: but no lover of Danties, or the
Inventions of Cookery: solid meats better fitting his strength of Constitution;
but from drink very much abstemious, which questionless was the cause of that
uninterrupted Health he enjoyed till this his First and Last sickness: of
which Felicity as he himself was partly the cause of by his exactness in
eating and drinking, so did he the more dread the sudden infliction of any
Disease, or other violence of Nature, fearing this his care might amount to a
presumption, in the Eyes of the greas Disposer of all things, and so it pleased
GOD it should happen.

But his great abstinence of all was from Sleep, and strange it was that one of
such a Fleshly and sanguine composition, could overwatch so many heavy propense
inclinations to Rest. For this in some sort he was beholden to his care in Diet
aforesaid, (the full Vapors of a repletion in the Stomach ascending to the
Brain, causing that usual Drowsinesse we see in many) but most especially to
his continual custom, use, and practice, which had so subdued his Nature, that
it was wholly Governed by his Active and Industrious mind.

And yet this is a further wonder: he did scarcely allow himself, from his
First Degree in the University any Recreation or Easy Exercise, no not so much
as walking, but very Rare and Seldom; and that not upon his own choice, but as
being compelled by friendly, yet, Forcible Invitations; till such time as the
War posted him from place to place, and after that his constant attendance on
the Press in the Edition of his Books: when was a question, which went the
fastest, his Head or his Feet: so that in effect he was a very stranger, if not
an Enemy to all pleasure.

Riding was the most pleasant, because his necessary convenience; the Doctors
occasions, especially his last work, requiring Travel, to which he had so
accustomed himself: so that this Diversion, (like Princes Banquets only to be
looked upon by them, not tasted of) was rather made such then enjoyed by him.

So that if there were any Felicity or Delight, which he can be truly said to
have had: it was either in his Relations or in his Works. As to his Relations,
certainly, no man was more a tender, more indulgent a Husband and a Father: his
Conjugal Love in both matches being equally blessed with the same Issue, kept a
constant Tenor in both Marriages, which he so improved, that the Harmony of
his Affections stilled all Discord, and Charmed the noise of passion.

Toward the Education of his Children, he was exceeding careful, allowing
them any thing conducing to that end, beyond the present measure of his estate;
which its well hoped will be returned to the Memory of so good a Father, in
their early imitation of him in all those good Qualities and Literature, to
which they have now such an Hereditary claim.

As to his Books, which we usually call the Issue of the Brain, he was more
then Fond, totally abandoning and forsaking all things to follow them. And yet
if Correction and Severity (so this may be allowed the gravity of the Subject)
be also the signs of Love: a stricter and more careful hand was never used.
True it is they did not grow up without some errors, like the Tares: nor can
the most refined pieces of any of his Antagonists boast of perfection. He that
goes an unknown and beaten Track in a Dubious way, though he may have good
directions, yet if in the journey he chance to stray, cannot well be blamed;
they have perchance plowed with his Heifer, and been beholden to those
Authorities (for their Exceptions) which he first gave light to.

To his Neighbors and Friends he behaved himself with that cheerfulness and
plainness of Affection and respect, as deservedly gained him their Highest
esteeme^ from the meanest to the highest he omitted nothing what to him
belonged in his station, either in a familiar correspondency, or necessary
Visits: never suffering entreaties of that which either was his Duty, or in his
power to perform. The quickness of his apprehension helped by a Good Nature,
presently sugested unto him (without putting them to the trouble of an
innuendo) what their several Affairs required, in which he would spare no
pains: insomuch that it was a piece of Absolute Prudence to rely upon his
Advice and Assistance. In a word, to his Superiors he was Dutifully
respectfull without Ceremony or Officiousness; to his equals he was
Discreetly respectful; without neglect or unsociableness, and to his
Inferiors, (whom indeed he judged Christianly none to be) civilly respectfull
without Pride or Disdain.

But all these so eminent virtues, and so sublimed in him were but as foyles to
those excellent gifts wherewith God had endued his intellectuals. He had a
memory of that vast comprehensiveness, tha he is deservedly known for the first
inventer of that Noble Art, whereof having left behind him no Rules, or
directions* save, only what fell from him in discourse, no further account can
be given, but a relation of some very rare experiments of it made by him.

He undertook once in passing to and fro from Temple Bar to the furthest
Conduit in Cheapside, at his return again to tell every Sign as they stood in
order on both sides of the way, repeating them either backward or forward, as
they should chufe, which he exactly did, not missing or misplacing one, to the
admiration of those that heard him.

The like also would he do in words of different Languages, and of hard and
difficult prolation, to any number whatsoever: but that which was most strange,
and very rare in him, was his way of writing, which something like the
^hineses, was from the top of the page to the bottom: the manner thus. He would
write near the Margin the first words of every Line down to the Foot of the
Paper, then would be beginning at the head again, fill up every one of these
Lines, which without any interlineations or spaces but with the full and equal
length, would so adjust the sense and matter, and so aptly Connex and Conjoyn
the ends and beginnings of the said Lines, that he could not do it better, as
he has said, if he had writ all out in a Continuation.

The Treasury of this Happy Memory was a very great Advantage to his Preaching.
but being assisted with as Rich invention, and extraordinary reading, did
absolutely complete him for the Pulpit. His great stores both of School and
case Divinity, both of History and Philosophy, of Arts and Tongues, his
Converse in the Scriptures, the Fathers and Humane Writings had so abundantly
furnished him, that without the other additaments he had been very eminent
among his function. Now all so happily met together; such a Constellation could
portend no less then some wonder of men, who should be Famous in his
Generation.

Not to omit to this purpose (however to the first intuition it may seem to the
Reverend and Graver Divines a precipitancy, and a Venturous Rashness in any
Man with such unprovidednesse to step into the Pulpit) that this Venerable
Doctor, upon some sudden Emergent occasions, upon two hours warning, and upon a
subject of his friends Choice, which was Knotty and very Difficult, has
performed the Task enjoined him with much Accuratenesse; such his Art of
Method, besides that his understanding was strangely opened, for the unlocking
and opening of Scriptures, which he would do very Genuinely and Evidently, and
then Embellish his explication with curious variety of expression.

For his ordinary manner of teaching, it was in some kind different from the
usual Preachers method of most Ministers in those times; for he seldom made
any excursions into the handling of common places, or drew his subject matter
out at length, by any prolixely continued discourse: But the maine frame of his
public SERMONS, if not wholly, consisted (after some brief and genuine
resolution of the Context and Explication of the Terms, where need required,
of Notes and Observations with much variety and great dexterity drawn
immediately from the Text, and naturally without constraint, issuing or flowing
either from the maine body, or from the several parts of it, with some useful
Applications annexed thereunto; which though either of them iong insisted upon,
yet were wont wirh that vivacity to be propounded and pressed by him, as well
might, and often did pierce deep into the Hearts of his Hearers, and not only
rectify and clear their Judgments, but have a powerful work also upon their
Affections.

Nor was it his manner to quote many Scriptures, finding it troublesome to
himself, and supposing it would be so to his Auditors also; besides deeming it
the less needful, in regard that his observations being grounded immediately
on the Scripture he handled, and by necessary consequence thence deduced,
seemed to receive proof sufficient from it.

A Constant form of prayer he used, as in his Family, so in his public
Ministry; only varying or adding, upon special occasions, as occurrences
intervening required, because not only hesitation (which the Good Doctor for
all his strength of Memory, and invention, was afraid of before so awful a
presence as the Majesty of Heaven) was in prayer more offensive then other
discourse; but because such excursions in that Duty, in the Extempore way, were
become the Idol of the Multitude.

In his mixed Contemplations, read these words; Let such new Practices as are to
be brought into our Church, be for a time Candidates and Probationers on their
good behavior, to see how the temper of people will fit them, and they fadge
with it, hefore they be publicly enjoined.

Let them be like Saint Paul's Deacons, 1 Timothy 3. first be proved, then be
used, if found blameless. I cannot therefore but commend the Discretion of
such Statesmen, who knowing the directory to be but a stranger, and considering
the great inclination the Generality of our Nation had to the Common Prayer,
made their Temporary Act to stand in force but for three years.

He could as well declare his mind and errand, and of all others likewise, with
as much plainness, clearness, and (which is more) reverence, as any of those,
who cried up the Spirit, and their own way in opposition to the Laws and the
Judgment of Antiquity; so to take the people with their new Fangled words and
licentious easiness of discoursing with GOD Almighty, whose Attributes they
squared to their Petitions, that it be not said, Wills.

As he was an Enemy to the inventions of men, obtruded upon the Blessed Spirit
in that irreverend and profane manner of praying and revelation; so was he
likewise on the other side a professed and avowed adversary to the Mass and
Traditions, which caused him no little Slander and Obloquie. But the Spirit of
this pious Doctor was exceedingly stirred in him against all Popish
Insinuators; because he was too sensible that through the mad zeal of the
Vulgar, whom they had by Jesuitical practices inflamed, the House of God in
these Kingdoms was set in combustion.

Therefore with much Prudence, Courage and Boldness, did he every where in his
Books, as occasion offered, Unmasque the deceits and designs, resist and curb
the pride; convince and lay open the errors of the Church of Rome; though he
never wrote any thing particularly by way of Controversy against it, because
as he said there was no end of it; and more then sufficient had already been
wrote; if any ingenuity had been in the adherents of that Sea, to have
submitted to Truth.

Nor was there ever any of that Religion, who were so hardy, as to Challenge or
Tax the Doctor but Obliquely, for any thing wherewith he had charged them,
either of Apostasy, Heresy, or manifest Idolatry; their abuse of Antiquity in
their Rasures and Additions, which did very often occurr to him in most of his
books: from which they were sure to hear of them to the purpose. It much
rejoiced the Roman Party, when that misunderstanding happened betwixt Doctor
Heylin and himself, about his Ecclesiastical History, though they caught no
fish in those Troubled Waters; while they tossed of their proud billows
forward and backward, the Protestant Cause was safely Anchored and Moared
between them.

And as he never had occasion to engage in any Polemical discourse with any of
that Party; so in these miserable bandyings of our late unhappy times, did he
always refrain from stickling in any side, though it was sufficiently known
how firmly grounded and addict to the true Protestant Religion; in opposition
to the innovations of Presbytery, and the Schism of Independency, against whom
also he had a zeal, but allayed with a greater compassion, then to the Papist,
distinguishing betwixt the Seducers and the Seduced: whom not withstanding he
did very severely deal withal in his writings; one instance whereof take in his
mixed Contemp. I am sad that I may add with too much truth, that one man will at
last be divided in himself, distracted often betwixt many Opinions; that what
is reported of Tostatus lying on his Death Bed. In multitudine controversiarum
non habuit quod crederet, amongst the Multitude of persuasions, through which
he had passed, he knew not where to cast Anchor, and fix himself at Last. So
that he may be said to have been a Right-Handed Enemy to the stubborn Romanist,
and a Left Handed one to the cunning Sectary.

He was wont to call those controversies concerning Episcopacy, and the new
invented Arguments against the Church of England, with the Answers and
Refutation thereof, (...) things of a days Life and of no permanency; the
Church being built upon a Rock, as no storms could shake or move it, so needed
it not any Defenses of Art or Learning: Being of the same mind with Sir Henry
Wootton, Disputandi pruritus, Scabies Ecclesiae.

He was wholly conversant du^ring the Broiles and Dissentions of the Clergy, in
the thoughts and considerations of that Text: Let your Moderation be known to
all men, on which place he once Preached a while before his Majesty's
Restitution to a very great Auditory; little imagining the subsequent words,
for the Lord is at hand, were so near the fulfilling in the merciful
Visitations of GOD toward these Miserable Nations.

In this he was the same still, but more sollicitous in the Glimmering of that
happy Revolution: when he plainly saw how indispensably necessary, the mutual
condiscentions of all parties, were to the establishment and consolidating of
Peace. (Mixed Contemplation, to this purpose again) Peace in our Land, like St.
Paul at Athens, betwixt two Sects of Philosophers, is now like to be Encountered
with two such opposite Parties: such as are for the Liberties of a Common
wealth, and such as are for an absolute Monarchy in the sull length thereof.
But I hope neither of them both are so considerable in their number, Parts and
Influences on the People; but that the Moderate Party Advocates for Peace, will
prevail for the settling thereof. Ibidem. The Episcopal Party does desire and
expect that the Presbyterian should remit of his Rigidnesse, in order to an
expedient between them; the Presbyterians require, that the Episcopal side
abate of their Authority to advance an Accommodation. But some on both sides are
so wedded to their willfulness, stand so stiff on their Judgments, are so
hot and high in their Passions, they will not part with the least Punctilio in
their Opinions and Practices: such Men's judgments cannot pretend to the
exactness of the Gibeonites, Judge. 20. 16. that they hit the Mark of an hairs
breadth, and fail not: yet will they not abate an Hairs breadth in order to
Unity; they will take all, but tender nothing: make motions with their Mouths,
but none with their Feet for Peace, not stirring a step toward it -- Oh that
we could see some Proffers and Performances of Condiscention on either side,
and then let others who remain obstinate, be branded with PEREZ, Genesis 38. 19.
the Breach be upon them.

Thus the Good Doctors bent and resolutions, were for a fair and mutual
compliance, out of a tender Jealousy of this Divided Church: seeing other Men
resolved, indeed, into an obstinate persistance and adherence to their
Opinions, who would rather rashly cut the Gordian knot of Union and Concord, to
fulfill the doubtful Oracles of their own Judgment, then leasurly and with
patience endeavor the Untying of it, which would set the Church of God at
perfect Liberty, and release it from the Violence of prejudiced and captived
Beason.

How much this lay upon his Spirit, being the Benjamin of his Love above all
other Duties and Necessities in a Christian Conversation, or Government, may
seem further tedious to relate; but because it is so Genuine a Traict of his
Elegant Pen, and so like him: it is hoped that this Excellent feature Copied
here, in this Rude Transcript of him, may be of delight (amidst the Mass and
Undigestednesse of these Collections) to the curious Reader -- In my Fathers
time there was a Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge, a Native of Carleton
in Leicestershire: where the people through some occult cause, are troubled
with a Wharling in their Throats, so that they cannot plainly pronounce the
Letter R. This Scholar being conscious of his infirmity, made a Latin Oration
of the usual expected length, without an R. therein: and yet did he not only
select words fit for his easy pronuntiation, but also as pure and expressive
for signification: to show that men might speak without being beholden to the
Dogs Letter -- Our English Pulpits for these last Eighteen years have had in
them too much caninal anger vented by snapping and snarling Spirits on both
sides. But if you Bite and Devour one another, says the Apostle, Gal. 5. 15.
take heed ye be not Devoured one of another -- Think not that our Sermons must
be silent if not satirical, as if Divinity did not afford smooth subjects
enough to be seasonably insisted on in this Juncture of Time; let us try our
skill, whither we cannot Preach without any Dog Letter, or Biting Word; the Art
is half Learned by intending, and wholly by serious endeavoring of it -- I am
sure that such soft Sermons will be more easy for the tongue of the Preacher
in pronouncing them; less grating to the Ears of Pious People that hear them:
and most edifiing to the Heart of both Speaker and Hearer -- Again and for all
-- Oh may the State be pleased so far to reflect on this Isaac, as to settle
the inheritance on him. Let Protestant Religion be only countenanced by Law:
be owned and acknowledged for the received Religion of the Nation. -- As for
other Sects the Sons of Keturah, we grudge not that Gifts be bestowed on them:
Let them have a Toleration (and that I assure you is a great gift indeed) and
be permitted peaceably, but privately to enjoy their Consciences, both in
Opinions and Practices: such Favor may safely, not to say ought justly be
afforded unto them so long as they continue peaceably in our Israel, and not
disturb the State.

This is the rather inserted, both for the cau^elousnesse of the Expression he
used, and which those times required: and by which discreet and amicable way,
our Differences and Breaches were likeliest to be made up; the Disguises of
words to the undeceiving of a misled people into the right way of their
Felicity* who had all along been driven with Speeches and such like Parliament
Oratory, being the facilest Method of introducing that Peace which by the same
Arts was Violated. Storms begin from, and end in Calmes; the gentle breathings
of soft and temperate Spirits commencing the outrages of other men's violent
passions, and terminating and stopping their Fury.

This was a Charitable, and also a Reasonable and political Design of the
Doctor, very well applied in the Crisis of that Distemper: whose acute pains,
in the stripping of those people of their Illegal possessions and purchases,
(though in time they might and would Naturally and Centrally return to their
just Owners) were to be Alleviated and Eased by some healing Balsome: not to be
Lanced and Exasperated by the sharp and keen incisions of invectives and
Exprobations; those Tumors and Swellings of Usurped Estates being better to be
laid by Lenitives and Suppling Oils, then to be eaten away by Corrosives, or
Cut off by cruel instruments.

This Policy, more eminent in Illustrious persons (though not the Charity of
the Good Doctor) GOD succeeded in that juncture of Time, by amusing the most
considerable persons, as well as the generality of the engaged Rebellious
Faction and party, into a supinenesse, or (which was the greater work of
providence, that does commonly go by a Method) confident relyance on the Kings
Grace and Kindness. Those who would not trust his Blessed Father, though under
confirmation of his Royal Seal, and Word, to be further strengthened by their
own Authority in Parliament, were quiet and contented in the only bare
expectation, what his Royal Son would promise them.

But the Doctors Charity as before, though so extensive, was far overreached
by that Liberty of Conscience, which, interest and self-will, and the Pride of
Schism, stretched beyond all convenient or reasonable Limits: his
condescentions, to such as went by the name of Tender Christians, signifying no
more then some Acts of Grace and Pardon lately passed: So that all the good the
Doctor did in that respect, was to himself the benefit of that Love and Charity
being returned and multiplied on him to his Everlasting comfort.

But what the measure of his Charity could not fulfill, was made up in his
Piety and constant Intercession: that they might prove such, as he in his best
thoughts had wished them; He was most earnest in this duty of Prayer, and his
often Accesses to that Mercy Seat, had made it a place of acquaintance and
free reception. As his Study importuned him at very unreasonable Hours, so it
opportuned his Devotion, in the early and late Sacrifices, which he
indispensably and firstly offered to the God of Heaven: a phrase for its
comprehensiveness of the Divine Majesty, in the Glory and perfection of it
above all other his Creatures, very Familiar and usual with the Doctor, by way
of Emphasis, or Reverend instance.

If it may pass here without any Rigid Adversion; a very excellent passage of
the Doctors (in the beginning of the Anarchy, under a Commonwealth) would seek
admittance, having relation to this Duty in hand. Soon after the Kings Death he
Preached in a Church near London, and a Person then in great power, now
Levelled with his Fellows, was present at the Sermon; In his Prayer before
which* he said -- God in his due Time settle our Nation on the true Foundation
thereof. The then Great Man demanded of him, what he meant by the true
Foundation? he Answered, he was no Lawyer, nor Statesmen, and therefore skill
in such matters could not be expected from him. But being pressed further to
explain himself, whether thereby he did not intend the King, Lords and
Commons, he answered, that -- It was a part of his Prayer to GOD who had more
knowledge then he ignornce in all things; that he knew what was the True
Foundation; and so remitted the Factious Querist to Gods Wisdom and Goodness*

This was a kind of his experiments in Prayer, which were many and very
observable; GOD often answering his desires in kind, and that immediately when
he was in some distresses; and Gods providence in taking care and providing for
him in his whole course of Life, wrought in him a firm resolution to depend
upon him, in what Condition so ever he should be; and he found that providence
to continue in that Tenor, to his last end. Indeed he was wholly possessed with a
holy Fear of, and relyance in GOD, was conscionable in his private Duties, and
in sanctifying the Sabbath* being much offended at its Profanation by
disorderly Men, and that both in reference to the Glory of GOD, and the scandal
brought on the Church of England, as if it allowed, (as some have impudently
affirmed) such wicked Licentiousness. For his own particular, very few
Sundaies there were in the year in which he Preached not twice; besides the
duties performed in his own house, or in his attendance on those Noble persons,
to whom successively he was Chaplain.

So that if he had not been helped by a more then Officious Memory, which
devoured all the Books he read, and digested them to easy nutriment, that
supplied all the parts and the whole body of his Learning, for his service and
furtherance of his Labors; it had been impossible, but that the Duties he
performed as a Divine, must have hindered and justled out those his happy
productions as a most Complete Historian; which study, being tied to the Series
and Catenation of Time and Truth, could ill brook, or break through those
Avocations, though no doubt it thrived the better under the kindly influence of
his Devotion.

It will make it also the less wonder, why a Man of so Great merit, and such*
conspicuous worth, snould never arrive to any eminent Honor, and Dignity, or
Church Revenue, save that of Prebend in Salisbury, being also of competent Age,
to become the Gravity of such preferments: For he could not afford to seek
great matters for himself, who designed his All, for the public good and the
concerns of his precious Soul: Questionless he could not have wanted Friends
to his advancement, if he would have pursued such ends, who would have been as
great furtherers of himself out of a particular affection, (which is always
ambitious of laying such obligations upon Virtue) to his person, as they had
assisted him in his works and Labors.

He was reward and recompense enough to himself, and for his fame and Glory
certainly he computed it the best way, it is the Jewel that graces the Ring, not
so contrary. High places are levelled in death, and crumble into dust, leaving
no impression of those that possessed them, and are only retrievable to
posterity by some excellent pourtraits of their nobler part; wherein it will on
all hands be confessed, the Doctor has absolutely drawn himself beyond the
excellentest counterfeit of Art, and which shall outlive all addition of
monument, and outflourish the pomp of the lasting'st sepulchrall glory.

But had the worthy Doctor but some longer while survived, to the fruition of
that quiet and settlement of the Church, of which by Gods goodness and favor,
we have so full a prospect, and that the crowd of suitors for Ecclesiastical
promotions, had left thronging and importuning their great friends to the
stifling and smothering of modest merit, it may be presumed the Royal bounty
would favorably have reflected on and respected that worth of the Doctor
(which was so little set by and regarded of himself in his contented obscurity)
by a convenient placing and raising of that light to some higher Orb from
whence he should have dilated and dispensed his salutiferous rays and
influences:

Some little time after his death his course would have come to have preached
before his Majesty, for which the Doctor made preparations, and that most
probably would have proved a fit opportunity of notifying himself to the King;
whose most judicious and exact observation the remarques of the Doctors learned
preaching would have happily suited. This honor was designed him before by a
Right Noble Lord, in whose retinue as Chaplain he went over to the Hague, at
the reduction of his Majesty, into these his Kingdoms. But the have and
dispatch which that great Affair required in the necessity of the Kings
presence here, afforded him not the effect of that Honorable intendment. But
what he was disappointed of here, is fully attained by his happy appearance
before the King of Kings, to praise and magnify him, and to sing Halelujahs
for ever.

So ADIEV to that Glory of the Doctor, which is incommunicable with the World;
and Ave and all Prosperity be to those his remains, which he has to the
General advantage of Learning and Piety most Liberally imparted.

Too Customary were it, to recite the several kinds and sorts of Honorable
Epithets, which his equal Readers have fixed on him; but this under Favor, may be
assigned peculiarly to him, that no man performed any thing of such difficulty
as his undertakings, with that Delight and Profit, which were as the Gemelli
and Twins of his hard Labor, and superfaetations of wit, not distinguishable
but by the thread of his own Art, which clued men into their several and
distinct* appartiments.

And so impertinent it will be to engage further in a particular account of his
Books, whose sure and perpetual Duration needs not the Minutes of this
Biography, especially that his ultimate piece, and partly Posthumous, (his
often mentioned Book, the Worthies General of England) whose design was drawn
by Eternity; commencing from their (before) unknown Originalls, and leading
into an Ocean of New Discoveries. And may some happy, as hardy Pen attempt the
Continuation.

The Names of his other Books having had their due Reception, need no other
mention to Posterity, then what you have in this ensuing Catalogue. Books of
Dr. Fuller. Poems.
Heinousness of sin. Heavy punishment, and Hearty Repentance. 8.

Holy War 2 Folio.

Joseph's Party Colored Coat, and Sermons on the Corinths, 4.

Holy state and profane state, Folio.

Sermon of Reformation, 4.

Truth maintained, or an answer to Mr. Saltmarsh that writ against his
Reformation Sermon, 4.

Inauguration Sermon Preached at St. Westminster Abbey, 4.

A Sermon of Assurance, 4.

Good thoughts in bad times, in 12.

Thoughts in worse times, 12.

Life of Andronicus, 8.

Cause and cure of a wounded Conscience, 8.

Infants Advocate, 8.

Pisgah sight of Palestine, or a description of the holy land, Folio with Cuts.

Fullers Triple Reconciler stating the Controversies, 8.

Whether
1. Ministers have an Exclusive power of barring Co^municants from the
Sacrament. 2. Any person Unordained may Lawfully preach. 3. The Lords prayer
ought not to be used by all Christians.
A fast Sermon^ preached upon Innocents Day, 4.

Sermons on Matthew upon the Temptations, 8.

A Sermon of Life out of Death 8.

Sermons on Ruth, 8.

Best name on Earth, 8.

Another 8. of Sermons.

Speeches of the Beast and Flowers, 8.

Church History of Britain, Folio.

Mixed Contemplations in these times, Folio.

Lives of several Modern Divines in the 4to book, by Fuller, 4.

The Appeal of Injured Innocence, to the Learned and Impartial Reader,

In Answer to some Animadversions of Dr. Heylins on his Church History.

Fullers History of the Worthies General of England, now finished, Folio. An
excellent Piece.

A Tract in Latin concerning the Church, not perfected by him.

These Elegant pieces are the best Epitaph can be inscribed on his Tomb, where
though he Rest himself, yet shall the World never see an end of his Labors.

FINIS.

