BATAVIA: OR THE Hollander displayed: IN BRIEF Characters and Observations Of
the PEOPLE and COUNTRY, THE GOVERNMENT OF THEIR ^TATE and Private FAMILIES,
THEIR VIRTUES and VICES.

ALSO, A PERFECT DESCRIPTION Of the PEOPLE and COUNTRY OF SCOTLAND.

LONDON, ^rinted for G. Widows, at the Green-Dragon in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1672.

TO THE READER.
AS I live Gentlemen, I am amazed how any Piece could be made such minc't meat
as this has been by a twice-printed Copy, which I find flying abroad to abuse
the Author, who long since traveling for Companies-sake, with a Friend into
the Low Countries, would needs for his own Recreation, write this Essay of
them, as he then found them: I am sure as far from ever thinking to have it
public, as he was from any private spleen to the Nation, or any person in it;
for I have moved him often to Print it, but could never get his consent, his
modesty ever esteeming it among his Puerilia, and (as he said) a piece too
light for a Prudential man to publish: th truth is, it was merely occasional in
his youth, and the time so little, that he had for observation (his stay there
not being above three weeks) that it could not well be expected, he should say
more, and though the former part be joculary and sportive, yet the seriousness
of the latter part renders the Character no way injurious to the people. And
now finding some ruffled Feathers only presented for the whole Bird, and having
a perfect Copy by me, I have presumed to trespass so much upon the Author as to
give it you (in vindication of him) so as I am confilent it was dressed by his
own Pen. And after I have begged his Pardon for exposing it without his
Warrant, I shall leave you to judge by comparing this and the former
Impressions, whether or no he has not been abused sufficiently.

Three Weeks OBSERVATIONS of the Low Countries; Especially HOLLAND.
THey are a general Sea-Land. The great Bog of Europe. There is not such
another Marsh in the world that is flat. They are an universal Quag-mire
Epitomized. A Green Cheese in pickle. There is in them an AEquilibrium of mud
and water. A strong Earthquake would shake them to a Chaos, from which the
successive force of the Sun, rather then Creation, has a little emended them.
They are the Ingredients of a black Pudding, and want only stirring together.
Marry it is best making on it in a dry Summer, else you will have more blood then
grist; and then have you no way to make it serve for any thing, but to tread it
under Zona Torrida, and so dry it for Turfs.

Says one, it affords the people one commodity beyond all the other Regions;
if they die in perdition, they are so low, that they have a shorter cut to Hell
then the rest of their Neighbors. And for this cause, perhaps all strange
Religions throng thither, as naturally inclining toward their (enter. Besides,
their Riches shows them to be Pluto's Region, and you all know what part that
was which the Poets did of old assign him. Here is Seyx, Acheron, Cecytus, and
the rest of those muddy streams that have made matter for the Fablers. Almost
every one is a Charon here, and if you have but a Naulum to give, you cannot
want or Boat or Pilot. To confirm all, let but some of our Separatists be
asked, and they shall swear that the Elizian Fields are there.

It is an excellent Country for a despairing Lover: for every corner affords
him Willow to make a Garland on; but if Justice doom him to be hanged on any
other Tree, he may in spite of the sentence live long and confident. If he had
rather quench his spirits than suffocate them, so rather choose to feed Lob^^ers
then Crows; it is but leaping from his window, and he lights in a River or Sea;
for most of their dwellings stand like Privies in moted-houses, hanging still
over the water. If none of these cure him, keep him but a Winter in a house
without a Stove, and that shall cool him.

The oil is all fat, though wanting the color to show it so; for indeed it is
the buttock of the World, full of veins and blood, but no bones in it. Had St.
Steven been condemned to suffer here, he might have been alive at this day; for
unless it be in their paved Cities, gold is a great deal more plentiful then
stones, except it be living ones; and then for their heaviness you may take in
almost all the Nation.

It Is a singular place to fat Monkeys in. There are Spiders as big as Shrimps,
and I think as many. Their Gardens being moist, abound with these. No
creatures; for sure they were bred, not made. Were they but as venomous as
rank, to gather herbs were to hazard Martyrdom. They are so large, that you
would almost believe the Hesperides were here, and these the Dragons that did
guard them.

You may travel the Country though you have not a guide: for you cannot baulk
your road without the hazard of drowning. There is not there any use of an
Harbinger. Wheresoever men go the way is made before them. Had they Cities
large as their walls, Rome would be esteemed a babble. 20 miles in length is
nothing for a Wagon to be hurried on one of them, where if your foreman be
sober, you may travel in safety, otherwise you must have stronger faith then
Peter had, else you sink immediately. A starting horse endangers you to two
death at once, breaking of your neck, and drowning.

If your way be not thus, it hangs in the water, and at the approach of your
Wagon shall shake as if it were Ague stricken. Duke d' Alva's taxing of the
tenth penny frighted it into a Palsy, which all the Mountebancks they have
bred since could never tell how to cure.

It Is indeed but a bridge of swimming earth, or a flag somewhat thicker then
ordinary, if the strings crack your course is shortened, you can neither hope
for Heaven nor fear Hell, you shall be sure to stick fast between them. Marry
if your Faith flow Purgatory height, you may pray if you will for that to
cleanse you from the Mud shall soil you.

It Is a green sod in water, where if the German Eagle dares to bath himself,
he is glad again to perch that he may dry his wings.

Some things they do that seem Wonders. It Is ordinary to see them fish for fire
in water, which they catch in Nets and transport to land in their boats, where
they spread it more smoothly then a Mercer does his Velvet when he would hook
in an heir upon his coming to age. Thus lying in a field, you would think you
saw a Cantle of green Cheese spread over with black butter.

If AEtna be Hells mouth or foregate, sure here is found the Postern. It Is the
Port-Esquiline of the world, where the whole earth does vent her crude
blackgore, which the Inhabitants scrape away for fuel, as men with spoon (...)
excrements-from Civit-Cats.

Their ordinary Pack-horses are all of wood, carry their bridles in their
tails, and their burdens in their bellies. A strong Tide and a stiff Gale are
the spurs that make them speedy. When they travel they touch no ground, and
when they stand still they ride; and are never in danger but when they drink up
too much of their way.

There is a Province among them, where every woman carries a Cony in a
Lambskin. It Is a custom, and not one that travels ever leaves it behind her.
Now guess if you can what beast that is, which is clad in a fur both of hair
and wool.

They dress their meat in Aqua Coelesti, for it springs not as ours from the
earth, but comes to them as Mann^ to the Israelites, falling from Heaven. This
they keep under ground till it stinks, and then they pump it out again for use.
So when you wash your hands with one hand, you had need hold your nose with the
other; for though it be not Cordial, it is certainly a strong water

The Elem^nts are here at variance, the subtle overswaying the grosser. The
fire consumes the earth, and the air the water. They burn Turffs, and drain
their grounds with Wind-mills: As if the Cholick were a remedy for the Stone;
and they would prove against Philosophy the Worlds Conflagration to be natural,
even showing thereby that the very Element of earth is combustible.

The Land that they (...) keep as neatly as (...) his Beard. They ha(...)
Mowing. It Is so (...) water and Rivers, (...)t it is impossible to make
a(...)ommon among them. Even the (...)ists are here at a stand, only they hold
their pride in wrangling for that which they never will find. Our Justices
would be much at ease although our English Poor were still among them: For
whatsoever they do, they can break no hedges. Sure had the wise men of Gotham
lived here, they would have studied some other death for their Cuckoo.

Their Ditches they frame as they list, and distinguish them into nooks, as my
Lord Majors Cook does his Custards. Cleanse them they do often: but it is as
Physicians ^^ve their potions, more to catch (...) then cast the Mud out.

(...) Country be part of a (...) every house almost (...)and. And that though
(...) it, looks as smug as a Lady (...) newly locked up her colors (...) by her
Irons. A gallant masquing suit sits not more complete, then a coat of thatch
though many years wearing.

If it stand dry it is embraced by Vines, as if it were against the nature of a
Dutch man not to have Bacchus his neighbor. If you find it lower-seated, it is
only a close Arbor in a plump of Willows and Alders, pleasant enough while the
dog days last; but those past once, you must practice wading, or be prisoner
till the next Spring. Only a hard frost with the help of a Sledge, may release
you.

The Bridge to this is an out landish Planck with a box of stones to poiz it
withal, which with the least help turns round like the executioner when he
whips off a head. That when the Master is over^ands drawn, and then he(...)in
his Castle.

It Is sure his (...)hat renders him suspicious. That he may therefore certainly
see who enters, you shall ever find his window made over his door. But it may
be, that is to show you his Pedigree, for though his Ancestors were never
known, their Arms are there; which (in spite of Heraldry) shall bear their
Atchievment with a Helmet for a Baron at least Marry the Field perhaps shall be
charged with three baskets, to show what trade his father was.

Escutcheons are as plentiful as Gentry is scarce. Every man there is his own
Herald; and he that has but wit enough to invent a Coat, may challenge it as
his own.

When you are entered the house, the first thing you encounter is a Looking
gla^^ No question but a true Emb(...) politic hospitality; for though it
reflect your self in your own figure it is yet no longer then while you are
there before it. When you are gone once it flatters the next comer, without the
least remembrance that you e're were there.

The next are the vessels of the house marshalled about the room like Watchmen.
All as neat as if you werein a Citizens Wives Cabinet; for unless it be
themselves, they let none of Gods creatures lose any thing of their native
beauty.

Their houses, especially in their Cities, are the best eye-beauties of their
Country. For cost and sight they far exceed our English, but they want their
magnificence. Their lining is yet more rich then their outside, not in hangings
but pictures, which ev(...)he poorest are there furnished with. Not a Cobbler but
has his toys for ornament. Were the knacks of all their houses set together,
there would not be such another Bartholomew Fair in Europe.

Their Artists for these are as rare as thought, for they can paint you a fat
hen in her feathers; and if you want the language, you may learn a great deal
of Dutch by their signs; for what they are, they ever write under them. So by
this device hang up more honesty then they keep.

Coaches are as rare as Comets; and those that live loosely need not fear one
punishment which often vexes such with us: They may be sure, though they be
discovered, they shall not be carted.

All their Merchandise they draw through the streets on Sledges; or as we on
Hurdles do traitors to execution.

Their rooms are but several land-boxes: if so, you must either go out to spit,
or blush when you see the Map brought.

Their beds are no other then land-cabins, high enough to need a ladder or
stairs. Up once, you are walled in with Wainscot, and that is good discretion
to avoid the trouble of making your will every night; for once falling out else
would break your neck perfectly. But if you die in it, this comfort you shall
leave your friends, that you di'd in clean linen.

Whatsoever their estates be, their houses must be fair. Therefore from
Amsterdam they have banished Sea-cole, lest it soil their buildings, of which
the statelier sort are sometimes sententious, and in the front carry some
conceit of the Owner, As to give you a taste in these.

Christus Adjutor meus;
Hoc abdicato Perenne Quero;
Hic Medio tuitus Itur.
Every door seems studded with Diamonds. The nails and hinges hold a constant
brightness, as if rust there were not a quality incident to Iron. Their houses
they keep cleaner then their bodies, their bodies then their souls. Go to one,
you shall find the Andirons shut up in network. At a second, the Warming pan
muffled in Italian Cut-work. At a third the Sconce clad in Cambrick. And like a
Crown advanced in the middle of the house, for the woman there is the head of
the husband, so takes the horn to her own charge, which she sometimes
multiplies, and bestows the increase on her man.

It Is true, they are not so ready at this play as the English; for neither are
they so generally bred to it, nor are their men such linnenlifters. Idleness and
Courtship has not banished honesty. They speak more, and do less; yet does their
blood boil high, and their veins are full, which argues strongly that when they
will they may take up the custom of entertaining strangers. And having once
done it, I believe they will be notable; for I have heard they trade more for
love then money, but it is of the sport not the man, and therefore when they
like the pastim they will reward the Gamester; otherwise their gross feed and
clownish breeding has spoiled them from being nobly minded. And if you once in
public discover her private favors or pretend to more then is civil, she
falls off like Fairy wealth disclosed, and turns like Beer with Lightening to a
sowerness, which neither Art nor Labor can ever make sweet again.

But this I must give you on report only; Experience herein has neither made
me Fool nor Wise.

The People are generally Boorish, yet none but may be bred to a Statesman,
they having all this gift, Not to be so nice-conscienced, but that they can
turn out Religion to let in Policy.

Their Country is the God they worship. War is their Heaven, Peace is their
Hell, and the Spaniard is the Devil they hate. Custom is their Law, and their
Will Reason.

You may sooner convert a Jew, than make an ordinary Dutch man yield to
arguments that cross him. An old Baud is easilier turned Puritan, than a
Waggoner persuaded not to bait thrice in 9 miles. And when he does, his horses
must not stir, but have their Manger brought them into the way, where in a
topsweat they eat their grass, and drink their water, and presently after hurry
away. For they ever drive as if they were all the sons of Nimshi, and were
furiously either pursuing an enemy, or flying him.

His spirits are generated from the English Beer, and that makes him
headstrong. His body is built of pickled Herring, and they render him testy:
these with a little Butter, Onions, and Holland Cheese, are the Ingredients of
an ordinary Dutch man; which a Voyage to the East Indies, with the heat of the
Equinoctial Consolidates.

If you see him fat, he has been rooting in a Cabbage-ground and that
bladdered him. Viewing him naked, you will pray him to pull off his Masque and
Gloves, or wish him to hide his face that he may appear more lovely. For that
and his hands are Egypt, however his body ^e Europe. He has exposed them so
much to the Sun and water, as he is now his own disguise, and without a vizard,
may serve in any Antimasque you put him in.

For their condition they are churlish as their breeder Neptune: and without
doubt very ancient; for they were bred before manners were in fashion. Yet all
they have not they account superfluity, which they say mendeth some, and
marreth many.

They should make good Justices, for they respect neither petsons nor apparel.
A boor in his liquord slop, shall have as much good use as a Courtier in his
bravery: Nay more, for he that is but Courtly or Gentile, is among them like a
Merlyn after Michaelmasi in the field with Crows. They wonder at and envy, but
worship no such Images. Marry with a Silver hook you shall catch these Gudgeons
presently. The love of gain being to them as natural as water to a Goose, or
Carrion to any Kite that flies.

They are seldom deceived; for they trust no body; so by consequence are better
to hold a fort then win it; yet they can do both. Trust them you must if you
travel. For to ask a Bill of particulars, is to purre in a Wasps nest; you must
pay what they ask, as sure as if it were the Assesment of a Subsidy.

Complement is an idleness they were never trained up in, and it is their
happiness that Court-vanities have not stole away their minds from business.

Their being Sailors and Soldiers have marred two parts already, if they bath
once in Court oil they are painted Trap-doors And shall then let the Jews
build a City where Harlem Mere is, and after cozen 'em on it.

They shall abuse a stranger for nothing, and after a few base terms scotch one
another to a Carbonado, or as they do their Roaches when they fry them.

Nothing can quiet them but money and liberty, yet when they have them they
abuse both; but if you tell them so you awake their fury; and you may sooner
calm the sea, then conjure that into compass again. Their anger has no eyes;
and their judgment does not flow so much from reason as passion and partiality.

They are in a manner all Aquatiles, and therefore the Spaniard calls them
water-dogs. To this, though you need not condescend; yet withal, you may think
they can catch you a duck as soon. Sea Gulls do not swim more readily: nor
More-hens from then nest run sooner to the water. Every thing is so made to
swim among them, as it is a question if Elizeus his Axe were now floating
there, it would be taken for a miracle.

They love none but those that do for them; and when they leave off, they
neglect him. They have no friends but their kindred, which at every wedding
feast among themselves like Tribes.

All that help them not they hold popish; and take it for an argument of much
honesty, to rail bitterly against the King of Spain. And certainly, this is the
badge of an ill Nature, when they have once cast off the yoke, to be most
virulent against those to whom of right they owe respect and service. Grateful
dispositions, though by their Lords they be exempt from service, will yet be
paying reverence and affection. I am confident, that had they not been once the
Subjects of Spain, they would have loved the Nation better. But now out of
dying Duties ashes all the Blazes of hostility and flame. And it is sufficient
ground to contemn their eternal hate, to know the world remembers, they were
once the lawful subjects of that most Catholic Crown.

Their shipping is the Babel which they boast on for the glory of their Nation.
It Is indeed a wonder, and they will have it so. But we may well hope they will
never be so mighty by Land, left they show us how doggedly they can insult
where they get the mastery.

It Is their own Chronicle business, which can tell you that at the siege of
Leyden, a Fort being held by the Spanish, by the Dutch was after taken by
assault. The Defendants were put to the sword, where one of the Dutch in the
fury of the slaughter, ripped up the Captain's body, and with a barbarous hand
tore out the yet-lving heart panting among the reeking bowels, then then with
his teeth rent it still warm with blood into gobbets, which he spitted over the
Battelments in defiance to the rest of the Army.

Oh Tigres breed! The Seythian Bear could never have been more savage To be
necessitated into cruelty, is a misfortune to the strongly tempted to it; but
to let spleen rave, and mad it in resistless blood, shows nature steeped in the
livid gall of passion; and beyond all bruitishness displays the unnoble Tyranny
of a prevailing Coward.

Their Navies are the whip of Spain, or the Arm wherewith they pull away his
Indies. Nature has not bred them so active for the land as some others: But at
Sea they are water devils, to attempt things incredible.

In Fleets they can fight close, and rather hazard all then save some, while
others perish: but single, they will flag and fear like birds in a bush, when
the Sparrow-Hawks bells are heard.

A Turkish Man of War is as dreadful to them as a Falcon to a Mallard; from
whom their best remedy is to steal away. But if they come to blows, they want
the valiant stoutness of the English, who will rather expire bravely in a bold
resistance, then yield to the lasting slavery of becoming captives to so
barbarous an enemy. And this shows, they have not learned yet even Pagan
Philosophy, which ever preferred an honorable death before a life thralled to
perpetual slavery.

Their ships lie like high Woods in Winter: and if you view them on the
north-side you frieze without hope, for they ride so thick, that you can
through them see no Sun to warm you with.

Sailers among them are as common as beggars with us. They can drink, rail,
swear, niggle, steal, and be lousy alike; but examining their use, a mess of
their Knaves are worth a million of ours: for they in a boisterous rudeness can
work, and live, and toil, whereas ours will rather laze themselves to poverty,
and like Cabages left out in winter, rot away in the lothsomeness of a nauseous
sloth.

Almost all among them are Seamen born, and like frogs can live both on land
and water. Not a Countrey-Uriester but can handle an oar, steer a boat, raise a
mast, and bear you out in the roughest straits you come in. The ship she
avouches much better for sleep then a bed. Being full of humors, that is her
cradle, which lulls and and rocks her to a dull phlegmatickness, most of them
looking like a full grown Oyster boiled. Slime, humid air, water, and wet dier,
have so bag'd their cheeks, that some would take their paunches to be gotten
above their chin.

The Countries Government is a Democracy, and there had need be many to rule
such a rabble of rude ones. Tell them of a King, and they could cut your throat
in earnest. The very name carries servitude in it, and they hate it more then a
Jew does Images, a Woman old age, or a Nonconformist a Surplice.

None among them has Authority by inheritance, that were the way in time to
parcel out their Country to Families. They are chosen all as our Kings choose
Sheriffs for the Counties: not for their sin of Wit, but for the Wealth they
have to bear it out withal; which they so over affect, that Mine Here shall walk
the Streets as Usurers go to Bawdy-houses, all alone and melancholy. And if
they may be had cheap, he will daub his faced cloak with two penniworth of
pickled Herrings which himself shall carry home in a string. A common voice
has given him preeminence, and he loses it by living as he did when he was but
a Boor. But if you pardon what is past, they are about thinking it time to
learn more civility.

Their justice is strict, if it cross not policy: but rather then hinder
Traffic tolerates any thing.

There is not under Heaven such a Den of several Serpents as Amsterdam is, you
may be what devil you will so you push not the State with your horns.

It Is an University of all Religions which grow here confusedly (like stocks in
a Nursery) without either order or pruning. If you be unsettled in your
Religion, you may here try all, and take at last what you like best. If you
fancy none, you have a pattern to follow, of two, that would be a Church to
themselves.

It Is the Fair of all the Sects, where all the Pedlers of Religion have leave
to vent their toys, their Ribands, and phanatick Rattles. And should it be
true, it were a cruel brand which Romists stick upon them. For (say they) as
the Camelion changes into all Colors but white: so they admit of all Religions
but the true; for the Papist only may not exercise his in public: yet his
restraint they plead is not in hatred but justice, because the Spaniard
abridges the Protestant. And they had rather show a little spleen, then not cry
quit with their enemy. His act is their Warrant, which they retaliate justly.
And for this reason rather then the Dunkirks they take shall not die, Amsterdam
having none of their own, shall borrow a Hangman from Harlem.

Now albeit the Papists do them wrong herein, yet can it not excuse their
boundless Toleration, which shows they place their Republic in a higher esteem
then Heaven it self: and had rather cross upon God then it. For whosoever
disturbs the civil Government is liable to punishment: But the Decrees of
Heaven, and Sanctions of the Deity any one may break uncheck't, by professing
what false Religion he please. So Consulary Rome of old, brought all the
straggling gods of other Nations to the City, where blinded superstition paid an
adoration to them.

In their Families they all are equals, and you have no way to know the Master
and Mistress, but by taking them in bed together. It may be those are they:
Otherwise Maiky can prate as much, laugh as loud, be as bold, and sit as well
as her Mistress.

Had Logicians lived here first, Father and Son had never passed so long for
Relatives. They are here Individuals, for no Demonstrance of Duty or Authority
can distinguish them, as if they were created together, and not born
successively. And as for your Mother, bidding her good night, and kissing her,
is punctual blessing.

Your man shall be saucy, and you must not strike; if you do, he shall complain
to the Schont, and perhaps have recompense, it is a dainty place to please boys
in: for your father shall bargain with your Schoolmaster not to whip you: if he
does, he shall revenge it with his knife, and have Law for it.

Their apparel is civil enough and good enough, but very uncomly, and has
usually more stuff then shape. Only their Huykes are commodious in winter; but
it is to be lamented, that they have not wit enough to lay them by when Summer
comes.

Their women would have good faces if they did not mar them with making. Their
Ear-wyers have so nip: in their Cheeks, that you would think some Fairy, to do
them a mischief, had pincht them behind with tongs. These they dress, as if
they would show you all their wit lay behind, and they needs would cover it.
And thus ordered, they have much more forehead then face.

They love the EnglishGentry well; and when Soldiers come over to be billeted
among them, they are emulous in choosing of their guest, who fares much the
better for being liked by his Hostess.

Men and women are there starched so blew, that if they once grow old, you
would verily believe you saw winter walking up to the neck in a barrel of
Indigo: And therefore they rail at England for spending no more blowing.

Your man among them is else cl^ tolerably unless he inclines to the
Sea-fashion: and then are his breeches yawning at the knees, as if they were
about to swallow his legs unmercifully.

They are far the^e from going naked, for of a whole woman you can see but half
a face. As for her hand, that shows her a sore Labourer; which you shall ever
find as it were in recompense laden with Rings to the cracking of her fingers.
If you look lower; she is a Monkey chained about the middle, and had rather want
it in diet, then not have silver links to hang her keys in.

Their Gowns are fit to hide great bellies, but they make them show so
unhandsom that men do not care for getting them. Marry this you shall find to
their commendation, their smocks are ever whiter then their skin.

Where the Woman lies in, the Ringle of the door does penance, and is lapped
about with linen; either to show you that loud knocking may wake the child, or
else that for a month the Ring is not to be run at. But if the child be dead,
there is thrust out a Nosegay tied to a sticks end; perhaps for an emblem of
the life of man, which may wither as soon as born; or else to let you know,
that though these fade upon their gathering, yet from the same stock, the next
year a new shoot may spring.

You may rail at us for often changing; but I assure you with them is a great
deal more following the fashion; which they will plead for as the ignorant
Laity for their faith. They will keep it because their Ancestors lived in it.
Thus they will rather keep an old fault though they discover errors in it, then
in an easy change to meet a certain remedy.

For their diet, they eat much and spend little: When they set out a Fleet to
the Indies, it shall live three months on the Offals, which we here fear would
surfeit our swine, yet they feed on it, and are still the same Dutchmen.

In their houses Roots and Stockfish are Staple-commodities. If they make a
feast and add flesh, they have Art to keep it hot more days, then a Pigs-head
in Py-corner. Salt meats and four Cream they hold him a fool that loves not,
only the last they correct with Sugar, and are not half so well pleased with
having it sweet at first, as with letting it four, that they may sweeten it
again, as if a woman were not half so pleasing being easily won, as after a
scolding fit she comes by man to be calmed again.

Fish indeed they have brave and plentiful; and herein practice has made them
Cooks as good as ere Luculbus his latter Kitchen had, which is some recompense
for their wilfulness, for you can neither pray nor buy them to alter their own
Cookery.

To a feast they come readily, but being set once you must have patience. They
are longer eating meat then we preparing it. If it be to supper, you conclude
timely when you get away by daybreak. They drink down the evening. Star, and
drink up the morning Star. At those times it goes hard with a stranger, all
in courtesy will be drinking to him, and all that do so he must pledge: till
he does, the filled Cups circle round his Trencher, from whence they are not
taken away till emptied. For though they give you day for payment, yet they
will not abate the sum. They sit not there as we in England, men together, and
women first, but ever intermingled with a man between: and instead of
March-panes, and such juncates, it is good manners if any be there, to carry
away a piece of Apple-Py in your pocket.

The time they there spend, is in eating well, in drinking much, and prating
most. For the truth is, the compleatest drinker in Europe is your English
Gallant. There is no such Consumer of liquor as the Quaffing off of his
Healths. Time was the Dutch had the better of it; but of late he has lost it
by prating too long over his pot. He sips, and laughs, and tells his tale, and
in a Tavern is more prodigal of his time then his wine. He drinks as if he were
short-winded; and as it were eats his drink by morsels, rather besieging his
brains then assaulting them. But the Englishman charges home on the sudden,
swallows it whole, and like a hasty tide, fills and flows himself till the mad
brain swims, and tosses on the hasty fume. As if his Liver were burning out his
stomach, and he striving to quench it, drowns it. So the one is drunk sooner,
and the other longer. As if striving to recover the wager, the Dutchman would
still be the perfectest soker.

In this Progress you have seen some of their Vices, now view a Fairer Object.

SOlomon tells of four things that are small and full of Wisdom; The Pismire,
the Grasshopper, the Coney, and the Spider.
FOr Providence, they are the Pismires of the world: and having nothing but
what grass affords them; are yet for almost all Provisions, the Storehouse of
the whole of Christendom. What is it which there may not be found in plenty?
They making by their industry all the fruits of the vast Earth their own. What
Land can boast a privilege that they do not partake of? They have not of their
own enough materials to compile one ship; Yet how many Nations do they furnish?
the remoter angles of the world do by their pains deliver them their sweets:
and being of themselves in want, their diligence has made them both Indies
nearer home.

They are frugal to the saving of Egg-shels, and maintain it for a Maxim, That
a thing lasts longer mended then new.

Their Cities are their Mole-hills; Their Schutes and Flyboats creep and return
with their store for Winter: every one is busy and carries his grain; as if
every City were a several Hive, and the Bees not permitting a drone to inhabit;
For idle persons must find some other mansion. And lest necessity bereave men
of means to set them on work, there are public Banks, that (without use) lend
upon pawns to all the poor that want.

There is a season when the Pismires fly, and so each Summer they likewise
swarm abroad with their Armies.

The Ant, says one, is a wise creature, but a shrewd thing in a Garden or
Orchard. And truly so are they; For they look upon others too little, and upon
themselves too much. And wheresoever they light in a pleasant or rich soil,
like suckers and lower plants, they rob from the root of that tree which gives
them shade and protection, so their wisdom is not indeed Heroic or Numnial; as
Courting an Universal Good; But rather narrow and restrictive; As being a
wisdom but for themselves, Which to speak plainly, is descending into Craft;
and is but the sinister part of that which is really Noble and Celestial.

Nay in all they hold so true a proportion with the Emmet, as yon shall not
find they want so much as the sting.

For dwelling in Rocks they are Conies. And while the Spanish tumbler plays
about them, they rest secure in their own inaccessible berries. Where have you
under heaven, such impregnable Fortifications? Where are beautifies nature, and
nature makes art invincible: Here in indeed they differ: The Conies find Rocks,
and they make them. And as they would invert the miracle of Moses, They raise
them in the bosom of the waves, where within these twenty years, ships furrowed
in the pathless Ocean, the peaceful plough now unbowels the fertile earth,
which at night is carried home to the fairest Mansions in Holland.

Every Town has his Garrison; and the Keys of the Gates in the nightime are
not trusted but in the State-house. From these holds they bolt abroad for
provisions, and then return to their fastnesses replenished.

For war they are Grasshoppers, and without a King go forth in bands to conquer
Kings. They have not only defended themselves at their own home, but have
braved the Spaniard at his. In Anno 1599. under the command of Vander Does, was
the Grand Canary taken. The chief City sacked; the King of Spain's Ensigns taken
down, and the colors of his Excellency set up in their room. In the year 1600
the battle of Nieuport was a gallant piece, when with the loss of a thousand or
little more, they slew 7000 of their enemies, took above 100 Ensigns, the
Admiral of Arragon a prisoner. The very furniture of the Arch Duke's own
Chamber and Cabinet, yea, the signet that belonged to his hand.

In 1607. they assailed the Armado of Spain in the Bay of Gibraltar, under
covert of the Castle and Towns Ordnance, and with the loss of 150, slew above
2000, and ruined the whole Fleet. Certainly a bolder attempt has ever scarce
been done. The Indian Mastiff never was more fierce against the angry Lion. Nor
can the Cock in his crowing valor, become more prodigal of his blood then they.

There hardly is upon earth such a school of Martial Discipline. It Is the
Christian worlds Academy for Arms, whither all the Neighbour-Nations resort to
be instructed; where they may observe how unresistible a blow many small grains
of powder will make, being heaped together, which yet if you separate, can do
nothing but sparkle and die.

Their recreation is the practice of Arms; and they learn to be soldiers
sooner then men. Nay, as if they placed a Religion in Arms, every Sunday is
concluded with the train'd-bands marching through their Cities.

For industry, they are Spiders, and are in the Palaces of Kings. Of old they
were the guard of the person of the Roman Emperor; And by the Romans themselves
declared to be their friends and companions. There is none have the like
intelligence; Their Merchants are at this day the greatest of the Universe.
What Nation is it where they have not insinuated? Nay, which they have not
almost anatomized, and even discovered the very intrinsic veins on it?

Even among us, they shame us with their industry, which makes them seem as if
they had a faculty from the worlds Creation, out of water to make dry land
appear. They win our drowned grounds which we cannot recover, and chase back
Neptune to his own old Banks.

All that they do is by such labor as it seems extracted out of their own
bowels. And in their wary thrist, they hang by such a slender sustentation of
life, that one would think their own weight should be enough to crack it.

Want of Idleness keeps them from want. And it is their diligence makes them Rich.

A fruitful Soil increases the Harvest. A plentiful Sun augmenteth the
Store; and seasonable showers drop fatness on the Crop we reap. But no Rain
fructifies more then the dew of Sweat.

You would think being with them you were in old Israel, for you find not a
beggar among them. Nor are they mindful of their own alone; but strangers also
partake of their care and bounty. If they will depart, they have money for
their Convoy. If they stay, they have work provided. If unable, they find an
Hospital. Their Providence extends even from the Prince to the catching of
flies. And left you lose an afternoon by fruitless mourning, by two of the
Clock all Burials must end. Wherein to prevent the wast of ground, they pile
Coffin upon Coffin til the Sepulcher be full.

In all their Manufactures they hold a truth and constancy, for they are as
fruits from Trees, the same every year that they are at first; Not Apples one
year and Crabs the next; and so for ever after. In the sale of these they also
are at a word, they will gain rather then exact, and have not that way whereby
our Citizens abuse the wise and cozen the ignorant; and by their infinite
over-asking for commodities proclaim to the world that they would cheat all if
it were in their power.

The Depravation of Manners they punish with contempt, but the defects of
Nature they favor with charity. Even their Bedlam is a place so curious, that a
Lord might live in it; Their Hospital might lodge a Lady: So that safely you
may conclude amongst them even Poverty and Madness do both inhabit handsomely.
And though Vice makes every thing turn fordid, yet the State will have the very
correction of it to be neat, as if they would show, that though odedience fail,
yet Government must be still it self and decent. To prove this, they that do
but view their Bridewel, will think it may receive a Gentleman though a
Gallant. And so their prison a wealthy Citizen. But for a poor man, it is his
best policy to be laid there, for he that cast him in must maintain him.

Tht is Language though it differ from the higher Germany, yet has it the same
ground, and is a sold as Babel. And albeit harsh, yet so losty and full a
tongue as made Goropius Becanus maintain it for the speech of Adam in his
Paradise. And surely if there were not other reasons against it, the significan
cyof the Ancient Teutonick might carry it from the primest Dialect. Stevin of
Bruges reckons up 2170 Monosyllables, which being compounded, how richly do
they grace a Tongue? A Tongue that for the general profession is extended
further then any that I know. Through both the Germanis, Denmark, Norway,
Sweden, and sometimes France, England Spain. And still among us all our words
are Dutch, with yet so little change, that certainly it is in a manner the same
that it was 2000 years ago, without the too much mingled borrowings of their
neighbor Nations.

The Germans are a people that more then all the world I think may boast
sincerity, as being for fom thousands of years a pure and unmixed people. And
surely I see not but their conduction by Tuisco from the building of Babel may
pass as unconfuted Story, they yet retaining the Appellation from his Name.

They are a large and numerous people, having ever kept their own, and
transported Colonies into other Nations. In Italy were the Longobards; In Spain
the Goths and Vandalls; In France the Franks or Franconians; In England the
Saxons: having in all these left reverend Steps of their Antiquity and Language.

It is a noble Testimony that so grave an Historian as Tacitus has left still
extant of them, and written above fifteen hundred years ago: Deliberant dum
fingere nesciunt: Constituunt dum errare non possant. They deliberate when they
cannot dissemble: and resolve when they cannot err.

Two hundred and ten years the Romans were in conquering them. In which space
on either side were the losses sad and fatal. So as neither the Samnites, the
Carthaginians, the Spaniards, the Gauls, no nor the Parthians ever troubled
them like the Germans. They slew and took prisoners several Com. manders of the
highest rank, as Carbo, Cassius, S. Caurus Aurelius Cervilius Cepio, and M.
Manlius' They defeated five Consulary Armies, and Varus with three legions, yet
after all this he concludes, Triumphati magis guam victi sunt. They were rather
triumphed over then conquered. To confirm this, the keeping of their own
language is an argument unanswerable. The change where of ever follows upon the
fully vanqnished, as we may see it did in Italy, France, Spain, England.

And this he speaks of the Nation in general: nor was the opinion of the Romans
less worthy in particular concerning these lower Provinces, which made them for
their valor and warlike minds style them by the name of Gallie Belgica, and
especially of the Batavians, which were the Hollanders and part of Guelders.
You may hear in what honorable terms he mentions them, where speaking of the
several people of Germany, he says, Omnium harum Gentium virtute praecipui
Batavi: Nam nec tribucis contemnuntur, reepublicanus atterit: exempti oneribu
and Collationibus, and tantum in usum praeliorum siposit, velut tela atque Arma
Bellisreservantes, Of all these Nations the prineipal in valiant virtue are the
Batavians; for neither are they become despleable by paying of tribute, nor
oppressed too much by the Farmor of public Revenues, but free from taxes and
contributions of servility; they are specially set apart for the fight, as
Armor and Weapons only reserved for War.

All this even at this day they seem to make good. For of all the world they
are the people that thrive and grow rich by the war, like the Porepisce, that
plays in the storm, but at other times keeps sober under the water.

War which is the worlds ruin, and ravins upon the beauty of all, is to them
prosperity and ditation. And surely the reason of this is their strength in
shipping, the open Sea, their many sortified Towns and the Country by reason of
its lowness and plentiful irriguation becoming unpassable for an army when the
winter but approaches. Otherwise it is hardly possible that so small a parcel
of Mankind, should brave the most potent Monarch of Christendom, who in his own
hands holds the Mines of the wars sinews Money, and has now got a command so
wide, that out of his Dominions the Sun can neither rise nor set.

The whole seventeen Provinces are not above a thousand English miles in
circuit. And in the States hands there is not 7 of those. Yet have they in the
field sometimes 60000 Soldiers, besides those which they always keep in
Garrison, which cannot be but a considerable number near thirty thousand more.
There being in the whole Countries above two hundred walled Towns and Cities.
So that if they have people for the War, one would wonder where they should get
money to pay them; They being, when they have an army in the field, at a
thousand pound a day charge extraordinary.

To maintain this, their Excise is an unwasted Mine, which with the
Infiniteness of their Traffic, and their untired industry, is by every part of
the World in something or other contributed to.

The Sea yields them by two sorts of Fish only, Herrings and Cod, sixty
thousand pound per annum; for which they go out sometimes seven or eight
hundred boats at once, and for greater ships, they are able to set out double
the number.

Their Merchandise amounted in Guiceiardinis time to fourteen millions per
annum. Whereas England, which is in compass almost as large again, and has the
Ocean as a Ring about her, made not above six millions yearly; so sedulous are
these Bees to labor and enrich their Hive.

As they on the Sea, so the women are busy on land in weaving of Nets, and
helping to add to the heap. And though a husbands long absence might tempt
them to lascivious ways; yet they hate adultery, and are resolute in
Matrimonial chastity. I do not remember that ever I read in Story, of any great
Lady of that nation, that has bin taxt with looseness. And questionless it is
their ever being busy, makes them have no leisure for lust

It Is idleness that is Cupids Nurse; but business breaks his Bow, and makes his
arrows useless.

They are both Merchants and Farmers. And there act parts, which men can but
discharge with us. As if they would show that the Soul in all is masculine, and
not varied into weaker sex as are the bodies that they wear about them.

Whether this be from the nature of their Country, in which if they be not
laborious they cannot live; or from an Innate Genius of people by a Superior
Providence adapted to them of such a situation; from their own inclination
addicted to parsimony; from custom in their way of breeding; from any
Transcendency of active parts more than other Nations; or from being in their
Country, like people in a City besieged, whereby their own virtues do more
compact and fortify; I will not determine. But certainly in general they are
the most painful and diligent people on earth: And of all other the most truly
of Vespasians opinion, to think, that Ex re qualibet bonus odor lucri; Be it
raised from what it will, the smell of gain is pleasant.

Yet they are in some sort Gods, for they set bounds to the Sea: and when they
list let it pass them. Even their dwellings is a miracle. They live lower then
the fishes. In the very lap of the floods, and incircled in their watery arms.
They are the Israelites passing through the Red Sea. The waters wall in them,
and if they set open their sluices shall drown up their enemies.

They have strugled long with Spains Pharaoh, and they have at length enforced
him to let them go. They are a Gideons Army upon the march again. They are the
Indian Rat, gnawing the bowels of the Spanish Crocodile, to which they got when
he gaped to swallow them. They are a serpent wreathed about the legs of that
Elephant. They are the little swordfish pricking the belly of the Whale. They
are the wane of that Empire, which increased in Isabella, and in Charles the
fifth was at full.

They are a glass wherein Kings may see that though they be Sovereigns over
lives and goods, yet when they usurp upon Gods part, and will be Kings over
conscience too, they are sometimes punished with loss of that which lawfully is
their own. That Religion too fiercely urged is to stretch a string till it not
only jars, but cracks; and in the breaking, whips (perhaps) the streiners eye
out.

That an extreme taxation is to take away the honey while the Bees keep the
Hive, whereas he that would Ink that, should first either burn them, or drive
them out. That Tyrants in their Government are he greatest Traitors to their
own States. That a desire of being too absolute is to walk upon Pinacles and
the tops of Pyramides, where not only the footing is full of hazard, but even
the sharpness of that they tread on may run into their foot and wound them That
too much to regrate on the patience of but tickle Subjects, is to press a thom
till it prick your finger. That nothing makes a more desperate Rebel than a
Prerogative enforced too far.

That liberty in man is as the skin to the body, not to be put off, but
together with life. That they which will command more than they ought, shall
not at last command so much as is fit.

That moderate Princes sit faster in their Regalities, than such as being but
men, would yet have their power over their Subjects, as the Gods unlimited.
That oppression is an iron heat till it burns the hand. That to debar some
States of ancient Privileges, is for a Falcon to undertake to beat a flock of
Wild-geese out of the Fens. That to go about to compel a sullen reason to
submit to a wilful peremptoriness, is so long to beat a chained mastiffinto
his kennell, till at last he turns and flies at your throat. That unjust policy
is to shoot as they did at Ostend, into the mouth of a charged Canon, to have
two Bullets returned for one. That he does but endanger himself, that riding
with too weak a Bit, provokes a headstrong horse with a spur. That it is safer
to meet a valiant man weaponless, then almost a coward in Armor. That even a
weak cause with a strong Castle, wili boil salt blood to a rebellious Itch.
That it is better keeping a Crazy body in an equal temper, than to anger humors
by too sharp a Physic.

That Admonitions from a dying man are too serious to be neglected. That there
is nothing certain that is not impossible. That a Cobbler of Vlushing was one of
the greatest enemies that the King of Spain ever had.

To conclude, the Country it self is a Moted Castle, keeping a Garnish of the
richest Jewels of the world in it; The Queen of Bohemia and her Princely
Children.

The people in it are Jews of the New Testament that have exchanged nothing but
the Law for the Gospel; and this they rather prosess then practice. Together a
Man of War riding at Anchor in the Downs of Germany.

For foreign Princes to help them is wise self-policy. When they have made them
able to defend themselves against Spain, they are at the Pale, if they enable
them to offend others they go beyond it. For questionless, were this thorn out
of the Spaniards side, he might be feared too soon to grasp his long intended
Monarchy. And were the Spaniard but possessed Lord of the Low. Countries, or
had the States but the wealth and power of Spain, the rest of Europe might be
like people at Sea in a Ship on fire: that could only choose wherther they would
drown or burn. Now, their war is the peace of their neighbors. So Rome when
busied in her civil broils, the Parthians lived at rest; but those concluded
once, by Caesar next are they designed for Conquest.

If any man wonder at these contraries, let him look in his own body for as
many several humors. In his own brain for as many different Fancies. In his own
heart for as various passions; and from all these he may learn That there is
not in all the World such another Beast as Man.

FINIS.
A PERFECT DESCRIPTION OF THE PEOPLE AND COUNTRY OF Scotland.

LONDON. Printed for Rich. Lownds. 1670.

A Perfect DESCRIPTION of Scotland.
FIrst, for the Country, I must confess it is good for those that possess it,
and too bad for others, to be at the charge to conquer it. The Air might be
wholesome, but for the stinking people that inhabit it The ground might be
fruitful had they wit to manure it.

Their Beasts be generally small, women only excepted, of which sort there are
none greater in the whole world. There is great store of Fowl, too, as foul
houses, foul sheets, foul linen, foul dishes and pots, foul trenchers, and
napkins; with which sort, we have been forced to say, as the children did with
their fowl in the wilderness They have good store of fish too, and good for
these that can eat it raw; but if it come once into their hands, it is worse
than if it were three days old. For their Butter and Cheese, I will not meddle
with I at this time, nor no man else at any time that loves his life.

They have great store of Deer, but they are so far from the place where I have
been, that I had rather believe, than go to disprove it: I confess, all the
Deer I met withal, was dear Lodgings, dear Horse-meat, and dear Tobaco, and
English Beer.

As sor fruit, for their Grand fire Adams sake, they never planted any; and for
other Trees, had Christ been betrayed in this Country, (as doubtless he should,
had he come as a stranger) Judas had sooner found the Grace of Repentance, than
a Tree to hang himself on.

They have many hills, wherein they say is much treasure, but they show none of
it; Nature bath only discovered to them some Mines of Coal, to show to what end
he created them.

I saw little grass, but in their Potrage: The Thistle is not given of naught,
for it is the fairest flower in their Garden. The word Hay is Heathen Greek
unto them; neither man nor beast knows what it means.

Corn is reasonable plenty at this time, for since they heard of the Kings
coming, it has been as unlawful for the common people to eat Wheat, as it was
in the old time for any, but the Priests, to eat shewbread. They prayed much
for his coming, and long fasted for his welfare; but in the more plain sense,
that he might fare the better: all his followers were welcome, but his guard;
for those they say are like Pharaoh's lean Kine, and threaten death wheresoever
they come: They could persuade the Footmen, that oaten cakes would make them
long-winded; and the children of the Chapel they have brought to eat of them,
for the maintenance of their voices.

They say our Cooks are too saucy, and for Grooms and Coachmen they wish them
to give to their Horses no worse then they eat themselves; they commend the
brave mind, of the Pensioners, and the Gentlemen of the Bed-Chambers, which
choose rather to go to Taverns, then to be always eating of the Kings
provision, they likewise do commend the Yeomen of the Buttery and Cellar, for
their readiness and silence, in that they will hear 20 knocks, before they will
answer one. They persuade the Trumpeters that fasting is good for men of that
quality; for emptiness, they say, causes wind, and wind causes a Trumpet to
sound well.

The bringing of Heralds, they say, was a needless charge, they all know their
pedigrees well enough, and the Harbingers might have been spared, s^^he^ce they
brought so many beds with them; and of two evils, since the least should be
chosen. They wish the beds might remain with them, and poor Harbingers keep
their places, and do their office, as they return His Hangings they desire
might likewise be left as Reliquos, to put them in mind of His Majesty; and
they promise to dispense with the wooden Images, but for those graven Images in
his new beautified Chapel, they threaten to pull down soon after his
departure, and to make of them a burnt offering, to appease the indignation
they imagined conceived against them in the Breast of the Almighty, for
suffering such idolatry to enter into their Kingdom; The Organ, I think, will
find mercy, because (as they say) there is some affinity between them and the
Bag pipes.

The Skipper that brought the singing men with their Papistical Vestments,
complains that he has been much troubled with a strange singing in his head,
ever since they came aboard his ship. For remedy whereof the Parson of the
Parish has persuaded him to fell that profane Vessel, and to distribute the
money among the faithful Brethren.

For his Majesty's entertainment, I must needs ingeniously confess, he was
received into the Parish of Edinburgh, (for a City I cannot call it) with great
shouts of joy, but no shows of charg for Pageants; they hold them idolatrous
things, and not fit to be used in so reformed a place; from the Castle they
gave him some pieces of Ordnance, which surely he gave them since he was King of
England, and at the entrance of the town, they presented him with a golden
Basin, which was carried before him on men's shoulders to his Palace, I think,
from whence it came. His Majesty was conveyed by the Younkers of the Town,
which were about 100 Halberds, (dearly shall they rue it, in regard of the
charge) to the Cress and so to the high Church where the only bell they had
stood on tip toe to behold his sweet face; where I must entreat you to spare
him, for an hour I lost him.

In the mean time to report the Speeches of the people concerning his
never-exampled entertainment, were to make his discourse too tedious unto you,
as the Sermon was to those that were constrained to endure it. After the
Preachment he was conducted by the same Halberds unto his Palace, of which I
forbear to speak, because it was a place sanctified by his divine Majesty, only
I wish it had been better walled for my friends sake that waited on him.

Now I will begin briefly to speak of the people according to their degrees and
qualities; for the Lords Spiritual, they may well be termed so indeed, for they
are neither Fish nor Flesh, but what it shall please their earthly God, the
King, to make them. Obedience is better then Sacrifice, and therefore they make
a mock at Martyrdom, saying, That Christ was to die for them, and not they for
him. They will rather subscribe then surrender, and rather dispense with small
things, then trouble themselves with great disputation; they will rather
acknowledge the King to be their head, then want wherewith to pamper their
bodies.

They have taken great pains and trouble to compass their Bishoprics, and they
will not leave them for a trifle; for the Deacon, whose defects will not lift
them up to dignities, all their study is to disgrace them that have gotten the
least degree above them; and because they cannot Bishop, they proclaim they
never heard of any. The Scriptures, say they, speak of Deacons and Elders, but
not a word of Bishops. Their Discourses are full of detraction; their Sermons
nothing but railing; and their Conclusions nothing but Herefies and Treasons.
For their Religion they have, I confess they have it above reach, and
God-willing I will never reach for it.

They christen without the Cross, marry without the Ring, receiv the Sacrament
without reverence, die without repentance, and bury without divine Service;
they keep no Holy Days, nor acknowledge any Saint but S. Andrew, who they said
got that honor by presenting Christ with an oaten cake after his forty days
fast. They say likewise, that he that translated the Bible was the son of a
Maulster, because it speaks of a miracle done by Barley-Loaves, whereas they
swear they were Oaten Cakes, and that no other bread of that quantity could
have sufficedso many thousands.

They use no prayer at all, for they say it is needless, God knows their minds
without prattling; and what he does, he loves to do it freely. Their Sabbaths
exercise, is a preaching in the forenoon, and a persecuting in the afternoon;
they go to Church in the forenoon to hear the Law, and to the crags and
mountains in the afternoon to louz themselves.

They hold their Noses if you talk of Bear-baiting, and stop their Ears if you
speak of a Play: Fornication they hold but a pastime, wherein man's ability is
approved, and a woman's fertility is discovered; At Adultery they shake their
heads; Theft they rail at; Murder they wink at; and Blasphemy they laugh at;
they think it impossible to lose the way to Heaven if they can but leave Rome
behind them.

To be opposite to the Pope, is to be presently with God; to conclude, I am
persuaded, that if God and his Angels at the last day, should come down in
their whiest Garments, they would run away and cry, The Children of the Chapel
are come again to torment us, let us fly from the abomination of these boys,
and hide our selves in the Mountains.

For the Lords Temporal and spiritual, temporizing Gentlemen, if I were apt to
sp ak of any, I could not speak much of them; only I must let you know they are
not Scottishmen, for as soon as they fall from the breast of the beast their
mother, their careful fire posts them away for France, which as they pass, the
Sea sucks from them that which they have sucked from their rude dams; there they
gather new flesh, new blood, new manners, and there they learn to put on their
clothes, and then return, into their Countries, to wear them out; there they
learn to stand, speak, discourse and congee, to court women, and to complement
with men.

They spared for no cost to honor the King, nor no complemental curtesy to
welcome their Countrymen; their followers are their fellows their wives their
slaves, their horses their masters, and their swords their Judges; by reason
whereof, they have but few laborers, and those not very rich: their Parliaments
holo but three days, their Statutes three lines, and their Suits are
determined in a manner in three words, or very few more, etc.

The wonders of their Kingdom are these; the Lord Chancellor, he is believed;
the Master of the Rolls, well spoken of; and the whole Council, who are the
Judges for all causes, are free from suspicion of corruption. The Country,
although it be mountainous, affords no Monsters but Women, of which, the
greatest sort (as Countesses, and Ladies) are kept like Lions in Iron grates;
the Merchants wives are also prisoners, but not in so strong a hold; they have
wooden Cages, like our Boar Franks, through which, sometimes peeping to catch
the Air, we are almost choked with the sight of them; the greatest madness
amongst the men, is Jealousy; in that they fear what no man that has but two
of his senses will take from them.

The Ladies are of opinion, that Susanna could not be chaste, because she bathed
so often. Pride is a thing bred in their bones, and their flesh naturally
abhors cleanliness; their breath commonly stinks of Pottage, their linen of
Piss, their hands of Pigs turds, their body of sweat, and their splay-feet
never offend in Socks To be chained in marriage with one of them, were to be
tied to a dead carcass, and cast into a stinking ditch; Formosity, and a dainty
face, are things they dream not of.

The Ointments they most frequently use amongst them are Brimstone and Butter
for the Scab, and Oil of Bays, and Stave sacre. I protest, I had rather be the
meanest servant of the two of my Pupils Chamber-maids, then to be the
Master-Minion to the fairest Countess I have yet discovered. The sin of
curiosity of ointments is but newly crept inro the Kingdom, and I do not think
will long continue.

To draw you down by degree from the Citizens Wives, to the Country
Gentlewomen, and convey you to common Dames in Seacoal lane, that converse with
Rags and Marrow-bones, are things o^ Mineral-race; every whore i^ Hound ditch
is an Helena; and the greasy Bauds in Turnmil street at Greekish Dames in
comparison of these. And therefore to conclude, The men of old did no more
wonder, that the great Messiah should be born in so poor a town as Bethlem in
Judea, then I do wonder that so brave a Prince as King James, should be born in
so stinking a Town as Edinburgh, in lousy Scotland.

FINIS.

