A LETTER FROM A Person of Quality on Board the William and Mary in the FARE of
MESSINA To a Friend in LONDON.

Wherein is set forth the present State and Condition of the said CITY.

ALSO A true Account of the French FLEET now lying in the Port of Messina.

To which is added A Brief Discourse of the Island of Sicilia concerning the
several Alterations of Government and Conquests made therein.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCLXXVI.

A LETTER From aboard the William and Mary in the Fare of MESSINA.
IN compliance to your Commands and Advice to me at my departure, to be
diligent in observing all things that might be worth remark in our Voyage, but
most especially the situation of the principal Cities, the Customs and
Inclinations of the people, And what other Historical Notions I could gain from
the mouths of the Inhabitants; in all which I have been very observant
hitherto, as will appear by my Journal at my return.

But to gratify you in the mean time, having the opportunity of a Ship bound
for Naples, I have requested the Master to convey this Letter to you from
thence by the Post.

About two days since we rid at Anchor off Messina upon the rear of the French
Fleet, our Master was invited aboard one of the Ships that was nearest to us,
who did me that Favor as to carry me on board with him: we were there very
civilly welcomed and nobly treated. The French Coptain spoke English very well,
and entertained us after a Ship Collation with a large Discourse concerning
their la^e Fight with the Spanish and Dutch Fleet, and their Fortunate success
therein. First in relieving the City Messina with timely Provisions, and coming
off with honor in the Engagement.

But, Sir, I suppose this Discour^e of the Engagement will be no News to you by
that time this Letter comes to your hand, since you will have diverse Relations
and Particulars of the Fight long before.

The number of their Fleet was above Thirty Capitol Ships, besides their
Galleys and small Vessels, to which number they expected an addition from
France to make up about Fifty Sail, which they hoped wouldcome speedily, for
they expected a second Engagement within a short time, for they had lately
heard that Lieutenant Admiral De Ruyter was returned back and joined with the
Spanish Ships and Galleys in order to attaque them again.

The Captain was a Man no less a Scholar than a Soldier, and gave us a pithy
Historical Account of the City Messina and Sicilia, the Heads of which
Discourse, or so much of it as may come within the bounds of a Letter, I have
here communicated to you, knowing how acceptable such divertisement has been
always to you.

Messina is the Principal City of Sicilia, being strongly situated and well
accommodated for Trade or Merchandise, though Palermo be the Regal Seat and
Residence of the Viceroy. This Messina was raised out of the ruins of the
once Famous City Zanclia, which was destroyed by the Sarasens, who over run all
Sicilia, and possessed the Island many years; but at length the Sarasens was
droven out by the Normans, who quietly possessed and governed the Island above
Forty three years; which Governors were styled Counts of Sicilia; but then the
Famous Captain Robert Gascordo, Brother to the King of Arragon lays claim to
Puglia, then possessed by the Normans, and comes against it with a considerable
Army, and takes it for himself; and then prosecutes the War farther,
pretending his Brothers claim to the whole Island of Sicilia, and by the
assistance of his Brothers (the King of Arragon) Forces he maintained the
claim, and conquered all Sicily, and dispossessed the Normans.

To this Robert Gascordo Pope Nicholas the Second gave the Title of Duke of
Sicily; but the Sicilians were soon weary of this Government, and revolted from
the Arragonians, and with the consent of the Pope, called in Carolus de Anjou,
Brother to St. Lewis King of France, and invested him in the Throne, and swore
Allegiance to him.

Thus was the Island governed by the Anjouans about the space of Forty years,
and then Pietro de Arragon contrived and plotted with the Sicilians the
Massacre of the French throughout all the Island; the Day, Time, and manner
appointed being come, notice was given by the ringing of the Vespers Bell, and
then this Tragical Plot was put in execution. After which this Pietro de
Arragon was elected to the Government of Sicilia. Upon this there followed
tedious and terrible Wars between the French and the Arrogenians and Sicilians;
but at last the Arragonians were conquered and driven out of Sicilia by Carolus
the Eighth King of France, and the Sicilians submitted to the French
Government, and lived peaceably and quietly under it many years. And in the
Reign of Ferando King of Spain Wars happening between the French and the
Spaniards, Sicilia was taken by Consalvo Ferando the Great Captain of Spain,
who took Messina, and afterward subdued the whole Island, and settled a Spanish
Government there. From this Ferando the Island of Sicilia came by succession to
Carolus the Fifth Emperor, and from him to Philip the Second King of Spain; and
so by succession it has been subject to the Crown of Spain to this time. This
is a short Accouut of what I intend hereafter to enlarge upon and send it to
you.

THE City Messina is at present in pretty good condition, but before the French
Fleet arrived to bring them Provision, they were reduced to great straits,
being forced to eat all manner of Vermin for their subsistence. We met with a
Ship that had put in there about a month before the French Fleet arrived, that
told us they came aboard them like Bees, to search for Provision, and proffered
any money for it; one of which offered three Pieces of Eight for a few dried
Skins of Fishes, which the Cook had thrown by as useless. What will not
Necessity and Hunger drive a man to! We are all very well and merrily sailing,
I hope you are in the like good condition. What further opportunity offers it
self to me, I shall readily embrace and make use of it to acquaint you with the
proceedings of our Voyage, and subscribe my self

Your most obliged Servant and Nephew. T. F.


