Universal Redemption OFFERED IN JESUS CHRIST, In Opposition to That Pernicious
and Destructive Doctrine of ELECTION and REPROBATION of Persons from
Everlasting. By JANE FEARON.

For Zions sake will I not hold my Peace, and for Jerusalems sake I will not
rest, until the Righteousness thereof go forth as Brightness, and the Salvation
thereof as a Lamp that burns. Isa. LXII. 1. Printed in the year School.

Universal Redemption OFFERED IN JESUS CHRIST, etc.
HAving for some time had an Unusual Weight upon my Spirit, and many times
being deeply Exercised in Mind, I waited upon the LORD, that my Understanding
might be clear in what he required of me, whose mighty Power reached unto my
Soul, and by his Living Presence my Heart was affected, and could say Amen to
what the LORD required of me, because of the Day of his Power, which otherways
would have been a great Cross to my own Will, which was to go to the Meeting of
the People called Anabaptists, at Great Broughtoun in Cumberland, where I stood
for some time (till their Minister had done) waiting upon the LORD in much
Trembling and Bowedness of Soul and Spirit: And that which I had to Declare
amongst them (although not with Enticing Words of Man's Wisdom, yet in the
Demonstration of the Spirit and Power, for my Heart was filled with the Love of
GOD to such whose Day of Visitation was not Expired) was to show unto them the
great Benefit of the New Covenant which GOD Promifed to make with his People,
as also the Universality of GOD's Love to the Sons and Daughters of Men.

But being opposed by Joshua Ware (their Minister) was not suffered to Ease my
Spirit, nor clear my Conscience in the sight of GOD; but he spoke with great
Earnestness, That none should be suffered to speak there, but who could give an
Account of their Faith; and asked me, What I hoped to be saved by? To which I
answered, Not by Works of Righteousness that either I or any other could do,
but according to his Mercy he saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and the
Renewing of the Holy Ghost, etc. with several more Questions which I Answered
to, which he could not by the Scripture contradict, in expectation I might have
had liberty to clear my self of the aforesaid weight; but instead of that, he
with some others called to some to put me out, and said, A Woman should not be
allowed to speak; which matter I desired often to speak to, but could not be
heard, they despising and rejecting the Message I had to bear, although in much
love to their Souls, and the said J. W. endeavored to make it appear (by
perverting the Scripture) that GOD's Love was not to all, contrary to the
Message of the Angel, Luke 2. and 10. And some of them said, I preached false
Doctrine, in holding forth that Christ was a Propitiation for the Sins of the
whole World. But with J. W. time after time, I offered a Public Dispute, and
to maintain by Scripture that Doctrine I did hold forth amongst them, but was
denied, (as some Friends there with me can witness) except on these terms, That
only one Man of my Friends should dispute with him in my stead, and neither I
nor any other should be suffered to speak a word: And unless I would promise
not to speak, I should not be suffered to be where the Dispute was; and that it
should be agreed upon that two Persons should be made choice of, to be present
at the Dispute (to be Moderators) neither of their Judgment not ours, to see
that good Order was kept, and to Judge who is in the Right, and who in the
Wrong; so it is evident the Moderators must have been of a different Faith and
Principle from us Both. Now how this would consist with true Christianity, and
a right Contending for the Faith delivered to the Saints, according to the
Apostle Jude's Advice, let it be seriously considered, for us to give up our
Faith and Testimony, and to be concluded whether it is Right or Wrong, by Men
not of the same Faith, we thought it very Improper, and that no true Christian
can do, and therefore could not answer his Proposals therein. And yet finding a
Concern to remain upon my Mind, and so far as the LORD by his holy Spirit shall
assist me, by bringing into my Remembrance what may be suitable to the present
Subject, shall bear Testimony to, in these following Lines, in order to ease my
Spirit and clear my Conscience.

Concerning the Universality of GOD's Love: AND ALSO The Saving and Spiritual
LIGHT wherewith every Man is Lighted.
GOD out of his Infinite Love, who delights not in the Death of a Sinner, but
that all should Live and be Saved, has so loved the World, that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
Everlasting Life, Joh. 3.16. And by his Light Lights every Man coming into
the World, John 1.9. Which Light makes manifest all things that are
reprovable, Ephesians. 5.13. And teaches all Temperance, and Righteousness, and
Godliness, and this Light lights the hearts of all Mankind, in order to the
Salvation of all, if not refisted, nor is it less Universal than the Seed of
Sin, being the Purchase of his Death who tasted Death for every Man; For as in
Adam all died, so in Christ shall all be made alive. 1 Cor. 15.22.

As for that Doctrine, (viz. Absolute Reprobation) according to which some are
not afraid to assert, That GOD by one Eternal and Immutable Decree, has
Predestined to Eternal Damnation the far greater part of Mankind, without any
respect to their Disobedience or Sin, but only for the Demonstrating the Glory
of his Justice: And that for the bringing this about, he has Appointed these
Miserable Souls, Necessarily to Walk in their Wicked Ways, that so his Justice
may lay hold on them: And that GOD does therefore not only suffer them to be
liable to this Misery in many Parts of the World, by withholding from them the
Preaching of the Gospel and Knowledge of Christ; but even in those Places where
the Gospel is preached, and Salvation by Christ is offered, whom though he
Publicly Invites them, yet he Justly Condemns them for Disobedience;
notwithstanding he has withheld from them all Grace, by which they could have
laid hold on the Gospel, viz. Because he has by a Secret Will unknown to all
Men, Ordained and Decreed (without any respect had to their Disobedience or
Sin) that they shall not Obey, and that the Offer of the Gospel shall never
prove Effectual for their Salvation, but only serve to aggravate and occasion
their greater condemnation. I say, As to this horrible and blasphemous
Doctrine, our Cause is common with many Others, who have both Wisely and
Learnedly, according to Scripture, Reason, and Antiquity, refuted it. Seeing
then that so much is said already against this Doctrine, that little can be
added except what has been already said, I shall be short; yet because it lies
so in opposition to my way, I cannot let it altogether pass.

First, It is highly injurious to GOD, because it makes Him the Author of Sin,
which of all things is most contrary to His Nature: I confess the Asserters of
this Principle deny this Consequence, but that is but Mockery, seeing it so
naturally follows from their Doctrine, and is equally Ridiculous as if a Man
should obstinately deny that One and Two makes Three: For if GOD has decreed
the Reprobated shall Perish, without all respect to their Evil Deeds, but only
as his own Pleasure; and if he has also decreed, long before they were in
being, or in any Capacity to do Good or Evil, that they should walk in these
Wicked Ways, by which as a Secondary Means, they are led to that End; Who, I
pray, is the Author and Cause thereof, but GOD, who so Willed and Decreed it?
Is not this as Natural a Consequence as can be?

Secondly, This Doctrine is injurious to GOD, because it makes Him appear to
delight in the Death of Sinners; yea, and will have many to die in their Sins:
Contrary to these Scriptures, Ezekiel. 33.11. 1 Timothy 2.3. 2 Pet. 3.9. For if He
has created Men only for that End, that He might show forth His Justice and
Power in them, as some Affirm, and for effecting thereof has not only
withheld from them the Means of doing Good, but also foreordained the Evil
that they should fall into; must He not therefore delight in their Death,
seeing against His own Will He neither does nor can do any thing?

Thirdly, Is it not highly injurious to CHRIST our Mediator, and to the
Efficacy and Excellency of his Gospel? Does it not render his Mediation
ineffectual, as if he had not by his Sufferings thoroughly broken down the
Middle Wall, nor yet removed the Wrath of GOD, or purchased the Love of GOD to
all Mankind, if it was before decreed that it should be of no Service to the
far greater part of Mankind? It is to no purpose to allege that the Death of
CHRIST was Effectual enough to have saved all Mankind, if in effect its Virtue
be not so far Extended as to put all Mankind in a capacity of Salvation.

Fourthly, Makes it not the Preaching of the Gospel as a mere Mock and Deceit,
if many of those to whom it is Preached, be by an Irrevocable Decree Excluded
from being benefited by it? It wholly makes Useless the Preaching of Faith and
Repentance, and the whole Tenor of the Gospel-Promises and Threatenings (as
being all Relative to a former Decree and Means before-appointed) to such,
which because they cannot fail, Man needs do nothing but wait for that
Irresistible Snatch which will come, though it be but at the last hour of his
Life, if he be in the Decree of Election: And be his Diligence and Waiting what
it can, shall never Attain it, if he belong to the Decree of Reprobation.

Lastly, This Doctrine is highly injurious to Mankind, and renders them in a
far worse Condition than the Devils in Hell; for they were sometime in a
capacity to have stood, and do suffer for their own Guilt: Whereas many
Millions of Men, according to this Doctrine, must suffer for Adam's Sin, which
they neither knew of, nor ever were accessory to: It renders them worse than
the Beasts of the Field, of whom the Master requires no more than they are able
to perform; and if they be killed, Death is to them an end of Sorrow; Whereas
Man is for ever Tormented for not doing that which he was never able to do. It
puts him in a far worse condition than Pharaoh put the Israelites; for though he
withheld Straw from them, yet by much Labor and Pains they could have gotten
it. But from Men, they make GOD to withold all means of Salvation, so that by
no means can they attain to it.

Having thus briefly removed this false Doctrine out of my way (which has been
a great Concern to me) because they that are desirous may see it Learnedly and
Piously refuted by many others: I come to the Doctrine of Universal Redemption,
or Christ's Dying for all Men, which is that Subject I find with me to Treat
of, and is of it self so Evident from the Scripture-Testimony, that there is
scarce found any other Article of the Christian Faith, so frequently, so
plainly, and so positively Asserted: It is that which makes the Preaching of
CHRIST to be truly termed the Gospel, or the Message of Glad Tidings to all:
Thus the Angel declared the Birth and Coming of CHRIST to the Shepherds, Luke
2.10. Behold I bring you good Tidings of great Joy, which shall be to All
People; he says not to a Few People. Now if this Coming of CHRIST had not
brought a possibility of Salvation to All, it should rather have been Accounted
Bad Tidings of great Sorrow to most People; Neither should the Angel have had
Reason to have sung Peace on Earth, and Good Will toward Men, if the greatest
part of Mankind had been necessarily shut out from Receiving any Benefit by it:
How should CHRIST have sent out Disciples to Preach the Gospel to every
Creature? Mark 16.15. A very comprehensive Commission! That is, To every Son
and Daughter of Mankind, without all Exception: He commands them to Preach
Salvation to all, Remission of Sins to all, Warning every one, and Exhorting
every one, as Paul did, Col. ^.28.

Now how could they have Preached the Gospel to every Man, as became the
Ministers of JESUS CHRIST, in much Assurance of Salvation by that Gospel, had
it not been possible for all? What if some of us had asked, or should now ask
any of these who deny that CHRIST died for all, Has CHRIST died for me? How
can they with Confidence give a certain Answer to this Question? If they give a
Conditional Answer (as their Principle obliges them to do) and say, If thou
Repent, CHRIST died for thee; Does not the same Question still recur, Has
CHRIST died for me, so as to make Repentance possible for me? To this they can
Answer nothing, unless they run in a Circle.

Whereas the Feet of those that bring glad Tidings of the Gospel of Peace, are
said to be Beautiful, for that they Preach the Common Solvation, and Repentance
unto All, offering a Door of Mercy and Hope unto All, through JESUS CHRIST, who
gave Himself a Ransom for All. The Gospel invites All, and certainly by the
Gospel, CHRIST intended not to deceive or delude the greater part of Mankind.

If all then ought to look for Salvation by Him, He must needs have made
Salvation possible to All: For who is bound to seek after that which is
Impossible? Certainly it were a mere mocking of Men to bid them do so. And such
as deny that by the Death of Christ Salvation is made possible unto all Men, do
most Blasphemously make GOD mock the World, in giving his Servants a Commission
to Preach the Gospel of Salvation unto All, while He has before Decreed that
it should not be possible for them to Receive it; would not this make the LORD
to send forth His Servants with a Lie in their Mouths, which were Blasphemous
to think, commanding them to bid all and every one believe that CHRIST died for
them, and had purchased Life and Salvation; whereas it is no such thing,
according to their before mentioned Doctrine?

But seeing CHRIST gave a Commission to Preach Repentance and Remission of Sins
and Salvation to All, it is manifest he died for All: For he that has
Commissionated his Servants thus to Preach, is a GOD of Truth, and no Mocker of
poor Mankind; neither does he require of any Man that which is Impossible, but
is a Principle of Truth Engraven in every Just Man's Mind: And seeing He is
both a most Righteous and Merciful GOD, it cannot at all stand either with His
Justice or Mercy, to bid such Men Repent or Believe, to whom He has made it
Impossible.

Moreover, If we regard the Testimony of Scripture in this matter, where there
is not one Scripture that I know of, that affirms CHRIST not to have died for
All, there are diverse that positively Assert He did, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
I exhort that first of all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving
of Thanks, be made for all Men, etc. for this is good and Acceptable in the
sight of GOD our Savior, who will have ALL MEN TO BE SAVED, and to come to the
Knowledge of the Truth, who gave Himself a Ransom FOR ALL, to be testified in
due time.

Except we will have the Apostle here to intend quite another thing than he
asserted, there can be nothing more plain to confirm what we have here
asserted; and this Scripture does well Answer to that manner of Arguing which
we have hitherto used: For first, The Apostle here exhorts him to Pray for All
Men; and to withstand such an Objection, as if they had said (with our
Adversaries) CHRIST prayed not for the World, neither wills He us to pray for
All, because He will not that All should be Saved, but has ordained many to be
Damned, that He might show forth His Justice in them: He withstands, I say,
such an Objection, telling them, That it is good and acceptable in the sight of
GOD, who will have ALL MEN TO BE SAVED.

I desire to know what can be more expressly affirmed? Or can any two
Propositions be stated in Terms more Contradictory than these Two, GOD wills
that Some Men shall Not be Saved; GOD wills All Men to be Saved; or GOD will
have No Man Perish. If we believe the last, as the Apostle has affirmed, the
first must be destroyed; seeing of Contradictory Propositions, the one being
Placed, the other is Destroyed: Whence (to conclude) he gives us a Reason of
His willingness that All Men should be Saved, in these words, Who gave Himself
A RANSOM FOR ALL: As if he would have said, Since CHRIST died for All Men,
since he gave Himself a Ransom for All, therefore he would have All Men to be
Saved.

This CHRIST Himself gives as the Reason of GOD's Love to the World, in these
Words, John 3.16. GOD so loved the World, that He gave His only begotten Son,
that WHOSOEVER Believes in Him should not Perish, but have Everlasting Life;
compared with John 4.9. This is very positively affirmed, Heb. 2.9. in in these
words, But we see JESUS, who was made a little lower than the Angels, for the
Suffering of Death; Crowned with Glory and Honor, that He by the Grace of GOD,
SHOULD TASTE DEATH FOR EVERY MAN. He that will but open his Eyes, may see this
Truth here asserted; If he tasted Death for EVERY Man, then certainly there is
NO Man for whom He did not taste Death; then there is no Man who may not be
made a Sharer of the Benefit of it: For He came not to Condemn the World, but
that the World through Him might be Saved, John 3.17. He came not to Judge the
World, but to Save the World, Joh. 12.47. If He never came to bring Salvation
to great part of Mankind, but that his coming (though it could never do them
good, yet) shall augment their Condemnation: from thence it necessarily
follows, that He came not of Intention to Save, but to Judge and Condemn the
greater part of the World, contrary to His own Express Testimony.

And as the Apostle Paul in these words above cited, does assert Affirmatively
that GOD wills the Salvation of ALL; so does the Apostle Peter assert
Negatively, that he Wills Not the Perishing of any, 2 Pet. 3.9. The LORD is
not slack concerning his Promise, as some Men count slackness, but is long
suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that All should
come to Repentance. And this is correspondent to that of the Prophet Ezekiel,
Chap. 33.11. As I live, says the LORD, I have no pleasure in the Death of the
Wicked, but that the Wicked turn from his Ways and live. If it be safe to
believe GOD, and to trust in him, we must not think he intends to cheat us by
all these Expressions through his Servants; but that he was in good Earnest.
And that this Will and Desire of His, has not taken effect, the blame is on
our parts; which could not be, if so be we were never put in any capacity of
Salvation, and that CHRIST had never died for us, but left us under an
Impossibility of Salvation.

What means all those Earnest Invitations, all these Serious Expostulations,
wherewith the holy Scriptures are full? As, Why will you die, O House of
Israel? Why will you not come unto me, that you might have Life? I have waited
to be gracious unto you; I have sought to gather you; I have knocked at the
Door of your Hearts: Is not your Destruction of your selves? I have called all
the Day long. If Men who are so Invited, be under no capacity of being saved,
if Salvation be impossible unto them, why does the Psalmist express himself
thus, The LORD is gracious and full of Compassion, slow to anger, and of great
Kindness (or Mercy) The LORD is good to all, and his Tender Mercies are over
all His Works; of which, Man is the Noblest Part.

This Doctrine is abundantly confirmed by the Apostle, 1 John 2.1, 2. And if
any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the FATHER, JESUS CHRIST the Righteous,
and He is the Propitiation for our Sins; and not for ours only, but also for
the Sins of the WHOLE WORLD. Here the Apostle John tells us plainly, That
CHRIST not only died for him, and for the Saints and Members of the Church of
GOD to whom he wrote, but for the WHOLE WORLD. Let us then hold it for a
Certain and Undoubted Truth, notwithstanding such as oppose.

If we Regard the Testimony of the Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the Romans,
we must conclude that the Death of CHRIST was as large to Save, as Adam's Sin
was to Condemn, Romans 5.15, 18. where he says. For if through the Offense of One
many be Dead, much more the Grace of GOD, and the Gift by Grace, which is by
one Man, JESUS CHRIST: Therefore as by the Offense of One, Judgment came upon
ALL MEN to Condemnation; EVEN SO by the Righteousness of One the Free Gift came
upon ALL MEN to Justification of Life. And we all agree that Adam's Sin brought
the Curse upon all his Posterity: And shall we not, likewise believe that as in
Adam ALL Die, so in CHRIST shall ALL be made Alive. 1 Cor. 15.22.

This also might be proved from many other Scripture-Testimonies, if it were at
this Season needful; but the aforementioned Scriptures being so clear, except
a Man will close his Eyes, he cannot but see the Truth of this Doctrine.

But some may say, What is then the Cause of Condemnation?

Answ. According to John 3. and 18. He that believes in Him is not condemned;
but he that believes not, is condemned already, because has not believed on
the Name of the only begotten Son of GOD: And this is the Condemnation, that
Light is come into the World, and Men love Darkness rather than Light, because
their Deeds are evil: For every one that does evil, hates the Light, neither
comes to the Light, lest his Deeds should be reproved: But he that does Truth
comes to the Light that his Deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought
in GOD, John 3. and 19, 20, 21. And CHRIST exhorted those who followed him,
while they had the Light to believe in the Light, that they might be the
Children of the Light, John 12.36. Whereby it may be concluded that the Light,
Grace, or Measure of GOD's Spirit, may be Removed from them, which strives with
a Man in order to save him, during the time of his Visitation, which GOD gives
unto All, in which Time or Day they may be saved.

We do not understand the whole Time of every Man's Life, though to some it may
be extended even to the very hour of their Death, as we see in the Example of
the Thief upon the Cross. But such a Season at least, as sufficiently clears
GOD of every Man's Condemnation, which may be to some sooner, and to some
later, according as the LORD in His Wisdom sees meet; so that many Men may
outlive this Day; after which there may be no possibility of Salvation to
them; and GOD justly suffers them to be hardened, as a just Punishment of their
Unbelief; and even raises them up as Instruments of Wrath, and makes them a
Scourge one against another. Whence to Men this Condition may be fitly applied
those Scriptures expressed by the Apostle, Romans 1. from Verse. 17. to the end;
but especially Verse. 28. Even as they did not like to retain GOD in their
Knowledge, GOD gave them up to a Reprobate Mind, to do those things that are
not convenient.

That many may outlive this day of GOD's gracious Visitation to them, is shown
by Example of Esau, Heb. 12.16, 17. who sold his Birthright, so he had it once,
and was capable to have kept it; but afterward when he would have Inherited
the Blessing he was rejected.

This appears also by CHRIST's weeping over Jerusalem, Luke 19.42. saying, If
thou had known IN THIS THY DAY, the things that belong unto thy Peace; BUT
NOW they are hid from thine Eyes; which plainly imports a Time when they might
have known them, which was now removed from them, though they were yet alive.

Therefore we having the Experience of the Inward and Powerful Work of this
Light in our Hearts, even CHRIST revealed in us, cannot cease to proclaim the
Day of the LORD that is Arisen in it, crying out with the Woman of Samaria,
Come and see one that has told me all that ever I have done; Is not this the
CHRIST? That others may come and feel the same in themselves, and may know that
little small thing that reproves them in their Hearts, however they have
neglected it, is no less than the Gospel preached in them, CHRIST the Wisdom
and Power of GOD, being thereby seeking to save their Souls.

This is that Universal Evangelical Principle, in and by which this Salvation
of CHRIST is shown or presented to all Men, both Jew and Gentile, Barbarian and
Scythian, of whatsoever Country he be. And therefore GOD has raised up unto
Himself, in this our Age, Faithful Witnesses and Evangelists, to preach again
His Everlasting Gospel, and to direct as well the high Professors, who boast of
the Scriptures, and the outward knowledge of CHRIST, as the Infidels and
Heathens that know Him not, that way; that they may all come to mind the Light
in them, and know CHRIST in them the Just One, whom they had so long killed and
made merry over, and He has not resisted, Jam. 5.6. And give up their Sins,
Iniquities, False Faiths, Professions, and Outside Righteousness, to be
Crucified by the Power of his Cross (or Spirit) in them, so as they may know
CHRIST Within to be the Hope of Glory; and may come to walk in his Light, and
to be saved, Who is that True Light that lights every Man that comes into
the World.

Having briefly hinted concerning the Universal Redemption by CHRIST, which for
some Time has been a Concern upon my Mind, I shall proceed to speak something
in short concerning the New Covenant.

Behold, The Days come, says the LORD, that I will make a New Covenant with
the House of Israel, and with the House of Judah; not according to the Covenant
which I made with their Fathers, etc. But this shall be the Covenant that I
will make, etc. says the LORD, I will put my Law in their Inward Parts, and
write it in their Hearts, and will be their GOD, and they shall be my People:
And they shall teach no more every Man his Neighbor, and every Man his
Rrother, saying, Know the LORD; for they shall all know Me, from the least of
them to the greatest: For I will forgive their Iniquity, and I will remember
their Sins no more, Jer. 31.31, 32, 33, 34.

Now those that would have this great Benefit, to be GOD's People, and to have
this great Blessing of the Gospel, to have their Iniquities Forgiven, and would
know the Teachings of his holy Spirit, must take heed to this Law written in
the Heart: So shall such witness with the Apostle, That GOD having raised up
his Son JESUS, (whom he has given for a Light to the Gentiles, and for a
Covenant to the People) and sent him to bless them, in turning away every one
of them from their Iniquities; otherways such Deprive Themselves of that Good
the LORD intended for them, as may be seen in Jerem. 18. and 9. where it is
said, At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, or concerning a
Kingdom, to Build and to Plant it; if it do Evil in my Sight, that it obey not
my Voice, then I will repent of the Good wherewith I said I would Benefit them.
As also in Isaiah, Chap. 55. verse. 7. where it is said, Let the Wicked forsake
his way, and the Unrighteous Man his Thoughts; and let him return unto the
LORD, and he will have Mercy upon him; and to our GOD, and He will abundantly
pardon. Whereby it may be plainly understood, although the Covenant be sure on
GOD's Part, yet the Failure is on Man's Part, in not Abiding in this holy
Covenant, and in dis-regarding and slighting that Law (or Light) GOD has
appointed for a Teacher, for a Guide, and for a Leader, which would lead into
all Truth, Holiness and Purity, without which No Acceptance with GOD.

And furthermore, The Apostle speaking of the Excellency of this Law, says,
The Law of the Spirit of Life in CHRIST JESUS, has made me free from the Law
of Sin and Death: For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through
the Flesh, GOD sending His own SON in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and for
Sin, condemned Sin in the Flesh, that the Righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.

And as he delighted in the Law of GOD after the Inward Man, and could speak of
the Efficacy of it, and the Sufficiency thereof, so it may be observed the
great Benefit he received, through minding this Law, and believing in it, was,
that it set him free from the Law of Sin and Death; it was that whereby he was
translated out of the Power and Kingdom of Satan, into the Power and Kingdom of
the Dear SON of GOD, who is sufficient for all that believe on him: For GOD
sent not his SON into the World to condemn the World, but that the World
through Him might be saved, John 3.17. as they believe on Him: Otherways,
according to his own Saying, If ye believe not that I am He, ye shall die in
your Sins; and whither I go, thither ye cannot come, John 12.46, 47. Who says
again, And if any Man hear my Words, and believe not, I Judge him not; for I
came not to Judge the World, but to Save the World.

So it appears that the Love of GOD is held out to All, that All might have
been, or may be saved by CHRIST. But alas! it proved the misery of the Jews,
who were of that Stock of whom CHRIST came, according to the Flesh (GOD's
Peculiar People) whom he had chosen above all the Families of the Earth, to
fall short through Unbelief; and because they Believed Him not, they did not
Receive Him; but they that Believed Him, Received Him: And as many as Received
Him, to them He gave Power to become the Sons of GOD, John 1.12, 13.

So here may be plainly seen, Unbelief was the Cause wherefore the Jews came
short of the Benefit that GOD is bestowing upon such who do not only believe
that CHRIST our LORD came in that prepared Body to do the Will of His FATHER,
to be offered up once for all; but also believing on Him, as He is come the
second time without Sin unto Salvation; waiting for His Inward Appearance by
His Light and Grace in their Hearts and Souls, that thereby they may know the
Great Work of Regeneration, with out which they cannot see the Kingdom of GOD,
nor doubtless enter into it. So it may be observed the Fault is on Man's Part,
and not by an Eternal and Absolute Decree, as some assert.

Again, It is said in Rev. 3. and 20. Behold, I stand at the Door and Knock; IF
ANT MAN hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come in and sup with him, and
he with Me. And blessed are they that hearken to the Inspeaking Voice of the
Son of GOD, who is Undoubtedly knocking at the Door of every Man's heart, during
the day of his Visitation, in order to reclaim him from the Evil of his ways,
and to cleanse his Heart from all Iniquity, that so he may be United or Married
to the Lamb. But and if Man will not hear His Voice, nor hearken, the LORD will
certainly be clear of his Blood, and his Destruction will be upon his own Head.

And again, It may be read in Rev. 22. and 17. And the Spirit and the Bride
faith Come, and let him that hears say Come, and let him that is athirst
Come, and WHOSOEVER will, let him take of the Water of Life freely; Mark,
WHOSOEVER, so there is None Excluded: And according to the saying of our LORD,
John 4. and 14. But WHOSOEVER drinks of the Water that I shall give him,
shall never Thirst; but the Water that I shall give him shall be in him a Well
of Water springing up unto Everlasting Life.

O the Benefit of it, and the Joy of it unto such who know the springing up
thereof, is that which cannot be Demonstrated, as it is Felt and Witnessed!
There is much Assurance of Peace! It springs up to Everlasting Life! There Is no
Thirsting after any other Refreshment to the Soul, but that which proceeds from
the Spirit; For this spoke He of the Spirit, that such should receive who
believed on Him. O what pity it is that poor Mankind should deprive themselves
of such Great Blessings, such Unutterable Kindness, such Great Favor, such
Joy, as to draw Water out of the Well of Salvation in themselves, by falling
short through Unbelief, as did the Jews! For because of Unbelief they were
broken off. Behold therefore the Goodness and Severity of GOD! On them which
fell, Severity; but toward thee Goodness, if thou continue in his Goodness,
otherwise thou shall also be cut off, Romans 11.22.

And again, I am not ashamed of the Gospel; it is the Power of GOD unto
Salvation, unto every one that believes: But he that believes not, excludes
himself from the Benefit of this Gospel-Power.

Moreover it is said, Prove. 1. and 20. Wisdom cries without, she utters her
Voice in the Streets, she cries in the chief Places of Concourse, in the
openings of the Gates, in the City she utters her Words, saying, How long, ye
Simple ones, will ye love Simplicity, and the Scorners delight in their
scorning, and Fools hate Knowledge? Turn you at my Reproof; Behold, I will pour
out my Spirit unto you, I will make known my words unto you: Because I have
called and ye refused, I have stretched out my Hand, and no Man regarded; but
ye have set at naught all my Counsel, and would have none of my Reproof, I also
will laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear comes. Here may be seen
the Love of GOD without respect of Persons, when He is calling to the Scorners,
to the Simple, and to Fools: As likewise in Acts 10.34. where the Apostle Peter
says, Of a Truth I perceive that GOD is no Respecter of Persons, but in every
Nation he that fears Him and works Righteousness, is Accepted with Him: So
he makes the Fear of GOD, and the working of Righteousness, the Qualifications.

Such then that have this, are Accepted, wherever they be; But Tribulation
and Anguish upon every Soul of Man that does Evil, to the Jew first, and also
to the Gentile, for there is no respect of Persons with GOD; where the Apostle
clearly shows, concerning Jew and Gentile, they that have an outward Law, and
they that have none, when they do Good shall be Justified, and partake of that
Honor, Glory and Peace, which comes upon every one that does Good: And in Genesis
4. and 6, 7. where the LORD expresses himself unto Cain thus, And the LORD
said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth, and why is thy Countenance fallen? If thou
do well, shall thou not be Accepted? And if thou do not well, Sin lies
at thy Door.

So here again it may be observed, It is in the Well-doing the Acceptance is,
and not by an Eternal and Absolute Decree, as aforesaid: Had not Cain a Day of
Visitation given him of GOD? And was it not possible in that day, even for
Cain, to be Accepted? Otherwise would GOD have proposed the doing Good as a
Condition, if He had not given Cain sufficient Strength, whereby he was capable
to do Good?

Lastly, That there is a Day of Visitation given to the Wicked, wherein they
might have been Saved; and that being Expired, they are shut out from
Salvation; Appears evidently by CHRIST's Lamentation over Jerusalem: And when
he was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over it, saying, If thou had
known, even thou, at least in this thy Day, the things that belong to thy
Peace! But now they are hid from thine Eyes. What can be more evinent, than
that there was a Day wherein the Inhabitants of Jerusalem might have known
those things that belonged to their Peace; and that during that Day, He was
willing to have gathered them, even as a Hen gathers her Chickens; but they
refused, and therefore the Things belonging to their Peace, were hid from their
Eyes.

Note, Whereas they say, That GOD has foreordained WHATSOEVER COMES TO PASS:
It Is a Contradiction to that Scripture where the LORD said -- And they have
built the High Places of Tophet, which is in the Valley of the Son of Hinnom,
to burn their Sons and and their Daughters in the Fire, which I Commanded them
not, NEITHER CAME IT INTO MY HEART, Jer. 7.31. -- Here it is plain, GOD never
Ordained the Burning of their Children, yet it came to pass.

Again, If a certain Number be decreed for Heaven, and another certain Number
for Hell, CHRIST, his Prophets and Apostles never added one by all He and they
did or could do; and much less can the Preachers of such Doctrine add any;
therefore it is not just to receive Wages from such as they add nothing unto.

POSTSCRIPT: BEING REMARKS upon J.W.'s RHIMING ACROSTICK.
HAving lately seen a Paper written Alphabetically by way of Poem, with an
Acrostick of Joshua War's Name, wherein he shows the Reader his Opinion in some
Divinity (as he calls it) which he cannot truly say, except he be Divinely
inspired, because the word imports the Mystery of Heavenly Things, which must
needs proceed from immediate Revelation. Likewise in the same Acrostick he
says, Above all Human Arts I here have writ; If above all human Arts, what must
it proceed from, less than the Spirit of GOD? (without which no Man knows the
things of GOD, as says the Apostle.) And if so, let the Reader judge whether
it be not from the Revealed Mind of GOD within, yea or nay, which heretofore
has been denied by them, whom now he appears to be a Pastor to.

He begins his Alphabet with setting forth the state of Adam, as GOD created
him in a state of Happiness, free from Sin: It is certainly believed GOD did
place Adam in this happy state in his own Image of Holiness and Purity, that he
should glorify Him above the rest of His Creation, all which do show forth the
Glory of GOD, and declare his handy work: But how much more Man, the Noblest
part thereof, created in Innocence and Uprightness; and while he did there
abide, was in a Capacity to Answer the Mind of GOD, and was well-pleasing to
GOD, and good in His sight; for if all the rest of the Creation was Good,
surely Man the Noblest Part thereof was Good, who above all the Creation was
created in the Image of GOD: But all the Creation was Good, therefore Man was
Good: Then how will it be proved that from Eternity Adam was Reprobated, or by
the Ordination or will of GOD Adam fell, as J. W. would make it appear; those
that are saved, GOD in Eternity designed to save; so those that are Reprobated,
it will follow, was in Eternity so designed? Likewise how then do his following
words consist with this Doctrine, where he says, Condemned he was WHEN he did
thus offend, and in him his whole Posterity: If it was when he did offend, then
not from Eternity; But it was WHEN he did offend, says J.W. and therefore not
from Eternity. J.W. is in this part of our Judgment. At the Letter F. he says,

From this fearful state of Sin and Misery, GOD has found out for those that
are undone,

From Law and Sin to work Delivery, By JESUS CHRIST, His Well-Beloved Son.

I Answer, We are of his Judgment in this part, That our LORD JESUS CHRIST laid
down his Life for Sinners, that He might free them from the aforementioned
state, according to that Saying, And thou shall call His Name JESUS, for he
shall Save His People from their Sins: And that of John, Behold the Lamb of GOD
which takes away the Sins of the World, Joh. 1.29. And if there can be any Man
found who was not of this Number, viz. Sinners, CHRIST has not died for all:
but there can be no Man found who was not of this Number, Therefore CHRIST died
for all. So JW. is in this Verse also of our Opinion, that CHRIST died for all,
since all are undone by Sin.

But in his Next, he is quite of another Mind, when he says, (in contradiction
to what he writ before) GOD in Eternity designed to save a certain Number in
his Son, and all of them he gave unto him, who (then) by Him were freed from
Wrath to come: (Then) to wit, from Eternity. Here he is for a certain Number,
and the rest to remain in that fearful state beforementioned; as if GOD nor
CHRIST ever purposed Love nor Salvation to a great part of Mankind, and that
the Coming and Sufferings of CHRIST never was intended, nor could be useful to
their Justification, because when he speaks of the amazing strange cries he
sent up to his Father, when He the Sins of the Elect did bear; when the Apostle
John says, 1 John 2.2. And if any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
even JESUS CHRIST the Righteous: And He was the Propitiation for our Sins; and
not for ours only, but for the Sins of the WHOLE WORLD: And if for the Whole
World, not only for the Sins of the Elect. The way which some take to avoid
this Testimony, is most foolish and ridiculous; The World here, say they, is
the World of Believers: For this Commentary they have nothing but their own
Assertion, and so while it manifestly destroys the Text, may be justly
rejected: And if J.W. be in this Mind, as I suppose he is by what I heard him
speak, let him show me, if he can, in all the Scripture, where the whole World
is taken for Believers only. But I shall show him where it is taken for quite
the contrary; as, The World knows Me not, the World receives Me not, I am not
of this World; besides many other Scriptures, as, Mat. 18.7. Joh. 7.7, 8.26.12,
19.14.17.15.18, 19. 17 15, 18, 16.17.24.18. and many more: Secondly, The
Apostle in this very place distinguishes the World from the Saints thus, And
not for ours only, but for the Sins of the whole World; What means the Apostle
here by ours? Is not that the Sins of Believers? Was he not one of those
Believers? And was not this an Universal Epistle, written to all the Saints,
that then were so, except he can make it appear the Apostle meant another thing
than he spoke, CHRIST is the Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World. He
says, Run Sinners then to CHRIST without Delay: If they belong to the Decree
of Reprobation, what will it avail them to run? What will avail their Prayers,
Cries or Tears, or Concern for their Souls, or walking humbly in GOD's sight?
According to that destructive Doctrine, they may as well sit still, and do
nothing. Would not this Doctrine give way to all Looseness and Profanity? For
if it was decreed from Eternity they were of the Elect, there is no regard to
Works, Good or Bad; contrary to that Scripture where it is said, Behold I come
quickly, and my Reward is with me, to give to every Man according as his Works
shall be. I am not speaking of Works wrought in our own fallen Nature, which we
by our own strength have wrought, our own Legal Performances, and therefore may
be truly and properly called ours, whatever specious Appearances they may seem
to have, but by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy GHOST,
seeing Regeneration is a Work comprehensive of many good Works, even of all
those called the Fruits of the SPIRIT.

Does he not contradict Himself, when he says, The worst of Sinners, they may
be welcome to JESUS; on him their Souls to rest, when before he was but for a
certain Number? If he, or any of his Opinion, can groundedly tell that they are
of that Elect Number that CHRIST has died for, if they be such as belong to
the Election of Grace, otherwise they may as well sit still and do nothing. So
one while this, another while that, such mingled Doctrine! But how should it be
otherwise, when there is so little Zeal for GOD, among those he calls his own
People, as he confesses in his last Verse? But CHRIT tells us what is the cause,
When Iniquity shall abound, the Love of many shall wax cold: When love to
something else gets more room in the Heart than the LORD JESUS, such render
themselves unworthy of Him, according to His own Saying, He that loves Father
or Mother, Wife or Children, etc. more than Me, is not worthy of Me.

What I have before written, is not out of a Prejudiced Mind, or the least
Tincture of Enmity or Hatred to the Persons of any, neither durst I forbear for
the fear of procuring the Ill Will or Hatred of any: For GOD has not given us
the Spirit of Fear, but of Love and of a sound Mind, who is my Witness, who
knows it is all my desire that Zion may shine, and Jerusalem may become the
Praise of the whole Earth, and that GOD would enlarge the Borders of his
Sanctuary, and his Dominion may be from Sea to Sea, and many may be the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the very Entrance into whose Gates are Praises, and
Blessed are they that do His Commandments (which and not Grievous but Joyous.)
And such have Right to the Tree of Life, and enters in through the Gates into
the City, the New Jerusalem, where Thanksgiving, Honor and Glory, with Worship
and Obedience, is Returned to Him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb,
for ever and for evermore. Amen.

the 26th of the first Month, School. I am a Well-Wisher to the Souls of all
People, JANE FEARON

The End.

