AN EVIDENT DEMONSTRATION TO Gods Elect, Which clearly manifests to them, I.
How necessary and expedient it is for them to come to witness true faith. II.
That after they have attained to the faith, it must be tried as gold is tried
in the fire. III. It shows how many have departed from the faith and denied it.
IV. That the standing of the Saints is by faith in the Son of God. V. How
strong Abraham was in the faith, and how all that believe are to look unto him.


By Margret Fell.

That the trial of your faith being much more precious then of gold that
perishes, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise and honor
and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.7.

And this is the victory that overcomes the World even our faith.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the sign of the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate, 1660.

Friends of God and of the Living Truth as it is in Jesus, who are called to be
Saints and to live godly in Christ Jesus as becomes Saints.
THere is something upon me as from the Lord to write unto you concerning the
precious Faith which was once delivered unto the Saints, which (may be) you may
be called to contend for; times of trial thereof seeming to approach; but the
the only intent and desire of my soul is, that you may be brought into it, in
the Truth and soundness of it, which indeed is a mystery, and cannot be held
but in a pure conscience void of offense toward God and toward man: And being
that it is so, that without faith it is impossible to please God, and that
whatsoever is not of faith is sin; This being weighed and read in the pure
eternal Light which every one has a measure of to try withal, it will nearly
concern every one to search and try narrowly and thoroughly, whether they be in
the faith which is of Gods Elect yea or no: This may be lightly looked upon
with many, as though it were needless and below their condition and state, as
if it were easy to be in the faith of God, yea the very World the Apostatized
Christians will talk of a faith though it be dead and they yet in their sins;
But truly Friends I see in the Eternal that it is a great mystery to be made
partaker of the precious faith, which gives the victory over the World, and
faith is the gift of God.

And I find in the Scriptures of the Prophets that there was few that witnessed
and spoke of Faith, though there was many faithful men which by faith obtained
a good report, and died in the faith, by which they did the Commandments of
God, according to his Eternal purpose, yet the Fathers were under the cloud,
and the appearance of God in their day was in a cloud, and all passed through
the Sea, and were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the Sea, and they
did drink of the Rock which followed them, which Rock was Christ; while Moses
is Read the vail is over the heart, which vail is done away in Christ.

When God called Moses and Aaron and Miriam he said, Hear now my word, if there
be a Prophet among you, I the Lord will make my self known unto him in a
vision, and speak unto him in a dream. This is the state which we must pass
through; but the Lord said with Moses my servant it is not so, who is faithful
in all my house, with him I will speak mouth to mouth, even apparently and not
in dark speeches. Here Moses was faithful to God as a servant, and his
ministration was glorious, yet this glory was to be done away, by reason of the
glory that excelled, which glory remains where the spirit of the Lord is the
covering. And so, Friends, come into the Light of the Son of God, which gives
the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, the
brightness of the Fathers glory, which Moses could not see and live; And here
you will come to see and to read through the mystery of the faith of the Gospel
in the ministration of the spirit; And now that none may think of themselves
above what they ought to think, let every one with the light of Jesus seriously
and singlely search and try your standing, for it may be that times of trial of
faith may come. The Apostle bad the Corinthians examine themselves whether they
were in the faith, prove your own selves (says he) know you not how that
Christ is in you except you be Reprobates: This he said to the Corinthians who
were a gathered people, And to the Galathians says he, If a man think of
himself to be something when he is nothing he deceives himself, but let every
man prove his own work, and then he will have joy in himself and not in another.

Friends, be not offended that you are put to a search and warned beforehand,
that your foundation and standing may be sure when the day of trial comes, for
the Lord has said Zech. 13.9. I will bring the third part of them through the
fire, and will refine them as silver is refined, and try them as gold is tried,
And they shall call on my Name, and I will hear them, I will say it is my
people, and they shall say the Lord is my God.

And Peter says Ye who are kept by the power of God through the faith unto
salvation ready to be revealed in the last time, wherein ye greatly rejoice,
though now for a season ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations, that
the trial of your faith being much more precious then gold that perishes
though it be tried by fire might be found unto the praise, honor and glory at
the appearing of Jesus Christ; O blessed will ye be if you be found here, for
then will you not think it strange concerning the fiery trials which are to
try you, but you will even rejoice, inasmuch as you are partakers of the
sufferings of Christ.

Truly Friends my care is, with the desire of my soul, that you might come into
the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that the same mind may be in you that
was also in Christ Jesus, who made himself of no reputation, but took upon him
the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men, and being found in
fashion as a man he humbled himself, and became obedient to the death of the
Cross, and through that he is exalted; And this is the path that the faithful
in Christ Jesus must walk in, which may be found strait and narrow to the first
man which is rough and hairy, Esau-like: And though (as I said before) you may
think strange that you should be exhorted to come into the faith of the Lord
Jesus Christ, yet this is above the Disciples condition, for they were often
reproved for the want of this of their Lord and Master, when he was exhorting
them to take no thought for their meat nor for their drink, neither for their
body what they should put on, for says he shall he not much more clothe you O
ye of little faith. And again when the tempest rose upon the Sea, they begun to
be afraid, Then said he unto them, Why are ye fearful O ye of little faith? And
again when he showed them the Fig Tree how it was withered, Christ said unto
them, If ye have faith and doubt not, ye shall not only do this which is done
to this Fig Tree, but also if you say unto this mountain be thou removed into
the Sea, and it shall be done, and whatsoever you pray for, believing, ye shall
receive. And again he said unto Peter when the Sea was boistrous and he afraid,
he said unto him, O thou of little faith why do thou doubt? Yet after this
Peter's faith was shaken. Again when that the Disciples could not cure the man
that was Lunatic, then Jesus said unto them, O faithless and perverse
generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you? bring
him hither to me; And one of the Disciples said, why could not we cast him out?
Then Jesus said unto them, because of your unbelief, For verily I say unto you,
if you had faith as a grain of mustard seed, you should say unto this mountain
remove hence to yonder place, and it should be so, and nothing shall be
unpossible unto you; And unto Thomas he said, Be not faithless but believing.

So here is the very life of your life, that you believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ, for whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed, for there is no
difference between the Jew and the Greek, for the same Lord over all is rich
unto all that call upon him and believe in him.

And so now Friends, seeing that many when trials come upon them have been
shaken, as you may see in the Scriptures more fully, Therefore in the fear of
the Lord God keep close and near to the word of faith which is nigh in the
heart, and neither ascend nor descend, but keep to the righteousness of faith,
and then you keep to the substance of things hoped for, and to the Evidence and
Testimony of things not seen. Through faith you may understand that the Worlds
were made by the Invisible Word of God, so that things which are seen are not
made of things which do appear, but by the immortal and Eternal Word which was
in the beginning, here you will see him that is invisible, as Abraham did who
believed, and it was accounted unto him for Righteousness, not when he was in
the Circumcision, but when he was in the uncircumcision, and so he received the
sign of Circumcision a seal of the righteousness of his faith which he had
before he was Circumcised, that he might be the Father of all that believe
though they be not Circumcised outwardly, that Righteousness might be imputed
unto them also, not of the Jews only but also of the Gentiles; for all who
walk in the steps of that faith of our Father Abraham, for the promise that he
should be the Heir of the World was, not to Abraham or to his seed through the
Law, but through the Righteousness of Faith, therefore is it of faith that it
might be by Grace, to the end that the promise might be sure to all the seed,
not to that only which is of the Law, but to that also which is of the faith
of Abraham which is the Father of us all, who against hope believed in hope,
that he might become the Father of many Nations: Oh the Infinite love and
wisdom of the Lord God, and the depth of the mystery that has been hid but now
is revealed by his Spirit.

Know ye therefore that they that are of faith are the children of Abraham, and
the Scripture which cannot be broken foreseeing that God would Justify the
Heathen through faith preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, saying in thee
shall all Nations be blessed: The promise of the blessing to Abraham and his
seed, this is the glad tidings of the Everlasting Gospel, the liberty to the
Captives, the desire of all Nations which is now come and risen, manifested and
fulfilled what he has promised in this his day; And all they that be of the
faith are blessed with faithful Abraham, and this is the Gospel which the
Apostle was not ashamed of to preach, which is the power of God unto salvation
to every one that believes, to the Jew first and also to the Greek, for
therein is the Righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith, for the Just
lives by faith, whether they be Jew or Greek, bond or free, there is neither
male nor female here but they are all one in Christ Jesus: And if they be
Christ's then are they Abraham's seed and heirs according to promise. And here is
the fountain opened for the house of David and for the Inhabitants of Jerusalem
for sin and for uncleanness, Christ Jesus the Everlasting Covenant, who in the
last day of the great feast stood and cried, saying, If any man were athirst
let him come unto me and drink, he that believes on me out of his belly shall
flow Rivers of living waters, but this he spoke of the spirit, which they that
believed on him should receive, according to the words of the Apostle, who said
unto the Jews, Received you the Spirit by the works of the Law or by the
hearing of faith? for we through the spirit wait for the hope of the
Righteousness of faith, for in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision nor
uncircumcision avails, but faith that works by Love, and obedience unto
him, who says, I am the Resurrection and Life, he that believes on me, though
he was dead yet shall he live; And he that lives and believes shall never
die, and he that believes works the works of God, he that believes shall
never thirst; And this is the will of the Father that has sent the Son, that
every one that sees him, should believe on him and have everlasting life, and
he would raise him up at the last day; and blessed are they that believes and
lives in the freedom of the spirit, for to the spiritual mind is life and
peace, and no evil tidings can come to such, such reckons not the sufferings of
this present time worthy to be compared to the glory that shall be revealed, for
the Just lives by his Faith, but if any man draw back, my soul has no pleasure
in him.

Now Friends, seeing it is so, that the spirit speaks expressly, that in the
latter times some shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing spirits
and Doctrines of Devils, and that some have cast off their first Faith, and
some through the love of money have erred from the Faith, and pierced
themselves through with many sorrows, and some have denied the Faith, and some
have had their Faith overthrown by others words, and some have made shipwreck
of Faith, and Jude speaks of many (and sundry) that fell away and lost their
first love, and did not keep their first estate as you may read; And therefore
did he exhort them that they should earnestly contend for the Faith which was
once delivered to the Saints?

And so Friends, this is the very end of my writing, that you even would
contend for the precious Faith in every particular and also in the general; And
call to mind how that God after he had brought the Children of Israel out of
Egypt, yet they fell in the Wilderness because of unbelief; Therefore fly all
ungodliness and follow after Righteousness, Faith, Love and Patience, fight the
good fight of Faith and lay hold on eternal Life; Consider the Apostle and High
Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus, who was faithful to him that appointed
him, as also Moses was faithful in all his house as a Servant, and Christ as a
Son over his own house, whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence and
rejoicing of our hope unto the end, here will every one be preserved clear in
his condition, who through the Spirit wait for the hope of the Righteousness
of Faith, and take heed there be not in any of you an evil heart of unbelief
departing from the Living God, for we are made partakers of Christ if we hold
fast the profession of our Faith without wavering; And unto us the Gospel is
preached as well as unto them, but the word preached did not profit them not
being mixed with Faith in them that had it, Therefore did he swear in his wrath
that they should not enter into his rest, they entered not because of unbelief.

Now this being so fully proved and manifested to you, lay aside every weight,
and run with patience the Race that is set before you, looking unto Jesus the
Author and finisher of our Faith, who is the Corner stone and Rock of Eternal
salvation, who is rooted and grounded on him will not be shaken though the
storms and tempests beat; Consider him that endured such contradiction of
sinners, least you be weary and faint in your minds; For all the promises of
God in him are Yea and in him Amen, in whom we have boldness and access with
confidence by the Faith of him who works all in us and for us; For none are
Justified by the works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ, and by
Faith you stand, For God has put no difference betwixt the Jews and the
Gentiles, if their hearts be purified by Faith, whose eyes are opened, and who
are turned from the darkness to the ligbt, from the power of Satan unto God,
that they may receive the forgiveness of sin, and an Inheritance among them
that are sanctified by Faith in Christ, even the Righteousness of God which is
by Faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe, For there is
no difference, for all have sinned and come short of the glory of God; For if
the first fruit be holy, the Lump is holy also, and if the Root be holy so are
the branches, and if some of the branches be broken off, it is because of
unbelief, and thou stand by Faith, be not high-minded but fear.

Oh Friends, consider that your standing is by Faith in Christ Jesus, even we
have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be Justified by the Faith of
Christ, For whatsoever is born of God overcomes the World, and this is the
victory that overcomes the world, even our faith, who is he that overcomes
the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Christ, here shall we be
more then Conquerors, as we abide and grow from strength to strength, and from
Faith to Faith, building up one another in our most holy Faith, till we all
come in the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, that we
henceforth be no more Children tossed to and fro and carried about with every
wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of men and cunning craftiness whereby they
lie in wait to deceive, but speaking the Truth in love may grow into him in all
things who is the head, even Christ, that so we might make all men see what is
the fellowship of the mystery which from the beginning of the World has been
hid in God, who Created all things by Jesus Christ, in whom we have boldness
and access with confidence by the Faith in him, that so Christ may dwell in
your hearts by Faith, and you being rooted and grounded in love may be able to
comprehend with all Saints, what is the height, breadth, length and depth, and
to know the Love of God which passes knowledge, unto whom be eternal glory,
honor and dominion for ever.

Now dearly beloved Friends and Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the
power of his might, take unto you the Armor of Righteousness, that you may be
able to stand against the wiles of the Devil, For now you come not to wrestle
with flesh and blood, but with principalities and powers, and against the
Rulers of the darkness of this World, and against spiritual wickednesses in
high places; Wherefore let your clothing and Armor be Light, that you may be
able to stand in the evil day: and above all take the shield of Faith, in this
will you quench the fiery darts of the wicked: Stand fast in one spirit
striving together for the Faith of the Gospel, and in nothing terrified by your
Adversaries, which is to them an evident token of perdition, but to you of
Salvation and that of God; For unto you is given in the behalf of Christ, not
only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake, and that you holding
fast the Word of Life, may cause us to rejoice in the day of Christ that we
have not run in vain, neither labored in vain; Yea if I were offered upon the
sacrifice of your Faith, I could joy and rejoice with you all. And now that you
may come to the soundness of the Truth of the Gospel of Christ, who is the
beginning, the first born from the dead, that you being rooted and grounded in
him, and that through the spirit you may wait for the hope of Righteousness by
Faith, and so grow up as living plants, which are called Trees of Righteousness
the planting of the Lord.

And truly Friends, there is none that believes but he knows that God is, nor
there is none that believes but he has the witness in him that he is in the
unity of the Faith, and he that believes has his heart purified by faith, he
that believes is entered into the rest, and he is sealed with the spirit of
promise.

So Friends search your selves, for a sinner in Zion will be afraid, and fear
will supprize the Hypocrite, and truly none can dwell with the everlasting
burning but he that works Righteousness, and every man's work must be tried
by fire, and he that is saved in the day of the Lord it is so as by fire, it is
not offerings that will burn that will serve in this our day, but it is the
perfect offering of Righteousness that will pass the fire that is now
accepted. The God of Eternal power and life strengthen you by his Grace in the
Inward man, that so you may be True and Faithful Warriors in the Work of the
Lord, that you may fight the good fight, and finish your course, and keep the
Faith, that a crown of Righteousness may be laid up for you.

For certainly the day is come in which the Lord with his sore great and strong
sword will he punish Leviathan that piercing crooked Serpent, and he will slay
the Dragon that is in the Sea; And though there be a Song of a Vineyard of red
Wine, yet the Lord will keep his Plants, he will water it every moment least
any hurt it, yea he will keep it night and day, if Briars and Thorns be set in
battle against him, he will go through them and burn them together, for the
Lords people is his portion, Israel is the lot of his Inheritance, and though
he has found Jacob in a Desert Land, and a wast howling Wilderness, yet he
has led him about and instructed him, he has kept him as the Apple of his
eye, as an Eagle stirs up her Neast, fluttereth over her young, spreads
abroad her Wings and takes them, so does the Lord with the Seed of his
Covenant; And the day is come that they do sing in the Land of Judah, the Lion
of which Tribe has opened the Book and unloosed the Seals; We have a strong
City, Salvation God has given for Walls and Bulwarks, the Gates whereof are
opened that the Righteous Nation may enter in, who are as lively Stones built
up a Spiritual house, an Holy Priesthood to offer up Spiritual Sacrifice
acceptable unto God by Jesus Christ, whose foundation is laid in Zion the chief
corner stone elect and precious, and he that believes on him shall never be
confounded, unto all that believe on him he is precious, but unto them which be
disobedient, the Stone which the builders disallowed, the same is made the head
of the Corner, and you that do believe on him are the chosen Generation, a
Royal Priesthood, an Holy Nation, a peculiar People, so will you show forth the
praises of him that has called you out of darkness into his marvelous Light,
here abiding with God, whose immortalty dwells in the Light, and whose power
and sweet precious presence is in the Light, here abiding with God, whose
immortality dwells in the Light, and whose power and sweet precious presence is
in the Light all things here are possible, here will you inherit all things, so
while you have the Light, believe in the Light, that you may be the Children of
the Light begotten into it, born of the spirit which is light, here you will be
preserved sitting under your own vine, where none can make you afraid, while
that Babylon is falling, and all the graven Images of her Gods is breaking unto
the ground, I will rise up says the Lord God of Hosts, and will cut off from
Babylon the Name and Remnant, Son and Nephew says the Lord, I will make it a
possession for the Bittern, and I will sweep it with the besome of destruction;
The Lord of Hosts has sworn saying, Surely as I have thought so shall it come
to pass, as I have purposed so shall it stand, that I will break the Syrian in
my land, and upon my Mountains tread him under foot, then shall his yoke depart
from off them, and his burden depart from off their shouldiers; This is the
purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth, and this is the hand that is
stretched out upon all Nations, for the Lord of Hosts has purposed, and who
shall disannul it? And his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back?
So all wait in the Faith of Gods Elect for the fulfilling and bringing to pass
of his great Work, for God is faithful that has promised unto Abraham, before
him whom he believed, even God who quickens the dead, and calls those
things which be not, as though they were.

Abraham against hope believed in hope, and so was the Father of many Nations,
he staggered not at the promise of God through unbelife, but was strong in
Faith giving God the Glory, and this was counted to him for Righteousness; Now
ye that seek the Lord, ye that follow after Righteousness, ye must look unto
the Rock whence ye were hewn, and to the hole of the Rock whence ye were
dug, ye must look unto Abraham your Father in the Faith and unto Sarahs Womb
who bare you, For I have called him alone says the Lord, I have blessed him
and increased him, here is Zion comforted, and the wast places and Wildernesses
made like Eden, and her deserts like the Garden of the Lord, joy and gladness
is found therein, Thanksgiving and the voice of Melody to this safe habitation
of rest and peace which is eternal and does endure for ever, do I commit you.

The believing Jews and the believing Gentiles are the Children of Abraham, and
are blessed with faithful Abraham, for of a truth God is no respecter of
persons, but every one that believes and works Righteousness is accepted of
him, whether they be Jews or Greeks, Barbarian or Cythian, Bond or Free, if
they believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and walk in him they are all one, and
this is the Salvation that is to the ends of the Earth the Covenant of Light.

Postscript.
FAith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen,
though many profess it, yet they are but few that know the excellency of it;
In the World there are professions of Faith many, and great Disputings and
Contentions about it among all sorts of Professors; Nevertheless when the Son
of man comes, shall he find Faith on Earth among Jews or Gentiles that does
not believe in the light which he has enlightened them withal? I say nay, for
though many have the words from which they have heard a report of him, yet
shall they not thereby be justified, neither every one that says he believes
the words, and is not yet come to hear and obey the word nigh in the Heart (by
the hearing of which Faith comes) though such may profess faith in words, yet
in the day of trial (I do aver) that their faith will never avail nor profit
them; For that faith which purifies the heart, which gives victory over the
World, through which Kingdoms were subdued, righteousness wrought, promises
obtained, the mouths of Lions stopped, the violence of the Fire quenched, the
edge of the Sword escaped, etc. I say, That that Faith by which those things
have been brought to pass was the gift of God, and Christ the Light of the
World, the Son of Gods Love was the Author of it, and they whose Faith stands
in the Power of God, who have received Gods gift, and have believed in Christ
the Light, the Author and finisher of the Saints Faith, such can give an
account of the Effects of their Faith which works by love, through which they
have gotten victory over their Corruptions and Lusts, over Sin and Death, over
the World and him that is the God of it, and by which they have passed through
many perils and dangers both by Sea and Land; And when the Lord has moved them
to go unto a people in weakness fear and much trembling, they not knowing what
they should say unto them, or whether they should escape with their lives or
no, yet they have given up, and by Faith have been made strong in the Power of
the Lords might, and through Faith they have received the word of the Lord
plentiously, and have ministered it powerfully in the demonstration of the
spirit; and by faith they have escaped the hands of unreasonable men, and often
have turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens, as witness the frequent flying
of the Hireling Priests and their Adherents before a despised people, who
esteem the reproach of Christ greater riches then the Treasures of Egypt, who
to this day sustains trials of cruel mockings, and some scourgings, and many
Bonds and Imprisonment, who by their patience and long suffering have obtained
through faith a good report, yea joy and gladness in the midst of their
tribulation; They have seen through faith many high and mighty Mountains
removed out of the way, and cast into the Sea, And they have also heard and
seen the Sea rage and swell and make a great noise, which they have seen
through faith stilled, and the waters thereof on heaps hurled; Yea through
faith they have passed through many Tribulations and fiery Trials, through many
Perils and Dangers, through many Hardships and Difficulties, and now (through
mercy) have received the end of their faith, to wit, the Salvation of their
Souls, and of this sort are they that know the excellency of Faith and the
worth of it; others that profess faith in words (who do not believe in the
Light which has enlightened them withal) may assay to go through the things
which the Righteous pass through, but let such take heed that they be not
swallowed up by them as the Egyptians were (who wanted Faith in God) yet
assayed to follow the Israelites through the Sea, but behold they were drowned,
when the Israelites by Faith passed through, as by dry land, so without faith
we may conclude it is impossible to please God or to come unto God, or unto the
rest which God has prepared for his people, which many assayes and strives to
enter into, but cannot by reason of unbelief; So let all the faithful that
stands by Faith be circumspect and vigilant, that ye may be able to withstand
in the evil day, and having done all to stand, that through faith you may
obtain an incorruptible inheritance which will never fade away.

London, the 3th, month, 1660. W. C.

THE END.
Errors escaped.
Page 3. l. 10. blot out the, page 4. l. 9. for the state which we must pass
through, read, the state which must be passed through, p. 9. l. 7. for had r.
heard, p. 11. l. 32 for plants r. plant, p. 12. l. 19. about two lines are to
be raced out, p. 15. l. 22. has enlightened, r. Christ has enlightened.


