A Testimony and Warning Given forth in the love of Truth, and is for the
Governor, Magistrates and People inhabiting on the Island of Barbados; which
is a Call to turn to the Lord.
O Ye Magistrates and Inhahitants of the Island of Barbados, O consider how
often the God of Heaven has visited you, sending his faithful Servants and
Messengers amongst you, to call to Repentance and Amendment of Life, and to
warn you, that so you might have escaped the many Judgments which his Hand has
brought upon you diverse times both by Fires often, and Pestilence, and Storms,
all which happened to your great Damage in outward things; also many have been
taken away by sudden Death, as ye well know, to the Sorrow of some, and
amazement for the present, though indeed very soon forgotten again, as many
have been Eyewitnesses thereof: For when the last great Fire was in Town, I
being in one House near adjoining, where were many of the chief Women of the
Town, who were there to escape the Danger, and looking on the Fire, and seeing
it like to take hold on their Houses, great Terror was then in their Hearts,
who then in the Time of Affliction remembered to call upon God, where I heard
some of them say, Lord have Mercy, and spare us this time, and surely we will
Repent and Amend our Lives: whereas ye knew that ye did lie to God; for ye
still went on in the same Excess after, and unto this day; so out of your own
Mouths you will be condemned; for you were then spared alive, and many of your
Houses did escape the Fire. And now you are afraid of Wars; for indeed the
Sword it is already furbished for a Slaughter; all Trees that bring not forth
Fruit to God must be cut down by the Sword of his Mouth. Neither can any truly
say, that God is unrighteous in his dealings toward the Sons of men, because
that his Visitations have been many to turn People from the Ways which are not
good, that so he might have Mercy on all, and abundantly pardon those who
through true Repentance and Amendment of Life do hearken unto his Reproofs of
Instruction, which is the Way of Life, as says the Scripture. So now consider
how his Messengers have been slighted among you, and sent away empty, and some
ye Imprisoned, who came from far to seek for Fruits amongst you, Fruits of
Mercy, that so God might show Mercy in the Day of Visitation, which surely will
come on all that dwell on the Earth. Some also who have been long Inhabitants
amongst you, my self and another Woman, we were moved to go to your House of
Worship, to call upon you to Repentance, that so amongst God's faithful Ones ye
might be made Partakers of like precious Mercies in this day of Lovingkindness,
which is known to those who are given up with the whole Mind and whole Heart to
follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes: And indeed, in the shedding abroad of
God's Love in our Hearts it was in which I with the other Friend came among
you, but ye know ye made a Mock at it; O therefore take heed that God, who is
just in all his Ways and righteous in all his Judgments, do not laugh at your
Calamity, and mock when your Fear comes, yea, whenas your Fear comes like a
Whirlwind, that none can stop it, then shall you call, but he will not hear,
and cry, but he will not answer: And so though we did not break any Law (for it
was not charged against us at your Court) yet were we committed to Prison, and
were haled along by the Bell-man of the Town, who at first handled us roughly;
but we told him, We should not resist him, nor seek to go from him, seeing he
was commanded to carry us: thus has God's Servants been handled in your
Island. Likewise the Oppression of God's People who are Dwellers among you is
very great, because that for Conscience sake toward God they cannot send
Horses nor go in Arms, their Goods are taken from them, almost to the Ruin of
some Families outwardly. So all these things and more the great God both of
Heaven and Earth takes notice of; and surely if there be not a speedy course
taken for to ease these heavy Burdens and Oppressions of his People, who are
indeed made a Prey upon for turning from Iniquity, and Persecuted for living
godly in Christ Jesus: Yea, surely, even God the Lord, who knows how to
deliver his People, who in all Ages did marvellously appear for those who
trusted in him, who is now riding on conquering and to conquer; we know he is
God, who changes not, but is the same this day, yesterday and forever, with
whom there is no variableness nor shadow of turning: I say, he will not turn
away from any who turn unto him, and put their whole trust in him; for he has
said. Mine Ear is not heavy that it cannot hear, neither is mine Hand shortened
that it cannot save; nor will he in any wise cast off any who come unto him. So
now there are many that can draw near unto the Throne of his Grace, and can
come unto him as unto a faithful Creator, who has promised, That the Rod of
the Wicked shall not always rest on the back of the Righteous, lest they turn
to Folly: So I say, that God will show forth more and more of his Mercies unto
thousands, who love him and keep his Commands; and his Indignation will be
known upon thousands of them that hate him, and keep not his Commands; For if
any say, they love God, and keep not his Commands, such are Liars, and do not
the Truth: So these are his Commands, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength, and thy Neighbor
as thy self; so to fear God and to keep his Commands is the whole Duty of man,
as say the Scriptures of Truth. Now, I say, they who take away Goods from any,
would not be so done unto; they who do imprison any when what is done is for
the Answer of a Good Conscience toward God, such would not be done so unto;
such as go about to Kill with the Sword or any carnal Weapon, they would not
that another should do so to them; but Christ says, He which kills with the
Sword, shall be killed with the Sword: So all his Followers or Disciples must
not take up any carnal Weapon; for their Weapons are spiritual, and mighty
through God, to the pulling down of the spiritual Wickedness; they must take
his Yoke, which is easy, and his Burden, which is light, they must take up the
Cross daily, which is the Power of God unto Salvation unto all that believe and
obey the Truth; they must walk in the Light as he is in the Light, and so
become Children of the Light and of the Day, by putting off all the Works of
Darkness and of the Night: and these are Christ's Commands to all his little
Flock, for whom he said that a Kingdom is prepared; yea, he said, Walk in the
Light while you have the Light, and work while it is called to Day, for the
Night comes wherein none can work; yea, the Night comes, I say, upon the
Children of the Night, in whom the Prince of this World rules, where the Wars
are, and Rumors of Wars within and without: But blessed be God, there are many
Children of the Day who can truly say, Greater is he that is in us then he that
is in the World; and Christ said to his Followers, If ye were of the World, the
World would love his own; but ye are not of the World, even as I am not of the
World; but I have chosen you out of the World, therefore does the World hate
you; but they hated me before they hated you; and for this cause they hated me,
because I testified that the Works thereof are evil. So now consider what is of
the World, Evil Thoughts, Envy, Malice, the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the
Eye, and the Pride of Life, with other such like things, and the Love of the
World, which is Enmity with God, as says the Scripture; for where the Love of
the World is, the Love of the Father is not. And so, I say, turn to the Light
of Christ Jesus in your Consciences, that with it you may see how it stands
between God and your immortal Souls; for that is it which stands all people
most in stead, that is to say, how it shall be with us when we go hence and be
no more, even to our long home; for our time here is but a moment in comparison
of Eternity; and all Souls are immortal, either ever to live with God in Joy
and Happiness, or else in eternal separation from him, in perpetual Misery and
Torment, in that Fire which cannot be quenched; as for instance, you may read
how that Dives when he was in Hell was not dead, but living in that place of
Torment, where he saw Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom, and how Abraham said, Now
remember how thou in thy Lifetime had thy good things, but Lazarus evil
things; but now he is comforted, and thou tormented: and further he said, There
is a great Gulf between, that those who would come from thence cannot come; so
his Day time was gone over his Head. O therefore I warn you in God's Fear, lay
these things to heart, before it be too late, and your day of Visitation pass
over your Heads; and let not these things be to you as a Tale that is told,
but, as I said, turn to within, to the Light of Christ, and every one deal
truly with your own Souls, while you have a time and space given you; for God
will not be mocked, such as every one sows, such shall they reap; they who sow
to the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap Corruption; but whosoever sows to the
Spirit, does from the Spirit reap Life everlasting. Now what can any sow to the
Spirit? I say, Nothing but Obedience to its Requirings; for so is Life reaped,
and Joy and Peace, that none can take away; blessed and praised be God forever,
does my Soul say: and as says the Scripture, so we say, All have a Measure of
the Spirit given to profit withal, as to Godward; and by it all may know a
profitting in the Knowledge of God, whom to know is Life; and some have more
and some less, as it is testified: but he who has least, if he come to improve
it, he shall find it sufficient for Salvation, for Reproof, for Instruction:
and the Reproof of Instruction is the Way of Life; and so herein it is that
God's Grace has appeared unto all, in that all are enlightened with a measure
of the true Light, which as the Apostle said, The Grace of God has appeared to
all men, which teaches us, that denying all Worldly Lusts, we might live
soberly, righteously and godlily in this present evil World: so it has
appeared to all, but all do not turn to it, to be taught by it. And Christ
says, I am the Light of the World: and John says, That was the true Light,
which enlightneth every man that comes into the World: So we say this is the
Grace, the Light, which manifests all that is to be known of God, for by it
God has shown it unto us, and by it God will show it unto all who believe in
it, and no other way but by the measure of his Grace made known in the hearts
of all Believers, whereby a profitting is known, and a growing from one degree
of Grace to another degree of Grace; for, By Grace are we saved, and that not
of our selves, it is the Gift of God, as said the Apostle, who was taught first
to live soberly, then righteously, then godlily, and to do unto all as we would
have all do unto us; for so it teaches, and brings into Righteousness and true
Holiness, without which none can ever see God: So all that do run this Ra^e
which is set before us faithful unto the end, shall surely obtain the Crown of
Life, which God the Righteous Judge shall give at that day: So the Way of Life
and the Way of Death is set before every Man and every Woman; so they who love
the Light, they bring all their deeds to the Light, that thereby they may be
tried whether they are wrought in God, who is Light, with whom there is no
Darkness at all; for God will render unto all according as their Works are,
whether good or evil; but they who hate the Light, love their evil deeds, and
will not bring their deeds to be tried, lest by the Light they should be
reproved; for that which manifests is Light; so while it shines in Darkness,
the Darkness cannot comprehend it; but as it shines out of the Darkness, then
shall all see how it is with them; that is a measure of him who told the Woman
of Samaria all that ever she had done, who when she had met with him, she ran
and told them of the City, and said, Is not this the Christ? so when we had
found him, by turning to the Light, for that is his Name, we cannot but tell
you of him, that you may wait to see his Day Star arise in your Hearts, which
gives the true Knowledge of God and of his Glory in the Face of Jesus Christ;
and his Name is called The Word of God. So to the Word of Faith, which is near
all, in the Heart and in the Mouth, that all may obey and do it; for Obedience
is better then Sacrifice, and to Hearken better then the Fat of Rams: yea, this
Word is a swift Witness, as it is given heed unto, against every Evil Way, and
Evil Word, and Evil Thought; and as it is minded it says, This is the Way,
walk in it, when thou turnest to the right hand or to the left; and so as
Christ said, This is the Condemnation of the World, that Light is come into the
World, but men love Darkness rather then Light, because their deeds are evil:
so that which shows the Evil, the same gives power against all Evil, and
purifies the Conscience from all dead works, and makes alive to serve God in
the newness of his own Spirit; to whom be Praise and Glory, even to God, who is
over all in Heaven and Earth blessed forever and ever, Amen.

So this is a Testimony and also a Warning from one who has obtained Mercy
through Christ the Lord of Life and Glory, that now ye may seek God, that ye
may find him to your Joy; for he is not far from any one of you; and this is
the way to keep God's Judgments from a Place or Land, even by keeping his
Commands, for it is said, that a man's greatest Enemies are those of his own
house. And also consider if Iniquity does not greatly abound in your Island,
and even the Sins of Egypt, Babylon and Sodom; first Egypt, Hardness of
Heart; for as Pharaoh said, having hardened his Heart against the Servant of the
Lord, Moses, he said, Who is the Lord that I should obey him? and then the Sins
of Babylon, Whoredom and Confusion of Tongues, as Cursing, Swearing, and not
Plainness of speech one to another; whereas Christ said, Let your Communication
be Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay, for what is more comes of evil: and then the Sins
of Sodom, Pride, Idleness and Fullness of Bread. Now let that of God in all your
Consciences answer if these things be not so, which are herein testified, and
that by the Movings of God's Spirit in my Heart; and indeed, it is for no other
end then to clear my Conscience in his Sight: So if you would have God's Anger
turned away, and his Hand of Mercy stretched out toward you still, and toward
your Island, it must be by turning to him, who will then turn unto you, and to
lie low under his Mighty Hand; for if God keeps not the City or Place, all
the Watchmen watch but in vain. So this is in true Love to your Souls, from one
who is known by the Name of

LYDIA FELL.

THE END,

