PRO PRESBYTERO JOHANNE, AC Omnibus ejus REGIBUS and PRINCIPIBUS subordinatis A
Populo Dei in Anglia, vocato Anglice QUAKERS.

FOR Presbyter John, AND All his subordinate KINGS and PRINCES.

FKOM THE People of God in ENGLAND, in ENGLISH called, QUAKERS.

H. F. J. S.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson at the sign of the Black-spread Eagle and
Windmill in Martins l'Grand, 1660.

Pro PRESBYTERO JOHANNE, ac omnibus ejus Regibus, and Principi bus subordinatis.
Nos populi sumus e longinquo proventi, qui (...) sumus, qui salutem illorum
cum timore, and tremore c^mus (...) tales sumus, quales qui apud verbum Domini
(qui vivit ac permanet in aeternum,) tremunt; quo cuncta finientia, and non
permanentia neque insistentia videntur. Nos ex omnibus Derisoribus, and Scurris
in mundo ejecti sumus; a blateronibus circa Ministerium, ecclesiam, Religionem,
and cultum, qui ab illis in Derisione tremores vocati sumus, qui quod
concutiendum est concuti cognoscimus, utque id quod concuti non potest
appareat; Agnus a fundamento mundi Mactatus nunc etiam apparetur; omnesque
occisores, cum maxim precipuis illorum maximi illius professores fuerunt, and
nune est tremor, quassatioqu* in Tabernaculis, in Campis, in exercitibus
illorum: nuncque omnium voluntariorum adoratorum, and ecclesiarum, and
Ministerii, inventionumque quassatio, and concussii sunt, and scientiae,
intellectusque quae in nihilum rediguntur, nunc enim semen surrectum est, super
illorum vestigium, eos in pulverem ad molandum; nunc agnus surrectus est, and
ad regnandum ventus est, qui omnia sibiipsi subjiciet, and regna Nationesque
subdet, qui reget, and regnabit, imperiumque in jusitia habebit.

Annunciatio nostra mittitur ad te, and ad tua regna, a servis Domini, misitque
nos servos suos ad te, tuaque Dominia, Nationesque visitandum, nosque audientes
te amorem habere in fidem Christi mundi luminis, qui illuminat omnem hominem
venientem in mundum, quo homines fidem ab illo apprehendunt.

Nos a Domino ex magna Britannia moti, ex Anglia ab inter familias Prophetarum
Dei excelsi, inter quos potestas, nomen, and gloria ejus revelatur, qui duo
sumus ex ceteris, qui in alteras Nationes emittimur in mundum, in extremas
terrae ^ras, ad Dei vineam visitandum, ac Reges terrae quos Deus in manu ejus
h^bet, and sicut aquas illos regit, qui personam alicujus hominis respicere non
possumus, neque legem potentis Dei transgredi, quae dicit quod ille qui
personas re picit peccatum committit, and ita totius Legis potent^s Dei
universae terrae sit reus, Dei Jacob, Abraham, Mosis, Solomonis, Davidis, Dei
qui ita mundum amavit ut unigenitum Filium suum in mundum misit, quod quisquis
in illo crederet non periret, sed vitam aeternam haberet, qui filius emnem
hominem in mundum venientem illuminat, ut omnes per illum credere possint, sic
in illo stasta, respectuque omnes homines in estimatione habemus ut saluari
possent, and ad vitam venirent, ac omnes homines, and creaturas in Domino
honoramus, quatenus ipse eos creavit, quatenus creaturas, quas ipse fecit,
quanquam ab illo degene^es fiant, iis opus manuum ipsius existentibus; Ita
igitur ab omnibus in terram hominibus despecti sumus, utrum professores Dei
Chri^ti, Prophetarum, Apostolorum, Sanctorumque verborum; in tota Scriptura
sint; iis non in vita, and potestate Christi existentibus, in vita Prophetarum,
and Apostolorum, atque id omnis odii in terra causa est tam inter Professore,
quam Ethnicos, sic tua nobilitas, amor tui ad Jesum, amor tui ad Apostolos, and
amor tui erga Prophetas multum delocutus est; at hoc non nisi pars nostri
nuncii, quod Tu, and Vos, and omnes in vitam Mosis, Prophetarum, Christi Jesu,
and in vitam Dei pervenire possetis, totumque subter te Dominium tuum, quo pax
Dei omnem intellectum pretereuns cuncta corda vestra possideat, ut ad fidem
quam habetis in filio Dei virtutem addatis, utque ad scientiam quam habetis de
Prophetis and Apostolis, and Christo temperantiam addatis, and ut ad
temperantiam, addatis patientiam, ac pietatem, and ad pietatem fraternum amorem
and charitatem, quae nunquam deficiat ubi Dei amor est, hic amor in cord
diffusus, Nunc autem his in vobis entibus, abundabitis ac nequaquam steriles,
nec infructuosi in cognitione Domini nostri Jesu Christi eritis; sed introitus
vobis abunde ministrabitur in regnum sempiternum Domini nostri Jesu Christi,
sed si haec deficiunt caeci eritis, vosque a pristinis peccatis vestris unquam
purgatos fuisse obliviscemini; haec itaque praefata in vobis cognoscenda sunt;
and necesse e^t ut regnum caelorum notum sit in vobis licet grano sinapis
simile est, and illud est quod malo, aut peccato nunquam assentiverit, idque
est fermentum donec nova massa fiat.

Fert verbum, quod erat in principio, Chri lus [in quo omnes Prophetae, and
Typi, figurae, umbraeque desinunt sentiendum est ac inveniendum in cord, idque
est verbum quod pretiosum a vili disserat, pretiosa desideria a vilibus,
preriosa verba a vilibus Christusque ft intus mysterium, spes gloriae, and
omnis verus Chri^^ianus noscituras est Legem Dei intra mentem, and in cord suo
positam, adeo ut non necesse erit illis ad invicem dicere, cognoscite Dominum,
omnes enim a maximo ad mimmum cognoscent eum, quicunque legem in cerdibus suis
inscriptam habent and in mentibus suis pontam, Dominusque ipse ad docendum
populum ejus Spiritumo venturus est, in quo apud seipsum unitatem habebunt, in
quo adorabitur in veritate, in quo Spiritu unitatem cum filio, cum verbis
Prophetarum, and Apostolorum ejus, illorumque Spiritibus, and apud se invicem
habebunt. Nunc autem nemo qui Christianus est cum carne, and sanguine
certaturus est, aut inimicos osurus, sed illos amaturus; neque circa ecclesiam
suam, circa Ministerium suum, circa cultum suum, circa Religionem suam
persecuturus est, nihil coactione, sed amore facturi sunt Christiani, nihil in
lite, ibi enim gloratio, and Jactantia, elatio erunt, Deus enim amavit mundum
etiamsi hosts ejus, atque ita oportet Filios ejus non circa Religionem,
ecclesiam, cultum, ac Ministerium interficere; atque is Christus, filius Dei,
qui in mundum missus fuit, saluator mundi, ipse dicit Discipulis suis amate
inimicos, and persecutores, alioquin quid plus quam Pharisei agitis? illi enim
amicos suos amabant, and non in amore Dei qui mundum amabat fuerant; hic ita
Christianorum amorem oportet ab amore mundi differ, Phariset, Judaei, illi
Templum, sacerdotes, Prophetas, Scripturasque habebant, sed extra vitam quae
illas edidit, sic Christum quando venit non receperunt, atque ita amorem Dei
nesciebant; sed amico suos persecuti sunt, sicut omnes Christiani qui
scripturas ventatis, and Christi verba habent, and inimicos non amant, illi non
ab amore Phariseorum differrunt, qui amor est amor sui, fic universalis Dei
amor (filiis ejus in eo manentibus) host amat, perfectus fit, ficqne in mentem
Christi venit, per quem mentem Dei sciunt, and in pactum Dei veniunt, and cum
vita Dei consociantur.

FINIS.
For PRESBYTER JOHN, and all his subordinate KINGS and PRINCES.
We are a people come from far, who are such as works out their Salvation
with fear, and trembling; who are such as tremble at the word of God (who
lives, and abides, and endures for ever) by which all things are seen that end,
and do not endure, and do not abide, we are by all the scorners, and scoffers
in the world cast out, by the janglers about Ministry, Church Religion, and
Worship, who are by them in scorn called Quakers, who know that which is to be
shaken is shaken, and that is appeared which cannot be shaken, the Lamb slain
from the Foundation of the World, and now is appeared; and are the slayers,
which the chiefest of them have been the greatest Professors of him: and now is
the trembling and shaking in their tents, in their Camps, in their hosts, and
now are the quivering and shaking, of all the will worshippers and Churches,
and Ministry, and Inventions, and of the knowledge, and understanding which
comes to naught; for now is the seed risen a topp of them to grind them to
powder, for now is the Lamb risen, and come to reign who will subject all
things to himself and subdue Kingdoms, and Nations who will Rule, and Reign,
and have the Government in righteousness.

Our message is sent unto Thee, and to thy Kingdoms by us the servants of the
Lord, and has sent us his servants to give Thee, and Thy Dominions, and
Nations a visit and hearing that thou have a Love to the faith of Christ, the
Light of the World, which enlightneth every man that comes into the world, by
which men apprehend the Faith from him.

We from the Lord having a moving out of great Britain, England, from among
the family of the Prophets of the most high God, among whom his name and power
and glory is revealed, who are two of the rest which are sent out into the
Nations, into the World, into the utmost parts of the Earth, to visit Gods
Vineyard, and the Kings of the Earth whom God has in his hand, and rules them
as the waters, who cannot respect any man's person, nor transgress the Law of
the mighty God, which says, he that respects persons commits sin, and so
becomes guilty of the whole Law of the mighty God of the whole earth, of Jacob,
of Abraham, of Moses, of Solomon, of David, God that so loved the world, that
he sent his only begotten Son into the world, that whosoever believes in him
should not perish but have eternal life, which Son does enlighten every one
that comes into the World, that all through him might believe, so in that
state, and regard we have all men in esteem; (that they might be saved and come
to life) and honor all men, and Creatures in the Lord as he has created them,
as creatures that he has made; though they be degenerated from him, they being
his handywork, so therefore are we despised of all the men of the earth,
whether Professors of God, Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles, and Saints
words, in the whole Scripture, they not being in the life, and power of God,
Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles lise, and that is the cause of all hatred in
the earth, amongst Professors as well as Heathens, so thy Nobility, thy Love to
Jesus, thy love to the Apostles, and thy love to the Prophets is much spoken
off, but this is but part of our message, that thou, and you, and all might
come into the life of Moses, of the Prophets of Christ Jesus, and the life of
God, and all thy Dominion under thee, whereby the peace of God which passes
all understanding may possess all your hearts, that to the faith you have in
the Son of God you may add virtue, and to the knowledge which you have of the
Prophets, and Apostles, and Christ you may add Temperance, and to Temperance,
you may add Patience and Godliness, and to Godliness, Brotherly kindness, and
Charity, which never fails where the love of God is, this love shed in the
heart; Now these things being in you, you shall abound, and never be barren,
nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, and an entrance shall
be Ministered unto you abundantly, into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord
Jesus Christ; but if these things be laking you will be blind, and forget that
ever you were purged from your old sins. Therefore these things before
mentioned must be known in you; and the Kingdom of Heaven must be known in you,
though it be but like a grain of Mustardseed, and that is it which never
consented unto sin, and evil, and that is leaven until it become a new Lump.
And the word which was in the beginning, Christ (in whom all the Prophets and
Types, and Figures, and shaddows end) is to be felt, and found in the heart,
and that is the word that does divide asunder the Precious from the Vile,
Precious desires from Vile, Precious words from Vile, and Christ becomes within
the Mystery, the hope, of Glory, and every true Chri^^ian is to know the law of
God put into his mind, and into his heart, that they need not say one to
another, know the Lord, for all shall know the Lord from the lead to the
greated, who have the Law written in their hearts, and put in their minds, and
the Lord is coming to teach his people himself by his spirit, in which they
shall have unity with himself, in which he will be worshipped in the truth, in
which spirit they shall have unity with the Son and with his Prophets, and
Apostles words, and with their Spirits, and one with another. Now no one that
is a Christian is to wrestle with flesh and blood, or is to hate enemies, but
to love them, and they are hot to persecute about their Church, about their
Ministry, about their Worship, about their Religion, they are to do nothing by
Constraint, but by Love, nothing in strif, for their will be a glorying, and a
bosting, and lifting up, for God loved the world though enemies of himself, and
so must his Children, not kill about Religion, Church-Worship, and Ministry,
and that Christ the Son of God, that was sent into the world, the Savior of
the world he says unto his Diciples, love Enemies, and, Persecutors, or else
what do you more than the Pharisees, for they loved their own friends, but were
not in the love of God that loved the world, so here Christians love must
differ from the world, the Pharisees, the Jews, they had the Temple, the
Priests, and the Prophets, the Scriptures, but out of the life that gave them
forth, so did not receive Christ when he came, and so they did not know the
love of God, but they persecuted their Friends, as all the Christians that have
the Scriptures of Truth, and Christ's words, and do not love enemies they differ
not from the Pharisees love, which is selfish, so the universal love of God,
the Children of God being in it, loves enemies, becomes perfect, and so comes
into the mind of Christ, through which they know the mind of God, and comes
into the Covenant of God, and acquainted with the life of God,

THE ENd

