LEX TALIONIS: OR, THE AUTHOR OF Naked Truth STRIPPED NAKED.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's.
MDCLXXVI.

Imprimatur.

G. Jane R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domesticis.

LEX TALIONIS: OR, The Author of Naked Truth stripped naked.
To the Chapter concerning the Articles of Faith.
I Have perused the Pamphlet which you sent of Naked Truth, and whereas you
require me to give you my opinion of it, though I might refer you to the
Printed Discourse of that worthy Person who has animadverted upon it; yet
because this would look like an Artificial excusing of pains, and seem only
more civilly to disobey, I will trouble you with the cursory reflections which
I made upon a hasty view of the aforesaid Book; wherein I shall chiefly aim at
two things not particularly designed in the Printed Answer: First, to show that
this humble Moderator (as he styles himself) who pretends in his Title to give
the true state of the Primitive Church, is utterly ignorant of Ecclesiastical
Antiquity, and grossly mistaken in the representations he makes thereof. And
then secondly, whereas he boldly avers to the Lords and Commons, to whom he has
the confidence to dedicate his Libel, that there is nothing therein contained
which is contrary to the known Laws of the Land; I shall evidence that several
things therein contained are as contrary to the known Laws as his Printing
without License confestly was: and that the Book is pernicious, and tending to
the disturbance of the established constitution of the Church and State.

As to the Book considered in the gross, my first reflection about it was,
whether it could be the work of the same person, several things being so well,
and more so very ill said; Therefore if it happened to have one single Author, it
either seemed the exercise of Wit of some Skeptic and Atheistical derider of
Religion, who desired to make sport with holy things, and say pro and contra,
all that occurred to his mind: Or else that it was wrote in the different
intervals of a crazed Enthusiast, and therefore not unseasonably introduced by
a declaration of being the product of Fasting and Prayer, and seeking of God,
venerable words which have not left off to abuse the World: Or lastly, (which
seems most probable) that it was wrote by some ambitious discontented Person of
the Church of England, who not preferred according to his merit, or what may be
greater than that, his expectation, his mind being leavened with spite and
anger, cavils at the present Constitution of the Church; and he having in ill
humor left off studying, writes out of memory imperfect shreds of Antiquity,
and yet not able to cast away at once the Principles formerly imbibed,
sometimes speaks in favor to Conformity, and quarrels the disobedience of
Dissenters.

But to pass from Conjectures to that which is more certainly before us. At the
first setting out our Author tells us, That the Primitive Church received the
Apostles Creed, as the sum total of Faith necessary to Salvation. And then
disputes, Why is it not now so? Which involving an intimation that in the
Church of England it is not thought so, can only tend to sedition, being an
odious suggestion* and absolutely false: And it is known, that scarcely any
thing is more particularly insisted on by our Church against the Papists than
their making new Articles to the Creed. But it seems the fault will rather lie
upon us, that with the Primitive Church, we think the whole Creed necessary:
For we are bid remember and observe, That the Treasurer to Candace his Creed
was only, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God; and no more that this
purch^sed the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. That is, the Articles of the Death of our
Savior, his Resurrection, and Ascension; at least, those of the Catholic
Church, the Communion of Saints, the Forgiveness of Sins, and Resurrection of
the Body, are if not superfluous, yet unnecessary speculations. How well this
suits with the close of the Athanasian Creed, our Author would do well to
consider: If it shocks it, then he must confess that he has said something
contrary to the known Laws of the Land: The Liturgy (of which that makes a
part) being confirmed by several Acts of Parliament, and in particular the late
one of Uniformity. Moreover, the Statute of Primo Eliz. which established the
Oath of Supremacy, determining the limits of Heresy to be, not only what has
been ordered or judged to be so, by the Authority of the Canonical Scriptures,
but also by the first four General Councils, or any of them; he may bethink
himself, whether the System of what is to be held de fide, by the Law of the
Land, is so narrow as is here pretended. But our Author says, Philip required
no more ^of the Eunuch than this short Confession, that I believe that Jesus
Christ is the Son of God, and that there is no assurance nor great probability
that he was more fully instructed; which is plainly to contradict the Text of
S. Luke, who tells us, that Philip (from the place of Isaiah which the Eunuch
was reading) began at the same Scripture, and preached unto him Jesus; which
certainly expresses a greater compass of particularities than is in the short
System here proposed. Yet farther, it would be considered whether our Authors
Argument be good; Philip required no more, but baptized him on this; and had
the Eunuch departed this life in the same instant that Philip parted from him,
I believe I have better assurance that thi^ Faith would have saved the Eunuch,
than any man has that he was ever taught more; therefore that Confession here
required, is a sufficient Summary of Faith. For sure there is more required as
necessary to be known of a Man, than of a Child in Christ. Such a knowledge as
persuades to the undertaking the Covenant and duties of the Gospel, may entitle
unto Baptism; but yet neither involves the knowledge of the whole Gospel, nor
supersedes the necessity of it. As to the Event of the Eunuchs condition had he
departed this life immediately after Baptism, it is as much to the purpose as
if one should say, that if an Infant immediately after Baptism should depart
this life, he would be saved even without the Eunuchs Creed, therefore even
that may well be spared. But after a complaint of the mischiefs arising from
the establishment of new and many Articles of Faith, and requiring all to
assent unto them: (which let them who are guilty of doing answer for it) the
Author goes on to say, That for his part he thinks nothing can be more clearly
deduced from Scripture, nothing more fully expressed in Scripture, nothing more
suitable to natural Reason, than that no man should be forced to believe.
Whereby he means, or else he can mean nothing, (for what appears not is as if
it were not) that no man should be forced to declare his belief of any thing.
Now since the Scripture under the severest penalties requires the confession of
Christ before men, it is not sure contrary to Scripture, that Persons should be
forced to declare their Belief; and if so, will not be thought unsuitable to
natural Reason neither. But now let us see whether this Assertion of our Author
be not contrary to the Law of the Land, notwithstanding the assurance we have
from him who tells us, there is not a word in his discourse against it. The
Oath of Sovereignty, enjoined by the Statute before mentioned, Primo Eliz.
commands the Subject to testify and declare in his conscience, that the Kings
Majesty is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
things or causes, as Temporal, etc. So likewise the other Tertio Jacob. I truly
and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify, and declare in my conscience
before God and the World, etc. And the Act of Uniformity commands the Abjuring
of the Covenant, and assenting and consenting to every thing contained in the
Liturgy. And after this, let my Author consider with what duty and good manners
he concludes, Thus you see how impertinent, how irrational, how impious it is
to require a man to believe (that is, profess his belief of) any thing more
than is clearly contained in Scripture. The truth is, we, dull as we are, do
not at all see this impertinence and unreasonableness, notwithstanding the
beautiful illustrations of the Eye and the Candle, the hammer and the beating
out the brains. St. Paul has taught us that Heresy is a work of the flesh,
and we know Pride, and Prepossession, and Interest are of more concernment
therein than want of faculties and apprehension. The thing complained of is,
that men turn away their faces, shut their eyes, and will not lay their heads
to consider what is set before them: And if the immorality of error be once
cured, there will be a speedy account of its misadventures in Speculation and
Theory. The Will of man has an higher pretense to freedom than the Intellect;
Tyranny can make me suffer, but cannot oblige me to approve, much less to
choose: and yet it is not impertinent or irrational to require men to will, and,
what is more than that, actually to perform their duty: Nor can any sufficient
cause be rendered, why perverse and stubborn men should not be made to learn it
and consider it too; which plainly is their duty, and previous to the
performance of it. The Scripture indeed commands to speak the truth in love, to
instruct the Brother in the spirit of meekness; and the same Scripture has made
the greatest Christian Monarch, and his meanest Vassal brethren; but
notwithstanding that, he bears not the Sword in vain; and in love and meekness,
and with the greatest kindness and charity, is obliged to cut off the evil
doer. The question, To what purpose is force? would indeed do well in the mouth
of a Ranter or Anabaptist, and I might answer thereto, that it is ordained by
God to punish the rebellion of such a question by sharp severities; but I shall
content my self to repeat the Apostles words, just now recited, The Magistrate
bears not the Sword in vain; there is a purpose why fo^ce should be used, and
all sober men understand it, though our Author knows not of it. What is added
of the Scripture rule of Faith being complete and full is seriously to be
considered: But he who straitens the credenda into one short Proposition of the
Eunuchs Creed, may in likelihood be as blameable in diminishing from it, as any
can be by adding to it. Though, by the way, our Author is to know, that the
explication of Faith, is not the extending or making new Articles of it. And
what he says of requiring men to believe with Divine Faith what they add to the
Scripture, is to make their words equal with God^: If this refer to the Church
of England, first he proceeds on a false supposal, that there is somewhat
added, when there is not any thing added; And secondly, it is notorious, they
have never pretended that any thing ought to be believed, as Scripture, or with
Divine Faith, but Scripture. So that the exaggerations of impertinent,
irrational, and impious, fall to the ground, unless they may chance to rest
upon the head of him who to seditious and uncharitable purposes produces them.

The next Paragraph desires it may be soberly considered, that the Trinity,
Incarnation, Resurrection are things far above the highest reason, yet
believed, because God, who cannot lie, has declared them: And that it is
strange that any one should take upon him to declare one tittle of them more
than God has declared. But I desire to be allowed to put in a caveat, that men
should not be suffered to declare several (not tittles, but) Articles, less
than God has declared; that our Authors direction concerning the quashing the
whole debate of the Omoo^sios and Omoiousios may not be admitted; and for
quietness sake we may not be Latitudinarian Arians, and Theists; pretend to
admit the Scripture-Doctrines in our own extravagant sense, and therefore to be
liable to no control* or farther rendering a reason of the Faith that is in us.
It is easy to say, that the Bishops who contended in this great Controversy
were more zeal^us th^n dis^re^t: But they who have read the History of those
times (which it is plain our Author never did) know very well that the
Orthodox, if they were defective in any thing, offended in permitting by their
lenity Arius to infect the World and form his party, before ever they took
notice of him: And the discreet advice here given by silence to prevent the
Malice, Rancor, Persecution, and War, which fell upon the Orthodox* might as
well have been given to the Christians, during the ten Persecutions; and
doubtless might have preserved many thousand lives, and damned as many souls.
The instance here mentioned of the Resurrection falls very pat to the purpose;
the Scripture happening to afford a Parallel of what our Author thinks so
advisable. The Resurrection (he tells us) whereby men shall rise with the same
body, when one body may be eaten and converted into several bodies, is far
above the highest reason and sharpest understanding; yet was believed by
Hymeneus and Philetus, because God had declared it: Yet they by keeping within
the bounds which God had declared, and referring it to that which was perfectly
true, the first Resurrection from the death of sin, destroyed the faith of
some: And it is to be hoped that St. Paul was not more zealous than discreet,
because he was so earnestly concerned against them. There is no Arian nor
Socinian who professes not to believe in Jesus Christ the Son of God, or allows
him not to be God; but our Author must hold us exc^sed, if we expect farther
satisfaction in so weighty a concern, and examine how these Gentlemen stand
affected to the tenure by which he holds his Godhead, and the Shiboleth of his
Eternal Generation, and the (...). I am no friend to the unravelling of
Mysteries, and making them so evident as to forfeit their nature; yet I must
not be so much a Socinian, notwithstanding our Authors opinion concerning the
procession of the Holy Ghost, of I will send the Comforter: Or of the
Sacrament, This is my Body: To believe every one Orthodox who admits those
words to be Scripture, and declaratory of truth. He says indeed, that we have
no other s^fe way to speak of divine matters, but in Scripture L^ng^age,
^psissi^is verbis, with the very same words. How then I pray comes it about
that we may speak of them in Dutch, or French, or English? they are none of
them the ipsissima verba, the original Hebrew or Greek. It were easy to show
how much of our Creed the Socinian would have us cashier on this account, and
how pestilent consequences have been drawn from these unhappy Premises. Nay,
let us give even the Socinians their due, they in their sober Moods are not so
extravagantly mad as is our Author. Volkelius in his Fifth Book and Seventh
Chapter says, Sacris voluminibus ob ipsorum perfectionem, nihil nec adjiciendum
nec subtrahendum, hoc tamen non eo consilio a nobis dictum existimari velim
quasi omnes dictiones, omnes sententias, omnesque collectiones iisdem literis
ac syllabis in S. Scriptura non expressas ob hoc ipsum repudi^mus. Nam vel
dictio aut phrasis aliqua subaudiri, vel sententia aliqua si non verbis, reipsa
tamen in S. literis contineri potest, vel denique ex iisdem colligi. Id autem
qualecunque est perinde habendum existimamus, ac ^i disertissime scriptum
extaret. Neque enim in sola verba sed praecipue in verborum sententiam animum
intendere debemus. Such is the perfection of the holy Scripture that nothing is
to be added to, or taken from it. This we say, not that we reject all Words,
Sentences, and Inferences, which are not there in the same Letters and
Syllables. For many times Words and Phrases are to be understood; and diverse
things, though not verbally, yet really may be be contained in the Scripture,
or inferred from it. All which we take to be the same thing, as if it were most
expressly written, for we must not consider naked words, but the meaning of
them. Thus much a soberer man (I am sorry to add, a better principled
Christian) is this Socinian, than our Pretender to Naked Truth* But he is so
liberal as to give a reason of h^s opinion: If in Divine Matters we once give
way to Humane Deductions, a cunning Sophis^er may soon lead a weak Disputant
into many Errors. Truly very well urged; Whose fault is it that men are weak
Disputants, or being so, that they will meddle with Controversy? St. Paul has
abundantly provided in the case, Him that is weak in the Faith receive; but not
to doubtful Disputations. Men of Parts and Learning will comprehend a Deduction
as perfectly as the Text it self: And they who are deficient either in natural
or acqui^ed Knowledge, will understand neither one or other; whereof we have an
example here before us.

And now a mighty heat is struck upon the sudden against School Divinity, as
the greatest plague to Christian Religion. In which career our Author, to show
his Learning, tells us, That the School at Alexandria was the first
Divinity-School he reads of. He might have better told us of the School of one
Tyrannus, where St. Paul read his Lectures. Certainly the Angelical, the
irrefragable, the subtle, and most founded Doctors would have been very proud
of such Antiq^ity as the age of Pantenus: But Peter Lombard, it is likely,
would not have taken it well to be robbed of his Mastership; and to be made an
Usher, nay, Schoolboy to Pantenus. Well, we will pass this over; The School of
Alexandria, we are told, was set up by Pantenus. Our Author might more
^easonably have said, that it was set up by St. Mark; had he ever heard of
E^sebius his relation, he could not have been so grossly ignorant. In this very
account here pointed to, he expressly says, that this School was in Pantenus his
time, (...). There was of ancient Custom, settled with them a School of the
holy Scriptures. Now Pantenus lived in the time of Commodus, and what could
then be said to have been from ancient times, will bid fair to be almost as old
as Christianity it self. Our Author goes on with the same ill Stars, and the
very next Period is a new misadventure: From this School, says he, sprung forth
that damnable Heresy of the Arians. What shall we say if Arius were neither
bred up at all, nor was a Professor in this School* but an Afri^an by birth,
and a plain Parish Priest of Alexandria? Nay farther, what shall we say i^ this
School was employed in an honest Catechism-Lecture, or Exposition of the
Scripture, and had nothing more to do with teaching School Divinity than in
teaching Anatomy or Mathematics? Will not this Gentleman, whoever he is,
appear a wonderful meek Writer; fitter to deal in a Romance than Church
History? Of his Country and Employment Epiphanius informs us, (...); He was of
Libya by his Country; and being made a Priest in Alexandria, was preferred to
the Church called Baucalis. And that we may be more assured of the nature of
his Employment, Epiphanius presently reckons up the other Churches of that
great City, and recites the names of several of the Rectors of them. That this
School was for Catechizing, St. Ierom is most express, who in his Catalogue of
Ecclesiastical Writers, says that Clement, after Pantenus; Alexandriae
Ecclesiasticam Scholam tenuit, and (...) Magister fuit* Clement after Pantenus
kept the Ecclesiastical School at Alexandria, and was Catechist there. We see
then what a goodly Bracelet of ^alse Pearls our Author has hung together upon a
string in hopes to adorn himself with them. One would now have the curiosity to
ghess what should come into his head positively to assert so many false and
extravagant things. Was Pantenus a Heretic, or noted for a great Sophister and
man of Notions, and thereby obnoxious to have the great plague to Christian
Religion, School Divinity fathered upon him? Nothing of all this: He is by
Eusebius (l. 5. c. 10.) styled, (...), a most famous man, and said to have
showed so much, and such Divine Zeal for the Word of God, as to have gone and
preached the Gospel unto the Indians: And that after his return he was made
Master of this School; where partly by Words, partly by Writing he expounded
the Treasures of Divine Knowledge. But secondly, had this School at any time
been so unfortunate as to have bred up notorious Heretics, or perverse
Disputers that did mischief in the Church? Nothing of this neither; it was the
happy Nursery of the most eminent Propagators of the Christian Faith, and at
this time when Arianism entered the World, merited this Character, (...). It
continues to our times, and is celebrated for persons powerful in the Word, and
study of Divine things. What then could be the matter that should hare and lead
a poor innocent man into such a Maze of falsehoods? Why surely no more than
this: He had heard from the Parson of the Parish, or some other good body in
discourse, that the Arian Heresy took its rise from Alexandria; that it
supported it self much with quirks of Philosophy, and Sophistical Nicities; and
that there was a Divinity-School at Alexandria, and a notable man, one
Pantenus, had been Master of it; and now if this were put together, and all the
Heresies of the world laid upon the back of this Pantenus and School Divinity,
it would make a very pretty story, and look like a learned account of
Antiquity. Just as if a stranger should have heard, that there was a
mischievous fanatical Rebellion, which overr^n the whole Nation, and was the
cause of the destruction of so many tho^sands of Christians both body and soul,
fomented and carried on at Westmi^ster in England; and likewise that there was
a famous School, and one Dr. Lambert Osbaston, a noted man* had been Master of
it* and then should tack all this together, and say, that Westminster School
was a Seminary of Fanaticism and Rebellion, and that Dr. Lambert Osbaston was
the first and chief Promoter of it. Now this ridiculous Fable is far more
probable than that which our Author obtrudes upon us, in that several of the
Ringleaders in the la^e Rebellion, as Sir Arthur Haslerig, Sir Harry Vane,
Scot, and others, were really Scholars to Dr. Osbaston, and Governors of that
School; nothing of which nature can be truly suggested of the other. But our
Author goes on, and has certainly made a Vow not to say one true word in this
whole Paragraph, and keeps it most religiously. His following period runs thus:
The Heresies before thi^ were so gross and sensual, that none took them up but
dissolute or frantic people, and soon vanished: But after this School-subtil
way of arguing was brought into Christianity, Heresy grew more refined, and so
subtle, that the plain pious Fathers of the Church knew not how to lay hold of
it, etc. But now what will become of us, if there were refined, and spiritual
Heresies before? Nay, in a manner if this very Heresy were so? What if they
were followed by men neither dissolute, nor frantic? nor did soon vanish? And
that the Fathers of the Church were not so plain men, but that they knew how to
encounter this School Divinity Monster? Has not our Author the worst luck of
any man that ever put Pen to Paper? As to the sensuality and grossness of
Heresy; no^ to look higher than the confines of this Age we talk of, surely
neither Novatianism, nor the Heresy of Sabellius, or Paulus Samosatenus, of
which Arianism was but an off-set, were gross or sensual: Nor were Novatus,
Tatian, Tertullian, and Origin, who were all very considerable men, and fell
into Heresy before this time, ever noted for being frantic or dissolute
people. But on the contrary, their very severity of life, and zeal for Virtue,
were the prime occasion of their Heresies. Nor did their Heresies soon vanish,
but continued for several Ages, some in their own, others under new names and
titles. And whosoever reads the Controversies of those times will find that the
pious Fathers of the Church were not quite baffled by School-distinctions and
evasions; nor did these Sophisters, proud of their conquest, triumph and carry
away a specious appearance of truth: But the advantage of Arius was quite of
another kind in application and address. (...). He was of taking and pleasant
conversation, always glozing and flattering, as Epiphanius tells us; then adds,
(...) (...). He addressed to each particular ^ishop with insinuating arts and
flatteries, whereby he drew in many to be Partisans with him. And, as Sozom^n
expresses it, (...). His Party finding it their interest to prepossess in their
behalf the Bishops of each City, they sent their ^gents to them, with
confessions of their Faith.... w^^^h practice turned mightily to their
advantage. But th^^r chief advantage lay in their Court insinuations, first
with Constantines Sister during his life; and after with Constantius his Sons
after his death; and when the Aria^s had the suffrage of an Emperor on their
side, we need not imp^te it to Sophistry that they prevailed.

Our Author, having not as he thinks fully enough discovered to us the
mysteries of his knowledge, goes on, with the same ausp^ces of Ignorance and
Error, to acquaint us farther: That this great bane of the Church took its rise
from hence: Many of the Primitive Doctors and Fathers, being converted from
Heathenism, and having by long and great industry acquired much knowledge in
natural Philosophy, Antiquity, His^ory, and subtle Logic or Sophistry, were
very unwilling to abandon quite these their long studied and dearly beloved
Sciences, falsely so called; and therefore translated them into Christianity,
etc. And now we know perfectly the true cause of all the Heresies that ever
came into the Church. I will adventure notwithstanding all this to add one more
to the number, and say, in opposition to what is here averred, that
Christianity received more advantage from Philosophy than ever it did damage
from it. It is true, as Tertullian tells us, that the Philosophers were the
Patriarchs of Heretics, but it is as true, they were the Champions of
Christian truth. He must be a stranger to every thing that relates to the
Church, who know not how much Religion ows to Justin Mart^r, Athenagoras,
Ammonius, Pantenus, Clemens of Alexandria, and (notwithstanding all his
misadventures) to Origin himself. The last and most dangerous attempt against
Christianity was the setting up Heathen Morality, gilded over with Magic
against Christian Ethics; labored by Apollonius Tyanaeus, Porphyry,
Iamlichus, Plotinus, Hierocles, Simplicius, and several others: And had not the
good providence of God raised up the before mentioned, and other eminent
Christian Philosophers, to attaque them in their strengths, and fight them with
their own Weapons; it is to be feared our holy Faith would not have had so
easy, or so clear a victory over the World. But because our Author has so
particular a Pique against Sophistry, I shall desire him at his leisure to read
the twenty ninth Chapter of the seventh Book of Eusebius's Ecclesiastical
History, the Title of which Chapter is, (...). How Paulus Samosatenus, baffled
and confuted by one Malchion a Priest, who had been a Sophister, was deposed.
And sure the Sophister may be allowed to have done no small service, who
baffled and confuted that so considerable Heretic.

But the stop put to the Donatists Schism, by the interposition of the Civil
Magistrate is a great mote in our Authors eye, and one way or other he will be
sure to remove it. First, he tells us, It is well known the Donatists were a
Sect very turbulent in behavior. Alas, our Author has a Confessors memory, and
has quite forgot the unpeaceable temper of our Dissenters, and how naturally
Conventicles mustered themselves into Armies: But which way the enforcing a
Confession of Faith comes to be our case, he will do well to interpret himself.
If he speaks against the Penal Laws; and the tendering of the Oath of Supremacy
to Recusants thereby directed, be the enforcing a Confession of Faith which he
speaks against; there is again somewhat contained in his Book which is contrary
to the known Laws of the Land. Fearing the success of this answer, he offers
another, which is, that for ought any body knows these seeming converted
Donatists were only Hypocrites, who for the love of the World, more than for
the love of the truth, forsook their Heretical Profession; or if their hearts
were really changed as to belief, it is evident they were worldly still, and
not one step nearer heaven. First, if for ought any body knows these Donatists
were only Hypocrites, for ought any body knows they were sincere; and Charity
obliges to the better side. As to the carnality of their hearts, it is Gods,
and not our Authors, Prerogative to judge of them; In the mean time, it is
surely of some good effect, to have set the understanding right, though a
thorough reformation be not made on the affections. The ill luck is, the
reasoning of our Author herein, if it prove any thing, is as valid against the
Secular M^gistrates restraining Immorality and Vice, as well as Error. For men
may be Hypocrites, and carnal in their hearts; may design and wish Murder,
Fraud, and Theft, though for fear they dare not act them. Our Author has more
solutions in his Budget, and is very liberal of them, for he goes on, and says,
That though we farther grant the pruning of the Magistrates Sword did really
correct the viciousness of the Tree, yet we must not do evil that good may come
of it. That is, to punish Heretics is in its self, and in its nature evil.
This, I confess, comes home to the point, and would have superseded the former:
But the proof is wanting, and must ever be; for the Assertion is false, as we
have showed above: And is contrary not only to all the Imperial Laws, made
against Heretics, as also the Ecclesiastical of this National Church; but the
Municipal, against which our Author gave the Parliament his engagement that he
had not spoken a word. But the illustration of this his Position is wonderfully
pleasant, I mean the instance of Peter's cutting off Malchus his ear, for which
he is sharply reproved, and threatened with perishing by the Sword, etc. As if
because St. Peter, a private man, might not use the Sword against the
Magistrate, the Magistrate might not neither against a private man. But lastly,
if none of all the answers will conclude, there is one in reserve that
infallibly will do the feat, it is the Turkish and Mr. Hobbes's Appeal to Fate:
They who are ordained to Eternal life will believe, and the rest are hardened,
the sharp^st Sword in this world will not enter the hard heart more than an
Adamant. And so farewell to all Exhortations and Instructions; to all Threats,
Rewards, and Punishments: Nay, to all Arguments and discoursings. Our Author
was predestined to talk absurdly, and the sharpest reason in this world will no
more enter the hard head than an Adamant.

Our good man recapitulates the whole matter, and would have us not mistake
him. All this he says in reference to compelling men to believe or conform,
reserving to the Magistrate power to punish evil Doers, not evil Believers. I
pray Sir remember once more your promise to the Parliament; whatever shift you
will make to palliate the matter concerning there not being Laws to compel men
to believe, I am sure there are Laws enough which would fain by Penalties
compel men to conform; and here you tell us, that all this long discourse is
levelled against them. What pity it is that great Wits, and men who speak
untruth, have not better memories? Whatever punishment they are worthy of who
disobey the Laws; they deserve much greater who stand in defiance, and dispute
against them; but what shall we say of him who at once denies and boasts his
guilt, robs in the midst of an Assize, and while he does so, cries out unto the
Judge, and desires him to take notice that he does no harm?

To the Appendix.
OUr Author having abridged the Articles of Faith into his Eunuchs Creed, one
would have hoped his Comment would have bore some proportion to his Text, but
he has not yet showed all his learning, and profound knowledge in Church
Affairs; and therefore we are blessed with his bounty in an Appendix.

And first, his Instances of the Millenary Error, Infants communicating, the
Cro^s and Chrism, have (if one mark it) a mighty Neighborhood with the
Articles of Faith* and the first Reformers by discarding the use of most, and
taking away the abuse of all of them, have discovered their shyness, and
timorousness to reject that Authority which they had long reverenced: And in
modesty some of them admitting the Authority of the F^thers and Councils, for
three or four of the first Centuries, some admitted five or six, whereby they
were reduced sometimes to great streights in their disputations. A heavy charge
indeed upon the first Reformers, that they had a reverence for Fathers and
Councils; and the Instances brought are wonderfully proper to demonstrate the
streights to which Protestants are likely to be brought in their Disputations,
the most of them being equally rejected by all with whom they have occasion to
dispute. Not to wast time with such a Tri^^er, I leave the question proposed to
the Papists, By what r^le they reject some things, and retain others? At their
best leisure to resolve: And to that offered to the Evangelical, by what rule
they submit to the Authority of some Centuries, and refuse others? without his
help I shall frame a ready answer. Our rule we borrow from Tertullian, Illud
verum quod primum: And add, that in all Concerns of Religion we make our resort
and utmost appeal to Scripture; but own also a great deference to Antiquity;
but by Antiquity* mean not, as our Author fondly imagines (who talks of Sacred
things, as if he had newly put off his Apron) the opinion of three or four
Write^s of all the first Ages; no^ of all of any one; ^ut the uniform
concur^ence both of Times and Persons. Now, why the la^er Centuries should not
be looked upon with the same reverence as the forme^, is in it self evident,
they having not the like Stamp and Character of Antiquity. Besides, our
Controversies being chiefly with the Papists, whose Exorbi^ancies breaking in
upon the World most notoriously abo^t the sixth Century, we think upon the
common rules of judiciary proceeding, we have all reason to decline the
testimony of obnoxious Persons and Times. I am weary of pursuing step by step
insolent impertinencies; and therefore for this time shall let pass the Pygmy
and the Giant* the charge upon Iren^us, Papias, St. Aust^^, and Lactan^ius;
with the good Character of our Authors own zeal, Sincerity, and eminent Parts,
it being, as he says, possible, nay, (what you will wonder at, having seen his
discoveries in the stripping of Truth) probable that there may be in the World
another who has more natural understanding, and more acquired learning than
himself. And shall proceed to his next Stage of Councils, where we are told
roundly, that all the Evangelical Doctors grant, that the later general
Councils have erred. I beg our Authors permission to differ from him herein;
and humbly conceive that he will scarce meet with a considerable number, who
allow any of the later Councils to be General: And if they say any have erred,
they show reasons how they came to do so, without destroying the credit due to
the decisions of the Church; or our Saviors Promise, that the Gates of Hell
should not prevail against her. And therefore the rest of his Harangue about
Councils, being most of it false, and all of it impertinent, I shall say no
more of it.

To the Chapters of Ceremonies.
OUr Author begins this Chapter with his wonder, Why any one of tolerable
discretion should be so eager either for, or against Ceremonies. What, in the
mean time, is to be done with men of our Authors kidney, men of intolerable
discretion, wiser tha^ their Superiors, than the Church wherein they live? Le^
them who are against Ceremonies answer for their eagerness; there are others
who find great reason to be eager for them. When a King of Spain pressed a
General of his to pass over a Punctilio of Honor which belonged to hi^ (...),
saying, That it was but a Ceremony: He replied smartly* That nothing
differenced the King from him but Ceremony. When our Author shall have planted
his levelling, Quaker^Gospel; and persuaded Princes to relinquish their Ensigns
of Royalty; the Sages of the L^w to sit upon the Bench i^ cuerp^; the Lord
Mayor of London with his Fraternity to part with their Liveries, and
unaccountable Formalities; Nay, that his Lordship should quit but his Chain and
great Horse: Or lastly, that our Author, with all his self-denial, should
condes^end so far, that he will be pleased to sit below his Kitch^n* maid at
Table, or light his Plough-boy up to bed; we will endeavor to think as
slightly of Ceremonies in Religion (where sure, if any where, there should be
awe and reverence) as he would have us. Not long since our Neighbors of
Holland refused to strike Sail to his Majesty's Flag, upon which a bloody War
ensued. Shall we borrow now our Authors Rhetorical Apostrophe, and cry out, My
Fathers, My Fathers, so much Christian blood spilt, so many Orphans, so many
Widows made, so much Treasure spent, and all for a Ceremony? I pray mount a
Turnip Cart, and preach to the heathen world the Spirit of the Hat, and hold
forth that striking Sail is the same Idolatry in a Ship, as the putting off a
Hat is in a Brother. Certainly, there is some dismal mischief in these
Ceremonies of the Church, else there would never have been such a loud outcry
of O my Fathers, my Fathers, will you restrain the Liberty of the Gospel to the
rigidity of your Discipline, to lose some, to lose many, and perchance in the
end to lose all, your selves and all? Be Pious, be Charitable, be Prudent, etc.
Let the World judge if such a charge, as this seems to import, be not the
declaring or speaking something in derogation to, and depraving of the Liturgy
of the Church, forbidden under severest Penalties in the Act of Uniformity,
Primo Eliz. And if the expostulating with the Governors of the Church, for
doing their duties themselves, and endeavoring that others should do it* be
not contrary to the known Laws of the Land, which enjoins those duties, both to
Bishop and People.

What our Author would be at he plainly tells us in the ensuing Period, You
will say, if you yield to some Dissenters in this, you must as well yield to
others in that, and so by degrees abolish all your Ceremonies. To this he
roundly replies, ^ beseech you, is not the ^ody more than R^iment, Substance
more than Ceremony. Which is plainly to say, That to gratify Dissenters we
ought to discard all Ceremonies, and in contradiction to St. Paul, who enjoins
that all things should be done decently and in order, nothing is to be done
decently and in order. I must have leave to say, That in this instance Raiment
is the Body, Ceremony is substance. I may put off a Sca^ff, or Belt, or
perchance a Coat in a cold Winters day; but should I throw off all my Clothes,
I should certainly kill my self. A Ceremony, considered in individuo, or
retail, may be of no great moment; but they, taken in genere, and in the bulk,
are absolutely necessary. The following Objection, that by parting with
Ceremonies, which tend to the increasing Devotion, preserving Order, and giving
glory to Almighty God, we shall displease our Friends, and then lie exposed to
our Enemies to spoil our goods, is of more moment than to be thrown off by
saying, that our goods are only Faith, Hope, and Charity, and that these stood
firm in the Primitive times, when there was not one of our Ceremonies to
preserve it. Surely, the scandalizing those who do their duty, by our breaking
the Laws, is a greater mischief, than to displease those who violate their
duty, by our keeping the Law. A Scandal only taken is of less moment, than one
both taken and given. And if Faith and Hope happen to be unconcerned in this
whole matter, yet Charity is sure the natural product of Decency and Order; and
the common rule, that it ought to begin at home, is here to take place, and
their satisfaction be most studied who are of the Household of Faith, rather
than the humor and caprice of the Desertors of it, Moreover, upon a true
account it is not Charity to Dissenters to humor them in their disobedience
toward their spiritual Superiors; no more than it is, to give Impunity to
that of Rebels, against their temporal. But were there no Ceremonies among the
Pri^itive Christians? What shall we say of the kiss of Charity, or was there
not one of ours, surely laying on of Hands, kneeling at Prayer, the Peoples
answering Amen after it, the having the Head uncovered in Religious Assemblies,
were more than one of theirs, and are our Ceremonies. I am weary of being a
Scavenger, and sweeping together all the straws and dirt, which this unhappy
Written scatters as he goes; and there being nothing but clamor and sedition in
the rest of this Chapter, or that which follows concerning Church Service,
which only, after a few Complements sprinkled upon Discipline and Order,
labors to disparage the present Constitution, and levels those who are
concerned for their duty and obedience, with the wild Rabble of Sectaries and
Fanatics. I shall without more words dismiss the Inquest, and go on to what
follows.

To the Chapter of Preaching.
THe Chapter concerning Preaching is a most unreasonable reproach of the Church
of England. After that the Uniform Vote of all our Neighbors has given us the
preference in this particular, the Ministers of the Reformed Churches, Germans,
Hollanders, Danes, Swedes, French, and Switzers, learning our Language
generally to take benefit of our Sermons, and many traveling hither for that
end; our Author, led to it by his excellent good nature, labors to show his
Talent in depreciating what strangers so must esteem. There was a time when
Nicity of Division, and the flowers of a Polyanthea were somewhat in fashion;
but those days are long since done, a practical sober way of pressing Christian
duty is generally taken up, which has as little of the Quid, or the Quale, or
the Quantum, as our Author seems to have in his head; or has discovered in his
Writings. His project for Preachers is as extravagant as his Character of our
Sermons. They must be grave elderly men, not raw Novices from the University
with all their Sciences and Languages; but rather ^ober persons of Age and
Experience, having a good natural capacity, etc. that never saw the University,
and knew no other Language than their Mother Tongue: That is, they must be
experienced Farmers, illuminated Cobblers, or gifted Weavers; and these, no
doubt, as they did twenty years since, would bring about a thorough
Reformation* These would redeem the Church from that great contempt, the
Aristotelists, Scotists, Aquinatists, with their* knacks of quiddities, and
qualities, Syllogisms, and Enthymems, Distinctions, and Subsumtions, and the
handsome Schoolboy exercise of the very good Preachers of the Age, have
brought upon it.

He goes on to tell us, That his heart bleeds to think how many thousand poor
souls there are in this Land, that have no more knowledge of God than Heathens,
etc. It is truly a lamentable thing, that where the Gospel has been so long,
and so h^ppily planted, any should be ignorant of it. Would to God all the
Lords People were Prophets; but in the mean time let us not be so ungrateful,
as not to own with all due acceptance and thankfulness that our People,
generally speaking, are better instructed in all the parts of Saving Knowledge
than any Nation in the World. And we may say it with perfect truth, and
therefore without vanity, that they have also the most learned and sufficient
Clergy: Men that understand the Athanasian Creed much better than our Author,
who in his first Chapter has done what his little knowledge, and violent
passion could effect, toward the undermining of it. The truth is, I cannot but
wonder how it is possible for a man, that did not design to put scorn upon
Religion, to offer such mad and unaccountable Proposals, and the while talk
demurely, and in Scripture Phrase, as if he would be thought to be in earnest.

To the Chapter concerning Bishops and Priests.
THe long Chapter of Bishops and Priests is of the same strein with the former,
it cries Hail Master to Episcopacy, acknowledges the Apostolical Antiquity and
Dignity thereof; and then fairly goes about to* betray it: Whether Presbytery,
or Erastianism, or Atheism be at the botton of the design, it is not easy to
divine: That which is obviously apparent is, that one thread of ignorance runs
through the whole discourse; neither what Petavius means, nor what the
Character of Priesthood is, nor what the practice of the Church was, i^ at ^ll
understood* b^t a long blunder is ^ade about A. B. C* as if there we^e no other
Character^ in the world besides those of the Alphabet; or as if the matter were
as unin^elligible as the great mystery he talks of. Which is to be known only
in a Metaphysic^l w^y of abstraction; that the superior Species contains the
inferior Genus. Indeed the nature of a Genus or a Species, which is no more
than every Schoolboy understands, who has learnt so much of his Grammar, as to
know what a Noun Appellative is, requires not much niceness of Metaphysics;
but the superior Species, and inferior Genus are terms of Art that the dull
Logicians of the University stand amazed at. Aristo^le said of a man that he
was Arbor inversa; but our Author has here turned upside-down Porphyr^es Tree,
and by it turned a Man into a Horse, for so he goes on in his learned
Metaphysick Lecture. A man, a ration^l Cre^t^re contains the Anim^l^ty of an
Horse, the inferior Crea^ure: But does not contain a real Hors^ in his belly,
nor can a man b^get hors^s, or men when he pleases* Nor can you truly say a man
is a horse. I believe my School me^ would take it in snuff, should I affirm any
of them to be horse^. Here having mended the matter, and reformed a horse from
being an inferior Genus to a man, and made him an inferiou^ Creature, he says
that he contains the Animality of a Horse. Upon which Hypothesis, whether he
will be as ill natured as the Schoolmen, and take it in snuff I know not* but I
am sure that I can irrefragably prove him to be a Horse* And the thin Sophism*
which every Fresh-man learns to solve within a Week after he comes to the
University, will be against him an unanswerable demonstration: Which, to try
his patience, I propose to ^im in common form thus* He that says, my Author is
a living Creature, says true; h^ that says, he is a Hor^^, says that he is a
living Cr^a^^re* therefore he who says, he is a Horse, says true. There is no
denying the Syllogism, and saying it has four terms. That though indeterminate
animality be enunciated of the Species, yet that which is determined by the
contrary diffe^ence may no^: Tha^^ is, the Ani^ality of a B^ute c^^ belong only
to an irrational animal, as that of a man to a rational; for our Author has
precluded himself from that answer, by saying expressly that a man, a rational
Creature, contains the animality of a Horse, the inferior or irrational
Creature. And now if my Author be not a mere animal, let the World judge: and
this comes of despising Logic. Let us now see whether his Divinity be better
than his Philosophy. After this hog-shearing, where we have had so loud a cry
and no wool, we will if we can pick out a little sense; The thing he aims at
proving is, that Bishops are not superior in Order to Priests; a thing, by the
way, directly contrary to the Liturgy of the Church, and thereby the Law of the
Land: but yet they are superior in Commission, and by virtue of that can
govern, exercise the power of the Keys, and ordain Priests and Deacons, which
Priests, ordinarily speaking, may not. Well, if this Commission were from
Heaven, and stand upon that Scripture Basis, of As my Father sent me, so send I
you, by virtue whereof the Bishops, during the first ten Persecutions, governed
their Flocks in despite of all Secular opposition, and retaining part of their
administration to themselves, disposed of some to Priests and Deacons; which is
as notorious in fact, as any thing in the world: The Bishops may do tolerably
well, with this new word Commission, instead of the old of Order. Especially,
since in the close it is confessed by our Author: that in this order the Apostles
left the Church at their death, and in this order their Successors continued it
(as in duty sure they ought) from time to time near 1500 years without any
interruption wherefore for any to alter this way of Government, or to take upon
them to ordain, not being chosen this way to it, they would be guilty of great
rashness and high presumption. Nor will it be in my Authors power to kick all
this down again, as he endeavors in the following period, by making the orders
given by Priests though irregular, yet firm and valid; for if this power be
from Heaven, and separate from all Secular Authority, as to its Nature and
Original; though limited by it in its Exercise and Application: no man upon any
pretense can take this honor to himself or confer it on others, but they who
were called of God as was Aaron.

But let us see how well our Author confutes the distinction of Order between
Bishops and Priests? It Is ridiculous, says he, that the Priesthood which is
capable to do the greatest things, to Consecrate the Souls of men by Baptism
and the Lords Supper, yet forsooth cannot Consecrate Oil and Cups? I desire to
know whether a Deacon cannot Consecrate the Souls of men by Baptism and the
Preaching of the Gospel, or if they can, whether they are of the same Order
with Priests? Or whether a Judge who has power of Awarding Life or Death which
is the greatest thing, may also make a Knight which is a less, and if therefore
a Judge and a King be of the same Order? This word ridiculous is very unlucky,
and commonly returns on him who is most busy with it; But since we are fallen
upon the instance of a King, for farther illustration of this matter let us
consider the Monarchs of the East, who permitted the whole Administration of
their Affairs to their Favorites, as we read of Pharaoh that he pulled his Ring
off his hand and said to Joseph, without thee no man shall lift up his hand or
foot in all the Land of Egypt, and according to thy word shall all my People be
Ruled; but for all this Pharaoh and this his Minister of State were not of the
same Order; for in the Throne he was greater then he. Though the King had
stripped himself of the whole Execution of his Power, and put it into the hand of
his Favorite, yet so long as the Origination of it continued with him, he was
as absolute, and the other as subject as ever. It Is true the Bishops power is in
itself Subordinate and Ministerial; he must not Lord it over the Inheritance of
God, but as to the dispensing of it to the inferior Orders, the Parallel will
hold; they all Act in Subordination and dependence upon him. (...), says
Ignatius. No Priest or Deacon for several Centuries ever did it without
particular leave given by the Bishop, nay the Lector or Reader did not so much
as Read the Gospel till first he had brought the Book to the Bishop, and had
his permission to go to the Ambo or Reading Pu^ with it* and though the License
with us be not no^ every day renewed, yet the dependence is still owned in the
very Form of our Ordination, where the Bishop says to the person Ordained, take
thou Authority to Read the Gospel in the Church of God, and Preach the same
when thou art thereunto Licenced by the Bishop himself. But a farther Argument
is taken from the promiscuous use of the name of Bishop and Presbyter, to prove
they are of the same Order, which sure is one of seeblest ways of proving any
thing; the whole force of it amounts to this, St. Peter and St. John call
themselves Presbyters, but were also Bishops; therefore Presbyters and Bishops
are all one: which is as much as to say, that his Majesty is King of Great
Britain and Knight of the Garter; therefore to be King of Great Britain and
Knight of the Garter is all one. Nay St. Paul styles himself a Deacon, as well
as an Apostle; therefore to be a Deacon and an Apostle is all one, but if our
Author be not satisfied with this, let him Read the Thirteenth Chapter of the
most Learned Bishop of Chester's Vindiciae Ignati^ and he will see how accurate
the first Christian Writers were in distinguishing the three Orders of Bishop,
Deacon and Priest.

We will go on and attend him in his Talent of Book Learning, wherein he has
been hitherto so unfortunate, and see how in his following expedition he mends
the matter. And here he tells us that Aerius (whom, by the way, he constantly
calls Arius) was not a Heretic upon the account of his introducing a parity
between Bishops and Priests, but only for being an Arian. That is, Epiphanius
made a List not of several Heresies, but a Catalogue of several Arians: and the
69. Heresy being assigned to Arius, it passes the Muster again in the 75.
Heresy under the auspice of A^rius. It is agreed on all hands that discontent
made Aerius a Heretic, for that Eustathius whom he thought a worse man then
himself, was preferred before him: and being in power, though formerly his
particular Friend, considered him no farther then to make him Master of an
Almshouse. We are then to believe that out of discontent Aerius turned Arian;
but as ill luck would have it, Eustathius was of that Sect, and if he had a
mind to quarrel with him, nothing could have been so proper, as to have turned
Orthodox in spite. It is manifest he was originally an Arian, and the prime
part of his Heresy was what his malice naturally dictated, and all Writers
agree it to be (...), etc. He entertained a mad opinion, beyond what a man
would receive, saying, What is a Bishop better than a Priest? There is no
difference between them; there is but one order, the same honor and dignity.

Since our Authors Greek reading fares no better, let us go on to consider his
Latin; and there is no missing St. Ieroms Epistle to Evagrius, which is so
clear in the point, that without more ado it converted our Author, who it seems
was once an Episcopal man, into that errant Presbyterian that now he is. Withal
it makes him wonder, and if the Reader understand Latin, he will wonder to see
men have the confidence to quote any thing out of it for the distinction
between Episcopacy and Presbytery. Well, I have read over the Epistle, and, as
our Author says, wonder, but it is at his great confidence to say, that there
is nothing to be met with in it, to found a distinction between Episcopacy and
Presbytery, when as he expressly reserves the power of Ordination peculiarly to
the Bishops, which is the point chiefly contested between the Assertors of
Episcopacy, and Patrons of Presbyterian parity. As to the second desire, that
the Reader should observe the various fate of St. Jerome and Aerius, that the
one is reviled as an Heretic, the other passes for a Saint: I will satisfy my
Author in that particular, and show him a plain reason for it. Aerius set
himself against the Apostolical Government by Bishops, dogmatized, and
separated himself from the Church: St. Ierom always obeyed his Governors, and
remained in Communion with them, upon other occasions expressed his opinion in
behalf of their Authority: And here only in a private Epistle to a Friend, and
that a very short one, being scandalized at an unseasonable opinion, which
pretended Deacons to be equal in dignity to Priests; as it is usual in such
cases, he depresses what he can the Order of Deacons, and exalts to his utmost
that of Priests, in the mean time does not so much as attempt to prove any
thing more than barely saying, Quid aliud facit Episcopus excepta Ordinatione
quod non facit Presbyter? What does a Bishop more than a Presbyter besides
Ordaining? And then reckoning up several actions common to both. Our
kind-hearted Author hereupon tells us, that this presently converted him; nay,
as if this good nature of his were as meritorious as grace, he thereupon
assures himself, that great is his reward in heaven. Our man of learning with
his accustomed dexterity and confidence runs down the business of Colluthus his
Ordination of Priests, and pities poor Bishop Hall for going about to prove
from thence, that Presbyters were not capable to Ordain. How slightly soever
our Author thinks of the matter, Socrates in the first Book of his History puts
it under the blackest Character. (...). He privately adventured on an action
worthy of many deaths, who, having never been ordained a Priest, did those
things which belonged to the Function of a Priest. This you are to know was
said of Ischryas who had as good Orders as Colluthus a Priest could give him,
but yet antecedently to the Decree of the Council of Alexandria, is declared
never to have been ordained a Priest. Let up now see why the old man was so
much to be pitied, because he had quite forgot that the famous Council of Nice,
consisting of above three hundred Bishops, had made a Canon, wherein they
declare, that if any Bishop should Ordain any of the Clergy belonging to
another Bishops Diocese, without consent and leave had of that Bishop to whose
Diocese they did belong, their Ordination should be null. You see the irregular
Ordination of a Bishop is as null as the irregular Ordination of a Presbyter:
Therefore the irregular Bishop, and the irregular Presbyter are of the same
Order, of the same Authority; neither able to Ordain. Our Author, according to
his usual Sagacity, knows no difference betwixt an Act that is null and void in
it self, and an Act voided by Law. There is no question but Bishops, and
Priests, and Deacons for their Crimes may be degraded and deposed, but that is
not the same thing with the never having been Bishops, Priests, or Deacons. The
Council of Alexandria declared the Ordinations of Colluthus to have been void
ab initio, that of Nice voids those that are irregular. Surely these are very
different matters. That the invalidity of the Ordination in the later case was
of this kind, that is, made invalid by way of Penalty and Sentence, we may
learn from the thirty fifth Apostolic Canon; by which both Zonaras and
Balsamon interpret this of Nice; who decree that in case of ordaining in
another Diocese the Bishop (...), Both he be deposed and they who were
ordained by him. And truly if they were to be deposed, it is plain the Orders
were in themselves valid; and it is unquestionable that the Ordaining Bishops
were so: which is not to be said, and can never be proved of a mere Presbyters.
And therefore the Triumph which is added here of dashing out the indelible
Character, or that the Line of a Diocese is a Conjurers Circle, might very
fairly have been laid aside. And I appeal to the Reader, and more than hope he
will see how no proofs are brought for this Identity and parity of Order; no
Scripture, no Primitive Council, no general consent of Primitive Doctors and
Fathers; that he is perfectly out in every thing he avers, and therefore for
his poor judgment he may do well to keep it to himself, and probably his
Judgment is so poor because he himself is rich. He in likelihood has employed
his time in Secular Concerns, which had it been spent in Study, would have
rescued him from such gross misadventures, as he at every turn incurrs.

But though the matter stand thus plain before us, yet ^ince our Author has had
the confidence to cite the Council of Nice in proof of the nullity of irregular
Orders: to show with greater evidence his perpetual ignorance and mistake, I
will throw in for vantage the proceeding of this very Council in the Case of
Meletius, who had usurpt upon the rights of Peter Patriarch of Alexandria, in
the point here contested of Ordaining within his Diocese; the words of
Theodoret are (...). He invaded the Ordinations belonging to the other. Now the
Council decreed herein, that Meletius should be suspended from the future
exercise of his function, and retain (...), the bare name of a Bishop, but do
no Act of his Function either in the City or Villages; but the Orders conferred
by him were as to their intrinsic validity ratified and acknowledged. (...),
those already Ordained should Communicate and Officiate, but come after the
Clergy of each Church and Parish. It Is to be wondered at, how this man who
seems to have always lived in a hollow Tree, came to have heard by chance that
there was once such a thing in the World, as the Council of Nice.

To the Chapter of Deacons.
OUr Author is resolved on all occasions to show that he thinks himself wiser
then both the Church and State, and therefore in defiance unto both, he
attempts to prove that Deaconship is not Holy Orders; and to bring about so
g^n^rous a d^sign, he makes nothing of st^^ining a point with the Scripture,
since it is so unkind as to stand in his way. It so happened that Petavius
discoursing of Deacons had said, what the Contents of our English Bibles, and
Commentators generally agre^ in, that P^ilip the Deacon Preached, did Miracles,
and Baptized, and Converted the City of Samari^, and that the History described
Act. 8. belongs to him. Now our Author is better advised, and assures us, that
this more probably was Philip the Apostle. St. Luke, it is true, tells us that
upon the Persecution against Stephen, several of the Brethren went through all
the Regions of Judea and Samaria, except the Apostles; it is says our Author, a
gross mistake, the Apostles are not to be excepted; but Philip the Apostle, and
not the Deacon went about these Regions. Having thus happily entered himself
into the Lists, he goes on and tells us, that the first we shall find of
Deacons* Officiating in Spiritual matters, is in Justin Martyr: A modest man
would thing that to be competent Antiquity: but it seems to him that though in
Greece it was then received; it was not so in Afric^; for Terttullian says that
the Christians received the Sacrament only from the hand of the President or
Bishop, that is, what I said even now out of Ignatius, that neither this, nor
any other sacred Office was to be done (...), without the knowledge or consent
of the Bishop; Which thing our Author himself hereafter confesses. And sure
when the Bishop Consecrated both Elements, and with his own hand delivered the
Bread immediately to every Communicant, and gave the Cup to the Deacon to
distribute after him: 'twill be a great truth to say that the Eucharist was
only received from the hands of the Bishop. But it is a fatal thing to be
haunted by ill luck; what will become of our Authors Profound Learning, if it
should appear that the Deacon did distribute the Cup in Africa? St. Cyprian
will, I hope, be taken for a competent Witness in the Case, who says in his
Book de Lapsis. Vbi solennibus adimpletis calicem Diaconus offerre praesentibus
coepit. When the other solemnities were performed, and the Deacon distributed
the Cup to them who were present. Nay if St. Cyprian be to be believed, he
utterly confounds all our Authors pretensions at once, saying that Diaconis non
d^fuit sacerdotalis vigor; there was not wanting to the Deacons sacerdotal
power, Ep. 13. allowing them somewhat of Priestly jurisdiction: and in the
twelfth Epistle, giving them power to release from the Censures of the Church,
In articulo mortis, si Presbyter repertus no^ fuerit, and urgere exitus
coeperit, apud Diaconum quoque exomologesin facere delicti sui possint, ut manu
ejus in poenitentia imposita, veniant ad Dominum cum pace. If a Priest be not
to be fo^nd, and death draw on, they may make their Exomologesis or Confession
before the Deacon, that hands being laid on them as Penitents, they may go to
the Lord in peace.

Our Author proceeds, and according to his wont, shows his Learning backward;
and quoting an Epistle of St. Ignatius ad Tralli (Trallianos I presume he
means) finds, and often laments that learned men go on in a Track, one after
another, and some through inadvertency, some through partiality take many
passages of ancient Authors quite different from their meaning. One would now
expect some eminent discovery. The fault in short is this, that our Authors
good Friend Vedelius, Bishop Usher, Doctor Vossius, Co^ellerius, and as many
others as have put forth Ignatius, ^ave gone on in a Track, and falsely
translated these words, (...). The Deacons, being Ministers of Jesus Christ,
are to be honored, for they are not the Ministers of meats and drinks, but of
the Church, and Servants of God; to run thus, and to concern Deacons, when as
indeed the words are meant of Priests. Whosoever first translated this Epistle
of Ignatius, says our Author, sure this fancy of Deacons ran much in his head,
otherwise he could never have found them here, for it is evident the word
Diaconus, in this place, relates to the Presbytery newly before mentioned, etc.
Well, we hear what you say, but for all this are convinced you are infinitely
mistaken: And are sure that Doctor Isaac Vossius, whatever became of other
learned men, did not go in a Track, nor by inadvertency nor prejudice (his
Education, if he could have been seduced, leading him the other way) but
considered the place very particularly, and adhering to the Translation which
you despise, concludes, Miror Antiochum qui sermon 124. haec Ignatii cit^t,
it^ illa mutasse, ut id quod de Diaconis hic dicitur, Presbyteris attribuat,
modo apud illum locus sit integer, nec aliqua exciderint verba. I wonder
Antiochus, who in his 124. Sermon quotes these words, should so change them,
that what (...) here said of Deacons, should by him be attributed to Priests,
if so be the place be entire with him, and some words not left out. Well, but
our Author has a mind that we should see the utmost of his skill: I do the more
wonder at the Interpreters mistake in this place, because by the following
words Ignatius here excludes the specifical Deacons, saying not the Ministers
of meat and drink. To see the wonderful difference of men's understandings; the
most learned Doctor Isaac Vossius, from these very words concludes the
beforegoing Period was meant of Deacons ( specific Deacons, since they must be
called so) from whence our Demonstrator proves they could not be spoke of them.
It is, it seems, a Scheme of speech which our Author never met with, to say of
things or persons you are not this or this, but that; when they are remarkably
more that, than this or this. Thus God says to Samuel of the People, who,
complaining of his Old Age, and evil Sons, desired a King: that they had not
rejected Samuel, but God. All men of common sense know very well the meaning to
be, that though they rejected the Prophet, that was not to come into account
with the Rebellion and Insolence wherein they rejected the Lord himself. Though
God commanded Sacrifices under the Law, he expressly says, he will have no
Sacrifice, and delights not in, nay, abhors Burnt Offerings; yet this did not
abrogate the Divine Institution, nor make Almighty God contradict himself. So
St. Paul advises Philemon to receive Onesimus his servant, not now as a
servant, but above a servant, a Brother beloved: By which words it is not to be
inferred, that he should presently manumit him, but use him with kindness. But
vanity and ignorance are most incommodiously quartered together; our Author had
a mind to show his reading, and pick a quarrel with the Translator of a Father:
And then, no doubt, he must be a Giant in Learning, and list himself with those
Worthies that have slain their thousands. But such is our Authors hard Fate
that this inconsiderable P^^^od which is here so earnestly controuled, is said
unquestionably almost in every Page of this holy Martyr. So that should he have
happened once in his life to be in the right, he had gained nothing to his
cause; and besides, from hence it is morally certain that our Author never read
a Page together in Ignatius. In this very shor^ Epistle within twenty Lines he
says, (...); He that does any thing without the Bishop, the Presbyter, and
Deacon, has not a pure conscience. In that to the Magnesians, (...). I admonish
you to do all things in love, the Bishop presiding in the place of God, the
Presbyters in the place of the College of the Apostles, and the Deacons most
dearly bebeloved of me, as those who are trusted with the Ministry of Jesus
Christ. In that to the Philadelphians, (...)* Hearken to the Bishop, the
P^esbytery, and the Deacons. And again in the same Epistle he adds, that it is
necessary (...) To ordain there a Deacon to perform the Embassy of God. One
would think this a competent instance of our Authors intolerable insolence,
without any regard of truth or ingenuity to dictate to the World, and pretend
to correct learned men. But this is not all; it is manifest he never read this
very Period, whose Translation he pretends to mend: For so Ignatius goes on
there, (...)* So in like manner let all reverence the Deacon as Jesus Christ,
and also the Bishop as the Son of the Father; and the Presbyters as God's
Senate, and band of the Apostles; without these the Church is not called. But we
have not done yet. Behold a piece of ignorance and impudence more inexcusable
than the former; Poor Petavi^s is taken to task for calling St. Laurence a
Deacon; which many hundreds before him had very innocently done; and generally
all that ever heard of his Grediron, or his Martyrdom, or indeed the occasion
of it, are of his mind; but it is our Authors privilege to be ignorant of what
every body else is informed of. Now in the present misadventure he attempts a
greater Mastery, goes beyond, and surpasses himself: For in that very place of
St. Ambrose which he cites; the direct contrary of what he goes about to prove
is in termini^ asserted* For that speech of St. Laurence, which he
recapitulates, and says, That it plainly shows St. Laurence was a Priest, not a
bare Deacon, tells us that he was a Deacon. The words are Lib. 1. Offic. cap.
41. Quo progrederis sine filio Pater? Quo Sacerdos sancte sine Diacono tu^
properas? etc. O my Father (speaking to his Bishop going to Martyrdom) whither
go you without your Son? O holy Priest whither* hasten you without your Deacon?
Had it not been better for our Author to have said St. Laurence was an
Archdeacon to credit the matter; or a Deacon Cardinal; than thus run counter
to the words he alleged? Unless a man owed himself a shame, and was in dread
he should never make honest payment, and therefore on purpose spoke what he
knew most absurd, mere chance could never fall out so unluckily, that he should
not in a whole Book make one true recital of an Author, or matter of Fact, as
he has done. Yet after all this, as if he had come off with mighty credit, he
closes his Chapter with a quod erat demonstrandum: So I leave, says he, the
Deacons to their proper Office of serving of Tables, not finding in Scripture
any thing more belonging to them. Our Author having thus taken away, we will
expect the next Course, where it is to be hoped we shall be better served; and
that at last the Banquet will make amends for the very ill Fare we have
hitherto had.

To the Chapter of Church Government.
OUr Author has a dexterity of talking extravagantly of several weighty
subjects, and this he calls handling them: which being beyond his strength, he
heaves them to as much purpose as if they were Timber; and thinks he has
acquitted himself to admiration. Having therefore handled the former points;
that is, talked beyond all aim and measure Foolishly; Now he says he comes to
the Authority of Bishops to Govern as well as to Ordain. And truly if they are
to do one, as they are on his principle, to do the other, their Authority is
likely to signify but little; being shared by every the meanest Priest. But
the outcry is, that the Power of the Keys is left to Chancellors, Laymen who
have no more capacity to Sentence or Absolve a sinner, then to dissolve the
Heaven and the Earth, and make a new Heaven and an Earth. And thus the good man
runs on like an Horse with an empty Cart, exceedingly pleased with the rattling
of the Wheels, and gingling of the Bells; but he never considers that all the
proceedings of Chancellors in the Bishops Court are in consequence of the
Canons of the Church which are the Decrees of Bishops Authoritatively met
together, which have defined such and such Doctrines Heretical, such and such
actions punishable with Suspension, Sequestration or Deprivation, and the like:
Now all that the Chancellor has to do, is to examine the matter of Fact, take
the allegations and proofs, and apply the Sanction of the Law to them. But
where that extends to the use of the Keys, that is reserved to them who by
Christ's Institution are trusted therewith. And if Dr. Duck did do an ill thing,
the fault lies at his door; and it is well if in this profligate age a single
instance can only be pitched upon. We have, blessed be God, a great happiness in
the protection of our Municipal Laws, none in the World being a firmer Bulwark
of the Princes Rights and Peoples Liberties; but should every clamorous Person
be hearkened to, who complains of the exorbitance of a Judge, (when if the matter
be truly examined, probably the ground of the dislike, is that he did his duty)
we should soon tear out one another Thro^ts; and every man's hand would be
against his Brother. We know the worst of our present Constitution, and desire
not the hazards of a change.

To the Chapter of Confirmation.
THis Chapter begins with a liberal Confession, that Confirmation or some such
thing is necessary: but it is a little odd that in a matter which approaches to
the being necessary, a loose succedaneum of some such thing, should be
sufficient. Our Author like a true Empiric, in all cases strives to bring in
aliquid Nostri, his preparation of the Medicin will render it Sovereign: but
the old, known, and received Forms must by no means be taken. Having then made
up a narrative of matter of Fact, jumbling, as his way is, true and false
together, his first objection against Confirmation as it now stands is. That it
is not possible for a Bishop of so large a Diocese as some of ours are, some
extended Three or Fourscore Miles, many Forty or Fifty, Personally to Confirm
half the Youth in a Diocese, if he duly examine each one as is fit and
necessary. We see how this is performed in their Triennial Visitations. Having
put in a Caveat in behalf of the present Constitution, and minded my Author
again of his promise to the Lords and Commons, that there was not a word in his
Book against the known Laws; I cannot but reflect, that surely he lives in a
Country where the Bishop is not over-diligent in his duty, else he would never
make the task to be so impossible, unless the Bishop never comes into his
Diocese, or never stir any where abroad in it: surely a very little contrivance
with the diligence of the Ministers would make it possible both for the Bishop
and Youth to meet together without much trouble to either. There is no doubt if
the affair be adjourned over to the Triennial Visitation, it is not likely to be
well done: but as this ought not to be the course; so thanks be to God it is
not. The next inconvenience in the present Constitution is the disability of
the Curat to fit for Confirmation; and the little credit to be given, when he
assures the Bishop when he presents the Children, that they are fully
instructed for it: and therefore he concludes it necessary, to appoint some
discreet conscientious Ministers in the several Circuits to examine and License
for the Lords Table: for he passes it for granted, that Confirmation is no
Sacrament, and if it were, why may not Priests, not Bishops perform it? Well
but suppose these discreet conscientious Ministers, that are to supply the
place of the Parochial ones, should not be better qualified, be more discreet
or conscientious then them, as it may very probably happen; it is plain they
cannot have those opportunities either to instruct the Youth of each Parish, or
know they are instructed, as the local Minister is furnished with; but then
farther is it likely that the several Parochial Ministers will readily admit
their neighbor Minister, whom they may reasonably think not much wiser or
better then themselves to meddle in their Cures, or that the people will be
contented with it? Will not animosities and quarrels, and contempt of the duty
certainly follow? As to the lawfulness of Priests and not Bishops performing
it, upon the supposal that Priests and Bishops are the same thing, and that
Priests may Ordain, which is the Doctrine taught in one of the preceding
Chapters, this of Priests ^onfirming may ^easonably enough be admitted: but the
falseness of that imagination being abundantly evident, the absurdity of this
will necessarily follow. And therefore notwithstanding our Authors project,
Bishops may do well to go on in the Execution of their Duty in this most
Ancient and Useful Right, in which from the first Planting of the Gospel to
this moment, they have been in possession. They who of late invaded the power
of Ordaining Priests, having been so modest yet, as not to usurp this part of
the Episcopal Office.

As to the expedients proposed about framing additions to the Catechism, making
Paraphrases on the Lords Prayer and Ten Commandments, regulating the Ministers
way of Catechizing, and enforcing Parents and Masters to bring their young
people to be Catechis'd, I shall only say that if every body in the Nation, who
is as wise as our Author, shall be allowe'd to make Models for the Church, we
shall have almost as many Schemes of Government, as there are persons to be
Governed. In the mean time we will take old Cato's rule, and be well pleased
with the State of things as it stands at present.

The next p^que is at the bounds of each Bishops Diocese, and having told a
Story of Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, Jerusalem, Ephesus,
Corinth, and Philippi, which sound big and look well in the Inventory, he
informs us that partly by great distances of Citys, partly by the favor of
former Princes, several Towns being cast into one Diocese they became so large
as it is impossible any one Bishop should have a sufficient inspection into them;
the Bishop knows not the names nor faces of half a quarter of them, much less
their behavior; he may have as well a part of France in his Diocese to Govern.
Our Author never considers where his argument will light, is it possible to
Govern three Kingdoms, nay are they therefore happy, because entire and under
one Government? Is there no manner of need why the Prince should know the names
of the Aldermen in his Metropolis, much less of the people in his Dominions?
and is it so impossible a thing to comprehend all the necessary interests of an
Episcopal Diocese? The truth is, our Author would make every Parish Priest a
Bishop, and then the Diocese will be little enough; and the Revenues of the
Bishops will be needless things, and as he says, the greedy Harpyes will
readily make use of his zealous intentions: but I pray let us make a parallel
to his Ecclesiastial Policy in the Civil State. There are a certain sort of men
made Judges in the several Circuits of England, which Circuits are many of them
Fifty, Six^y, an Hundred or more Miles in Compass, they know not the name or
faces of half or a quarter of them* much less of their behavior, they may as
well have a part of France in their Circuit: Were it not therefore better that
every Lord of the Leet should distribute Justice in the Precincts of his
Manor; that no man should be at the expense of seeing Council, taking out
Writs, or of going to the Shire-Town, or vamping upon the Hoof with shoes at
back to Westminster Hall; but the Steward of the Court who knows the name and
face and concern of every one should dispatch all things, and doubtless this
would make a happy World. The Parish would quickly find the advantage of this
new Scheme; to have their Estates, their Lives and Fortunes in ^he hand of a
little Attourny, and be all together by the Ears, and have none to part them,
but him whose interest it is to set them on. I need not set down the Moral.
Thus mad is the Ecclesiastical Policy of our Divinity-Common-Wealths-man, it is
no very good account of time to write an Vtopia, a Politic Romance; but to
play tricks in Holy things, and set on foot a Christian Oceana, is an
unpardonable fault. But our Author proceeds to consider a second abuse in
Church Government, which is exempt Jurisdictions. Whatever a man thought of the
unexpedience of any thing Established by Law, surely in good manners he should
not give it ill Language, and call it an abuse, while it stood so Authorized
and supported. Which should be done especially by him who has past a solemn
promise of not speaking a word against the known Laws of the Land. But of all
men in the World our Author, whose business it is to make all the Parishes in
England peculiars, and have them straightened to the narrow limits, which admit
the knowing every name and face, should not speak against exempt Jurisdictions;
for if the whole Nation were so Cantoned out, and we had ten thousand Bishops
in England, we had exactly the Scheme which he recommends, and at the same time
complains of. It seems my Author may freely write against what is Established in
Church and State, as having obtained an exempt Jurisdiction from the power of
both: and to say incoheren^ things and such as none else would say,
contradictory not only of all sober men who have wrote before him, but of
himself also, is his Peculiar* And so I leave him.

To the Charitable Admonition.
THis being addressed to Nonconformists, I must confess does not properly concern
me, and is for the most part so well said, that I heartily wish it had been the
whole Book: but since our Author finds himself obliged in Charity, to think of
those misguided men, I must also upon the same Principle, have a concern for
him; and earnestly beg him to revise what he has wrote, and see whether he has
laid Grounds in it for Socinianism, and all kinds of Separation: and whether he
has done a good Office to Religion, to supply Dissenters, whom he decla^es to
be obliged to obey the Government, with all the Arguments he could think of, to
palliate and countenance their disobedience. Surely men are not too well
principled, that it should be needful to unsettle them; nor too dutiful, that
ther^ should be reason to check them in their duty: And in a time when, as my
Author himself observes, Separation, and many following Divisions, have caused
many to abhor the Church, and turn to Popery: It is obvious to apprehend that
the doing every thing which the maddest Separatist requires, and making
Religion slovenly and despicable, will not probably retain those who are
tempted to Popery, or recover them who have revolted to it. It will not be
enough to say, that the Book has every where in it sober and honest truths; for
so has the Cracovian Catechism, and the Alcoran; nay, there is scarce any
Conjuring Book which does not for the greatest part consist of devout and godly
Prayers, We are told by our Author, That it is above two years since he had
these thoughts, in which time he has read and conferred all he could to
discover if he were in an Error; but, for all he could yet meet wi^h, does not
find it so, but hopes all he says is truth, and that it may be useful to the
Public, in this present conjuncture of Affairs. Now this is certainly a most
prodigious thing, that a man in two years time should never be once awake,
converse with any good Book, or man of Sense; or have the least reflection upon
what is either truth or expedience. I never read this Book entirely over more
than once; nor have I had much leisure to consider it: And yet I presume any
indifferent Reader will see what gross misadventures have been detected by me,
and probably himself will discover many more: For, in earnest, there are every
where such blots that one can hardly avoid the hitting; such flaws in
Discourse, that there needs no picking of holes, or looking narrowly to find
the Incoherence, but the passage lies wide open, and one may fairly drive a
Cart and Horses through. Upon the whole matter I cannot but conclude, that Pride
or Discontent, or some other very prevalent Passion has here interposed: For
what else should make a man think himself fit to renverse the established
Constitution of the Church, and give his advice to the Parliament, how they
should evacuate all their Laws? What should make him almost in every Period
contradict himself; pretend to the knowledge of Antiquity and Religion, rant
against Universities, disparage the Ministers and Preaching of the Nation: and
at the same time discover the grossest ignorance and inconsideration as is
imaginable? And amidst all this acknowledge obligations to Submission and
Conformity, and whatever he has spoke against: And after two years deliberation
not to see that which is evident at the first glance, to any one that has but
half an eye? All this, I say, mu^t be the Product of some one, or many violent
Passions. Let my Author seriously consider where this Fundamental mischief
lies; search his own heart, and desire the Searcher of hearts to discover it to
him. He says, he has Fasted and Prayed, let him do so again; but with Humility
and Earnestness; and the good God be merciful to him.

FINIS.

