THE Character of the last Days. A SERMON Preached before THE KING.

By JOHN FELL, D. D. Dean of Christ-Church, and Chaplain to his MAJESTY.

Printed by Command.

At the THEATER in Oxford. Anno Dom. 1675.

2 Pet. 3. 3. There shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their
own lusts, and saying, where is the promise of his coming? For since the
Fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the
Creation.
THE great business of Religion, is to oblige its Votaries to present duty by
the awe and expectation of future retribution: and the particular design of the
Gospel, the Doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ, is to oblige to this, by the
assurance and belief that he who came unto us heretofore to teach his Law, will
come again to execute the sanctions of it. Behold says St. John, Rev. 1. 7. He
comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced
him. And he says of himself, Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me,
to give every man according as his work shall be. Rev. 22. 12.

Which weighty truth, tho abundantly established, by all the miracles the types
and prophecies that attend the Gospel, is most particularly enforced by the two
inimitable expresses of Divinity, our Saviors Resurrection from the dead, and
his Ascension into Heaven. Concerning the former of which St. Paul
remonstrates, Acts 17. 30. The times of ignorance God winked at, but now
commands all men every where to repent: because he has appointed a day in
which he will judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he has
ordained: whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised
him from the dead. The other is expressed by St. Peter, Act. 2. 19. Repent and be
converted that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall
come from the presence of the Lord. And he shall send Jesus Christ, which
before was preached unto you, whom the Heaven must receive until the times of
restitution of all things, which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy
Prophets, since the world began.

Indeed this second advent is the foundation, the support and end of our
Religion. If in this life only we had hope, we were of all men most miserable,
1 Cor. 15. 19. If to the other Articles of our Creed which concern our Savior,
there had not succeeded the belief, that he shall come again to judge both the
quick and the dead, we were as ridiculous as these mockers of the Text pretend
us, hated and scorned by men, and deserted by Almighty God.

It will therefore import us highly to examine whether the Christian be so
absurd a person as these drols and merry men would make him, a creature only
useful, because he finds them sport and entertainment.

And for a just survey hereof, twill be material to consider,

First the personal qualifications of the Disputers here described, and

Secondly the force of their arguments and discoursings: according to those two
prevailing Topics in use among us, from the head of Authority, and that of
Reason. And this being well deduced, twill not be hard to bring the whole
debate to a short and certain issue, both in regard of speculation, and what is
more important in reference to practice.

I begin to consider what I first proposed, the personal qualifications of the
Disputers here described. They are said to be scoffers walking after their own
lusts.

To be a Scoffer is sure no very laudable Character, being the joint result of
Pride and Malice, the doing mischief, and the doing it in sport. So that
whereas it is said that the Flatterer is the worst of tame beasts, and the
Detractor of wild, the Scoffer has the ferity of both. Amidst the pretenses to
Urbanity, and being pleasant company, he is the bane of all society, the poison
of Asps is under his lips, his teeth are spears and arrows, and his tongue a
sharp sword, Psalm. 5. 7. Any injury is supportable, that has not contemt and
scorn superadded to it; we can better bear the wounds, then the insultings of
an enemy; or if we must submit to that, we would not have our understandings
trampled on; be run down like fools and Idiots, or fall the victims of petulant
ill nature, edged with envenomed wit.

But as this temper is most injurious and unsociable; it is also ignorant and
indocile. The sure effect of knowledge, is an humble sense of the want of it:
the deeper we immerse our selves in any Art or Science, the greater and more
insuperable difficulties are started by us: and the same event happens to all
industrious enquirers, which befell Socrates; to arrive at last to this one
great discovery, that they know nothing. It Is the peculiar privilege of the
ignorant and half-wited, by thinking well of their own skill and acquisitions,
to make it impossible for them to have any. See thou a man wise in his own
eyes, says Solomon, there is more hope of a fool then of him, Prove. 26. 12.
and at the 9. Chap. ver. 7, 8. He that reproves a scorner gets himself a
shame, and he that rebukes a wicked man gets himself a blot: rebuke not a
scorner least he hate thee: rebuke a wise man and he will love thee. and Chap.
14. ver. 6. A scorner seeks wisdom, and finds it not.

But farther, over and above the beforementioned ingredients, of pride, ill
nature, and incorrigible folly; the mockers of the Text are branded with
immorality and vice: to walk after their own lusts. And sure there cannot be a
more prodigious impudence, then that the guilty and obnoxious, persons liable
to the severest punishments as well as censures, should dare to awaken
observation, by being sharp on others. But so it is, the man that walks in the
counsel of the ungodly, and has stood in the way of sinners, will not fail to
recreate himself by sitting down in the seat of the scornful. ad Nicom. Eth.
lib. 1.
Aristotle truly resolved that the sensual or passionate were incapable of
receiving moral knowledge, and it is hard that they who are not in a possibility
to be learners, should take upon them to be judges.

But in the present case it is their great concern and interest not to be
instructed. To convince the sensual man that there is a future doom, is to sour
all his joies, and torment him before the time. So that to pass all other
grounds of prejudice, whatever is suggested by these mockers of the Text, their
testimony at least is not to be considered, they being bribed and led aside by
interest to all that they assert.

And let this suffice to have bin said of the personal qualifications of the
disputers against a future judgment. I come now to examine the force of their
discoursings.

Where first, it is obvious to advert, that the Enquiry, Where is the promise of
his coming, is very extravagantly made.

As the Apostle says, that hope which is seen is not hope, Romans 8. 24. so a
promise performed is not a promise, all its obligation is ceast. But tho our
pacts and undertakings fall not under the notice of our senses, it does not
therefore follow they are nothing. Upon this transient blast of emty air, hangs
all the intercourse and traffic of the world. If we will trust altogether to
our eyes, and nothing to promises and words, we must expect the self same
diffidence from others; and so be enemies and out-lawes to mankind.

Nor is the delaying of performance a prejudice against it. It Is true the morrow
is to us a distant thing, however suddenly expected: and therefore Epig. lib. 5.
Martial did not amiss to enquire of one who still undertook for the next day,
where his to morrow dwelt, whether in Parthia or Armenia? But with Almighty
God, every thing however distant it may seem, is actually present: and as
whatever really is, however contingently it happened, certainly and necessarily
is; so whatever he has promised, must certainly and necessarily be: nay should
be reckoned on as already don.

But the discoursings of the mockers in the Text, if they amount to any thing
will run thus. All things continue as they were since the beginning of the
Creation, therefore our Saviors promise of coming to judge the world is vain
and frustaneous. The weakness of which reasoning, the Apostle effectually lays
open, by destroying every part of it. First he denies the proposition, or
supposal that all things continue as they were since the Creation: and Secondly
he denies the consequence drawn from thence, Tho all things did continue, it no
way follows they shall for ever do so; and that the promise of a future change
will not hereafter be accomplished.

As to the Proposition, it is observable, that the Creation of the world is
frankly here acknowledged, tho it be to the evident disadvantage of the
designed Hypothesis. If the world were once Created, in that Act however
transient, it has showed its self liable to the greatest change, since there
are the same steps from not being unto being, as there are back again the
contrary way: with this variety, that it is easier to pass from a habit to its
privation, then it was from the privation to advance into the habit: and
therefore as the Universe did not exist heretofore, so it may likewise not
exist hereafter.

But the truth is, the Origin of the World is a matter so notorious, that even
Epicurus and his followers could not overlook it; and thought it a less
absurdity to make a casual concurse of Atoms, produce all the powers, the
motion, the beauty, and order of the World, then to imagine it to have no
beginning. And to this they were induced not only by attending the chain of
causes, which in a succession of finite beings, could not be infinite: but more
particularly, from the observation of those evident marks of newness, which
appear every where thro-out the world; and which are substantially urged by the
Epicurean Apostle Lucretius in his 5 Book. I mean, the growth of Arts and
Sciences, the plantation of Countries, the date of Histories, the Analogy of
Languages, and the like.

But to pass forward. Whereas it is urged by our Disputers, that since the
Fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they did since the Creation, it is
obvious to reply, that all things do not continue as they were, because the
Fathers are fallen asleep: the destruction of all preceding generations, being
a very remarkable mutation in the Universe. For however by constant successions
the world has bin supplied, yet since it is evident that all the parts are in
perpetual flux and motion, the whole which is nothing but an aggregate of those
parts, must needs be of the same complexion. So that upon the matter the
argument comes to this. All things continue as they were since the Creation,
because nothing continues as it was since the Creation.

It Is true the World has lasted a long time, but so have diverse other things,
which many ages since have perished, as also others which we see are perishing.
Let us consider artificial compositions, for instance Buildings; whereof the
parts constantly decay and moulder: and tho by diligent repairs, the fabric is
maintained so as to be habitable for several Ages, yet at last in spite of all
supplies, it sinks into a ruin. And thus it fares in that other fabric of our
Bodies, which we know are liable to a thousand accidents, every one of which is
able to destroy us: and tho by the supply of food, and careful tendance we are
not only maintained in life, but seem to grow and to be nurisht; yet after a
set period of years the whole drops down, and by no art or care can be
preserved. So likewise in Societies, that Aggregate of separate members allied
together by civil bonds of union, which we call the body Politic; these we see
preserve the same establishment, and settled form of government for several
Centuries of years, and notwithstanding many shocks and great mutations,
recover their pristin constitution: yet it is observed that there awaits even
them a fatal period, and that after Ptolem. Campanel.
6 or 700, or at most 1000 years they are totally dissolved and overthrown.

From the which instances it is easy to collect, that in Systems of all kinds,
whether artificial, natural, or political, every thing is transient and engaged
to dissolution. And tho the Universe in proportion to its vaster bulk, have a
much larger term assigned to its duration, then is prefixed to trivial little
beings, all equally must share in the same common law of fate, and at length
perish by inevitable ruin.

The age of Man is by David Ps. 90. declared to be threescore years and 10,
that of Nations and Governments is esteemed as 100 unto 10, so that 6 or 700
years makes up their ordinary period. Now whether the Universe go on by like
progression, and in accordance to the celebrated tradition, its rate be as 1000
is to 10, and after a Millenary week (and we know that the Apostle says 1000
years is with God Almighty but as one day,) the everlasting Sabbath shall
commence, and Thalmud. Abod. Zara. c. 1. fol 9. R. Ketina. in Ps. 92. Hilar. in
17 Mat. Just. Mart. in Dial. cum Tryph. and quaest. ad Orthod. 71. Iren. l. 5.
c. 28. 30. Cypr. l. de exhort. Mart. Lactant. l. 7. c. 14.
2000 years having past before the Law, 2000 under it, and 2000 in the Gospel,
the seventh thousand shall bring on the period of all accounts, when time shall
be no more; I will not go about to calculate. As God has conceled from us the
day of our death, and that of the destruction of Empires, so has he of the
Universe. In the mean time it is sure more reasonable from the premises laid
down, to infer the future destruction of the world and future doom, then the
denial of it; especially since in consequence to what has bin surmis'd, the
times wherein the Gospel was first preached, are distinctively said to be the
last times, Act. 2. 17. and they who then lived, to be those upon whom, the
ends of the world are come. To which we may subjoin, that our Savior has
interposed his promise, that the regular date shall not be permitted to run
out, and for the Elects sake those days shall be shortened. Luke 24. 22.

But for a farther confutation of these Disputers, the Apostle by a memorable
instance, that of the Flood, an event confessed by the whole heathen world, the
notice of it being transmitted down by general Abyden. Beros. Nic. Damasc.
Plat. in Tim. Suidas in (...) ex Apollin.
tradition, by Histories of all Nations, and by the Rites and Ceremonies of
their Religions, makes it manifest that all things have not, as they suggest,
continued as they were from the beginning of the Creation. This, says the
Apostle ver. 5. they willingly are ignorant of, that by the word of God the
Heavens were of Old, and the Earth standing out of the water, and in the water,
whereby the world that then was, being overflowed with water perished. But the
Heavens and the Earth which are now, by the same word are kept in store,
reserved unto fire, against the day of Judgment and perdition of ungodly men.
That is, men (unless wilfully blind) must acknowledge the Creation to be an
unaccountable riddle of Omnipotence: the habitable Earth being so placed, that
it indeed stands out of the waters, but yet so as to be really within the
waters, the surface of the liquid Element being convexe, and in its workings
demonstrably above the level of the shores that bound it: and nothing but the
word of God that said unto the waves, Thus far shall you go and no farther,
during the first Ages of the world withheld that general inundation, which
afterward succeeded; when, as the Scripture expresses it, the fountains of the
great deep were broken up, and the windows of Heaven, till then shut up, were
opened, Genesis 7. 11. whereupon immediately the waters prevailed upon the Earth.
And on the other side, the force of the Promise of the some God of truth, set
down at the 21 verse of the 8 Chapter, is the only dam and fence which ever
since secures from a repeted ruin. Therefore the Heaven and Earth subsist,
because they are reserved against the general conflagration. Which (by the way)
was the common expectation of the Heathen World, according to that known
persuasion of Plat. in Tim. Senec. Not. quaest. 3. 13. Ep. ad Polyb. Minut.
Fell. Ovid. Metam. l. 1. f. 7. Lucan. l. 1. Hystasp. in Eusebius. Praep. Justin in
Apol.
Platonics, Stoics, and Epicureans also; and celebrated frequently by the
Doctors of Heathen Theology the Poets. In the same manner we see Prisons made
strong, and safely guarded, that the Malefactors may be forth coming at the
Assize and goal delivery. And therefore upon a true account, the preservation
of the world, is so far from being an argument against a future Judgment, that
in reference to it, its fabric is kept up, and hitherto continued.

In like manner also, whereas ill men please themselves much in their impunity;
and because they have lived long without control, think they shall for ever do
so; they have all reason to consider, that this success is of ominous abode
unto them: their condition is the same with that of the guilty prisoner, who is
therefore fed upon the public charge and carefully secured, because he is
reserved to be brought forth to Execution: when in the interim the honest man
is left at large, without that care, or any notice taken of him.

It Is true indeed God has besides another more kind intendment, when he indulges
this impunity, if wicked men would be receptive of it: they therefore are
reprieved, that they may have an opportunity to sue their pardon out, and
reconcile themselves to their offended Judge: for so it follows in the context,
ver. 9. The Lord is not slack concerning his promise (as some men account
slackness) but is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance.

And this consideration is of an astonishing importance, that the best argument
men can frame against the existence of Almighty God, and his future Judgment,
is that he is infinitely good, and that he passes over those indignities, which
in the opinion of the guilty Authors are beyond all sufferance. They would not
have him be a revenger of their foul demerits; no more would he himself: he
would be a God to bless, to save and pardon, but not to punish and destroy; and
therefore, wretched as they are, they would not have him be at all: and madly
throw away their hopes, when they would rid themselves of fear. To such a
miserable issue does brutish guilt engage; makes it the interest of men that
there should be no Omnipotence to support the world, or Providence to guide it;
no power in Heaven to bless and to protect; and what is yet more desperate, no
mercy there to pardon and forgive.

But farther, suppose no promise had bin made of a future coming to Judgment,
it will by no means follow that there will be none; or that such a dreadful,
tho but contingent possibility, should reasonably be laughed at and contemned.
Many things are daily don by us which we never engaged before hand that we
would do; and sure it is equal, that the most free agent should be allowed the
self same liberty.

But lastly, to make the most advantageous supposal for these Disputers of the
Text, that God had said, nay sworn that he would not come to Judgment; with
what face can they, who frequently do what they have bound themselves by horrid
execrations never to attemt, expect a greater veracity from others then they
exercise themselves? Moreover since in all things else they disbelieve Almighty
God, why should they credit him in this? or if they will let him be veracious
in this one instance, how are they sure he meant in earnest what he spoke, and
did not rally, as they love to do? It Is certain the time will come, when he will
transcribe their practice, and in their fatal exigence, laugh at their
calamity, and mock when their fear comes: nor can they easily be sure, that he
has not begun to treat them in their own way already.

Now all this being put together, can any thing be more unaccountable, then
that men should by such ropes of sand let themselves down to Hell; by such
pitiful inconsequences, which yet are the best proofs the matter can afford,
think they have baffled all the expectations and fears, nay all the
possibilities; for nothing else can give security of future Judgment?

Yet so it is, these stupid Arguers have voted themselves to be the Masters of
Reason, and so they are resolved to be. A dull inconsequence, pointed with a
blasphemous scoff, in despite of Logic and common sense, is Wit and
demonstration to boot: and all they that own an awe of God, a love of Virtue,
and fear of Hell, are fools and mad men, and it is lost labor to dispute against
it. These Doctors of the scorners Chair, are (if it may be) more infallible
then that of Rome.

I shall not therefore any farther attemt to undeceive them: but having thus
unravel'd the disputings of the Text in point of consequence and argument, I
shall now take leave to look upon them in another light; as they are a recital
of a Prophecy, and thereby offer to us a farther proof of all that they
propose: To wit

The appearance of these scoffers in the World who laugh at all Religion, and
despise a future Judgment, when so ere it happens, is its self a very signal
mark of its approach.

I stir up, says St. Peter, at the beginning of this Chapter, and the words
immediately preceding the Text, your pure minds by way of remembrance: that ye
may be mindful of the words which were spoken before by the holy Prophets, and
of the commandment of us the Apostles of the Lord and Savior: knowing this
first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, etc. To which St. Jude
exactly accords at the 17 and 18 verses of his Epistle, Beloved remember ye the
words which were spoken before of the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, how
that they told you there should be mockers in the last time, who should walk
after their own ungodly lusts. And St. Paul 1 These. 5. 1. Of the times and
seasons, brethren, ye have no need that I write unto you, for you your selves
know perfectly, that the day of the Lord so comes as a thief in the night: for
when they shall say peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes, etc. All
which is in the same manner declared by our Savior himself, Mat. 24. 37. who
says that his coming will resemble that of the Flood, which fell upon a
generation of men as they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in
marriage, and despised the warning and predictions of Noah the Preacher of
righteousness, as St Peter calls him in the foregoing Chapter to the Text.

Nor may it be suggested, that the scoffing at Religion and a future Judgment,
is no such new thing in the world as to be any way remarkable, and made the
Character of the greatest revolution that ever was. For tho there have bin
always debaucht and profligate persons more then a good many; yet to have them
openly scoff at Religion, do it with assurance and impunity, is a thing so
unusual, as may justly ground the observation laid upon it. Indeed for a fool
to say in his heart there is no God, is not without example: but for a Sect of
men to say it with their mouth, dictate it as Philosophy, and for that be
esteemed Wits and Masters of Reason, is utterly without the precedents of
ancient times, and an atchievment to commence with the last dotage of the
world: a prodigy great enough to go hand in hand with the Suns being darkened,
and the Moons not giving her light, the Stars falling from their orbs, and the
powers of Heaven being shaken, mentioned by our Savior as the prologues of his
second coming at the 24 of St. Matthew, the place before recited.

As no Nation in the world however barbarous has bin found to be without
Religion; so none has bin without a concern for it. By Gods law among the Jews,
the Blasphemer was to be put to death; and Levit. 24. we see that sanction by
Gods particular command put in Execution. Which severity afterward obtained,
even then when the worship of the nation diverted to Idolatry: for when Gideon
had cut down the consecrated Grove of Baal, and destroyed his Altar, Judge. 6.
his life was required as an expiation of the fact. Nebuchadnezzar, tho a
Heathen Prince, thought himself obliged to vindicate the honor not only of his
Bell, but also of the God of Israel; and as we read Dan. 3. 29. decreed that if
any one should speak amiss against him, he should be cut in pieces, and his
house be made a dunghill. At Ephesus, upon the suggestion that the honor of
Diana had bin touched, the whole city was put into a confusion, Act. 19. and at
the 17 we find St. Paul questioned at Athens for being a setter forth of
strange Gods, and probably would not have escaped, had the accusation run, that
he denied the old. For in that place Suid. in Diag. Diog. Laert. Corn. Nep. in
Alcib.
Diagoras, Theodorus, Anaxagoras, Stilpo, Protagoras and others were on this
account punished by banishments, pecuniary mulcts and confiscations, and by
death it self. Nay what is most remarkable, and particular to our present
purpose, when Alcibiades had here in the jollity of a feast indulged unto his
Wit, and made sport upon the Rites of Ceres, in mockery personating the Priest,
tho he was their General in a most important war, they recalled him home, who
not returning, they proscribed his Person, seized his Estate, and publicly
devoted him by solemn execrations.

It would be endless to deduce this subject through ancient History: all the
persecutions with so much blood and fury raised against Christians, are so many
instances of this very matter; they all arising from no other ground then the
zeal they had for their false Gods, and an opinion that Christians were
Atheists and Blasphemers, that mocked at their Devotions, and despised their
Deities.

Now whether it be reasonable for us, to have less veneration and esteem for
the true God, then they had for the false, and verify whatever was suggested by
the Heathen, it will not be difficult to determine. But if after the preaching
of the Gospel, wherein are made discoveries of the Majesty of God and of his
mercy, beyond any vouchsafed to former ages, men shall have less regard of Him
and of his Honor, and after that his Son has for our sakes exposed himself to
shame and mockery, and become of no reputation, we shall therefore add to his
inanition, and let him be of none with us; converting all the obliging
circumstances of his life and death to his continued reproach; crucify him
afresh, and put him to an open shame: and farther, if these multiplied, these
unaccountable indignities, which in former times had certainly bin Capital,
shall now become a Specimen of parts and education; be committed by the Actors
with bold insolence, and by the Hearers entertained with pleasure and applause;
these practices thus put together and enhanc'd, upon a sober estimate must
prove, such as do carry with them as the blackest guilt, so the most direful
ominous abode.

That this Age of ours has somewhat of mockery for its particular Genius, so
that scarce any thing is so entertaining, as to sport with the misadventures or
failances of others; nor no faculty more recommending then the being dextrous
in turning serious things to Ridicule, I think is a truth so notorious, that I
may say it without offense to any: they that are passive in these skirmishes,
being sufficiently sensible of what they suffer; and they that are active, not
desiring to concele or disown their Talent: nay both sorts at one time or other
being active, those that have wit to show it, and those that have none to
pretend to it. Tho alas, what great proof is it of wit, to make others laugh?
which an Idiot can do as effectually by having none: and as to what is the
height of that celebrated faculty, and is thought true bearing wit, the saying
sharp unexpected rambling things, it is most happily acquired by an approach to
drunkenness or frenzy; and twill be no very advantageous barter, to loose our
understandings to advance our wit.

The Arist. Rhet. l. 3. Quintil. Instit. l. 6.
Masters of Greek and Roman Rhetoric in their Institutions, discourse indeed of
causing laughter as a piece of the Art which they pretend to teach: but they
tell us it is only to be allowed in those causes which admit no other defense.
The Buffoon in a desperate exigence is to relieve the Orator, impudence to
supply the place of argument, and wit fill up the room of sense: as we see men
who have no better weapon, think it no shame to rake the canal, and secure
themselves by throwing dirt.

But what shall we say of those, who have introduced this way of fight into the
Christian Warfare? those Schole divinity Drolls of this our Age, who defend the
Faith, by destroying Charity, attaque their fellow-men by those opprobrions
methods of disputing, by scoffs and railing accusations, with which twere not
allowable to oppose the Devil himself, Jud. 9. It Is certainly great pity a good
cause should be asserted by such arguments as libel and reproach it; such as
cannot be urged but by the worst of Men, and which even they will not produce,
till that all others fail them. And were those flowers of Rhetoric weeded out
of our late controversial books, we should find large Volumes shrink into
Manuals, and be as little in their bulk, as they are in their conviction. Where
ere this procedure takes place, it is not at all material on what side the truth
lies; a Jest will as effectually provide an answer to a demonstration, as to
the most manifest inconsequence. The brightest evidence and virtue disguised
and rendered monstrous by burlesque, like the Primitive Christians in the skins
of wild beasts, will easily be worried and destroyed. Nay so it fares, that the
most venerable persons, things, and actions, are most liable to be thus exposed
and made ridiculous: for whatever this beloved acquisition proves, be it the
gift of Nature, meant certainly for better purposes, or the product of
drunkenness or frenzy, or what is yet a shorter method, of spite or malice, it
has a peculiar faculty to pervert the best and most useful things, traducing
sobriety for dullness, gravity for foppishness, order for formality, learning
for pedantry, and is most immediately prepared to cut the nerves of Government,
by despising Dominion, and speaking evil of Dignities, Jude 8.

These are the men, who, as the roial Psalmist tells us, make Songs of him, who
pretend therein not only to impunity, but authoritative right; and say, they
are those who ought to speak. When these are once on the Tribunal, nothing can
escape their sentence, the modesty of Virgins, learning of Scholars, wisdom of
Counselors, integrity of Magistrates, honor of Nobles, the dearest interests
of all conditions and estates are laughed away, as things not worth the keeping.
Nay Majesty its self is here obnoxious, treated as our Savior was in order to
his Crucifixion; arai'd in a ridiculous robe, armed with a reed instead of a
roial Scepter, then mocked and bowed to in reproach, and then it is thought high
time to hang it on a tree. This lewd familiarity ends in the worst contemt, and
nothing can be so unhappy as Authority when baffled. The Coffee-house Rebel is
more mischievous, then he that takes the field; and a Prince is sooner murdered
with a libell, then a sword. And therefore it will concern those who are in
Authority to consider of what effect it may be, that there are so many mockers
of this form and level, in these last times of ours.

My present enquiry is after those of a higher dispensation, who set their
mouth against Heaven, and defy God and Providence; which yet is but a natural
emprovement of the other, and no less powerfully, if not much more destructive
of Government and Laws. And therefore it will also be the Magistrates great
interest, as it is their highest duty, to be concerned herein.

To these ungodly mockers, walking after their own lusts, proud as they are,
and confident that the day of Judgment will either never be, or is far off; I
shall not add more words upon that Head to their disturbance; but mind them of
another day, which they cannot deny to be approaching, I mean the day of Death,
that sentence of the Lord over all flesh, as the Wise man calls it, which is
the day of Judgment to each particular person, as that of Doom is to the World.

And will these mockers ask in scorn where is this promise of his coming? tho
the Fathers are fallen asleep, do they hope by a peculiar privilege to continue
still, and reverse the general law of the Creation? If the long day of the
Fathers had a night who after 7, 8, or 900 years went down to sleep in dust,
and when they did so there was no inquisition in the grave, whether the date
had bin so many hours, but all their labors vanished as they did, in dull
forgetfulness and silence; shall our winter Solstice day, whose Sun scarcely
looks over the Horizon, but instantly starts back again to dwell upon the other
World, so lie upon our hands, as if the Sun were to stand still as it did in
Joshuas time, or to go back as it did in Hezechias, that we might frolic it
without disturbance, in everlasting riot and excess?

The sensual Epicure described at the 12 of St. Luke, who said unto his soul,
Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink,
and be merry: tho he only overlookt, and not denied a Providence, was stopped in
his carriere by hasty vengeance, which pronounced this irreversible decree,
Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee: and then whose shall
those things be which thou have provided?

And let our jolly men of dissolute ungodly life, who notwithstanding the
concerns of their immortal soul, are at leisure to make sport with every thing
however Sacred, who with scorn and greediness pursue unlawful plesures, and bid
defiance to Almighty Justice, lay their hands upon their breast, and ask
themselves at what ensurance office they have secured a longer date of life:
how they come to know their soul shall not be required: or if it be, how well
they are prepared to give an answer to the question but now asked. This very
sentence at this moment is really pronounced against many thousands in the
world, who ere to morrows night will breath their last; of which number not one
single person that now hears me, is sure that he is not.

Have they debated calmly with themselves what death is, how many unwelcome
circumstances are hudled up in that short word? Can they willingly forego their
houses and estates, their tables and their beds, and bid a long farewell to
their dear company, their paramours and flatterers, lying ghastly, and cold, and
senseless, imprisoned in a Coffin, and immured in Earth? To speak in the
language of the Scripture, will the tender and delicate women, who would scarce
adventure to put their feet unto the ground through delicacy, Deuteronomy. 28. be content
to be despoiled of their rings and jewels, the changeable suits of apparel,
the mantles, the wimples, and the crisping pins, the glasses and fine linen,
the hoods and veiles, Isa. 3. and, as he adds, take in exchange, insted of a
sweet smell a stink, insted of a girdle a rent, iusted of well-set hair
baldness, and burning insted of beauty?

But this is not all, will they be willing to come to the Tribunal of their
Maker, and render an account of all the words, the thoughts, the actions and
omissions of an ill led life? answer for their noonday insolence, and
midnight revels; answer for their own and others guilts: the sin of their
rebellion, and greater sin of their impenitence: the accusations of offended
justice, and deeper charge of slighted Mercy?

Or lastly can they after the confusion and horror, of having all their guilts
set in array before them, enhanc'd by the no less numerous overtures of grace
and mercy, out-brave that dreadful sentence of Depart ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25. Will they
maintain the jolly humor there, and like the three Children in the Babylonian
furnace, sing in the midst of flames, and resemble them in being untoucht by
pain, as they shall in not being wasted and devoured? Will they find arguments
of mockery and laughter, in the place of weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of
teeth?

If they can do this, on Gods name let them mock on, deny a future Judgment, or
what is more generous and brave, let them provoke and dare it. But if they
cannot dwell with the devouring fire, nor abide with everlasting burnings, Isa.
33. If they cannot wrestle with Omnipotence, nor have an arm like God; twill be
advisable, to take a timely warning, and according to the counsel given to Job,
Chap. 41. 8. to think upon the battle, and do no more.

I shall close all with the inference, and in the words of St. Peter pursuant
to my Text. The day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night: in the which
the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt
with fervent heat, the Earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt
up. Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of
persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness? looking for and
hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the Heavens being on fire
shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat? Nevertheless
we according to his promise look for new Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein
dwells righteousness. Wherefore beloved seeing that ye look for such things,
be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless:
and account that the long-suffering of the Lord is Salvation. Ye therefore,
seeing you know these things before, beware least ye also being led away with
the error of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness. But grow in grace,
and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ: to him be glory both now and for
ever. Amen.

FINIS.

