TO THE MAGISTRATES AND People of ENGLAND where this may come.
WHat is the matter with the Christians of our Age, and of our English Nation,
that has been looked upon to be a Garden and a Nursery in Christianity and
Religion, beyond all other Nations, that have made so great profession of God
and Christ, and of the Scriptures; and are they now turned Persecutors and
Lawmakers against Christianity, and against those that are in the same Spirit
of God, Power and Fellowship, as they were in that gave forth the Scriptures,
which the people of England professes: And are those now become the greatest
enemies that England has? and for no other cause, but because they worship
God, and obey Christ's Command, and abides in his Doctrine, and bears the same
Testimony of Truth, and Resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ, as the Apostles
did; and all that they do, and act, and speak, and suffer for, is according to
Scripture, and nothing that they suffer for is contrary to the Scriptures. Is
those things become a crime in England? and is this the greatest offense that
England has taken with the people of God, even because they believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ, and obey his Doctrine. Oh take up a Lamentation for England?
Surely there is some heavy, sad, and grievous Judgment waiting upon it. And is
not hardness of heart, and a reprobate mind, and a feared Conscience, one of
the greatest Judgments that can befall a people? and is not this already seized
upon the Lawmakers of England, that have hardened their hearts against the Lord
and his people, as if they had no other enemies but they, who never did them
wrong nor hurt, nor never desired nor intended any hurt against them, but has
ever desired their good, and peace, and welfare, and that they might come to
the true knowledge of the Lord, and to the true knowledge of his Truth, as it
is in Jesus, which they clearly manifest they are ignorant of, by their making
of Laws against those amongst them that fear God, and worship him, and gives
Glory to his Name, though they be freeborn English men and women, nor have
they transgressed any just Law of England, until they were forced to make one
to make them transgressors with, though they be of the same Religion that they
themselves profess; they profess Christ and the Scriptures in words: but they
that come to the works of righteousness, and to believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, which is the work of God, such they persecute and make Laws against.

So that England appears now, as if it would shut Christianity out of its
Dominion: And what will they bring in and set up next, seeing they banish out
Christ, and his Members, and Servants, and Saints, and so makes them Slaves
that be free born English men, which have been a blessing unto them, and to the
Land wherein they lived, and no hurt to them; and if they had given them the
liberty of their Consciences, to have served the Lord God, they might have been
partakers of the blessings with them: but being that they have turned their
hand against the Lord, and turned their Swords backwards against the righteous,
surely the Lord will plead for this, and surely there will a recompense come,
for its hard to strive against the Lord, and to touch his anointed, and to do
his Prophets any harm: when they were but few in number, he reproved Kings for
their sakes; and he is the same now, he changes not, and his Arm and Power is
the same, and his Righteousness is the same, which is to be revealed upon the
Head of the wicked. And he is engaged to plead the Cause of the Innocent, who
has no Pleader in the earth, and his Eye sees and beholds all the actions of
the children of men, and those that act against him and his Servants he takes
special notice of: And he saw the afflictions of his people formerly, when they
were afflicted in Egypt, and heard their cries, and knew their sufferings. And
surely he is the same now as he was then; and as he has said himself, In as
much as you do it unto my little ones you do it unto me: This he said, when he
knew that his next appearance would be in his Saints. And certainly those that
persecuted his Saints, even without a Law, when they had none, and contrary to
several Laws of England, as several of the Servants of the Lord have suffered;
has Christ's Servants been persecuted by those that were in power formerly, and
they that make new Laws? Certainly if Christ and the Apostles had been and were
upon the earth, they would have done the same unto them. But all these things
the Lord has taken notice of, and they are written down where they cannot be
blotted out; and all the righteous blood that has been shed since Abel, and
all the Saints sufferings in all Ages, the Lord has taken notice of, and all
those Christians that have suffered by those that have called themselves
Christians in these latter Times, where several have been imprisoned till death
for the Christian Faith. All this the Lord has in everlasting remembrance; and
when he comes to make inquisition for the blood of his Saints and Servants, it
will be a hard and a sad day for the Actors and Fighters against God.

So all you who are called Christian Magistrates, beware what ye do and keep
your hands out of the blood and persecution of the innocent, and let that which
is past suffice, for ye will find it heavy enoug^ and for the time to come
dread and fear the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, that has all your life and
breath in his hand to give and take away at his pleasure, and do not that which
may incur the Lords displeasure against you, by making Children fatherless, and
Wives Widows, as there are already several in England at this day; it is better
for you to offend men than God, and so endanger your immortal souls. So mind
that which concerns your Eternal Peace, and the Eternal welfare of your Souls.
And this I am moved of the Lord to forewarn you of, least you bring woe and
misery upon your Souls, and a general Judgment on the whole Land; and this is
true Love unto you, and the desire of your general peace and good, and remember
that you were warned from a Prisoner of the Lord in Lancaster Castle.

Margret Fell.
The 7. day of the 4. Month, 1664.

