A Trip to Holland, BEING A DESCRIPTION OF THE Country, People and Manners: As
also some Select OBSERVATIONS ON AMSTERDAMc

His Motto Jason and the Fleece
Who had a notable Headpiece,
(Who though agross one often would boast
Himself a Wit, like Quixots Host
Inlaid with brass, and for his Crest
A ship, displayed with Back and Breast,
On Billow Rampant with fullsails
Ermin'd with Cod, and Herring Scales.
Dutch Hudibrass. Printed in the Year, 1699.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
CErtainly a Trip to Holland may be as grateful as one to Jamaica? I am sure
the Dutch can furnish one with as good a Subject as any English Colony
whatsoever And if I am not so Witty as the Plantation Author I am certain I am
somewhat Wiser. He takes the liberty of abusing his own fellow Subjects, and
consequently beshits his own Nest, but I fall upon a Nation which shits upon
all the world beside, if over witting it may be called so, and I think nasty
terms are fitly applied to such nasty People. I am afraid our West India Poet
is some transported Fellon, who being sent to the Plantation for a Venture, lit
on a bad Master, and with a true Newgate Courtisie to revenge his Spleen on
one House, he squirt his Excrement against a whole Island. But no more of his
Trip: it has Sold very well, and it is my business to sell mine if I can, and
like a true Author Preface it heartily, or the Ignorant Puppy my Chap will
never buy it. For unless a a Writer nowadays, like a Dutch Painter, sets the
name under the Beast he has drawn, the Devil a bit, does the Reader know what
he means; and indeed some of our modern Compositions, as our Aesops, etc. have
as much occasion for a Key to let you into their meaning, as Mine Here Van
Butterbox his Picture has for a Name to be written under it. In short
Gentlemen, I am resolved to get rid of my Commodity, which will stick upon my
Hands, unless I give such an account of it as may make it Saleable. And says
right or wrong I can satisfy the Reader it shall not want my Commendation.
What a Plague would he have, if what follows will not please him? Here Is *
Collection of all Bartholomew-Fair in one single Dutchman, and Fool, Knave,
and Monster, is but part of the Medly ofwhich he is Composed. To talk with him
is present Deafness, and to deal with him is no other than to be certainly
Cheated: To Eat with him is to save the charge of a Vomit, and to Lie with him
is to put you in mind what occasion you have the next day for an Apothecary.
For if you chance to escape the Itch, the Lice will overtake you, If you go to
make application to one of their Women by knocking at her Fore-door she
immediately claps her A -- se, and points to the Postern; and to offer to do any
thing the right way, is immediately to be told you are in the wrong: To
conclude, all things are so irregular, as to think only of order, is to forget
the People we are about to treat of, and to declaim against Rebellion, is to
put 'em in mind to whom they owe their Allegiance, which is a far greater sin
amongst them than Rebellion it self. But that the Reader may be no longer
detained at the Threshold, let him (if he has Money) put his hand into his
Pocket and pull out Sixpence, which will admit him into the House, otherwise
he is no Man for our turn, for he cannot imagine that we who are about to show
him the Mercenary'st Beasts in the World, will be such Asses our selves as to
do it for nothing. Let the Gentlemen therefore that have a mind to see the
Raree-show, down with their Money, and take their places, for we are just going
to begin, whilst those-who cannot produce the Ready, may march off, for we are
for no such Customers.

A Trip to Holland.
HAving in the Month of August last past, some earnest occasions which called
me to Holland, I accordingly took Coach for Harwich, in order to Embark. But
arriving there too late for the Packet-Boat, which had set Sail some time
before, I was forced to lay hold on an opportunity, which gave me an insight
into the Manners of that Country I was going to pay a visit to. It happened a
Dutch Smack was weighing Anchor for Helvoetsluys, and the Longboat staying for
the Master who was drinking at a Publick-House, I was told by some Persons on
the Key, that he had taken in some Passengers, and would gladly accept of my
Company too. Pursuant therefore to the directions which were given me, I went
up to the Sign of the Amsterdam, where he was drinking, and asking for him, had
admision into his Company. But Lord when I had the first sight of the Beast how
I was in a surprise! He had no less than half a Pint of Brandy in his hand,
which he had infallibly swallowed without any other Ceremony, had he not
thought it more breeding to defer the Execution of it (for his Country manner
of drinking is no other than downright Murdering the Liquors they gorge down)
till he had first saluted me. Which was a manner of complimenting which I
amidst a thousand Extravagancies had hitherto been ignorant of. For being
fearful of losing his Liquor should he set it down, and solicitous lest his
addresses should not be timed soon enough, up he made toward me and hit me
such a cursed slap on the Chaps with his damned Phiz, that tho time has worn
off the mark of the blow he gave me with his intended Kiss, yet I shall always
retain the memory of the stink it left behind it. He was as well acquainted in
less than a minute with me as the best Friend I left behind me at the
Rose-Tavern in London, and without asking me my business, after having
sputter'd out a little Dutch, which was as much as to say, My dear Friend
here is to you, down went the half pint at one draught, which was filled up to
the Brim for me to do the same. But I having been used more to Hippolito's and
Chaves his Chocolet-House than any Distillers whatsoever, and by consequence
more conversant with the Looking-Glass, than Glasses which held such
distructive Liquors to the Face in 'em, begged his excuse by the wry Faces I
made to him for that was the only way I had to let him into my meaning, since
my Friends had educated me more like a Christian than to teach me abominable
Dutch, But the Skipper for his part answered me in worse Grimaces than I made
him, and was so importunate with his sputterings which I understood not till a
Chaplain to a Regiment during the War in Flanders, and who was going to fetch
his Wise from thence, told me 'twas his Country fashion, and if I would be
civily used, and designed to be a Passenger, submission to his temper was the
only means to acquire it; and though such a reception to a Gentleman of my
appearance (for I must tell you I looked like no small Fool) might savor of
rudeness, yet it was Mine Here Is chief accomplish meant and grace, who served
every one after that manner, whom he had an esteem for. The Parson having
acquainted me with his own resignation in drinking three full Pints of this
F^ea-killing Medicine, I even forgave the Puppy his intolerable stinking Kiss,
and up I top'd a Draught, which never a Beau in Covent Garden would have
submitted to but my self, and which I should have had the Grace to have
refused, had not the urgency of my Concerns joined with the entreaties of my
spiritual Adviser prevailed over me. I had no sooner dispersed this Emblem of
Hell amidst my Guts, but our Heavenly Ambassador had whipped off his
supernaculum, a way of drinking Customary to our Military Clergy. I immediately
looked in his Face, to see whether the vehemence of that Flood of Liquor, had
drove out no Carbuncle; already enquiring for a Looking-glass, in order to
mortify those, which I did not doubt but I had encouraged, with a Patch. But
the man of the House told me in short, he had no such wry faced Company, who
kept to his House, that should ask for any such Foppish Instrument; and I must
say this in Sir Crape's defense; he had performed to a Miracle, for the Devil a
bit could a Pimple be seen in his Face, it being all over but one continued
Carbuncle, and one must have used the same means to find it out, as Astronomers
do in searching for Motes in the Sun, for nothing under a Telescope could have
satisfied you in your enquiry after it. But enough of the Soul-saving, but
Body-destroying Parson, my business is with the Skipper, and a Plague on him,
for he plied me so with Liquor, that all Mount Aetna would have been but a
Spark to what I had in my Guts. In short, I began very much to repent me of my
journey, and could have wished my Friend had rather lived, who left me the
Legacy I was going for, than I had fallen into such an execrable Society. But
since I was come so far, and it could not be long before the Ship went off, I
comforted my self with the short continuance of these Hellish proceedings, and
endeavored to make the Glass stand still by telling the Master of the Vessel
by my Vallet my Interpreter, that I was come to be his Passenger. He answered
he knew that, though how he should, increased my Wonder, since he had plied me so
by drinking to me, that I had not time to tell him; but it seems these Skippers
are such intolerable Soakers, that no body will bear the fatigue of their
Conversation by Land, but those who must have their Company by Water. When
Heaven's be praised in came the Boats-Crew, who without any Ceremony with their
Hats on their Heads, sat down by their Commander, and told him all things were
ready for our Departure.

Good God! What an alteration did these Fellows make in me, who could not but
think my self almost in a state of Damnation before their coming! Every one was
a good Genius to me, though they had all, like their ill favored Master, the
appearance of evil ones. Four and twenty hours would complete my deliverance,
for whatever came on it I was resolved to make my return in an English Vessel.
But one damned Ceremony was to be encountered with still, Mine Here must have a
Bumper to our good Voyage, and the Parson cried blessings attend the Cup, which
I agreed to, but was forced to go out, to ease my Stomach which was
over-charg'd before. At last, tho the Liquor over came me, all obstacles were
overcome too, and we got aboard; where I was Conducted into my Apartment which
was like our Li^tle-Ease at Guild Hall, there was small fear of falling out of
my Bed, for the Tenement I had taken up was nothing else, and less, of being
made lightheaded by the Waves, since the Brandy had discharged the weight from
my Brain before: In short I fell asleep, and kept in that lazy posture till my
Man came to give me notice we were in sight of Helvoe^sluys, which made me put
off my close bodied Coat the Cabin, and come above Deck, from whence to my no
small surprise, I saw at least two or three Hundred Boats making toward us.
Every one was for making a Market of us, when for as much as I could see, all
the Passengers Equipage besides my own, might have been landed in a
Hand-basket. I had now nothing to do, but to ask my Blockhead, the Skipper,
what he must have for my Passage, which he had like to have prevented me in, by
demanding it from me, for they are as hasty for their Money, as they are for
their Drink, and they will as soon abate you a spoonful or two in your Glass, as
they will Half a Skilling of their first demands, In fine, the Price was Seven
Pistols, which I to get rid of his Company paid down readily, tho I knew the
Exaction. Having left my Spark, whose Conversation had made me so uneasy, I
made toward the Land in a pair of Oars, first bargaining with the two
Sco^erkins my Boatmen for a Ducatoon: Indeed, they performed their parts like
any Water-Rats, and put me a shore with such expedition, as one might perceive
the Love they bare to the Ducatoon, by the have they made to finger it. Being
on the Land (if we may call a Country which is half Water so) the first Inn of
any tolerable appearance which I met with, was the sign of the Angel, which I
could not but admire at in a place where all the Inhabitants bear the
Characters of mere Devils. Here I put in, as thinking by the sign they must be
something better than Dutchmen that dwelt in it, but I was soon undeceived by
the first sight of the Master of the House, who came with his Hat on his Head,
and asked my Business. I resolved him by my Man, for his Language was Heathen
Greek to me, and being very Hungry, bespoke two or three Dishes, as
Scotch-Collops, Fowls, etc. Lord, Sir, cries my Servant, do you intend to be
ruined, there are at least thirty Taxes laid on the several ingredients with
which the several Sances are to be made. However, I was resolved to try the
Experiment, and according to his Words, found such a Reckoning, as a Candidate
for a Parliament might have treated a Mayor and his whole Corporation with.
Several Complements passed here, as distasteful as those my Skipper paid. But
to detain my Reader no longer from the general Observations, I made of the
whole Country, let it suffice, if I tell him I took Sledge, for they travel
here in the same manner as our Criminals take a journey to Tyburn in, for the
Hague, and having ended my Business in a day or two, I spent three Weeks in
visiting the several Provinces, on which he may take the following Remarks.

THey are a general Sea Land, the Great Bog of Europe; and there is not such
another Marsh in the World that is flat. They are an Universal Quagmire
Epitomized. A Green Cheese in Pickle. There is in them an Aequilibrium of Mud
and Water. A strong Earthquake would shake them to a Chaos, from which the
successive force of the Sun, rather than Creation, has a little amended them.
They are the Ingredients of a Black Pudding, and want only stirring together.
Marry, it is best making on it in a dry Summer, else you will have more Blood
than Grist: And then have you no way to make it serve for any thing, but to
tread it under Z^na Torrida, and so dry it for Turfs?

Says one, it affords the People one Commodity beyond all the other Regions, If
they die in Perdition, they are so low, that they have a shorter cut to Hell
than the rest of their Neighbors. And for this Cause, perhaps all strange
Religions throng thither, as naturally inclining toward their Center. Besides,
their ^^^ches show them to be Pluto's Region, and you all know what Part that
was which the Poets did of old assign him. Here is Styx, Acheron, Cocytus, and
the rest of those muddy Streams that have made Matter for the Fablers. Almost
every one is a Charon here; and if you have but a Naulum to give, you cannot
want a Boat or Pilot. To confirm all, let but some of our Separatists be asked,
and they shall swear, That the Elezian Fields are there.

It is an excellent Country for a Despairing Lover; for every Corner affords
him a Willow to make a Garland on; but if Justice doom him to be hanged on any
other Tree, he may, in spite of the Sentence, live long and confident. If he
had rather quench his Spirits than suffocate them, rather choose to feed
Lobsters than Crows; it is but leaping from his Window, and he lights in a River
or Sea; for most of their dwellings stand like Prives in Moted Houses, hanging
still over the Water. If none of these cure him, keep him but a Winter in a
House without a Stove, and that shall cool him.

The Soil is all Fat, though wanting the Color to show it so; for indeed it is
the Buttock of the World, full of Veins and Blood, but no Bones in it. Had St.
Steven been condemned to suffer here, he might have been alive at this day, for
unless it be in their paved Cities, Gold is a great deal more plentiful than
Stones, except it be living ones; and then for their heaviness, you may take in
almost all the Nation.

It Is a singular Place to fat Monkeys in. There are Spiders as big as Shrimps,
and I think as many. Their Gardens being moist, abound with these. No
Creatures; for sure they were bred, not made. Were they but as Venomous as
Rank, to gather Herl; were to hazard Martyrdom. They are so large, that you
would almost believe the Hesperides were here, and these the Dragons that did
Guard them.

You may travel the Country, though you have not a Guide; for you cannot baulk
your Road, without the hazard of Drowning. There is not there any use of an
Harbinger. Wheresoever Men go, the Way is made before them. Had they Cities
large as their Walls, Rome would be esteemed a Bawble; 20 Miles in length is
nothing for a Wagon to be hurried on one of them, where, if your Foreman be
sober, you may travel in safety, otherwise you must have stronger Faith than
Peter had, else you sink immediately. A Startling Horse endangers you to two
Deaths at once, breaking of your Neck and Drowning.

If your way be not thus, it hangs in the Water, and at the approach of your
Wagon, shall shake as if it were Ague-strucken. Duke d' Alva's asking of the
Tenth Penny, frighted it into a Palsy, which all the Mountebanks they have
bred since, could never tell how to cure.

It Is indeed but a Bridge of Swiming Earth, on a Flag somewhat thicker than
ordinary; if the Strings crack, your course is shortened; you can neither hope
for Heaven, nor fear Hell; you shall be sure to stick fast between them. Marry
if your Faith flow Purgatory height, you may pray if you will for that to
cleanse you from the Mud that shall soil you.

It Is a green Sod in Water, where, if the German Eagle dares to Bath himself,
he is glad again to perch, that he may dry his Wings.

Some things they do that seem Wonders. It Is ordinary to see them fish for Fire
in Water, which they catch in Nets, and transport to Land in their Boats, where
they spread it more smoothly than a Mercer does his Velvet, when he would hook
in an Heir upon his coming to Age. Thus lying in a Field, you would think you
saw a Cantle of Green Cheese spread over with Black Butter.

If Aetna be Hell's Mouth, or Fore-gate, sure here is found the Postern. It Is
the Port Esquiline of the World, where the whole Earth does vent her crude
black Gore, whick the inhabitants scrape away for Fuel, as Men with Spoons do
Excrements from Civet-Cats.

Their ordinary Pack-Horses are all of Wood, who carry their Bridles in their
Tails, and their Burdens in their Bellies. A strong Tide and a stiff Gale are
the Spurs that make them speedy. When they travel, they stand still, they drink
up too much of their Way.

T^^^ is a Province amongst them, where every Woman carries a Concy in a Lamb
Skin. It Is a Custom, and not one that travels ever leaves it behind her: Now
guess, if you can, what Beast that is, which is clod in a Fur both of Hair and
Wool.

They dress their Meat in Aqua Coelesti; for it springs not as ours, from the
Earth, but comes to them as Manna to the Israelites, falling from Heaven. This
they keep under ground till it stinks, and then they pump it out again for use.
So when you wash your Hands with one Hand, you need to hold your Nose with the
other; for though it be not Cordial, it is certainly a Strong Water.

The Elements are here at Variance, the subtle overswaying the grosser. The
Fire consumes the Earth, and the Air the Water. They Burn Turfs, and Drain
their Ground with Windmills; as if the Cholick were a Remedy for the Stone: And
they would prove against Philosophy, the World's Conflagration to be Natural;
even showing thereby, that the very Element of Earth is Combustible.

The Land that the have, they keep as neatly as a Courtier does his Beard. They
have a Method in Mowing. It Is so intervened with Water and Rivers, that it is
impossible to make a Common among them. Even the Brownists are here at a stand,
only they hold their Pride in wrangling for that which they never will find.
Our Justices would be much at ease, although our English Poor were still among
them; for, whatsoever they do, they can break no Hedges. Sure had the Wise Men
of Gotham lived here, they would have studied some other Death for the Cuckoo.

Their Ditches they frame as they list, and distinguish them into No^ks, as my
Lord Mayor's Cook does his Custards. Cleanse them they do often; but it is as
Physicians give their Potions, more to catch the Fish, than cast the Mud ^^t.

Though their Country be part of a Main Land, yet every House almost lands in
an Island. And that though a Boor dwell in it, looks as smug as a Lady that
has newly locked up her Colors, and laid by her Irons. A galant Masquing Suit
sits not more complete than a Coat of Thatch, though of many years wearing.

If it stand dry, it is embraced by Vines, as if it were against the nature of a
Dutchman, not to have Bacchus his Neighbor. If you find it lower seated, it is
only a close Arbor in a Plump of Willows and Alders, pleasant enough while the
Dog Days last; but those past once, you must practice Wading, or be Prisoner
till the next Sprink, only a hard Frost, with the help of a Sledge, may release
you.

The Bridge to this, is an Outlandish Plank, with a Box of Stones to poise it
withal, which with the least help turns round, like the Executioner when he
whips off a Head. That when the Master is over, stands drawn, and then he is in
his Castle.

It Is sure his fear that renders him suspicious. That he may therefore
certainly see who enters, you shall ever find his Window made over his Door.
But it may be, that is to show you his Pedigree; for though his Ancestors were
never known, their Arms are there; which (in spite of Heraldry) shall bear
their Archievement, with a Helmet for a Baron, at least. Marry, the Field,
perhaps, shall be charged with their Baskets, to show of what Trade his Father
was.

Escutcheons are as plentiful as Gentry is scarce. Every man there is his own
Herald; and he that has but Wit enough to invent a Coat, may challenge it as
his own.

When you are entered the House, the first thing you encounter is a
Looking-Glass. No question but a true Emblem of Politic Hospitality; for
though it reflect your self in your own Figure; it is yet no longer than while
you are there before it. When you are gone once, it flatters the next Comer,
without the least remembrance that you ever were there.

The next, are the Vessels of the House, marshalled about the Room like
Watchmen; all as neat as if you were in a Citizen's Wife's Cabinet; for, unless
it be themselves, they let none of God's Creatures lose any thing of their
Native Beauty.

Their Houses, especially in their Cities, are the best Eye beauties of their
Country: for Cost and Sight they far exceed our English, but they want their
Magnificence. Their Lining is yet more rich than their Outside, not in
Hangings, but Pictures, which even the poorest are there furnished with. Not a
Cobbler but has his Toys for Ornament. Were the Knacks of all their Houses set
together there would not be such another Bartholomew-Fair in Europe.

Their Artists for these are as rare as thought, for they can paint you a Fat
Hen is her Feathers; and if you want the Language, you may learn a great deal of
Dutch by their Signs; for, what they are, they ever write under them. So by
this Device, hang up more honesty than they keep.

Coaches are as rare as Comets; and those that live loosly need not fear one
Punishment, which often vexes such with us; they may be sure, tho they be
discovered, they shall not be Carted,

All their Merchandise they draw through the Streets on Sledges; or as we on
Hurdles do Traitors to Execution.

Their Rooms are but several Sand-boxes: if so, you must either go out to spit,
or blush when you see the Mop brought.

Their Beds are no other than Land-cabins, high enough to need a Ladder or
Stairs; Up once, you are walled in with Wainscot; and that is good Discretion
to avoid the trouble of making your Will every Night; for once falling out,
would break your Neck perfectly. But if you die in it, this Comfort you shall
leave your Friends, That you Di'd in Clean Linen.

Whatsoever their Estates be, their Houess must be Fair; therefore from
Amsterdam they have banished Sea-coal, left it soil their Buildings, of which
the stateliet sort are sometimes Sententious, and in the Front carry some
Conceit of the Owner* is to give you a taste in these: ChrIstVs ADIV^or M^Vs
Hoc abdicato perenne pereo.
HIC Me DIO (...) ^^Vr.


Every Door seems studded with Diamonds. The Nails and Hinges hold a constant
Brightness, as if Rust there were not a quality incident to Iron. Their Houses
they keep cleaner than their Bodies, their Bodies than their Souls. Go to one,
you shall find the Andirons shut up in Network. At a second, the Warmingpan
mu^^^ed in Italian Cut work. At a third, the Sconce clad in Cambrick, and like
a Crown, advanced in the middle of the House; for the Woman there is the Head
of the Husband, so takes the Horn to her own charge, which she sometimes
multiplies, and bestows the increase on her Man.

It Is true, they are not so ready at this play, as the English; for neither are
they so generally bred to it; nor are their Men such Linen lifters. Idleness
and Conrtship has not banished Honesty. They speak more, and do less; yet does
their Blood boil high, and their Veins are full, which argues strongly, that
when they will, they may take up the Custom of Entertaining Strangers: and
having once done it, I believe they will be notable; for I have heard, they
trade more for Love than Money; but it is for Sport, not the Man; and therefore,
when they like the Pastime, they will reward the Gamester; otherwise their
gross Fool and clownish Breeding has spoiled them from being nobly-minded. And
if you once in public discover her Private Favors, or pretend to more than is
Civil, she falls off, like Fairy-wealth disclosed, and turns, like Beer with
Lightning, to a Sowerness, which neither Art nor Labor can ever make sweet
again.

But this I must give you on Report only; Experience herein has neither made
me Fool nor Wise.

The People are generally Boorish, yet none but may be bred to a Statesman
they having all this Gift, Not to be so Nice-Conscienced, but that they can
turn out Religion to let in Policy.

Their Country is the God they worship. War is their Heaven. Peace is their
Hell: and the Spaniard is the Devil they hate. Custom is their Law; and their
Will, Reason.

You may sooner convert a Jew, than make an ordinary Dutchman yield to
Arguments that cross him. An old Bawd is easilier turned Puritan, than a
Waggon^^ persuaded not to bait thrice in nine Miles: and when he does, his
Horses must not stir, but have their Manger brought them into the Way, where,
in a top sweat they eat their Grass, and drink Water, and presently after hurry
away; for they ever drive as if they were all the Sons of Nim^^^, and were
futiously either pursuing an Enemy, or flying him.

His Spirits are generated from the English Beer, and that makes him
Headstrong* His Body is built of Pickled Herring, and they render him Testy;
these with a little Butter, Onions and Holland Cheese, are the Ingredients of
an ordinary Dutchman; which a Voyage to the East Indies, with the Heat of the
Aequinoctial consolidates.

If you see him fat, he has been rooting in a Cabbage ground, and that
bladdered him. Viewing him Naked, you will pray him to pull off his Masque and
Gloves, or wish him to hide his Face, that he may appear more lovely. For that
and his Hands are Egypt, however his Body be Europe. He has exposed them so
much to the Sun and Water, as he is now his own Disguise, and without a Vizard,
may serve in any Antimasque you put him in.

For their Condition, they are churlish, as their Breeder Neptune; and without
doubt, very Ancient, for they were bred before Manners were in Fashion; yet all
they have not, they account Superfluity, which they say, mends some, and marrs
many.

They should make good Justices; for they respect neither Persons nor Apparel.
A Boor in his liquor'd Slop, shall have as much good usage as a Courtier in his
Bravery; nay, more; for he that is but courtly or gentile, is among them like a
Merlyn after Michaelmas in the field with Crows. They wonder at and envy, but
worship no such Images. Marry, with a Silver Hook you shall catch these
Gudgeons presently; the love of Gain being to them as natural as Water to a
Goose, or Carrion to any Kite that flies.

They are seldom Deceived; for they Trust no body; so by consequence are better
to hold a Fort that, win it; yet can do both. Trust them you must if you
travel; for to ask a Bill of Particulars, is to put in a Wasp's Nest; you must
pay what they ask, as sure as if it were the Assessment of a Subsidy.

Compliment i^ an Idleness they were never trained up in; and it is their
Happiness, that Court-Vanities have not stolen away their Minds from Business.

Their being Sailors and Soldiers, have marred two parts already; if they bath
one in Court oil, they are painted Trapdoors, and shall then let the Jews build
a City where Harlem M^er i^, and after cozen em on it.

They shall abuse a Stranger for nothing, and after a few base terms, scotch
one another to a Carbonado, or as they do their Roches when they fry them.

Nothing can quiet them but Money and Liberty, yet when they have them, they
abuse both; but if you tell them so, you awake their Fury; and you may sooner
calm the Sea; than conjure that into compass again. Their Anger has no Eyes;
their Judgment does not flow so much from Reason, as Passion and Partiality.

They are in a manner all Aquatiles, and therefore the Spaniards calls them
Water Dogs. To this, though you need not condescend, yet withal, you may think
they can catch you a Duck as soon. Sea Gulls do not swim more readily; nor
Moor-Hens from their Nest run sooner to the Water. Every thing is so made to
swim among them as it is a Question, if Elizeus's Ax were now floating there,
it would be taken for a Miracle.

They love none but those that do for them, and when they leave off, they
neglect them. They have no Friends but their Kindred, which at every Wedding,
Feast among themselves like Tribes.

All that help them not, they hold Popish; and take it for an Argument of much
Honesty, to Rail bitterly against the King of Spain. And certainly, this is a
Badge of an ill Nature, when they have once cast off the Yoke, to be most
virulent against those, to whom of right they owe Respect and Service. Grateful
Dispositions, though by their Lords they be exempted from Service, will yet be
paying Reverence and Affection. I am confident, that had they not been once the
Subjects of Spain, they would have loved the Nation better. But now out of
dying Duty's Ashes arise the Blazes of Hostility and Flame. And it is sufficient
Ground to condemn their eternal hate, to know the World remembers, They were
once the lawful Subjects of that most Catholic Crown.

Their Shipping is the Babel, which they boast on for the Glory of their
Nation, it is indeed a Wonder, and they will have it so. But we may well hope,
they will never be so mighty by Land, lest they show us how doggedly they can
insult, where they get Mastery.

It Is their own Chronicle-Business, which can tell you, that at the Siege of
Leyden, a Port being held by the Spanish, by the Dutch was after taken by
Assault; the Desendants were put to the Sword, where one of the Dutch, in the
Fury of the Slaughter, rip't up a Captain's Body, and with a barbarous hand
tore out the yet living Heart, panting among the reeking Bowels, then with his
Teeth rent it; still warm with Blood, into Gobbets, which he spit over the
Battlements in Defiance to the rest of the Army.

Their Natives are the Whip of Spain, or the Arm wherewith they pull away his
Indies. Nature has, not bred them so active for the Land, as some others; but
at Sea they are Water-Devils, to attempt things incredible.

In Fleets they can fight close, and rather hazard all, than save some, while
others perish; but single they will flag and fear, like Birds in a Bush, when
the Sparrowhawk's Bells are heard.

A Turkish Man of War is as dreadful to them as a Falcon to a Mallard; from
whom their best Remedy is to steal away: But if they come to Blows, they want
the valiant Stoutness of the English, who will rather expire bravely in a bold
Resistance, than yield to the lasting Slavery of becoming Captives to so
barbarous an Enemy. And this shows, they have not learned yet even Pagan
Philosophy, which ever prefer an honorable Death before a Life thrawl'd to
perpetual Slavery.

Their Ships lie like high Woods in Winter; and if you view them on the North
side, you freeze without hope; for they ride so thick, that you can through
them see no Sun to warm you with.

Sailers among them are as common as Beggars with us. They can drink, rail,
swear, niggle, steal, and be lousy a like; but examining their use, a Mess of
their Knaves are worth a Million of ours; for they in a hoisterous rudeness can
work, and live and toil; whereas ours will rather laze themselves to Poverty,
and like Cabbages left out in Winter, rot away in the loathsomeness of a
nauseous Sloth.

Almost all among them are Seamen born, and like Frogs, can live both on Land
and Water. Not a Country-Vrister but can handle an Oar, steer a Boat, raise a
Mast, and bear you out in the roughest strai^s you come in. The Ship she a
vouches much better for Sleep than a Bed. Being full of Humors, that is her
Cradle, which lulls and rocks her to a dull Phlegmatickness, most of them
looking like full grown Oysters boild. Slime, humid Air, Water, and wet Diet,
have so bag'd their Cheeks, that some would take their Paunches to be gotten
above their Chin.

The Country's Government is a Democracy, and there had need be many to rule
such a Rabble of rude Ones. Tell them of a King; and they could cut your Throat
in earnest The very Name carries Servitude in it, and they hate it more than a
Jew does Images, a Woman Old Age, or a Nonconformist a Surplice.

None among them has Authority by Inheritance, that were the way in time to
parcel out their Country to Families. They are chosen all as our Kings choose
Sheriffs for their Counties; not for their sin of Wit, but for the Wealth they
have to bear it out withal; which they so over-affect, that Mine Here shall walk
the Streets as Userers to go to Bawdy-houses, all alone and melancholy. And if
they may be had cheap, he will dawb his faced Cloak with Two pennyworth of
picked Herrings, which himself shall carry home in a String. A Common Voice has
given him Pre-eminence, and he loses it by living as he did when he was but a
Boor. But if you pardon what is past, they are about thinking it time to learn
more Civility.

Their Justice is strict, if it cross not Policy; but rather than hinder
Traffic, tolerates any thing.

There is not under Heaven such a Den of several Serpents as Amsterdam is; you
may be what Devil you will, so you push not the State with your Horns.

It Is an University of all Religions, which grow here confusedly (like Stocks
in a Nursery) without either Order or Pruning. If you be unsettled in your
Religion, you may here try all, and take at last what you like best: If you
fancy none, you have a Pattern to follow, of two, that would be a Church to
themselves.

It Is the Fair of all the Sects, where all the Pedlars of Religion have leave
to vent their Toys, their Ribbons, and Phanatick Rattles. And should it be
true, it were a cruel brand which Romists stick upon them; for say they, as the
Chamaleon changes into all Colors but White; so they admit of all Religions
but the true; for a Papist only may not exercise his in Public: Yet, his
Restraint, they plead, is not in Hatred, but Justice, because the Spaniards
abridges the Protestants. And they had rather show a little Spleen, than not
cry quit with their Enemy. His Act is their Warrant, which they retaliate
justly. And for this Reason, rather than the Dunkirkers they take shall not
Die, Amsterdam having none of their own, shall borrow a Hangman from Harlem.

Now, albeit the Papists do them wrong herein, yet can it not excuse their
boundless Toleration, which shows they place their Republic in a higher esteem
than Heaven it self; and had rather cross upon God than it. For, whosoever
disturbs the Civil Government, is liable to Punishment; but the Decrees of
Heaven, and Sanctions of the Deity, any one may break uncheck't, by prosessing
what False Religion he please. So Consulary Rome of old, brought all the
straggling Gods of other Nations to the City, where blinded Superstition paid
an Adoration to them.

In their Families they are all Equals; and you have no way to know the Ma ster
and Mistress, but by taking them in Bed together: it may be those are they,
otherwise Malky can prate as much, laugh as loud, be as bold, and sit as well
as her Mistress.

Had Logicians lived here at first, Father and Son had never passed so long for
Relatives: they are here Individuals; for no Demonstrance of Duty or Authority
can distinguish them, as if they were created together, and not born
successively. And as for your Mother, bidding her Good Night, and Killing her,
is punctual Blessings.

Your Man shall be Saucy, and you must not Strike; if you do, he shall complain
to the Scout, and perhaps have Recompense. It Is a dainty place to please Boys
in, for your Father shall bargain with your Schoolmaster, not to Whip you, if
he does, he shall Revenge it with his Knife, and have Law for it.

Their Apparel is Civil enough, and Good enough, but very uncomely, and has
usually more stuff than shape. Only their Huikes are commodius in Winter: but
it is to be lamented, that they have not Wit enough to lay them by when Summer
comes.

Their Women would have good Faces, if they did not mar them with making.
Their Ear-wyers have so nipt in their Cheeks, that you would think some Fairy
to do them a mischief, had pinched them behind with Tongs. These they dress, as
if they would show you all their Wit lay behind, and they needs would cover it.
And thus ordered, they have much more Forehead than Face.

They love the English Gentry well; and when Soldiers come over to be billeted
among them, they are emulous in choosing of their Guest, who fares much the
better for being liked by his Hostess.

Men and Women are there starched so blue, that if they once grow old, you
would verily believe you saw Winter walking up to the Neek in a Barrel of
Indigo: And therefore they rail at England for spending no more Blewing.

A Man among them is else clad tolerably, unless he incline to the Sea fashion;
and then are his Breeches yawning at the Knees, as if they were about to
swallow his Legs unmercifully.

They are far there from going Naked; for of a whole Woman, you can see but
half a Face. As for her Hand, that shows her a fore Labourer; which you shall
ever find, as it were in Recompense, loaded with Rings, to the cracking of her
fingers. If you look lower, she is a Monkey, chained about the middle; and had
rather want it in Diet, than not have Silver Links to hang her Keys in.

Their Gowns are fit to hide great Bellies, but they make em show so unhandsome
that men do not care for getting them. Marry this you shall find to their
Commendation, their Smocks are ever whiter than their Skin.

Where the Woman lies in, the Ringle of the door does Penance, and is lapped
about with Linen, either to show you that loud knocking may waken the Child,
or else for a Month the Ring is not to be run at. But if the Child be dead,
there is thrust out a Nosegay, tied to a Stick's end, perhaps for an Emblem of
the Life of man, which may wither as soon as born; or else to let you know,
that though these fade upon their gathering, yet from the same stock, the next
year a new shoot may spring.

You may rail at us for often changing; but I assure you, with them it is a
great deal more following the Fashion, which they will plead for as the
Ignorant Laity for their Faith; they will keep it, because their Ancestors
lived in it. Thus they will rather keep an old Fault, though they discover Errors
in it, than in an easy Change to meet a certain Remedy.

For their Diet, they eat much, and spend little: when they set out a Fleet to
the Indies, it shall live three months on the Offals, which we hear fear would
furfeit our Swine; yet they feed ont, and are still the same Dutchmen.

In there Houses, Roots and Stockfish are Staple Commodities. If they make a
Feast, and add Flesh, they have Art to keep it hot more days than a Pigs-head
in Pye-corner. Salt meats and sower Cream they hold him a Fool that loves not,
only the last they correct with Sugar; and are not half so well pleased with
having it sweet at first, as with letting it sower, that they may sweeten it
again; as if a Woman were not half so pleasing being easily won, us after a
Scolding sit she comes by a man to be calmed again.

Fish indeed they have brave and plentiful; and herein Practice has made them
Cooks, as good as e're Lucullus his latter Kitchen had, which is some P^ce for
their Wilfulness; for you can neither pray nor ^^y them to (...) their own
Cookery.

To a Feast they come readily, but being set once, you most have Patience. They
are longer Eating Meat, than we are preparing it. If it be to Supper, you
conclude timely when you get away by Daybreak. They drink down the Evening
Star, and drink up the morning Star. At those times it goes hard with a
Stranger; all in Courtisie will be drinking to him; and all that do so he must
pledge; till he does, the filled Cups circle round his Tre^cher, from whence
they are not taken away till emptied. For though they give you a day for payment,
yet they will not abate the Sum. They sit not there as we in England, Men
together, and Women first; but ever intermingled, with a Man between: and
instead of Marchpanes, and such Juncates, it is Good manners if any be there, to
carry away a piece of Apple-pye in your Pocket.

The time they spend there is in eating well, in drinking much and prating
most. They sip, and laugh, and tell their Tales, and in a Tavern are more
Prodigal of their Time than their Wine. They drink as if they were short
winded, and as it were eat their drink by morsels, rather besieging their
brains than asfausting them.

In short, to come to a Conclusion, what they do is so far from being like
other men's actions, that they are wholly the reverse of Humanity, as they are
the backside of the whole World. And the men of Old did no more wonder, that
the Great Massias was born in so poor a Town as Bethlem in Iudec, than I do
wonder that so brave a Prince as King William should be born in such a Land of
beasts, as Lousy Holland.

Of AMSTERDAM.
As Amsterdam is the Metropolis of the seven Wicked Provinces, so it is the
chief in respect of the many Vices which have taken Sanctuary in it. To call a
man an Amsterdamer, is as much as to say, he is no Christian, and to tell the
place of his Nativity, is enough to ingratiate himself with the most
persecuting Dioclesian. The King of Iapan being a great Enemy to Christianity,
would permit none that professed our Savior's Doctrine, to Traffic with his
Subjects without a previous Oath, that they would not exercise their Religion
curing their continuance in his Dominions; several Nations, amongst the rest,
the English refused to comply with proposals so dishonorable to themselves and
the Holy Religion they were instructed in: But the Dutch from this place being
resolved to have something to Pamper their Bodies which though they damned
their Souls for it, send instructions for their two Heathenish Deputies to sign
whatever should be demanded of 'em. Accordingly the two Raskals, instead of
owning themselves Christians, signd the Agreement by the m^^e of Hollanders,
which has ever since been a current Name with those of Iapan for a downright
fellow Subject, and Infidel. This stands upon Record, and they have Worm'd out
all other Nations from that Country's Traffic by it.

As to its Situation the Inhabitants call it the Land of Canaan, though instead
of flowing with Milk and Honey it overflows, with nothing but Water. The
Heavenly showers which add to the Fertilty of other soils, takes from the
fruitfulness of this, and God Almighty has punished 'em with Water in this
life, since they are to have another Element to torture 'em in the next.

However, though it be not the Land of Canaan, its certainly a Land of Promise,
but if you look for Performances, or an Israelite in it without guile, you may
chance to be never the near to your Journey's end.

As its Riches comes by its Shipping, so the Foundation of all its building, is
laid upon huge Piles of Masts, and that which makes their floating houses move,
is the only thing which renders those that are fixed on Land without motion.

And though if a good strong Tide* would but bring their Masts by the board (as
they call it) there would be no occasion for a Wind to drive 'em to Sea, I Will
warrant 'em.

Every Private house here looks like an Alehouse and is painted with Green
Red, and White, and they are so sensible of their Country Villainies, that every
Window has its Iron Grates, like our Jayls, in order to keep the Felon its
owner out of harms way.

An eminent Surgeon who lives there, told me, That for the space of three years
last past, notwithstanding the frequent Quarrels which happened among 'em: He
had none under his hands but such as were wounded in the back; and if a man was
but so fortunate as to get a scotch in the forehead, etc. he was immediately
made an Officer in the Militia.

They are as dextrous in flying from a Foe, as they are in the pursuit of
Riches, and they hate the French Religion, because the Te Deum is in it, which
they have been so fortunate as to make use of against 'em.

To go into one of their Churches, is to catch cold, for there are so few
People in 'em that their breath can never warm you: But their Bawdy-houses are
so crowded that half an hours staying there would save you the charge of a
Bagnio.

They love' all pictures but that of the King of Spain, and if any one is
desirous to end his days, the most Expeditious way to effect it, is to hang up
his head at his Sign-Post.

Their Stadt-house, which is the most famous piece of building in the whole
Province, would be very fine were it not for the pitiful entrance into it, as
indeed their buildings in general, were it not for the nasty Inhabitants.

If you talk with one of their Preachers about Religion, he diverts you to
Trade, and still thinks himself upon his first Topic, which is the only truth
he is Guilty of, for though they differ in Name, they are the same in Substance.

The King of England has a Consul here, who makes some small Figure, and fits
in an eminent Pew in the English Church, where there is sorry Preaching, a dull
and tedious Sermon, about an hour and three quarters long, and a few Auditors,
all Presbyterians. The Chancel is let out for a Ioyner's Shop, because they
hate any thing that has the appearance of Popery in it.

The De Wits were born here, those noted Enemies of his present Majesty of
Great Britain, and there are yet some of that Faction in this City, for which
the English owe 'em no great Thanks, and the Remembrance of Amboyna, and those
horrid cruelties perpetrated on us there, may make us more cautious in our
dealings with 'em for the future.

They have public Stews or Brothel-houses erected at the charge of the
public, and to see a Magistrate come to receive the Taxes laid on that which
distinguish the Female Sex, is as common as to see a Burgo-Master with a Rope
of Onions in his hand, or a Judge shouldring a Bunch of Turnips.

But I am so weary of this abominable Town, the Description of which must have
tired the Reader, as well as my self, that I shall have said, all when I have
told him.

Their Religion, I mean the chief of the many which are tolerated there, is
rank Calvinis^, their Manners downright Brutishness, their Dealings perfect
Knavery, their City a Den of Thieves, their Exchange their Church, and their
Church a wide covert place to take the Air in, their buildings without Gates,
their Hospitals without Wounded People, their crimes without Punishment, their
Assurances without Honesty, and their Heads without Brains. And so much for
Amsterdam, whose Sluices I wish opened, that the City might set fail, to some
Country more remote than at present that cursed place is in.

WHich Heaven permit, if pitying Heaven can hear
What ills we suffer, and what wrongs we bear,
To be caressed, defrauded, and betrayed,
Promised their Friendship, though refused their Aid,
Disgraced abroad, and fawned upon at home,
Is every Neighboring Nations common doom.
But thou, O Land of Europe's Realms the chief,
The Guard of Empires, and the World's Relief,
Whose hands have raised 'em, and whose Arms have Blessed
Their States to HIGH AND MIGHTY from DISTRESSED.
BRITANNIA, Thou! ah! Thou can chiefly show
Their guilt unmeasured as is now thy woe:
And in thy Sons from thy embraces torn
Behold their Friendship, and beholding mourn,
Whilst in Amboyna's cruelties are shown,
Crimes now their practice, as not then unknown.
Instructions from thy former harms receive,
How far to trust 'em, and how far believe,
Interest will shorten what they promise long,
When never to trust is never to suffer wrong.
And if the wishes of thy Son may join
With those which either are, or should be Thine,
May Thou once more Thy Ancient rights regain,
Empress at Land, and Mistress of the Main:
No Fleets but Thine amidst the Ocean ride,
Thy Neighbor's Terror, and thy Countries Pride;
Whilst injured Kings petition for thy Aid,
And Thou thy own support, ar't that of Others Made.
FINIS.

