This is to the CLERGY Who are the Men that goes about to settle RELIGION (As
they say) according to the Church of England. Whether they may be BISHOPS or
PRESBYTERS, or what Name soever they may go under.
I Am moved of the Lord God to give you a Warning from him in love to all your
souls, that you may not bring upon your selves the guilt of innocent blood, and
that you may be ware and cautious concerning this thing, which is of great and
high Concernment, lest you do entrench upon the Right and Prerogative of CHRIST
JESUS, who is the Head of his Church, which is his Body, Ephesians. 1.21, 22.
the fullness of him that fills all in all, far above all Principalities and
Powers, Might and Dominion, and every Name that is named; not only in this
World, but also in that which is to come, who has led captivity captive, and
gave gifts unto men, some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ; that was the End and Work
that they had to do, who had received gifts from God for the Work of the
Ministry: Now if you have this Authority from CHRIST, who is the Head of the
Body, his Church, and have received Commission from him, and the gifts which he
gives for this Work, then you would be tender over his Saints and Lambs which
he has gathered into his Fold in this his Day, by the Ministration of his
Spirit which he has given unto every one to profit with all; and no man by the
Spirit of God calls Jesus accursed: Now prove your selves, and let your
practice prove you, whether you have your derivation from this Root and Rock on
which the whole Church is built, which Rock is CHRIST, who gives diversities of
Gifts by the same Spirit; for to one is given by the Spirit, the Word of
Wisdom, to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit, to another Faith
by the same Spirit, to another the gift of healing by the same Spirit, to
another the working of Miracles, to another Prophecy, to another discerning of
Spirit, to another diverse kinds of Tongues, and to another the Interpretation
of Tongues; but all these works that one, and the self- same spirit.

Now if you drink of this Spirit, and be baptized into this body, which you
profess to succeed from, then will you be tender, and be careful of those that
have received these gifts of his Spirit, which may be several and various,
which Spirit cannot be limited, because it proceeds from the Lord of Heaven and
Earth; 1 Cor. 12.
and though there may be differences of Administrations, yet the same Lord; and
though there may be diversities of operations, it is the same God that works
all in all: And this is he that cannot be limited, who has created Heaven and
Earth, and rules and orders all things by the Word of his Power, who will make
all subject unto him and will make all his people willing in this day of his
Power, to be obedient unto him, who is coming to rule in the hearts and
consciences of men; and there is he establishing his Throne, which is for ever
and ever, and his Scepter there he will sway, which is a righteous Scepter, and
the Nations will he rule with a Rod of Iron, and break to pieces all his
Enemies like a Potters Vessel.

Now it is very like that you, or at least many of you cannot believe that he
is thus come, and coming; and therefore you may take the more boldness and
liberty to act against him and his Power, because you will not see nor believe
that this is he; now that you may not be ignorant when Christ appears against
those his Enemies that would not that he should reign, am I moved to warn you,
before you proceed and go on in acting against the Lord God, that you may not
be ignorant in this thing.

Consider, Paul (who once was called Saul) how zealous he was in persecuting of
the Saints, and he had great reason, in that he was a Jew outward, and touching
the Law, a Pharisee, and concerning the Law blameless; yet in the blindness of
his zeal and ignorance, breathed he out threatenings against the Saints, which
afterward was his sorrow. Now sit down solemnly, and consider seriously, that
God is a Spirit, and his Worship is in the Spirit, and he has promised the
pouring forth of his Spirit, and this cannot be limited to Time, nor Place, nor
Person; for it is not men that ye have to deal with in this thing, but the
Lord; this is the Stone that all the Builders ever set at naught, and did
disallow, which now is become the Head of the Corner, which indeed is the
Lord's doing, and its marvelous in our eyes.

Now if a man desires the Office of a Bishop, he desires a good Work, and not a
great Name only; but he desires that the good Work of God may go on, and not to
stop it: But a Bishop must be blameless, the Husband of one Wife, valiant,
sober, and of a good behavior, apt to teach, not given to wine, no striker, 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1.6.
not greedy of filthy lucre, but patient, not a brawler, nor covetous, one that
rules well his own House; for if a man know not how to rule his own House, how
shall he take care of the Church of God: For a Bishop must be blameless as the
Steward of God, not self-willed, nor soon angry, but a lover of good men,
sober, just, holy, and temperate. These are the Qualifications and Marks of
them that should be Overseers of the Church of God, And likewise Deacons must
be grave, not double-tongued, not given to much wine, not given to filthy
Lucre, holding the Mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience: Let these also, first
be proved, says the Apostle. And so those that desires or looks after, or
takes upon them these Offices of being Bishops and Deacons, and to be Overseers
of the Church of God, they ought to be proved and tried beforehand, whether
they are men fearing God, and hating Covetousness, bringing forth fruits of the
Spirit, not men of corrupt minds, not reprobate concerning the Faith, but
holding the Mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience, void of offense, and were to
give no offense, neither to the Jew, nor Gentile, nor to the Church of God;
Such were these, from whom the men of our Age would seem to derive their
Pedigree; but if they be searched thoroughly, they will appear to be of a later
standing, and to be Branches which springs from another Root, which indeed is
the Pope, from whence they had their Rise and Beginning, as might be clearly
evidenced and demonstrated, if it be desired: Now it will be good and safe that
these men do stand upon their own Foundation and Ground, and not to stretch
themselves beyond their measure, nor to limit the Spirit of God, which limits
all things, 2 Cor. 10.12.
and searches all things, even the deep things of God: The Apostle said, Them
that measure themselves by themselves, and compared themselves amongst
themselves, were not wise; and said, They would not boast themselves without
their measure, but according to the measure of the Rule which God had given
them; Not boasting themselves without their measure that is, of other men's
labors, but his glorying was in the Lord, and in the Hope he had in him, who
commended himself to every man's Conscience in the sight of God: And so now, if
you come to be approved and tried by that of God in every man's Conscience, then
ye will not limit nor offend that in the conscience, if ye be made manifest to
that of God in every man's conscience, in the sight of God, then will you not
lay Burdens, Yoaks, and oppressions upon them, but fulfill the Royal Law,
according to the Scriptures, which says, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy
self: In this you will do well; but if you respect persons, you will commit sin:
For the Apostle says, God has chosen the poor of this world, rich in Faith
and Heirs of the Kingdom, which he has promised to them that love him; For God
has chosen the foolish things of the World to confound the Wise; 1 Cor. 27, 28.
and God has chosen the weak things of the World to confound the things which
are mighty, and base things of the World, and things which are despised has
God chosen, yea and things that are not, to bring to naught the things that
are, that no felsh might glory in his tresence.

So it will be for your peace and safety, not to be partial in your selves, and
so become Judges with evil thoughts, and judge that to be evil which you know
not to be evil; for they that did speak evil of the things that they knew not,
the Apostle said, Jude 10.11
the woe was unto them, for they went in the way of Cain and ran greedily after
the error of Balaam: And so keep you out of this Way, lest the hand of the Lord
stop you, and you perish in the gainsaying of Core, as they did. And be not
Judges of other men's Consciences, nor take not upon you to usurp Authority over
the Consciences of men, Jam. 4.12.
for that is Christ's Prerogative, and the place of his Throne; For there is
one Lawgiver, who is able both to save, and to destroy: So your safest way
will be to leave people to this of God in their conscience, which they must
stand or fall to, and none to judge another man's Servant, for to his own Master
must he stand or fall: But those that will have you to rule over them, and can
receive your Doctrine, and own your Church Government, and Church Fellowship,
such you may Rule over; for there is a necessity that those that are not guided
by that of God in their consciences, there must be a Law for such to Rule and
Govern them, who are not subjected to that of God in them, but are Lawless: But
truly I say unto you, it will be dangerous for you to strive against the Power,
and the Hand which is now stretched forth for the redeeming and recovering the
Seed from under Bondage and Captivity, under which they have been long held. Oh
remember what it was that dashed you to pieces before! The same Rock is present
still, and changes not; It was the Pressures, and the Burdens, the Yoaks and
Bondages that were imposed upon Peoples consciences, that was the cause that
their spirits were raised and heightened, and therefore were they even resolved
to fight to the death, for the LIBERTY of their CONSCIENCES; this LIBERTY of
CONSCIENCE is of great weight, and gives a great stroke in the minds of People;
this you will find to be true: Look back and consider what was imposed formerly
in the days of the Bishops, what Spiritual COURTS, and spiritual LAWYERS, what
Sitations and EXCOMMUNICATIONS, and limiting to Parishes, etc. Oh! such
grievous Burdens, as were even heavy to be born: Ye have suffered for those
things, and God did cast you out, and dispossess you of those things, even by
reason of those sad and heavy burdens which the people of these Nations
suffered under, which formerly they could not bear: And now you will find it
hard to bring them back into that Bondage again; and now you are in a hope of a
possibility and likelihood of your being tried the second time, but beware that
you resist not the Hand that has smitten you, for it will be in vain for you
to kick against the pricks; for the Work of the Lord must go on which he has
begun in this his Day, in which he is delivering and redeeming his Seed out of
Bondage, and bringing back the Captivity of Israel, and the dispersed of Judah;
for he has heard the cry of the oppressed Seed, and he has felt its
groanings, and seen its sorrow, and heard its sighings, and because of the
Innocent, he is engaged to plead with all flesh; for the Deliverer is come to
Zion, so that Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad, and he that is the
SUPREME JUDGE in the conscience is arisen, who purges the Conscience from dead
Works, to serve the living God; and the voice is heard which says, Arise you
dead, and come to judgment; and the time is come, and now is, that the dead do
hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hears, do live; and he that is
the Resurrection and the Life is manifested, and he that believes on him,
though he be dead, yet shall he live; and he that lives and believes, out of
his belly flows Rivers of living Waters: And this Fountain and Current is set
open, which all the Powers of Darkness cannot stop, which will fill the earth
with the knowledge of the Lord, even as the waters the sea: Therefore let all
Hands be staid, and all Mouths stopped that would act and speak against this;
Pro. 21.30 Isa. 14.
for there is no Wisdom, nor Understanding, nor Council against the Lord: I
will arise (says the Lord) of Hosts, and cut off from Babylon the Name and
Remnant, Son and Nephew, (says the Lord) and I will make it a Possession for
the Bittern, and I will sweep it with the Besom of Destruction, says the Lord
of Hosts, who has sworn, saying, Surely as I have thought, so shall it come to
pass, and as I have purposed, so shall it stand. And this is the hand that is
stretched out upon all Nations; so let all fear and tremble before him, who is
a consuming Fire to the Wicked, who is coming to render recompense to his
Adversaries, and Fury to his enemies; for the transgressions of the people are
multiplied, and their Iniquities and sins testifies to their faces; for they go
on in transgressing and lying against the Lord, and they are departed from the
Way of God, and are speaking and uttering Words of falsehood, and Judgment is
turned away backward, and Justice stands afar off; For Truth is fallen in the
streets, and Equity cannot enter; yea, Truth falls, and he that departs
from Iniquity, makes himself a prey, and the Lord has seen it, and it has
displeased him that there is no true Judgment; therefore has he put on
Righteousness for a Breast Plate, and a Helmet of Salvation upon his Head, and
he has put on the Garments of Vengeance for Clothing, and clad with Zeal as a
Cloak; according to their deeds, accordingly will he repay; so shall they fear
the Name of the Lord from the West, and his glory from the rising of the Sun;
and the redeemed shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression
in Jacob: So every one that fears the Lord, and works righteousness, will
be accepted of him, and no evil tidings can come to such; and the Lords people
shall never be ashamed, though they may suffer much, and undergo many sad
afflictions, yet if their suffering be not for evil doing, but for the Lord,
and for conscience sake, it will not be worthy to be compared to the glory
which shall be revealed; but it will be good for you that are called Ministers
and Teachers, that ye have not your hands in blood and persecution; for the
blood of the Innocent will cry aloud in the ears of the Lord; and when he looks
and beholds that there is no Pleader in the Earth, then is he engaged to stand
up, and to own that which no eye pitties, which breaths unto him alone, and
cannot be satisfied without life and refreshment from him, who is now raising
up Pastors after his own heart, which loves him, and feeds his Lambs and his
Sheep, over which he is the Shepherd; and therefore they cannot want, but he
feeds them with green Pastures, who is the Bishop of the soul, and those that
rules over his flock, watches for the souls of people.

Therefore remember that you are warned in your lifetime to keep your hands
from limiting of peoples Consciences, whose Appeal is only unto the Lord, the
Souls Bishop, and so cannot be limited by no man: Remember also, that there
were Pastors that destroyed the Vinyard, and the Heritage was unto the Lord as
a speckled Bird; and when they assembled, they were as Beasts of the Field that
came to devour, and God's Tabernacle was spoiled, and their Pastors were become
brutish, they sought not the Lord, and therefore they did not prosper, but
their Flocks were scattered.

Consider of this, and see what the Lord is doing, and do not wilfully shut
your eyes against the Hand of the Lord, lest you fall into utter ruin and
destruction; for he is the same to day, as he was yesterday and for ever; and
as you tender your own souls, and your eternal peace and comfort, be tender of
tender Consciences, which the Lord has made tender, and which are tender and
dear unto him; and make not ye their hearts sad, which the Lord has not made
sad, which if you do, sad and heavy will be your misery; and if you should go
about to limit and bind people to your ways and worships, even upon pain of
Firing, Prisoning, Banishing, yea if it be to Massacring and Martyring, you will
find that there is a people in this Nation that will give up their lives and
their Blood for their Testimony which they hold, which is the testimony of
Jesus, the Spirit of Prophecy, and that will follow the Lamb wheresoever he
goes; here is the patience of the Saints, they that keep the Commandments of
God, and the Faith of Jesus, who shall overcome by the blood of the Lamb, and
the Word of their Testimony, who loves not their lives unto death; And now
remember that you cannot plead ignorance of this, nor that you are not
forewarned that ye might avoid shedding innocent blood, which will be an
everlasting Testimony for the Lord when he comes to make Inquisition for Blood,
and when he comes to plead the cause of the Innocent, who have suffered
innocently, and for CONSCIENCE SAKE, and not for any evil-doing: Then what will
you answer him? Oh harden not your hearts while it is called to day, but cease
to do evil, and learn to do well, that the Lord may have mercy on you, who
delights in Mercy, and loves not the death of sinners, but rather that they
should turn from their wickedness, and live.

M. F.

THE END.
LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, and are to be sold at his Shop at the sign
of the Black-spread-Eagle and Windmill, in Martins L'Grand, 1660.


