The Standard of the Lord REVEALED.

By which He has led and guided and preserved his people since Adam to this
day, as is manifested through the Scriptures, and is showed forth in this
following Abstract.

AS ALSO

A clear manifestation by the Scriptures of the Recovering and Redeeming his
Spiritual Seed and Body, which is his Church, out of thraldom and Captivity,
which day is begun.

Then he remembered the days of old, Moses and his people, saying, where is he
that brought them up out of the Sea with the Shepherds of his flock? where is
he that put his holy Spirit within them, that led them by the right hand of
Moses with his glorious arm, that led them through the deep as a Horse in the
Wilderness that they should not stumble. Isa. 63.11, 12, 13. Neither said they
where is the Lord that brought us up out of the Land of Egypt, and led us
through the Wilderness, etc. Jer. 2.6. But fear not thou O my servant Jacob,
and be not dismayed O Israel, for behold I will save thee from the land of
their Captivity, and Jacob shall return and be in rest, and at ease and none
shall make them afraid, Jer. 46.27. Isa. 41.13.14. And I will bring again the
Captivity of my people Israel and they shall build the waste Cities and inhabit
them, and they shall plant Vinyards, and they shall drink of the Wine thereof,
and shall make Gardens and eat of the fruit thereof. Amos 9.14. The Redeemer is
come to Sion, Jacob does rejoice, and Israel is glad. Psalm. 53.6. Given forth
at Lancaster Castle 11. month 1665/6, By M. F. a Prisoner of the Lord.

Printed in the Year MDCLXVII.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Diligent Reader,
IF thou seriously consider that we are fallen into the last days and ages of
the World, in which the Lord of Heaven and Earth will come and plead with his
Enemies, and to recompense them according to their works, Rev. 20.12. 2 Cor.
5.10. Mat. 16.27. and that the terrible day of the Lord is coming with burns as
an Oven, and all his Enemies are before him as stubble, and he will call all
men high and low, rich and poor to an account for their deeds done, and reward
every one according to their works, whether they be good or whether they be
bad: The serious consideration of these things should put thee to a stand, to
search and to see how it stands between thee and the Lord. And if thou desires
the knowledge of the living God and of his eternal Truth, and desires to know
the dealings of the Lord with his people, and his seed here upon the earth,
since he made man and created him, and gave him a being upon the earth, look
into this following Extract which is taken out of the Scriptures, and thou
may thereby see how the Lord has led his seed and people from the beginning
of the World until this present day: As also his tender care and love that he
has exercised unto them all along as thou thy self will judge in the reading
of this Treatise through, which will be for thy own advantage, and the building
of thee up in the knowledge of the Lord and his Truth, and also in the
knowledge of the Scriptures, which too many are and have been ignorant of, and
therefore have they dyed in their sins, according as Christ says, if you do
not believe that I am he ye shall dye in your sins, Joh. 8.24. And none do
believe that Jesus is Christ, but who believes in his light and in his holy
Spirit; for that is the unction of the holy one, the anointing which is the
Christ, which is the truth and is no lie, and which leads into all truth, which
Christ Jesus promised he would send when he went to his Father, in John 16. It
is expedient for you, says he, that I go away, for if I go not away the
Comforter will not come unto you, but if I depart I will send him unto you:
howbeit when the Spirit of truth is come he shall guide you into all truth, for
he shall not speak of himself, but he shall receive of mine and show it unto
you; all things that the Father has are mine, therefore I said unto you he
shall take of mine and show it unto you; thou may read of this at large in
this Chapter: So this is the very life of our knowledge of the truth to mind
the light of the Lord Jesus Christ which is in thy heart, and his Spirit that
he has put in thy inward parts, and with that eye read this following Treatise
in sobriety, gentleness, and meekness of Spirit, without partiality or
prejudice, and thereby thou may gain knowledge and understanding into the
truth of God, and also into the Scriptures which it may be thou did not know
before. Thou may also read in this following Book of the Redemption and
bringing back of the Captivity of the Church of Christ, whose day of redemption
and deliverance comes as is showed therein by the Scriptures: and so as I said
before being the time is short, and the Lord comes as a thief in the night,
and the servant knows not at what hour his Lord comes: Therefore Christ
says it is good for you to be ready, for in such an hour as you think not of
the Son of man comes, blessed is the Servant whom the Lord when he comes
finds watching; watch therefore for you know not at what hour the Lord
comes, Mat. 24. so in this time and day all people had need to be found
watching, lest they say peace when sudden destruction comes upon them. So in
love to the Souls of all people upon the whole earth is this written, and that
it might be of advantage to all people is the end of the writing of this
following book.

And the Lord that has opened and moved by the power of his holy Spirit in
writing of it, make it also effectual and of use and service for the salvation
of the Souls of all the Readers of it.

M. F.

Genesis.
IN the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was
God, the same was in the beginning with God, all things were made by him and
without him was not any thing made that was made. Joh. 1. This is the testimony
and the record of John the beloved Disciple that leaned on Jesus breast, this
agreeing with the first of Genesis; In the beginning God created the heaven and
the earth, and the earth was void, and without form, and darkness was upon the
face of the deep; and the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters, and
God said let there be light and there was light. 1 John 5.7. So here is the
record which is in heaven, God, the Spirit, and the Word that was in the
beginning with God, by which all things were made and created, the Heavens and
the Earth, the Sea and the firmament, and all things that are therein, and
every living creature that moves in the Sea, and upon the Earth were created
by the word of God, and God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was
very good; and God said let us make man in our own likeness, and let them have
dominion; so God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he
him, male and female created he them.

To this agrees Mat. 19.4. where Christ says, have you not read, he that made
them in the beginning made them male and female? fe added to male signifies to
increase, to multiply or bring forth. So here is all the distinction that the
word that was in the beginning made between them, God called them male and
female: the same John as bears witness of the word that was in the beginning
with God, also bears witness that the word was made flesh, Joh. 1.14. and dwelt
among us, and we beheld his glory as the glory of the only begotten Son of the
Father, which is Christ in the male and female, this is the true image of God
full of grace and truth, according as the Apostle says in the Ephesians. 4.24.
Ephesians. 2.10. And that you put on the new man which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness; and this word stood in the decree and election
of God, until it was made flesh, his Son manifested in the flesh, which makes
and creates the image of God in the male and in the female, in righteousness
and true holiness in the male and female; Gal. 3.28. The males were to be the
Lords, Exodus 13.13.15.16. Lev. 1.3. They were to offer a male without blemish,
Mal. 1.14. they were cursed that had a male in their flock and offered unto the
Lord a corrupt thing: and again Exodus 13.2. and Numbers 18.15. According to
this Law of Moses Joseph and Mary observed the command of God, and circumcised
Jesus on the eight day, as it is written in the Law of the Lord, every male
that opens the womb shall be called holy to the Lord, Luke 2.21.23. here is
the true and living image which God has created in the male and female; but
here lies the mystery, God manifested in the flesh, which is yet hid to the
most of men, that lies in the fall, but perfectly known to those that are in
the resurrection and redemption. Howbeit on the sixth day the Lord formed man
of the dust of the ground and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life,
and the man became a living Soul. And the Lord God planted a Garden Eastward in
Eden, and the Lord God took the man and put him in the Garden of Eden to dress
it and to keep it ver. 15. and the Lord God said it is not good for man to be
alone, I will make him an help meet for him; and the Lord God caused a deep
sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept, and he took one of his ribs and closed
up the flesh thereof, and the rib which the Lord God had taken from man made he
a woman, and brought her unto the man; and Adam said this is now bone of my
bone and flesh of my flesh she shall be called woman, because she was taken out
of man. So Adam gave names to all the creatures, for God brought every beast of
the field, and every fowl of the air unto Adam, that he might give names unto
them, and so he brought the woman unto Adam, and he called her woman, because
she was taken out of man.

Now the Serpent being more subtle than any beast of the field which God had
made, he began to exercise his subtlety, and to lay his temptations and snares
unto the innocent and weak, and so began with the woman which was but a part of
man; and in the first place told her a lie to entice her to break the command
of the Lord God, which the Lord God strictly commanded the man that he should
not eat of it, for in the day that thou eats thou shall surely die says the
Lord: says the Serpent, has the Lord God said that ye may not eat of every
tree in the Garden? the woman said unto the Serpent, we may eat of the trees of
the Garden, but of the fruit of the tree that is in the midst of the Garden,
God has said, ye shall not eat, neither shall ye touch it lest ye die; the
Serpent said, ye shall not surely die. Here was the liar, and so Christ says
of him, Joh. 8.44. ye are of the Father the Devil, and the lust of your Father
ye will do, he was a Murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth
because there is no truth in him, when he speaks a lie he speaks of his
own, for he is a liar and the Father of it, 1 John 3.8. he that commits sin
is of the Devil, for the Devil sinned from the beginning; so this was he that
did encounter with weak and innocent woman, and when he led out her eyes to
look upon the tree, she saw it was good and pleasant to the eye, and a tree to
be desired to make one wise, and she took of the fruit thereof to eat, and gave
also unto her Husband and he did eat with her: And so here they both came into
the disobedience and fell from the command of God, lending their ears, their
minds, and their eyes to the temptation of the Devil, fell from righteousness,
fell from innocence and holiness, and so became transgressors against God and
breakers of his commands. And so the Devil was the Original and beginning of
this sin and transgression, and they hearkening unto his temptation, and
answering unto his desires, and joining with him in it, came under the curse
and so was driven out from the presence of God, and so dread and fear took hold
on them, that when they heard the voice of God they hid themselves from his
presence among the trees of the Garden, and when the Lord called unto Adam, he
heard his voice and was afraid because he was naked; the Lord said, who told
thee thou wast naked? have thou eaten of the tree whereof I told thee thou
should not eat? the man said, the woman thou gave to be with me, she gave
me of the tree, and I did eat. And the Lord said unto the woman, what is this
that thou have done? and the woman said the Serpent beguiled me and I did eat:
and the Lord said unto the Serpent because thou have done this, thou art cursed
above all cattle, and above every beast of the field, upon thy belly shall thou
go, and dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life. Genesis 3.14.

This is the Serpents portion, and the decree of God upon him for evermore, and
all that are of his Spirit, that hearken to his temptations, who disobey the
command of the living God, and transgress against him, he that commits sin is
of the Devil 1 John 3. And the Lord said I will put enmity between thee and the
woman and between thy seed and her seed, it shall bruise thy head, (mark, that
the woman's seed shall bruise the Serpents head, the Lord has said it) and thou
shall bruise his heel, Genesis 3.15. and this has been and is fulfilled, the heel
of the precious seed has been bruised ever since the day that Adam fell, the
Lamb has been flain from the foundation of the world, Rev. 13.8.

The descending part of the Lamb has been bruised and slain since the world
had a foundation in the heart of man, for the Devil got into Evahs heart, and
Adams heart by his temptation, when they obeyed the voice of the Serpent (and
disobeyed his voice that made them) he told them they should be as Gods, but he
became the God of that world of sin and of transgression; and this world is set
in the hearts of all men in the fall, that they cannot find the beginning or
the end of the work of God, Eccl. 3.11. And the God of this world has blinded
the minds of all them which believe not 2 Cor. 4.4. through the disobedience
that did enter into their hearts: and so their foolish hearts were darkened,
and he, the Prince of darkness, has ruled ever since this world had a
foundation in the heart of man, and to this very day does rule in the children
of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.5, 6. And so that precious part of the Lamb, that
descending part that God has placed in man's heart, has been and is slain in
all the children of disobedience, who are not risen with Christ unto
righteousness and true holiness. Now he that ascended, says the Apostle, is
the same that descended first into the nethermost parts of the earth (and he
that descended is the same also that ascended far above all heavens, that he
might sill all things, Ephesians. 4.8.9.) So there has he suffered and been
oppressed as a Cart has been with sheaves, and born the iniquities of all
above 5600 years. But the Lord of his infinite mercy and love reserved a remedy
and redemption at that very instant, who decreed and said that the precious
seed of the woman should bruise the Serpents head and break his power: And so
as it is already manifested and fulfilled; the Word which the Lord spoke that
he should bruise his heel; so, as certainly and assuredly as the word of the
Lord endures for ever, and that not one jot or tittle of it shall fail till
all be fulfilled; so certainly will he fulfill this part also that the seed of
the Woman shall bruise the Serpents head and break his power; and to this
purpose has he redoubled his promise again and again as we shall show more
fully hereafter: And so Adam and Eve stood under the sentence that the Lord
pronounced upon them; unto woman that he would greatly multiply her sorrow in
her conception, and in bringing forth Children: And unto Adam he said cursed is
the ground for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it all thy days; so in
this miserable state they continued, and in this darkness, transgression, and
disobedience. Adam knew his Wife and she brought forth a Son; and called his
name Cain, and Adam called his wife Eve, because she was the mother of all
living: and this Cain was the fruits of the Spirit of the Devil who was a liar
and a murderer. And again she bare his brother Abel, and Cain was a tiller of
the ground, but Abel was a keeper of Sheep; and in process of time it came to
pass, that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the Lord,
and Abel he also brought of the firstlings of his flock, and of the fat
thereof, and the Lord had respect unto Abel and his offering (for the Apostle
says Heb. 11.4. by faith Abel offered unto God) but unto Cain and his offering
he had no respect: And Cain was wroth, and his countenance fell; and the Lord
said unto Cain, why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance fallen? if thou
do well shall thou not be accepted? if thou do not well sin lies at thy
door; And unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shall rule over him, Genesis 4.7.

But the Apostle says, that Abel offered a more excellent offering than Cain,
by which he obtained a witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his
gifts, and by faith he being dead yet his blood speaks; Heb. 11.4. and also
Cain manifested what seed he sprang from, unto which God said, I will put
enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed, which
seed was a liar and a murderer from the beginning: and Cain talked with his
brother, and it came to pass that when they were in the field, that Cain rose
up against Abel his brother and slew him: and wherefore slew he him? because
his own works were evil and his brothers righteous 1 John 3.12. And this Cains
Spirit has remained amongst men to this very day, for he slew his brother
about offering unto God, and the worship of God; and so this Cains spirit has
been slaying, and killing, and persecuting ever since, (about Offerings, and
Sacrifices, and Worships) righteous Abel, and that spirit which God accepts
has been persecuted and slain, and is to this day. But God will fulfill the
words of Christ upon them, Mat. 23.35. that upon you might come all the
righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of rightous Abel: but the
Lord knew when Abel was slain, and he knows, and sees, and has seen all the
righteous blood that has been shed since Abel: and the Lord said unto Cain,
what have thou done? the voice of thy brothers blood has cried to me from the
ground, and now thou art cursed from the earth which has opened her mouth to
receive thy brothets blood from thy hand, Genesis 4.10, 11. And under this curse
all Cains spirit and off spring remains, a fugitive and vagabond from the Lord;
for Cain went out from the presence of the Lord, and dwelt in the Land of Nod.
ver. 16. And Adam knew Eve his Wife again, and she bare a Son and called his
name Seth, for God (says she) has appointed me another Son instead of Ahel
whom Cain slew: So here is another Son brought forth of Abel's seed which the
Lord accepted, and to which the promise of the Lord remained: and to Seth, to
him also there was born a Son, and he called his name Enos, then began men to
call upon the name of the Lord: here was the right seed again, which set up the
worship of God, as you may read in the fifth of Genesis the Generations of them
that worshipped God in that day from Adam, some of which the Apostle bore
witness of in Heb. 11.5.

By Faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death, Enoch translated.
and was not found because God had translated him, for before his translating
he had this testimony that he pleased God. By faith N^ah being warned of God of
things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an Ark to the saving of his
house, by the which he condemned the world, and became heir of the
righteousness which is by Faith, ver. 7. So here the Lord had a Church then
upon the earth, that worshipped, and served, and feared, and walked with the
Lord, and dyed in the faith, as the Apostle bears witness of in Heb. 11. and
may be read at large in Genesis 5. which was of that seed which God accepted.

And Lamech lived 182 years and begat a Son, and he called his name Noah,
saying, this shall conmfort us concerning the work and toil of our hands,
because of the ground which the Lord has cursed, Genesis 5.28.

Here Lamech was a Prophet concerning his Son Noah, which the Apostle witnesses
to be a Preacher of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.5. And Noah was 500 years old and
begat Shem, Ham, and Japhet; for it came to pass when men began to multiply
upon the face of the earth, and daughters were born unto them, and the Sons of
God saw the daughters of men were fair, and they took them Wives of all which
they chose, Genesis 6.2.

And so here again, the earth was corrupted, and here they fell again into
transgression, and the Lords Spirit was grieved, and the Lord said my Spirit
shall not always strive with man for that he is but flesh, yet his days shall
be 120 years, and God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth,
and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was evil, and that
continually; and it repented the Lord that he had made man upon the earth, and
it grieved him at his heart; and the Lord said I will destroy man, whom I have
created, from the face of the earth, both man and beast, and the creeping
things, and the fowls of the air, for it repents me that I have made them.
But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord, Noah was a just man and perfect
in his Generation, and Noah walked with God, and the earth was corrupt before
God, and the earth was filled with violence; and God looked upon the earth, and
behold it was corrupt, for all flesh had corrupted his way: and God said unto
Noah, the end of all flesh is come before me, for the earth is filled with
violence through them, and behold I will destroy them with the earth, make the
an Ark of Gopher wood, etc. So Noah being a perfect and just man obeyed the
Lord, and set about the work, for he had the Lords words and promise, Genesis
6.18. with thee I will establish my Covenant, and thou shall come into the Ark,
thou and thy Sons and thy Wife, and thy Sons Wives with thee: So Noah labored
in the work and Commandment of the Lord, and preached amongst them, after the
Lord complained of the wickedness of men, a hundred years before the flood; in
which time the long suffering of God waited while the Ark was preparing, so
that there was but eight persons saved 1 Pet. 3.20. And Noah took of every
living thing of all flesh, two of every sort, and brought into the Ark to him,
to keep them alive, according as the Lord commanded him, male and female of
every sort, and of the fowls after their sort, and the cattle after their kind,
and of every creeping thing after his kind, two shall come unto thee of every
sort to keep them alive, and take unto thee of all food that is eaten, and it
shall be meat for thee and them, thus did Noah according to all that God
commanded him.

The Lord God said unto Noah, come thou and all thy house into the Ark, for
thee have I seen righteous in this Generation, and of every clean beast take
with thee by sevens, males, and females, for yet seven days and I will cause it
to rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights, and every living substance
that I have made, will I destroy from the face of the earth.

And Noah did according to all that the Lord commanded him, and Noah was 600
years old, when the floods of the Waters were upon the earth; and Noah went in,
and his Sons, and his Wife, and his Sons Wives with him into the Ark; and here
was his Father Lamech's Prophecy fulfilled, Cen. 5.29. who saw the curse upon
the ground, which by reason of sin and wickedness the Lord cursed: he saw this
before it came, even when he named his Son Noah, saying this same shall comfort
us, and so he did, for through his faithfulness unto the Lord in this wicked
Generation, the Lord had respect unto him who was a just and perfect man,
preserved him and his house even in that great deluge, that they might be a
seed unto the Lord God; and so here it is proved that the Lord had a Church
upon the earth, that served the Lord, and walked with him even before the
flood, as the Apostle bears witness, Jude 14. Enoch also, the seventh from
Adam, prophesied of these, saying, behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of
his Saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly
amongst them, here Enoch prophesies of the eternal truth that was to be
revealed. And Peter says, God spared not the old world, but saved Noah the
eight person a Preacher of righteousness, by which he went and preached to the
Spirits in Prison, when once the long suffering of God waited in the days of
Noah while the Ark was prepared, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved,
1 Pet. 3.19, 20. So brought in the flood upon the world of ungodly, 2 Pet. 2.5.
So he saved a seed for himself of those that worshipped and served him; but
these were not of Cain's stock, that slew his brother Abel, but these were of
that seed which Cain persecuted, and whose blood cried to the Lord for justice
against the m^rderer, which seed has suffered ever since by that murdering,
persecuting spirit, and that was Cain's stock that corrupted the earth, and
filled it full of violence, by which they grieved the Lord at the very heart,
as Jude says in the 10. ver. But these speak evil of dignities which they know
not, but what they know naturally as bruit beasts, in those things they corrupt
themselves, woe unto them for they have gone in the way of Cain: So Cain's
spirit is always full of wrath, envy, murder, and bloodshed: and so this
fulfils the word of the Lord unto the Serpent, when he said, I will put enmity
between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; and so upon this
seed and world of ungodly men the Lord brought the flood, and overflowed the
whole world because of their wickedness, so that all flesh dyed, and every
living substance was destroyed, Noah only remained alive and they that were
with him in the Ark. And the waters prevailed upon the earth 150 days, and in
the second Month, on the 27. day of the month the earth was dried, and God
spoke unto Noah saying, Go forth of the Ark thou and thy Wife, and thy Sons and
thy Sons Wives with thee, and bring forth with thee every living thing that is
with thee, etc. and Noah went forth and every living thing that was with him
after his kind went forth out of the Ark.

And Noah builded an Altar unto the Lord and took of every clean beast, and of
every clean fowl and offered burnt-offerings on the Altar, and the Lord smelled
a sweet savor, and the Lord said in his heart, I will not again curse the
earth any more for man's sake, for the imaginations of his heart are evil from
his youth, neither will I again smite any more every thing living as I have
done; while the earth remains, seed time and harvest, cold and heat, Summer
and Winter, day and night shall not cease, Genesis 8.20, 21, 22.

And God blessed Noah and his Sons, and said unto them be fruitful and multiply
and replenish the earth, and the fear of them and the dread of them shall be
upon every beast of the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, the power of all
living, the living creatures, the Lord delivered into the hands of Noah and his
Sons, and the Lord said every thing that lives shall be meat for you, even as
the green Herb, I have given you all things; but flesh with the life thereof
which is the blood thereof you shall not eat. And surely your blood of your
lives will I require, at the hand of every beast will I require it, and at the
hand of man, and at the hand of every man's brother will I require the life of
man, Genesis 9.4, 5.

So here the Lord warned them before hand, not to kill one another, as Cain had
done his brother, no nor the beasts to kill them, who so shedeth man's blood, by
man shall his blood be shed; for in the image of God made he man ver. 10. And
to Noah and to his Sons, he said, be fruitful and multiply, and bring forth
abundance in the earth, and multiply therein, and behold I will establish my
Covenant with you, and with your seed after you, neither shall all flesh be cut
off any more, neither shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth; and
God said, this is a token of the Covenant that I will make between me and you,
I do set my Bow in the Cloud, and it shall be seen in the Cloud, and I will
remember my Covenant, and I will look upon it, that I may remember the
everlasting Covenant between me and every living Creature of all flesh upon the
earth. And the Sons of Noah that went forth of the Ark were Shem, Ham, and
Japhet; Ham is the Father of Canaan, these are the three Sons of Noah, and of
them was the whole earth spread.

And Noah began to be a Husbandman, and he planted a Vinyard and drank of the
Wine, and was drunk, and he was uncovered within his Tent; and Ham the Father
of Canaan saw the nakedness of his Father, and told his two Brethren without;
and Shem and Japhet took a Garment and laid it upon both their Shoulders and
went backward and covered the nakedness of their Father, and their Faces were
backward, and they saw not their Fathers nakedness, ver. 23.

So this cursed Ham he could look upon his Fathers nakedness and lay it open to
his Brethren, but his Brethren covered his nakedness and could not look upon
him. And Noah when he awoke from his Wine he knew what his younger Son Ham had
done unto him, and he said cursed be Canaan a servant of servants shall he be
unto his brethren; and he said blessed be the Lord God of Shem, and Canaan
shall be his servant; and God shall enlarge Japhet, and he shall dwell in the
Tents of Shem, and Canaan shall be his servant. Here Noah had the inspiration
of the Almighty and was a true Prophet concerning his three Sons, and they
which he blessed is blessed, and he whom he cursed is curst^; and according to
his Prophecy the Lord has enlarged Japhet, for of Japhet's stock is the Isles
of the Gentiles as you may read Chap. 10. ver. 5.

And of Shem's stock came Abraham the Father of all the faithful, to which the
promise of the Lord is, and Christ Jesus the seed of the promise is not only
given a Covenant unto Abraham and his seed the Jews, but he is also given a
light to the Gentiles, that he may be Gods salvation to the ends of the earth.
And so here is Noah's Prophesle fulfilled upon Shem and Japhet, that as they
joined together in covering their Father's nakedness, so Christ Jesus the
everlasting Covenant has joined them together in one, and will be their
salvation to the ends of the earth: and so Japhet dwells in the Tents of Shem
in God's Covenant of light: And so Ha^'s stock is of the cursed seed, he begat
Cush, and Cush begat Nimrod, and he was a mighty hunter, and a great man in the
earth, and the beginning of his Kingdom was Babel in the Land of Shinar, as ye
may read in Genesis 10.

The whole earth at that time was of one Language, and this Nimrod began to
build a City in the plain of Shinar, and this Ham's stock, and Nimrod's stock
they would go make brick, and they would go build a City and a Tower whose top
may reach to Heaven, lest we be scattered upon the face of the earth, say they;
and the Lord God came down to see the City which the Children of men builded;
and the Lord said let us go down and confound their language, that they may not
understand one another speech: so the Lord scattered them abroad from thence
upon the face of the earth, and they left off to build the City, therefore is
the name of it called Babel, because that there the Lord did confound the
Language of all the earth: and the cause of this was the pride of cursed Ham's
stock, and Nimrod that would be so great that he would build a Tower to Heaven,
that he might not be scattered, but his Kingdom is Babel, and from thence they
were all s^attered, and this was the beginning of many Languages, even a curse
from God upon Ham's stock, for before the earth was all of one Language; for
Ham's stock is of the cursed seed, and for their sakes the Language was
confounded, and they scattered over the earth. Now the Generations of Shem you
may read of in Genesis 11.10. to the end.

And Terah lived 70 years and begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran, ver. 26. and Haran
begat Lot, and Haran died before his Father Terah in the Land of his Nativity,
Hor of the Caldees: and Abram and Nahor took them Wives, the name of Abram's
Wife was Sarai, and the name of Nahor's Wife was Milcah, and Terah took Ahram
his Son, and Lot the Son of Haran his Son's Son, and Sarai his daughter-in-law,
his Son Abram's Wife, and they went forth with him into Vz of the Caldees, to
go into the Land of Canaan, Genesis 11.31. And the Lord said unto Abram get thee
out of thy Country and from thy kindred, and from thy Fathers house, into a
Land that I will show thee, and I will make of thee a great Nation, and I will
bless thee and make thy name great, and thou shall be a blessing, and I will
bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curses thee, and in thee shall
all the Families of the earth be blessed.

So Abram departed as the Lord had spoken to him, and Abram took Sarai his
Wife, and Lot his Brother's Son, and all their substance that they had
gathered, and the Souls that they had got in Haran, and they went forth to go
into the Land of Canaan, and into the Land of Canaan they came; and Abram
passed through the Land to Scchem, unto the plain of Morch, and the Canaanite
was then in the Land: this Canaanite was of Ham's stock and seed, which
afterward the Lord drove out to bring in his own seed of his Promise.

And the Lord appeared unto Abram, and said, unto thy feed will I give this
Land; and there Abram built an Altar unto the Lord who appeared unto him there
in the Land, though the Cana^nite was there; and Abram removed from thence unto
a mountain on the east of Bethel, and pitched his Tent, and there he builded an
Altar unto the Lord, and called upon the name of the Lord.

And so journied toward the South, and there was a grievous Famine in the
Land, and Abram and his Wife, and Lot went down into Egypt to sojourn there,
because the Famine was great, and there they stayed in Egypt till they were
grown very rich in Cattle, in Silver, and in Gold. And Abram came back again
out of Egypt, and his Wife, and Lot, and all that they had, and he went on his
journey from the South even to Bethel, unto the place where his Tent had been
in the beginning, and unto the place of the Altar which he had made there at
first, there Abram called on the name of the Lord, even in the Land which the
Lord had given unto him; he came back unto it from Egypt, he and his Wife, and
Lot, and all their substance and Cattle, but their Servants and Herdsmen could
not agree; and Abram desired that there might be peace betwixt L^^ and him
because they were brethren; and Abram said, the whole Land is before thee,
separate thy self from me, and take the one hand: and I will take the other;
and Lot chose the plain of Jordan because it was well wat^red, and as the
Garden of the Lord, and Abram dwelt in the Land of Canaan, and Lot dwelt in the
Cities of the plain, and pitched his Tents toward Sodom; but the men of Sodom
were wicked, and sinned before the Lord exceedingly, for they were of Ham's
stock, and of that cursed seed, for he was the Father of Canaan; and the Lord
said unto Abram, after that Lot was separated from him, list up now thine e^es,
and look from the place where thou art, Northward, and Southward, and Eastward,
and Westward, for all the Land which thou see to the will I give, and to thy
seed for ever; and I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth, so that if
thou can number the dust of the earth then shall thy seed be numbered.

Abram removed his Tent and came and dwelt in the plain of Mamre which is in
Hebron, and builded there an Altar unto the Lord, and called upon the name of
the Lord: Then there was a great battle fought about Sodom and Comorrah, four
Kings against five made War, and they took Lot, Abraham's brothers Son, a
Prisoner, and all his goods. And when Abram heard they had taken his Brother's
Son captive, he armed his servants that were born in his house, and pursued
them unto Dan, and pursued them unto Hobah, and he brought back all the Goods,
and he also brought again his brother Lot.

And when Abram returned back from the slauther of the Kings, Melchisedec King
of Salem brought forth bread and Wine, and he was the Priest of the most high
God, and he blessed him and said, blessed be Abram of the most high God,
possessor of Heaven and earth, and blessed be the most high God which has
delivered thine enemies into thine hand, and Abram gave him Tyths of all.

Now the Scripture says, that Christ the everlasting high Priest, is after the
Order of Melchisedec, Psalm. 110.4 David says the Lord has sworn and will not
repent, thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedec; and the
Apostle says, Heb. 6.20. whither the forerunner is entered, even Jesus made an
high Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedec, this cannot be of mortal
man, nor according to man's Order, that Christ Jesus is made a Priest after: the
Apostle says, this Melchisedec King of Salem, Priest of the most high God, who
met Abram returning from the slaughter of the Kings and blessed him, to whom
Abraham also gave a tenth part of all. The Apostle gives the signification of
his name; first, being by interpretation King of Righteousness, after that King
of Salem, which is King of peace, without Father, without Mother, without
descent having neither beginning of days nor end of life, but made like unto
the Son of God, abides a Priest continually.

This is the interpretation the Apostle gives of him, now consider, says the
Apostle, how great he is unto whom the Patriarch Abraham gave the tenth: Now
they that are of the Sons of Levi; who receive the Office of Priesthood, have a
commandment to take Tithes according to the Law, but he whose descent is not
counted from them, received Tithes of Abraham, and blessed him that had the
promise, and without all contradiction the less is blessed of the better, for
if he had not been above Abraham he could not have blessed him, for here men
that die, says the Apostle, receive Tithes, but there he received them of whom
it is witnessed that he lives, Heb. 7.8.

What will it advantage the Priests of this age, when they cannot prove by the
Levetical Law Tithes to be lawful in these days, because they profess
themselves to be Ministers of the Gospel, and their Order should be
Gospel Order; and they bring Melchisedec, that he took Tithes, and they bring
Abraham who is the seed that God has blessed, that had the promises of God
unto him, that paid them; and they themselves are mortal, sinful men that takes
the Tithes, and people that are laden with sin and iniquity pays the Tithes,
what example have these from Melchisedec's Order? after whose Order Christ
Jesus the everlasting high Priest is made; for Levi that took Tithes, paid
Tithes in Abraham unto Melchisedec: for he was in the loins of his Father when
Abraham met him; if there were perfection in the Levitical Priesthood which is
after the Order of Aaron, what needed there another Priest after the Order of
Melchisedec, for it is evident that our Lord sprang out of Judab; it is also
evident, that after the Order of Melchisedec there arises another Priest who
is made not after the Law of a carnal commandment, but after the power of an
endless life; for being that the Priesthood is changed, there must of necessity
be a change of the Law, Heb. 7. for he testifies, thou art a Priest for ever
after the Order of Melchisedec; which Order is not of a carnal commandment,
neither is this Priest a mortal man subject to fall and infirmities. More might
be said concerning this Melchisedec which met Abraham and blessed him, but the
Apostle is very la^ge in the demonstration of him, for he says, Heb. 5.11.
that he had many things to say of him hard to be uttered, because they were
dull of hearing.

After these things the word of the Lord came to Abram in a Vision, saying,
Fear not Abram I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward: and Abram said,
Lord God what will thou give me seeing I go childless, and one that is born in
mine house must be mine heir: the Lord said, this shall not be thine heir, but
one that comes out of thine own bowels shall be thine heir: and the Lord said,
look up toward Heaven, and tell the Stars if thou be able to number them,
and he said so shall thy seed be, and Abram believed, and it was accounted to
him for righteousness.

And when Abram was 99 years old the Lord appeared unto him, and said, walk
before me and be thou perfect, and my Covenant shall be with thee, and thou
shall be the Father of many Nations, and thy name shall be called no more
Abram, but Abraham shall be thy name, a Father of many Nations have I made
thee, and as for Sarai thy Wife thou shall not call her name Sarai, but Sarah
shall her name be, and I will bless her, and she shall be the Mother of
Nations: then Abraham fell upon his face and laughed, and said in his heart,
shall a child be born unto him that is 100 years old, and shall Sarah that is
ninety years old bear; and Abraham said unto God, Oh that Ishmael might live
before the Lord: and God said, Sarah thy Wife shall bear thee a Son indeed, and
thou shall call his name Isaac, and I will establish my Covenant with him for
an everlasting Covenant, and with his seed after him: and as for Ishmael I have
heard thee, behold I have blessed him, but my Covenant will I establish with
Isaac which Sarah shall bear unto thee at this set time in the next year.

And according to this the Lod sent his Angels unto Abraham and Sarah to
confirm unto them that at the time appointed she should bring forth a child:
and the Lord said unto Abraham, wherefore did Sarah laugh? saying, shall I have
a child? is any thing too hard for the Lord? at the time appointed will I
return unto thee according to the time of life, and Sarah shall have a Son: so
at the same time, the Lord discovered unto Abraham what he intended against
Sodom.

And the men turned their faces toward Sodom, and Abraham set them on their
way: and the Lord said, shall I hide from Abraham the thing that I do? seeing
that Abraham shall be surely great and a mighty Nation, and all the Nations of
the earth shall be blessed in him, for I know that he will command his Children
and his Household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, and do
justice and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has
spoken of him. And the Lord said, because of the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is
great, and because their sins are very grievous, I will go down now and see
whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it which is come unto
me, and if not I will know, and the men turned their faces from thence, and
went toward Sodom: but Abraham stood before the Lord, and drew near and prayed
unto the Lord for the righteous in Sodom, and the Lord heard him, as you may
read Genesis 18.

And so the two Angels came into Lot's house, and Lot received them kindly, and
so he and all his house were preserved; the men said unto Lot, have thou any
here besides thy Son-in-law, and thy Sons and thy Daughters, and whatever thou
have in the City, bring it out, for we will destroy this place, because that
the cry of it is waxen great before the Lord, and the Lord has sent us to
destroy it. So the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and fire out
of Heaven from the Lord, but just Lot was preserved in the little City called
Zoar, and was permitted to escape thither that his Soul might live, he, his
Sons, and his Daughters; and all the Cities round about were destroyed, all the
Cities of the plain.

And God remembered Abraham and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow,
where Lot dwelt in the plain. And Abraham got up early in the morning, and he
looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and the smoke of the Country rose up as the
smoke of a Furnace, Genesis 19.28.

And the Lord visited Sarah as he had said, for Sarah conceived and bare
Abraham a Son in his old age, and Abraham called the name of his Son that was
born unto him Isaac, and he circumcised him the eight day as God had commanded
him, and Abraham was a hundred years old when his Son Isaac was born.

And it came to pass after these things that God called Abrabam, and said unto
him, take now ^hy Son, thine only Son whom thou love, and get thee into the
Land of Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt-offering upon one of the
mountains which I will tell thee of.

And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and saddled his Ass, and took two of
the young men with him, and Isaac his Son, and clave the wood for a
burnt-offe^^g, then on the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes and saw the
place afar off, and Abraham said unto the young men, abide you here with the
Asses, and I and the Lad will go yonder and worship, and come again unto you.
And Abraham took the wood of the burnt-offering, and laid it upon Isaac his
Son, and he took fire in his hand, and a knife, and they went both of them
together: And Isaac spoke unto Abraham his Father, and said, my Father, and he
said here am I my Son, and he said here is the fire and the wood, but where is
the Lamb for a burnt-offering? and he answered, my Son the Lord will provide
one: So they went both of them together, and they came to the place which God
had told him of: and Abraham built an Altar, and laid the wood in order, and
bound Isaac his Son, and laid him upon the wood, and Abraham stretched forth
his hand and took the knife to slay his Son; and the Angel of the Lord called
unto him out of Heaven, and said, Abraham, Abraham? and he said, here am I, and
he said, lay not thine hand upon the Lad, neither do thou any thing unto him,
for now I know thou fear God, seeing thou have not withheld thy Son, thine
only Son from me; and Abraham lifted up his eyes and looked, and behold behind
him a Ram caught in a thicket by his horns; and Abraham went and took the Ram
and offered him up for a burnt-offering instead of his Son, and Abraham called
the name of that place Jehovah-jireh, as it is to this day in the mount of the
Lord it shall be seen. And the Angel of the Lord called unto Abraham the second
time, and said, by my self I have sworn, says the Lord, because thou have done
this thing, and have not withheld thy Son, thine only Son, that in blessing I
will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the Stars of
Heaven, and as the sand upon the Sea shore, and thy seed shall possess the
Gates of thine enemies, and in thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be
blessed, because thou have obeyed my voice, Heb. 6.23, 34 So Abraham and his
Son returned unto his young men, and they rose up, and went to Beershebu
together where Abraham dwelt. And Sarah being 127 years old she died in
Kiriath-arba, the same is Hebron in the Land of Canaan, and Abraham mourned for
Sarah, and wept for her, and Abraham bought a burying place of the Sons of
Heth, to bury his dead in out of his sight, Genesis 23. So when Abraham grew old
and stricken in age, he caused his eldest servant of his House to put his hand
under his thigh, and made him swear by the God of Heaven, and the God of the
earth, and said thou shall not take a Wife unto my Son of the Canaanites,
amongst whom I dwell, but thou shall go into my Country and unto my kindred and
take a Wife unto my Son Isaac, and the servant said peradventure the woman will
not be willing to follow me, and Abraham said, the Lord God of Heaven which
took me from my Fathers house, and from the Land of my kindred, and which spoke
unto me, and swear unto me saying, unto thy seed will If give this Land, he
shall send his Angel before thee, and thou shall take a Wife for my Son from
thence, and if the woman will not be willing to follow thee, then thou shall be
clear from this mine Oath. And the Servant put his hand under the thigh of
Abraham his Master, and swear to him concerning the matter.

So the Servant believed in Abraham's words, and made ready for his journey,
and took with him Camels and Goods of his Masters, and set forward on his
journey to Mesopotamia; and at a well before he came to the City, he met with
Rebekah, Bethu^l's daughter, whose Mother's name was Milcah, the Wife of Nahor,
Abraham's Brother, and shelentreated him kindly, and carried him home to her
Fathers house, and her Father and Mother and brother Laban received him kindly
into their house, and said unto him, thou blessed of the Lord come in; and they
set meat before him, and the servant declared unto him whose servant he was,
and how his Master had sent him, and declared what his message was unto them,
as the whole passage you may read in Genesis 24. Then Laban and Bethuel answered
and said, the thing proceeds from the Lord, we cannot speak unto thee good or
bad; behold Rebekah is before thee, take her and go, and let her be thy
Master's Son's Wife as the Lord has spoken; at which words the Servant
worshipped the Lord, and bowed himself to the earth; and the servant brought
forth Jewels of Silver and Gold and gave them to Rebekah, and gave precious
things to her Mother and Brother, and when they had eat and drunk, they set
forwards toward his Master: and as they were returning home, Isaac met them by
the way, and she said unto the servant, what man is this? and he said it is my
Master, therefore she took a vail and covered her self; and the servant told
Isaac, all that he had done, and Isaac brought her into his Mother Sarah's
Tent, and took Rebekah, and she became his Wife, and he loved her, and Isaac
was comforted after his Mother^ death.

These are the Generations of Isaac Abraham's Son; Abraham begat Isaac, and
Isaac was 40 years old when he took Rebekah to Wife, the Daughter of Bethuel
the Syrian of Padan-Aram, the Sister to Laban the Syrian; and Isaac entreated
the Lord for his Wife, because she was barren, and the Lord was entreated of
him, and Rebekah his Wife conceived, and the children struggled within her, and
she said why am I thus? and she went to enquire of the Lord, and the Lord said
unto her, two Nations are in thy Womb, and two manner of People shall be
separated from thy Bowels, the one people shall be stronger than the other, and
the elder shall serve the younger. And when her days to be delivered were
fulfilled, behold there were twins in her Womb, and the first came out red all
over like an hairy Garment, and they called his name Esau, and after that came
his brother out, and his hand took hold of Esau's heel, and his name was called
Jacob; Isaac was threescore years old when she bare them.

Here was the two Nations and the two seeds comprehended and brought forth of
one Womb, the Lord foreknowing and foreseeing this thing as he spoke unto
Rebekah, as the Apostle testifies, that when the Children were yet in the Womb
unborn, having done neither good nor evil, that the purpose of God according to
the election might stand, not of works but of him that calls; it was said
unto her the elder shall serve the younger; as it is written, Jacob have I
loved, but Esau have I hated, Romans 9.11, 12, 13. of this Esau's stock came the
Edomites, of which we shall say more hereafter.

But the word of the Lord by his Prophet Malachi, I have loved you says the
Lord, yet ye say wherein have thou loved us? was not Esau, says the Lord,
Jacob's Brother? yet I loved Jacob and I hated Esau, and laid his mountains and
his herritage waste for the Dragons of the Wilderness, Mal. 1.2, 3. And again
Hos. 12. Ephraim feeds on wind, he daily increases in lies, and they do make
a Covenant with the Assyrians, and carries Oil into Egypt; and not only the
stock of Esau, but also Jacob and Judah, had grieved the Lord at this time;
this Prophecy was after Judah and Israel had sinned against the Lord, and
committed abominations, as you may read in the 2 Kings 25. and Hos. 12.2. The
Lord has also a controversy with Judah, and will punish Jacob according to
his ways, according to his doings will be recompense him, he took his brother
by the heel in the Womb, and by his strength he had power with God, he had
power over the Angel, he wept and made supplication unto him and prevailed, he
sound him in Bethel, even the Lord the God of Hosts, the Lord his memorial,
ver. 5 Esau was a cunning hunter, and Jacob was a plain man dwelling in Tents,
and Isaac loved Esau, but Rebekah loved Jacob.

And Jacob sod pottage, and Esau came from the field, and he was faint, and
Esau said to Jacob, feed me I pray thee with that same red pottage, for I am
faint, therefore was his name called Edom, and Jacob said sell me this day thy
birthright, and Esau said I am at the point to die, and what shall this
birthright do to me? And he swear to him, and he sold his birthright unto
Jacob, then Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of Lentals, and he did eat and
drink, and rose up and went his way, thus Esau despised his Birthright, Genesis 25
26. to the end, according to that of the Apostle Heb. 12.16, 17. who for one
morsel of meat sold his birthright.

And there was a Famine in the Land, and Isaac went unto Abimelech King of the
Philistines, and the Lord appeared unto him, and said, go not down into Egypt,
dwell in the Land which I shall tell thee of, so journ in this Land, and I will
be with thee, and I will bless thee, for unto thee and unto thy seed I will
give all these Countries, and I will perform the Oath which I swear unto thy
Father Abraham, and I will make thy seed to multiply as the Stars of Heaven,
and will give unto thee all these Countries, and in thy seed shall all the
Nations be blessed, because that Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge,
my Commandments, my Statutes, and my Laws: so Isaac dwelt in Gerar, and sowed
in that Land, and received in that year one hundred fold, for the Lord blessed
him.

And it came to pass when Isaac was old, and his eyes were dim, he called Esau
his eldest Son, and he said, behold I am old, and know not the day of my death,
therefore take thy Bow and thy weapons and go to the field to take me some
Venison, and make me savoury meat such as I love, that my soul may bless thee
before I die: and Rebekah heard what Isaac spoke unto Esau, and when Esau was
gone into the field to hunt, Rebekah spoke unto Jacob her Son, saying, I heard
thy Father speak unto Esau thy Brother, saying, bring me Venison and make me
savoury meat, that I may eat and bless thee before the Lord, before my death:
now therefore my Son obey my voice, do that I command thee, go to the flock
fetch me two good Kids of the Goats, and I will make thee savoury meat for thy
Father such as he loves, and thou shall bring it to thy Father, that he may
eat, and that he may bless thee before his death: and Jacob said to Rebekah his
Mother, my brother is an hairy man, and I am a smooth man, and my Father
peradventure will feel me, and I shall seem to him to be a deceiver, and I
shall bring a curse upon me, and not a blessing: And his Mother said unto him,
upon me be thy curse my Son, only obey my voice and go fetch them; and he went
and fetched them and brought them to his Mother and she made savoury meat such
as his Father loved: and Rebekah took raiment of her eldest Son Esau's and put
them upon Jacob, and she put the skins of the Kids upon his hands, and upon the
smooth of his neck, and she gave the savoury meat, and the bread that she had
prepared, into the hand of her Son Jacob, and he came unto his Father, and
said, my Father? and he said, here am I, who ar^ thou my Son? and Jacob said
unto his Father I am Esau thy firstborn, I have done according as thou badest
me, arise and eat of my Venison, that thy soul may bless me; and Isaac saidunto
him, how is it that thou have found it so quickly my Son? and he said, because
the Lord thy God brought it to me: and Isaac said unto Jacob, come near that I
may feel thee, whether thou be my very Son Esau or not, and Jacob went near
unto Isaac, and he felt him and said, the voice is Jacob's, but the hands are
the hands of Esau, and he discerned him not, because his hands were hairy as
Esau's were; so he blessed him, and he said unto him, art thou my very Son
Esau? and he said I am; and he said bring it near unto me, that I may eat of my
Sons Venison, that my Soul may bless thee, and Isaac said, come near my Son and
kiss me: and he came near and kissed him, and he smelled of his Raiment and
blessed him; and he said I give thee of the dew of Heaven, and the fatness of
the earth, and plenty of Corn and Wine; let all people serve thee, and Nations
bow down to thee, be Lord over thy Brethren, let thy Mothers Sons bow down unto
thee, cursed be every one that curses thee, and blessed be he that blesses
thee. And as soon as Isaac had made an end of blessing Jacob, Esau came from
his hunting, and brought his Venison, and made savoury meat for his Father, and
said let my Father arise and eat of his Sons Venison, that thy Soul may bless
me; and Isaac said unto him, who art thou? he said, I am thy firstborn Esau:
and Isaac trembled very exceedingly, and he said where is he that has brought
me Venison, and I have eaten before thou came, and I have blessed him, yea
and he shall be blessed: and when Esau heard the words of his Father, he cried
with an exceeding bitter cry, and said bless me, even me also my Father: (...)
he said thy brother came with subtlety and has taken away ^^y blessing: and he
said is he not rightly named Jacob? for he has supplanted me this two times,
he took away my birthright, and now behold he has taken away my blessing.

Here is a Parable and a mystery concerning these passages, for if Isaac had
blessed Esau, he had blessed the wrong birth, for God calls himself by the name
of the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, this is my name
and my memorial for ever says the Lord, Exodus 3.15. And Christ Jesus says,
that he is the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, Mat.
22.32. Certainly Jacob was the right seed which the blessing of the Lord was
to; for Cain was the first birth but he was the wrong seed: And so Esau was the
first birth but not the seed of the Promise which the blessing was to, though
Isaac loved Esau; if he had given him the blessing, it had not been so well,
but the Lord ordered it otherwise: the Apostle says, by faith Isaac blessed
Jacob, and the very name of Jacob signifies a Supplanter, and so he was to
supplant his Brother and root him out, for Cain the elder Brother slew his
Brother Abel; but the Lord has given Jacob, the second birth, power over his
Brother Esau, to supplant him, and to receive the blessing.

See what the Apostle says, Heb. 12.16. lest there be any Fornicator, or
profane person, as Esau, who for one morsel of bread sold his birthright; for
ye know how that afterward when he would have inherited the blessing he was
rejected, for he found no place of repentance, though he sought it carefully
with tears. So it is not tears that come from the wrong nature and birth that
will prevail with God, for his promise is to the right seed, and but to one
seed, etc.

And Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing wherewith his Father blessed him,
and Esau said in his heart, the days of mourning for my Father are at hand, and
then will I slay my Brother Jacob; here Esau manifested the same nature as was
in Cain, but tha^ the Lord prevented him, for the Lord searched out the hidden
things of Esau and frustrated his intention: for thy violence against thy
brother Jacob, shame shall cover thee, and thou shall be cut off for ever.
Obad. 10.

Esau's words were told to Rebekah that he intended to slay his Brother, and
she called her Son Jacob and said, thy Brother Esau comforts himself purposing
to kill thee: Now therefore my Son obey my voice, and arise and fly to Laban
my Brother, and tarry with him a few days until thy brothers fury be turned a
way, and I will send and fetch thee, why should I be deprived of you both in
one day? And Rebekah said unto Isaac, I am weary of my life because of the
Daughters of He^h, if Jacob take a Wife of such as these who are the daughters
of this Land, what good shall my life do me? And Isaac called Jacob and blessed
him, and charged him, and said unto him thou shall not take a Wife of the
Daughters of Canaan, for all the inhabitants of the Land of Canaan were of
Ham's stock which were of the cursed seed; so this blessed seed of Abraham was
not to mingle with them. Therefore Isaac said, arise and go to the house of
Bethuel thy mothers Father, and take thee a Wife from thence, of the Daughters
of Laban thy Mothers brother, and God Almighty bless thee and multiply thee,
and make thee fruitful, that thou may be a multitude of people, and give the
blessing of Abraham to thee, and to thy seed with thee, that thou may inherit
the Land which God gave unto Abraham; and Isaac sent Jacob away: And when Esau
saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob and sent him away to Padan-Aram, and as he
blessed him, he charged him that he should not take a Wife of the Daughters of
Canaan; and Esau seeing that the Daughters of Canaan pleased not Isaac his
Father, then went Esau unto Ishmael and took a Wife. But Jacob obeyed his
Fathers command, and traveled on his way, and lay down in the night and slept,
and laid stones for his pillows, and he dreamed, and behold a Ladder was set on
the earth and the top reached to Heaven, and the Angels of God ascended and
descended on it, and the Lord stood above it, and said I am the Lord God of
Abraham thy Father, and the God of Isaac, the Land whereon thou lie to thee
will I give it, and to thy seed, and thy seed shall be as the dust of the
earth, and thou shall spread abroad to the West, and to the East, and to the
North, and to the South, and in thee and in thy seed shall all the Families of
the earth be blessed: And behold I am with thee, and will keep thee in all
places whither thou go, and will not leave thee until I have done that which
I have spoken: And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and said surely the Lord is
in this place, and I knew it not; and he was afraid, and said, O how dreadful
is this place, this is the house of God and the Gate of Heaven: and Jacob rose
up early in the morning, and took the stone that he had put for his pillow, and
set it up for a Pillar, and poured Oil on the top of it, and called the name of
that place Bethel; and Jacob vowed a vow saying, if God will be with me, and
keep me in this way that I go, so that I come again to my Fathers house in
peace, then shall the Lord be my God.

Then Jacob went on his journey into the Land of the East, and at the Well he
met with men of the place whither he was going, which were come to water their
Flocks, and he said unto them, my brethren whence be ye? and they said, of
Haran we are: And he said unto them, know ye Laban the Son of Nahor? and they
said we know him: and he said, is he well? and they said, he is well, and
behold Rachel his Daughter comes with the sheep; when Jacob saw Rachel the
Daughter of Laban, his Mothers Brother, and Laban's Sheep, he went near and
rouled the Stone from the Wells mouth and watered the flock of Laban; and Jacob
kissed Rachel, and lift up his voice and wept: And Iacub told Rachel that he
was Rebekah's Son, and she ran and told her Father: when Laban heard the
tidings of Jacob his Sisters Son, he ran to meet him, and embraced him, and
kissed him, and brought him to his House, and he told Laban all these things:
and Laban said, surely thou art my bone and my flesh, and he abode with him the
space of a month: and Laban said unto Jacob, because thou art my brother,
should thou therefore serve me for naught? tell me what thy Wages shall be:
and Laban had two Daughters: the name of the elder was Leah, and the name of
the younger was Rachel; Leah was tender-ey'd, but Rachel was beautiful and
well-favour'd; and Jacob loved Rachel, and said I will serve thee seven years
for Rachel thy younger Daughter, and Laban said, it is better that I give her
unto thee, than I should give her unto another man. And Jacob served seven
years for Rachel, and they seemed unto him but a few days for the love he had
to Rachel: and Jacob said unto Laban, give me my Wife, for my days are
fulfilled, that I may go in unto her.

And Laban gathered together all the men of the place and made a Feast, and it
came to pass in the evening, that he took Leah his Daughter and brought her to
him, and he went in unto her, and in the morning behold it was Leah. And he
said to Laban, what is this that thou have done unto me? did not I serve thee
for Rachel? wherefore have thou beguiled me? and Laban said, it must not be so
done in our Country, to give the younger before the firstborn, fulfill her
week, and we will give thee this also, for the service which thou shall serve
with me, yet other seven years: and Jacob did so and fulfilled her week: and he
gave him Rachel his daughter to Wife also: And Laban gave unto Rachel his
Daughter Billah to be her Handmaid, and he gave unto Leah, Zilpah to be her
Handmaid: and Jacob went in unto Rachel, and he loved Rachel more than Leah:
and when the Lord saw that Leah was hated, he opened her Womb, but Rachel was
barren; and Leah conceived and bare a Son, and she called his name Reuben, for
she said the Lord surely has looked upon mine affliction, now therefore my
Husband will love me.

And she conceived again and bare a Son, and said, because the Lord has heard
that I was hated, he has therefore given me this Son also, and she called his
name Simeon.

And she conceived again and bare a Son, and said, now this time my Husband
will be joined unto me because I have born him three Sons, therefore was his
name called Levi.

And she conceived again and bare a Son, and she said, now will I praise the
Lord, therefore she called his name Judah.

And when Rachel saw that she bare Jacob no Children, she envied her Sister,
and said unto Jacob give me Children or else I die; and Jacob's anger was
kindled against Rachel, and said, am I^in Gods stead? who has withheld from
thee the fruit of the Womb? and she gave him Billah her Handmaid to Wife, and
Jacob went in unto her, and Billah conceived and bare Jacob a Son, and Rachel
said, God has judged me and heard my voice, and has given me a Son, and she
called his name Dan.

And Billah, Rachels Handmaid, conceived again and bare Jacob a second Son, and
Rachel said, with great wrestlings I have wrestled with my Sister, and have
prevailed, and she called his name Naphtali.

When Leah saw she had left bearing, she took Zilpah her Handmaid and gave her
Jacob to Wife; and Zilpah, Leah's maid, bare Jacob a Son, and Leah said, a
Troop comes, and she called his name Gad.

And Zilpah, Leah's maid, bare Jacob a second Son, and Leah said, happy am I,
for the Daughters will call me blessed, and she called his name Asher.

And in the time of Wheat-Harvest Reuben found Mandrakes and brought them to
his Mother Leah; then Rachel desired them, but Leah said unto her, is it a
small thing that thou takes away my Husband? and would thou take away my
Sons Mandrakes also? and Rachel said, therefore he shall lie with thee this
night for them.

And Jacob came out of the field in the evening, and Leah met him and said,
thou must lie with me, for surely I have hired thee with my Sons Mandrakes, and
he lay with her that night; and God hearkened unto Leah, and she conceived and
bare Jacob a fifth Son, and Leah said, God has given me mine hire, because I
have given my maiden to my Husband, and she called his name Issachar.

And Leah conceived again and bare Jacob the sixth Son, and Leah said, God has
endowed me with a good Dowry, now will my Husband dwell with me, because I have
born him six Sons, and she called his name Zebulun.

And afterward she bare a Daughter, and called her name Dinah.

And God remembered Rachel, and hearkened unto her, and opened her Womb, and she
conceived and bare a Son, and said God has taken away my reproach, and she
called his name Joseph, and said the Lord shall add to me another Son.

And it came to pass when Rachel had born Joseph, Jacob said unto Laban, send
me away, that I may go unto my own place, and to my Country, give me my Wives
and my Children for whom I have served thee, and let me go, for thou know my
service which I have done thee: And Laban said, I pray thee carry, for I have
learned by experience, that the Lord has blessed me for thy sake; and Jacob
said, thou know the Lord has blessed thee and increased thee, and now when
shall I provide for mine house also? but Laban not being willing to part with
Jacob, they agreed that he should stay with him again and feed his flocks, and
he desired but the spotted and speckled Cattle, and the spotted and speckled
among the Sheep and Goats, and the Flocks increased of that sort of Cattle so
fast, that he heard the words of Laban's Sons, saying, Jacob has taken away
all that was our Fathers, and he has gotten all this glory; and Jacob beheld
the countenance of Laban, and it was not toward him as it was before.

And the Lord said unto Jacob, return unto the Land of thy Fathers, and to thy
Kindred, and I will be with thee: And Jacob called Rachel and Leah, and said
unto them, I see your Father's countenance that it is not toward me as it was
before; but the God of my Fathers hath-been with me, and ye know that with all
my power I have served your Father, and your Father has deceived me, and
changed my wages ten times, but God suffered him not to hurt me: so Jacob rose
up, and set his Sons and his Wives upon Camels, and he carried away all his
Cattle, and all his goods which he had gotten in Padan-Aram, to go to Isaac his
Father in the Land of Canaan; so he went with all that he had, and rose up and
passed over the River, and passed toward mount Gilead, and Jacob went on his
way, and the Angels of God met him, and when Jacob saw them he said, this is
God's Host, and he called the name of that place Mahanaim.

And he was to pass through the Country of Edom, and through the Land of Seir,
which was his Brother Esau's Country, and Jacob sent messengers before him to
his Brother Esau, he had been twenty years that he had not seen him, so he did
not know whether he would forget his old intention and purpose to kill him,
therefore he commanded the Messengers that he sent saying, thus shall ye speak
to my Lord Esau, thy servant Jacob says thus, I have so journed with Laban,
and stayed there until now, and I have Oxen, Asses, Flocks, Menservants, and
Women servants, and I have sent to tell my Lord Esau, that I may find grace in
thy sight: and the Messengers returned unto Jacob, saying, we came to thy
Brother Esau, and he comes to meet thee, and four hundred men with him.

Then Jacob was greatly afraid and distressed, and he divided the people that
was with him, and the Flocks and the Herds, and the Camels into two Bands, and
said if Esau come to the one company and smite it, the other may escape. And
Jacob said, O God of my Father Abraham, and God of my Father Isaac, the Lord
which said unto me, return into thy Country and to thy Kindred and I will deal
well with thee, I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies, and of all the
truth which thou have showed unto thy servant, for with my Staff I passed over
this Jondan, and now I am become two Bands, deliver me I pray thee from the
hand of my Brother Esau, for I fear him lest he should come and smite me, and
the Mother with the Children, and thou saidest I will surely do thee good, and
make thy seed as the sand of the Sea which cannot be numbered.

And Jacob took 200 She-goats; and 20 He-goats, 200 Ews, and 20 Rams, 30
milch-Camels with their Colts, 40 Kine, and 10 Bulls, twenty She-Asses, and ten
Foals, and he delivered them unto his Servants, and behold when Esau my Brother
meets thee, and asks thee, saying, whose are these before thee? thou shall
say, they be thy servant Jacobs, it is a Present sent unto my Lord Esau, behold
he is behind us, and thus he commanded his Servants to say unto Esau when they
met him: And sent his two Wives, and two Women servants, and his eleven Sons
over the Brook Jabbock, and that night Jacob was left alone, and there wrestled
a man with him until the breaking of the day, and when he saw that he prevailed
not against him, he touched the hollow of Jacobs thigh and it was our of joint
as he wrestled with him; and he said, let me go, for the day breaks, and he
said, I will not let thee go unless thou bless me; and he said unto him, what
is thy name? and he said Jacob: and he said thy name shall no more be called
Jacob but Israel, for as a Prince thou have power with God, and with men have
thou prevailed; and Jacob called the name of that place Peniel, for I have seen
God face to face, and my life is preserved.

And Jacob lifted up his eyes, and behold Esau came and with him 400 men, and
he divided the Children unto Leah and unto Rachel, and unto the two Handmaids,
and he put the Handmaids and their Children foremost, and Leah and her Children
after, and Rachel and Joseph hindermost, and he passed over before them, and
bowed himself to the ground seven times, until he came near unto his Brother,
and this he did to stop his Brothers fury, who had been enraged against him
when they parted, for he knew he was a proud man and a great man in the earth,
and so to allay his spirit and get past him, for he was to pass through his
Country, did he make this Obeisance to him; and Esau ran to meet him, and
embraced him, and fell on his neck and kissed him, and they wept, and he lift
up his eyes and saw the Women and the Children, and he said whose are these
with thee? Jacob said these are the Children which God has graciously given
thy servant, and the Women and the Children passed by him, and they bowed
themselves: and he said what meanest thou by all this drove which I meet? And
Jacob said, these are to find grace in the sight of my Lord: and Esau said I
have enough my brother, keep that which thou have to thy self; and Jacob said,
nay I pray thee, if I have found grace in thy sight, receive my present at my
hand, because God has dealt graciously with me, and I have enough, and he
urged him, and he took it: And Esau would have gone on his journey with him;
but Jacob said, my Lord knows that the Children are tender, and the flocks are
with young, and we must lead them on softly, as they are able to endure.

So Esau returned that day unto Seir, and Jacob journied unto Succoth, and came
to Salem, a City which is in the Land of Canaan. And God said unto Jacob,
arise, go up to Bethel, and dwell there, and make an Altar unto God that
appeared unto thee when thou fledst from Esau thy Brother. And Jacob said to
all those that were with him, Let us arise and go up to Bethel, and let us make
there an Altar unto God who answered me in the day of my distress, and was with
me in the way which I went. So Jacob came to Luz which is in the Land of
Canaan, that is Bethel, and built there an Altar and called upon the Lord; and
God appeared unto Jacob again and blessed him, and God said unto him thy name
shall not any more be called Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name, and he called
his name Israel. And God said unto him I am God Almighty, be fruitful and
multiply, a Nation and a company of Nations shall be of thee, and Kings shall
come out of thy loins, and the Land which I gave Abraham and Isaac, to thee
will I give it, and thy seed after thee, and God went up from him.

And they journied from Bethel, and there was but a little way to come to
Ephrath, and Rachel traveled and had hard labor, and when she was in hard
labor, the Midwife said unto her fear not, thou shall have this Son also, and
it came to pass as her soul was departing, that she called his name Benonl, but
his Father called his name Benjamin: and Jacob set a Pillar upon her Grave, and
so Jacob came unto Isaac his Father unto Mamre, unto the City of Arhab which is
Hebron, where Abraham and Isaac so journed; and the days of Isaac were one
hundred and fourscore years, and Isaac gave up the Ghost and died, and was
gathered unto his people being old and full of days, and his Sons Esate and
Jacob buried him, Genesis 35.

In the next Chapter you may read the Generations of Esau who is Edom, how he
took Wives of the Daughters of Canaan, but this is not the seed that I am to
treat of, this 36. Chapter of Genesis will show the Offspring of Esau.

And Jacob dwelt in the Land wherein his Father was a Stranger, in the Land of
Can^an, Genesis 37.

The History concerning Joseph, how his Father loved him, and how his brethren
envied him, and how they intended to have killed him, and took him and cast him
into a Pit; and how they sold him to the Ishmaelites, and he was brought down
to Egypt, and Potiphar an Officer of Pharaoh an Egyptian, bought him at the
hand of the Ishmaelites, which had carried him down thither, and how the Lord
was with Joseph and preserved him from Potiphar's Wife, how she betrayed him,
and accused him falsely, but the Lord was with him and showed him mercy, and
gave him favor in the sight of the Jailer, and how he came to be the Governor
of Pharaoh's House, and how he governed Egypt in the time of plenty, that when
the Dearth came there was Corn enough, and how his Brethren came down into
Egypt to buy Corn when the Famine was sore in the Land of Canaan, and how he
discovered himself to his Brethren, and sent for his Father and Brethren, and
all their Families; all this you may read of from the 37. Chapter to the 46.

And Israel took his journey with all that he had, and came to Beersheba, and
offered Sacrifice to the God of his Fathers, and God spoke unto him in the
visions of the night, and said Jacob! and he said here am I. And God said I am
the God of thy Fathers, fear not to go into Egypt, I will make of thee a great
Nation, I will go down with thee into Egypt, and will surely bring thee up
again, and Joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes.

So Jacob rose up and went into Egypt with his Sons, and their Wives and their
little ones were carried in the Wagons that Pharaoh sent for them; and Pharaoh
received them kindly and entreated them courteously, as you may read in the 46.
and 47. Chapter of Genesis: and Israel dwelt in the Land of Egypt in the
Country of Goshen, and they had Possessions there, and multiplied exceedingly,
and Jacob lived in the Land of Egypt 17 years, so the whole age of Jacob was
147 years; and the time drew nigh that Israel must die, and he called his Son
Joseph, and said unto him, if I have found grace in thy sight, put I pray thee
thine hand under my thigh, and deal kindly and truly with me, bury me not I
pray thee in Egypt, but I will lie with my Fathers, and thou shall carry me out
of Egypt, and bury me in their burying place: And he said I will do as thou
have said; and he said swear unto me, and he swear unto him, and Israel bowed
himself upon his beds head.

And it came to pass after these things, one told Joseph, thy Father is sick,
and he took with him his two Sons Manasseh and Ephraim, and Jacob told Joseph
how God appeared to him at Luz in the Land of Canaan, and blessed him; and he
said God said unto me, I will make thee fruitful and multiply thee, and make of
thee a multitude of people, and will give this Land to thy seed after thee, for
an everlasting possession, and now thy two Sons Ephraim and Manasseh which were
born in Egypt before I came, they are mine as much as Reuben and Simeon. And
the Issue which thou have after them shall be thine. And Israel beheld Ioseph's
Sons, and said, whose are these? and Joseph said unto his Father, they are my
Sons whom God has given me in this place; and he said bring them unto me, and
I will bless them. Now the eyes of Israel were dim that he could not see, and
he brought them near unto him, and he kissed them and embraced them: and Israel
said unto Joseph, I had not thought to have seen thy face, and lo God has
showed me thy seed. And Joseph took them both, Ephraim in his right hand
toward Isreal's left, and Manasseh in his left hand toward Isreal's right hand,
and brought them near unto him. And Israel stretched out his right hand and
laid it upon Ephraims head, who was the younger, and his left hand upon
Manassehs head, guiding his hands wittingly, for Manasseh was the firstborn;
And he blessed Joseph and said, God before whom my Fathers Abraham and Isaac
did walk, the God which fed me all my life long unto this day, the Angel which
redeemed me from all evil, bless the Lads, and let my name be named on them,
and the name of my Fathers Abraham and Isaac, and let them grow into a
multitude in the midst of the earth: And when Joseph saw that his Father laid
his right hand upon the head of Ephraim, it displeased him, and he held up his
Fathers hand to remove it from Ephraims head to Manassehs head; and said not so
my Father, for this is the first born, and his Father refused, and said, I know
it my Son, I know it; he shall be great, but truly his younger brother shall be
greater than he: and he blessed them that day, saying, in thee shall Israel
bless; saying, God make thee as Ephraim and Manasseh. And Israel said unto
Joseph, behold I die, but God shall be with you, and bring you again into the
Land of your Fathers.

And Jacob called unto him his Sons, and said, gather your selves together,
that I may tell you, what shall befall you in the last days, and hear ye Sons
of Jacob, and hearken unto Israel your Father; here Jacob prophesied unto all
his twelve Sons what they should be, and gave every one their sentence and
portion, but more especially and largely he prophesies of Judah, of whom our
Lord sprang, and this it the seed that we are to treat of; Judah thou art he
whom thy brethren shall praise, thine hand shall be in the neck of thine
Enemies, thy Fathers Children shall how down to thee; Judah is a Lions Whelp:
from the Prey my Son thou art gone up, he stooped down, he couched as a Lion,
and as an old Lion, who shall rouse him up.

The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor the Lawgiver from between his
feet until Shiloh come, unto him shall the gathering of the people be, binding
his foal unto the Vine, and his Asses Colt unto the choice Vine; he washed his
Garments in Wine, and his Clothes in the blood of Grapes. His Eyes shall be red
with Wine, and his teeth white with Milk.

Here is a holy and a glorious Prophecy of Judah, of which we shall show more
hereafter; as also of all the rest of his Sons, he prophesied unto them, and
told them what should come to pass to all the 12 Tribes of Israel, as you may
read, Genesis 49.

So after that he had charged them that they should bury him, and carry him up
into Canaan, and bury him in that field which Abraham had bought, where Abraham
and Sarah was buried, and Isaac and Rebekah and Leah his Wife.

When Jacob had made an end of commanding his Sons, he gathered up his feet
into the bed, and yielded up the Ghost, and was gathered unto his people.

And Joseph and his Brethren carried him up to Canaan to bury, and the Elders
of Pharaohs House went along with them, and when they had buried him, and
mourned for him, Joseph and his Brethren returned into Egypt. So Joseph and his
Brethren continued in Egypt, and Joseph was tender and loving to his Brethren.

And when Joseph was 110 years old, he dyed, and Joseph took an Oath of the
Children of Israel saying, God will visit you, and ye shall carry my bones from
hence, Genesis 50.

Exodus.
SO Jacob and his Sons, their Wives and their Children that went down into
Egypt with him were seventy in number, and Joseph died and all his Brethren and
all that Generation, Exodus 1.6.

But their Children increased abundantly, and multiplied and waxed exceeding
mighty, and the Land was filled with them, and Pharaoh, that was kind and
loving to Joseph and his brethren, died; and there arose a new King in Egypt
which knew not Joseph, and he stormed at the increase of the Children of
Israel, and said, they might deal wisely with them, and so he began to afflict
them, and set Taskmasters over them, and the Egyptians made them serve with
rigor, so that they made their lives bitter with hard bondage in Mortar and in
Brick, and in all manner of service: and Pharaoh charged their Midwives to kill
all their Male-children; And Pharaoh charged all his people, saying, every Son
that is born ye shall cast into the River: but the Midwives feared God, and did
not as Pharaoh had commanded them, but saved the Children alive; and the more
they afflicted them, the more they grew and multiplied.

Thus you see how kindly the Lord has dealt with the seed of his promise and
Covenant, and how often he has renewed his Promises and his Blessings and
Mercies unto them; hereafter you may see also how he took care all along of his
seed, that his Promise remained upon, and how he committed them afterward to
the hand of Moses whom he preserved by his power, who was nursed up by Pharaohs
Daughter, as you may read at large in Exodus 2.

And when this cruel King of Egypt died, the Children of Israel sighed and
groaned under their bondage, and the Lord heard their cry, and God heard their
groaning, and God remembered his Covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with
Jacob; and God looked upon the Children of Israel, and God had respect unto
them; and the Lord sent his Angel unto Moses, to the Mount of God, even to
Horeb, and he appeared to him in a flame of Fire, out of the midst of a Bush,
and he looked, and behold the bush burnt with fire, and the bush was not
consumed: And Moses said, I will now turn aside and see this great sight, why
the bush is not burned.

And when God saw he turned aside to see, God called unto him out of the bush
and said; Moses, Moses! and he said, here am I; and he said draw not nigh
hither, put off thy shoes from thy feet, for the place where thou stand is
holy ground: Moreover he said, I am the God of thy Fathers, the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob: and Moses hid his face, for he was
afraid to look upon God; and the Lord said, I have surely seen the affliction
of my people which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of their
Taskmasters, for I know their sorrows, and I am come down to deliver them out
of the hands of the Egyptians, and to bring them up out of that Land into a
good Land: come now therefore, I will send thee unto Pharaoh, that thou may
bring my people the Children of Israel out of Egypt, for I have heard their
cries and seen their oppressions.

Here the Lord committed his seed into the hand of Moses a faithful Servant,
who came of Lavi both by Father and Mother, which was Jacobs third Son. So how
Moses went unto Pharaoh with the Elders of Israel, and wrought the Wonders of
the Lord and his miracles before him, and how Moses and Aaron brought them from
under the Egyptian Bondage, and the many Plagues that the Lord brought upon
Pharaoh, we shall show hereafter.

And Moses said unto God, who am I that I should go unto Pharaoh? and the Lord
said certainly I will be with thee, and this shall be a token unto thee, that
when thou have brought the people out of Egypt ye shall serve God in this
Mount, etc. as you may read in Exodus Chap. 4.5. And thou shall say unto
Pharaph, thus says the Lord; Israel is my Son, even my firstborn, I say unto
thee, Let my Son go that he may serve me, if thou refuse to let him go, behold
I will smite thy Son, even thy firstborn, ver. 23.

Thus Moses and Aaron went in and told Pharaoh, saying, thus says the Lord God
of Israel, let my people go that they may hold a Feast unto me in the
Wilderness. And Pharaoh said, who is the Lord that I should obey his voice, to
let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go, Chap. 5. So
he caused the greater Tasks to be laid upon them, that they should make their
tale of Bricks without straw, as you may read; and the Lord said unto Moses,
Now thou shall see what I will do unto Pharaoh.

And God spoke unto Moses and said, I am the Lord, and I appeared unto Abraham,
unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name of God Almighty, but by my name Jehovah
was I not known to them, and have also established my Covenant with them to
give them the Land of Canaan, the Land of their Pilgrimage wherein they were
strangers, and I have also heard the groaning of the Children of Israel, whom
the Egyptians keep in bondage, and I remember my Covenant: wherefore say unto
the Children of Israel, I am the Lord, and I will bring you from under the
burdens of the Egyptians, and I will rid you out of their bondage, and I will
redeem you with a stretched out arm, and with great Judgments; and I will take
you to me for a people, and I will be to you for a God, and ye shall know that
I am the Lord your God, which brings you out from under the bondage of the
Egyptians, and I will bring you into the Land, concerning the which I swear to
give it to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, and I will give it to you for an
heritage, I am the Lord, Chap. 6.8. So Moses spoke to the Children of Israel,
as you may read to the end of the Chapter.

And the Lord said unto Moses, see I have made thee a God unto Pharaoh, and
Aaron thy brother a Prophet, and thou shall speak all that I command; and Aaron
thy Brother shall speak unto Pharaoh, that he send the children of Israel out
of his Land, and I will harden Pharaohs heart, etc. Chap. 7. And so the Lord
wrought his 12 miracles upon Pharaoh, and the Egyptians, as you may read from
the 7. Chapter to the 14. where Pharaoh and his Host were overwhelmed in the
red Sea.

1. The first of his wonders was Aarons Rod that became a Serpent, and
swallowed up all the Egyptians Serpents.

2. Moses smote the Waters with his Rod, and they became blood, and all the
Fish in the River died, Chap. 7.20.21. and the Magitians did so.

3. He smote all the borders with Frogs, and Aaron stretched forth his hand
over the Waters, and Frogs came up and covered the Land of Egypt, and the
Egyptians did so, Chap. 8.6, 7.

4. And again the Lord said unto Moses stretch forth thy Rod and smite the dust
of the Land, that it may become Lice, and Aaron did so: So that the dust of the
Land became Lice throughout all the Land of Egypt, and the Magitians would have
done so, but they could not; then the Magitians said unto Pharaoh, this is the
finger of God, but Pharaohs heart was hardened, that he would not hear them as
the Lord had said.

5. The Lord said unto Moses rise early in the morning and stand before Pharaoh
and say unto him, thus says the Lord, let my people go and serve me, else I
will send swarms of Flies upon thee, and upon thy Servants, and upon thy
people, so that all the Houses of the Egyptians shall be full of swarms of
Flies, and also the ground; and I will sever in that day the Land of Goshen in
the which my people dwell, so that none of the swarms of Flies shall be there,
and I will put a Division between my people and thy people, and the Lord did
so: and on the morrow there came grievous swarms of Flies into the House of
Pharaoh, and into all the Houses of the Egyptians, nevertheless Pharaohs heart
was hardened again as the Lord said.

6. The Lord said unto Moses, go unto Pharaoh, and say, thus says the Lord God
of the Hebrews, let my people go that they may serve me, if thou will not,
behold the hand of the Lord is upon thy Cattle, upon thy Horses, upon thy
Asses, upon thy Camels, upon thy Oxen, and upon thy Sheep, there shall be a
very grievous murrain. And the Lord did sever between the Cattle of Israel, and
the Cattle of the Egyptians, so that nothing did die of all the Childrens of
Israel, Chap. 9.

7. And the Lord said unto Moses and Aaron take a handful of Ashes of the
Furnace, and let Moses sprinkle it toward Heaven in the sight of Pharaoh, and
it shall become a Boil breaking forth with Blains upon man and upon beast, and
Moses and Aaron did so. And Boils came throughout all the Land of Egypt, so
that the Magitians could not stand before Moses because of the Boils, but the
Lord hardened the heart of Pharaoh that he would not hearken.

8. And the Lord said unto Moses rise up early his the morning and stand before
Pharaoh and say unto him, thus says the Lord God of the Hebrews, Let my people
go that they may serve me, for I will at this time send all my Plagues upon thy
heart, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people, that thou may know there
is none like me in all the earth; for now I will stretch out mine hand that I
may smite thee and thy people with Pestilence, and thou shall be cut off from
the earth; in very deed for this very cause have I raised thee up for to show
on thee my power, that my name may be declared throughout all the earth: behold
to morrow about this time I will cause it to rain a very grievous hail, such as
has not been in Egypt since the foundation thereof, send therefore and gather
thy Cattle; and those that feared the word of the Lord among Pharaohs servants,
sent and gathered their Cattle, but those that did not regard, let them abide
in the fields. And the Lord said unto Moses, stretch forth thine hand, and
Moses stretched forth his hand toward Heaven, and the Lord sent Thunder and
Hail, and the fire ran along upon the ground, and the Lord rained hail upon the
Land of Egypt and fire mingled with hail very grievous, such as there was none
like it in all the Land of Egypt since it became a Nation, and the hail smote
man and beast, all that was in the field, and every herb in the field, and
brake down all the trees in the field, only in the Land of Goshen where the
Children of Israel were, there was no hail.

9. And the Lord said unto Moses go unto Pharaoh, for I have hardened his heart,
and Moses and Aaron came unto Pharaoh and said, thus says the Lord God of the
Hebrews, how long will thou refuse to humble thy self before me? let my people
go that they may serve me; else behold to morrow I will bring the Locusts in
thy Coasts, and they shall cover the face of the earth, that one cannot be able
to see the earth, and they shall eat the residue of that which remains from
the hail, and they shall fill all the houses of thee, and thy servants, and all
the Egyptians, and they did so. So that Pharaohs servants said, how long shall
this man be a snare unto us? Let the men go that they may serve the Lord their
God, know thou not yet that Egypt is destroyed? So Moses stretched forth his
Rod over the Land of Egypt, and the Lord brought an East Wind which brought in
the Locusts, so that they covered the face of the whole earth, and the Land was
darkened, and they eat every herb of the Land, and all the fruit of the trees
which the hail had left, and there remained not any green thing on the trees
throughout all the Land of Egypt. Then Pharaoh called for Aaron and Moses in
haste, and he said, I have sinned against the Lord your God, and against you,
and now therefore forgive I pray you my sin this once, and entreat the Lord
your God, that he may take from me this death only: and Moses went and
entreated the Lord, and the Lord sent a strong West-wind and took away the
Locusts, yet the heart of Pharaoh was hardened that he would not let Israel go.

10. And the Lord said unto Moses, stretch forth thy hands toward Heaven, that
there may be darkness over the Land of Egypt, even darkness that may be felt;
and Moses stretched forth his hands toward Heaven, and there was a thick
darkness in all the Land of Egypt for three days, they saw not one another,
neither any rose from his place for three days; but all the Children of Israel
had light in their dwellings; but the Lord yet hardened Pharaohs heart that he
would not let them go: and Pharaoh said unto Moses get thee from me, take heed
to thy self; see my face no more, for in that day thou see my face thou shall
die, and Moses said unto him, thou have said well, I will see thy face no more.

11. And the Lord said unto Moses, I will yet bring one Plague more upon
Pharaoh, afterward he will let you go hence, about midnight will I go into the
midst of Egypt, and all the firstborn in the Land of Egypt shall die, from the
firstborn of Pharaoh that sits upon the Throne, even to the first of the
Maidservant that is behind the Mi^l, and all the firstborn of the beasts, and
there shall be a great cry through the Land of Egypt, such as there has been
none like it, neither shall be like it any more; but against any of the
Children of Israel shall not a Dog move his tongue, that ye may know the Lord
has put a difference between the Egyptians and Israel, Chap. 11.

Then the Lord commanded the Children of Israel to keep the Passover, and to
offer a Lamb without blemish, a male of the first year, and to take the blood
of it, and strike the Posts of the Houses of the Children of Israel, as you may
read Chap. 12. And the blood shall be to you for a token upon the Houses where
you are, says the Lord; and when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and
the Plague shall not be upon you, to destroy you, when I smite the Land of
Egypt, ver. 13: And at midnight the Lord smote all the firstborn of the Land
of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat on the Throne, to the
firstborn of the Captive that sat in the Dungeon, and all the firstborn of
the Cattle: And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he and all his servants, and all
the Egyptians, and there was a great cry in Egypt, for there was not a house in
which there was not one dead. And he called for Moses and Aaron by night, and
said arise and get ye forth from among my people, both you and all the Children
of Israel; go serve the Lord as ye have said, and bless me also: And the
Egyptians were urgent upon the people that they might send them out of the Land
in haste, for they said we be all dead men.

So the Children of Israel journied from Rameses to Succoth, about six hundred
thousand on foot that were men, besides Children, as you may read in this 12.
Chapter.

And it came to pass at the end of 430 years, even the self same day that all
the Hosts of the Lord went out from the Land of Egypt, it is a night much to be
observed unto the Lord, for bringing them up from the Land of Egypt, this is
that night to the Lord to be observed by all the Children of Israel, ver. 42.
And they went up harnessed out of the Land of Egypt: And Moses took the bones
of Joseph with him, for the Children of Israel had strictly sworn unto him, and
he said, God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry my bones away from
hence, ver. 18, 19.

And the Lord said unto Moses, sanctify unto me all the firstborn; whatsoever
opens the Womb of man or beast among the Children of Israel it is mine, as
you may read at large, Chap. 13.

And it came to pass when Pharaoh let the People go, that God led them not
through the Land of the Philistines, although that was near, but God led them
about through the wilderness of the Red Sea: and the Lord spoke unto Moses,
saying; speak unto the Children of Israel, that they turn and encamp before
Pi-habiroth, between Migdol and the Sea over against Baal-Zephon, for Pharaoh
will say of the Children of Israel they are entangled in the Land, the
Wilderness has shut them in: and I will harden Pharaohs heart, and he shall
follow after them.

And it was told Pharaoh that the People were fled, and his heart was hardened,
and the hearts of his Servants, and they said, why have we done this, that we
should let the People go from serving us? And the King made ready his Chariots,
and he took 600 chosen Charlots of all the Chariots of Egypt, and made Captains
over every one of them: And the Lord hardened the heart of the King of Egypt,
and he pursued after the Children of Israel, but the Lord carried them out with
a high hand, but the Egyptians pursued after them, all the Horses and Charlots
of Pharaoh and his Horsemen, and his Army, and overtook them encamped by the
Sea; and when Pharaoh drew nigh, the Children of Israel lift up their eyes, and
behold the Egyptians marched after them, and they were sore afraid, and the
Children of Israel cried unto the Lord; and Moses said unto them, fear ye not,
stand still and see the salvation of the Lord, which he will show you this day,
for the Egyptians whom ye have seen to day, ye shall see them no more for ever,
the Lord shall fight for you, and hold your peace.

And the Lord said unto Moses speak unto the Children of Israel that they go
forward, but lift up thy Rod, and stretch forth thy hand over the Sea and
divide it, and the Children of Israel shall go on dry ground in the midst of
the Sea, and I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians, and they shall follow
them. And the Angel of God which went before the Camp of Israel, removed and
went behind them, and the Pillar of a cloud which went before their face, stood
behind them, and it came between the Camp of the Egyptians and the Camp of
Israel, and it was a cloud and darkness to them, but it gave light by night to
the Children of Israel, so that one came not near the other all the night; and
Moses stretched out his hand over the Sea, and the Lord caused the Sea to go
back by a strong East Wind all that night, and the Children of Israel went into
the midst of the Sea, upon dry ground, and the waters were a wall unto them, on
their right hand, and on their left.

12. And the Egyptians pursued and went after them to the midst of the Sea, all
Pharaohs Chariots, his Horses, and his Horsemen, and in the morning watch the
Lord looked on the Host of the Egyptians through the Pillar of fire and the
Cloud, and troubled their Host, and took off their Chariot-Wheels that they
drove heavily, so that the Egyptians said, let us fly from the face of Israel,
for the Lord sighteth for them, and against us: and the Lord said unto Moses,
stretch out thy hand over the Sea that the waters may come upon the Egyptians,
upon their Chariots, and upon their Horsemen; and Moses stretched forth his
hand over the Sea, and the Sea returned to its strength: and when the morning
appeared the Egyptians fled against it, and the Lord overthrew the Egyptians in
the midst of the Sea, and the waters returned and covered their Chariots, and
their Horsemen, and all the Host of Pharaoh that came into the Sea after them,
there remained not so much as one of them; thus the Lord saved Israel that day
out of the hands of the Egyptians, and Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the
Sea shore.

Then sang Moses and the Children of Israel this Song unto the Lord, etc. Exodus
15. Thus the Lord wrought these 12 wonders upon Phara^h and the Egyptians, all
which made them harder and harder, notwithstanding they could not with hold the
Israelites, when the Lord would deliver them, for he brought them forth with a
strong hand, and with an outstretched arm, and led them through the Wilderness
where they met with many trials and hardships, it being a place not affording
outward necessaries, and they wanted Faith to trust in the arm and power of the
Almighty, which had so graciously and mercifully heard their cries under their
oppression and seen their sorrows, and had delivered them out of their heavy
bondage, and darkness that they were in under the Egyptians; and though he had
showed his mighty and wonderful works upon Pharaoh and his Host, yet when they
came to want what they desired, they murmured exceedingly against the Lord; and
the Children of Israel said, would to God we had dyed by the hand of the Lord
in the Land of Egypt, when we sat by the fleshpots, and when we did eat bread
to the full, for ye have brought us forth into this Wilderness to kill this
whole Assembly with hunger: then the Lord rained Manna from Heaven.

And it grieved the Lord that they murmured against him, and the Lord said I
have heard your murmurings, at even ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning ye
shall be filled with bread, and ye shall know that I am the Lord your God,
Exodus 16.12. and the Lord commanded Moses and Aaron that they should put an
Homer of this Manna, which they did eat, into a Pot, and lay it up before the
Lord to be kept for the Generations, ver. 33 And the Children of Israel did eat
Manna forty years until they came to the borders of the Land of Canaan, and all
the Congregation of the Children of Israel journied from the Wilderness of Sin,
after their journey according to the command of the Lord, and pitched in
Rephidim, there was no water for the people to drink, and the people did chide
with Moses; and the people thirsted there for water: and Moses cried unto the
Lord saying, what shall I do unto this people, they be almost ready to stone
me? and the Lord said unto Moses, go on before the people, and take with thee
the Elders of Israel, and thy Rod wherewith thou smotest the River take in thy
hand, and go, and behold I stand before thee there upon the Rock in Horeb, and
thou shall (...) the Rock, and Water shall come out of it, that the people may
drink; and Moses did so in the sight of all the Children of Israel, and the
Lord gave them his Laws and his Statutes, and sent Moses unto them and said
thus shall thou say unto the House of Jacob, and tell the Children of Israel,
ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bare you on Eagle wings,
and brought you unto my self; now therefore if yo^ will obey my voice indeed,
and keep my Covenant, then shall ye be a (...) treasure unto me above all the
people of the earth.

And the Lord said unto Moses, lo^ come unto thee in a thick cloud, that the
people may hear when I speak unto thee, and believe thee for over t^ be readlly
therefore on one third day, for the Lord will come down unto Mount Sina in the
sight of all the people* and it came to pass in the morning of the third day,
that there were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the Mount, and
the voice of the Trumpet exceeding loud, so that all the people that was in the
Camp trembled; and Mose^ brought forth the people out of the Camp to meet with
the Lord; and they stood at the nether part of the Mount, and Mount (...) was
altogether of a smoke, because the Lord descended upon it, in fire, and the
smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a Furnace, and the whole Mount quaked
greatly; and when the voice of the Trumpet sounded long and waxed douder and
(...) Mos^s spoke, and God answered him by a v^iue, and the (...) Mos^s up to
the top of the Mount, and Moses went up, as you may read at large Exodus 19.

And the Lord gave his Law unto Moses from his own mouth, and God spoke all
these words and said, I am the Lord thy God, thou shall have none other Gods
but me, etc. Exodus 20.

And after the Lord had given his Law and his ten Commandments to them, when
the people saw the thundrings and the lightnings, and the noise of the Trumpet,
and the Mountain smoking, they removed and stood afar off; and said unto Moses
speak thou unto us, and we will hear, but let not God speak with us lest we
die; And Moses said unto the people fear not, for God is come to prove you,
that his fear may be before your faces, that ye sin not: and Moses drew near
unto the thick darkness where God was, and the Lord said unto Moses, say unto
the Children of Israel, you have seen that I have talked with you from Heaven^
ye shall not make with me Gods of Silver, neither shall ye make ye Gods of
Gold, ver. 23.

And God commanded Moses to make an Ark, the Ark of his Covenant, with a
Candlestick, and all the holy Vessels of the Sanctuary, as you may read at
large Exodus 25. Moreover he commanded Moses to make the Tabernacle with all its
Curtains, Coverings and Vails, Chap. 26. Also he commanded him to make an Altar
on which the Offerings were to be offered, as you may read from Chap. 27. to
Chap. 30. and so to the end of the Book of Exodus.

And after this the Lord made Moses write his Law in Tables of Stone, and Moses
hewed two Tables of Stone, and went up early in the morning, as the Lord
commanded him, unto Mount Sinai, and took in his hands the two Tables of Stone,
and the Lord descended in the Cloud and stood with him there, and proclaimed
the name of the Lord; The Lord merciful and gracious, long-suffering, abundant
in goodness and truth, and keeping mercy for thousands, pardoning iniquity,
transgression, and Sin, Exodus 34.

So all the precious works of Moses and Aaron, and all their faithfulness and
their care, and their diligence, and how the Lord: honored them with his
presence, and how they taught, and governed, and prophesied unto the Children
of Israel, why they led them through the Wilderness 40 years together, ye may
read in the four Books of Moses, viz. Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy.

Deuteronomy.
THE Lord promised the Children of Israel, and said unto Moses, I will raise
them up from among their brethren a Prophet like unto thee, and I will put my
words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I command him, Deuteronomy.
18.18. here Moses was a Prophet, for Christ witnesses that Moses writ of him,
and Philip said, we have found him, of whom Moses in the Law, and the Prophets
did write, J^^. 1.45. and Chap. 5.45. do not think that I will accuse your to
the Father, there is one that accuses you even Moses, for (...) you believed
Moses ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me, but if ye believe not his
writings, how shall ye believe my words! And the Apostle says, and Moses
verily was faithful in all his house as a servant, forth testimony of those
things which were to be spoken after, Heb. 3.5.

And this was the Commandment which Moses laid before the Children of Israel a
little before his departure from them, says he, for this Commandment which I
command you this day, it is not hidden from thee, neither is it afar off, it is
not in Heaven that thou should say, who shall go up for (...) to Heaven, and
bring it unto us, that we may hear it and do it, neither is it beyond the Sea,
that thou should say, who shall go over the Sea for us, and bring it unto
us, that we may hear it and do it? but the word is very nigh thee, in thy mouth
and in thy heart, that thou may do it, I have s^t before thee this day life
and death, and good and evil, Deuteronemy 30.11. to the 15. and Romans 10.5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10.

So after his Exhortations he blessed them with large blessings, as you may
read in the 31.3^. and 33 Chapters at large.

And he said I am 120 years old, I can no more go out and come in, and the Lord
has said, thou shall not go over Jordan. And Moses went up from the plain of
Moab unto the Mountain of Nebo, the top of Pisgah over against Jeric^o, and the
Lord showed him all the Land of Gilead unto Dan, and all Napthali, and all the
Land of Ephraim and Manasseh, and all the Land of Judah unto the utmost Sea,
and the South and the plain of the Valley of Jericho, the City of the
Palm Trees unto Zoar, and the Lord said unto him, this is the Land which I
swear unto Abraham, unto Isa^^, and unto Jacob, saying, I will give it unto thy
seed, I have ca^sed thee to see it with thine eyes, but thou shall not go over
thither.

So Moses the Servant of the Lord died there in the Land of Moab, according to
the word of the Lord, and he buried him in a Valley in the Land of Moab, over
against B^th-peor, but no man knows of his Sepulcher unto this day, Chapter
34. unto the 9. V^^se.

And Joshua the Son of Nun was full of the spirit of Wisdom, for Moses had laid
his hands on him, and the children of Israel hearkened unto him, and did as the
Lord commanded Moses, there arose (...) a Prophet since in Israel like unto
Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face, ver. 10.

Joshua.
NOw after the death of Moses the servant of the Lord, it came to pass that the
Lord spoke unto Joshua the Son of Nun, Moses minister, saying, Moses my servant
is dead, now therefore arise go over this Jordan, thou and all the people, unto
the Land which I do give unto them, every place that the sole of your foot
shall tread upon, that I give unto you as I said unto Moses, from the
Wilderness, even to the great River Euphrates, there shall not be a man able to
stand before thee all the days of thy life; as I was with Moses so will I be
with thee, I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee, be strong and of a good
courage, for unto this people shall thou divide the Land which I swear unto
their Fathers to give them.

Here take notice of the faithful and constant true care of the Almighty over
the seed of his Covenant and promise, when Moses his faithful servant was dead,
how he did deliver them unto Joshua, and promised him his presence, and
performed the same, as you may read at large in the Book of Joshua.

And the Lord said unto Joshua, this day I will begin to magnify thee in the
sight of all Israel, that they may know, as I was with Moses so I will be with
thee. Joshua commanded the Priests to carry the Ark of the Covenant before
them, saying, when ye are come to the River of Jordan, ye shall stand still in
Jordan, and Joshua said unto the Children of Israel, the Ark of the Covenant of
the Lord of all the earth passes over before you into Jordan, and it shall
come to pass as soon as the soles of the feet of the Priests, that bears the
Ark of the Lord of all the earth, shall rest in the waters of Jordan, that the
waters of Jordan shall be cut off from the waters that come down from above,
and they shall stand upon an heap: and they did so, as you may read in Joshua
3.14, 15, 16, 17. thus Joshua led them over with twelve men with twelve stones
upon their shoulders, that they took out of the midst of Jordan, who passed
before the Ark of the Lord in the midst of Jordan, according to the number of
the Tribes of Israel: and Joshua set up twelve stones in the midst of Jordan,
in the place where the feet of the Priests stood which bare the Ark, and they
are there unto this day; and when the people were passed clean over, that the
Ark of the Lord passed over in the midst of the people, but the Priests which
bare the Ark stood in the midst of Jordan until every thing was finished that
the Lord commanded Joshua.

Thus the Lord miraculously wrought with Joshua, as he did with Moses, for the
Lord God dried up the waters of Jordan, as he did the Red Sea before their
Fathers; you may read also how the Lord God wrought with Joshua miraculously at
the taking of Jericho, when the Ark of the Lord compassed about the City seven
times, that the Walls of Jericho fell down flat at the shout of the people, and
at the sound of the Trumpets of Rams Horns, Josh. 6.20.

Again how the Lord was with Joshua in a special manner in the taking of the
City of Ai, as you may read, Chap. 8.

And when the five Kings came against Israel, and fled before them, that the
Lord cast great stones from Heaven before, and they that died were more that
died by hailstones, than they that Israel slew with the Sword. Then spoke
Joshua to the Lord, in the day when the Lord delivered up the Amorites before
the Children of Israel, and he said in the sight of the Children of Israel, Sun
stand thou still upon Gibeon, and thou Moon in the Valley of Ajalon; and the
Sun stood still, and the Moon stayed until the people had avenged themselves of
their Enemies, so the Sun stood still in the midst of Heaven, and hastened not
to go down for about a whole day, and there was no day like that before it nor
after it, that the Lord harkened unto the voice of man, for the Lord fought for
Israel, Chap. 10.12, 13, 14.

These with many more miracles and wonders, and the many Victories that he gave
Joshua over his Enemies, you may read throughout this whole book of I^shua. And
in the latter end of his days he called for the Heads and for the Rulers of
Israel, and for their Judges, and for their Officers; and Joshua said unto all
the people, Thus says the Lord God of Israel, your Fathers dwelt on the other
side of the flood in old time, even Terah the Father of Abraham, and the Father
of Nachor, and they served other Gods, and I took your Father Abraham from the
other side of the flood, and led him throughout all the Land of Canaan, and
multiplied his seed, and I gave him Isaac, and I gave Isaac Jacob and Esau; and
I gave unto Esau mount S^ir to possess it, but Jacob and his Children went down
into Egypt: and I sent Moses also and Aaron, and I plagued Egypt, according to
that which I did amongst them, and afterward I brought you out, and I brought
your Fathers out of Egypt, and ye came unto the Sea, and the Egyptians pursued
after your Fathers with Chariots and Horsemen unto the Red Sea, and when they
cried unto the Lord, he put darkness between you and the Egyptians, and brought
the Sea upon them and covered them, and your eyes have seen what I have done in
Egypt, and ye dwelt in the Wilderness a long Season. Then Balak the Son of
Zippor, King of Moab, arose and warred against Israel, and called Baalam the
Son of Peor to curse you, but I would not hearken unto Baalam, therefore he
blessed you still, so I delivered you out of his hand, Josh. 24. to the 10.
verse.

Thus Joshua goes on rehearsing the mercies of the Lord to them, and exhorting
them to serve the Lord God, and to fear the Lord in sincerity and in truth, and
not to serve other Gods, for the Lord God says, he is a jealous God, he will
not forgive your transgressions and sins; if you forsake the Lord, then will he
turn and do you hurt and consume you. And the People said unto Joshua, nay but
we will serve the Lord: and Joshua said unto the people ye are witnesses
against your selves, that ye have chosen the Lord to serve him; and they said
we are witnesses: And Joshua made a Covenant with the people that day, and set
them a Statute and an Ordinance, and thus Joshua bound them by Covenant to
serve the Lord, and set up a great stone under an Oak by the Sanctuary of the
Lord to be a witness unto them lest they should deny God, and so Joshua sent
the people away.

And it came to pass that Joshua the Son of Nun the servant of the Lord died,
being 110 years old, and they buried him in the borders of his inheritance, in
Mount Ephraim: And Israel served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the
days of the Elders that outlived Joshua, which had known the works of the Lord
that he had done for Israel.

Judges.
NOW after the death of Joshua, the Children of Israel asked the Lord, saying,
who shall go up for us against the Canaanites? and the Lord said Judah shall go
up, behold I have delivered the Land into his hands; and Judah said unto Simeon
his brother come up with me, that we may go fight against the Canaanites. So
Simeon went with him, and the Lord delivered the Canaanites and the Perizzites
into their hands, and they slew them ten thousand men, as you may read in the
first of Judges throughout, and likewise in the second Chapter you may see what
command the Lord laid on them.

But Joshua being dead, and all that Generation that knew the works and wonders
of the Lord being gathered to their Fathers, and there arose another Generation
after them, that knew not the Lord nor yet the works which the Lord had done
for Israel; then the Children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and
served Baalim, and they forsook the Lord God of their Fathers, and served Baal,
and provoked the Lord to anger, and it was hot against Israel, as you may read
the most part of Judges.

After this Deborah the Prophetess judged Israel, and they came up to her for
judgment; and Sisera came up against Israel, and Deborah said unto Barak, this
day he is delivered into thy hands, and so Barak pursued Sisera, and I^el slew
him, as you may read in the 4. and 5. Chapters of Judges.

After this Gideon was called to Rule over Israel, and the Spirit of the Lord
came upon him, Chap. 6. And the Lord made him victorious over his Enemies,
Chap. 7.8.

And it came to pass as soon as Gideon was dead, that the Children of Israel
turned again and went a whoring after Baalim, and made Baal-Peor their God,
while Abimelech the Son of Gideon ruled over them, Chap. 9.

And after Abimelech there arose a man of the Tribe of Issachar, and he judged
Israel 23 years, and he died, and Jephtah judged Israel, Chap. 11. and 12.

And there was a man of Zorah, of the Family of the Danites, whose name was
Manoah, and his Wife was barren, and bare not, and the Angel of the Lord
appeared unto her, and said unto her, behold thou shall conceive and bear a
Son, and this Son was Sampson, and he was amongst them for several years, and
judged Israel twenty years, Chap. 14, 15, 16, etc.

Then there was no King in Israel, and the Danites sought for an inheritance,
and they came to Zorah, and said to their Brethren, arise, we have seen the
Land that it is good; and they gathered six hundred men together appointed with
Weapons of War: And they took a City named Laish, and called it Dan. Chap. 18.

And thus the Children of Israel fell away from the Lord, and the Lord was
grieved and provoked with them, as you may read throughout the Book of Judges,
insomuch that the Tribe of Benjamin had like to have been cut off from the rest
of the Tribes, because of a wicked action that they wrought, as you may read
from Chap. 18. to the end of the Book of Judges.

Ruth.
AND it came to pass in the days when the Judges ruled Israel, that there was a
Famine in the Land, and a certain man of Bethlehem-Iudah went to sojourn in the
Country of M^ab, as you may read in the Book of Ruth; and the name of the man
was Elimelech, and the name of his Wife was Naomi, and the names of his two
Sons was Mahlon and Chilion, Ephrathites of Bethleh^m-Iudah, and they stayed in
Moab, and they took them Wives of the Moabites, till Elimelech was dead; and
his two Sons and his Wife Naomi returned back to her own Country, and her
Daughter-in-Law Ruth would not leave her until they came to Bethlehem-Iudah, as
you may read in the first Chapter.

And Naomi had a Kinsman of her Husbands, a mighty man of wealth, of the Family
of Elimelech, whose name was Beaz, and it came to pass that this Boaz took to
Wife Ruth, as you may read in the 2.3. and 4. Chapters of Ruth: so Boaz took
Ruth, and she was his Wife, and he went in unto her, and the Lord gave her
conception, and she called his name Obed, he is the Fathen of Iesse, the Father
of David, of whom Christ sprang.

I Samuel.
THere was a certain man of Ramathaim-Zophim of mount Ephraim, and his name was
Elkanah, the Son of Ieroham, the Son of Elihu, the Son of Tohu, the Son of Zuph
an Ephrathite, and he had two Wives, the name of the one was Hannah, and the
name of the other Peninnab, and Peninnah had children, but Hannah had no
children, and this man went up out of his City yearly to worship and to
sacrifice unto the Lord of Hosts in Shiloh; and the two Sons of Eli, Hophni and
Phinehas the Priests of the Lord were there, and Hannah was in much bitterness,
and prayed unto the Lord in her heart, but her voice was not heard, and Eli
reproved her, but the Lord heard her and granted her petition; wherefore when
the time was come, after Hannah had conceived, that she bare a Son, for the
Lord remembered her, and she called his name Samuel, saying, because I asked him
of the Lord, as you may read 1 Samuel 1. And she exalted and praised the Lord for
his mercy, as you may read Chapter 2. and Samuel ministered before the Lord being a
Child, girded with a Linen Ephod, according to the Order of Aaron, and this
Child Samuel ministered unto the Lord before Eli the Priest.

And the word of the Lord was precious in those days, for there was no open
vision in those days, and when the Lord called unto Samuel, he answered and
went unto Eli, and Eli sent him back again, and the Lord called again, and
Samuel went to Eli again, and said here am I, for thou did call, and Eli said
I called not, my Son lie down again. Now Samuel did not yet know the Lord,
neither was the word of the Lord yet revealed to him. And the Lord called
Samuel again, and he went to Eli the third time, and Eli perceived the Lord had
called the child; Eli said unto Samuel, go lie down, and if the Lord call thee,
thou shall say, speak Lord, for thy servant hears: so Samuel went and lay
down in his place, and the Lord came and stood, and called as at other times,
Samuel, Samuel! then Samuel answered, speak for thy servant hears; and the
Lord said to Samuel, behold I will do a thing in Israel, at which both the ears
of every one that hears shall tingle, and this word was against Eli and his
house, as you may read in the 3. Chapter. Eli called Samuel, and (...) what is
the thing that the Lord has said unto thee, I pray th^^ hide it not from me;
and Samuel told him every whit; and a^^ Israel even from Dan unto Beersheba
knew that Samuel was established to be a Prophet of the Lord.

And when Samuel grew old, he made his Sons Judges over Israel, and before that
he judged and ruled over Israel, for the Lord was with him, but the Elders of
Israel were not pleased with Samuels Sons to judge over them, and so they
desired a King, as you may read in the 8. Chapter, but the thing displeased
Samuel when they asked a King; and Samuel prayed unto the Lord, and the Lord
said unto Samuel, hearken unto the voice of the people in what they say, for
they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign
over them, and according as they have dealt with me, so shall they have a King:
and Samuel told the mind of the Lord unto the People, as you may read in Chap.
8. to ver. 18.

Nevertheless the people refused to hear the voice of Samuel, and they said
nay, but there shall be a King over us that we may be like all the Nations, and
that our King may judge us, and go before us and sight our battles; and Samuel
rehearsed the words of the people in the ears of the Lord, and the Lord said
unto Samuel hearken unto their voice, and make them a King.

Now there was a man of Benjamins Tribe whose name was Kish, and he had a Son
whose name was Saul, a choice young man and goodly, higher from the shoulders
upward than any of the People, as you may read in the 9. Chapter. Then Samuel
took a Vyal of Oil, and poured it upon his head, and kissed him, Chap. 10. and
Samuel said unto all the people, behold I have hearkened unto your voice, in
all that ye said unto me, and have made a King over you, and behold now the
King walks before you, and I am old and grey-headed, and my Sons are with
you, and I have walked before you from my childhood to this day.

Now therefore behold the King whom ye have chosen, and whom ye have desired,
whom the Lord has set over you; if ye will fear the Lord, and serve him, and
obey his voice, and not rebel against the Commandments of the Lord, then shall
both ye and your King all follow the Lord your God, but if ye will not obey the
voice of the Lord, but rebel against the Commandment of the Lord, then shall
the hand of the Lord be against you, as it was against your Fathers.

So this Saul ruled over Israel and judged Israel, from Chap. 12. to 15. in
which the Lord sent Samuel unto him, that he might hearken to the voice of the
words of the Lord, Chap. 15. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, I remember that
which Amaleck did to Israel, Exodus 17.8, 9, 10, 11. how he laid wait for him in
the way when he came up from Egypt: Now go and smite Amaleck, and utterly
destroy that they have, and spare them not, but slay both man and woman, infant
and suckling, Camel and Ass: but Saul and the people spared Agag, and the best
of the Sheep, and the Oxen, and the Fatlings of the Lambs, and all that was
good they spared.

Then came the word of the Lord to Samuel, saying, it repents me that I have
set up Saul to be King, for he is turned back from following me, and has not
performed my Commandments; and it grieved Samuel, and he cried to the Lord all
night, and Samuel rose early in the morning to meet Saul, and Saul said unto
him blessed be thou of the Lord, I have performed the Commandment of the Lord,
and Samuel said what means this bleating of the Sheep and lowing of the Oxen
in mine ears? and Saul said the people have saved the best of the Sheep, and of
the Oxen to sacrifice to the Lord thy God, and the rest we have utterly
destroyed. And Samuel said, has the Lord greater delight in burnt Offerings
and Sacrifices than in obeying the voice of the Lord? to obey is better than
Sacrifice, and to hacken than the fat of Rams, for Rebellion is as the sin of
witchcraft, and stubborness is as Iniquity and Idolatry; because thou have
rejected the word of the Lord, he has also rejected thee from being King, and
Saul said unto Samuel, I have sinned, 1 Samuel 15.23.24.

And the Lord said unto Samuel, how long will thou mourn for Saul, seeing I
have rejected him from reigning over Israel? fill thine Horn with Oil, and I
will send thee to Jesse the Bethlehemite, for I have provided me a King amongst
his Sons, and Samuel said how can I go? if Saul hear he will kill me: and the
Lord said take an heifer with thee, and say, I am come to Sacrifice to the
Lord, and call Jesse to the Sacrifice, and I will show thee what thou shall do,
and thou shall anoint him whom I name unto thee, etc.

And Samuel did that which the Lord spoke, and came unto Bethlehem, and the
Elders of the Town trembled at his coming, and said come thou peaceably? and
he said peaceably I am come to sacrifice unto the Lord, sanctify your selves
and come to the sacrifice with me, and he sanctified Jesse and his Sons, and
called them to the Sacrifice, and Samuel looked on Jesses Sons, and Jesse made
seven of his Sons to pass before Samuel: and Samuel said unto Jesse, the Lord
has not chosen these, and he said, are here all thy children? and he said
there remains yet the youngest, and behold he keeps the Sheep; and Samuel
said unto Jesse, send and fetch him, for we will not sit down till he come
hither; and he sent and brought him in David: Now he was ruddy and withal of a
beautiful countenance, and goodly to look to; and the Lord said arise, anoint
him, for this is he: then Samuel took the horn of Oil and anointed him in the
midst of his Brethren; and the Spirit of the Lord came upon David from that day
forward. Here the Lord anointed David to be King over Israel by his Prophet,
and by his eternal Spirit, but this was hid from Saul many years, as you may
read from Chap. 16, to 23.

And how the Lord was with David in all his undertakings, and how he was
preserved from the wrath and fury of Saul, and how David preserved Saul's life
when he came into the Cave; where he and his men were upon the Rocks, and he
would not hurt Saul as you may read in the 24. Chapter; but still Saul pursued
David's life, as you may read throughout the Book of Samuel.

And the Armies of the Amalekites gathered together against Israel, and David
enquired of the Lord, saying, shall I pursue after this Troop, shall I overtake
them? and he answered, pursue them, and without fail recover all: So David went
and six hundred men that were with him, four hundred pursued, and two hundred
stayed behind, and David recovered all that the Amalekites carried away, and
David recovered his two Wives, and there was nothing lacking, neither small nor
great, neither Sons nor Daughters, neither flocks nor herds, but David
recovered them all and came to the two hundred men that stayed behind, that
were so faint they could not follow him.

Now after this the Philistines fought against Israel that was under Saul, and
the men of Israel fled before the Philistines, and the Battle went sore against
Saul, and the Archers hit him and he was sore wounded; and Saul said unto his
Armor-bearer, draw thy Sword and thrust me through, but his Armor-bearer
would not, therefore Saul took a sword and fell upon it, and when his
Armor-bearer saw that Saul was dead, he fell likewise upon his sword and died
with him; so Saul died and his three Sons and his Armor-bearer and all his men
fell that day together, 1 Samuel 31.

II. Samuel.
AND when David had word that Saul and Jonathan were dead, then David took hold
on his Clothes and rent them, and all the men that were with him, and they
mourned and wept, and fasted until evening, for Saul and for Jonathan his Son,
for the People of the Lord, and for the House of Israel, because they were
fallen by the sword, and David lamented with this lamentation over Saul, and
over Jonathan his Son, which Lamentation you may read 2 Samuel 1.

And it came to pass after this that David enquired of the Lord saying, shall I
go up into the Cities of Judah? and the Lord said unto him go up; and David
said unto him whither shall I go? and he said unto Hebron; so David went up
thither, and his two Wives, and his men that were with him, every man with his
Household, and they dwelt in the Cities of Hebron, and the men of Judah came,
and there they anointed David King over the House of Judah, and they told
David that the men of Iabesh-Gilead were they that buried Saul; and David sent
Messengers unto the men of Gilead, and said unto them, Blessed be ye of the
Lord, that ye have showed this kindness unto the Lord, even unto Saul, and
buried him, and now the Lord show kindness and truth unto you, and I will
requite you this kindness for your Master; Saul is dead, and the House of Judah
has anointed me King over them. So now David reigned over the House of Judah,
but yet there continued long War between the House of Saul and the House of
David, but David waxed stronger and stronger, and the House of Saul waxed
weaker and weaker.

Then came all the Tribes of Israel to David unto Hebron, and spoke saying, we
are thy bones and thy flesh, and in time past when Saul was King over us, thou
leddest out and brought in Israel, and the Lord said unto thee, thou shall feed
my people Israel. So all the Elders of Israel came to the King to Hebron, and
King David made a league with them before the Lord, and they anointed David
King over Israel, Chap. 5.

David was thirty years old when he began to reign in Israel in Hebron, he
reigned over Judah seven years, and he reigned over Israel and Judah forty
years. So David governed Israel in the fear and wisdom of the Lord God; for
David gathered together all the chosen men of Israel thirty thousand, and David
arose and went with all them that were with him, from Baal of Judah, to bring
up from thence the Ark of God, whose name is called the Lord of Hosts, that
dwells between the Cherubims, the whole passage whereof you may read Chap. 6.

And when King David sat in his house, the King said unto Nathan the Prophet,
see I dwell in an house of Cedar, but the Ark of God dwells within Curtains;
and that night the word of the Lord came unto Nathan, saying, go tell my
servant David, thus says the Lord, shall thou build a house for me to dwell
in, whereas I have not dwelt in an house since the time that I brought up the
Children of Israel out of Egypt, even to this day, but have walked in a Tent,
and in a Tabernacle; but when thy days shall be fulfilled that thou sleeps with
thy Fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee which shall proceed out of thy
Bowels, and I will establish his Kingdom, he shall build an house for my name,
and I will establish the Throne of his Kingdom for ever, I will be his Father,
and he shall be my Son, if he commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod
of men, and with the stripes of the children of men, but my mercy shall not
depart away from him, as I took from Saul, Chap. 7.

Thus David governed the Kingdom of Israel nobly all his days, and the mighty
works that he did, and the great Victories that the Lord gave him, you may read
of to the end of this Book.

1 Kings, 2 Chronicles.
AND when the days of David grew nigh that he should die, he charged Solomon
his Son saying, I go the way of all the earth, be thou strong therefore and
show thy self a man, and keep the charge of the Lord thy God, to walk in his
ways and to keep his Statutes and his Commandments and his Judgments, and his
Testimonies, as it is written in the Law of Moses, that thou may prosper in
all that thou do, that the Lord may continue his word which he spoke
concerning me, saying, if thy Children take heed to their way to walk before me
in Truth, with all their heart and with all their Soul, there shall not fail
thee a man, said he, to sit on the Throne of Israel, 1 Kings, 2. And so David
slept with his Fathers, and was buried in the City of David.

Then sat Solomon upon the Throne of David his Father, and his Kingdom was
established greatly ver. 12. the Lord appeared unto Solomon in a Dream by
night, and God said ask what I shall give thee; Solomon said thou have showed
to David my Father great mercies, according as he walked before thee in truth
and in righteousness, and uprightness of heart with thee, and thou have kept
for him this great kindness, that thou have given him a Son to sit on his
Throne, as it is this day; and now O Lord my God, thou have made thy servant
King instead of David my Father, and I am but a little Child, I know not how to
go out and come in, thy servant is in the midst of thy people which thou have
chosen, a great people, it cannot be numbered nor counted for multitude; give
therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may
discern between good and bad, for who is able to judge this so great a people?
And the speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon asked this thing; and God said,
because thou have asked this thing, and have not asked long life, neither have
asked riches to thy self, nor have asked the life of thine Enemies, but have
asked for thy self understanding to discern Judgment, behold I have done
according to thy words, I have given thee a wise and understanding heart, so
that there was none like thee before thee, neither shall any arise after thee
like unto thee, Chap. 3.

So King Solomon reigned over all Israel; as you may read in the fourth and
fifth Chapters. And it came to pass in four hundred and fourscore years after
the Children of Israel were come out of the Land of Egypt, in the fourth year
of Solomon's reign over Israel, in the month Zif, which is the second month,
that he began to build the House of the Lord; of which building and the
magnificency of it you may read from the sixth Chapter to the ninth Chapter of
2 Chronicles. 5.2.

Then Solomon assembled the Elders of Israel and all the heads of the Tribes of
Israel unto Jerusalem, that they might bring up the Ark of the Covenant of God
out of the City of David, which is Sion, and the Priests brought in the Ark of
the Lord, into the Oracle of the House of the Lord, even to under the wings of
the Cherubims. He built also his own House, which he was 13 years in building,
Chap. 7.

And it came to pass when Solomon had furnished the building of the House of
the Lord and the Kings House, that the Lord appeared unto Solomon the second
time, and the Lord said unto him, I have heard thy prayer and thy supplication
that thou have made before me, I have hallowed this house which thou have
built, to put my name there for ever, and if thou walk before me as David thy
Father walked, in integrity of heart, and in uprightness, to do according to
all that I command thee, and keep my Statutes and Judgments, then will I
establish the Throne of thy Kingdom upon Israel.

So King Solomon excelled all the Kings of the earth for riches and for wisdom,
and the Queen of Sheba heard of the same of Solomon concerning the name of the
Lord, she came to prove him with hard questions, Chap. 10.

After this King Solomon loved many strange women, together with the Daughters
of Pharaoh, the Moabites, and Ammonites, and Edomites, and Zidonians, and
Hittites, all which the Lord had commanded the Children of Israel that they
should not go into them.

So Solomon was drawn away with his Wives, and worshipped their Gods, and made
Idols, and the Lord was angry with Solomon because his heart was turned from
the Lord God of Israel, which had appeared to him twice, wherefore the Lord
said unto Solomon, for as much as this is done of thee, and thou have not kept
my Covenant and my Statutes which I commanded thee, I will surely rent the
Kingdom from thee, and give it to thy servant, notwithstanding in thy days I
will not do it for David my servants sake, but I will rend it out of the hand
of thy Son, howbeit I will not rend away all the Kingdom, but will give one
Tribe to thy Son for David my servants sake, and for Ierusalems sake which I
have chosen.

And it came to pass when Jeroboam went out of Jerusalem, that Ahijah the
Shilonite found him in the way, and he clad himself with a new garment, and
Ahijah caught the new Garment and rent it in twelve pieces, and he said to
Ierobeam take thee ten, for thus says the Lord God of Israel, behold I will
rend the Kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and I will give ten Tribes to
thee, but he shall have one for my servant David's sake, and for Jerusalems
sake, the City which I have chosen out of all the Tribes of Israel.

Solomon sought therefore to kill Jeroboam, and Jeroboam arose and fled into
Egypt until the death of Solomon, and the rest of the Acts of Solomon and all
that he did are written in the Book of the Acts of Solomon, and the time that
Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel was 40 years, and Solomon slept
with his Fathers, and Rehoboam his Son reigned in his stead, Chap. 11.

And when Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem he gathered of the House of Judah and
Benjamin an hundred and fourscore thousand chosen men, which were Warriors, to
fight against Israel, that so he might bring the ten Tribes to him again, which
Jeroboam the Son of Nebat went about to take from him, for they were given to
him; but the word of the Lord came to Shemaiah the man of God, saying, speak
unto Rehoboam the Son of Solomon King of Judah, and to all Israel in Judah and
Benjamin, saying thus says the Lord, ye shall not go up to sight against your
Brethren, return every man to his house for this thing is done of me, and they
obeyed the word of the Lord and returned from going against Jeroboam.

And it came to pass in the fifth year of Rehoboam that Shishak the King of
Egypt came up against Jerusalem, and took the senced Cities thereabouts, and
the Lord sent his Prophet Shemaiah to Rehoboam and the Princes of Judah, and
they humbled themselves before the Lord, and the Lord was entreated of them,
and heard them, and said that he would not destroy them, 2 Chronicles. 12. 1 Kings
14.31. and Rehoboam slept with his Fathers, and Ahijah his Son reigned in his
stead.

In the 18 year of Jeroboams reign began Ahijah to reign over Judah, and there
was War between Ahijah and Jeroboam, and Abijah set the Battle in array with an
Army of valiant men of War, even four hundred thousand chosen men; and Jeroboam
set the Battle in array against them with eight hundred thousand chosen men,
being mighty men of valor; Abijah stood upon Mount Semaraim, which is in Mount
Ephraim, and said, hear thou me Jeroboam, and all Israel, ought ye not to know
the Lord God of Israel gave the Kingdom of Israel to David for ever, by a
Covenant of Salt, and yet Jeroboam is risen up and rebelled against his Lord?
and now do ye think to withstand the Kingdom of the Lord in the hands of the
Sons of David? and ye be a great multitude and there be with you golden Calves,
which Jeroboam has made for Gods, and behold God himself is with us for our
Captain, and his Priests with sounding Trumpets to cry aloud against you, O
Children of Israel sight not against the Lord God of your Fathers, ye shall not
prosper: but Jeroboam caused an ambushment to be set before the Children of
Judah and behind them, and they cried unto the Lord, and the Priests sounded
with Trumpets, then the men of Judah gave a shout, and as they shouted God
smote Jeroboam and all Israel, and the Children of Israel fled before Judah,
and God delivered them into their hands, 2 Chronicles. 13. 1 Kings 12.28.

After this Abijah waxed mighty, and married 14 Wives, and had twenty two Sons
and sixteen Daughters, and the rest of the acts that he did are written in the
Story of the Prophet Iddo; and the Prophets that prophesied in his days were
Shemaiah and Iddo; and Abijah slept with his Fathers, and Asa his Son reigned
in his stead.

So now you may read i^ the remaining Chapters of this Book how Israel was
divided and rent asunder, and how they served other Gods, and wrought
abomination before the Lord, and the Lord spoke unto them by his Prophets, but
they would not hear, but hardened their hearts and wrought wickedness, and
killed the Lords Prophets: but Baals Prophets were 450. and the Lord plagued
them, and sent them Famine and Drought, as you may read, Chap. 18.22.

And in the twentieth year of Jeroboam, Asa reigned over Judah, and Asa did
that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and he gathered all Judah and
Benjamin together, and they entered into a Covenant with the Lord God of their
Fathers, that they would seek him with all their hearts: he took away the
Altars of the strange Gods and the Images, and took away the Sodomites out of
the Land, and he removed away the Idols which his Father had made: and the Lord
cut off the Ethiopians before Asa, Judah, and Benjamin, and he removed his
Mother from being Queen, because she had made an Idol in a Grove, and he
destroyed her Idol and burnt it, 2 Chr. 15. 1 Kings 15.13.

In the 36 year of the reign of Asa, Baasha King of Israel came up against
Judah, and built Ramah, to the intent he might let none go out nor come in to
Asa King of Judah: then Asa brought out Silver and Gold out of the Treasury of
the House of the Lord, and sent it to Benhadad King of Syria that dwelt in
Damascus, that he might join with him against the King of Israel; and the King
of Syria harkened unto him, and they smote Jion, and Dan, and Abel-Beth-Ma^chab
and all the Cities of Naphtali.

And at that time Hanani came unto Asa King of Judah, and said, because thou
have relied on the King of Syria, and have not relied in the Lord thy God,
therefore is the Host of the King of Syria escaped out of thy hands, for the
eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole Earth to show himself
strong in the behalf of those whose heart is perfect toward him; herein thou
have done foolishly: and Asa was wroth with the Seer and put him in Prison.

And Asa in the thirty ninth year was diseased in his feet, and he sought not
unto the Lord, but unto Physicians, and he slept with his Fathers; and the
Prophets Hanani, and Azaziah the Son of Oded prophesied in his days, and his
Son Iehosaphat reigned in his stead; and he walked according to Asa his Father,
and turned not aside from doing that which was right in the eyes of the Lord;
nevertheless the high places were not taken away, for the people had not
prepared their hearts unto the God of their Fathers.

And the Lord was with Jehosaphat, because he walked in the ways of David his
Father, and sought the Lord, and his heart was lifted up in the ways of the
Lord, and called his Princes, and with them he sent Levites and Priests, and
they taught in Judah, and had the book of the Law of the Lord with them, and
went about through all the Cities of Judah, and taught the people, and the fear
of the Lord fell upon all the Kingdoms of the Land round about Judah, so that
they made no War with Jehosaphat.

And Jehosaphat joined affinity with Ahab, and went down to Samaria to Ahab
King of Israel, and they went down to Ramath-Gil^ad, as you may read the 2 Chronicles. 18.1. 1 Kings 22.2. and Jehosaphat caused Ahab to enquire of the
Prophets of Israel, and afterward they enquired of Michaiah the Prophet of the
Lord, which Ahab said he hated, for he never prophesied good of him, but evil.

2 Kings.
SO the King of Israel and Jehosaphat King of Judah went up against
Ramath-Gilead, and a certain man drew a bow at a venture and smote the King of
Israel between the joints of his Harness, so that he died, 2 Chronicles. 18.33. 1
Kings 22. Now Ioram the Son of Ahab reigned over Israel in Samaria in the 18.
year of I^hosaphat King of Judah, it came to pass when Ahab was dead, that the
King of Moab rebelled against the King of Israel, and Ioram King of Israel sent
to Iehosaphat King of Judah to join with him against Moab; and the King of
Israel and the King of Judah went, and the King of Edom went with them against
Moab: and the King of Israel said, alas! has the Lord gathered these three
Kings together to deliver them into the hand of Moab? and Ichosaphat said, is
there not here a Prophet of the Lord, that we may enquire of him? 2 Kings. and
one of the Kings servants said, here is Elisha that poured water on the hands
of Elijah; and the three Kings went to enquire of him and Elisha said unto the
King of Israel, what have I to do with thee? get thee to the Prophets of thy
Father, and the Prophets of thy Mother; and Elisha said, as the Lord of Hosts
lives before whom I stand, were it not that I regard the presence of
Iehesaphat King of Judah, I would not look toward thee nor see thee, but now
bring me here a Minstrel, etc. and they prevailed against the Moabites, as you
may read, 2 Kings 3.

And it came to pass after this, that the Children of Moab and the Children of
Ammon, and with them, from beyond the Sea from this side of Syria, went a great
multitude that came up against Iehosaphat King of Judah, as you may read 2 Chronicles. 20. and Iehosaphat feared before the Lord, and proclaimed a Fast, and
set himself and all his people to seek the Lord; and the Lord gave Iehosaphat
Victory over his Enemies; then returned Iehosaphat King of Judah with joy to
Jerusalem, for that the Lord had made them to rejoice over their Enemies.

But after this did Iehosaphat King of Judah join himself with Ahaziah King of
Israel, who did very wickedly, to make Ships to go to Tarshish; then Eliezer
prophesied against Iehosaphat, saying, because thou have joined with Ahaziah,
the Lord has broken thy Works, so the Ships were not able to go to Tarshish.

So Iehosaphat slept with his Fathers, and Iehoram reigned in his stead, and
Michaiah, and Elisha, and Eliezer were the Prophets that prophesied in his
days.

And Iehoram reigned eight years in Jerusalem, and did evil in the sight of the
Lord, and walked in the ways of the Kings of Israel, as did the House of Ahab,
for the Daughter of Ahab was his Wise, yet the Lord would not destroy Judah,
for David his servants sake, as he promised to give him always a light to his
Children; in his days Edom revolted, 2 Kings 8. 2 Chronicles. 21.

Moreover he made high places in the mountains of Judah, and caused the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit Fornication, and compelled them thereto: and
there came a Writing from Elisha the Prophet, saying, thus says the Lord God
of David thy Father, because thou have not walked in the ways of Iehosaphat,
but have walked in the ways of the Kings of Israel, and have made Judah and
Jerusalem go a whoring after Whoredoms, behold with a great Plague will the
Lord smite thee, and thy people, and thy Wives, and thy Children: and after the
Lord smote him in his bowels, that at the end of two years his bowels fell out,
so that he died of sore Diseases; and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ahaziah
his youngest Son King in his stead.

And the Lord sent his Prophet to anoint Iehu, the Son of Iehosaphat, the Son
of Nimshi to be King over Israel 2 Kings 9. and he arose and went into the
House, and poured Oil on his head, and said, thus says the Lord God of Israel,
I have anointed thee King over the people of the Lord, and thou shall smite
the House of Ahab thy Master, that I may avenge the blood of my Servants the
Prophets, and the blood of all the servants of the Lord, at the hands of
Jezebel, for the whole House of Ahab shall perish, and I will make the House of
Ahab like the House of Jeroboam, and the Dogs shall eat Jezebel in the portion
of Jezreel.

Twenty and two years old was Ahaziah when he began to reign, and he reigned
one year in Jerusalem, also he walked in the ways of Ahab, for his Mother was
his Counselor to do wickedly, wherefore he did evil in the sight of the Lord,
and the destruction of Ahaziah was of God, by coming to see Jehoram; for when
he was come, he went out with Jehoram against Jehu the Son of Nimshi, whom the
Lord had anointed to cut off the house of Ahab, as you may read in 2 Chr. 22.
and they caught Ahaziah where he was hid in Samaria, and when they had slain
him they buried him, because they said, he is the Son of Jehoshaphat who sought
the Lord.

But Jehosheba the Daughter of King Jehoram, took Joash the Son of Ahaziah, and
put him and his Nurse in a Bedchamber, for she was the Wife of Jehojada the
Priest, and he was with them hid in the House of God six years; then Athaliah
reigned six years, and in the seventh year Jehoiadah called all the Captains of
the hundreds together, and the Priests and the Levites, and all the
Congregation together with the King in the House of God, and he said unto them,
the Kings Son shall reign, as the Lord has said of the Sons of David, 2 Chr.
23.

And Joash began to reign in the seventh year of Jehu King of Israel, and he
was seven years old when he began to reign, and he reigned over Jerusalem forty
years, and he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, as Jehojada
the Priest instructed him.

But Jehojada waxed old, and was full of days, and when he died he was 130
years old, and after his death the Princes of Judah left the House of the Lord,
and served Idols in Groves, and wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem; and the
Spirit of the Lord came upon Zachariah, the Son of Jehojada the Priest, which
stood above the People, and said, thus says God, why trespass ye against the
Commandment of the Lord? and they conspired against him, and stoned him with
Stones at the Commandment of the King; thus Joash remembered not the kindness
that Jehojada had done unto him, but slew his Son.

The Army of the Syrians came against them, because they had forsaken the Lord
God of their Fathers, so they executed judgment against Joash, and his own
servants slew him in his bed, and Amaziah his Son reigned in his stead, 2 Chr.
22. 2 King. 9.27.

In the twenty third year of Joash, Jehoahaz Son of Iehu began to reign over
Israel, and he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, 2 King. 13.
and followed the sins of Jeroboam, and the anger of the Lord was kindled
against Israel, and he delivered them into the hand of the King of Syria, and
Jehoahaz besought the Lord, and the Lord harkened unto him, for he saw the
oppressions of Israel because the King of Syria oppressed them, and the Lord
gave Israel, a Savior, so they went out from under the hand of the Syrians,
and the Children of Israel dwelt in their Tents, nevertheless they departed not
from the sins of Iereboam, Chap. 13.6. and Iehoahaz slept with his Fathers, and
Jehoash his Son reigned in his stead.

In the thirty seventh year of the reign of Joash King of Judah, began Iehoash
Son of Iehoahaz to reign over Israel and reigned sixteen years, he did that
which was evil in the sight of the Lord, and departed not from the Sins of
Jeroboam, who made Israel to sin: and Iehoash slept with his Fathers, and
Jeroboam sat upon his Throne.

In the second year of Iehoash, Son of Iehoahaz King of Israel, reigned Amaziah
the Son of Ioash King of Judah, he was 25 years old when he began to reign, and
he reigned 29 years in Jerusalem, and he did that which was right in the sight
of the Lord, but not like unto David nor Joash his Father: When his Kingdom was
confirmed in his hands, he slew all his servants that had slain his Father; and
he sent messengers to the King of Israel, that they might come up to look one
another in the face: He slew also of the Children of Edom, in the Valley of
Salt, ten thousand; and the King of Israel sent unto him, and said, thou have
indeed smitten Edom, and thine heart is lifted up, tarry at home, but Amaziah
King of Judah would not, therefore Jehoash King of Israel went up and met
Amaziah King of Judah, and looked him in the face at Bethshemish which belongs
to Judah, and Judah was put to the worst, and fled every man before Israel; and
the King of Israel took all the Gold and Silver, and all the Vessels that were
found in the House of the Lord, and Jehoash King of Israel slept with his
Fathers, and Iereboam his Son reigned in his stead. And Amaziah King of Judah
lived after his death fifteen years, and they made a conspiration against him
in Jerusalem, and he fled to Lachish, but they sent after him and slew him
there; and all the people of Judah took Azaziah and made him King instead of
Amaziah his Father.

In the twenty seventh year of the reign of Jeroboam King of Israel, began
Azaziah, alias, Vzziah Son of Amaziah King of Judah to reign; sixteen years old
was he when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty and two years in Jerusalem,
and did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, Chap. 15. but the high
places were not removed, but the people sacrificed and burnt Incense still
thereon, and the Lord smote Amaziah King of Judah, that he was a Leper to the
day of his death.

In the thirty eighth year of Azaziah King of Judah, did Zachariah Son of
Jeroboam reign over Israel in Samaria six months, and he did that which was
evil in the sight of the Lord, he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, the
Son of Nebat, that made Israel to sin; and Shallum the Son of Jabesh conspired
against him, and smote him and slew him, and reigned in his stead. This was the
word of the Lord that he spoke unto Jehu, saying, thy Sons shall sit on the
Throne of Israel to the fourth Generation, and so it came to pass.

And Shallum the Son of Jabesh began to reign in the 39. year of Vzziah King of
Judah, and he reigned but one month in Samaria; and Menahem, the Son of Gadi,
went up to Samaria and slew him, and reigned in his stead, and he did that
which was evil in the sight of the Lord, 2 Kings 15.

And in the thirty ninth year of Azaziah King of Judah began Menahem the Son of
Gadi to reign, and he reigned ten years in Samaria, he did that which was evil
in the sight of the Lord, and slept with his Fathers; and Pekahiah his Son
reigned in his stead in Samaria two years, and he did evil in the sight of the
Lord like Jeroboam, the Son of Nebat, that made Israel to sin; but Pekah the
Son of Remaliah, a Captain of his, conspired against him, and killed him, and
reigned in his stead.

And in the fiftieth year of Azaziah King of Judah, Pekah the Son of Remaliah
began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned twenty years, he did that
which was evil in the sight of the Lord, and departed not from the sins of
Jeroboam. In his days came the King of Syria, and took Jion, and
Abel-beth-maachah, and Janoah, and Kedish, and Hazor, and Gilead, and Galilee,
and all the Land of Naphtali, and carried them captive to Syria; and Hoshea Son
of Elah made a Conspiracy against Pe^ah the Son of Remaliah, and smote him, and
slew him, and reigned in his stead: in the days of these Kings, the Prophet
Isaiah, and the Prophet Hosea prophesied, as you may read in Isa. 1.6.7. Chap.
and Hos. 1.

In the second year of Pekah the Son of Remaliah King of Israel, began Jotham
the Son of Vzziah King of Judah to reign, 2 Chronicles. 27.1. and he did that which
was right in the sight of the Lord, but the high places were not taken aways in
those days did the Lord begin to send against Judah, Rezin King of Assyria, 2
Kings 15.39. and Pekah the Son of Remaliah; and Iotham slept with his Fathers,
and Ahaz his Son reigned in his stead.

In the seventeenth year of Pekah, Son of Remaliah, Ahaz the Son of Iotham King
of Judah began to reign, twenty years old was he when he began to reign, and he
reigned sixteen years, and he did not that which was right in the sight of the
Lord: The Prophets that prophesied in these Kings days, were Isaiah, Hosea, and
Micah; and how they came to war against Ahaz, and Ahaz took the Silver and Gold
that was found in the House of the Lord, and sent it to the King of Asyria, and
the King of Assyria carried the people away Captive, and slew Resin, and King
Ahaz went to meet the King of Assyria at Damascus, and made Vrijah the Priest
make an Altar, and offer thereon after the manner of the Assyrians, as you may
read in 2 Kings 16. and he turned the Kings entry from the House of the Lord,
for the King of Assyria, 2 Chr. 28. he made his Sons pass through the fire,
according to the abominations of the Heathen: and Ahaz slept with his Fathers.

In the twelfth year of Ahaz King of Judah began Hoshea the Son of Elah to
reign in Samaria over Israel, and he reigned nine years, he did that which was
evil in the sight of the Lord; against him came Shalmaneser King of Assyria,
and Hoshea became his servant, and the King of Assyria found a Conspiracy
amongst them, as you may read 2 Kings 17. They walked in the Statutes of the
Heathen whom the Lord cast out, and they served their Idols, and they wrought
wicked things to provoke the Lord to anger; yet the Lord testified against
Israel and against Judah, by all the Prophets and by all the Seers, saying,
turn ye from your evil ways, and keep my Commandments and Statutes according to
all the Laws I commanded your Fathers, which I sent to you by my servants the
Prophets, notwithstanding they would not hear, but hardened their necks, ver.
13.14. and this did Moses prophecy of them, Deuteronomy. 30.17.

In the ninth year of Hoshea, the King of Assyria took Samaria, and carried
Israel away into Assyria, for so it was that Israel had sinned against the Lord
their God, which brought them up from under the hand of Pharaoh, and the
Children of Israel did secretly that which was not right against the Lord their
God, they build them high places, and set up Images, they burnt Incense, they
made two Calves, and made a Grove, and worshipped all the Host of Heaven, and
served Baal, and caused their Sons and their Daughters to pass through the
sire, and they used Divination and Enchantments, and sold themselves to do evil
in the sight of the Lord to provoke him to anger: Therefore the Lord was very
angry with Israel, and removed them out of his sight, and there was none lest
but the Tribe of Judah only, for the Children of Israel walked in all the sins
of Jeroboam, which he did until the Lord removed Israel out of his sight, as he
had said by his Prophets; 10 Tribes carried into Captivity.
so Israel was carried out of their own Land unto Assyria unto this day.

Now in the third year of Hoshea King of Israel, Hezekiah the Son of Ahaz King
of Judah began to reign, and he did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord, according to all that David his Father did, he removed the high places,
and broke the Images, and cut down the Groves, and brake in pieces the Brazen
Serpent, for the Children of Israel burnt incense to it. He trusted in the Lord
God of Israel, so that after him was none like him among all the Kings of
Judah, nor any that were before him, and the Lord was with him, and he
prospered whithersoever he went, as you may read in the 18.19. and 20 Chapters
of the second of the Kings; for when the Prophet Isaiah brought him tidings of
their carrying into Babylon all that was in his house, all that his Fathers had
laid up in store, and the carrying of his Sons and his Issue: That they should
be carried into Babylon, and that his Sons should be Eunuchs in the Palace of
the King of Babylon, Chapter twenty; Second of Chronicles 29.30.31.32.
Chapters; then said Hezekiah unto Isaiah, good is the word of the Lord which
thou have spoken, and he said, is it not good? if peace and mercy be in my
days, ver. 18, 19. And Hezekiah slept with his Fathers, and Manasseh his Son
reigned in his stead.

Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty
five years in Jerusalem, and he did that which was evil in the sight of the
Lord, after the abominations of the Heathens, 2 Chronicles. 33. for he built again
the high places that Hezekiah his Father had cast down, and reared Altars for
Baal, and worshipped the host of Heaven, as you may read in Chap. 21. After
this the Lord spoke to Manasseh, and to his people, but they would not regard,
wherefore the Lord brought upon him the host of the King of Assyria, which took
Manasseh and bound him with Fetters, and carried him to Babylon: and when he
was in tribulation he prayed unto the Lord, and the Lord was entreated of him
and brought him again to his Kingdom in Jerusalem, as you may read in the 2
Kings 21. and 2 Chronicles. 33. and Manasseh slept with his Fathers, and Amon his
Son reigned in his stead.

Amon was twenty and two years old when he began to reign, and reigned two
years in Jerusalem; and he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, as
did Manasseh his Father, he sacrificed to all the Images that Manasseh had
made, and he humbled not himself before the Lord as Manasseh his Father did;
and the servants of Hamon conspired against him and slew him in his own house,
2 Chronicles. 33. And the people of the Land made Josiah his Son King in his stead.

And Josiah was 8 years old when he began to reign, and he reigned thirty one
years in Jerusalem, and he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord,
like unto David his Father, as you may read in the 22 and 23. Chapters, 2 Chronicles. 34.35. Chapters, and like unto him there was no King before him, that
turned unto the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all
his might, according to all the Law of Moses; notwithstanding the Lord turned
not away from the fierceness of his wrath wherewith his anger was kindled
against Judah, because of all the provocations that Man^sseh had provoked him
withal: and the Lord said I will remove Judah our of my sight, as I have
removed Israel; for the Lord had given the ten Tribes of Israel into the hands
of the King of Assyria, for the Children of Israel walked in the sins of
Jereboam, which he did; they departed not from them until the Lord removed
Israel out of his sight, as he said by his servants the Prophets; so was Israel
carried away out of their own Land to Assyria; so the Lord rejected all the
seed of Israel, and afflicted them, and delivered them into the hands of
spoilers to cast them out of his sight, Chap. 18. So as the Lord out off
Israel, so also he cut off the City of Jerusalem which he had chosen, and the
House which he had said, my Name shall be there, Chap. 23.27.

And of all these things did the Prophet Isaiah prophecy of in the days of
Vzziah, Iotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah Kings of Judah; the Daughter of Sion is left
as a Cottage (says the Prophet) in a Vineyard, as a Lodge in a Garden of
Cucumbers, as a besieged City, (and in the 5. of Isaiah you may read at large,
what the Lord speaks there by his Prophet) except the Lord had lestus a very
small remnant, we had been as Sodom, and we had been like unto Gomorrah, as you
may read in the first Chapter, and so throughout the Book of Isaiah.

And Jeremiah the Prophet, the word of the Lord came to him in the days of
Josiah, Son of Amon, King of Judah; he prophesied of the carrying away of
Jerusalem Captive, as you may read, Ier. 1. I will utter my judgments against
them touching all their wickedness, who have forsaken me, and have burnt
incense unto other Gods, and worshipped the works of their own hands; therefore
gird up thy loins and arise against this whole Land, and against the Kings of
Judah, against the Princes thereof, against the Priests thereof, and against
the people thereof, for I have made thee as a defenced City, and as an Iron
Pillar they shall not prevail against thee, for I am with thee, says the Lord
to deliver thee.

The Lord said unto me, in the days of Josiah the King, have thou seen what
this rebellious Israel has done, for she has gone up upon every high
Mountain, and under every green Tree, and there played the harlot, and I said
when she had done all this, turn thou unto me, but she returned not, and her
rebellious Sister Judah saw it: and when I saw that by all occasions rebellious
Israel had played the harlot, I cast her away, and gave her a Bill of
divorcement, yet her rebellious Sister Judah was not afraid, but went also and
played the harlot, so that the lightness of her Whoredoms has defiled the
Land, as you may read at large in the third Chapter of the Prophecy of
Jeremiah, so on throughout the Book.

And this Josiah put down the idolatrous Priests that burnt incense unto Baal,
according as the man of God did foretell 1 King. 13. a Child shall be born unto
the house of David, Josiah by name, and upon thee shall he offer the Priests,
and men's bones shall be burnt upon thee, viz. the Altar: he put down also the
horses that the Kings of Judah had given to the Sun, at the entering of the
House of the Lord, and the Altars that were on the top of the Chamber of Ahaz,
which the Kings of Judah had made, and he broke the Images in pieces, and cut
down the Groves. Furthermore the Altar that was at Bethel, and the high places
made by Jeroboam the Son of Nebat; and as Josiah turned himself he spied the
Graves that were in the Mount, and sent and took the bones out of them, and
burnt them upon the Altar, according to the word of the Lord which the man of
God proclaimed, who cried the same words; then said he, what title is this that
I see? and the men of the City said, it is the Sepulcher of the man of God,
which came from Judah and told these things which thou have done to the Altar
of Bethel, 1 Kings 13.2. then said he let him alone, let none remove his bones,
2 Chronicles. 34.35. Chap.

And this King Josiah caused the Law of the Lord to be read, and when he heard
the words of it, he rent his Clothes, because that his Forefathers had
forsaken the Lord, and burnt incense unto Baal; and he sent to Huldah the
Prophetess, that dwelt in the College in Jerusalem, to enquire of the Lord
concerning the people of Judah; and she said unto them, thus says the Lord
God, tell the man that sent you, thus says the Lord, I will bring evil upon
this place, and upon the Inhabitants thereof, even the words of the Book which
the King of Judah has read, because they have forsaken me, and burnt incense
unto other Gods that they might provoke me to anger, therefore my wrath is
kindled against this place, and shall not be quenched, Chap. 22.

And the King sent and gathered unto him all the Elders of Judah and Jerusalem,
and read the Law before them in the house of the Lord, and the King stood by a
Pillar and made a Covenant before the Lord, and before all his people, to walk
after the Lord, and to keep his Commandments, as you may read, Chap. 23.

In his days Pharaoh Neehoh King of Egypt went up against the King of Assyria
to the River Euphrates, and King Josiah went up against him, whom when Pharaoh
saw he slew him at Megiddo, and the people of the Land took Jehoahaz Son of
Josiah, and anointed him King in his Fathers stead.

And Iehoahaz was thirty and three years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned three months in Jerusalem, and he did that which was evil in the sight
of the Lord, and the King of Egypt put him down at Jerusalem, and made Eliakim
his Brother King over Judah and Jerusalem, and turned his name to Iehojakim.

And Iehojakim was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned eleven years in Jerusalem, and he did that which was evil in the sight
of the Lord, and in his days the King of Babylon came up, and the Lord sent
against him the Bands of the Chaldees, and Bands of the Syrians, and Bands of
the Moabites, and Bands of the Children of Ammon, and sent them against Judah
to destroy it, according to the word of the Lord which he spoke by his Servants
the Prophets; surely at the Commandment of the Lord came this upon Judah to
remove them out of his sight, for the sins of Manasseh according to all that he
did, and also for the innocent blood that he shed, for he filled Jerusalem with
innocent blood, Chap. 24.

At that time Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon came up against the City of
Jerusalem, and he and his Servants besieged it, and Iehojachim King of Judah,
he and his Mother, and his Princes, and his Servants, and his Officers, went
out to meet him, and the King of Babylon took them, and he carried out thence
all the Treasures of the House of the Lord, and the Treasures of the Kings
House, and cut in pieces all the Vessels of Gold which Solomon the King of
Israel had made in the Temple of the Lord, and he carried away all Jerusalem,
and all the Princes, and the mighty men of valor, even ten thousand Captives,
and all the Crastsmen, and the Smiths, and there remained none save the poorest
sort of the people.

And he carried away Iehoiachim into Babylon, and the Kings Mother, Judah and
Jerusalem going into Babylon.
and the Kings Wives, and his Officers he carried away captive from Jerusalem,
the mighty men of the Land, even seven thousand, and Craftsmen and Smiths a
thousand, all that were strong and apt to War, them the King of Babylon brought
captive to Babylon; and he made his Fathers Brother King of Jerusalem, and he
reigned seven years, until he rebelled against the King of Babylon; and then
the King of Babylon came against him and took him: and then the havoc and the
spoil that was made at Jerusalem, you may read in the twenty firth Chapter, 2
Chr. 36.

And thus the sins and abominations that the Children of Israel wrought against
the Lord with their Kings that reigned over them, and how the Lord by his
Prophets would have turned them unto himself, and how he sent precept upon
precept, and line upon line, as you may read at large in the Prophecy of
Isaiah, and in the Prophecy of Jeremiah: and Hosea prophesied in that time, in
the days of Vzziah, Iotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, and in the days of Jeroboam the
Son of Ioash King of Israel: The beginning of the word of the Lord by Hosea,
the Lord said unto Hosea, go take thee a Wife of Whoredoms, and the Children of
Whoredoms, for the Land has committed great Whoredoms, departing from the
Lord. So he went and took Gomer, the Daughter of Diblaim, which conceived and
bare a Son, and the Lord said unto him, call his name Iezreel; for yet a little
while and I will avenge the blood of Iezreel upon the House of Iehu, and it
shall come to pass in that day, that I will break the bow of Israel in the
Valley of Iezreel, Hos. 1. to 5. my people ask Counsel at their stocks, and
their staff declares unto them, for the spirit of Whoredoms have caused them
to err, and they have gone a whoring from under their God, they have dealt
treacherously against the Lord; the Princes of Judah were like them that remove
the bound, therefore I will pour out my sury upon them like water, says the
Lord, Hos. Chap. 4.5. and so on throughout that Book, you may read how the Lord
by his Prophet complains of their Idolatry.

The words of Amos who was amongst the Herdsmen, which he saw concerning Israel
in the days of Vzziah King of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam King of
Israel, two years before the earthquake; and he said the Lord will roar from
Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem, and the inhabitants of the Shepherds
shall mourn, and the top of Carmel, Amos 1. Hear this word that the Lord has
spoken against you, O Children of Israel, against the whole Family which I
brought up from the Land of Egypt, saying, ye only have I known of all the
Families of the earth, therefore will I punish you for your iniquities, Amos
3.1, 2.

And the Prophet Ezekiel says, now it came to pass in the thirtieth year, in
the fourth month, on the first day of the month as I was among the Captives,
that I saw the Visions of God: here the Lord did not only prophecy before they
went into Captivity, but even when they were in the Captivity, the Lord sent
his Prophets unto them, as you may see hereafter.

The word of the Lord came expressly to Ezekiel the Priest the Son of Buzi, in
the Land of the Caldeans, by the River Chebar, and the hand of the Lord was
there upon him as he was amongst the Captives, Ezekiel. 1.3. and the Spirit entered
into me, and when he spoke unto me, and set me on my feet; he said unto me, Son
of man, I sent thee to the Children of Israel, a rebellious Nation, that have
rebelled against me, they and their Fathers have transgressed against me, even
to this very day, for they are impudent Children, and stiff necked; I do send
thee unto them, and thou shall say, thus says the Lord God, Chap. 2. and so
on, as you may read throughout the Prophecy of Ezekiel.

And Jeremiah in his Lamentations says, how does the City sit solitary, that
was full of people? how is she become as a Widow, Judah is gone into Captivity
because of affliction, and because of her great servitude, she dwells amongst
the Heathen, she finds no rest, all her Persecutors overtook her, as you may
read on through the Lamentation of Jeremiah.

Daniel the first Chap. in the third year of Jehojakim King of Judah, came
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon unto Jerusalem and besieged it, Judah and
Jerusalem in Captivity.
and the Lord gave Iehojakim King of Judah into his hands, with p^rt of the
Vessels of the House of God which he carried into the Land of Shinar, and he
brought the Vessels into the Treasury of the House of his God, ver. 1.2.

Now this King Nebuchadnezzar spoke to the Master of the Eunuchs, that he
should bring certain of the Children of Israel, and of the Kings seed, and of
the Princes: now amongst these were the Children of Judah, amongst which Daniel
was one, as you may read Dan. 1. and so on to Chap. 9.

In the first year of Darius, in the first year of his reign, I Daniel
understood by Books the number of years, whereof the word of the Lord came to
Jeremiah the Prophet, that he would accomplish seventy years in the Desolations
of Jerusalem, Dan. 9.1.2. And so Daniel set his heart unto the Lord and prayed,
and he was answered in the 24. ver. seventy weeks are determined upon thy
people, and upon thy holy City to finish the transgression and to make an end
of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting
Righteousness, and to seal up the Vision and the Prophecy, and to anoint the
most holy, as you may read to the end of the Chapter; and it shall come to
pass, when seventy years are accomplished, that I will punish the King of
Babylon, that Nation says the Lord for their iniquities.

And the Prophet Malachy, he says, that Judah has dealt treacherously, and an
abomination is committed in Israel and in Jerusalem, for Judah has profaned
the holiness of the Lord which he loved, and has married the Daughter of a
strange God; the Lord will cut off the man that does this, for the God of
Israel says, that he hates putting away, for one covers violence with his
Garment, therefore take heed that ye deal not treacherously, says the Lord,
Mal. 2.

And as these holy Prophets prophesied of their going into Captivity, so
likewise they prophesied of their returning back again, as you may read in
Isaiah 45. and Jeremiah 24. and 25. Chapters.

Thus says the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus whose right hand I have holden
to subdue Nations before him, Isa. 45.1. The word of the Lord came to Jeremiah
in the fourth year of Jghojakim, Son of Josiah King of Judah, that was the
first year of Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon; the which Jeremiah the Prophet
spoke unto all the People of Judah, and all the Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
saying, this whole Land shall be a desolation, and an astonishment, and these
Nations shall serve the King of Babylon seventy years; and it shall come to
pass when seventy years are accomplished, that I will punish the King of
Babylon, and that Nation, says the Lord, for their iniquity, and I will make
the Caldeans a perpetual desolation, Jer. 25.11, 12.

In the first year of Cyrus King of Persia, that the word of the Lord by the
mouth of Jeremiah and Isaiah might be fulfilled, the Lord stirred up the Spirit
of Cyrus King of Persia, that he made a Proclamation throughout the Kingdom,
and put it in writing, saying, thus says Cyrus King over Persia, the Lord God
of Heaven has given me all the Kingdoms of the Earth, and has charged me to
build him an House at Jerusalem which is in Judah, who is there amongst you of
all his people, his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem which is in
Judah, and build the House of the Lord God of Israel, for the House of God is
in Jerusalem.

Then rose up the chief of the Fathers of Judah and Benjamin, and the Priests
and the Levites, with all them whose spirit God had raised to go up to build
the House of the Lord which is in Jerusalem; also Cyrus the King brought forth
the Vessels of the House of the Lord which Nebuchadnezzar had brought forth out
of Jerusalem, and had put them in the House of his Gods; and this confirms
the Prophecy of Isaiah who prophesied long before they went into Captivity;
and said to Jerusalem thou shall be inhabited, and says to the Cities of Judah
ye shall be built, that says of Cyrus he is my Shepherd, and shall perform all
my pleasure, even saying to Jerusalem, thou shall be built, and to the Temple,
thy Foundations shall be laid, Isaiah 44.28.

And in Jeremiah, Chap. 29. thus says the Lord, that after seventy years are
accomplished in Babylon, I will visit you and perform my good word toward you,
in causing you to return to this place, for I know the thoughts that I think
toward you, says the Lord, are thoughts of peace and not of evil, ver. 11,
12. hear ye therefore the word of the Lord all ye of the Captivity whom I have
sent from Jerusalem to Babylon, turn ye again every one from his evil way, and
dwell in the Land that the Lord has given you, ver. 28. and Ier. Chap. 31.
Thus says the Lord, a voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation, and bitter
weeping, Rachel weeping for her Children, and refused to be comforted for her
Children, because they were not: Thus says the Lord, refrain thy voice from
weeping, and thine eyes from tears, for thy work shall be rewarded, says the
Lord, and they shall come again from the Land of the Enemy, and there is hope
in thine end says the Lord, that thy Children shall come again to their own
border, ver. 15, 16, 17.

And Amos the 4. I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah, and ye were as a Firebrand plucked out of the burning, yet have ye
not returned unto me says the Lord, therefore thus will I do unto thee O
Israel, and because I will do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O
Israel, ver. 11, 12.

And the Prophet Micah says, be in pain and labor to bring forth, O Daughter
of Sion, like a woman in travel, for now shall thou go forth out of the City,
and there shall thou dwell in the field, and thou shall go to Babylon, and
there shall thou be delivered, there shall the Lord redeem thee from the hand
of thine Enemies, many Nations are gathered together against thee, that say let
them be defiled; but they know not the thoughts of the Lord, neither understand
his Counsel, for he will gather them as the Sheaves into the floor, Mich. 4.
throughout the Chapter; and again Micah the 7. Rejoice not against me, O mine
Enemy, when I fall I shall arise, when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be my
light: I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against
him, until he plead my cause: in that day that the Walls are to be built, in
that day the Decree shall be far removed. Thus Micah prophesied in the days of
Jotham, and Hezekiah Kings of Judah concerning Israel, as you may read in
Micah. 1.

And the Prophet Joel says, blow a Trumpet in Sion, sanctify a Fast, call a
solemn Assembly, for the Lord will be jealous for the Land, and pity his
people, and say I will send you Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and I will no more
make you a reproach among the Heathen, and I will remove off far from you the
Northern Army, and I will drive him into a Land barren and desolate: Rejoice
and be glad ye Children of Sion, etc. Joel 2.3. Chapters, and I will bring
again the Captivity of Judah and Jerusalem.

And the word of the Lord came to Zephaniah, in the days of Josiah Son of Amon
King of Judah, I will also stretch out my hand upon Judah, and upon all the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and I will cut off the remnant of Baal from this
place, and them that worship the Host of Heaven upon the House tops, and them
that worship and swear falsely by the Lord, and that swear by Malcham, Zeph. 1.

Ezra.
THus you may read throughout the whole foregoing Prophesies, how the Lord
dealt with his people in loving kindness and tenderness, sending his Prophets
with line upon line, and Precept upon Precept, as you may read in all the
Prophesies through all the Bible, and until (according to the word of the Lord
by his Prophets) that they were carried away captive, and until the term of
years was expired, which the Lord by his Prophets Prophesied of: And when the
years were expired, he raised up Cyrus, according to his word by his Prophets,
to build his Temple, and to call them home to Jerusalem, as is before
mentioned, and as you may read in the 1. Chapter of Ezra, and so on; Even so
did Cyrus King of Pers^a, bring forth by the hand of Mithredath the Treasurer,
the Vessels of the House of the Lord, and numbered them unto Sheshbazzar the
Prince of Judah, ver. 8.

Now these are the Children of the Province that went up out of the Captivity,
70 years fulfilled, and Judah and Jerusalem coming out of captivity.
of those that had been carried away, whom Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon had
carried unto Babylon, and came again unto Jerusalem and Judah, every one unto
his City: you may read their names in the 2. Chapter of Ezra.

And when the seventh month was come, and the Children of Israel were in the
Cities, the people gathered themselves together as one man to Jerusalem, and
they set up the Altar upon his basis, and they offered burnt Offerings thereon
unto the Lord, even burnt Offerings morning and evening, according to
Deuteronomy 12.56.

They kept also the Feast of Tabernacles, as it is written in Exodus 23.16.
Numb. 29.12. and so on; they set up the Worship of God, as you may read in Ezra
Chapter 3.

Now in the second year of their coming unto the House of God at Jerusalem, in
the second month began Zerubbabel, and those that were with him, the Brethren,
the Priests, and the Levites, they that were come out of the captivity unto
Jerusalem, they began to build the House of God, and to set forward the
Workmen, Nehem. 4. And when the Builders had laid the foundation of the Temple
of the Lord, they set their Priests in their apparel, as you may read to the
end of the Chapter.

Now when the Adversaries of Judah and Benjamin, The Temple in building.
heard that the Children of the Captivity builded the Temple unto the Lord God
of Israel, then they came to Zerubbabel and to the chief of the Fathers, and
said unto them, let us build with you, for we seek your God as ye do, and we do
sacrifice unto him; but Zerubbabel, and Joshua, and the rest of the chief of
the Fathers of Israel, said unto them, you have nothing to do with us, to build
a House unto our God, we our selves together will build unto the Lord God of
Israel, as Cyrus the King of Persia has commanded us; and the people of the
Land weakened the hands of the people of Judah, and troubled them in building,
and hired Counselors against them to frustrate their purpose all the days of
Cyrus King of Persia; and in the reign of Ahasuerus, in the beginning of his
reign, wrote they unto him an accusation against the inhabitants of Judah and
Jerusalem, and in the days of Artaxerxes; Rehum the Chancellor, and Shimshai
the Scribe, The building of the Temple stopped
wrote a Letter against Jerusalem to Artaxerxes the King in this sort, which
Letter hindered the building, until the reign of Darius, as you may read in Ezra
4.

Then the Prophets Haggai, and Zachariah prophesied unto the Jews which were in
Judah and in Jerusalem, in the Name of the Lord God of Israel: in the second
year of Darius the King, in the sixth month, came the word of the Lord by
Haggai the Prophet unto Zerubbabel the Son of Shealtiel Governor of Judah, and
to Ieshua the Son of Iozadak the High Priest, saying, thus says the Lord of
Hosts, the people say the time is not come, the time that the Lords House is to
be built; then came the word of the Lord to Haggai the Prophet saying, is it
time for you to dwell in your cieled Houses, and this House lie waste? Hag. 1.

Then Zerubbabel the Son of Shealtiel, and Ieshua the Son of Lozad^k the High
Priest, with all the remnant of the people, obeyed the voice of the Lord their
God, and the words of Haggai the Prophet, as the Lord their God had sent him;
and the people did fear before the Lord: then spoke Haggai the Lords Messenger
in the Lords message unto the people, saying, I am with you says the Lord, and
the Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel, and the spirit of Ieshua, and the
spirit of the remnant of the people, and they came and did work in the House of
the Lord of Hosts their God: in the seventh month, and the twenty first day of
the month, came the word of the Lord by the Prophet Haggai, saying, speak unto
Zerubbabel the Governor of Judah, and to Ieshua the High Priest, and to the
residue of the people, saying, who is left among you that saw the House in her
first glory, and how do ye see it now? is it not in your eyes in comparison as
nothing? yet be strong, O Zerubbabel, says the Lord, and be strong O Ieshua
the High Priest, and be strong all ye people of the Land, says the Lord, and
work, for I am with you says the Lord of Hosts, according to the word that I
covenanted with you when ye came out of Egypt, so my spirit remained among you,
fear ye not: as you may read throughout the Prophecy of Haggai.

In the eighth month, in the second year of Darius, came the word of the Lord
unto Zachariah, unto the Jews that were to build the Temple in Jerusalem,
saying, the Lord has been sore displeased with your Fathers, thus says the
Lord of Hosts, turn unto me, and I will turn unto you says the Lord of Hosts;
be not as your Fathers unto whom the former Prophets cried, saying, turn ye
from your evil ways, and from your evil doings; but they did not hear, nor
harken unto me faith the Lord, but your Fathers, where are they now? do they
live for ever? but my words and my Commandments which I commanded my Prophets,
took hold on them, as you may read from the first Chapter of Zashariah to the
4. Chapter

So after that these Prophets had prophesied unto them, The building of the
Temple goes on again.
in the second year of Darius, as you may read in Ezra 5. Then rose up
Zerubbabel and Ieshua, and began to build the House of God which is at
Jerusalem, and with them were these Prophets of God helping them; and then came
to them Tatn^s Governor on this side the River, and Shethar-boznai, and their
Companions, and said unto them, who has commanded you to build this House, and
make up this Wall? but the eye of their God was upon the Elders of the Jews,
that they could not cause them to cease, till the matter was come to Darius,
and then they returned an answer by Letter concerning the matter; the Copy of
which Letter you may read to the end of the 5. Chapter.

Then Darius the King made a Decree, according to the Contents of the Letter,
and search was made in the House of the Rolls, where the Treasuries were laid
up in Babylon, as you may read throughout the 6. Chapter. And the King made
Decrees that none should hinder them, but the House should be built with speed:
and the Elders of the Jews builded, and they prospereed through the prophefying
of Haggai and Zachariah: and Zachariah prophesied to them again in the fourth
year of Cyrus, as you may read Zach. 7.

And they builded and finished it, according to the command of the God of
Israel, and according to the Commandment of Cyrus, and Darius, and Artaxerxes,
Nehem. 5.6. and 7. Chapters; and this House was finished on the third day of
the month Adar, The Temple finished.
which was in the sixth year of the reign of Darius the King.

So you may read their course of life, and their worship that they performed
unto the Lord, and how they sought the Lord, you may read through the Book of
Ezra and Nehemiah, and how Ne^emiah prayed unto the Lord, and humbled himself
before the Lord, and how he went in the night to view the Wall that was broken
down, and laid ruinous, and how he joined himself with the Builders, and
opposed the Adversaries, and looked up, and encouraged the Nobles, and the
Rulers, and the rest of the people, and said, be not afraid of them, as you may
read in this Book of Nehemiah.

In the ninth Chapter of Nehemiah you may read how the Children of Israel
assembled themselves together with fasting, and with Sackcloth, and earth upon
them; and the Seed of Israel separated themselves from all Strangers, and stood
and confessed their sins; and worshipped God after they were returned back from
their captivity, and were come to Jerusalem, and had built the Temple, as you
may read at large in this Chapter, and so on throughout the Book of Nehemiah.

Esther.
AND so likewise in the Book of Esther, you may see how the Lord in his mercy
was pleased to promote the Jews interest under Ahasuerus, by means of Mordecai
and Queen Esther, as you may read throughout the History of this Book of
Esther; therefore the Jews of the Villages, that dwolt in the unwalled Towns,
made the 14. day of the month Adar, a day of gladness and feasting, and a good
day of sending portions one to another, and Mordecai wrote these things, and
sent Letters unto all the Jews that were in all the Provinces of King Ahasuerus
both far and near, even to one hundred and thirty seven Provinces, to establish
this amongst them, that they should keep the fourteenth day of the month Adar,
and the seventeenth day of the same month; and this was established among the
Jews to be kept yearly, as you may read to the end of the 9. Chapter of Esther:
and the King Ahasuerus did so promote Mordecai the Jew, that he was next unto
King Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews, and accepted of the multitude of his
Br^thren, seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking peace to all his seed;
and this is writ in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Medea and
Persia, Est. 10.

And thus far you may see how the Lord has dealt with his people Israel, and
how faithful he has been in his promises to their forefathers, and the tender
eye and care he had over them all along, and how gladly he would have had them
to have obeyed his Commandments and his Statutes, that they might have lived to
him, you may read through these before mentioned Prophesies; and notwithstanding
that they did rebel against him, and did grievously provoke him through their
manifold abominations, yet you see how careful he was of them, and faithful to
them, and according to the Prophesies of the Prophets brought them back again
to their own City.

But this was not all, there is much behind yet, for the Decree and
Determination of the Lord was a further thing, and these peculiar people which
the Lord did choose above all the Families of the earth, they were a figure of
the right, and ture, and precious seed of God; and though they were a people as
you see that had often rebelled against the Lord, and fallen away from him, and
murmured against him, as you may see they did often in the Wilderness, when the
Lord had set Moses and Aaron over them, as you may see, Numb. 13. and all the
Congregation lift up their voices and cried, and the people wept; and the
Children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron, and the whole
Congregation said, would God we had died in the Land of Egypt, would God that
we had died in the Wilderness, and wherefore has the Lord brought us up to
this Land? our Wives and our Children to be a Prey? were it not better for us
to return into Egypt? let us make us a Captain, and let us return into Egypt.

Here you may see how they requited the Lord, and how evilly they dealt with
him for all his mercies, and his wonders which he wrought for them, and many a
time did they murmur and rebel against the Lord, while Moses led them through
the Wilderness; even forty years long was the Lord grieved with them, and
tempted with them, till he even swore in his wrath that they should not enter
into his rest; and all along ever since you may see how ill they dealt with the
Lord, and continually provoked him to anger by their abominations and
worshipping of other Gods, insomuch that he complains by his Prophet Isaiah:
hear O Heavens, and give ear O earth, for the Lord has spoken, I have
nourished and brought up Children, and they have rebelled against me, the Ox
knows his owner, etc. as you may read through the first Chapter of Isaiah.

And again in Jer. 2. Be astonished O ye Heavens at this, and be horribly
afraid, be ye very desolate says the Lord, for they have forgotten me the
Fountain of living (...), and hewed (...)

And again the Apostle when he was speaking of his Kinsmen the Jews according
to the flesh, says, I could wish that myself were accursed from Christ for my
Brethren, my Kins^en according to the flesh, who are Israelites, to whom
pertains the adoption and the glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the
Law, and the service of God, and the promises, whose are the Fathers, and of
whom concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever,
Romans 9.3, 4, 5.

And in the first of John, when the Disciples were seeking for Christ, Jesus
turned and says unto them what seek ye? they said unto him Rabbi, which being
interpreted, Master, and one of them finds his Brother, and says unto him,
we have found the Messiah, which being interpreted, is the Christ; Jesus saw
Nathaniel, and says of him, behold an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no
guile, ver. 47.

And Jesus himself says to the woman of Samaria, we know what we worship, for
salvation is of the Jews; the woman says, I know that when the Mess^^h comes,
which is called Christ, he will tell us all things; Jesus says unto her, I am
he, Joh. 4.22. to the 26. ver.

Thus the Lord performed his faithful Covenant and promise unto Abraham, and to
his seed, of whom according to the flesh, Christ came. So that you see he is a
God that keeps Covenant with his people; though they broke his Commandments
and his Laws, and his Ordinances, and his Statutes, yet he fulfilled his
Promises and Covenant to them concerning Christ coming in the flesh; So now as
the Law was given forth by Moses, grace and truth comes by Jesus Christ: And
so as the Children of Israel and all their Laws, and the Ark of the Covenant,
and their Priests, and their Offerings, and their Sacrifices, and their
Sabbaths, and their Temple, the Apostle says, was but a Figure for the time
then present, in which were offered both Gifts, and Sacrifices, that could not
make him that did the service perfect; as pertaining to the conscience, they
could not make the Priests perfect, as you may read at large in the 9. and 10.
Chapters of the Hebrews.

Therefore the Lord had a further thing in his determination and Decree, in the
manifesting his Son Christ Jesus in the flesh, of which we shall speak more
hereafter.

And the Apostle says, Col. 2. let no man therefore judge you in meat or in
drink, or in respect of an holy day, or a new Moon, or of the Sabbath days,
which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is Christ. And this is that
seed which the Apostle says the promise was made unto; Now to Abraham and his
seed were the promises made, he says not to seeds, as of many, but as of one,
and to thy seed, which seed is Christ, Gal. 3.16.

And so, notwithstanding that they broke their Covenant with the Lord, which
stood in outward performances, yet the Lord performed his promise and Covenant
unto Abraham, which is the seed Christ, which the Lord calls a new and
everlasting Covenant, Heb. 8.10. Jer. 31.33. For says the Apostle, it is
written that Abraham had two Sons, the one by a bond-maid, the other by a
freewoman: he who was of the bondwoman, was born after the flesh, and he of
the freewoman was by promise; which things are an Allegory: for these are the
two Covenants, the one from Mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage, which is
Hagar, for this Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia, and answers unto Jerusalem
which now is, and is in ^ondage with her Children, Gal. 4.22, 23, 24, 25.

These are they we have treated on all along, Jerusalem according to the flesh,
which were the visible people that the Lord owned in their day upon the Earth,
which had their Laws outward written in Tables of stone, their Covenant
outward, which was an Ark, their Priests whose lips were to preserve their
knowledge, were outward Priests, which was the Tribe of Levi, their Offerings
and their Sacrifices outward, their Sabbath every seventh day, their Temple an
outward Temple bu^lded at Jerusalem, which they were all to go to worship at
once a year, as you may read in the Law of Moses; and all these they did not
perform according to the command of the Lord, but broke Covenant on their parts
with him.

So now this other seed which the Lord promised unto Abraham, which all the
Prophets bare witness of, he changes this first Covenant and this first
Priesthood, and the Law also, as you may read Heb. 7. Now we (says the
Apostle) as Isaac was) are the children of the promise, for Jerusalem which now
is free, which is the mother of us all. So then, brethren, we are not Children
of the Bondwoman, but of the free, Gal. 4. So this seed Christ has put an end
to all that went before him, he is the fulfilling and the substance of those
that went before, that were figures and types: for he has obtained a more
excellent Ministry, by how much also he is the Mediator of a better Covenant,
which is established upon better promises. For if the first Covenant had been
fruitless, then should no place have been sought for the second, but finding
fault with the first, he promised the second, Heb. 8.6, 7. as you may read in
the most of the Prophesies of the Prophets, who have not only relation to the
first Covenant, which we have treated on before; but also to this second and
New Covenant that the Lord made with the house of Israel and with the house of
Judah, as you may read in Isa. 42. I the Lord have called thee in
Righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and will give thee
for a Covenant of the people; for a light to the Gentiles, ver. 6. And in Isa.
49. he said it is a light thing that thou should be my servant to raise up
the Tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel, I will also give
thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation to the end of
the earth, ver. 6.

And in Jer. 31. Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will make a New
Covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah, not according
to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers, in the day that I took them by
the hand to bring them out of the Land of Egypt; which my Covenant they broke,
although I was an Husband unto them, says the Lord: but this shall be the
Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, After those days, says the
Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts,
and will be their God, and they shall be my people; and also Chap. 24. And
Ezckiel 36. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean
from all your silthiness, and from all your Ido^^ I will cleanse you, a new
heart will I give you; and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh,
and will give you a heart of flesh, ver. 25, 26. also Chap. 11. and 19.

This is the Covenant which God is establishing, and Christ Jesus is the seed
which was promised unto Abrsham; Christ Jesus is the Elected seed which God
has chosen, which he prophesied of by his Prophet Esaiah, Behold my Servant
whom I uphold, mine Elect in whom my soul delights, I will put my Spirit upon
him, and he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles; this is he that is the
true and right seed, and with this agrees the Apostle, when he was speaking of
Jacob and Esau, for the children being yet unhorn, neither having done good nor
evil, but that the purpose of God, according to Election, might stand; and
again the Apostle says, Israel has not obtained that which he secketh for,
but the Election has obtained it, and the rest are blinded, Romans 11. Neither
because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all Children, but in Is^^c shall
thy seed be called, that is, they which are the children of the flesh, are not
the children of God, but the children of the promise are counted for the seed;
and therefore the Apostle told them, that blindness in part has happened unto
Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles come in, and so all Israel shall be
saved, both of the Jews and also of the Gentiles; but the Apostle tells you in
another place, that all are not Israel that are of Israel, but there shall come
out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ^ugodliness from Jacob, this is
my Covenant with them when I take away their sins, Romans 11.26, 27.

And the Redeemer shall come to Sion, (...) unto them that turn from
transgression in Jacob, says the (...), as for me this is my Covenant with
them, says the Lord, My Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have
put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the (...) of
thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from hence^
forth and for ever, Isa. 59.20, 21.

This is the seed which the Lord is gathering in this day, both in Jews and
Gentiles, even to the ends of the Earth, even such as turn away from iniquity
and sin: for Christ Jesus is manifest to take away sin, and in him is no sin,
and the gathering is unto him, for he is the head of his body, which is his
Church, and the Apostle says, that the body is Christ, and the seed is Christ;
so the head and the body is united together, and of this body and Church all
the holy Prophets of the Lord have prophesied of all along, as you may read in
the Scriptures.

David of whom the Lord said, I have found David my Servant, with my holy Oil
have I anointed him, with whom my hand shall be established for ever, he
prophesied of the Mystery of Christ and his Church, as you may read in Psalm.
45. and Solomon in his Song, you read how largely he treated there of the
Mystery of Christ and his Church; and the Prophet Isaiah in the 54. Chap.
says, Sing, O barren, thou that did not bear, break forth into singing, etc.
for thy Maker is thy Husband, the Lord of Hosts is his Name, and the Redeemer,
the holy One of Israel, the God of the whole Earth shall he be called, as you
may read in the 54. of Isaiah, and Chap. 62.11. at large, with many more places
of Scripture.

Also Zachariah, he prophesies of Christ's coming to his Church, Zach. 9.9.
Rejoice greatly, O Daughter of Zion, shout, O Daughter of Jerusalem, behold thy
King comes unto thee, he is just, having Salvation, lowly, riding upon an Ass,
and upon a Colt the Foal of an Ass; and this was fulfilled, Math. 21. as you
may read there, when Jesus came nigh unto Jerusalem, for there was the place,
that this might be fulfilled in, he sent his Disciples to a Village, and told
them they should find an Ass tied, and a Colt with her, and he bad them loose
them, and bring them unto him; and the Disciples went and did as Jesus
commanded them, as you may read in that Chapter. Mark says that he was tied at
the door without, where two ways met, Mark 11. And they brought the Colt to
Jesus, and cast their garments upon him, and set Jesus upon him. Luke says,
that they were to find a Colt tied, that yet never man sat thereon, and they
brought him to Jesus, and cast their garments upon him, and set Jesus thereon,
Luke 19.36. And John says, and Jesus when he found a young Ass, sat thereon,
as it is written, Fear not, Daughter of Sion, behold thy King comes sitting on
an Asses Colt, John 12.14, 15.

And this perfectly fulfills old Iacoby Prophecy of his Son Judah, where he
says, Indah is a Lions Whelp, from the prey ^oy Son thou art gone up Judah was
the Whelp of this ^ion, which was before Abraham, Ioh. 8.^8. and this is h^
which John saw in the Rev. 6. open the Bock that was sealed, this ^^on stooped
down, and crouched down as an old Dion; when he stooped to Judah, who shall
rouse him up, says old Iacob^ the Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor the
L^^^ giver from between his feet until S^ilch come, and unto him (...) the
gethering of the people be, b^inding his Foall unto the Vine, and his Astes
Colt un^o the choice Vined.

Herd Iudahs wild, untained, unac^nitoined, unsubjected and unchaste nature,
which is as the Golt, or (...) of a wild Ass, is bound to the choice Vine, as
you may (...) Iu^^^ life and conversation; for (...) Judah saw (...) Daughter
of a certain Canaanite whose na^^e was Shuah, he (...) Sons unto her, as you
may read in Genesis 38. She ^are several Sons unto him, which was contrary to the
command of the Lord (...) for they were not to meddle with the Canaa^^^ (...)
after this he defiled himself with Lamar his Daughter in (...), as you (...)
read in that Chapter ^he being fair, (...) he thinking her to be un Harlot.

And all these Children of Iudahs off spring, of which we have treated all
along, which the Lord has led on all along, you may see by the So^lp^ures,
(...) herein written, how unrevesenitly, and how unkindly, and (...)
^^de^^lliously they have dealt with the Lords all (...) of the wild Ass, Christ
might rith^ ou this Eval, which has been bound unto the choice Vine, and their
garments (...) washed in the blood of the fruit of this Vine, according to this
(...) of Jacob, and also the Prophecy of Is^^ah, Chap (...) and of old
Zachariah, who pr^hesi^^ that Sions King should (...) on this wild Asse^ Colt;
Behold thy King comes to thee, meek, and sitting upon an Ass, and the Golt,
the Foal of an Ass, Math. 21.9.

Now when Jesus came riding on this Colt toward Jerusalem, Christ come.
the multitude were so glad and rejoiced (for they had great reason) that they
spread their garments in the way, others cut down branches from the trees, and
strawed them in the way, and the multitude that went before, and that followed,
cried, saying, Hosannah to the Son of David, blessed is he that comes in the
Name of the Lord, Hasannah in the highest; and when he was come into Jerusalem,
all the City was moved, saying, who is this? and the multitude said, this is
Jesus the Prophet of Nazareth of Galiles: and Jesus went into the Temple of
God; and cast out all them that sold and bought in the Temple, and overthrew
the Tables of the Moneychangers, and the seats of them that sold Doves; here
Jesus began to c^eanse out the wild, unseasoned and unsanctified nature of
Judah and Jerusalem: and he said unto them, it is written, my House shall be
called the House of Prayer, the Prophet Isaiah prophesied so, Chaps 56.7. Ier.
7.11. but says Christ, ye have made it a Den of Theever.

Now Mark says, that the people cried Hosanna, blessed be the Kingdom of our
Father David, that comes in the Name of the Lord, Hisanna to the highest.

And Luke says, that some of the Pharisees would have had Jesus to have
rebuked his Disciples, but he answered and sald unto them, I tell you, if these
should hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry out, and when he came
near to Jerusalem, he beheld the City, and wept over it, saying, if thou had
known, even thou at least, in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy
peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes: for the days shall come upon thee,
that thine Enemies shall cast a Trenn^^ about thee and compass thee about, and
keep thee on every side, and shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy
children within thee, and they shall not leave thee one stone upon mother, he
eduse thou knew not the time of thy visitation, and he vien^ into the
Temple, and cast out, etc. And he taught daily in the Temple, but the Chief
Priests and Selil^^^ sought to destroy him, Luke 19.47.

Here Jesus prophesied of the destruction of Jerusalem and of the Temple, which
truly came to pass, after it was built again, according as he had said unto his
Disciples in Math. 24. where he said that one stone should not be left upon
another, but all should be thrown down; but this was that which they made the
cause and foundation for the taking away his life: when the Chief Priests and
Elders and all the Counsel, sought false witness against Jesus to put him to
death, at last they sound two false Witnesses, which said this fellow said, I
am able to destroy the Temple of God, and to build it in three days; and the
High^ Priest arose and said unto him, answerest thou nothing? What is it that
these witness against thee? But Jesus held his peace: But the High Priest
answered and said unto him, I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us
whether thou be the Christ the Son of God, Jesus said unto him, thou sayall it,
and liercafter you shall see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of the
Power, coming in the clouds of Heaven; then the High Priest rent his cleaths,
saying, he speaks Blasphemy, what further need have we of Witnesses? Math.
26.62, 63, 64. but that which Jesus spoke (which these Witnesses spoke fally)
was, when he went up to Jerusalem to keep the Passcover, and he sound in the
Temple those that sold Oxen and Doves, and the Changers of money sitting, and
when he had made a Storage of small cords, he drove them all out, and said,
take these things hence, make not my Fathers House a House of Merchandice, and
his Disciples remembered it was written, the zeal of thine house has eateir me
up, Psalm. 69.9. And the Jews asked him a sign, because he whip^ out of the
Temple, and did reprove, seeing thou do these things (say they) Jesus
answered and said unto them, destroy this Temple, and in three days I will
raise it up; then said the Jews, sorty six years was this Temple building, and
will thou rear it up in three days? but he spoke of the ^^mple of his Body.
When he therefore was risen from the dead, the Disciples remembered what he had
said unto them, Joh. 2.20, 21, 22.

So this Temple of his Boily was the Temple be knew was to be raised, therefore
he cleansed the outward Temple at Jerusalem as a figure of the Temple of his
Body, which Temple at Jerusalem was abused by Judahs wild Coltish nature, viz.
all the people of the Jews: and so he bore his testimony against them, because,
they had abused that house that was his Fathers house, for that time then
present; and by this he also showed them that the Temple of his Body was that
which would put an end to their house, and cause their daily Sacrifices and
their Offerings to cease, according to Daniels Prophecy; so that the spiritual
Temple of his Body, which is his Church, is that which he came to raise up and
to redeem.

And the Apostle says, wherefore when he comes into the world, he says,
Sacrifices and Offerings thou would not, but a body have thou prepared me: So
this is the body the Elected Seed of God, which he has chosen, in whom his
Soul delights: this is that body that does his will; in burnt Offerings and
Sacrifices for sin, thou have no pleasure; then sald I, Lo I come, in the
Volumn of thy Book it is written of me, to do thy will, O God: he takes away
the first (says the Apostle) that he might establish the second; he took away
the first Offerings and the first Sacrisices which he delights not in,
neither had he pleasure therein, and he established the second and everlasting
Offering, Christ Jesus, who has a body prepared to do thy will, O God, by the
which will (says the Apostle) we are sanctified, through offering up the body
of Jesus Christ once for all, Heb. 10. to the 10. ver. And this is the Offering
and Sacrifice in which God is well pleased, this is my beloved Son in whom I am
well pleased, says the Lord, hear ye him; for he has given himself for his
Church, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the
Word, that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without bl^mish,
Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. And so this pure Church and Body of Christ, is he coming now
to redeem and to bring out of Captivity, as he brought his former Israel out of
Captivity, of which you have heard, which was but a Figure of this true and
pure and holy Church, which has been a long time in the Wildernes^, as you may
read in Revel. 12.

And for this end is Christ Jesus come a light into the world, not only to the
Jews, but to the whole world, for he came unto his own, even unto his Tribe of
Judah which was at Jerusalem, but his own received him not; but as many of them
as received him, to them he gave power to become the Sons of God, not only of
them but the whole world, for to that end is he come, that whosoever believes
on him, they should not perish but have everlasting, life.

For he is come a light, and has enlightened the whole world, and every man
that comes into the world, Joh. 1. So every one that comes into the world, that
turns his mind unto the light of our Lord Jesus Christ, turns his mind to the
elected seed which the Lord has chosen, which he has laid in Sion for a
foundation: And therefore thus says the Lord, behold I lay in Sion for a
foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious cornerstone, a sure foundation,
that lays judgment to the Line, and righteousness to the Plummet, Isaiah 28.16.
And the Apostle Peter says, wherefore it is contained in the Scripture, behold
I lay in Sion a chief corner stone, elect and precious, he that believes on
him shall not be confounded; unto you therefore who believe he is precious, but
unto them who are disobedient he is a stone of stumbling, and a rock of C^fence
to them that stumble at the word, 1 Pet. 2.6, 7, 8.

So this is the foundation that the Lord has laid in Sion, Christ Jesus the
light he has sown in every man's heart, and this new Covenant, of which we have
mentioned, which cannot he broken, he has written in every man's heart; and who
keeps in this Covenant, and obeys this light, and the Spirit of the Lord that
is in his heart, which shows him his thoughts, and reproves him for his sin,
who believes in this light of the Lord Jesus, believes in the Elect of God,
chosen of God and precious; to all that believes he is precious but to the
disobedient a stone of stumbling.

So here is the difference and distinction between the holy Nation, the royal
Priesthood, the peculiar people, and the whole world; those that believe, and
obey, and follow him that is precious, they become precious, they that obey
Christ Jesus and follow him, in whom there is no sin, but takes away the sins
of the whole world, of those that obey him, all that continue and abide in him,
are cleansed and purged from sin, and washed and made nigh by his blood: but to
the disobedient that hates the light, to them he is a stone of stumbling, to
them he is a rock of Offense; whereunto, the Apostle says, they were
appointed: So this is the main substance of all that can be said, Christ Jesus
that is Gods everlasting Covenant, not only to the Jews but also Gentiles, and
all people even to the ends of the earth; his light has reached and shined
into every man and every woman's heart and conscience that is come into the
whole world; so that every one that will turn to that measure of the light of
our Lord Jesus Christ which they have received, they turn to the Elect of God,
they turn to that which God has chosen, in which his Soul delights, whether
they are Barbarian or Scythian, whether they are Jew or Gentile, whether they
are bond or free, whether they are male or female, if they come to the light of
Christ in their heart, they are all one in Christ Jesus, and so by this pure
and glorious shining light, which shines in the hearts and cons^^ences of
people, does the Lord redeem his Church, and purge it, and purify it, and
gives liberty to that precious seed that has long laid in Captivity.

The Lamb has been slain from the foundation of the world, which world entered
into man's heart at the fall of Adam, and into man's heart is Christ Jesus come a
light, the new Covenant and everlasting Covenant of God, which he has written
in every man's heart, and his spirit he has put in the inward parts, by which
the Prince of the power of the air comes to be removed, by the spirit of his
mouth, and the brightness of his coming will he slay that wicked one, that man
of sin and Son of perdition that has sitten in the Temple of God, exalted
above all that is called God: Now is the Judgment of this world, how shall the
Prince, of this world be cast out, and if I be lifted up from the Earth I will
draw all men unto me, says Christ, John 12.31, 32. chap. 8.28.35.

So Jesus having tasted death for every man, Heb. 2. the virtue of his death
has reached unto every man, so that every man has partaken of that infinite
mercy and bounty; for it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness
dwell, whose fullness of grace and mercy has reached unto all men and women;
for says the Apostle, he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours
only, but for the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2.2. Jesus cried and said, he
that believes on me, believes not on me only, but on him that sent me, and he
that sees me, sees him that sent me. I am come a light into the world, that
whosoever believes on me should not abide in darkness; and if any hear my word
and believe not, I judge him not, for I am come not to judge the world, but to
save the world, Joh. 12. this was the end for which the Father sent his Son
into the world; God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Sor into
the world, that whosoever believes on him should not perish but have
everlasting life, for God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world
(...) that was not his end in sending of him, but that the world through him
might be saved: God is in Christ reconciling the world to himself, Jeh. 3.16,
17. 2 Cor. 5.19.

So that here is free love, and f^^e geace, and free mercy, that every one that
thirsts may come freely and buy Wine and milk without money and without
price, without any respect of persons; all may come, every one that thirste^^
may come: he said unto the Jews, ye sold your selves for ^ought, but ye shall
be redeemed without money: tu^^ again turn again thou back^^iding Israel; but
here is the sum of all, he that believes on hun is not condemned whoshaver he
be; but he that believes not is condemned already, because he has not
believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God; and this also is without
respect of any person, and oh in thing Chapter of John; and with the light of
Christ Jesus in thee thou may search thy heart, and see how thou stands unto
the Lord God.

And so this is the main and only truth that we have to hold forth to the whole
world, as also all the Scriptures bear witness to the same; wherefore as by one
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and death has passed over all
men, for all have sinned, for until the Law sin was in the world, but sin is
not imputed where there is no Law; while there was no Law to transgress
against, sin could not be so easily known among them, before Moses had the Law
given unto him, who had directions from the Lord in Mount Sinai, what they
should do, and how they should walk before the Lord: Nevertheless death reigned
over them from Adam until Moses, and over them that had not sinned according to
Adams transgression, that is to say, had not broken any express command of the
Lord, but was the right seed in the Figure of him that was to come, Romans 5.

Wherefore the Apostle says, the Law is our Schoolmaster to bring us unto
Christ, for there is neither Jew nor Greek, neither bond nor free, there is
neither male nor female; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus, and if ye be
Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise: now the
heir so long as he is a child is under Tutors and Governors, and differs
nothing from a servant though he be Lord of all; so even we who are of the
precious seed, while we are Children, are in bondage under the Elements of the
world; but when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a
woman, made under the Law, to redeem the seed that was under the Law, that we
might receive the adoption of Sons; and because ye are Sons, God has sent
forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying Abba Father: wherefore
thou art no more a servant but a Son, then an heir of God through Christ.

So by this Spirit of his Son which he has sent into the Hearts of his people,
by this does he gather, this is the ensign that is set up for the gathering of
all Nations; this is the Shiloh that is come, and the gathering is unto him,
Isa. 11. to the and of the Chapter; and by this does he gather his elect from
the ^our^ winds of the Heavens, and from the four corners of the earth, and by
this does he redeem Sion through Judgment, our of every Kindred, Nation, Tongue
and People, and by this will the Lord sift the Nations as with a sive, and
purge the chaff from the wheat, and gather the wheat into his Garner.

And all they that do not obey the light and spirit which he has sent into
their hearts, by this will he judge the whole world in righteousness, because
the whole world had received a measure of this light and spirit; for as the
Apostle says, What shall we say? is God unrighteous who takes vengeance? I
speak as a man; (God forbid) for then how should he judge the world in
righteousness? but that his truth has abounded so far, and his mercy and his
love has reached to the whole world, for at the times of Ignorance God winked,
but now he commands all men every where to repent^ for this is the day
wherein he judges the secrets of all men by Jesus Christ, by the light of his
glorious Gospel, and this is the day which he has appointed, in which he will
judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained, whereof he
has given assurance unto all men, that he has raised him from the dead, Acts
17.31.

For the love of Christ, says the Apostle, constrains us, because we thus
judge, that if one dyed for all, then were all dead, and that he dyed for all,
that they which live should not henceforth live to themselves, but unto him
that dyed for them and rose again: So by his Resurrection he judges all those
that live to themselves and not unto him that dyed for them and rose again.

So also by his Resurrection he judges all those that live unto themselves:
This is the condemnation that light is come into the world, and men love
darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil: If I had not come and
spoken unto them, they had not had sin; but now they have no cloak for their
sin; he that hates me, hates my Father also, Joh. 5.21. for as the Father
raises up the dead, even so the Son quickens whomsoever he will; for the
Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son, that all men
should honor the Son even as they honor the Father; he that honors not the
Son, honors not the Father that sent him: Verily I say unto you, he that
hears my word and believes in him that sent me, has everlasting life, and
shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death unto life. Verily I
say unto you, that the hour is coming and now is, that the dead shall hear the
voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live; for as the Father has
life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have life in himself, and has
given him Authority to execute Judgment also, because he is the Son of Man,
John 15. from the 15. to the 28. Here Christ Jesus has spoken himself the very
sum and substance of truth, and there is not another: Now this is the same
Christ as was promised of the Father to Abraham, and this is the same Christ
whereof all the Prophets bore witness, and he is the same way, the truth, and
the life, and there is none comes to the Father but by him, as he himself
says, Joh. 14. And there is no other way nor name under Heaven by which any
man can be saved (the Apostle says) but by Jesus Christ, and he is the
foundation of all the Prophets and all the Apostles, The Church of Christ upon
the earth in the Apostles days, when he spoke by them by his Spirit, and poured
it upon them in the power of his Resurrection.
and the cornerstone that upholds all the building of his Church, he is the
Lion of Judah's Tribe, and David's Root, Rev. 5. and he only was found worthy to
open that Book which John saw, written within, and on the backside sealed with
seven seals; and his Spirit and Power is the same as all the Apostles were
redeemed by; and this same Spirit was poured upon the Apostles, and they were
endowed and enriched with it, and lived in it, and obeyed it, according to its
motion, and working and operation, and said another foundation could no man
lay, than that which is already laid: but let every one take heed how he builds
thereupon.

So this is the main care that every one is to take, to take heed how they
build upon this true foundation; for every ones work must be tried by the fire,
and he whose work is burned suffers loss; for there will nothing abide but that
which will dwell in the fire; for God is a consuming fire, and his Spirit burns
up the chaff, but gathers up the wheat: So who abides in the fellowship and in
the unity of this eternal Spirit, they abide in Gods Elect which he has
chosen, and they abide in that which joins to the Lord, where the blood of
Jesus Christ his Son cleanses from all sin; and here is the Mystery of the
fellowship, and here is the unity of the precious faith which is held in a pure
Conscience; and who abides here will grow up to a perfect man, and these will
sight the good sight of faith, and contend for it, and for them there will be
laid up a Crown of righteousness; for they that abide and continue to the end
in the faith of Gods Elect, they will obtain the price of the mark of the high
calling; but contrariwise they that fall away and shrink back, and set up a
feigned and a false deceitful Spirit, and in that professes the truth, and
appears outwardly like other Saints, but when the time of trial comes then they
fall flat, and draws back from the good word of God, from the light and spirit
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is the Elect of God, where all the Saints in
light meet together, and join and unite and knit together in the unity of the
Spirit of life, and is baptized by one Spirit into one body, and all drinks
into one Spirit. Let all such as draw from this and deserts from this, read
their portion in the 10. of the Hebrews, and they shall be sure of it; for the
Lord is not slack concerning his coming, neither will alter the word that is
gone out of his mouth. And all who are not of the right seed and spirit and
life which is in Christ Jesus, all such will be judged by him and condemned by
him; for if those that despised Moses Law dyed under the hand of two or three
witnesses, how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall they be thought worthy
of, who have trodden under foot, and counted the blood of the Covenant
wherewith he was sanctified an unholy thing, and has done despite to the
Spirit of Grace? but vengeance belongs unto me says the Lord, and I will
recompense.

But in the Apostles days there were many false Christ's and false spirits,
which he saw were entering into the Church, so that he feared that which came
to pass, for darkness and Apostasy came over all, and the Church of Christ that
was then amongst the Saints in the Apostles days, went into the Wilderness as
John saw in the Revelations, and of this the Apostles foretold before it came,
as it is Acts 20. where he says, Now behold I know that ye all, among whom I
have gone preaching the Kingdom of God, shall see my face no more; wherefore I
take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men, for I
have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God. Take heed
therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost has
made you overseers, to feed the Church of Christ, which he has purchased with
his own blood; The Apostle prophesies of the Church going into the Wilderness.
for I know this that after my departure, shall grievous Wolves enter in among
you not sparing the flock, also of your selves shall men arise, speaking
perverse things to draw away Disciples after them.

This is that Spirit which ever did betray and oppose the truth which was sound
among them that professed Christ, as Judas was found amongst the twelve, for
the Apostle says, such are false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming
themselves into the Apostles of Christ: and the Apostle complains of the perils
he went through among false Brethren, as you may read 2 Cor. 11.2 Pet. 2.1.
also Christ prophesied of false Christ's coming in his name, Mat. 24. and this
Spirit is contrary to the right and true seed of God, as the Apostle testifies,
1 John 3. whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, for his seed remains
in him, and he cannot sin because he is born of God; in this are the Children
of God manifest and the Children of the Devil: whosoever does not righteousness
is not of God, neither he that loves not his Brother, for this is the message
that ye heard from the beginning, that ye love one another, not as Cain who was
of that wicked one, and slow his Brother, and wherefore slew he him? because
his own works were evil and his brothers righteous, ver. 9.10, 11, 12.

But the Apostle says, Now the spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter
times some should depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and
Doctrines of Devils, and speaking lies in Hypocrisy, having their Consciences
seared with an hot Iron, 1 Timothy 4.1. and of these times did Christ himself
foretell in Mat. 24.25. chap. as you may read at large; when the Disciples were
showing him the goodly buildings of the Temple, and he told them that one stone
should not be left upon another, but all should be thrown down: and as he sat
upon the Mount of Oli^es, the Disciples came unto him privately, saying, tell
us when shall these things be, or what shall be the sign of thy coming, and the
end of the world; and Jesus answered and rehearsed unto them, as you may read
at large in those Chapters, which had relation to this night of Apostasy which
was coming on; and he told them that false Christ's and false Prophets should
arise, and he tells them that immediately after the tribulation of those days
shall the Sun be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light, and the Stars
shall fall from Heaven, and the powers of the Heavens shall be shaken, ver. 29.
Isa. 13.10. Ezekiel. 32.7. but Christ says farther, verily I say unto you, this
Generation shall not pass away till all these things be fulfilled, which were
fulfilled according to Christ's words; for before the Disciples were removed all
these things came to pass, and were fulfilled in that day; and the Apostles saw
and knew the sum and substance of all that was spoken fulfilled; but the next
words makes it clear, Heaven and Earth shall pass away (says Christ) but my
word shall not pass away; my word shall endure for ever, and is fullilling
through all Generations, yea beyond the Heaven and the Earth; one Generation
comes, and another Generation goes, and the word fulfills through them all: and
though that Generation did not pass till these words were fulfilled, yet they
continue in the substance the same, fulfilling for ever to the end of the
world, Christ says, I will be with you, who is the word: but of the day and
houe knows no man, no not the Angels, but my Father only, for the times and
seasons are in the Fathers hand.

And according to this, the Apostle says, 1 J^h. 2. the world passes away,
and the lusts thereof, but he that does the will of God abides for ever:
Little Children it is the last time, and ye have heard that Antichrist should
come, and I even now there are many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the
last time; they went out from us, etc. ver. 17.18. and Jude 17. Beloved
remember ye the words which were spoken before of the Apostles of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, how they told you there should be mockers in the last
time, who walk after their own hearts lusts: So these with several others that
might be mentioned, confirms the truth of the night of the Apostasy that was
coming on, and that the true Church of Christ that was among the Apostles
should go into the Wilderness after their decease and departure, which John saw
would come to pass, as you may read in Rev. 12.

There was War in Heaven, then the true Worship of God was lost, and that
eternal Spirit which was in the Apostles, where the wicked one had no part, but
they had overcome the wicked one, 1 John 2. I have written unto you young men,
because you are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have
overcome the wicked one, ver. 14.

That Spirit was lost which was among the Apostles, they sat together in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus, as you may read Ephesians. 1.3. and Chap. 2.6.

And Jesus exhorted his Disciples to lay up their treasure in Heaven, for he
said, where the treasure is there the heart will be also, Math. 6.20, 21.

But this worship of God and power was lost when the Woman sled into the
Wilderness, The Church of Christ gone into the Wilderness.
and then the Dragon got up and made War in Heaven; and to this agrees that
Prophecy of Christ, where he says, the powers of the Heavens shall be shaken,
Mat. 24.29. but Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon, and the
Dragon fought and his Angels, as you may read in the 10. of Daniel, after
Daniel had mourned three full weeks, and had eaten no pleasant bread, neither
came Wine in his mouth until three full weeks were fulfilled, after this Daniel
saw the Visions and heard the voice that said fear not Daniel, for from the
first day that thou set thine heart to understand, and to chasten thy self
before thy God, thy words were heard, and I am come for thy words, but the
Prince of the Kingdom of Persia withstood me many days, but lo Michael one of
the chief Princes came to help me; now I am come to make thee understand what
shall befall thy people in the last days, for yet the Vision is for many days,
and after this Daniel became dumb and fell upon the ground, and retained no
strength, neither was breath left in him; then the Angel came again and touched
him (as you may read) and said know thou wherefore I am come unto thee, and
now I will return and sight with the Prince of Persia, and when I am come
forth, lo the Prince of Grecia shall come, which is the third Monarchy, but I
will show thee that which is noted in the Scriptures of truth, and there is
none that holds with me in these things but Michael the Prince, ver. 21. So
Michael stood for the Angel there in the days of Daniel against the power of
the Dragon, this Michael the Apostle calls the Archangel, Jude 9.

And so here in the Apostasy Michael and his Angels have fought against the
Dragon and his Angels, for they prevailed not, while the woman has been in the
Wilderness, for it is a place prepared of God for her, that she should be fed
there a thousand two hundred and threescore days; but after this John saw the
Dragon cast out, that old Serpent called the Devil and Satan which had deceived
the whole world, there was no more place for him in Heaven, but he was cast out
into the earth, and his Angels were cast out with him, when the true and
precious seed of the body, which is Christ, which is his Church, appeared
again, in which the wicked one has no part, then there was no place sound in
Heaven for the Dragon, therefore, says John, Rejoice, ye Heavens, and ye that
dwell in them, woe unto the Inhabitants of the Earth and of the Sea, for the
Devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knows his time is
but short; this is very truly witnessed and fulfilled at this day: for where
the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ is witnessed, and where his seed is raised
up in any, where the Spirit of Satan has no place in their Worship, but they
worship in the Spirit of the Lord and in his Truth, then Satan rages in the
Inhabitants of the Earth and of the Sea, whither he is cast; for in their
Heaven and in their Worship he is there, making war: but where he is cast out
from Heaven, there he persecutes the Woman that brings forth the man-child, and
is wroth with her, and makes war with the remnant of her seed which keeps the
Commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ, Rev. 12.17.

And in the next Chapter, when John stood upon the sand of the Sea, which was
but a brittle foundation, for it was to be done away, there he saw the beast
arise out of the Sea with his seven heads and ten horns and his ten crowns, and
upon his heads the name of Blasphemy, as you may read throughout that 13.
Chapter to the end: but afterward John saw an Angel slying in the midst of
Heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the
Earth, and he cried with a loud voice unto every Nation and Tongue and People
and Kindred, saying, Fear God and give glory to him, and worship him that made
Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and the Fountains of waters.

The Book which John saw sealed with seven Seals, which he mentions in the 5.
Chap. he saw the Lamb open it in the 6. Chap. as you may read; and so here,
there follows another Angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great
City, because she has made all Nations drunk with the wine of her fornication,
as you may read Chap. 14.

And in the 15. Chapter John saw the seven Angels having the seven last
plagues, for in them is filled up the wrath of God; and one of the four beasts
gave unto the seven Angels seven golden Vials full of the wrath of God, who
lives for ever and ever: and in the 16. Chap. he saw the seven Angels go
forth, and they poured out their Vials, as you may read; and in the 17 Chap.
there came one of the seven Angels which had the seven Vials, and he said, come
up hither, and I will show thee the judgment of the great Whore. So he carried
me away (says John) in the Spirit into the wilderness, here was the place
where the true Church was persecuted, here was the place where the Dragon cast
out his flood after the true Church to destroy her.

And says John, I saw a Woman sitting upon a Scarlet-colored beast, full of
names of Blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns, and the Angel showed him
the Mystery of the Beast, and of his horns, as you may read throughout that 17.
Chap. and in the 18. Chap. he saw Babylon destroyed.

So here is comfort for all the true seed of Gods Elect: for John heard the
voices of much people in Heaven, saying, Halelujah, Salvation, Glory and
Honor; and a voice came out of the Throne, saying, praise our God, all ye that
fear him, small and great, let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him,
for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made her self ready,
and to her was granted, that she should be arrayed in fine linen, white and
clean: for the fine linen is the righteousness of the Saints; and he said unto
me, write, Blessed are they which are called to the Marriage-supper of the
Lamb, and he says unto me, these are the true sayings of God, ver. 9. as you
may read throughout Chap. 19.

And in the 20. Chap. John saw the Angel come down from Heaven, having the key
of the Bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand, and he laid hold on the
Dragon, and bound him a thousand years, as you may read.

And John saw the dead, small and great, stand before God, and the Books were
opened, and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in
these Books; and another Book was opened, which is the Book of life, and
whosoever was not found written in the Book of life, was cast into the Lake of
fire, ver. 15.

And in the 21. Chap. John saw a new Heaven and a new Earth, The Church coming
forth of the wilderness.
here was no Dragon in this Heaven; for the first Heaven and the first Earth
were passed away, and there was no more Sea, where the Dragon lodges and has
his way, Isa. 27.1.

And I John saw the holy City, new Jerusalem coming down from God out of
Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband: here the Holy Spirit of
the Lord God clothes her seed that has so long laid desolate, as a nourishing
mother which is free, and gives liberty, and sets at liberty all her freeborn
which are not Children of the Bondwoman but of the free: and of this glorious
City does the Prophet Isaiah prophecy, when he said, Rejoice, O Barren, that
did not bear; and this is the City which the Apostle says, Jerusalem which
is above, is free, which is the mother of us all, of all the freeborn seed of
the promise, they are the Heirs: but the Bondwoman and her Son are to be cast
out of this holy City, for he is not the Heir, Gal. 4.30.

And John heard a great voice out of Heaven, saying, Behold the Tabernacle of
God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and
God himself shall be with them, and be their God: and he that sat upon the
Throne, said, behold I make all things new, that is, according as the Apostle
says, if any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature, old things are past away,
behold I make all things new, 2 Cor. 5.17. and he said unto me, write, for
these words are true and faithful, and he said unto me, it is done, I am Alpha
and Omega, the beginning and the end, I will give unto him that is athirst of
the fountain of the water of life freely: Here is the rich bounty of God.

And there came one of the seven Angels unto John, which had the seven vials of
the seven last plagues, and he said come hither, and I will show thee the Bride
the Lambs wife, and he carried me away in the Spirit to a great and high
mountain, he showed me that great City, the holy Jerusalem descending out of
Heaven from God, having the Glory of God, and her light was like unto a stone
most precious, even like a Jasper stone clear as Crystal.

This is the Stone the Builders have disallowed, which now is become the Head
of the Corner of this precious and holy building, which is made up of living
stones, elect and precious, and of a Royal Priesthood, and of an holy Nation;
and the Walls of this City had twelve gates, and at the gates twelve Angels,
and names written thereon, which are the names of the twelve Tribes of Israel;
and the Walls of this City had twelve foundations, and in them the names of the
twelve Apostles of the Lamb, and the foundation of the City was garnished with
twelve precious stones, and the twelve gates were twelve Pearls, every gate was
of one Pearl; he that understands, reads and sees all these things.

And I John saw no Temple in this City; for the Lord God and the Lamb is the
Temple of it.

And this City has no need of the Sun or the Moon to shine in it; for the
Glory of the Lord does enlighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof, and the
Nations of all them that are saved, shall walk in the light of it, and the
Kings of the Earth that are saved, shall bring their glory and honor to it,
and the gates of it are not at all shut by day, yet there enters not any
thing that desileth, Chap. 21.27.

And in the 22. Chap. you may read how John saw the pure River of water of
life, proceeding out of the Throne of God and of the Lamb, and the tree of life
which bears twelve manner of fruits, and yields her fruits every month, and the
leaves of the tree are for the healing of the Nations: and he said, these
things are faithful and true, and the Lord God of the holy Prophets sent his
Angel to show unto his Servant the things which must shortly be done.

For the Lord God had prophesied of these things before by the Prophets, and by
Christ Jesus, and his Apostles; and says unto John, seal not the Prophecy of
the sayings of this Book, for the time is at hand, and behold I come quickly,
for my reward is with me, to give unto every one according to his works: And I
am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last, blessed
are they that do his Commandments, that they may have right to the tree of
life, and may enter in through the gates into the City; I Jesus have sent mine
Angel to testify unto you these things to the Churches; I am the Root and
Offspring of David, and the bright morning Star, and the Spirit and the Bride
says come, and let him that hears, say come, and let him that is athirst
come, and whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely.

He that testifies these things, says surely I come quickly, even Amen, come
Lord Jesus: the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen, ver.
20.21.

Thus you may see in part the constancy and faithfulness of the Lord God, how
unchangeable and how un^lterable he is, and what love and faithful care he has
had over his seed, ever since he made man, and gave him a being upon the Earth:
but indeed his love is everlasting, for he had elected, and decreed, and
determined Salvation and Redemption to his seed, before the foundation of the
world was; and because he could not alter nor change, therefore his seed was
preserved, as you may read in several places of the Scriptures, because I
change not, therefore ye Sons of Jacob are not consumed; and if the Lord had
not left us this seed, we had been as Sodom, and like unto Gomorah.

But by this little tract that we have gone through the Scriptures since the
Lord made man, you may read the long-suffering and the patience of the Lord
God, and his kind dealing, and his fatherly care over his seed, even when they
rebelled against him, and that because of his faithfulness in keeping of his
promises and Covenants, which he so often promised and covenanted (as has been
showed) not only unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, but also unto David,
as you may read at large in the Prophecy of Isaiah and in Jeremiah, and the
Book of Psalms, often has he redoubled his promises unto David and unto his
seed for ever, that as his Covenant was with the day and with the night, so is
his Covenant with David and his seed for ever; and as he had sworn that the
Waters should not go over the Earth, so he had sworn that his Blessing and
Covenant should be with David and his seed for ever, which he has faithfully
performed: of the seed of David he has sent his Son. And so the Lord has led
them along (as you may read through this Treatise) until Christ, and according
to his promise Christ came, and took not upon him (as Apostle says) the Nature
of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham: for he was made a little
lower then the Angels for the suffering of death, crowned with Glory and
Honor, that he by the Grace of God should taste of death for every man, as you
may read in Heb. 2.

And he that thought it no robbery to be equal with the great God, yet he took
upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of man, and being
found in the fashion of a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto the
death, even the death of the Cross; wherefore God has highly exalted him, and
given him a name better then every name, that at the Name of Jesus every knee
should bow, and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of
the Father, Phil. 2.

So he has gone through this great Work, and finished it (for as the Apostle
says) so it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things,
to make the Captain of our Salvation perfect through sufferings: for in the
days of his flesh he offered up prayers and supplications, Christ's Sufferings
with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from death,
and was heard; and though he was a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things
that he suffered, and being made perfect through sufferings, he became the
Author of Eternal Salvation unto all them that obey him, Heb. 5.

So the price he has paid, and man's Salvation and Redemption he has purchased
by his own blood (as John says) Jesus Christ who is the faithful and true
Witness, the first begotten of the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the
Earth, unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood,
Rev. 1.

And he according to his promise unto his Disciples, that he would pour down
his Spirit upon them, and send them another Comforter, and bad them stay at
Jerusalem till the Spirit was poured on them from on high, which was
plentifully and richly fulfilled, as the Scripture testifies; for they were
made partakers of it in a plentiful manner; and the Apostles were made able
Ministers of the Spirit, by which they begat multitudes unto God and to the
true Faith which is in Christ Jesus; so that the light of the glorious Gospel
shone gloriously among them, and Christ had a glorious Church at that day, as
those Epistles which the Apostles wrote to the Churches, being left upon
Record, bears a true testimony of the holy Spirit that was in them, and all
that live in the Spirit of the living God, and is endowed and enriched with it,
bears witness to the Scriptures, that they were given forth by the holy Spirit
of God, and by the inspiration of the Almighty.

But we may see that Christ and his holy Apostles had a foresight and a
knowledge of the beauty and glory of this Church, being veiled, and that the
night of Apostasy and darkness would come over, as has been already showed,
and as you may read in the Scriptures, which has been fulfilled, as experience
of many ages can testify: for by most of the Records that we can find, it is
above twelve hundred years since the glorious beauty of the Church of Christ
was stained; but all this has not come to pass without the foreknowledge of
the holy Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles.

And so now blessed and honored be the glorious God, our lot is fallen in a
good Land, and our time is a time of love; and as we are fallen into the last
age of the world, so also we are risen with Christ Jesus the Sun of
Righteousness, who arises with healing in his wings; and now the light of the
glorious Gospel has shined in our hearts, and has given us the knowledge of
the glory of the invisible God in the face of Jesus Christ; and this Gospel of
the Kingdom of God we are willing and ready to preach throughout the whole
world: for we wait, and expect, and groan within our selves for the redemption
of our body, the elected precious seed, which is the Church of Christ, which
the Lord of Heaven and Earth has had an eye unto continually; yet since the
foundation of the world, this seed has suffered, and been bruised, and slain;
but certainly we are assured that as the Lord has performed that part of his
Word, that it should suffer, he will also perform that part of his Word that
has said, the seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents head.

For according to this Word, in the fullness of time he sent his Son made of a
Woman, and as certainly as the Church and body of Christ has gone into the
wilderness, so certainly her Child that she brought forth, which has been
caught up to God and to his Throne, shall come down, and rule all Nations with
his rod of iron, and dash to pieces, as a Potters vessel, all his enemies: this
we wait for, and are assured shall come to pass, that the elected seed which is
chosen of God, and precious, which is the body that he has prepared to do his
will, Christ Jesus which is come, is the resurrection and life of all his seed,
and the hope of the resurrection (...) all the seed of Israel, which all the
twelve Tribes look for: the desire of all Nations is come, the light of the
Gentiles, and the glory of the people Israel.

And surely he will gather his Elect from the four winds, from one end of the
Heaven to the other; and it is for the Elects sake that these days are
shortened: for except these days had been shortened, no flesh could have been
saved, and Christ says, shall not God avenge his own Elect that has cried
unto him night and day, I tell you he will avenge them speedily, Luke 18.7.

And the Apostle Paul, when he exhorts his Son Timothy, consider what I say
(says he) and the Lord give thee understanding in all things; remember that
Jesus Christ, the seed of David, was raised from the dead, according to my
Gospel, wherein I suffer trouble as an evil doer, even unto bonds; but the Word
of God is not bound, therefore I endure all things for the Elects sake, that
they also may obtain the Salvation which is in Christ Jesus in eternal glory,
who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind of
the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which is the
Chruch, Col. 1.24.

It is a faithful saying, if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him;
if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him; if we deny him, he will
also deny us; if we believe nor, yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny
himself. So this was that which the Apostles looked for, and waited for the
Redemption of the body, as in Romans 8. and they suffered all things for the
bodies sake; so the Resurrection of this body, is that Christ Jesus
accomplisheth, who says, I am the resurrection and the life, he that believes
in me though he were dead yet shall he live, and he that lives and believes
shall never die; I am the Fountain, if any man thirst let him come unto me, and
out of his belly shall flow Rivers of living water; and this he spoke of the
Spirit that was to be poured forth, and by this Spirit does he redeem and
recover his elected seed: and so the Apostles reckoned the sufferings of this
present life not worthy to be compared to the glory that was to be revealed,
because of the expectation of the manifestation of the Sons of God.

And this the great Husbandman is now looking for, and gathering up, who has
long waited for his Crop, as he did when he saw the multitudes come unto him,
he was moved with compassion toward them, because they fainted, and were
scattered abroad as Sheep having no Shepherd; then says he unto his Disciples,
the Harvest truly is plenteous, but the Laborers are few, pray ye therefore
the Lord of the Harvest that he send forth painful Laborers into his Harvest,
here the Lord desired the gathering of his seed.

And when Christ spoke the Parable of the Sower, he said, so is the Kingdom of
God, if a man cast seed into the ground, and should sleep and rise night and
day, the seed springs and grows he knows not how, for the earth brings
forth fruit of her self, but when the fruit is brought forth, immediately he
puteth in the Sickle because the Harvest is come, Mar. 4.29. Here Christ brings
a comparison by a Parable of his great Harvest, and when Jesus had showed the
Parable of the Tares, his Disciples came unto him, and desired him to declare
that Parable; he answered and said unto them, he that sows the good seed is
the Son of man, the Field is the world, the good Seed are the Children of the
Kingdom, but the Tares are the Children of the wicked one, the Enemy that
sows them is the Devil, the Harvest is the end of the World, and the Reapers
are the Angels; the Son of man will send forth his Angels, and they shall
gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend, and shall cast them into the
Furnace of Fire, then shall the righteous shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom
of their Father: who has ears to hear, let him hear, Mat. 13.24. Dan. 12.3.

And when the Lord sent forth the seventy Disciples he said unto them, the
Harvest truly is great but the Laborers are few, pray ye therefore the Lord of
the Harvest, Luke 10. This is the great Lord of the great Harvest, this is the
great Husbandman; I am the true Vine, says Christ, my Father is the
Husbandman, every branch in me that bears not fruit he takes away, every branch
that bears fruit he purges, that it may bring forth more fruit; herein is my
Father glorified, that you bring forth much fruit: So herein is the glory of
the Husbandman that fruits be brought forth.

And this great and mighty Husbandman has been patient, and waited patiently
for the precious fruit, and had long patience for it, according to James 5.7.
for he did sow his seed in Adam, above five thousand six hundred years since,
so as he made the world and created all things in six days, so he has
husbanded and tilled and pruned and dressed and watered it well toward six
thousand years; and to this agrees the Apostles words, 2 Pet. 3.3. to 8. when
he says, one day with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as
one day; for God is not slack concerning his coming, as some men count
slackness. In Adam he sowed his seed a natural body, and this the Apostle very
well opens in 1 Cor. 15. where he speaks at large of the Resurrection of the
body, after he had been speaking how the Apostles had seen Christ after he was
risen from the dead.

Now if Christ be preached (says the Apostle) that he rose from the dead, how
say some among you, that there is no Resurrection from the dead? ver. 12. but
if there be no Resurrection of the dead, then is not Christ risen; this is very
true, for by the Resurrection of Christ the dead arises, by preaching of his
resurrection; and if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and ye
are yet in your sins, then also they which are fallen asleep in Christ are
perished; but now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of
them that sleep: for since by man came death, by man also came the resurrection
of the dead; for as in Adam all died, so in Christ all shall be made alive:
there is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body, says the Apostle. And
some men will say, how are the dead raised? and with what body do they come?
thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened except it die, and that
which thou sowest is not the body which shall be, for that thou sowest must die
that it may increase, God gives it a body as it pleases him, but to every
seed its own body: so whatsoever seed thou sowest, whether it be Wheat or any
other grain, though that which thou sowest die in the ground that it may
increase, yet it brings forth its own body, its own nature, its own image.

And to this agrees Christ's own words in John 12. where he says, verily I say
unto you, except a corn of Wheat fall into the ground and die, it abides
alone, but if it die it brings forth much fruit; this he spoke when he saw
his hour was coming, and he said Father save me from this hour, but for this
cause came I unto this hour, Job. 12 24. to the 27.

And now this great Husbandman, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, he did sow
his seed in Adam, and it died, that it might increase in Christ Jesus, who is
the resurrection and the life of this seed: and the Lord has watched and
waited, and had an eye over his Vineyard, Isa. 5.1. as we have showed
throughout this Treatise: but the Apostle goes on farther, and speaks of the
glory of the Sun, and of the Moon, and of the Stars, and says, so also is it
in the Resurrection; it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory, it is sown
in weakness, it is raised in power, it is sown a natural body, it is raised a
spiritual body; for so it is written, the first man was made a living soul, the
second Adam a quickening spirit; howbeit that Adam was not first which is
s^iritual, but that Adam which is natural, and afterward that which is
spiritual; the first man of the earth earthy, the second man the Lord from
Heaven: as is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy; as is the
heavenly, such are they that are heavenly; and as we have born the image of the
earthy, so shall we bear the image of the heavenly: Now I say unto you
Brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, and so on to
the end of the Chapter.

And this is the earthy, that which is of the first man, flesh and blood, which
must not inherit incorruption; and this is the resurrection that we witness and
wait for, the spiritual body, the spiritual image, the spiritual life, the
quickening spirit, the Lord from Heaven, the gathering of the immortal seed to
the great Lord of the Harvest, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; that he
desires his Disciples to pray for, to send forth painful Laborers into his
harvest: So the great God is now coming to gather his great Harvest and his
Crop that he has sown so long since (and the Angels are his Reapers) and
waited for, and watched over, as you may read through this Book.

And to this agrees that which Christ says in Math. 25. when the Son of man
shall come in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then shall he sit
upon the Throne of his glory, and before him shall be gathered all Nations, and
he shall separate them one from another, as the Shepherd divides the Sheep
from the Goats, and he shall set the Sheep on his right hand, but the Goats on
his left, ver. 31, 32, 33. and so shall the resurrection of the just be to
life, and the resurrection of the unjust unto condemnation: this is the
Resurrection that all shall find and may expect, for Christ has been (as he
says in this Chapter) as one in a far Country, and has called his servants,
and has delivered unto them his Talents, and as every one has gained and
profited so shall they receive.

So it is required of every one to know the precious seed which God has
elected and chosen for himself; of all seeds he has chosen but one, the
precious seed, though it be likened unto a grain of Mustard Seed, which is the
least of all seeds, but is the most precious and pure and holy seed, because it
came from the life and breath of the immortal pure God, whose life and
immortality dwells in eternal light and eternal brightness: So the Lord by his
glorious word and power is gathering in again his precious and holy seed, and
renewing and restoring a far more and exceeding weight of glory than what was
the glory of the first man, the glory of the second man far exceeded it; for as
the Apostle says, the first man was made a living Soul, so likewise David
says, he was made a little lower than the Angels, Psalm. 8. what is man that
thou art so mindful of him? and the son of man that thou visitest him? for thou
have made him a little lower than the Angels, and have crowned him with glory
and honor, thou have made him to have Dominion over the works of thy hands,
thou have put all things under his feet: which words the Apostle rehearses
again in the 2. of Heb. and says, that he left nothing that was not put under
him, then in that state that he then stood in, which was before the Fall; but
now (says the Apostle) we see not all things put under him: why? because he
was come under in his transgression, and fallen from that where God had set
him: but says the Apostle, we see Jesus who is made a little lower than the
Angels, for the suffering of death, he is crowned with glory and honor that is
everlasting, that he by the grace of God should taste of death for every man,
which glory and honor changes not, as the glory and honor of the first man
did.

So the glory of the first man Adam, he was made a living Soul, a little lower
than the Angels, and all the glory of the first body he was crowned with, and
had Dominion over all the visible Creation, and had power over all the
Creatures that God had made, God set him King over all the works of his hands,
and gave him dominion and power over them; and here is the glory of the first
man, and the glory of the first body, the visible glory of the Creation, all
things that God had made in the Heaven and in the Earth, and when he looked
upon them, behold they were very good; Adam was crowned with the glory of them
all, and had the Dominion over them, but this Dominion he lost, and this glory
he stained through his disobedience and transgression, and so fell, and became
servant and in a state of servitude, and not only so, but painful and miserable
with a sentence upon him, that in the sweat of his face he should eat his
bread. So after this, as has been showed, the Lord of his infinite mercy
confirmed his eternal love and Election of Grace in his promise unto his seed,
and Covenant unto Abraham, that of him he would bring forth a seed in whom all
the Nations of the earth should be blessed; which he has faithfully and
perfectly performed, as has been showed: And so he chose a people from amongst
all the families of the earth, that he did own for himself, as you may read
Deuteronomy. 7.6. which he knew and had regard and love unto above all the families of
the earth, as has been showed and manifested.

Yet according as Adam did there rebel and transgress against him, though he
had a continual care and an eye over them, and a continual regard unto them,
and watched over them by his holy Angels, as you may read in the Scriptures;
for man was at that time lower than the Angels. The Lord spoke unto Abraham and
Sarah by Angels, and unto Jacob, and the Lord spoke unto Moses by his Angel,
Exodus 3.2. and Acts 7.3. where Stephen says, And God sent Moses to be a Ruler
and a Deliverer by the hand of the Angel which appeared to him in the Bush. God
also sent his Ange unto David after he had numbered the people, as you may read
1 Chronicles. 21. God sent an Angel unto Jerusalem to destroy it, and when David
^ift up his eyes and saw the Angel of the Lord stand between the Earth and the
Heaven, having a drawn sword in his hand stretched over Jerusalem, then David
and the Elders of Israel humbled themselves, as you may read after; then the
Lord commanded the Angel, and he put up his sword into its sheath.

The Angel also was sent unto Zacharias and Elisabeth before the Birth of John,
and unto Mary before the Birth of Christ, as you know; and the Angel came unto
the Shepherds after the Birth of Christ, Luke 2.9. And the Angels came and
ministered unto him, Math. 4.11. So the revelation of Jesus Christ was signified
by his Angel, Rev. 1. with many more that might be brought. Cornelius was
warned of God by an Angel, Acts 10. and Stephen when he was bearing his
testimony before the High Priest, when he said, Ye stiff-necked and
uncircumcised in hearts and ears, which of the Prophets have not your Fathers
persecuted and slain? them which showed before of the coming of the just one,
of whom ye have been betrayers and murderers, who have received the Law by the
disposition of Angels, and have not kept it, Acts 7.53. and Gal. 3.19. The Law
was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator. So the Prophets and such as
the Lord made Overseers and Leaders of his people, the Lord spoke to them by
his Angels, and the Law they received by the Angels; but as the Apostle says,
in the fullness of time God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the
Law to redeem them that were under the Law, Gal. 4.3. for what the Law could
not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sent his Son in the likeness
of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness
of the Law might be fulfilled in us: read on in Romans 8. So they that walk after
the Spirit, they are those that fulfill the righteousness of the Law; for the
Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus makes free from the Law of sin and
death, and this renews into the right and into the perfect Image, which is not
lower than the Angels, but into the Image of the Son, unto which all the Angels
are subject, according to the Apostles words Heb. 1.

God who at sundry times and in diverse manners spoke in times past unto the
Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken to us by his Son, whom
he has appointed Heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds, who
being the brightness of his Fathers Glory and the express Image of his person,
and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself
purged our sins; for that was the work he was to do, when, as the Apostle
says, he became lower than the Angels for the suffering of death, and so took
not upon him the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham, and there he has
tasted death for every man, that through death he might destroy him that had
the power of death, that is the Devil, and deliver them who through fear of
death were all their life time subject to Bondage: and when he had finished
this work, he is set down on the right hand of the Majesty on high, being made
so much better than the Angels, as he has by an inheritance obtained a more
excellent name than they; for to which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou
art my Son, this day have I begotten thee? And again, when he brings in his
first begotten into the world, he said, Let all the Angels worship him; and to
his Angels he says, Who has made his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a
flame of fire: but unto the Son he says, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever, a
Scepter of Righteousness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom: And so on.

So here you may see, as the first man was made a little lower than the Angels,
so the second man the Lord from Heaven, the quickening spirit, is made higher
than the Angels, the brightness of the Fathers glory, and his express image.

And so this is the seed, and body, and image which the Lord God is raising and
restoring and preparing to do his will, which far exceeds the glory of the
first body; for the glory of the first body was a visible glory, but the glory
of the second man, the second body is an invisible glory, and known and seen by
the invisible eye, and manifested by the invisible power and spirit of our Lord
Jesus, in whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of
sins, who is the image of the invisible God, and the first born of every
creature; by him were all things created, that are in Heaven and that are in
Earth; visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones or Dominions, or
Principalities or Powers, all things were created by him and for him, and he is
before all things, and by him all things consist, and he is the Head of the
Body, the Church, who is the beginning, the first begotten from the dead, that
in all things he might have the preheminency; and so this is he, and this is
his Body and his Image which he is restoring and creating after God in
Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians. 2.10.4.24.

Abraham by his says saw him who is invisible, Heb. 11. who was the Father of
the sai hful, and so all the faithful who continue and abide in the faith of
Gods Elect, will see the resurrection and restoration of this invisible body,
which is the Church of Christ, the second man, the Lord from Heaven; this is he
who builds the second house, who is a greater then Solomon, and whose house far
exceeds the glory of Solomon's Temple, whom the Apostle exhorts his holy
Brethren to consider, the High Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus, who was
faithful to him that appointed him; as also Moses was faithful in all his
house: for this man was counted worthy of more glory then Moses, in as much as
he who has builded the house, has more honor then the house; for every house
is builded by some man; but he that builds all things is God: for Moses was
faithful in all his house as a servant; but Christ as a Son over his own house,
whose house are we, if we hold fast the considence of the hope firm unto the
end, Romans 3. and also 1 Timothy 3.15. where the Apostle exhorts Timothy how to
behave himself in the house of God, which is the Church of the living God, the
ground and pillar of truth: so having therefore boldness to enter into the
holiest by the blood of Jesus Christ by a new and living way, and having an
High Priest over the House of God, let us draw near with a true heart, says
the Apostle, Heb. 10.

So in this new and living way, Christ Jesus, the light of his glorious Gospel,
every one that abides and walks in this light, may enter by his blood into
the holiest of all; for he reigns over the house of Jacob, according to the
Angels words to Mary, Luke 1.32, 33.

So the glory of this house of Jacob is the Lord bringing forth and
manifesting, and will manifest every day more and more; and blessed and happy
are all they that come into the brightness of the rising of this glory, and as
every one comes to the light of the Lord Jesus, who is the image of the
invisible God, that shines in their hearts, will come more and more to see the
glory of this day, and the glory and beauty of this body of Christ, which is
his Church, and the glory and beauty of this image of the second man, the Lord
from Heaven, who is the brightness of his Fathers glory; and unto this King
Eternal and Immortal, Invisible, and the only wise God, be Honor and Glory,
for ever and ever.

Margaret Fell.

FINIS
A Chronology of the Judges, and Kings of the JEWS.
1. Moses. 2. Joshua. 3. Othniel. 4. Ethud. 5. Deborah and Barak. 6. Gideon. 7.
Abimelech. 8. Tolah. 9. Jair. 10. Jephthah. 11. Ibzan. 12. Elon. 13. Abdon. 14.
Sampson: 15. Eli. 16. Samuel, At which time the people desired to have a King
like to other Nations.
Kings of the Jews.
Saul. David. Solomon.
Kings of Judah.
1. Rehoboam, in whose time the ten Tribes were rent away. 2. Abijam. 3. Asa.
4. Jehoshaphat. 5. Jehoram. 6. Ahaziah. 7. Athaliah. 8. Jehoash. 9. Amaziah.
10. Azaziah, or Uzziah. 11. Jotham. 12. Ahaz. 13. Hezekiah. 14. Manasseh. 15.
Amon. 16. Josiah. 17. Jehoahaz. 18. Jehojakim. 19. Jehojachin. 20. Zedekiah, in
whose time Nebuchadnezzar destroyed Jerusalem.
Kings of Israel.
1. Jeroboam. 2. Nadab. 3. Baasha. 4. Elah. 5. Zimri. 6. Omri. 7. Ahab. 8.
Ahaziah. 9. Joram. 10. Jehu. 11. Jehoahaz. 12. Joash. 13. Jeroboam. Menahem.
Pekahiah. Pekah. Hoshea, who was vanquished by Salmaneser, and the Israelites
carried Captive into Assyria.
The Dukes and Governors of the Jews.
1. Zerobabel. 2. Resa Mosollam. 3. Johannes Ben Resa. 4. Judas Hircanas. 5.
Joseph. 6. Abner Simei. 7. Eli Matthia. 8. Aser Mahat. 9. Naged Artoxad. 10.
Haggai. 11. Maslat Mahum. 12. Amos Syrach. 13. Mattathiah Siloack. 14. Joseph
2. 15. Johannes Hircanus, who was the last Governor of Judea, who descended
from the Stock of David.
The Macchabaean Princes of Jewry.
1. Judas Macchabaeus. 2. Jonathan. 3. Simon. 4. Johannes Hircanus.
The Macchabaean Kings of Judah.
1. Aristobulus. 2. Alexander. 3. Alexandra, or Solome Wife to Alexander. 4.
Hircanus, eldest Son to Alexander.
The Heathen Kings of Jewry.
1. Herod the Ascolonite, at which time the Kingdom departed from Judah, and
Christ was born. 2. Archelaus, 2. Herod Antipas, and 3. Lysinias, Luke. 3.1. 3.
Herod Antipas, Tetrarch of Galilee, who beheaded John the Baptist, and in whose
time Christ suffered. 4. Agrippa Herod, who imprisoned Peter and James, and
being stricken by an Angel was eaten with Worms. 5. Agrippa Minor, before whom
Paul pleaded, and in whose time Jerusalem was overthrown by the Romans.
FINIS.

