A PLAIN Record or Declaration, SHOWING The Original ROOT and RACE OF
PERSECUTORS; Together With the Nature, Practice and End of that GENERATION, in
all Ages past since the Beginning; as we may Read in the Scriptures of Truth,
from Genesis to the Revelation.

But more Particularly thus: The Devil (who was a Murderer and a Liar from the
Beginning, and the Original of all Sin) is the Father of all Persecutors and
Persecution, which is the Birth born after the Flesh, which the Egyptian Woman
(the Bond Woman) is the Mother of, who is cast out with her Son from being
Heir, whose End is Destruction.

CHRIST JESUS, the Truth, the Peace, the Power of God (which destroys the
Devil, the Original of all Sin and Unrighteousness) He is the Original and
Everlasting Father of all the Righteous, which is the Birth born after the
Spirit: whose Mother is Jerusalem from Above, which is Free with her Children,
who are the Righteous (which are Persecuted) who will not persecute nor hate
but love Enemies. Now these are Abel's Generation, who was a Righteous man,
whose Sacrifice was accepted of God: him Cain slew, who was wicked.

And so all Haters, Murderers, Persecutors about Religion, Worship and
Sacrifice, from the Beginning even until this day, they are of Cain's
Generation (the PERSECVTOR) whose Sacrifices God has no respect unto, their
hands are full of Blood; though they Profess all the Scriptures of Truth, they
are Persecutors of the Just; and so their Reward will be according to their
Work.

H. F.

Gal. 4. He that is born after the Fesh, Persecutes him that is born after the
Spirit.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, in Martins Le Grand, 1661.

(...) A Plain RECORD or DECLARATION Showing The Original ROOT and RACE Of
PERSECUTORS; Together With the Nature, Practice and End of that GENERATION, etc.
NEver did any Prosper who were Persecutors of the Righteous; For when the
Devil went out of the Truth, then did he snare and tempt others out of the
Truth, and their Habitation: And being so, the State was Lost, which was in the
Beginning, 2 Pet. 2.4.
wherein all things were Blessed and Good. And the Devil, the Original of all
Sin, is the Father of Persecutors and Persecution, who is out of the Truth in
the whole World (which was always Blind) that lies in Wickedness, from which
Foundation of the World has the Lamb been slain, the Just have Suffered and
been Persecuted, by them that have obeyed the Devil, the Author and Original of
all Sin; Who has entered into their Minds, and defiled their Minds, so that
they have disobeyed the Good in them, the Just in them; which is the Cause of
all the Persecution in Christendom, and all the Persecution and Ignorance in
the whole World. And People disobeying the Good that is in them, and the Just;
and so obeying the Bad in them, they are Aliens in their minds and Strangers to
the Life of God, and Covenant of Promise, and Strangers to the Image and
Likeness of GOD, the Image of the Devil being within them, and yet undefaced,
and unsubdued. This is the Cause of the Enmity in the whole World, and the
Cause of the Enmity in them that do profess the Scriptures (both Jews and
Christians) being Aliens from the Life which they were in, which spoke them
forth, in which there is no Unity, and Subjection unto God, and to one Another.
So the Devil was the First Persecutor, the Enemy of Mankind, who is the Power
of Death, the Author of Sin, which brings it forth; which Christ the Truth, and
Prince of Life Destroys, for he Ends all Persecution.

Cain the Second Persecutor, who Persecuted righteous Abel, though he was a
Governor and built a City, God said, he was a Vagabond and Fugitive, Genesis 4.
and his Brother's Blood stopped the Earth from yielding its full strength. So
that a Persecutor Corrupts the Earth, and all that be Persecutors are of
Cain, Vagabonds, to whom belongs the Woe; though they be never so Great in the
Earth, the Woe is to them if they be Persecutors.

Genesis 6. 2 Pet. 2.5.
The Old World Persecuted Noah, righteous Noah, with whom was God's Covenant,
who was a Preacher of Righteousness; And God overthrew the Old World for their
Filthiness, and Wickedness, and Ungodliness, who grieved him, (and had
Corrupted the Earth, and filled it with Violence) who were Drowned; and
righteous Noah in the Ark was saved with Eight Persons: So there was the End of
those Persecutors.

The Sodomites were struck Blind by the Angel of the Lord, who assaulted Lot's
House in Sodom, and afterward the Lord Consumed their City with fire.

The Caldeans were Persecutors of Faithful Abraham, from among whom God brought
him; who denied his Acquaintance, Relations, and Friends, and Nation, and
Country, Worship and Fathers House, and went into a strange Land to Dwell; And
afterward Abraham's Seed were Strangers in the Land of Egypt, who by the
Egyptians were four hundred years Afflicted and Persecuted, but the Lord did
Overthrow the Egyptians in the Red Sea, and so Destroyed those Persecutors.

Ishmael the Son of Hagar, the Bondwoman, did Mock and Persecute Isaac, the
Son of Sarah the Freewoman, who was cast out of Abraham's Family, that he
should not Inherit with the Righteous, because he was a Persecutor.

Esau was a Persecutor of Jacob who fled from his Face; and he despised his
Birthright, for a mess of Pottage, and morsel of Bread. And Esau the
Persecutor because he hated his Brother, therefore the Lord said, I have hated
Esau, and laid his mountain desolate (and Jacob have I loved, who was blesseded
of God) and there is an End of that Persecutor.

Nimrod and Cain were two old Heretics, the one Persecuted Abel; and the other
was called the Mighty Hunter before the Lord, who did begin to build Babel,
which God confounded; and declared Cain to be a Vagabond; So a Persecutor is a
Vagabond and a Fugitive.

Ioseph's Brethren Persecuted him, and Sold him into Egypt; and Pottiphar's
Wife slandered righteous Joseph, yet nevertheless the Lord made him to
prosper, and cleared his Innocence. Joseph's Brethren were made to Bow in the
day of their Poverty to their Brother, whom they had Sold and Persecuted.

Pharaoh the King, that Old Persecutor, because he would not let the Children
of Israel go, that they might Worship God the Lord Destroyed him.

And the Egyptians Persecuted the Children of Israel, though to them Joseph had
been a blessing, and they killed their Children, and Oppressed them by sore
Labor and Taxes; therefore the Lord overthrew those Persecutors, and drowned
them in the Sea; and delivered His Persecuted and Oppressed People, by a mighty
hand and outstretched arm; So that there was an end of those Oppressors and
Persecutors.

And the Children of Israel Persecuted Moses, and were ready to stone him in
the Wilderness, and Rebelled against him, and neither regarded his word, nor
the Lord, wherefore the Lord said, they should not enter into his rest; Whose
carcasses fell in the Wilderness, and perished as Pharaoh did in the Sea with
his Host; who regarded not the word of the Lord, nor of Moses, that bid him get
him out of his sight. And so there was the end of those Persecutors.

Sampson was betrayed by his Dallilah and Persecuted by the Philistines, but
the Lord brought an end to his Persecutors. Therefore beware all ye that Trust
not in the Living God, least you lose your Strength, and be betrayed by your
Dallilah's.

Numb. 24.
Balaam was a Persecutor, who loved the Wages of Unrighteousness, a Deceive and
a Dissembler, in whose way many go; But mark their ways and his, (that go
against the righteous Seed) the End was destruction, who went against the
righteous Seed, and Life; and there was the End of that Persecutor.

Saul Persecuted David when the evil Spirit came upon him, and the Spirit of
the Lord departed from him, and pursued him up and down, and hunted him like a
Partridge and a Fly, but the Lord overthrew that Persecutor.

Absalom Persecuted his Father David, and sought after his Life, to get the
Kingdom to himself; and Ahithophel was his Counselor, whose Counsel God
confounded and brought to naught, and the Lord overthrew both him and Absalom;
and so they fell into the Pit which they had dug, and there was the End of
those Persecutors, 2 Samuel 17, 18. Chapters.

Shimei one of Readiness Family, was a Persecutor, who cursed King David, and
flung stones at him, and cried out, Come out thou bloody man, and thou man of
Belial, etc. 2 Samuel 16.6, 7. Now though David did pardon Shimei, that he did
not take away his Life; yet mark what came after, Solomon his Son caused him to
be slain. See 1 King. 2.46. and there was an End of that Persecutor.

Ioash the King, and his Counselors were Persecutors, as ye may read (2 Chronicles.
24.) what became of them, and what was their End that persecuted the Prophets
of the Lord, and slew Zechariah a Prophet of God (whom the King commanded to be
stoned to death in the Court of the House of the Lord) who in love warned them
for their souls eternal good; but to reproach they turned it, and made a mock
of the Prophets, and slighted the Messengers of God; and accounted of the
Spiritual men as Madmen, and called the Prophets Fools: Mich. 7.4.
But the uprightest of them is as sharp as a Thornhedge, and the best of them
as a Bryar: Among whom many of the Prophets trembled, shook and quaked in
Sackcloath and Ashes, and showed several Signs; and if they came Piping, or if
they came with Repentance to them, they did not regard: Therefore the Lord left
them over to their own hearts lusts, to perish in their gain-sayings, as Corah,
Dathan and Abiram did, whom the Earth opened, and swallowed up quick, Numb. 1.

Therefore consider all ye Persecutors upon the Earth, and remember your
Examples that be gone before; read the Scriptures of Truth, and see in whose
paths and steps ye walk: for they who love Enemies (as Christ commanded) and
keep brotherly love and fellowship, and esteem well of all men, they can hurt
no creature upon the Earth. The Righteous has always suffered (in the whole
world) and has been persecuted unto death, upon the account that they have
been the Tares, the false Prophets, and the Deceivers: for which doing Christ
gave them no Example, nor any Command for all the Persecution that has been
since the days of the Apostles. Though in the Law they were not to spare their
nearest Relations, Wife, Brother or Sister, that drew them from the Law of God,
and went to set up another god; if he were a Blasphemer or a false Prophet,
they were not to be spared, but to be put to death by the Law of God: Which Law
of God (Christ being put to death) ended; and he says, Love Enemies. For the
Jews said (who persecuted Christ) they had a Law, by which, if any man said he
was the Son of God, was to dye, and to be put to death: Therefore the People
might say, as they say now, They were but subject to the higher Powers. But
mark the end of those Blasphemers that persecuted the Son of God to death, the
Prince of Life.

And mark the end of those Persecutors that persecute Christ where he is
manifested in his Members; that visited not them in Prison, and came not to
them when they were sick, Mat. 25.
and clothed them, not and fed them not: Such he says must go into
everlasting punishment; much more them that cast into Prison shall receive the
Reward of Persecutors.

The Children of Israel were persecuted by the Heathen, whom the Lord overthrew.

Haman persecuted Mordecai and the Jews, and would have had them all put to
death, and Mordecai hanged; because he feared God, and could not bow to proud
Haman. So the same thing that should have been done unto Mordecai, befell Haman,
and so there was an end of that Persecutor.

Ahab the King persecuted Micaiah the Prophet, and commanded that he should be
cast into Prison, and fed with Bread and Water, till he returned from the
Battle at Ramoth-Gilead, because he could not flatter him, and speak well of
him, as the false Prophets, the Prophets of Baal did; So Ahab the King was
slain in the Battle, and did not return in Peace, according to Micaiah's words.
1 King. 22.
And there was an End of that Persecutor.

Jeroboam the King, his hand Withered which he put forth against the Man of
God, who cried against the Altar in Bethel, and their Idolatry there. See 1
King. 13.

Rechab and Baanah the Sons of Rimmon, did Persecute and Slay Ishbosheth the
Son of Saul, (a righteous person) in his own house upon his Bed, and cut off
his Head, and brought it to King David, and looked for a Reward (for this their
Murder) saying to David, they had killed his Enemy, and avenged him upon Saul
and his seed. But David commanded his youngmen, and they slew them, both Rechab
and Baanah, and cut off their heads; 2 Samuel 24
and that was their Reward for their Persecuting and Killing a Righteous Person.

Job's Friends persecuted him, and reviled him: and see the end of them, that
Job was constrained to offer sacrifice for them, and make intercession to God
for them, See Job 42. And though People read in the Scriptures daily, yet they
do not consider.

Psa. 119.10.
The Jews persecuted David (who was of the Royal Seed) of whom David said, Let
their Children become Vagabonds: And so they were, according to his Prophecy
(and are at this day) and their Eyes blinded, and they bow down their backs
always. So be all the Vagabonds and Blood-shedders, whose eyes are blinded and
backs bowed down, that be out of the Life and Power, which the Jews went out
of, and Cain; And so do all the Christians (so called) and all People upon the
Earth, whose eyes are blinded, and they gone from the Life of God in
themselves. These let in the Devil, the Murderer and Liar, that went forth of
the Truth; and so goes from the Principle of Life and Dominion. These are the
Vagabonds and the Persecutors, though they be never so Rich in the Earth, Great
Kings, Princes, or Emperors, yet have not a habitation in God.

A Persecutor, his eye is blinded, his ear is stopped to the Spirit of God in
himself; so wanders from the habitation in God: So a Vagabond, he will corrupt
the Earth, and stain the Earth, and fill it with Violence. A Fugitive that
spills the Blood of the Innocent, he causes the Earth not to yield her
strength. So here is the Author of Poverty and Beggars, by whom the Just and
Innocent always suffer, against whom is God's Woe; and that is the end of all
Persecutors.

Iezebel and Ahab were both Persecutors of the Prophets of the Lord, and
Killers of them; who painted her face, and thought to have been received and
esteemed by her Painting: but mark the end of those Persecutors, whose Blood
the Dogs licked; in whose days the Prophets wandered up and down in
Sheepskins and Goat Skins, and were in Caves and Dens of the Earth, and were
fed in them. And Elisha the Prophet in these days was fed by the Ravens.
Therefore consider ye that delight in Persecution, Do not devise evil on your
Beds, flatter not your selves in your own eyes, lest your Iniquities do become
so loathsome and so hateful, that you come to no change; for Shame will bring
forth Confusion and a fountain of Lies. Plot not against the Just, nor gnash
not your teeth against them: Cease from Anger and Wrath; be patient, and fret
not against the Innocent, and the Righteous.

Do you not read of the Great Persecution, in the second Psalm, The Rage of
the Heathen, who imagined vain things. The Kings of the Earth took Counsel
together with the Rulers; against the Lord, and against his Anointed. Will not
the Lord vex them in his Wrath and sore Displeasure, and laugh them to scorn
because of their folly and madness; and set his King upon his holy Hill? and so
frustrate the ends all of the Persecutors.

The Children of Israel when they transgressed the Law of God, they persecuted
his Prophet Jeremiah, they put him in the Stocks and in the Dungeon; who was
persecuted by Priests and Princes; and the Lord suffered them to be carried
away Captive into Babylon, and to put out their King's Eyes, and to destroy his
Sons; who in the day of their Prosperity in their lifetime hearkened to their
Priests, false Prophets, and Teachers, that smoothed them up, and cried Peace
to them in their Iniquities, and would not regard the Prophets of the Lord, but
persecuted them; and there was the end of those Persecutors.

And the Children of Israel, their Princes and Priests persecuted Isaiah the
Prophet, and the Children that were with him, were for Signs and for Wonders to
both the Houses of Israel before their Captivity: yet they would not regard
neither Signs, nor Wonders, nor Prophets, who afterward were carried away
Captive: and there was the end of those Persecutors.

Pashur the Son of Immer the Priest (who was also chief Governor of the House
of the Lord) did smite Jeremiah, and put him in the Stocks; Therefore did the
Lord tell him by the Prophet Jeremiah, that his name should not be Pashur, but
the Lord had called him Magor-missabib; For the Lord would make him a Terror to
himself and all his Friends; and they should fall by the Sword of their
Enemies; and that he should be carried captive to Babylon, and dye there: and
that was the end of that Persecutor. And again, when Jeremiah had spoken the
words, which the Lord had commanded him to speak to the Children of Israel,
Then the Priests and the Prophets, and all the People took him, saying, Thou
shall surely dye; because he prophesied in the Name of the Lord, and told them
of the Destruction of the Temple. See Jerem. chap. 26.

In the Children of Isreal's Captivity there had been Persecutors of the
Prophets: Ezekiel. 12.
Ezekiel told them, their Shepherds, Teachers and Prophets had caused them to
err, and had made havoc of the People, and sold them for handfuls of Barley,
and pieces of Bread; and eaten the Fat, and clothed themselves with the Wool:
the Lord would redeem them from their mouths, whom he says, are like Foxes in
the Desert, which worry and devour the Lambs, and they were made a prey upon
who departed from Iniquity. So let them see (who regard not the Lord nor his
Prophets) the fruits of their Persecution.

Daniel in the Captivity of the Children of Israel, let them see their Sins and
their Transgressions, who regarded neither the Lord nor his Prophets. And
Daniel was Persecuted for praying to God, and cast into the Lions Den. Mark,
Dan. 3.
did not God bring his Persecutors into the Den of Lions, who tore them to
pieces, and Daniel was Delivered?

And the Three Children were Persecuted for not Worshipping Nebuchadnezzar's
golden Image, and were cast into the fiery Furnace, whom God delivered, and
made their very Persecutors to confess that they were the Servants of the most
high God; and those who cast them into the fiery Furnace were slain; which was
a Testimony against their Cruelty and Persecution.

Amos the Herdsman, who was a Prophet of the Lord, was Persecuted at the Kings
Chapel, who told them the Songs of their Temple should be turned into Howling.
And they said that Amos had conspired against the King, and bid him get him
into the Land of Judah and Prophecy. And Amos told them of Vyals and
Instruments of Music, and of their drinking Wine in Bowls, and how they
stretched themselves upon costly Beds, and of the Seat of Violence, and how
they swallowed up the Needy, and caused the Poor to fall, and that they did not
remember the Afflictions of Joseph, Amos 6, 7, 8. Chapters. But mark what the
Lord says of them: Are ye not as the Children of the Ethiopians unto me O
Israel, says the Lord; and I will set mine eyes upon them for evil and not for
good, etc.

Micah Prophesied in the Captivity, and let them see how their Judges, their
Princes, Heads and Rulers of Israel, who hate the Good, and love the Evil: who
pluck off their skin from off them, and their flesh from their bones; who also
eat the flesh of my People, and flay their skin from off them, and they break
their bones and chop them in pieces, as for the Pot, and as flesh for the
Caldron. And Thus says the Lord concerning the Prophets that make the People
to err; who bite with their teeth; and cry peace, and he that puts not into
their mouths, they even prepare war against him. Therefore the Lord told the
Priests and Prophets, That they should not have a Vision, and that they should
not Divine, and the Sun should go down over the Prophets, Mich. 3.
and the Day should be dark over them. And their Seers should be ashamed, and
their Diviners confounded, and Sion for their sakes shouuld be plowed as a
field, and Jerusalem laid on heaps; And this was their reward from the Lord for
their wickedness and Persecution, Who divined for money, and taught for hire,
and judged for gifts and rewards; they had no Answer from God; and this was the
fruit of their Persecution and Persecutors, Formality and Blindness, Whom the
Prophets had foretold how they had served God with their lips, but their hearts
were removed far from him; And how they would Sacrifice, and Offer, and cry the
Temple of the Lord, and yet live in their Abominations: Which Offerings and
Sacrifice God had no respect to more than Cain's, whose hands were full of
blood: And told them, their Oblations, and Sacrifices were no more to him, than
to bless an Idol, and he that Offered a Sacrifice as he that cut off a Dogs
neck, or slew a man; For they were Persecutors.

Nahum, Joel, Haggi, Zachary, Let the Children of Israel, (the Jews) see their
Transgression; And see how the Judgments of the Lord came upon them for their
Transgressions and Persecution.

The Edomites who were the Children of Esau were Persecutors of Jacob and his
seed, as ye may read in the Prophecy of Obadia, where the Lord says to Edom,
The pride of thine heart has deceived thee, thou that dwell in the clifts
of the Rocks, whose habitation is high, that say in thy heart, Who shall
bring me down to the ground? How are the things of Esau searched out? how are
his hidden things brought to light? The mighty men of Teman shall be dismayed,
to the end that every one of Mount Esau may be cut off by slaughter. For thy
Violence against thy brother Jacob, shame shall cover thee, and thou shall be
cut off for ever. Shall not I in that day destroy the wise men out of Edom, and
the understanding out of mount Esau? Because thou stoodest on the other side in
the day that the Strangers carried away Israel Captive, and Foreigners entered
into his gates, and cast Lots upon Jerusalem: even thou wast as one of them.
But thou should not have looked on thy Brother in that day when he became a
stranger, neither should thou have rejoiced over the Children of Judah, in
the day of their destruction, nor have spoken proudly in the day of their
distress, nor should thou have entered into their gates, nor looked on their
affliction, in the day of their Calamity, nor have laid hands on their
Substance in the day of their Calamity, nor should thou have stood in the
cross Way, to cut off those of his that did escape, nor delivered those that
did remain. Therefore as thou have done, it shall be done unto thee, thy reward
shall return upon thine own head, and thou shall be as though thou had not
been. So there was an End of Edom the Persecutor.

Herod Persecuted John Baptist to death, and caused his head to be cut off: He
being Voluptuous, and delighted in his Daughters Dancing, gave her in stead of
the one half of his Kingdom, the Head of the Just John Baptist. But mark the
End of that Persecutor; Was he not eaten to death with Worms?

And mark what became of him that Persecuted, and proceeded against James, and
killed him with a Sword, Act. 12.
and Persecuted Peter, and Persecuted and Killed the Innocent Children at
Bethlehem, in madness when they could not find the Child Jesus, who fled from
the Persecuting Tyrant into Egypt. And the Pharisees told Christ that he should
go from thence, Luke 13.
for Herod would kill him: Who answered and said, Go, tell that Fox, Behold I
cast out Devils, and will heal still, to day and to morrow, and the third day I
shall be perfected. And he took up a Lamentation over Jerusalem, and said, Oh
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets and stonest them that were
sent to thee, how often would I have gathered thy Children, as a Hen does her
Chickens, and ye would not? Therefore is your House left unto you desolate,
etc. There was the reward of their Persecution.

The Jews Persecuted Christ, who came of them according to the flesh, and
mocked, and scoffed at Him, and despised Him, and blasphemed and said, He had a
devil, and buffeted him, and smote Him with a reed, and spit in His face, and
Crowned Him with thorns, among whom at His Birth He had no place but in the
Manger, in the Stable. But mark the end of these Persecutors, Priests,
Professors and Rulers. Did not the Lord bring the Heathen upon them according
to Christ's Prophecy, and destroyed their Citys and Temple, and scattered them
over all Nations, and many of them were carried Captives into Egypt. There is
the End of all Persecuting Professors in the Mouth and Lips without Life and
Power.

Paul was a Persecutor, and a yeelder to Persecution, (when Steven was stoned,
the Witnesses laid down their Clothes at Saul's feet) to whom the Lord showed
Mercy: which in most of his Epistles he confesses, and his Unworthiness, that
he should find Mercy, seeing he Persecuted.

Oh ye Persecutors, consider therefore, and remember what a great Thing it is
to find Mercy, as Paul did, who Confessed it to his very last, as you may Read
in his Epistle to Timothy.

The Jews Persecuted Steven to death, who was full of the holy Ghost: But the
Jews who resisted it (as their forefathers did) they Professed the Words given
forth by the holy Ghost; but mind their End: Were they not destroyed when
Jerusalem was compassed about with Armies, and was laid on heaps, and not one
stone of the Temple left upon another that should not be thrown down?

Christ said, that His Disciples should be Persecuted from City to City, and
scourged, and halled out of the Synagogues, and carried before Rulers, and cast
into Prison for His Name sake; which was fulfilled upon them according to
Christ's words. And he said, a day of Vengeance should come, and told them they
had Persecuted Zacharias, and Killed him between the Temple and the Altar, and
that the Temple should be thrown down.

And the true Christians in the Primitive times were no Persecutors, but Lovers
of Enemies, and tender of all Men; this was their Doctrine and Practice; which
is beyond Jews, and Heathens, and Hypocritical Christians, that are Apostatized
both from the Life, Doctrine, and Practice of Christ and the Apostles in the
Primitive times.

Act. 5.40
And the Council threatened James and John, and Beat them, and Commanded them not
to speak any more in the Name of Jesus.

John gave forth the Revelations, and was Persecuted, and Banished, and he
Prophesied of the Beast, the false Poophet, the Dragon, and the false Church
should Persecute, Kill and Destroy, and drink the Blood of the Saints and
Martyrs, and make War with the Remnant of the Seed of the woman; And then
Establish the Beasts Worship, the Dragons false Church, wherein all Nations
should drink her Cup, and so go on, until their sins should reach to Heaven,
and come into remembrance before God. And that God would in the end plague the
Whore, and burn her flesh with fire; and take the Beast and false Prophet, the
old Dragon, and cast them alive into the Lake of Fire that burns with
Brimstone: and all that drink of the Whores Cup, and worship the Beast, shall
be tormented, and drink the Cup of the Indignation of the Lord God Almighty:
And here is the end of those wicked Persecutors.

Judas the Persecutor who betrayed his Master, and kissed him, and sold him to
the Priests (for Thirty Pieces of Silver) who thirsted after his Blood, the
Blood of the Innocent: But mark his end, with his Company, with their Swords
and Staves, He hanged himself.

The Jews persecuted Paul up and down from place to place, after he came to
receive the Mercy; which many now receive his Words, but persecute his Life:
And after that he came to exercise his Conscience, to keep it void of offense
toward God and toward man; then they did account Paul an Heretic, and a
mover of Sedition, and a Pestilent Fellow, and one who turned the World up-side
down, and was accounted not fit to live upon the Earth, when many of the Jews
and Proselytes that feared God, followed Paul and Barnabas, who exhorted them
to continue in the Grace of God: But when the rest of the Jews saw the People,
they were full of envy, and spoke against Paul, and railed on them. And they
stirred up certain devout women, and chief men of the City, and raised
Persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out of their Coasts:
But they shook off the Dust of their Feet, as a Witness against these
Persecutors. Forty of the Jews bound themselves with an Oath, and conspired
together with the Priests and Council, to kill Paul; but were prevented by the
Chief Captain. Again, when the Jews saw Paul in the Temple, they moved all the
People, and laid hands on him, crying, Men of Israel, help: this is the man
that teaches all men everywhere, against the People and the Law, and this
Place. Moreover, he has brought Grecians into the Temple, and has polluted
this holy Place. Acts 21, 22. chap.
Then all the City was moved, and the People ran together, and they took Paul,
and drew him out of the Temple to kill him, but were prevented by the chief
Captain, who rescued him out of their hands; and they cried against him, Away
with such a fellow from the Earth, for it is not meet that he should live. So
Paul found more favor from the Romans, who were Heathen, than from his own
Nation, who were Jews, and the greatest Professors then in the World. And
Ananias the High Priest, and the Elders, and Tertullus the Orator, accused Paul
unto Felix the Governor, and told him, that they had found Paul a pestilent
fellow, and a mover of Sedition among all the Jews throughout the world, and a
chief maintainer of the Sect of the Nazarites, and would have polluted the
Temple: and afterward the Highpriests, and the chief of the Jews appeared
before Festus against Paul, and would have had him sent him to Jerusalem; and
they laid wait by the way to have killed him. But ye may read what was the end
of all these bloody Persecutors, who drew nigh unto God with their lips, and
with their mouths honored him, but removed their hearts far off from him. So
the lip-servers, will-worshippers will persecute now (as the Jews did of old)
But they that worship God in Spirit and in Truth (which the Devil is out of)
cannot persecute; for they can love Enemies, and bless those that curse them,
and pray for them that persecute them, and do good for evil; So these are the
true Christians and followers of Christ.

The Word of the Lord God to you all. Let no one persecute about Church,
Worship, Religion, Maintenance and Ministry, that profess themselves to be
Christians: For Christ gives no such Command nor Example, but to love Enemies;
for He rebuked his Disciples, who would have had Fire come down from Heaven on
them who would not receive them, and were contrary-minded to them (as the
Prophet had done:) Therefore Christ, who fulfilled the Law and the Prophets,
rebuked their zeal, and told them, He came not to destroy men's lives, but to
save them.

Therefore ye that are Persecutors and Destroyers of Men's Lives, ye are not in
Christ's Mind, Life nor Doctrine; nor the Spiritual men that wrestle with
Spiritual weapons: but you are carnal, of which (as I said before) the Devil
was the author, and the beginner of: And the Lamb and the Saints, and the Bride
and his Wife shall have the Victory; the First and the Last shall reign,
wherein Alpha and Omega shall be known (over the Persecutors) the Beginning and
the End; the Lamb of God's Kingdom; the First and the Last. So now in these
last days the Prophets of the Lord have warned the Turk, warned the Pope, and
warned most of the Kings in Christendom, of their Persecution; whose Field lies
like a Field of Blood, who stains the Earth with it, that the Inhabiters of it
are Vagabonds, like Cain that killed the Righteous; so that the Earth does not
yield her full strength: Therefore are there so many Beggars, desolate people
in Poverty among them.

Peter and Jude prophesied, and saw a persecuting Cain (that would kill about
Religion) was getting up among the Christians before their decease, which would
be Preachers or Teachers; who were by the Apostles judged.

John in the Revelations saw Iezebel that would be a Prophet and a Teacher
among the Churches, which Iezebel was a Persecuter and a drinker of the Blood
of the Saints and Prophets; whom John rebuked, and such as set her up and
followed her. Therefore, O consider! Have not Persecutors been set up by a Law
since the Apostles days, and the Doctrine of Christ trampled under foot, which
teaches to love Enemies, and overcome evil with good?

And have you not read in Heb. 11. how they persecuted the Saints, and spoiled
the Saints goods; and how they wandered in Sheepskins and Goat Skins, of whom
the World was not worthy; who lived in Dens and Caves of the Earth. And again
he says, I saw the Beast and the Kings of the Earth, and their Armies gathered
together, to make war against Him that sat upon the white horse, who was
clothed with a Vesture dipped in blood (the Lord Jesus Christ) whose Name was
called The Word of God; and against his Army (the Saints that were with Him)
And the Beast was taken, and with him the false Prophet that wrought Miracles
before him, with which he deceived them that had received the Mark of the
Beast, and them that worshipped his Image. These both were cast alive into the
Lake of Fire, burning with Brimstone. And the Remnant were slain with the Sword
of him that sat upon the white horse, which proceeded out of his mouth: and all
the fowls of the air were filled with their flesh. And this was the end of
those Persecutors.

The Ministers of Unrighteousness, and false Apostles, and Messengers of Satan,
and his Ministers were the Persecutors of the Righteous like their Father the
Devil, and walked in his steps; as ye may Read in the Corinthians, but their
end was according to their Works.

The Antichrists and Wolves which got the sheeps Clothing, who were the
Deceivers, these were the Persecutors and Worriers of the Lambs of Christ; as
we may Read, Matthew. 7.24.

And you may see the Jews that Killed the Lord Jesus Christ, and Persecuted the
Church: Now these Persecutors pleased not God, who afterward overthrew them, 2
These. 2.

Act. 9.4.
And it was said unto Saul, Saul why Persecutest thou me? I am Jesus whom thou
Persecutest, it is in vain for thee, etc. When that Saul was going with his
Packet of Letters (from the high Priest and Scribes) to Persecute the Saints.

And Paul afterward confessed, that he was a Persecutor of the Church, when as
touching the righteousness of the Law, he was blameless, which Law did Command
carnal Weapons, Mark that: and so he thought he had done God good Service in
Persecuting those that were contrary minded: But yet says he, through the
grace of God I found Mercy, because I did it ignorantly, Phil. 3.

David was often Persecuted of his Enemies without a Cause, and he said, They
Persecuted the poor and needy. And he prayed unto the Lord to deliver him from
them that Persecuted him, and to stop the Way of them that Persecuted him,
Psalm. 35.

The true Christians (who follow Christ) cannot Revile them that Persecute
them; according to Christ's Doctrine, Matthew. 5. But the Persecutors never
follow Christ in their Persecution, for His Doctrine is to pray for them that
do Persecute. And Christ told his Disciples, That they should be Persecuted
from City to City. And those Persecutors are such as are born after the flesh;
and are the makers of Sects.

And the Wisdom of God says, Behold I send you Prophets and Apostles, and some
of them they shall Persecute and Kill, that all the Blood that have been shed
from the Foundation of the World may be required of this Generation. Luke 11.
Of that Persecuting Birth born of the flesh, that cannot love Enemies.

And Christ says, If they Persecute me, they will also Persecute you that keep
my Sayings. And they will not keep your Sayings, that do not keep Christ's,
(who says, love Enemies. John 14.
) And therefore are we Persecuted, because we keep Christ's Sayings and
Commands, who is the Redeemer and Savior, who says, Swear not at all, etc.

Steven told the Jews when they did Persecute and Stone him to Death, That they
always resisted the holy Ghost, and that their Fathers had been Persecutors of
the Prophets.

And Paul after he was Converted, told the Jews and Heathens, how he had been
exceeding Mad against the Christians, and had Persecuted that Way, Christ the
Light; And now he was sent to turn People from Darkness to Light, and from the
Power of Satan unto God. And how he had Persecuted the Church of God, and
thought he did God good service; Act. 22.26.
And was exceeding Envious against them, and Injurious? A Fanatic spirit. Yet
afterward he says, that he himself was Persecuted but not forsaken, for the
Lord was with him; when he exercised himself to keep his Conscience void of
offense toward God, and toward man; Then those Persecuted him, and were
against him and forsook him, who before were for him; but the Lord did not
forsake him, but was with him, 1 Cor. 15.

Now here is the Two Births, Paul was Persecuted when he was Born of the
Spirit, but when he was of the Flesh he was a Persecutor. Now they that will
live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer Persecution by the ungodly, who are,
and ever were the Persecutors, and unprofitable Talkers, 2 Timothy 3.

And the Apostle says, he was in Necessities, and in Persecution, and
Affliction, and endured Stripes, Hunger and Nakedness: And again he says,
neither Persecution, nor Famine, nor Tribulation, nor Distress, should
separate them from the love of God: And for Christ's sake they were killed all
the day long, and were accounted as sheep for the slaughter, and through Christ
they were more than Conquerors over all those Persecutors. So he that is born
of the Spirit is to suffer Persecution by the Birth born after the flesh: and
not again to Persecute,

And Jeremiah says, who was Persecuted of the Jews: All their Persecutors
ovetook them (when God brought the Heathen upon them) which were swifter than
an Eagle from Heaven: And this came upon Jeremiah's Persecutors, who prayed to
the Lord to Revenge him of his Persecutors, Jer. 15.

And the Apostle speaks of some that had been accounted Christians amongst them
that were Dogs: that after a time turned again and lickt up the Vomit, (as
many do now, and these Dogs were greedy and hungry Persecutors, and Devourers,
that lick up their own Vomit) and will not feed upon the bread that comes down
from heaven, Christ Jesus. And some that went under the Name of Christians,
after that they were washed did run into the mire again.

So Consider this ye who are not Heirs of God and Elect before the World began,
see if ye be not of the Dogs and Swine renting, and tearing, and in the mire,
and licking up your own Vomit.

And the Woman, the true Church, was Persecuted, which brought forth the Man
Child. Sea Rev. 12.

And the Firstborn, who is born after the Flesh, Persecuted him that was born
after the Spirit, Gal. 4. For he that is born after the Flesh is a Persecutor,
though he may Profess all the Scriptures, Church-Worship, and Ministry, yet he
is a Persecutor.

Queen Mary Persecuted the tender Vines and Budds, and Plants as they sprang
up; Whose End and Days the Lord shortened: And woeful and miserable was the end
of many of those Bishops and Bloody Tyrants, which in her days were the
greatest Persecutors. As ye may read in Foxe's Monuments.

And also, we warned the Long-Parliament of their Persecution, who heard not,
nor regarded the Prophets of the Lord; who at the last were turned out as unfit
for his use.

We warned Oliver Protector, in whose Dominions there was Persecution almost in
every place, who would not here and consider as he ought to have done; and so
his Days also were shortened.

We warned other Parliaments of their Persecution, and to stop and limit
Persecutors.

We warned Richard Cromwell of Persecution and Persecutors, to stop and limit
them.

We warned the Committee of Safety (so called) of the Plagues and Judgments of
God that were coming upon their heads: and of the blood of the Innocent in the
Nation that lay shed, by Persecutors, in Goals, Prisons, and Houses of
Correction; And men's Lives and Estates were taken from them by men in Tyranny
and Persecution; yet great Talking and Professing of God and Christ with the
Lips, but out of his Life and Doctrine.

Last of all we have warned Charles the King who has his day, and all his
Officers and Magistrates under him, by whom many of the Innocent are cast into
Goals, lying on straw in Dungeons, some whereof are sick and weak, and some
dead, and Wives and Children, and necessary things denied them: Therefore
consider these things for this is the day now of your Trial.

All you that do Persecute about Religion, Church, Worship, Ministry,
Sacrifice and Offerings, are no more Respected of God than Cain was, neither
has God any more regard to your Services than He had to his.

H. F.

THE END.

