A BRIEF EXPOSITION OF THE EPISTLES of Paul TO THE GALATIANS AND EPHESIANS.

BY JAMES FERGUSSON, Minister at Kilwinning.

Isa. 28. 10. For precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon
line, line upon line, here a little and there a little. Col. 3. 16. Let the
Word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one
another, etc. LONDON, Printed for the Company of STATIONERS, Anno Dom. 1659.

To the Right Honorable and noble Lords, Alexander, Earl of Eglintoun, etc.
AND Hugh, Lord Montgomery, his Son; And to the Right Honorable and noble Lady,
The Lady Mary Lesley, Lady Montgomery.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
IT is decreed in Heaven, That we must through much tribulation enter the
Kingdom of God, Act. 14. -22. God only wise has so resolved, that, by means of
sanctified trouble the Heirs of glory may be weaned from earth, and learn to
place their chief contentment and happiness, not upon their enjoyments below,
which are uncertain, empty and perishing; but upon things above, an inheritance
incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for
them. How hard were it to make, even those who are born of God, long to be
dissolved and bid adieu to all their sublunary contentments, except the Lord in
mercy did place a prick in every one of those roses, and make their most
promising earthly comforts within a little to prove as streams of brooks that
pass away, Job 6. 15? And how should this conciliate love to a sad and
suffering lot, and make the Lord's People (who are strangers and pilgrims)
delight in the way, which leads to such an home as Heaven is? It is indeed
our unacquaintance with Scripture, and with what the Word of Truth holds
forth to be the mind of God, while He scourges every son whom He receives,
which does occasion so much proud rising of spirit, or base dejectedness of
mind, when the Lord does not carve us out such a satisfying lot in all things
as we would. How often do we mistake our way, and little less than quarrel
with God? only because He hedgeth us in with thorns of affliction, that we
cannot find out our lovers; and therefore that man is truly blessed whom the
Lord does not only chastise, but also instruct out of His Law, Ps. 94. 12. and
thereby make him understand and hear the voice of the rod, and of Him who has
appointed it, Mica. 6. 9. And herein indeed the Lord does greatly manifest His
mavelous loving kindness, and in wrath remembers mercy, that He joyneth
instruction with correction, and does furnish His afflicted People with
abundant means, by which they may take up the mind of God for good unto them
under His saddest dispensations, even that the fruit of affliction is to take
away their sin, Isa. 27. -9-. that He does punish them seven times more, and
yet seven times more, until their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they
accept of the punishment of their iniquity, Levit. 26. 24, 28, 41. that though
He visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes:
Nevertheless His loving kindness will He not utterly take from him, Psalm. 89.
32, 33. and that when they are judged, they are chastened of the Lord, that
they should not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11. 32. All this, and much
more to this purpose, has the Lord made known by His Word, and does daily
inculcate and make more and more known by His sent Ministers, who, according to
their Commission, do open up and apply the rich treasure of holy Scripture unto
the Lords People of their charge. And, as if all this were not sufficient, He
has besides stirred up the spirits of many of His Servants in every age to
(...)mit their Labors upon Scripture unto writing, for the more public use of
the Church of God, not only in the present, but also the succeeding generations.

As for my self, I ingenuously profess, that, being conscious of mine own
weakness, I did much incline to rest satisfied with expressing my Commission
by word only in preaching to, and conferring with, my Flock and those of my
charge: But, being earnestly requested, and in a manner commanded by some
Reverend Brethren, whom I honor and reverence in the Lord, to draw up briefly
in writ, a plain Analysis, a short and sound Exposition of, and the chief
Observations grounded upon such Scriptures as I had either largely preached
upon, or more briefly openedup to the Lords People of my charge, I showed them
some of my weak endeavors of that kind to be disposed upon at their pleasure:
which when they were pleased to publish and to call for more work of the same
nature, expressing their confidence, that what I had already done, was
acceptable to all that love the Truth, and would be edifying to the present and
after-ages; and, being thereunto also encouraged by diverse faithful and
understanding persons, I have, in obedience to their desires, givenout this
other Piece to be disposed of by them as they should see good.

And seeing they have advised the publishing of it, To whom could I, with more
confidence and conscience of duty, dedicate these my mean labors than to your
Honors; considering, that God has appointed me to watch for your souls, as
one who must g(...)n account, and that your Honors have endeavored, for your
parts, to encourage me to go about all the parts of my Ministry with joy, and
not with grief?

My Lords, when I called to remembrance how long each of you was detained these
years bypast from enjoying the benefit of my public Ministry, by your
necessitated abode elsewhere, I thought the best way to give you an account,
and to make you reap some fruit of my labors in your absence, was, to present
these my weak endeavors to your Honors: and what you have heard from me upon
these Scriptures in public, when you were permitted to be my hearers, I hope
this little piece shall conduce to bring it to your remembrance, and the Lord
Himself convey it into your hearts, there to remain, to make your Honors more
and more wise to salvation, that in the day of the Lord Jesus ye may be matter
of joy, and a crown of rejoicing to those who have labored among you and
spoken the Word of God unto you.

And for you, Madam, who has had liberty to be my hearer more frequently and
constantly than my noble Lords, as I trust your Honor will observe there is a
good harmony betwixt that which I taught in the Congregation and which I now
publish to the world; and that this little piece shall (according to your
usual diligence in searching Scripture, and in keeping fellowship with God in
the practice of all commanded duties) be improved by your Honor for your
further edification and encouragment to walk worthy of the Lord unto all
well-pleasing: So, when I consider how refreshfull it has been often unto me
to behold your sweet submission under the Lord's hand, your truly Christian
courage under variety of afflictions, your tractable disposition to receive
wholesome counsels, your willingness to be instructed in the way to life, and,
in order to that end, to attend public duties beyond many of your equals; your
strengthening my hands in the work of my Ministry, as by other means, so
especially by your good example amongst the People of my charge, I should judge
my self very unanswerable to God, and exceeding much blameworthy if I did not
encourage your Honor to make progress in that good way, wherein ye are
already engaged. And if my present essay upon this Piece of sacred Truth do
contribute any thing to this end, it shall be matter of thanksgiving from me
unto the Lord, who alone does teach His People to profit.

And finally, I do profess unto you all (Right Honorable and most dearly
beloved in our Lord) that those words, 2 Pet. 1. 12, 13, 14, 15. sound much in
mine ears, and do sometimes work upon my heart, if so I may in some measure
follow the example of that blessed Apostle who wrote them, Wherefore (says he)
I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of those things,
though ye know them, and be established in the present Truth. Yea, I think it
meet, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up, by putting you in
remembrance. Knowing, that ere long (or, not knowing how soon) I must put off
this tabernacle. Moreover, I will endeavor, that you may be able after my
decease, to have these things always in remembrance. Now, it is the Lord alone
who blesses the endeavors of His Servants, and gives increase both to our
planting and watering. To whose rich and saving grace I commend your Honors
most heartily, and shall ever pray for all manner of blessings on you and all
your rising posterity, as is the duty of,

Your Honors obliged Servant, who beggeth grace to approve himself your
faithful Pastor, JAMES FERGUSSON.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
I Do here present thee with an Exposition of two of Paul's Epistles after the
pattern (so far as my weakness could reach) held forth by those two Reverend
Brethren, Mr. David Dickson, and Mr. George Hutcheson, in their late Pieces of
this kind upon other parcels of holy Scripture.

The Reasons of my undertaking (besides what is held forth in the former
Epistle) were not any confidence I had to come up to my copy, wherein I doubt
not, but, as I my self am very conscious, so, the intelligent Reader will
easily perceive that I come far short, and that the superstructure by me is
much unanswerable, as to fullness of purpose, accuracie and style of language
to the foundation laid by them: But, first, an apprehension I had, that as the
completing of such a work as this upon the whole Scripture, is much wished for
by many, and would prove acceptable and profitable to the Church of Christ; So,
many of greater abilities and fitness than I for such a task, who did lie-by,
might be strongly induced to contribute their endeavors toward it, if any
essay of mine should be accepted, Wherein, I bless the Lord, I have not been
in a mistake, as may appear by what is sent abroad to the world since the
publishing of my former Piece, by a Reverend Brother my nearest fellow laborer
in the work of the Ministry, upon the two Epistles of PETER. And, secondly, I
was one of those, who, some ten years ago, without my knowledge, were pitched
upon by some Reverend Brethren of the Ministry for carryingon this Work: at
which time, I almost perfected the whole task then allotted for me; but,
through some sad accident in those times of trouble, all the Papers I had
written upon that subject, were destroyed and lost, and so a great part of my
time and life in a manner lost with them: which, notwithstanding, did not so
discourage me, but the remembrance of what sweetness I tasted in that study,
and of the manifold advantage wherewith it did recompense my pains, did make me
full seven years after more easy to be wrought upon and persuaded by the
earnest desires of others to make a new essay, as being confident from former
experience, I my self at least should be no loser by it.

If any shall think this present Piece to be of greater length than my former,
and some others of this kind are, I hope they will (for satisfaction) consider,
that seeing the Apostle does discuss a great and needful controversy in the
Epistle to the Galatians, it requires time and enlargement to find and follow
the thread of an intricate dispute; and to explain those excellent Truths,
which the Apostle does so much labor to assert. And as for the Epistle to the
Ephesians, it is well known to be so comprehensive (as containing the whole
substance of Christian Religion in so little bulk) that hardly can any man (at
least not I) satisfy either himself, or his Reader, without enlarging himself
somewhat in opening up such a rich treasure and excellent subject.

I know there may be much coincidencie of Doctrines, which do nativly arise
from those Epistles and from those others to the Philippians and Colossians;
But, the Reader may, for his satisfaction, consider that (besides I have
frequently referred him to those places, where such Doctrines were formerly
raised) seeing the Spirit of God has thought it necessary to assert necessary
truths oftener than once, in several Scriptures, for our further confirmation,
it should not be thought an idle repetition in a Writer to draw out the same
conclusions from the same truths when they occurr: for, hereby is given a proof
of the sufficiency and fruitfulness of Scripture, as furnishing many arguments
to establish one and the same necessary truth; To write the same things to you,
to me indeed is not grievous, but for you it is safe, says our Apostle,
Philip. 3. 1.

I trust it shall not offend, that in some places I do not only hold forth the
doctrine and conclusion, which flow naturally from the text; but also couch-in
some explanations, cautions, reasons, and sometimes some short uses; for, those
serve to obviate mistakes about the truth in hand, and to leave some impression
of it upon the heart and affections.

If any take exception that Scriptures are too frequently cited, and think they
are hereby retarded from making progress in reading the treatise, They may be
pleased to consider, that I cite no Scriptures to confirm the Doctrines
themselves, which, as I conceive, are sufficiently grounded upon, and confirmed
from the text, but only the cautions reasons and uses of those Doctrines, which
not being grounded upon the present Scripture, I desired none to take off my
hand upon trust. However, if any understand the purpose to be truth, and
grounded upon Scripture, he needs not stand to seek the particular passage,
which is brought to prove it, except he please and judge it convenient, that he
may have some further ground of meditation upon the truth in hand thereby
afforded.

And now, beloved Christians, let me exhort you all, and especially you to whom
the Lord has carved out such a lot in things worldly that ye have abundance of
time and leisure from your other employments, Give more of your time to the
searching of Scripture, and labor to understand the mind of God concerning
your Salvation revealed therein. Hereby shall you be preserved from being led
aside by Satan's emissaries, who do err, not knowing the Scriptures, Matthew. 22.
29. Hereby ye shall be made wise unto Salvation, and rendered victorious over
your strongest lusts, and thoroughly fitted for the most difficult duties, while
the Lord by His Spirit shall make the Scriptures profitable unto you for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, and
thereby make you perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3. 16,
17. Only in order to the gaining of those rich advantages by reading Scripture,
ye would read, not superficially, but conscientiously, attentivly, and
devoutly; and do not slight to take what helps ye can get from the Labors of
others for attaining to the increase of solid knowledge and sanctifying grace.

What humane frailties you discern in this piece of mine (which doubtless are
not a few) pity them and so much the more pray for me that I may discern and
amend them: and if any will be so faithful and free as to advertise me either
immediately, or by causing others to acquaint me with them, I shall (God
willing) be humbly thankful, and endeavor to make the best use I can of their
freedom, knowing that such reproofs will not break my head, but be as a
precious ointment. The great and gracious God bless all your endeavors for
advancing your selves and your relations in knowledge and grace. So prays,

Kilwinning, Nov. 12. 1658. Your servant in the Lord, JAMES FERGUSSON.

ERRATA.
Page, Line, Read. 6 11 subscribe 10 24 5. 13 28 had deserted 1^ 28 their 20 7
believing ^1 6 their 24 15 dele to 36 9 wickedness 37 15 32. 39 16 22. 40 23
went not up 52 5 our 53 23 acquired 54 28 2. 61 24 composing ibid 35 9. 19. 84
13 dele who 102 10 affections 131 10 inflicted 136 24 worth 163 20 does succeed
166 3 ver. 7. 171 7 17. 180 12 us sons 239 23 11. 283 11 may have 298 23 15.
315 7 sin and

A brief Exposition of the Epistle of Paul to the Galatians.
The ARGUMENT.
PAul, having planted several Churches in Galatia (Act. 16. 6. and 18. 23.) a
region of Asia the less; and being now, as it seems, a prisoner at Rome,
(chap. 6. 17.) some false Apostles had seduced these Churches from the sincere
doctrine of the Gospel preached by Paul, chap. 1. 6. persuading them that the
observation of the Levitical Ceremonies, now abolished, was necessary, chap. 6.
13. and that justification and salvation were partly from faith in Christ, and
partly also from their own works, chap. 3. 2. and 4. 21. and that Paul was no
lawful Apostle, no ways to be compared with the other Apostles who had seen
Christ in the flesh, (as may be gathered from chap. 2. 6, 9.) and therefore his
doctrine was but false. Upon which occasion, the Apostle writes unto them this
Epistle: wherein his scope, is, to convince those Galatians of their Errors; to
reduce them to the right way; to confirm them in the Truth, and to press upon
them the duties of an holy life, chap. 3, and 4, etc. which he labors to
effectuate (after prefacing, to ver. 6. chap. 1.) First, by asserting the truth
of the Gospel preached by him, and the Authority of his own Apostleship, to
ver. 15. of chap. 2. Secondly, by vindicating the true doctrine of
justification by faith, and of the temporary use and abrogation of the
Levitical Law, and of the whole legal dispensation of the Covenant of Grace, to
the end of chap. 4. Thirdly, by instructing them in the right use of Christian
Liberty, having exhorted them to stand to it, and pointing out, and pressing
upon them the exercise of several Christian Virtues, to ver. 11. of chap. 6.
From whence he concludes the Epistle, to the end of chap. 6.

CHAP. I.
IN the first part of this Chapter, is the preface to the whole Epistle,
containing the party who did write it, ver. 1, 2 -- the party to whom it was
written, ver. -- 2. the salutation, ver. 3. a description of Jesus Christ from
the work of Redemption, ver. 4. and a thanksgiving to God for this work, ver. 5.

In the second part, he reproves the Galatians for their defection from the
Gospel, ver. 6. to Errors, which did overturn it, ver. 7.

In the third part, that he may justify this reproof, he asserteth the divine
authority of the Gospel preached by him, First, by cursing those who should
hold out another Gospel, differing from it, ver. 8, 9. Secondly, from the scope
of his doctrine, and his aim in preaching it, ver. 10. Thirdly, because both
the first saving knowledge which he had of the Gospel, and his office to preach
it, were immediately from God, and not from men, whether Apostles or any other,
ver. 11, 12. whereof he gives several evidences; As first, that ever until
the instant of his conversion, he was a learned, but persecuting Pharisee, ver.
13, 14. Secondly, that being miraculously converted and called, he went
presently with no small pains and hazard to discharge his Apostolic Office,
without instruction or authority received from any Apostle, ver. 15, 16, 17.
Thirdly, that after three years he went to Peter, but not to be informed by
him, or to receive ordination from him, or from any other Apostle, ver. 18, 19.
The truth of all which history he confirms by an oath, ver. 20. Fourthly,
that he preached as an Apostle in Syria and Cilicia, with the approbation of
the Christian Jews whom formerly he had persecuted, ver. 21, 22, 23, 24.

Verse. 1. PAUL an Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and
God the Father, who raised Him from the dead, 2. And all the Brethren which are
with me, unto the Churches of Galatia.
IN these two Verses is the Inscription of the Epistle, holding forth, 1. Who
did write it, to wit, Paul, described from his Office, and his Call to that
Office, which were both wholly divine, as being immediately from God, ver. 1.
And the Brethren with him; such were eminent Professors, but especially public
Preachers, who then were with Paul, and did give their testimony to those
Truths contained in this Epistle, though they were not the immediate Penmen of
the holy Ghost in it, as Paul was. 2. To whom the Epistle was written, ver. 2.
From ver. 1. Learn, 1. Free Grace does often light upon the most unworthy, not
only by giving grace and salvation to themselves, but also making them
sometimes instrumental for the Kingdom of Christ, and for bringing about the
salvation of others: for, Paul, once a wicked persecutor, 1 Timothy 1. 13 -- is
now made an eminent Apostle; Paul an Apostle. 2. Faithful and called Ministers
of Jesus Christ, are to be so far from cowardly ceding, or heartlesse fainting
under the bold, bitter and unjust aspersions of those who would labor to
question their Calling, and thereby weaken their Authority, and render the
truth of their Doctrine doubtsom, Mat. 21. 23. that they ought so much the
more, for the credit of their Office, Romans 11. 13. and for the Truth's sake
which they preach, 1 Cor. 7. 25. avow their Calling against all, who do
question it. Thus Paul, writing to these Galatians amongst whom, by means of
the false Apostles, his Authority was questioned more than in any other Church,
(chap. 2. 6, 9, etc.) expresses himself more largely in avowing his Call to
the Apostolic Office, than in any other Epistle: not only affirming that he
was called by Jesus Christ, and God the Father; but also denying that he was an
Apostle of men, or, by man. 3. The Apostolic Office had this common to it with
all other Church-offices, whether ordinary, or extraordinary, Ephesians. 4. 11. that
it was not the invention of man, or founded upon authority merely humane, but
was instituted by Jesus Christ, to whom only it appertains to appoint
Office-bearers in His House, 1 Cor. 12. 28. for which respect, Paul affirms
he was an Apostle not of man, as the Ambassadors and Officers of Princes and
States are: Ministers are Ambassadors for Christ, representing Him, and having
their Authority from Him, 2 Cor. 5. 20. 4. The Office of an Apostle had this
peculiar unto it self, that the designation of the person to undergo that
Office, was not mediately by the election and suffrages of men, as it is in the
calling of ordinary Office-bearers, Act. 14. 23. but immediately from God; so
that the Function of the Apostles ceased with them, and did not pass by
succession to a Pope or any other: for, in this respect, Paul affirms he was
an Apostle, not by man, to wit, mere man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the
Father. He was called immediately by God, Act. 9. 15. Doct. 5. That Jesus
Christ is not mere man but God also, appears from this, that the Apostle here
opposes Christ to man, and so He behoved to be more than man: and this was not
an Angel, Heb. 2. 16. and therefore He was also God; Neither by man (says he)
to wit, mere man, but by Jesus Christ. 6. When Scripture ascribes an action to
the Father, the first Person of the blessed Trinity, as done by Him, it is not
to be so understood, as if the Son and holy Ghost were excluded from having
hand in that action; but that they are rather included in the Father, as
persons of the same Godhead: for, the calling of the Ministers of the Gospel,
which is ascribed to God the Father, is ascribed to the holy Ghost, Act. 20.
28. and Paul, who is here said to be called by God the Father, is by the holy
Ghost separated and sent forth unto a particular employment in his Calling,
Act. 13. 2, 4. and the raising of Christ from the dead in like manner ascribed
to God the Father here, is ascribed to Christ also, Joh. 10. 18. and to the
holy Ghost, Romans 8. 11. And God the Father, who raised Him from the dead. All
the external actions of the Godhead toward the creatures, are common to the
whole Trinity, Joh. 5. 19. So that the ascribing of some actions to the Father,
is not, as if any of the rest were not concurring, But because of the order of
working, which is among the Three Persons; the Father being the first fountain
of working, as doing all things from Himself (1 Cor. 8. 6.) by the Son (1 Cor.
8. 6.) and holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12. 6, 8. because of this order, those actions
which are common to the whole Trinity, are frequently ascribed unto the Father.
7. As Jesus Christ who has life in Himself, Job. 5. 26. and is the fountain of
life unto others, (Joh. 6. 33.) was once among the dead; so He was raised again
by the power of the Father from death unto life, and is alive for evermore,
Amen, Rev. 1. 18. it being impossible that He should be holden by death, Act.
2. 24. and Divine Justice having received full satisfaction from Him for all
which He undertook to do or suffer, as our Cautioner, Joh. 16. 10. Who raised
Him from the dead, says he. 8. So blinded are men usually with preposterous
zeal toward their erroneous opinions, that frequently they do allege those
things for to uphold them, which of all other things are most contrary unto
them: Thus the false Apostles, that they might shake the Truth preached by
Paul, and establish their own contrary Error, did allege that he was no lawful
Apostle, as for other reasons, so it would seem mainly for this, Because he had
not seen Christ in the flesh, 1 Cor. 9. 1. nor yet was called before His death;
and that therefore his Doctrine was not to be much regarded: Which reason Paul
does here refute, by showing he was called by Christ, after He was raised from
the dead, and had taken possession of His glorious Kingdom; leaving unto them
to gather, that therefore his Call^ng had at least no less dignity and glory
in it than if he had been called by Christ when He was here upon the Earth in
the days of His flesh; And God the Father, who raised Him from the dead.

From verse. 2. Learn. 1. The moc they are whom God makes use of to hold out
the beauty of Truth and Holiness unto us, that we may embrace and follow it;
or, the deformity and danger of Error and Vice, that we may fly from, hate, and
abhor it, We are the more to take heed how we reject or embrace, despise or
obey what is so pressed upon us; as knowing there will be the more to bear
witness of our guilt, and seek to the equity of God's judgment against us, if
we obey not, Luke 9. 5. for, Paul does join the consent of all the Brethren who
were with him, unto what he writes; that so his Doctrine and Reproofs might
have the more weight; And all the Brethren which are with me. 2. Though the
sins of a Church, whether in Doctrine or Manners, are not to be reputed as no
sins by us, because they are connived at, or pleaded for by a Church, Jer. 5.
31. and though the sins of Churches are to be pleaded against by private
Christians in their places and stations, Hos. 2. 2. So far are they to be from
following of a multitude to do evil, Exodus 23. 2. Yet we are not so to stumble
at the many sinful failings; yea, gross enormities, which may be in Churches,
relating either to Faith or Manners, as presently to unchurch them, by denying
them to be a Church, or to separate from them, by refusing to keep communion
with them in lawful and commanded Ordinances, being purely administrated
according to the prescript of God's Word, chiefly if their Error be not
contrary to fundamental Truths, or at least if they err of humane frailty, and
not obstinately or avowedly: for, the Churches of Galatia had made a grievous
revolt, even from a fundamental Truth, ver. 6. and chap. 3. 1. and yet because
they were rather through frailty seduced by others, than active seducers of
others, therefore he uses much meekness and moderation toward them, allowing
them the name of Churches, and exercising his Apostolic care toward them as a
part of his charge, and thereby keeping communion with them, as with Churches
which were sickly and under cure; Unto the Churches of Galatia: which Truth
makes nothing against our separation from the Church of Rome, as being after
much pains taken in order to their reclaiming, and not until we were driven to
it by persecution; besides that the Romish Church had erred in the foundation
obstinately, and avowedly.

Verse. 3. Grace be to you and peace, from God the Father, and from our Lord
Jesus Christ.
HEre is the Salutation, wherein he wishes unto them God's gracious favor and
good will, whereby He is well-pleased with the Elect in, and for Christ, Romans
3. 24. and Peace, that is, first, Peace of conscience, and with God, Romans 5. 1.
Secondly, peace with the creatures, as with the Angels, Col. 1. 20. with the
Godly, Isa. 11. 9. with our selves, all within us being conform to the rule of
the renewed mind, Romans 8. ^1. and in some respect with our enemies, Prove. 16.
7. and with the beasts of the field, Hos. 2. 18. Thirdly, Prosperity and good
success, Psalm. 122. 7. All which he seeks from God the Father as the
fountain of Grace, and from Jesus Christ as the conduit or pipe to convey Grace
from the Father unto us, Job. 1. 16. Doct. 1. God's gracious favor and
good will is to be sought by us in the first place, whether for our selves
(Psalm. 4. 6.) or others: that being a most discriminating mercy betwixt the
Godly and the wicked, Ephesians. 1. 6. and a mercy which of any other brings
maniest mercies along with it, Psalm. 84. 11. Yea, all things are mercy to a
man, who has obtained that mercy, Romans 8. 28. for, the Apostle wishes for
Grace unto them first; Grace and peace. 2. Peace also is to be sought, even
Peace with God, Peace with the creatures, together with prosperity and good
success; but withal, Peace is to be sought after Grace, and not to be expected
before it. Peace without Grace, is no Peace: there can be no peace with God, no
sanctified peace with the creatures, nor sanctified prosperity or success to
our undertakings, except through Jesus Christ we lay hold on God's favor and
grace; Yea, there is no peace to the wicked, says my God, Isa. 57. 21. Thus
the Apostle wishes unto them also Peace, but so as it flow from Grace; Grace
and Peace. 3. Grace and Peace are such, as we cannot acquire unto our selves by
our own industry or pains: they come from God, are to be sought from Him, and
His blessing is more to be depended upon for attaining of any thing, which
comes under the compass of Grace and Peace, than our own wisdom, industry or
diligence; So Paul seeks Grace and Peace from God the Father. 4. Whatever
favor we seek from God, we are to seek it also from Jesus Christ as Mediator:
for, He has purchased it, Ephesians. 1. 7. He is appointed Lord of His own purchase
to bestow all, Act. 5. 31. and there is no coming to, or trysting with the
Father; but in Him, Joh. 14. 6. Thus Paul seeks Grace and peace from our Lord
Jesus Christ. 5. They to whom Grace and Peace belong, are such as acknowledge
Christ for their Lord to command and rule them, and do yield subjection to Him
in their heart and life: for, while the Apostle wishes Grace and Peace to
them, he does lead them to thoughts of Christ's Soveraignity, he himself taking
Him up as Lord, and holding Him forth so unto others; From our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Verse. 4. Who gave Himself for our sins, that He might deliver us from this
present evil world, according to the will of God, and our Father.
THe Apostle (having but mentioned Christ, ver. 3: that he may in the very
entry draw the minds of these Galatians from off their errors and superstitions
to embrace Him, as one in whom is fullness of sufficiency for the redemption
and justification of lost sinners) does describe Him from one eminent action of
His, whereby, as the great High Priest over the House of God, Heb. 10. 21. He
did offer up Himself, Soul (Isa. 55. 10.) and Body (Heb. 2. 14.) by death upon
the Cross, Joh. 19. 17, 18. that He might expiate and take away (Joh. 1. 29.)
the sins of the Elect, Joh. 17. 9. and that hereby He might deliver them from
this present evil world, or from the sin, misery and cruelty of wicked men in
the world, who get the name of world, 1 John 5. 19. and all this He did in
obedience to His Father's will, who had foreordained this to be the only way
of bringing lost sinners to Heaven, Heb. 10. 8, 9. Doct. 1. The lively
impression of Christ's worth and excellency, does ordinarily so fill the hearts
of those, who know Him, and have tasted how gracious He is, as there will be a
readiness, upon any occasion of mentioning Him, to breakforth in His
commendation: for, such is the constraining power of love on Paul's heart, that
usually he does not so much as make mention of Him, but presently he must
extol, and at large commend Him; so does he in this verse, Who gave himself,
etc. which his attainment, should be our aim; and his practice, our copy, 1
Cor. 11. 1. 2. The well-grounded knowledge of what Christ is to us, and has
done for us, together with the frequent remembrance of it, is a sovereign
Antidote against all those Errors and Superstitions, which tend to draw us from
Christ, either in part, or in whole; and that, both to prevent them, and to
purge us from them: He is that Sun of righteousness, Mal. 4. 2. the arising
whereof does easily dispel and scatter all those fogs and mists, Act. 19. 18,
19, 20. for, Paul, in order to this end, does in the very entry hold forth what
Christ had done for them; Who gave himself, etc. says he. 3. So deep and
deadly was the guilt of sin, Gal. 13. 10. So exact was the justice of God, and
so unalterable was His faithfulness in executing the judgment, which was
denounced for sin, (Genesis 2. 17.) that there was no delivery to the Elect from
it, without the payment of a ransom and satisfaction for the wrong done by sin
to the provoked justice of God: for, Christ gave himself for our sins, that is,
a propitiation for them, 1 John 2. 2. and to cleanse us from them, 1 John 1. 7.
4. Nothing less could be a satisfying ransom to the Father's justice, than the
offering-up of Jesus Christ, the holy, harmless and spotless Lamb of God,
both in Soul and Body, as a Sacrifice, by death upon the Cross. The wrong was
infinite, Genesis 39. -- 9. and so must the price be, even no less than the Blood
of God, Act. 20. 28. Who gave himself for our sons. 5. Such was the desire
which Jesus Christ had to the salvation of lost sinners, Prove. 8. 31. such was
His care to perform what He had undertaken to the Father, and what was
foretold of Him in Scripture, (Psalm. 40. 7, 8.) that willingly, and of His own
accord, without any constraint, except that of love, (Joh. 15. 13.) He did
offer up himself a Sacrifice to satisfy provoked justice: for, He gave himself
for our sins, says Paul. 6. They for whom Christ did give Himself upon the
Cross, are also delivered by Him from this present evil world: which Christ
does not by taking them presently out of this world by death, or otherwise.
Joh. 17. 15. But, first, by renewing their natures, and so separating them from
the condition of unregenerate men, who are called the world, 1 John 15. 19.
And, secondly, by guarding them against those baits and snares of sinful
temptations, which are mainly prevalent in the men of this world, 1 John 2. 16.
Thirdly, by defending them, so far as He sees conducing for His own glory,
(Psalm. 76. 10.) and their good (Psalm. 84. -- 11.) from the malicious cruelty of
wicked men of this world, Psalm. 105. 14. And, lastly, by taking them at the
close of their time (2 Cor. 5. 1.) from Earth to Heaven, that they may be for
ever with Himself, Joh. 14. 3. for, He gave himself, that He might deliver us
from this present world. Doct. 7. So much do wickedness and wicked men abound
in the world, Genesis 6. 5. so many are the snares and temptations to sin and
wickedness, which are in it, 1 John 2. 16. so many also are the crosses and
calamities, which godly men may resolve to meet with while they are in the
world, Psalm. 34. 19. that though the world simply in it self, and as it
speaks our duration and abode in this life, all the days of our appointed
time, be not evil, but distinguished from evil, Joh. 17. 15. Yet for those
causes, and in those respects, the present world is an evil world; for so it is
here called. 8. That any of lost mankind, in whom by nature sin does reign,
should have their natures renewed, the power of sin in them mortified, and so
themselves delivered from this present evil world, it was necessary that Christ
should offer up Himself: for, as life eternal, so also God's Image and
Holiness was forfeited by Adam's fall unto all his posterity, 1 Cor. 15. 21.
and so behoved to be purchased by Christ's death before ever we could attain
unto it, Heb. 9. 14. for, says the Apostle, He gave himself, that we might be
delivered from this present evil world. 9. This evil world, wherein so much
wickedness, so much misery, and so many wicked men abound, is but present, not
lasting; transient, not continuing; it is hastening to its end, Romans 8. 19. and
at last shall be consumed with fire, 2 Pet. 3. 10. and a new World, new
Heavens, and a new Earth, are to succeed unto it, wherein shall dwell
righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. 13. for, he calls this a present world, importing
that there is another to come. 10. That Jesus Christ did offer up Himself in
satisfaction to provoked Justice for the sins of the Elect, was a thing decreed
and appointed by the Father, which, as it speaks the Fathers unspeakable love
unto lost sinners, Joh. 3. 16. so it shows the ground whereupon the
satisfaction given by Christ, is accepted for those, who by faith lay hold on
Him. Joh. 6. 39, 40. it was so transacted betwixt the Father and the Son, even
that He should give himself for our sins, according to the will of God, to wit,
the Father: for, when God is opposed to Christ, then God signifies the Father;
Yet so, as the other two Persons of the Godhead are not excluded, as is noted
upon Ver. 1. Doct. 6. 11. By reason of this satisfaction given by Jesus Christ
to provoked justice for our sins, God, who was before a consuming fire to
sinners, Heb. 12. 29. a strict sin-pursuing Judge, Exodus 34. 7. becomes now
our Father: for, justice being satisfied, and that satisfaction laid hold upon
by faith, Romans 5. 1. the enimity cease, and we become children; yea, heirs
and joynt-heirs with Christ, having received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we
cry, Abba, Father, Romans 8. 15, 16, 17. This is imported, while it is said,
According to the will of God, and our Father.

Verse. 5. To whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.
HEre is the close of the Salutation: in which, by holding forth his own
practice for an example, he comprehends the duty of the Redeemed: they are to
ascribe lasting glory and praise to God the Father for His goodwill to this
work of our Redemption by Jesus Christ. Doct. 1. As God, in this great work of
our Redemption by Jesus Christ, has made the glory of almost all His
Attributes, especially of His Justice, as to Christ, Romans 8. 32. of His Mercy,
as to us, Ephesians. 1. 7. and consequently of His infinite Wisdom (1 Timothy 1. 17.) to
kyth and shine forth: So it' is the duty of the Redeemed, and such a duty as
uses willingly to flow from the very making mention of that so excellent a
Work, in a heart duly affected with the worth thereof, even to acknowledge
that glory of His which is manifested therein, and to wish that His glory may
be set forth more and more, both by our selves and others; and this not only by
speaking to the commendation of His Glory and Greatness, Psalm. 145. 5, 6. but
by making our whole life and conversation to be nothing else, but a testimony
of our thankfulness to Him, 2 Cor. 5. 15. for, the Apostle, having mentioned
that great Work, ascribes glory to God, as God's due, and his own duty; To
whom be glory. 2. This duty of ascribing glory to God for the great and
excellent work of our Redemption, is such, that it can never be sufficiently
discharged: there is no less required than a succession of Ages to Ages; yea,
and Eternities leisure to ascribe glory to God: for, so much is imported, while
he says, To whom be Glory for ever and ever. 3. The Glory of the Redeemer, and
of God who sent His Son to do that Work, shall be the long-lasting and
neverending song of the Redeemed-ones through millions of imaginable ages, even
to all eternity: so much does the word, rendered for ever and ever, bear: for,
it signifies to ages of ages, or innumerable ages. 4. Our praise and
thanksgiving to God, must not be formal or verbal only, Mat. 15. 8. but ought
to be fervent and serious, as proceeding from the most intimate affection of
the heart, (Luke 1. 46, 47.) signified by the word, Amen, that is, Let it be
so; an earnest wish.

Verse. 6. I marvel, that ye are so soon removed from Him that called you into
the grace of Christ, unto another Gospel;
IN the second part of the Chapter, that the Apostle may reclaim those
Galatians from their Errors, he falls upon them with a sad, though most
gentle, reproof; wherein, by way of admiration at their unconstancy, he
charge them with the sin of suffering themselves to be so easily and so soon
seduced by their false Teachers from the Truth, which they had once embraced:
whereof he mentions three dangerous consequences, first, That hereby they had
made defection from God, who called them; and consequently were ungrateful, as
walking unworthy of their heavenly calling, Ephesians. 4. 1. Secondly, That herein
they had the doctrine of Free Grace through Jesus Christ, without which they
could not be saved, Ephesians. 2. 8. And, thirdly, They had embraced another Gospel
and way of Salvation, held forth by the false Apostles, concerning which he
declares his judgment in the following Verse. Doct. 1. It is the duty of
Christ's Ministers, not only to hold out the pure and sincere truth of the
Gospel unto the People of their Charge, Act. 20. 27. But also to defend it, by
convincing of gainsayers, and by reproving those sadly, who are carried away
with contrary errors: for, so does the Apostle here reprove those Galatians, I
marvel, that ye are so soon removed. 2. The Ministers of Jesus Christ, are in
all their reproofs, chiefly against such who are carried away with the spirit
of error, and are not incorrigible in their error, to use much moderation and
meekness, eschewing all sharpness of speech, at least until pains be taken to
inform their judgment; and this, left the evil which they intend to cure, be
otherwise made worse: for, although Paul intend afterward, chap. 3. ver. 1.
(having once confirmed his Doctrine from Scripture) to rebuke them most
sharply; yet he does not here, at the first entry, in an upbraiding way, shame
them, but using much moderation and meekness, with admiration and grief,
makes mention of their levity unto them; and this, because many of them at
least were not yet incorrigible, chap. 5. 10. I marvel, etc. says he. 3. They
are also in all their reproofs, to use much wariness and circumspection, not
omitting any circumstance which may justly extenuate the sin reproved, or
furnish with any ground of hope concerning the amendment of him who is
reproved: for, hereby the bitter potion of a medicinal reproof is much
sweetened, and the guilty patient alluted to the more thorow-receiving of it:
Paul uses this circumspection, while he says, not ye of your selves do remove
to another Gospel, but ye are removed, passively; thereby laying the chief part
of the blame upon others; and while he speaks of them in the present time,
not that they were already removed, but as being in the act of removing, so
that their case was not desperate; I marvel, that ye are removed: In the
Original, it is a word of the present time. 4. The most quick-sighted of
Christ's Ministers, may be much deceived and disappointed in their expectation
of good things from some eminent Professors (for, in charity they are obliged
to hope the best of all, 1 Cor. 13. 7. in whom the contrary does not appear,
Tit. 1. 16.) and so may readily fall short of their hope, as Paul shows he
did, while he says, I marvel, that ye are removed; importing, that their
defection had fallen forth beyond his expectation; for, at such things men use
to marvel, Mark 15. 44. Doct. 5. The Servants of Jesus Christ, are not, under
the pretense of wariness and circumspection in reproving, to omit any
circumstance, which may deservedly aggrege the sin reproved, whereby the guilt
may be charged home with greater weight upon the sinners conscience, 2 Samuel 12.
7. prudence and faithful freedom may well consist, Mat. 10. 16. Thus Paul
heapeth together several things, whereby their apostasy was aggreged, as that
it was sudden, a turning from God, and to another Gospel; I marvel that ye are
so soon removed, etc. 6. How great need have they who stand, to take heed lest
they fall, 1 Cor. 10. 12. seeing such is man's inconstancy, especially in the
matter of Religion; that they who are flourishing Professors of saving Truths
now, may upon a sudden, and with very little ado, be carried away to
soul-destroying Errors before it be long: for, such were those Errors, unto
which the Galatians were removed, chap. 5. 2. and that so soon, either after
their first conversion, or after the time when they were first assaulted by the
false Apostles, which does not militate against the doctrine of perseverance,
seeing Paul speaks to the whole visible Church, among whom some had never
saving grace; and for the few truly gracious, which were among them, there is
nothing here to prove that their falling away was either total or final. 7.
This aggregeth the sin of any person not a little, when he does suddenly
without difficulty or resistance, and with ease succumbe and yield unto the
tentation: for, hereby is their defection aggreged, even that they were so soon
removed; they did not long resist the ^^ntation. 8. Though active seducers of
others from Truth, be more inexcusable than simple creatures that are seduced
by them, Romans 16. 18. Yet, even those of the latter sort, are not altogether
free of guilt; when the blind do lead the blind, both fall together in the
ditch: for, herein were these Galatians guilty, that they did suffer themselves
to be seduced, or, so soon removed from Him that called them. 9. As the
dangerous consequences which follow upon Error, ought to be presented unto
People, that thereby they may be made the more to fly from it; So there are
some Errors in Doctrine, which do no less separate the person erring from God
and interest in free grace, than profanity of life does: of which Errors, this
is one, the maintaining of Justification by works: for, Paul shows that by
this Error they were removed from God, who had called them, and from the grace
of Christ. 10. As the inward effectual calling of sinners from the state of
nature unto grace, is the work of God, which He brings about by the preaching
of His Word, 1 Cor. 1. 21. Yea, and the external calling of men from Idols, to
be Members of the visible Church, which is attended with professed subjection
upon his part, who is called, unto God's Laws and Ordinances, is his work also,
though in an inferior degree and respect: So it is no small aggravation of sin
or error in any person, when it is evidently inconsistent with, or reflecting
upon, that state, unto which he is called: for, Paul describes God here, as
elsewhere, chap. 5. 8. from His calling of them, and chooses to describe Him
so, while he is speaking of their defection; that hereby he may aggrege it, as
reflecting so much upon their calling; From Him that called you. 11. The Gospel
is a Doctrine which holds forth much of Christ's free grace and good will to
sinners, and specially in this, that Heaven and Salvation, though purchased at
a dear rate by Christ, Joh. 3. 16. is notwithstanding freely offered unto all,
Rev. 22. 17. and really to be bestowed upon all who do but come to Him, Joh. 5.
40. and by savingfaith lay hold upon Him, Joh. 3. 36. for, God's calling them
to receive the Doctrine of the Gospel, is here termed His calling them unto the
grace of Christ. 12. It is ordinary for Seducers, and those that are acted by a
seducing spirit, to usher-in their Errors by some excellent designations, as of
New-Lights, a more pure Gospelway, and what not? as here they design their
Eerror, by the name of another Gospel; and this doubtless, as they would have
had the people believe, a more excellent Gospel than what Paul had preached:
for, Paul in imitation of the false Apostles, calls their Errors Another
Gospel.

Verse. 7. Which is not another; but there be some that trouble you, and would
pervert the Gospel of Christ.
THe Apostle takes away that excellent title from the error of the false
Apostles, whereby themselves did design it, and denies it to be a Gospel at
all; yea, and to be any other thing but the invention of men, whereby they
troubled the Churches peace, and labored to overturn and corrupt the doctrine
of the Gospel. Doct. 1. It is the part of Christ's Ministers to undeceive a
seduced People, by taking off the vail of fair pretenses, wherewith Error uses
to be covered, and so made the more taking, and to set it forth in its vilest
colors, that People may loath it: for, Paul does take the name of Gospel from
this error, declaring it to be nothing else but a perverting of the Gospel;
Which is not another. 2. There is but one Gospel, one in number, and no more;
and but one way to Salvation held out in the Gospel, which is by Faith laying
hold upon the righteousness of Christ, Joh. 3. 16. Whatever doctrine holds
forth any other way to Salvation than this, it is no Gospel, no glad-tidings of
Salvation, but a perverting of the Gospel: for, so does Paul affirm of the
doctrine taught by the false Apostles; Which is not another, etc. 3. The proper
effect of Error, is, to trouble the Churches peace; first, their outward peace
among themselves, the patrons of Error being zealous of nothing so much as to
gain many followers, Mat. 23. 15. for attaining whereof, they scruple not much
to make woeful rents and deplorable schisms within the Church, Romans 16. 17.
Secondly, their inward peace of conscience, while some are thereby rendered
first perplexed, and anxious what to choose or what to refuse, and at last are
made to question all Truth, 1 Cor. 15. 32. and others to embrace Error for
Truth, and so to ground their peace upon an unsure foundation, which can give
no solid peace, no not in the mean time; and whatever false peace is thereby
offered, it will afterward end in trouble, Jude 13. Hence it is said here of
the false Apostles by Paul, There be some that trouble you, to wit, by their
Errors. The Scripture-use of the word, is, mainly to signify inward trouble,
anxiety, fear and perplexity of mind, Mat. 2. 3. and 14. 26. The word seems
to be borrowed from the troubling of waters, Job. 5. 4, 7. which usually comes
to pass by great winds, Jona. 1. 7. and applied to the troubling of the
Galatians by the winds of erroneous doctrine, Ephesians. 4. 14. Doct. 4. Then is
usually the design of Satan, and of his instruments, against Truth, most
dangerous, and so most to be watched against and feared, Mat. 7. 15. when they
speak fairest and endeavor to palliate their Errors with specious pretenses:
for here, when they pretend to no less than the holding out of a more
excellent Gospel than Paul's, ver. 6. they endeavor even to pervert and
overturn the Gospel of Christ. 5. However people, who are in hazard of
seduction, or already seduced unto Error, are to be tendered, and by all means
servently to be labored with, in order to their confirmation or recovery, Jude
22, 23. Yet these obdured Leaders and desperate Seducers, are not much to be
taken notice of: Paul thinks such unworthy, whom he should once name; But
there be some that trouble you. 6. The Doctrine which maintains that
Justification and Salvation are obtained partly by Christ, and partly by the
merit of good works, is a perverting and total overturning of the Gospel, in so
far as it contradicts the main scope of the Gospel, which is to hold out and
exalt Christ as our complete Savior, Mediator, and Ransom, and not in part
only, Ephesians. 2. 7, 8, 9. 1 John 1. 7. Hence the false Apostles, while they press
justification by works, as appears from the tenor of the following dispute,
are said to pervert the Gospel of Christ.

Verse. 8. But though we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto
you, than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.
IN the third part of the Chapter, the Apostle, that he may justify his former
reproof, asserteth the Divine Authority of that Gospel, which he had preached
unto them. And first, by denouncing the terrible curse of eternal separation
from Christ against those who should corrupt that Doctrine by preaching another
way of Salvation differing from it. The certainty of which denounciation he
confirms from the supposition of an impossible case, That if either he
himself, or the other Apostles with him, Yea, or if an Angel from Heaven should
teach otherwise, they were not to be exempted from this curse; and therefore
much less should there be exemption for others. Doct. 1. The written Word of
God, without the help of unwritten traditions, contains in it all Truths
necessary for bringing about the salvation of those who yield themselves to be
instructed by it: for, the written Word comprehends the sum and substance of
all that Paul preached or believed, Act. 24. 14. and no Doctrine, differing
from what he had preached, was to be taught under the hazard of a curse, which
could not be, except he had preached all necessary Truths; Let him be accursed,
says he, who preaches any other Gospel. 2. Whatever Doctrine is propounded
unto the Church, as a part of God's Word and necessary to Salvation, if it be
diverse and differing from, or besides the written Word, though it be not
directly contrary unto it, it is a cursed Doctrine, and the Authors thereof
accursed: The Ambassador who speaks any thing beside his Commission, is as
well in a fault, as he who speaks the contrary, though not so much: for,
says the Apostle, If we preach unto you any other Doctrine than that (the word
signifies besides that we have preached unto you) let us be accursed. 3. So
assured ought Ministers to be of the truth of what they hold forth as the way
to life and salvation, that nothing imaginable, no not the authority of an
Angel from Heaven may prevail to brangle them in their leaving of it; yea, and
that knowingly and with confidence they may be able to denounce the curse of
God against those who would dare to hold out another way of Salvation contrary
unto it: for, so does Paul; If an Angel preach besides what we have preached,
let him be accursed. 4. The Ministers of Jesus Christ ought to be faithful
unto the souls of those over whom they are set, by declaring the whole Counsel
of God unto them, Act. 20. 27. and keeping up no Truth necessary for Salvation
from them: for, Paul was thus faithful to the Galatians, else he could not
denounce those accursed who would preach any thing, to wit, as necessary to
Salvation, even besides that which he had preached unto them, as he does here.
5. So much of glory to God's Justice and Mercy is manifested in the Doctrine of
the Gospel, Ephesians. 1. 6, 7, 12. the keeping of this Doctrine pure and incorrupt
is so necessary for the salvation of sinners, 1 Timothy 4. 16. the perverting of
this Doctrine by adding any thing of man's inventions to it, is so dishonorable
to God, whose wisdom is hereby taxed as defective; so destructive to the
Doctrine of the Gospel it self, ver. 7. and so perniciously poisonable to the
souls of People (Act. 15. 24.) that they who are guilty of this sin, and labor
to seduce others to embrace their pernicious Errors, are liable to the terrible
curse of eternal separation from Christ, and ought to be pronounced such
judicially by the Church, Tit. 3. 10. Let him be accursed, or, Let him be
Anathema, which was one kind of that dreadful sentence of Excommunication, as
it was used with the Jews; and the word signifies that which is put apart from
the use of man, and dedicated unto God, with the accursing of them who should
convert it to their own use; and so, by a translated sense, it signifies
eternal separation from Christ. Romans 9. 3. 1 Cor. 16. 21. Doct. 6. The more
impartial the Ministers of Christ be in reproving of sin, and denouncing of
threatenings against all without exception, who are guilty of the sin threatened,
the word of reproof and threatening will have the more weight from his mouth;
and when the Word is dispensed with evident respect to persons, so that the
faults of some are sharply rebuked, when the sins of others equally guilty for
by-respects are wholly connived at, usually no person cares for it: therefore,
Paul, that the judgment denounced may have the more weight with others,
exempteth not himself, if so he should be found guilty of the sin against which
he threatens, Though (says he) even I Paul, or any other of the Apostles,
preach any other Doctrine, etc. 7. As people, when they discern any
excellencies or perfections, whether in gifts or graces in Ministers, are ready
to take upon trust whatever they deliver; so nothing of that kind should make
faith to what they preach, if it be not founded upon the Word of Truth: the
first of these is supposed, the other more directly expressed, while he says,
If we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Doctrine, let him be accursed.
8. The Authority of the Gospel and written Word, is far above the Authority of
the most trust-worthy Men; yea, and of the glorified Angels, So that neither
Man nor Angel, Church or any other, can add any Authority to it, as though
without the testimony of those it had not sufficient Authority in it self, (2
Pet. 1. 19.) and from God the Author of it, 2 Timothy 3. 16. to give faith unto
it; neither can they detract any thing from its Authority, though they should
all in one voice contradict it, as it appears from this impossible case,
supposed by the Apostle; Though we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other
Gospel, let him be accursed.

Verse. 9. As we said before, so say I now again, If any man preach any other
Gospel unto you, than that ye have received, let him be accursed.
THat the Apostle may show what he spoke, proceeded neither from rage nor
rashness, he does again denounce the former terrible curse more generally
against all whomsoever guilty of the forementioned sin. Doct. 1. Such is the
incapacity of men's minds to understand the things of God. Ephesians. 4. 18. the
imbecility and weakness of their memories to retain and carefully keep, Heb.
2. 1. Yea, such is the deadness, slownesse and averseness of the will and
affections from embracing and giving entertainment to saving. Truths at first
when they are offered, Zech. 7. 11. that weighty and necessary Truths are not
only once but frequently to be inculcated by faithful Ministers, especially
fundamental Truths, Philip. 3. 1. and of daily use and practice, 2 Pet. 1. 12.
which frequent inculcating of one and the same thing, must flow not from
laziness, occasioning vain and idle repetitions condemned, Mat. 6. 7. but from
the zeal of God, respect to, and compassion of, the peoples necessity: for,
Paul does inculcate and again repeat this necessary and fundamental Truth, that
the Doctrine of the Apostles, and by consequence their Writings, (1 John 1. 1.)
have Divine Authority, and are thoroughly sufficient to Salvation, without any
mixture of humane Traditions added to them; As I said before, so say I now
again. 2. Though zeal for God and Truth, with servency in the delivery of
Truth, chiefly in the reproof of sin (Isa. 58. 1.) be required in a Minister;
yet he is carefully to guard, lest, under pretense of zeal, he vent his
inconsiderate and fleshly passions, or, lest he give any ground for people to
conceive so of him: for, Paul guardeth against this, by repeating advisedly
what he had presently spoken; As I said before, so say I now again. 3. It is
not enough for the Salvation of peoples souls, to have the Gospel preached in
purity among them, except it he also received by them, as laboring to
understand the purpose of it, Act. 8. 30. giving assent unto the truth of it in
their understanding, Heb. 4. 2. and embracing the good things offered by it in
their heart and affections, 1 Timothy 1. 15. for, whereas (ver. 8.) Paul said they
are accursed who teach otherwise than he had preached, here he says, they are
accursed who preach otherwise than they had received: whereby it appears, as
Paul had preached the Gospel of Christ, so the Galatians received it, to wit,
the whole bulk of Church Members come to age, the two first ways mentioned in
the Doctrine, and sincere Believers among them in the last way.

Verse. 10. For, do I now persuade men, or God? or do I seek to please men? for,
if I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ.
HEre is a second Argument, proving the Divine Authority of the Gospel, which
Paul had preached to those Galatians, taken partly, from the scope of his
Doctrine, which was not to persuade men, that is (by a necessary Ellipsis and a
construction somewhat unusual) he did not by his Doctrine persuade men to be
heard and obeyed (as the false Apostles, who did always inculcate the
Authority of men upon the hearers, that hereby they might gain credit to their
Doctrine;) but the drift of his Doctrine was to draw men to God, persuading
God, that is, to be heard and obeyed; that so the faith of the hearers might
rely only upon the Authority of God, and not of men; partly, from the scope of
the preacher, Paul himself, which was not to hunt after the favor of men, (as
the false Apostles did press the Legal Ceremonies, that they might hereby gain
the applause of, and decline persecution from, the Jews, Gal. 6. 12.) but his
aim was, singly to approve himself to God, however men should esteem of him, 1
Cor. 4. 3. and withal, gives a reason inducing him to be thus single and
sincere, to wit, if he should set himself to hunt after the favor of men, as
he did when he was a Pharisee, he could not be an approven Servant of Christ,
but of those whose favor he studied to gain. Doct. 1. The faithful Servants
of Jesus Christ, beside their many other sufferings, must resolve to suffer
somewhat sometimes in their credit and estimation from those, who, being set on
by a spirit of spite and malice, will spread sinistrous reports in secret of
honest Ministers, the truth whereof they dare not avow or publicly stand to,
when they are put to it, and have fair opportunity to do it if they could: for,
it appears Paul's adversaries had been secretly whispering, as if the scope
of his Doctrine had been to set up his own Authority and Testimony in the
Points controverted, not only above the other Apostles, to whom they falsely
boasted of to have favored them (as is collected from chap. 2. 6.) but also
above the Authority of God speaking in the Old Testament, and that he was not
constant to himself, sometimes disproving Circumcision, and sometimes approving
it, chap. 5. 11. as he might best please the humors of men with whom he had to
do: and Paul wipeth off these calumnies, not by a positive denial of any Truth
to be in them, but by interrogations and questions; which, as they serve for
strong negations of the things questioned, according to the use of Scripture, 1 Samuel 12. 3. So they in a manner provoke the adversary to assert the thing
questioned for truth, if he be able: for, do I now persuade men, or God? or, do
I seek to please men? 2. Though the Minister of Jesus Christ may make use of
humane Authority as a secondary proof and testimony unto the Truth, already
proved to be Truth from the Word of God, and chiefly toward those with whom
the testimony of such will have most weight, Act. 17. 28, Yet the Authority and
Writings of men, or of any man whatsoever, are not to be rested upon as the
first and main proof of any religious Truth: neither are they, especially in
preaching, to be always inculcated and promiscously unto every sort of
hearers; lest thereby the faith of people be brought to rely on the Authority
of men: for, this is to persuade men, to wit, to be chiefly heard, as the
supreme Judges of religious Truths, which Paul denies to have been his
practice; Do I now persuade men? 3. That Doctrine only, the truth whereof is
grounded upon Divine Testimony, and Thus says the Lord, is to be received in
the Church, as that which men may safely venture their eternal well-being on, 1
Cor. 3. 12, 15. and which God will own for His, Act. 15. 24. for, Paul proves
that the Doctrine preached by him was the only true Gospel of Jesus Christ,
because thereby he did persuade God, to wit, to be heard and obeyed, and His
Authority only to be stood to, as appears by the causal particle for; For do
I now persuade men, or God? The first part of the question has the force of a
denial; the second of a vehement affirmation, as if he had said, I do not
persuade men, but God. 4. It is not enough that a Minister preach nothing to
people, but that which is the Truth of God; he must also preach Truth
sincerely, not concealing any part of necessary Truth, or misapplying Truth so,
as that thereby he may please the sinful affections, humors and dispositions
of men, but aiming singly to approve himself to God in doing of his duty, 2
Cor. 2. 17. Thus Paul denies that his aim in preaching, was to please men; Or
do I seek to please men? 5. As true conversion does work a real change in a man
from what he once was in his unconverted state, 2 Cor. 5. 17. so particularly
in this, that where before he did prostitute his gifts and parts; yea, his very
conscience to the slavery of men's sinful humors whom he conversed with, and
by pleasing of whom he did expect any profit, credit or contentment, Joh. 5.
44. he will not now abase himself, or dishonor God by doing so any more: thus
was it with Paul; For if I yet pleased men; where he insinuates that formerly,
and while he was a Pharisee, he did please men, but he would do so no more. 6.
Though the Minister of Jesus Christ, ought not to set himself of purpose, and
without necessity to displease men, or, by his imprudent disobliging carriage
to irritate and stir up their corruptions; (for hereby the Word in his mouth
should be made unsavory unto them) and though he ought to endeavor the
pleasing of all men, by eschewing any thing which may be just ground of offense
to them, 2 Cor. 7. 2. by retrenching or enlarging himself in the use of his
christian liberty in things indifferent, as he may be least offensive unto
them, 1 Cor. 10. 32, 33. and as he may gain most upon them, 1 Cor. 9. 20, 21,
22. and by accommodating himself in his public preaching to the case, capacity
and state of all, by assigning unto every one what is competent, 1 John 2. 13,
13. and so is to please men for their good to edification, Romans 15. 2. Yet,
there is a way of pleasing men, most sinful and base, especially in a
Minister, and which is inconsistent with fidelity in Christ's service, to wit,
when he concealeth any necessary Truth, which he is otherwise called to
deliver; lest he displease men, 1 King. 22. 13, 14. when his highest aim is to
gain applause from men, 2 Cor. 4, 5-. and generally when he is so timerously
disposed, as to venture rather upon the displeasure of God, by omitting any
part of His duty, than to irritate and displease the sinful humors of men, by
faithfulness in the discharge of his Calling, Act. 4. 10. A Minister who
sets himself so to please men, and who resolves not in these respects to
meet with the displeasure of some men, cannot be a faithful Servant to Jesus
Christ; for, a man cannot serve two masters, Mat. 6. 24. If I yet pleased men,
I should not be the Servant of Christ. 7. A faithful Servant of Jesus Christ,
will prize his acceptance with Christ, his being approven of Him, and the
testimony of a good conscience for fidelity in His Service, more, than all the
favor, countenance, applause, or any advantage flowing from these, which he
can receive from men; and before he hazard the loss of the former, he will
rather a thousand times embrace with gladness the most certain loss of the
latter: for, Paul makes this an argument, why he did not seek to please men;
because that hereby he should lose the approbation of Christ: F^ra if I yet
pleased men, I should not be the Servant of Christ.

Verse. 11. But I certify you, Brethren, that the Gospel which was preached of
me, is not after man. 12. For I neither received it of man, neither was I
taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ.
THe Apostle adds a third Argument, to prove the Divinity of that Gospel
which he had preached, whereby he asserteth also his own lawful Call to be an
Apostle, which was questioned by his adversaries, affirming (as it appears
from his so much insisting to demonstrate the contrary from ver. 13. chap. 1.
to ver. 15. chap. 2.) that he was no Apostle, but some ordinary Preacher, who
had received the Doctrine of the Gospel at the second hand only, and having so
received it, had now himself corrupted it, contrary to what was taught by the
other Apostles, James and Cephas, of whose Authority and Patrociny his
adversaries did falsely boast, whereby they created a prejudice in the minds of
those Galatians, both against Paul's person, and his doctrine, which he wipeth
off, while he prosecuteth this Argument at large. And, in the first place, he
propounds the Argument as a thing known, at least which could not be
contradicted, to wit, that the Gospel preached by him was not after man, ver.
11. that is, as he explaineth presently, he neither received it of man, or, he
received not his Office to teach and preach the Gospel from any mere man, and
so was no ordinary Preacher; Neither was he taught it by man, that is, the
knowledge which he had of the Gospel, was not by any ordinary mean or
instruction from men, and so he had it not at the second hand, but it was
immediately revealed to him by Jesus Christ; and therefore behoved to be
divine, ver. 12. Doct. 1. It is the part of a faithful and prudent Minister by
loving and affectionate insinuations to bear himself in upon the affections of
people, even though deeply prejudicate against him, so long as there is any
hope of gaining them: for, thus does Paul to these Galatians, while he calls
them Brethren. 2. It is the usual custom of Heretics and adversaries of Truth,
when they have nothing to say in reason against the Doctrine it self, to cast
reproach upon the persons of those who preach it, and especially to question
their Call and Authority to preach; that so they may indirectly at least
reflect upon the Doctrine which they preach. So do the Papists now against the
Ministers of the Reformed Churches, and so did the false Apostles then against
Paul, as we cleared in giving the sense of the words, and appears from his
asserting his Call to be an Apostle; It is not after men, neither received I it
from man. 3. When subtle wits do thus puzle the People of God by such
diversions from the main purpose, and by Arguments which do not directly strike
at the Truth in question; it is nevertheless the part of Christ's able and
faithful Ministers, to take off those indirect prejudices, by showing how
groundless they are; and particularly they are not only to clear the truth of
the Doctrine, but also their own Call from God to preach that Doctrine: for, so
does Paul here, and to the end of the Chapter; Now I certify you, Brethren,
etc. 4. As none may take upon him to dispense the Word of God publicly unto
others, without a lawful Call from God to do it, Romans 10. 15. So there are
several sorts of callings, one, of men, and ordinary, when God calls by the
voices and consent of men, following the Laws of the Word, 2 Timothy 2. 2. another
of God, and extraordinary, when He does call immediately, the Call of the
Church not interveening, Joh. 20. 21. for, Paul does not preach until he
receive the Office to preach, and this not of man, in the ordinary way; and so
of God extraordinarily; For neither received I it of man, says he. 5. They who
are to teach others, are first to be taught themselves, to wit, ordinary
Preachers by ordinary means, whereby they may be enabled by sound Doctrine both
to exhort and convince gainsayers, Tit. 1. 9. The Priests lips should keep
knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth, Mal. 2. 7. for, as Paul
received an Office to preach the Gospel; so he was taught and instructed in the
Gospel; I neither received it, neither was taught it, but by revelation. 6. It
was required to the Office of an Apostle, that the person called to it, should
have the infallible knowledge of the truth of the Gospel, and this not wholly
by the help of humane means, as we do now learn knowledge at Schools of
Learning, and by our own private study, but also and mainly by immediate
inspiration from the Spirit of God: for, Paul shows that the Gospel was not
taught him of man; and this he says not to depresse humane learning, and the
knowledge of divine Mysteries, which we attain unto by the help of Learned-men,
and of their Writings, this being the ordinary way of attaining knowledge now,
1 Timothy 4. 13. 2 Timothy 2. 2. but, that hereby he may obviate the calumny of his
adversaries, who alleged he had the knowledge of the Gospel by ordinary
instruction from men only, and so was no Apostle; Neither was I taught it, but
by the revelation of Jesus Christ, that is, it was immediately revealed unto
him by Christ. 7. And this that Christ is opposed unto man, does point at His
Deity. See Verse. 1. Doct. 5.

Verse. 13. For ye have heard of my conversation in time past, in the Jews
Religion, how that beyond measure I persecuted the Church of God, and wasted
it: 14. And profited in the Jews Religion above many my equals in mine own
Nation, being more exceedingly zealous of the traditions of my fathers.
BEcause the Argument presently mentioned, is most weighty, therefore the
Apostle does at large prosecute it, and gives, in this Chapter, four Evidences
of the truth of what he asserted in it, to wit, That neither the knowledge
which he had of the Gospel was from humane persuasion, or by ordinary means;
nor yet his Call to preach the Gospel was from the suffrage of men, or any
Authority conveyed by man; but both of them were immediately from God. The
first Evidence, relating mainly to the first branch of the Assertion, is, The
hostile mind which he carried against the Christian Church, while he was a
Pharisee, Act. 26. 5. in persecuting and making havoc of it, ver. 13. together
with the great measure of knowledge he had in that Religion which he did then
profess, and of abilities to defend it beyond many of these who were equal in
age with him, and his zeal and servour for his Religion, and the worst part of
it, to wit, unwritten Traditions received from their fathers, without any
ground in the written Word of God, Mat. 15. 3, 9. All which he speaks as of a
thing publicly known, ver. 14. leaving them to gather hence, that his so
sudden change, from being so zealous, so deeply engaged, and every way so able
a persecutor, ^o embrace the Christian Religion, could not flow from humane
persuasion, or any ordinary means, but immediately from God. Doct. 1. It is a
matter of no small difficulty; yea, and in an ordinary way almost impossible
for a man, deeply engaged in a course of error, having kythed active for it,
and endued with ability to defend it, to be reclaimed from his error, to
embrace the way of Truth: for, Paul makes his so deep engagements to the
Pharisaical Errors, an evidence that his sudden change to Christianity did not
flow from any ordinary mean, but was wrought immediately by God; For ye have
heard, etc. 2. A sincere Convert will not shun to make an open and ingenuous
confession of his wicked life, not omitting any thing which may tend to the
just aggravation of it: and this not in a boasting or a rejoicing manner, Iam.
4. 16. but that here by the freedom of God's grace may be commended, 1 Timothy 1.
13, 14. and that other vile sinners, in their own eyes lost, may have
encouragement from God's dealing with him to belie^^ on Christ for life
everlasting, 1 Timothy 1. 16. and that Gods honor one way or other may be thereby
brought about for, Paul does ingenuously confess here, that in time p(...) he
had persecuted the Church of God extremely, and wasted it; that he may thereby
make evident that his conversion flowed from the immediate and extraordinary
work of God, and so stopped the mouth of those who were adversaries to Truth. 3.
That the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament were endited by the Spirit of
God, and that the Penmen thereof were not acted with humane policy, but
immediately inspired by that unerring Spirit, appears from this, jointly with
other evidences held forth in Scripture it self, that they concealed not their
own faults, but blazed them to the world when the glory of God did so require,
as Paul does here; Beyond measure I persecuted the Church of God, says he. 4.
This open and ingenuous confession of our bypast wicked life, is to be extended
only unto sins already known, that hereby the public offense may be removed;
but not to the making notour of such evils as have been kept secret from the
knowledge of others, the divulging whereof would but multiply scandals and
stumbling blocks, Romans 2. 24. for, Paul confesses only what they had already
heard; Ye have heard of my conversation in time past. 5. There is no particular
Church on earth, though never so famous for, and orthodox in, the point of
Religion, who may not so far degenerate from what they once were, as that
Religion both for Doctrine and Worship may be wholly corrupt, from which those,
who would be saved, must deliver themselves quickly, and which God will not own
for His, as not being prescribed by Him, but will father it on those who do
profess it, as their Religion, and as invented by them: thus the Jews, once
right in the point of Religion, Hos. 11. 12. had now, in Paul's time, so far
corrupted Religion in the doctrine of Justification, Romans 10. 3. of the
Trinity, Joh. 8. 9. of Manners, or of the Moral Law, as if it required nothing
but external obedience, (Mat. 5, 6, 7. chapters) in asserting the authority of
unwritten Traditions, and in worshipping God according to those, Mat. 15. 3, 9.
and rejecting Jesus Christ the promised Messiah, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15. that Paul
sees a necessity to quit that Religion, calling it theirs, not God's; My
conversation in times past in the Jews Religion. 6. Crosses, afflictions and
persecutions from wicked men, are the ordinary lot of God's Church and People:
and this by reason of that enimity which is betwixt the seed of the Woman, and
the seed of the Serpent, Genesis 3. 15-. together with Satan's malice against the
Church, Genesis 3. - 15. and his prevalent power over wicked men, whereby he
inciteth and draws them on by such inducements, as he knows will be most
prevalent with the different tempers of those who are acted by him, Joh. 12. 6.
compared with Mat. 26. 15. to be executioners of that his rage and malice, Rev.
20. 7, 8. and because of God's tolerance and permission, that thereby His
Church may be tried, (Rev. 2. 10.) every one, whether good or bad, being made
to appear what really they are, Dan. 11. 32. and that by the sufferings of His
People the way of Truth may be made more lovely, further spread, and more
embraced by others, Act. 8. 4, 5, 6, etc. and that they may be also corrected
for their bypast sins, as abused peace and prosperity, Judge. 10. 6, 7. and that
hereby also they may be restrained from many sins in time coming, Isa. 27. 9.
and this either by removing the opportunity of such sins through the rod, Hos.
2. 6. or by renewing the hearts of many through sanctifying grace, a greater
measure whereof is bestowed usually by God upon His People under persecution
and affliction (Hos. 2. 14, 15.) than at another time: thus, Paul persecuted
the Church of God extremely. 7. Though the Church of God, as to the inward
estate thereof, which stands in Election and the fruits of saving Grace
flowing therefrom, cannot be utterly wasted, Joh. 10. 28, 29: neither can the
outward state of the visible Church be so far decayed, as that the visible
Church should altogether cease to be, at least in all places, Mat. 16. -18. Yet
the Lord may so far give way to the rage of persecutors, for the reasons
mentioned in the former Doctrine, as that thereby the outward face and beauty
of the visible Church shall be totally marred, the Members thereof being partly
killed, Joh. 16. 2. partly scattered, Act. 8. 3, 4. the public Ordinances of
divine Worship being altogether for a time suppressed, and the public
Assemblies of the Church interrupted, Dan. 11. 31. Thus Paul wasted the Church:
the word signifies the vastation of Lands, burning of Houses, and utter
depopulation of Countries, which use to be accomplished by an enraged prevalent
enemy; I wasted it. 8. The Church of God may expect to meet with persecution
and sufferings, not only from men avowedly wicked and openly flagitious, but
also from others, whose carriage is smooth, free from scandal, and in all
things, according to that false way of Religion which they profess,
blameless: Satan labors most to have such engaged, and such being once
engaged, are most bitter and implacable persecutors, as having some respect to
conscience in other things, and being acted in this from the principles of a
deluded conscience, Joh. 16. 2. which of all other ties, does most strictly
bind, and most effectually drive forward to fulfill its dictates, especially in
things of religious concernment, Act. 13. 50. for, Paul, who profited in the
Jews Religion above his equals, and was exceedingly zealous, did persecute the
Church. 9. The life and way of some who are engaged in a false Religion, may be
so blameless, and, according to the dictates of their deluded conscience, so
strict, as that it may be a copy unto those, who profess the true Religion,
and a reproof to many such for their palpable negligence: so was Paul's way,
while he was a Pharisee, even such, as may serve for a copy unto Christians to
walk by in several things, as first, to be active in spreading the true
Religion in our places and stations, and bearing down of contrary Errors, as he
was in persecuting the Christian Church; because it was opposite to the Jewish
Religion professed by him. Secondly, that what we do in Religion, or for God,
we do it not negligently, but with all our might, Eccl. 9. 10. and to the
uttermost of what our power can reach, as he did persecute the Church, not
lazily, but above measure, or extremely. Thirdly, that we labor to profit,
advance and grow in Religion, both as to the knowledge of Truth contained in
it, Heb. 6. 1. and practice according to those Truths, 2 Pet. 1. 5. as he
profited in the Jewish Religion. Fourthly, that in the matter of growth, there
be an holy emulation and strife with others; that we may outstrip them, as he
profited above many of his equal^. Fifthly, that we be zealous for our Religion,
as having love to it, and to the honoring of God whether by our selves or
others according to it, Act. 15. 3. together with grief and anger when God is
dishonored and Religion wronged, Joh. 2. 15, 16, 17. as Paul was zealous of
the Traditions of his fathers: for, zeal has in it a mixture of love and
anger. Doct. 10. As love to the honor of God may engage a man sometimes to
speak to his own commendation; So there would be that modesty and sobriety of
spirit, as it may appear he does not speak from arrogance or pride, and that he
seeks not his own commendation in speaking: for, Paul commends his own
diligence and abilities, that thereby he may commend Free Grace, which
delivered him out of that state, but with great modesty: for, he says not, he
profited more than all, but more than many; and not, more than his superiors,
but, more than his equals, to wit, for time and age, and those not in all the
world, but of his own nation. 11. As our affections of joy, love, hatred, anger
and grief, are by nature so corrupt (Ephesians. 2. 3.) that even the choicest of
them, if they be not brought in subjection to the Word by the Spirit of God,
will lay forth themselves rather upon forbidden and unlawful objects, than
that which is warrantable and commanded by the Lord: So our zeal and fervency
of spirit in particular, will bend it self more toward the maintenance of
Error, than of Truth: for, Error is the birth of our own invention, Gal. 5. 20.
and has the rise from some unmortified lust within, which it does gratify. (2 Timothy 4. 3.) so is not Truth: Thus Paul shows that his zeal tended more to
maintain that part of the Jewish Religion, which was unwarrantable, to wit, the
unwritten Traditions, than all the rest of it; And was much more zealous of the
Traditions of my fathers, says he.

Verse. 15. But when it pleased God, who separated me from my mothers womb, and
called me by his grace, 16. To reveal his Son in me, that I might preach Him
among the Heathen; immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood; 17.
Neither went I up to Jerusalem, to them which were Apostles before me, but I
went into Arabia, and returned again unto Damoscus.
HEre is a second Evidence of the truth of what he formerly asserted, ver. 11.
and 12. to wit, that as God in His providence had been making way, both in
Paul's birth and education, for that which He had purposed to employ him in; so
when it pleased God at the time of his gracious and effectual calling, ver. 15.
to make Christ, and the doctrine of Redemption by Christ, known unto him by
extraordinary and immediate revelation, Act. 9. 4. that as an Apostle,
immediately called by God, ver. 1. he might publish the knowledge of Christ
among the Gentiles; he was so much persuaded of his immediate Call from God,
that he did not debate the matter neither with himself nor others, who might
have dissuaded him from giving obedience to it, ver. 16, but immediately went
about the discharging of his Apostolic Office, not without great hazard and
pains to himself, in Arabia and Damascus, without so much as once visiting any
of the Apostles, ver. 17. far less went he to be instructed in the knowledge
of the Gospel by them, or to receive Ordination unto the Ministerial Office
from them, as his adversaries did falsely allege of him, the falsehood whereof
he is here making evident.

From Verse. 15. Learn, 1. Such is the power of God's good pleasure, whereby He
does whatsoever He wills in Heaven and Earth, (Ps. 135. 6.) that the will of
man, though never so deeply engaged in the course of sin and wickedness,
cannot resist it, but most willingly does yield unto it, whenever the Lord
thinks fit to let forth that His good pleasure in its gracious and powerful
effects of drawing a sinner out of Nature to the state of Grace, as it
appears from the adversative particle, But, whereby the Apostle opposes Gods
pleasure to his own former weakness, as prevailing over it; But when it
pleased God, etc. 2. The fountain-cause of man's salvation, and of all things
tending to it, especially of his effectual calling, and of that, whereby he is
made first to differ from another, is, God's good-pleasure, and nothing present
(Ephesians. 2. 1.) or foreseen to be (Romans 9. 11.) in the person, who is called: for,
the Apostle ascribes all of that kind in himself, to the pleasure of God; But
when it pleased God to reveal His Son in me. 3. The disposing of events, or of
things which shall fall out, together with the time when they shall fall out,
are wholly ordered by God's will and pleasure: for, this pleasure of His,
circumscribeth even the time of Paul's calling; But when it pleased God, then,
and neither sooner nor later, was Christ revealed to him. 4. The Lord, by His
working in us, and particular acts of providence toward us, is often making
way for some hid design and purpose of His about us, which for the time we are
ignorant of, but when it appears by the event, a wonderful contexture of
providence making way for it, and tending to it, is also manifested with it:
Thus the Lord had separated Paul from the mothers womb, to preach the Gospel
among the Gentiles; whereby is meant, that God was without Paul's knowledge,
preparing him for that Office, by His providence about him from his very birth,
as, that he was born of such parents, with such a bodily temper, fitted, as it
would appear, to endure much travel and hardships, that he was educated at the
feet of Gamaliel, that he was a Pharisee, instructed in all humane and divine
learning according to the Law, etc. 5. The effectual calling of the Elect in
time, whereby they are drawn to Jesus Christ, Joh. 6. 44. and enabled to
embrace Him as He is offered, 1 Timothy 1. 15. their minds being savingly
illuminated, Act. 26. 18. and their wills renewed, Ezekiel. 36. 26. is, the work
of God's almighty Power and Grace; in the first instant of which work, man does
only receive the impression from Grace, and has no active influence in it,
Ephesians. 2. 5. This does Paul assert, while he says, God called me by His Grace.

From Verse. 16. Learn, 1. However man, by the light of Nature, Romans 2. 14, 15.
and by the works of Creation (Romans 1: 19, 20.) and Providence, (Psalm. 19. 1.)
may attain to know there is a God, and that this God should be served, (Act.
17. 23.) and will be terrible to those who serve Him not (Romans 1. 23.) Yet the
knowledge of Jesus Christ the Son of God, and of Redemption purchased to lost
sinners through Him, is a thing which the greatest Wits, by the forementioned
helps, cannot reach, except it be revealed unto them, either by an ordinary or
extraordinary revelation: for, even Paul had this knowledge by revelation; It
pleased God to reveal His Son in me. 2. As there is an ordinary way of
revealing Christ to souls, to wit, by the Word preached, (Romans 10. 17.) and
God's blessing upon the Word, 1 Cor. 3. 7. so there is another extraordinary,
without the Word preached, whether by voice, instinct or apparition: This
latter way was Christ revealed to Paul, as appears not only from the history
of his conversion, Act. 9. and 22. chapters, but also from the expression here
used, to reveal His Son, not, to, but, in me; whereby, as some conceive, is
signified, that the grace and knowledge of Christ did from Heaven immediately
break-in upon his soul. 3. The knowledge of Jesus Christ, which Ministers
especially do receive from God, is not only for themselves, but that it may be
communicated by them unto others: So that the Lord does bestow the more
liberally upon them for His Peoples sake, 2 Cor. 1. 4. Thus, God revealed His
Son in Paul, that he might preach Him among the Heathen. 4. Though before
Christ's coming in the flesh, the doctrine of Salvation was by God's
appointment confined in narrow bounds, Psalm. 147. 19, 20. Yet by Christ's
death, the partition wall was removed, and the division which was betwixt the
Jews and the Gentiles, quite abolished, Ephesians. 2. 13. so that the doctrine of
Salvation was to be spread among the Heathen; and this, that the Prophecies of
the calling of the Gentiles might be fulfilled, Psalm. 2. 8. Isa. 2. 2. That I
should preach Him among the Gentiles, says Paul. 5. The Call of God, whether
to amendment and newness of life, or to undergo any lawful Office, especially
an Office in His House, it being once known to be His Call, ought not to be
shifted, but immediately and without delay obeyed, Heb. 3. 7, 8. because our
life is uncertain, Iam. 4. 14. we know not if we shall again get such an offer,
Act. 13. 46. or, though we get a new offer, yet the longer we delay, there will
be the greater indisposition to embrace it, Jer. 13. 23. for, this made Paul
immediately to follow the Call of God; Immediately I conferred not with flesh
and blood. 6. Because flesh and blood (whether thereby be meant carnal men,
friends or any other, or our own carnal and natural reason) will furnish
abundance of seeming reasons, either for questioning the reality of God's Call,
or for not obeying, or at least for postponing obedience to His Call, chiefly
when obedience to it does carry hazard, loss, or probability of discredit with
it, Mat. 16. 22. Therefore, in the things of God, and in the matter of
obedience to the will of God, we are not to consult with flesh and blood, but
once knowing what the will of God is, we are without deliberation, whether we
shall obey or not, to put it in execution, committing all our cares and fears
about the issue to God, Esth. 4. 16. for, Paul conferred not with flesh and
blood: the word signifies to lay down our cares and difficulties, as a burden,
in some friends bosom; but he looked not on flesh and blood as a friend to be
advised with in the present case.

From Verse. 17. Learn, 1. That extraordinary way of revelation, whereby the
Lord made known His mind to the Penmen of Scripture, was so infallible in it
self, and so evident to those unto whom it came, to be no delusion, but the
very mind of God, that they were above all doubt to the contrary, and needed
not so much as to advise with the best of men in order to their
thorowconfirmation about the realitie of it: for, Paul was so persuaded of his
immediate Call from God to be an Apostle, and of the infallible truth of the
Gospel, which was revealed unto him, that he did not consult with the very
Apostles about it; Neither went I up to Jerusalem to them which were Apostles
before me, to wit, that he might consult with them, and obtain a Permission or
Commission from them to discharge his Office; otherwise it is probable, from
Act. 12. 17. that Paul shortly after his conversion went to Jerusalem, going
through it in his way to Arabia, but went not at that time to any of the
Apostles, being discharged by God to stay any longer there. 2. There may be
more ground of hope to bring the most wild and barbarous savages to the saving
knowledge of Jesus Christ, than a people outwardly civilized living under the
drop of Ordinances, and thereby inured to a form of godliness without the
power thereof: for, Paul being commanded to make have out of Jerusalem (there
being no hopes that his Testimony would be received there, Act. 22. 18.) is
sent to the wicked and savage Arabians; But I went to Arabia. 3. The Lord
makes sometimes the first piece of public service, which He puts His
Ministers upon, as hazardous, uncouth, and unsuccessful-like as any wherein He
does ever employ them afterward; that hereby they may be taught to depend more
on God's blessing, than upon any humane probabilities for success to their
pains, 2 Cor. 1. 9. and that they may give proof of the sincerity of their
obedience to the Call of God, when no apparent hazard will make them repent
their undertakings, Jer. 17. 16. and withal that they may, in the first entry,
receive a proof of God's fidelity in bearing them through all hazards, which
they may meet with in following of His Call, 2 Cor. 1. 10. Thus was it with
Moses, Exodus 2. 10, etc. so was it with Jeremiah, Jer. 1. 19. and so here with
Paul, whose first work, after God had called him to be an Apostle, was to
preach the Gospel among the wicked and savage Arabians; I went to Arabia. 4.
The Apostles by their Office, were not fixed or tied unto any certain Charge,
as ordinary Ministers now are, Rev. 2. 1, 8. but their Charge being the whole
World, Mat. 28. 19. they went from place to place, as the necessities of People
required, (Romans 1. 11.) rules of Providence (Romans 15. 20.) or God by His Spirit
did immediately direct, Act. 16. 9, 10. Thus Paul went unto Arabia, and returned
again to Damascus, near to which he was converted, Act. 9. 3. at which time of
his return, did fall out that hazard, wherein he was, from the Jews, mentioned
Act. 9. 23, etc. for, the history shows, it was many days after his
conversion, and that immediately after his delivery from it, he went to
Jerusalem and conversed familiarly with the Apostles, and therefore it could
not have been before his journey to Arabia, else that history should contradict
Paul himself, affirming here, that he went up to Jerusalem to them who were
Apostles before him.

Verse. 18. Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem, to see Peter, and
abode with him fifteen days. 19. But other of the Apostles saw I none, save
James the Lord's Brother.
HEre is a third Evidence, to wit, that three years after his conversion he
went to Jerusalem, to give a familiar, serious and friendly visit to Peter, in
token of mutual consent and agreement to one and the self-same Truth, which was
preached by them both, but not that he might learn the knowledge of the Gospel
from Peter, as his adversaries alleged: for, his abode with Peter, was but for
fifteen days only, ver. 18. And lest any should object, that he had been
taught at that time by some other Apostle, he shows he saw no other Apostle
there but James, and that he did see him only, as it were, upon the by: which
James, was not the son of Zebedeus, who was beheaded by Herod, Act. 12. 2. but
the son of Alpheus, Mat. 10. 3. who either himself, or his wife, has been of
kindred with Mary the mother of Jesus. Hence James their son is here called the
Lord's Brother, according to the custom of the Hebrews, who called men of the
same kindred and blood, Brethren, Genesis 13. 8. Doct. 1. That nothing of Peter's
supposed supremacy over Paul and the rest of the Apostles can be gathered from
this place, as the Papists do allege, appears from this, that Paul went
first to his Work before he came to Peter at all, and that his business with
Peter, was not to receive ordination from him, or to evidence his subjection to
him, but from the respect and reverence he carried to him, to give him a
friendly visit; Besides that, it is the Apostle's scope in a great part of this
Epistle, to show that he was nothing inferior to Peter, or to any other of the
Apostles. 2. We ought so to spend our time for diligence and faithfulness in
our stations, that we may be able to give a good account how time has been
spent both for days and years: Paul gives such an account, while he shows
he preached three years in Arabia and Damascus, and after stayed in Jerusalem
fifteen days; Then after three years I went up and abode fifteen days. 3. It
ought to be the endeavor of Christ's Ministers to entertain love and
familiarity one with another, as also to make their so doing evident unto
others; it being most unseemly for those who preach the Gospel of Peace unto
others, to live in discord among themselves: for, Paul went up to Jerusalem to
see Peter, as for other reasons, so that hereby he might evidence that love and
harmony which was between them. 4. The Lord does so direct the steps of those
who do acknowledge Him in all their ways, Prove. 3. 6. that His glory and their
good is sometimes eminently brought about by some of the ordinary passages of
their life, even beyond their own intention or purpose: as here Paul's
deferring to go to Jerusalem for the space of three years, his abode there only
fifteen days, and his seeing none of the Apostles there save Peter and James,
do serve as an evidence to refute that calumny of his adversaries against his
Doctrine and Office, and has been ordered so of God for that end; although
Paul in the mean time knew not so much, being then ignorant that ever he should
meet with such a calumny. 5. As Ministers may and ought to meet sometimes
together, to evidence and entertain mutual love and concord, and because of
that mutual inspection which they ought to have one of another; So their
meetings ought neither to be so frequent, or of so long continuance, as that
thereby their Flocks may suffer prejudice: for, the word imports that this
was a serious visit, and about serious things, made by Paul to Peter, and yet
he remained with him but a short time until he returned to his Charge again;
He went to see Peter, and abode with him fifteen days.

Verse. 20. Now the things which I write unto you, behold, before God, I lie not.
THe Apostle, having to do with adversaries, and some also amongst the seduced
Galatians, who gave not much credit to his Word, asserteth the truth of all he
has said, and is to say, in matter of fact, through the whole Epistle, and
confirms it by an oath, where, according to the use of Scripture els-where,
he expresses but one principal part of an oath, to wit, a confession of God's
presence and power to witness and judge the Truth, and includes the other
parts, such as our invocation of God to bear witness that we speak the truth,
2 Cor. 1. 23. and imprecation, that God would be a Judge to take revenge upon
us, if we lie, Ruth 1. 17. Doct. 1. The Spirit of God in Scripture has not
left us destitute of sufficient evidences to be found in Scripture it self,
from whence the truth of it may be made out, and all atheistical doubtings to
the contrary removed, among which this is one, the solemn Oath of those who
write it, being men otherwise godly and worthy of trust, attesting the truth
thereof, and taking God to witness against their own soul, if they did lie in
what they wrote; Behold, before God, I lie not. 2. The choicest Servants of
Christ may be looked upon as liars, and unworthy to be trusted, even by those
to whom they are sent: and yet they must not give over to preach, as knowing
the Word spoken by them does still get credit from some, 2 Cor. 2. 15. and will
beget trust to it self from others, whom God has ordained to be saved, Act.
13. 48. and for the rest, it will seal up their condemnation and make them
inexcusable, 2 Cor. 2. 16. for, Paul his purging of himself from lying, does
import some did suspect him for a liar, and yet he cease not to take pains
upon them; I lie not. 3. It is not unlawful for Christians under the New
Testament to take an Oath, providing it be with these conditions, 1. That the
thing which we swear be truth; so was it in Paul's Oath; I lie not. 2. That
there be weighty reasons for taking an Oath; so was it here, the glory of God,
the dignity of his Apostleship, which was questioned by his adversaries; the
confirmation of the Faith of those Galatians, and of all Christians, as to the
truth of the things asserted, did call upon Paul to swear. 3. That we swear
only by the Name of God, and not by the creatures, Zeph. 1. 5. seeing none but
God can bear witness to the secrets of his heart who does swear, Act. 15. 8.
So did Paul, Behold, before God. 4. That we do not swear rashly, but with great
attention, preparation and reverence, seeing an Oath is a kind of invocation, 2
Cor. 1. 23. and a part of divine Worship, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Thus Paul prefixeth to
his Oath a word of attention, Behold, before God, I lie not.

Verse. 21. Afterward I came into the regions of Syria and Cilicia, 22. And was
unknown by face unto the Churches of Judea, which were in Christ. 23. But they
had heard only, That he which persecuted us in times past, now preaches the
Faith which once be destroyed. 24. And they glorified God in me.
Follows a fourth Evidence to the truth of what he asserted, ver. 11, 12. to
wit, That after he was driven from Jerusalem by persecution, Act. 9. 29, 30. he
discharged his Apostolic Office in Syria and Cilicia his own Country, (Act.
21. 39.) ver. 21. and this with the approbation of the Christian Churches in
Judea, who, although he was unknown unto them, ver. 22. and though they had
heard by fame, that he was the man who had formerly been a bloody persecutor;
Yet, God did so bless the very report which they had of his Calling to preach,
as an Apostle, and consequently of his miraculous Conversion, ver. 23. as they
could not deny them to be divine, as appeared by their acknowledging of God's
mercy and power manifested in them, and by their thanksgiving to God for them,
ver. 24. Doct. 1. Though not one of the Apostles was universal Pastor and
Bishop of the whole World above the rest, seeing all of them were endued with
equal Authority by Christ, Mat. 20. 26, 27. Yet, if this illimited power were
to be pleaded-for unto any of them, there should be more pretense of reason for
placing of it in Paul, than in Peter, or any of the rest; Paul being
particularly ordained to be the Apostle of the Gentiles, Act. 9. 15. and
acknowledged heartily by the Jews to be so, and having actually discharged his
Office far and near, as in Arabia, and then in Damascus, ver. 17. and now in
Syria and Cilicia, as also at Rome, Act. 23. 11. and having been the first
planter almost of all the primitive Christian Churches among the Gentiles, as
appears from the history of the Acts, and Paul's own Epistles; and all this
he did by immediate Authority from Jesus Christ, ver. 16. and was not sent out
by Peter, as his Deputy or Suffragan, but in all things was his Equal, chap. 2.
ver. 6, 7, 8. So little ground have the Papists to plead that Peter was
universal Pastor above all the rest, and much less, that the Pope is Peter's
Successor in this Charge; Afterward I came into the regious of Syria and
Cilicia. 2. A faithful Minister of Jesus Christ, will labor mainly to be
known unto, and acquainted with the People of his own Charge, not ingyring
himself upon the Charge of others, or laboring so much as indirectly to draw
the affections of People toward himself from those who are their own Pastors,
and particularly entrusted with the actual charge of their souls: thus Paul was
unknown by face unto the Churches of Judea, as not having conversed familiarly
with them, though he had sometimes occasion to be among them in his frequent
going to, and returning from Jerusalem, and that because they were a part of
Peter's charge, chap. 2. ver. 7. Doct. 3. Immediately, or very soon after
Christ's Death and Resurrection the preaching of the Gospel has been
marvelously blessed, in converting of numerous multitudes to Jesus Christ; yea,
and more blessed than readily it has been in any age of the Church since,
whereof this is one evidence amongst many other, which are in the history of
the Acts, and in Paul's Epistles, that at this time whereof Paul writes, which
is supposed to be the fourth or fifth year after Christ's Ascension, there were
several Christian Churches planted with Officers, and constituted according to
the Rule of the Gospel, even in Judea amongst that people, who had hardened
their hearts against the light, Mat. 13. 15. and rejected and crucified the
Lord of life, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15. The Gospel was then new, and fresh, the Preachers
of it unanimous among themselves, the Truths insisted upon most by them, were
such as did relate to Faith in Christ, and Repentance from dead works, and the
most necessary duties of a Christian-life, besides that God's design was to
bring the Gospel once in credit and request with a blinded and idolatrous World
at the first breaking-up thereof, and therefore the preaching of it was
attended with more success, and a richer blessing at that time than ordinarily
it has been since; Unto the Churches in Judea. 4. Not only particular
Believers, but also whole visible Churches, are in Christ, though in a much
different way: real Believers are in Him savingly, so, as to be freed from
condemnation by Him, Romans 8. 1-. being knit to Him by the band of saving Faith,
Ephesians. 3. 17. and receiving the influence of saving graces from Him, Joh. 7. 38,
39. Again, visible Churches are in Christ in the respects presently mentioned,
only as to the better part of them, and with regard had to real Believers, who
always are among them: but besides this, the whole bulk of visible Churches,
and of visible Church Members, are in Christ, so, as they enjoy from Him
outward privileges and divine Ordinances, Psa. 147. 19, 20. the communication
of common gifts from the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 12. 8. and some measure of
divine protection more than the rest of the world, Isa. 27. 2, 3. and these all
by virtue of their union with Him; the bond whereof, is, the profession of His
Name, and of those substantial Truths which relate unto Him either personally
or parentally; which external union betwixt Christ and the visible Church, is
sealed up by Baptism; The Churches of Judea, which were in Christ. 5. Such
power has Christ over the hearts of very enemies, so deep are His engagements
to enlarge His own Kingdom, (Psalm. 2. 9.) that before means and instruments be
deficient for the propagation of the Gospel. He will turn the hearts of
desperate enemies, and make most bitter persecutors to be eminent, lively, and
painful Preachers: so was it here, He who persecuted us in times past, now
preaches the Faith which once he destroyed. 6. How patient ought the Church of
Christ to be under saddest persecutions, and how far from base despondency of
spirit, as if her case were wholly desperate and remediless, seeing Jesus
Christ at an instant can carry captive her chiefest adversaries, and make them
to be her stoutest friends, as appears from this, He who persecuted us, now
preaches. 7. As godless persecutors propose unto themselves no less than the
total overthrow and rooting-out of Truth, though neither Men nor Devils shall
be ever able to effectuate it, Mat. 16. 18. so men may look, if they repent
not, Luke 13. 3. to be justly charged with the guilt of all that evil, which
once they intended, as if they had actually accomplished it, although it was
without their reach so to do: for, that Faith, or Doctrine of Faith (as Tit. 1.
13.) which Paul at this time did preach, is said once to have been destroyed by
him; because he aimed at no less; and his sin before God was no less than if
he had done it, although the Lord in mercy did pardon it, 1 Timothy 1. 13. Now
preaches the Faith which once he destroyed. 8. We ought so to look upon
notable changes which do fall out, whether in particular persons or public
societies, whether to the better or the worse, as that we may see somewhat of
God manifested in them, either His Justice or Mercy, Wisdom or Power, some one
Attribute of His or other, and so as we may give a suitable return, whether of
fear or joy, thankfulness or admiration, or of any other sanctified frame of
spirit and holy performance, for which, such a manifestation calls: for,
those Christians in Judea, did so look upon this notable change in Paul, as to
see God's mercy and power manifested in it, and accordingly with joy, did give
God thanks: so much is imported in this, They glorified God in me, says he. 9.
Whenever God is pleased to make a man instrumental, whether for our own
particular good, or the more public benefit of Christ's Church, as we would
not be ungrateful unto the instruments themselves, Judge. 9. 16, etc. so neither
are we to rest upon them, ascribing the praise of what they do to them, but as
we would not provoke the Lord to smite them, or at least to make them useless
to us, 1 Cor. 4. 6. we are to look unto God more than them, ascribing the
praise of what they do unto Him, as that which is His proper right and due: so
do they ascribe to God the praise of any good, which Paul did by his preaching;
They glorified God in me, or, concerning me. 10. The more that God has made it
convincingly, and from clear evidences, manifest to the conscience of His
People, that a Work is owned and approven by Him, and has drawn an
acknowledgement from them to that purpose unto His own praise, it aggregeth the
sin of those the more, who would afterward question or deny that Work to be
His: for, the Apostle's scope, in part, is, to aggrege the sin of his
adversaries, who denied him to be an Apostle immediately sent from Jesus
Christ, and that the Doctrine preached by him was the Truth of God, from this,
that the Churches in Judea were convinced of the contrary, and had acknowledged
so much long since, to the praise of God, by giving glory unto Him on Paul's
behalf, so that those Galatians and the false Apostles, were guilty of
obscuring the glory of God, shining forth in his Conversion and Office, which
was already acknowledged by others; And they glorified God in me.

CHAP. II.
IN the first part of this Chapter, the Apostle adds some further Evidences,
that both his Office and Doctrine were divine. As first, They were such as
might abide the censure of the chief Apostles, ver. 1, 2. Secondly, In the main
thing controverted, which was about Circumcision, the other Apostles did join
with him, in that they were not for, but against, the circumcizing of Titus,
ver. 3. and for a weighty reason, ver. 4, 5. Thirdly, In that meeting, which
was at Jerusalem, the other Apostles did find nothing for which to challenge
either him or his Doctrine, ver. 6. but upon the contrary, perceiving that Paul
was called of God to be an Apostle, ver. 7. both from that divine assistance,
wherewith he was accompanied, ver. 8. and from those Apostolic gifts wherewith
he was endued, they acknowledged both him and Barnabas for Apostles, ver. 9.
and all of them did part good friends; the collecting of some supply to the
poor Jews among the Gentiles being recommended by the rest to Paul, ver. 10.
Fourthly. He did rebuke Peter, when in his practice he declined from the
Doctrine taught by Paul concerning the abrogation of the Ceremonial Law; and
for any thing which appears to the contrary, Peter in this debate, did yield
to Paul, as having truth for him, to ver. 15.

In the second part, because this dispute about the Ceremonial Law did fly very
high (the false Apostles urging the observation of it, as meritorious of
justification) therefore the Apostle turns the force of the dispute against
Justification by Works, and proves by several Arguments, that we are justified
by Faith only: As first, The believing Jews, who had as much reason to boast in
their works as any, ver. 15. did renounce all confidence in them for
Justification, ver. 16. Next, he preoccupieth an Objection, and shows that
this Doctrine of Justification by Faith without Works, gives no encouragement
to sin, ver. 17. Because, 1. it did press the mortifying and destroying of
sin, ver. 18. And, 2. though it did free them from the Law in several respects;
yet not, as it is the rule of an holy life, ver. 19. Yea, 3. it does tie the
justified person more strictly to subdue sin, and lead an holy life, ver. 20.
Lastly, he adds a second Argument, to prove that we are justified by Faith
only; because, if we were justified by Works, Free Grace and Christ's death
should be useless, ver. 21.

Verse. 1. THen fourteen years after I went up again to Jerusalem, with
Barnabas, and took Titus with me also. 2. And I went up by revelation, and
communicated unto them that Gospel which I preach among the Gentiles, but
privately to them which were of reputation, lest by any means I should run, or
had run in vain.
THe Apostle, first, mentions another journey of his to Jerusalem, together
with the time, when, and the companions with whom he went, and that
extraordinary Instinct and Command from God, which moved him to undertake that
journey, ver. 1, 2 -- And secondly, shows that when he came to Jerusalem, he
did privately communicate the Doctrine which he had preached among the
Gentiles, to the most eminent of the Apostles; that by their subscribing unto
it, as to the same with that which themselves did preach, his bypast and future
labors might have the more success, which (as it seems) was in hazard to be
much retarded by the calumnies of his adversaries, affirming that the other
Apostles did not approve of the Doctrine which he preached ver. -2. So that
here is a fifth Evidence, that both his Doctrine and Office were divine; in
that not only they were such as might abide the censure of the other Apostles,
but also that he in the course of his Ministry was singularly owned and
approved of by God, as being directed by immediate revelation from Him. Doct.
1. It pleases the Lord often, in mercy toward His Church, to preserve the
lives of profitable Instruments for His Work for a long time, notwithstanding
of all the endeavors of Men and Devils to the contrary: for, Paul, whose blood
was much thirsted after, and whose hazards were so many in several places, and
from several hands, (2 Cor. 11. 26.) is yet preserved, in despite of all, in
the free exercise of his Ministry, for the space at least of fourteen years
together, even though the space of time here mentioned were to be reckoned from
his first conversion, which yet some do reckon from the third year following,
to wit, the time mentioned, Chap. 1. ver. 18. Then fourteen years after I went
up, etc. 2. It may be sometimes lawful; yea, and necessary also, for a
Minister, to go abroad from the Flock committed to his charge for a season, to
wit, when and where the glory of God in defense of Truth, and in removal of
what may mar the edification of the Lord's People, does call him: for, Paul
here takes journey to Jerusalem, leaving the Gentiles for a season, who were
his own more proper Charge, Act. 9. 15. that his consent in Doctrine with the
other Apostles might be made evident, and so the edification of those, to whom
he did preach, more advanced; I went up to Jerusalem, says he, and that lest I
should run in vain. Jerusalem was seated on a mountain, and compassed with
mountains, Psalm. 125. 1, 2. whence it is said he went up to it. 3. It is the
part of all, and especially of Christ's Ministers, the more they are who mark
their steps, and mis-represent their actions, to walk the more circumspectly;
that so far as is possible, the mouth of adversaries may be stopped, 2 Cor. 11.
12. Thus Paul, being to make it evident that the other Apostles did approve the
Doctrine preached by him, takes with him Barnabas and Titus as two witnesses,
according to the Law, sufficient (Deuteronomy. 17. 6.) to give testimony to the
Apostles what Doctrine he had preached to the Gentiles; and again to testify
to the Gentiles that consent, which was betwixt him and the Apostles; And this,
lest his adversaries might have objected that he had lied in both, or either of
these; With Barnabas, and took with me Titus also. 4. Though we are not now to
expect immediate revelations from God, whether for direction in one duty, or
information of future events, such as were in use before the Canon of the
Scripture was completed, and the gift of extraordinary Prophecy had ceased,
Heb. 1. 1. Yet seeing the written Word is given unto us as a complete Rule both
for Faith (Joh. 20. 31.) and Manners, (2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.) and as that which may
abundantly supply the defect or want of all those extraordinary ways, whereby
God did make known His mind unto His People then, Heb. 1. 1. Therefore we ought
to advise with God's Will, revealed in Scripture, and regulate all our actions,
motions and journeys according to it, both for the lawfulness and expediency
of what we undertake, Psalm. 119. 9. that thus while we acknowledge God in all
our ways, He may direct our paths, Prove. 3. 6. Thus Paul advised with God in
his journey: for, he went up by revelation; in place whereof, as said is, we
have the written Word now. 5. How little ground the Papists have to infer from
Paul's practice here, that the Church of Rome, and particularly the Pope, the
head thereof, is the supreme Judge upon Earth of all questions pertaining to
Religion; and that all Preachers, after Paul's example, should submit their
Doctrine to be tried and judged by Peter's Successor, appears from this,
passing-by other things, that Paul did not submit his Doctrine to be judged by
Peter, or by any other, as if he had been either inferior to them, or
uncertain of the truth of that which he had preached: both which had been
contrary to Paul's scope, which, as said is, was to evidence, that both his
Doctrine and Office were immediately from God: Neither will the words bear
further than that he did in a friendly and brotherly manner acquaint them with
the Doctrine preached by him, that their approbation being given unto it, the
mouth of adversaries might be stopped: for, the word, rendered to communicate,
signifies to make any thing known to another in a familiar and friendly way,
which in strict Law we are not bound to. See Act. 25. 14. where the same word
is used: And communicated unto them. 6. Though the Minister of Jesus Christ is
not to depend upon the approbation of others for confirmation of his Doctrine,
as if he himself were uncertain of the truth thereof, before their testimony be
added to it, chap. 1. ver. 8. Yet he is not to be so self-willed as to
misregard what others do judge or think of what he preaches, but ought to
dimit himself so far, as, when there is necessity, he may give a friendly
account unto others of the Doctrine preached by him; that so, if it be
possible, mistakes arising through misinformation, may be removed, and the
joint consent of others to the truth of what he preaches may be obtained: thus
Paul, that he might gain their approbation, did communicate unto the Apostles
that Gospel which be preached among the Gentiles. 7. When the approbation of
others is sought after unto any action or deed, christian candor will, and
ordinary prudence may teach a man to report the matter of fact truly, which he
would have approved of; lest otherwise an approbation surreptitiously required,
and given upon misinformation and through mistake, may, upon a discovery, tend
unto the informer's greater prejudice: for, Paul here, being to gain the
approbation of the Apostles unto his Doctrine, did give them a faithful
account of that same Doctrine which he had preached: I communicated that
Doctrine which I preach among the Gentiles. 8. It tends in no small measure
to uphold the credit of a man's Ministry against his adversaries, that in his
Doctrine he has been always constant to himself, without wavering or
contradicting of himself in any thing, which he did ever vent for Truth;
providing always, that he be constant in the Truth: for, constancy in Error,
is nothing else but obstinacy; and to retract an Error, is praiseworthy,
Philip. 3. 7. Thus Paul, that he may further stop the mouth of adversaries,
shows the Doctrine which he did preach from the beginning of his Ministry,
and whereof he did give an account to the Apostles, was the same which he did
presently preach, while he says, I communicated unto them the Gospel which I
preach. It is a word of the present time. 9. As there are always some in the
Church of God, who for their place, graces or parts, have deservedly more of
reputation than others: so christian prudence will teach a man to be so far
from striving against the stream and current of common fame and universal
applause, by laboring to discountenance or oppose without necessity, those who
are so deservedly applauded unto; that he will endeavor, by giving due respect
unto them, to receive approbation from them, whereby he may be in a better
capacity to do good unto others, as being approved-of by such: for, Paul at
Jerusalem addresseth himself to those that were of reputation, to wit, James,
Peter and John (ver. 9.) who, though in their Apostolic Power they were but
equal with the other Apostles, 1 Cor. 9. 5. Yet because of their age, gravity
and some other respects, were generally more esteemed of, than the rest; and
this he did for gaining of their approbation to his Office and Doctrine: that
so he might not run in vain; I went up, says he, to them that were of
reputation, etc. 10. There is much prudency required in the public debating of
controverted Truths in Religion, neither would it be ventured upon without
necessity, and until all other private means for composing of differences be
first assayed, Act. 15. 28. lest thereby unnecessary doubts and scruples be
created in the vulgar sort, who do often prove but unskilful Judges in weighty
and intricate Questions: thus Paul, while this controversy was but yet in its
birth, did not make any public noise of it, communicating the matter but
privately to them that were of reputation. 11. It is the part of a faithful
Minister, not only to preach the Gospel, and go about all the other parts of
his Ministerial Office faithfully and painfully, and so as he may be approven
unto the consciences of all, 2 Timothy 4. 5. but he must be also sollicitous about
the success of his pains toward those among whom he labors: for, so was
Paul, who compares his continual labors and painfulnesse in his Ministry to
running in a race, and yet was careful, lest he had run in vain, that is, lest
his labors had wanted fruit among the hearers; for otherwise, and as to the
end intended to be brought about by God, 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16. or as to the
promised reward Isa. 49. 4. the work of a faithful Minister is never in vain;
Lest by any means I should run in vain, says he. 12. Nothing marreth the good
and success of the Gospel among the hearers more than difference of judgments,
and strites and debates about these differences among the eminent Preachers
thereof: for, hereby are people carried unto schisms, 1 Cor. 1. 12. the Truth
of God received with respect to persons, 1 Cor. 4. 6. and atheism given way to
by many, as resolving to believe nothing till Preachers agree among themselves,
Act. 18. 17. and many stumbling blocks casten before people of all sorts by the
venting of passions, jealousies, animosities, and sometimes a spirit of
revenge, which do usually accompany such divisions, 2 Cor. 12. 20. for, Paul
shows he endeavored so much to get the joint consent of the other Apostles,
to the Doctrine preached by him, lest by the calumnies of his adversaries, who
affirmed that Paul did differ from the rest, his preaching and other pains
should have been useless; Lest by any means I should run, or had run in vain.

Verse. 3. But neither Titus, who was with me, being a Greek, was compelled to
be circumcised.
HEre is a sixth Evidence, especially of the truth of his Doctrine, to wit, that
in the point controverted, betwixt him and his adversaries, the other Apostles
did join with Paul, judging Circumcision to be a thing indifferent, and not of
absolute necessity to Salvation, else they would have required Titus to be
circumcised, which they did not, but received him in fellowship with them,
though he was an uncircumcised Greek. Doct. 1. Amongst those controversies
which did very early trouble the Christian Church, this, concerning the
necessity of observing Circumcision, and the rest of those Levitical
Ordinances, was one, which appears (as from several other Scriptures, Act.
15. 1, 2. so) from this, where Paul, mentioning how the Apostles joined with
him in that controversy, which was betwixt him and his adversaries, does give
the instance in Circumcision; Neither Titus was compelled to be circumcised. 2.
Though Circumcision, and the rest of those Levitical Ordinances, were
necessarly to be observed by virtue of a divine Precept, Genesis 17. 10, etc. and
as the external part of Worship then prescribed, Heb. 9. 10. until Christ
should come in the flesh, and offer-up Himself a Sacrifice upon the Cross,
Ephesians. 2. 15. Yet, after he was come, they were abolished, and all necessity to
observe them, through virtue of a divine precept, removed: the body being come,
the shadow did evanish, Col. 2. 17. the Jews and Gentiles were then to be
united in one People, and so that partition wall was to be removed, Ephesians. 2. 14,
15. the Church also then, to wit, under the New Testament, was bound to
believe, and accordingly to profess, that Christ had already come in the
flesh, and offered-up a perfect and satisfactory Sacrifice to God, which was
wholly inconsistent with the observing of those Legal Ceremonies and
Sacrifices, which by virtue of divine institution did serve mainly for types
and figures of Christ to come, Heb. 8. 5. and 9. 8, 9. for, because of those
reasons, the Apostles did admit of Titus, a Greek, to their fellowship, not
requiring him to be circumcised; But neither Titus was compelled to be
circumcised. 3. It is not unlawful, but a duty incumbent to those who are in
place, not only to enjoin attendance upon, and practicing of the external
commanded duties of Divine Worship, but also by rebuke and other
Church Censures, to constrain and urge those who are disobedient: for, Paul
makes the Apostles their not compelling of Titus to be circumcised, an
evidence that they did not judge Circumcision at that time to be a part of
commanded Worship, which imports, if they had thought otherwise, they would
have compelled him to it (to wit) by the force of Church Censures; for they had
not the power of the Magistrate to compel him by pecunial mulcts, imprisonment,
or such like; But neither Titus was compelled to be circumcised. 4. From this
it follows, that the Civil Magistrate may constrain men, by inflicting of
corporal punishments, to go about the external duties of commanded Worship, in
case that more gentle means do not prevail: for, if constraining by
Ecclesiastick-censures be not unlawful, nor a tyranny over the consciences of
men, constraining by Civil-censures, must be lawful also: now that men may be
compelled by the former, as said is, is here supposed, while he says, Neither
Titus was compelled to be circumcised.

Verse. 4. And that because of false brethren unawares brought in, who came in
privily to spy out our liberty, which we have in Christ Jesus, that they might
bring us into bondage: 5. To whom we gave place by subjection, no not for an
hour, that the truth of the Gospel might continue with you.
HE gives the reason, why Titus was not compelled to be circumcised, to wit,
because some, called here false brethren, as having been urgers of the
necessity of Circumcision, and of the other Levitical Ordinances, and were
brought in to be members of the Church at Jerusalem by fraud, and through
reason of their large pretenses to piety, whereby they covered their heretical
spirits for the time: for, so much does the word, rendered unawares brought in,
hold forth: these men, I say, had secretly conveyed themselves to that meeting,
which Paul had with the other Apostles: and this of purpose to try if Paul
would stand to the defense of that liberty from the Ceremonial Law before the
Apostles, which he had preached among the Gentiles, as a part of Christ's
purchase: which if he had not done, but ceded to them in that one particular of
circumcising Titus, then they would have triumphed over Paul, among the
Gentiles, as if he had recanted before the Apostles; and so would have
endeavored to bring back the Apostles, Gentiles, and the whole Church, to the
bondage of the Ceremonial Law, ver. 4. Therefore was it that neither Paul, nor
the other Apostles, would yield to the importunate desire of these false
brethren, no not for an hour, that is, in using of Circumcision but that once;
and that because, this had been to subject the Apostles, and their Doctrine in
the Truth controverted, to their adversaries; which the Apostles did resolutely
withstand, that so the Doctrine of the Gospel might remain sincere and
incorrupt among the Churches of Christ, and particularly among the Galatians,
ver. 5.

From Verse. 4. Learn, 1. Though the Ceremonial Law of Moses was abolished by
Christ's coming in the flesh; (See upon vek. 3. doct. 2.) Yet the use and
practice thereof was not in it self sinful, but indifferent for a time,
chiefly to the Jews, and in some points at least; the Lord from respect to
that, which was once His own Ordinance, and from condescendence to the
weakness of the Jews, who being educated in the practice of these Levitical
Ordinances, could not be so soon convinced of their being laid aside, did
proceed slowly to the total abrogation of them, removing first the tie of
necessity through virtue of a divine precept, whereby they were obliged to
observe them, and leaving for a time the practice lawful and indifferent,
until the Doctrine of the Gospel and freedom from that yoke by Jesus Christ,
might be sufficiently cleared, the term whereof is affixed for the most part to
be the destruction of Jerusalem both of City and Temple by the Romans, whereby
the most obstinate in it, considering that Christ had now suffered, might have
been convinced that an end was put to the Jewish Policy, both Civil and
Ecclesiastic, by God; after which time, the use of the Ceremonial Law was not
only dead and unprofitable, but also deadly and damnable: thus the Apostles did
not compel Titus to be circumcised; not as if the use of Circumcision had been
at that time simply and in it self unlawful and sinful: for, Paul himself did
circumcise Timothy upon grave and weighty considerations, much about, and
probably after that time, Act. 16. 3. but because that false brethren, then
present, would have made bad use of their doing otherwise, to the prejudice of
the Gospel; And that because of false brethren, etc. 2. Though the practice of
the Ceremonial Law was for that time a thing in it self indifferent; Yet (which
also holds, of all other things in their own nature indifferent, 1 Cor. 8. 9,
10, etc.) it might not always and upon all occasions lawfully, and without sin
be practiced, but the practice thereof was to be ruled according to charity and
prudence; So that in the case of giving scandal by the neglect thereof to the
weak and infirm, it was to be practiced, as Paul did, Act. 16. 3. but in case
of hardening the obstinate, and confirming them in their opinion of its
necessity to Salvation, and thereby giving the adversaries of Truth advantage
against the Truth by the practice thereof, it was to be foreborn: for, the
Apostles here, did not circumcise Titus, because of false brethren, brought in
unawares, who would have taken advantage from the practice of the Apostles, if
they had circumcised him, to bring the Church of Christ again into bondage. 3.
It has been the Churches lot in all times and all places, to have a mixture of
wheat and tares, regenerate and unregenerate, godly and profane in it: even the
Church which was planted and governed by the Apostles themselves, had false
brethren: for, says Paul, Because of false brethren unawares brought in. 4.
Heretical spirits, not only can, but usually do so far dissemble their Errors,
2 Pet. (...). -1- and pretend so much to piety, thereby to gain respect and
credit, 2 Timothy 3. 5. that the most quick-sighted of men will readily be
deceived by them, taking them for the just contrary of that which they really
are, until they find an opportune time to discover themselves: Thus, those
false brethren were brought in unawares, to wit, to the Church at Jerusalem;
they carried the matter so handsomely, what by dissembling their Errors, what by
their pretenses to Piety, that the Apostles themselves, acting as ordinary
Ministers in the admission of Church Members, (Act. 6. 3, etc.) could see
nothing for which to stumble at them, or reject them. 5. Heretical spirits are
most active, vigilant, and so effronted as to ingyre themselves upon the most
private Societies and Fellowships of others, if their presence may contribute
any thing to advance their pernicious Errors: Thus those false brethren do
intrude themselves upon that meeting, which Paul had with the other Apostles,
though it was but of few, and private, ver. 2. Who came in privately to spy out
our liberty. 6. It is too too usual for many, to frequent the meetings of God's
People and Servants, not that they may be edified from them; but that they may
find occasion to carp at what they hear, and make bad use of it to the
prejudice of Christ's Servants, and to their own further confirmation in a
sinful course, who carry about their own judgment with them, they come to
ensnare others, and the Word of the Lord proves a snare unto them, Ezekiel. 14.
4. Thus those false brethren came in privately to spy out their liberty,
resolving whatever had been done, they should have ground from it to make Paul
invidious; if Titus had been circumcised, they were ready to traduce him to the
Gentiles, as a man who preached one thing to them, and practiced the contrary
among the Apostles; if he had not been circumcised, they had ground to incense
the Jews against him, as a contemner of that divine Ordinance. 7. Jesus Christ
having by that only Sacrifice of Himself upon the Cross, fulfilled all those
Legal Types and Shadows of things to come, Heb. 8. 5. and 9. 9. has purchased
liberty unto the Christian Church, and made them fully free from the
observation of those Levitical Ceremonies, chap. 5. 1. hence this freedom is
called Our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus. 8. The Ceremonial Law of
Moses was a great bondage, and most burdensome yoke (Act. 15. 10.) to the
ancient Church, what through the multitude of performances which were thereby
enjoined; some whereof were extremely expensive. Lev. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. chapters,
others painful and hazardous to the natural life, Genesis 34. 25. and others most
wearisom to the flesh, Deuteronomy. 16. 16. and what through the punctual observance
of all those Ordinances enjoined under most terrible Certifications, Deuteronomy. 27.
26. for, the Apostle calls the return of the Christian Church to the
observation of the Ceremonial Law, which was endeavored by those false
brethren, a bringing of them unto bondage; That they might bring us unto
bondage.

From Verse. 5. Learn, 1. When things in themselves indifferent, are urged as
necessary, and required as an evidence of our assent unto an untruth, or
quitting of any part of Truth, in that case, which is indeed a case of
confession, the practice of a thing indifferent, is sinful, and to be
abstained from: for, so did the false brethren urge the Circumcision of Titus,
even as an evidence of Paul's receding from the Doctrine of Christian Liberty,
and therefore he obeyed them not; To whom we gave place, no not for an hour. 2.
Though much may be done for comopsing of Church-differences, by using all
meekness and forbearance toward those who oppose themselves, 2 Timothy 2. 25.
acting jointly with them in those things, wherein there is an harmonious
agreement, Phil. 3. 16. holding off public debates in those things, whereabout
the difference is, Romans 14. 5. providing they be not of the most weighty and
substantial Truths, Gal. 5. 2, 3. Yet we are not for peace's cause to quit the
least part of Truth, whether by a formal denying of it, or doing that which in
reason may and ought to be so expounded: thus Paul, who for lawful ceding did
become all things to all men, 1 Cor. 4. 19, etc. would not give place by way of
subjection, so as to yield the cause controverted to the adversaries, neither
would he do any thing, though never so little, and in its own nature
indifferent, which might be an evidence of his yielding; To whom we gave place
by subjection, no not for an hour: he would not use Circumcision, no not that
once, he would not cede one hair breadth to them. 3. A Minister of Christ, when
he is called to confess and avow Truth, has not only his own peace with God,
and keeping of a good conscience to look unto, 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12. but also the
condition of his Flock, who will be much shaken or confirmed in the Truth, by
his faint, or bold and faithful confession: Thus Paul, in the present
business, had an eye to the converted Gentiles, of whom were these Galatians,
lest their Faith had been shaken by his inconstancy; We gave not place, faith
he, that the truth of the Gospel might continue with you. 4. It is not enough
that people have the name of the Gospel among them, of some Truths of it being
mixed with several Errors, but all, and especially Ministers, should endeavor
to have the Gospel in purity and integrity, free from any mixture of contrary
Errors; for, a little leaven (to which Error is compared, Mat. 16. 12.)
leaveneth the whole lump. 1 Cor. 5. 6. Thus it was Paul's endeavor that the
truth of the Gospel might continue with them, that is, the whole Doctrine of
the Gospel not corrupted with any Error.

Verse. 6. But of these, who seemed to be somewhat (whatsoever they were, it
makes no matter to me, God accepts no man's person) for they who seemed to be
somewhat, in conference added nothing to me.
Follows a seventh Evidence, that both Paul's Doctrine and Office were
divine, containing the event of that meeting which he had with the Apostles, in
three things; the first whereof, is in this Verse, to wit, that of these, or
from those who were looked upon as chief among the Apostles, of whom Paul's
adversaries did boast, as if they had been his superiors, Paul had learned
nothing (which last words, or some such like, are to be supplied for making out
the sentence) and because their personal prerogatives such as that they had
seen Christ in the flesh, were Apostles, when he was a persecutor, might have
been objected to his prejudice; he shows these were not to be taken notice of
by him, neither would be taken notice of by God, whose judgment is not swayed
by any thing which is extrinsecal, and belongs not to the cause in hand; and
therefore their being Apostles before him, would not make his Office or
Doctrine more uncertain, or less divine than theirs; seeing he was an Apostle
now, as well as they, and his Doctrine such as could not be questioned by
themselves: for, after that conference, wherein he related to them the Gospel
preached by him, they corrected nothing and added nothing to what he had said,
but approved all. Doct. 1. It is nothing contrary to, but agrees very well
with Christians modesty and humility, for a man to speak to his own
commendation in some cases; especially when he labors under reproach, and
when the honor of God and the Gospel do also suffer with him: for, Paul
avoweth that he learned nothing from the chief Apostles, and was not in any
thing inferior to them; because if he had yielded to the contrary, his
adversaries would presently have retorted that he was no Apostle, but, at the
most, an ordinary Preacher, and his Doctrine in time bypast had been erroneous;
But of these, or from those, who seemed to be somewhat, supply (for making out
the sense) I learned nothing; which Paul concealeth in modesty, it being that
part of the phrase which should have expressed his praise most, and leaves it
to be supplied by the reader from the scope of the purpose, and from the like
expression in the close of the verse: The like form of speaking is used, 1 Chronicles. 4. 10. Oh that thou would, etc. or, If thou would. 2. It is not
unusual for heretical spirits, to cry-up some of Christ's faithful Ministers
above the rest, and so to have the persons of men in admiration; and this not
from any respect to them, but for their own advantage, Jude, ver. -16. as
hereby rendering those, whom they so cry-up, suspect of favoring their Error,
and bearing down the rest with the pretended show of their authority: Thus
Paul's adversaries did extol Peter, James, and John, as much preferible to
him, because of their personal prerogatives above him, as appears from Paul's
laboring so much to prove that they were no ways superior to him, and to
take off any prejudice which might rise against himself from their personal
prerogatives of seeing Christ in the flesh, and being Apostles before him; But
from those I learned nothing, whosoever they were, etc. 3. In our esteem of
persons and things, our judgment ought not to be ruled by the approbation of
men, so as to put a price upon every thing which is commonly esteemed of among
men, Luke 16. 15. but by the approbation of God, so that every thing may have
more or less weight with us according as He esteems of it: Thus Paul
regarded not the personal prerogatives of the other Apostles, as bearing any
weight in the present business, because God regarded them not; It makes no
matter to me, God accepts no man's person. 4. The Lord, in passing judgment
upon persons or things, is not swayed with any thing which is extrinsecall, and
belongs not unto the cause whereabout He judges: He respects not the
person of man, that is, He will not approve or disapprove of a man's cause for
his person, if it be not otherwise worthy of approbation or reproof; because
most frequently a man's cause and person come under different considerations:
for, says he, God accepts of no man's person: whereby in this place is
meaned, that the personal prerogatives of the other Apostles did not bear
weight with God to make Paul's Office or Doctrine more uncertain, and less
divine than theirs; seeing whatever other use those prerogatives did serve for;
Yet they appertained nothing to the present cause. 5. Though some of Christ's
faithful Servants, may be cryed-up by light wits, or heretical spirits, to the
down-bearing of the deserved estimation of others; Yet so far ought they
themselves to be from being transported with groundless applause, and from
despising those others, beyond whom they are so much esteemed of, that they are
to bear-up their credit so much the more by withholding no approbation of
theirs from them which is their due, although they should thereby contradict
their own flatterers, and make them liars: for, those Apostles, who were so
much cryed-up by the false brethren, to Paul's prejudice, did thoroughly approve
his Doctrine, declaring him to be an orthodox Preacher and an Apostle of Jesus
Christ as well as themselves, contrary to what his adversaries and their
flatterers affirmed of him; In conference they added nothing to me: and, ver.
9. They gave me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship.

Verse. 7. But contrariwise, when they saw that the Gospel of the Uncircumcision
was committed unto me, as the Gospel of the Circumcision was unto Peter: 8.
(For he that wrought effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of the
Circumcision, the same was mighty in me toward the Gentiles) 9. And when
James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be pillars, perceived the Grace that was
given unto me, they gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship, that
we should go unto the Heathen, and they unto the Circumcision.
HEre is a second part of the event of that Meeting at Jerusalem, to wit, that
when the Apostles, James, Cephas, (that is, Peter, Joh. 1. 42.) and John had by
certain evidences found that the Gospel of the Uncircumcision, or the
Apostolick-office to preach the Gospel among the uncircumcised Gentiles, was
concredited by God to Paul as well as the Gospel of Circumcision, or the
Apostolick-office to preach the Gospel among the circumcised Jews, was
committed unto Peter, ver. 7. which they did gather from this, that the like
divine assistance, blessing and success, did accompany the labors both of
Peter and Paul toward their respective Charges, and so their Office behoved to
be equally divine, ver. 8. and when those three Apostles (who were commonly,
and no less deservedly, reputed pillars of the Church, as being, under God,
the upholders of it by their Ministry, gifts, diligence and fidelity) had seen
the grace, or gifts, both ordinary and extraordinary, which were bestowed by
God upon Paul, fitting him every way for the Apostolick-office, they did
without more ado acknowledge both Paul and Barnabas for their Colleagues or
fellow-Apostles, giving them the right hand in evidence of the same, as also of
their mutual agreement in dividing of their Charge, so as that Paul and
Barnabas should go on to discharge their Apostolick-office among the Gentiles,
and the other three among the Jews, vet. 9. which paction is nothing contrary
to what is held forth, Act. 15. 7. for, Peter speaks not there, that his
ordinary Charge was to preach unto the Gentiles, but of that one act of his,
mentioned Act. 10. whereby he was at one time employed to preach to them at the
first beginning of their conversion: All which, does evidence that Paul was an
Apostle, immediately called, and acknowledged to be such by the other Apostles.
Doct. 1. This Scripture does many ways refute that dream of the Papists
concerning Peter's primacy, or supremacy over the rest of the Apostles, and
over the Catholic Church, and of the Pope's succeeding to Peter in that
supposed illimited trust: for, 1. the Apostle's drift in all this, is, to show
that he was every way equal with Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, and no
ways inferior unto them, and that he was acknowledged to be so by Peter
himself; so that Peter was not supreme over all: When they saw that the Gospel
of uncircumcision was committed unto me, etc. 2. Paul does here compare himself
mainly and particularly with Peter, while he expresses him by name, even when
he is speaking of these things, which were common to Peter with the other two,
James and John, as that the Gospel of Circumcision was committed to Peter, and
this because it seems Paul s adversaries did mainly cry-up Peter, as
superior to him; so that this of Peter's primacy above the other Apostles has
been an old plea, but ill grounded, and expressly confuted by Paul in this
place; As the Gospel of Circumcision was committed unto Peter. 3. We find here
a divine Ordinance, that Peter should exercise his Office among the Jews, as
their Apostle, of which Ordinance they can produce no change; and so if the
Pope plead to be Peter's successor, he must challenge a superiority over the
Jews, and has nothing to do with us; As the Gospel of the circumcision was
unto Peter. 4. Paul, by virtue of the same divine Ordinance, was to exercise
his Office among the Gentiles, as their Apostle, and endued with the same
Authority in all points, which Peter had over the Jews; and therefore Peter was
not supreme: But if the Pope give-out himself for universal Pastor over the
whole World, he must not plead his succession to Peter so much as to Paul, who
had the Gospel of the Uncircumcision committed to him: which was a Charge
extending almost to all the universal World. 5. While there is a question here
of dignity anent the Apostles, James is first named before Peter, as being of
eminent Authority among the Apostles, who was President at the Council of
Jerusalem; for, he spoke last, and concluded all, Act. 15. 13, etc. to whom
Paul did betake himself, and with whom all the Elders did conveen in a matter
of great concernment, and not with Peter, Act. 21. 18. so that James has
rather been supreme than Peter; at least, it follows, the first naming of
Peter in other places, (Mat. 10. 2. Mark 3. 16.) is no sufficient ground
whereon to build his supremacy: And when James, Cephas, and John. 6. Peter was
at this time at Jerusalem, and without doubt had not yet seen Rome, seventeen
years at least after Christ's Resurrection, ver. 1. compared with chap. 1. ver.
18. Yea, neither was he at Rome a long time after this, when Paul was there a
prisoner, Col. 4. 11. 2 Timothy 4. 16. How then could he have sitten Bishop at
Rome twenty five years before his death? as is alleged for one main ground,
upon which the Popes succession to Peter, as universal Bishop over the whole
World, is founded: And when James, Cephas and John perceived. 7. There is here
a solemn and mutual agreement, that Paul, and not Peter, should be the Apostle
of the Gentiles: and therefore, How could Peter have been twenty five years
Bishop at Rome, except he had violated his solemn paction confirmed by giving
his hand, which were most absurd once to mention? They gave the right hands of
fellowship, that we should go unto the Heathen. Doct. 2. The more we wait upon
God for His Call and Direction to our Undertaking, we have ground to expect,
that the more of success and of a blessing will accompany them: for, Paul, who
did not undertake this journey to Jerusalem without the Call of God, ver. 2.
has all things succeeding with him according to his hearts wish; so that not
only the Apostles, did not condemn the Doctrine preached by him, ver. 6. but,
on the contrary, gave him their approbation, acknowledging him for their
Colleague and fellow-Apostle, whereby the mouths of his adversaries might have
been fully stopped: But contrariwise they gave to me and Barnabas the right
hands of fellowship; for, so are the words to be constructed, all that which
interveeneth being the reason which moved James, Peter, and John to do what
they did. Doct. 3. The Note which arises from dividing of the Charge of Jews
and Gentiles betwixt Peter and Paul, is at large, Col. 1. 25. doct. 3. Doct. 4.
The Office of preaching the Gospel, is a special Trust, whereby a rich treasure
of saving Truths (2 Cor. 4. 7.) is concredited to weak men, who must be
answerable to God how they keep, maintain and dispense that Treasure for the
good of souls: hence he says, the Gospel was committed, or, as a rich
Treasure, entrusted to him; The Gospel of the Uncircumcision was committed unto
me. 5. It is not the pains of Ministers, Isa. 49. 4. or any virtue which is in
the Word preached, as of it self, 1 Cor. 1. 18. from whence the success of the
Ministry among a People flows, but from the effectual working of the Spirit
of God, whereby He effectually works that which the Word does press upon us,
1 Cor. 3. 6. for, Paul ascribes the success both of his own and Peter's
Ministry to this; He that wrought effectually in Peter, the same was mighty in
me. 6. The power with which the Lord accompanies His Word toward those whom
he intends to convert by it, is most efficacious and such as cannot be
resisted, but breaks through and takes away whatever does oppose it; He that
wrought effectually: the word signifies to work with pith and energy, and
frequently it signifies to work with irresistible efficacy. 7. Where a
Ministers pains are much blessed of God, for the turning of many souls to God,
and where a man is endued with gifts and parts for the Ministerial Calling, it
is a real testimony, and speaking-evidence of that man's calling from God: for,
from this do they gather, that the Gospel of Uncircumcision was committed to
Paul, because his Ministry was powerful among the Gentiles, and endued with
gifts fitting him every way for the Apostolic Office: for, says he, the same
was mighty in me toward the Gentiles, and they perceived the Grace which was
given unto me. 8. It is the duty of Ministers, as pillars, to uphold the Truth
by their doctrine, prayers, graces and parts, Isa. 62. 6, 7. 2 Timothy 2. 2. to be
constant in Truth against all contrary blasts, Mat. 11. 7. to adorn the Truth
by good example of an holy life, whereby they ought to shine before others,
Mat. 5. 16. 1 Timothy 4. 12. for, as James, Cephas, and John, were accounted
pillars; so they, and all faithful Ministers are really such: and Paul does
here indirectly tax the common opinion, whereby that name was appropriate only
to those three, which did belong also to others: Hence it is also that the
Church Militant, in respect of the Ministry of the Word chiefly, is called the
pillar and ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3. -15. And when James, Cephas and John, who
seemed to be pillars. 9. Whom God does call to the undergoing of any
employment, and chiefly whom He calls to the Ministry, those he fitteth with
gifts and abilities suitable for that employment in some measure whether lesser
or greater, Mat. 25. 15. for, James, Cephas and John did not acknowledge Paul
to be an Apostle, called by God, but upon their perceiving that Grace, or
gifts, both ordinary and extraordinary were bestowed upon him; They saw that
the Gospel of Uncircumcision was committed unto me, when they perceived the
Grace that was given to me. 10. We ought not to withhold our approbation,
especially when it is craved, from that which by evident signs and reasons we
perceive to be approved of by God, although there be many who disapprove it,
and though the giving of our approbation to it may disoblige those who
otherwise pretend much friendship to us: for, those three Apostles, perceiving
by most convincing evidences that God had called Paul to be an Apostle, they
acknowledge him for such, though those who did cry them much up as pillars,
(and what not?) did no doubt oppose their so doing, as tending evidently to the
disadvantage of their cause; They gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of
fellowship.

Verse. 10. Only they would that we should remember the poor, the same which I
also was forward to do.
THe third thing in the event of that Meeting, which did also evidence, that
Paul and the other Apostles did part good friends, and in all things one among
themselves, was, That the other Apostles did earnestly recommend to Paul and
Barnabas the collecting of some charity among the Churches of the Gentiles, 1
Cor. 16. 1. to supply the poor Jews who were turned Christians, Romans 15. 25.
which they performed speedily and diligently. See the places cited, and 2 Cor.
8, and 9. chapters. Doct. 1. It is frequently the lot of those who are rich in
Grace, to be poor in the things of a present life; and who are heirs of a
Kingdom, (Luke 12. 32.) to be driven unto such straits, as they are forced to
live upon some charitable supply from others; God seeing it convenient hereby
to wean them from worldly contentments, that Heaven may be the more longed
after, and more sweet when it comes: Thus the Christians in Judea, for the
most part, were poor, and such as needed supply from the Gentiles; Only they
would that we should remember the poor. 2. Though those who are our own poor
within the bounds where we live, are chiefly to be relieved by us, because of
our nearer interest in such, 1 Timothy 5. 8. Yet, in cases of extremity, even
those poor who live remote from us (because they are also of our own flesh,
Isa. 58. 7. and members of the same mystical body, if Believers, Gal. 6. 10.)
are also to be supplied by us: for, Paul was to stir up the Gentiles to
contribute for the poor at Judea; Only they would that we should remember the
poor. 3. The care of the poor, and supply of the outward necessities of the
Saints, is an employment not unworthy of the very chief Apostles, and which
Ministers and other Officers of the Church ought to make conscience of: for,
the care of the poor, was the last farewell of those Apostles: Only they would
that we should remember the poor, which Paul also was forward to do. 4. The
Ministers of Jesus Christ, ought to press upon the People not only duties
which are easy, and cost them naught; but also those that are burdensome and
expensive, especially that they would willingly give of those things which they
enjoy, for the supply of others which want; and are to be as forward in
pressing the one sort of duties as the other, as being equally profitable to
the Church, and most evidencing of an inward work of Grace in the heart, 1 John
3. 17. Thus Paul was forward to press upon the Gentiles to give some supply to
the poor Jews; The same which I was also forward to do, or did speedily and
diligently, as the word signifies.

Verse. 11. But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the face,
because he was to be blamed.
FRom this Verse to the 15. there is a further evidence of that Truth, which he
had formerly asserted concerning the authority of his Office and his divine
Doctrine, even in that point which was controverted betwixt him and his
adversaries; which he makes appear from this, That, as an Apostle, and by
virtue of his Apostolic Office, he did with Authority rebuke Peter one of the
chief Apostles, when in his practice at Antioch he declined from the Doctrine
taught by him concerning the abrogation of the Ceremonial Law, and that, for
any thing which appears to the contrary, Peter in this debate did yield to
Paul, as having Truth for him. This action of Paul's toward Peter, is first
summarly propounded in this Verse, wherein Paul shows that boldly and freely
he did oppose himself to Peter, and that because his carriage, as he does clear
more fully afterward, was most blameworthy. Doct. 1. No band of friendship or
confederacy, which parties have entered, no fear of occasioning the breaking-off
of friendship (whatever may be the consequences thereof) ought to make those,
who are so conjoined, connive at others in a sinful course, or withhold a
testimony against that which is sinful in their friend, when the hazard which
may ensue from his sin to the Work and People of God, does call for it: for,
though Paul had come to Jerusalem of purpose to purchase a good understanding
betwixt him and Peter, ver. 1, 2. and though they had given, not long since,
mutual evidences of their harmony and agreement, ver. 9. and though their
renting assunder, was the thing which adversaries to Truth would have been most
glad of, as making much for the advantage of their bad cause; Yet, not long
after this agreement was made, when Peter falls in a sin reproof-worthy,
which had dreadful consequences to the People and Work of God (as will appear
afterward) following upon it, Paul does freely and boldly give testimony
against his sinful course; But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him
to the face. 2. As the Ministers of Jesus Christ are bound to reprove sin and
vice; so they are to reprove it, first, with much boldness and resolution, not
faintly, as if they were more feared for the offense of man, than grieved for
the dishonor of God: so Paul, in reproving Peter, withstood him: In the
Original, it is a military word, and signifies to stand against, whether it be
by force of arms, or arguments: it is a word of defiance, and combating, as it
were, hand to hand, face to face, and foot to foot, not yielding a hair breadth
to the adversary, Romans 13. 2. Ephesians. 6. 13. Secondly, with ingenuity and candor,
so as not to conceal the man's fault only from himself, and in the mean time to
speak of it broad and wide unto others for his prejudice, Lev. 19. 16. But they
are to declare his sin even-down to himself, and rebuke him for it: Thus Paul,
withstood Peter to the face: for, the word in the Original, does not import
that he withstood him only in show, and for the fashion, making the beholders
think they were serious when they were not, as some of the Ancients did
allege: such dissimulation had been most base in those two eminent Apostles,
and Paul had not here spoken truly, affirming that Peter was worthy to be
blamed, and that he walked not uprightly; so the word must read, as it is here
rendered, to the face, or to his face, as 2 Cor. 10. 1. Thirdly, with certainty
and knowledge of the deed reproved, both for the truth of the fact, and the
vicious quality of it: Paul before he reproved, was assured of both these;
Because he was to be blamed, says he. Doct. 3. The most eminent Saints on
earth, are not free of their own sinful and blameworthy failings; that hereby
they may be kept humble, and from being lifted up with their gifts, graces,
and other excellencies, 2 Cor. 12. 7. and others may hereby learn not to think
of them above what is written, 1 Cor. 4. 6. for, even the Apostles themselves
and Penmen of Scripture, though they could not err in writing Scripture, being
therein guided by the infallible assistance of the Spirit, 2 Pet. 1. 21. Yet in
other things they had their own sinful failings, as is evident in Peter;
Because he was to be blamed. 4. It is the part of every man, though never so
eminent and esteemed of by others, when he meets with a just and deserved
reproof, to stoop to it, without repining to embrace it, and with silence to
correct the error, and amend the fault which is reproved: for, he that hates
reproof, shall die, Prove. 15. 10. So does Peter, who, being sharply rebuked by
Paul, defends no^ his fault, contendeth not with his reprover, but patiently
takes with his reproof, as appears from his silence; for he replieth nothing.

Verse. 12. For before that certain came from James, he did eat with the
Gentiles: but when they were come, he withdrew, and separated himself, fearing
them which were of the Circumcision. 13. And the other Jews dissembled likewise
with him, insomuch that Barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation.
NExt, the Apostle enlarges what he had briefly propounded: and, first, he
shows Peter's sin for which he was reproved, to wit, that whereas before some
Jews did come from Jerusalem, where the Apostle James had his residence, Peter
did keep fellowship with the Christian Gentiles, and had eaten freely with
them, (wherein he did right according to the Doctrine of Christian Liberty, by
which all differences of meats, and betwixt Jew and Gentile, are removed under
the New Testament, as Peter himself was instructed by vision, Act. 11. 9.) but
when those Jews did come, he did separate from the Gentiles, as if it had been
unlawful to eat with them, and this through fear of offending those
forementioned Jews, who were most tenacious of the Ceremonial Law, ver. 12. by
which bad example of Peter's, the other Jews, which were at Antioch, were moved
to withdraw from the Gentiles, as if it had been unlawful to have entire
fellowship with them; Yea, and Barnabas also did the like, ver. 13. From whence
we Learn, 1. Such influence have circumstances upon our actions, that though an
action, considered simply and in it self, be not sinful; Yet, by reason of
accompanying circumstances, it may become exceeding sinful: for, the exceeding
sinfulness of Peter's action, for which he was here reproved, did not consist
in his simple abstinence from certain kinds of meats, to eschew the offense of
the weak; for, Paul did something like to this himself, Act. 16. 3. and 21. 26.
but in the circumstances which did accompany that his abstenance, which will
appear by pointing at some of those circumstances, whereby also the Text will
be further cleared; as first, That he did withdraw from the Gentiles in eating,
as if they had been no Church Members, with whom it was lawful to have entire
fellowship; He withdrew, and separated himself. Secondly, That he abstained not
among the Jews at Jerusalem, which had been more tolerable, but at Antioch,
where, a little before, he had openly done the contrary, in using his Christian
Liberty: for, before he did eat with the Gentiles; but when they were come, he
withdrew. Thirdly, That he did withdraw, not as if it had been a thing
indifferent to have done so, or otherwise, and therefore would do it for a time
to gain the Jews; but as if it had been a thing in it self sinful to have eaten
with them, contrary to what himself knew, and was informed of by the heavenly
vision; and therefore it is called dissimulation in him, while it is said, The
other Jews dissembled with him likewise. Fourthly, That his abstinence was not
for gaining of the weak Jews, whom he might afterward have informed of the
abrogation of these Levitical Ordinances, but from fear of losing esteem with,
and incurring the hatred of, those who were spying-out their liberty, and would
doubtless make bad use of that his abstinence, for confirming themselves in,
and drawing over others to, their Errors; Fearing them which were of the
Circumcision. Fifthly, That by his example he did hurt to the other Jews, who
were beginning to be informed concerning the abrogation of the Ceremonial Law,
and in evidence of it, had been eating with the Gentiles; but now, by this
practice of Peter's, did again drink-in their former error; And the other Jews
dissembled likewise. Sixthly, This practice of his (as is clear from the
following 14. verse) did tend to force the Christian Gentiles to take on the
yoke of the Ceremonial Law, (which had been most sinful in them, they being
never under it) as they would not have been debarred from the fellowship of
Peter, and of the Church; Why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as the Jews?
And, seventhly, He hereby gave a great dash to Paul's Doctrine, and the
Doctrine of the Gospel concerning Christian Liberty, and the abrogation of the
Ceremonial Law; for, his practice did speak as much, as if it had been yet in
force; He withdrew and separated himself, and the other Jews dissembled
likewise. Doct. 2. So weak and unconstant are the best of men, that, being left
to themselves, the least blast of tentation will make them break off the course
of doing-well in the very midst, and, without respect had either to conscience
or credit, openly to desert it: for, Peter having begun well in the use of
Christian Liberty, by eating with the Gentiles, gives evidence of great
levity, in that for fear of man's offense he did presently slip from it; Before
that certain came from James, he did eat with the Gentiles; but when they were
come, he withdrew. 3. To separate from, and to breakoff communion with, a true
Church, and the received Members thereof, is such an act as cannot be attempted
without sin, no not though hereby we could eschew the offense and stumbling of
many: for, this was it that made Peter blameworthy, even his separating from
the Church of the Gentiles, as if it had been unlawful to keep communion with
them, notwithstanding the Jews would have been offended if he had done
otherwise; He withdrew and separated himself, fearing them which were of the
Circumcision. 4. It is of great concernment to men of grace and parts, who are
in public place, and do enjoy the applause of many, to be both men of courage,
and self-denyed spirits; and even when they enjoy the applause of all, to be
dead and dying to it; lest, if they conceit more of it than they ought, through
their fleshly fear of losing applause and incurring hatred from men, they
venture upon the dishonor of God: for, even Peter, fearing too much his loss
of esteem among the Jews, did sin against the Lord; He withdrew and separated
himself, fearing them which were of the Circumcision, or the Jews, who are
frequently so designed. 5. As good men sometimes, under the fit of a violent
tentation, will in practice condemn that which in their judgment they do
approve; so for any to sin thus against their light, is an high aggravation of
their guilt: for, this is the dissimulation wherewith Peter is charged, and
whereby his sin is here aggreged: by his practice he pretended, that fellowship
with the Christian Gentiles was unlawful, in the contrary whereof, he was
instructed by the heavenly vision, Act. 11. 9. And the other Jews dissembled
likewise with him. 6. Of so great force is the bad example of men, eminent,
gracious and learned, that not only the weak and infirm, but even those who are
strong, and richly endued both with grace and parts, will sometimes be
corrupted by it: It is usual for us unawares to esteem of such, as of somewhat
more than men, and being once that far engaged in our esteem of them, we do not
so narrowly examine their actions, as we would of other men, Hence all is taken
for current that comes from them: thus not only the vulgar Jews, but even
Barnabas himself, an eminent Apostle, (Act. 13. 1, 2.) was carried away with
Peter's bad example; And the other Jews dissembled likewise with him, insomuch
that Barnabas was carried away with their dissimulati^n: and ver. 14. his
example had a kind of compulsion in it toward the Gentiles, to make them do as
he did; Why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews? 7. A speat and
inundation of evil examples, though even held forth by private Christians,
especially if they be otherwise pious, is so impetuous, and of such force, to
carry others along in their practice with it; that even the very best of men
can very hardly stand out against it: for, Barnabas his dissimulation, is
ascribed not only to Peter's bad example, but also, if not mainly, to that
influence which the evil example of these other Jews had upon him; And the
other Jews dissembled likewise; insomuch that Barnabas was carried away with
their dissimulation. 8. It is of great concernment unto all Superiors, and
chiefly those who are eminent for piety and parts, to take diligent heed left
they give bad example unto others; and this not only because of what is partly
expressed in the two former Doctrines, but also because the sins of others,
which are occasioned by the evil example of any, will be justly charged upon
him whose bad example they do follow: for, the dissimulation of the Jews and
Barnabas, is mentioned as an aggravation of Peter's sin, which had such
dreadful consequences; And the other Jews dissembled likewise.

Verse. 14. But when I saw that they walked not uprightly, according to the
truth of the Gospel, I said unto Peter before them all, If thou, being a Jew,
live after the manner of the Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why compellest
thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews?
SEcondly, The Apostle enlarges what he said ver. 11. of his withstanding
Peter; showing that when he had perceived they walked not uprightly, or with
(...) straight foot, according to the sincere Doctrine of the Gospel, without
more ado he did openly fall upon Peter, whose example had given the occasion of
that (...) unto all the rest: and the fault which he charge hi^ with, and
that which did aggrege his sin most, was, th(...) by his example he did
constrain the Gentiles, as they would not have been cast out of Peter's
fellowship and of the Church, to observe the Ceremonial Law of Moses, as the
Jews did: the iniquity whereof he show(...) in this, that Peter himself, who
was a Jew, and so mo(...) bound to observe the Ceremonial Law, which was
giv(...) not to the Gentiles, but to the Jews, had cast off th(...) yoke, and
lived after the manner of the Gentiles, as (...) clear from ver. 12. and
therefore there was no reason (...) it, that he should enforce that yoke upon
others. Doct. 1. The multitude of those who swerve from Truth, should not make
Truth the less lovely unto, or blunt the edge of others in the defense of it
against Error: Though Truth should be deserted by all except one only, it is
worthy to be owned, stood to, and defended by that one, and this against all
who do oppose it: for, though Peter, the other Jews, Barnabas and all did
dissemble, and halt from the Truth; Yet Paul alone does stand for it: And when
I saw that they walked not uprightly according to the Truth, I said unto Peter,
etc. 2. It is the duty of all professors to walk so both in the matter of
opinion and practice, as is suitable unto, and well-agreeing with the sincere
Truth of God, held out in the Gospel, even so, as that in opinion they hold
nothing, which is, though but indirectly, contrary to that Truth, or in
practice act nothing which may reflect upon that Truth; and when they halt, or
walk not with a straight foot in either of those, they are blameworthy: for,
the fault of Peter and the rest, for which they are here reproved, was, That
they walked not uprightly, or with a straight foot, according to the truth of
the Gospel. Their practice and their opinion concerning the lawfulness of
gratifying the Jews in the present business, did indirectly at least
contradict and reflect upon that great Gospel Truth about the abrogation of the
Ceremonial Law. 3. When many are guilty of one and the same sin, the Minister
of Jesus Christ ought to reprove wisely and without respect of persons, making
the weight of the reproof light upon them, as they have been more or less
accessory to the sin: for, because Peter's example had been the occasion of sin
to all the rest, Paul directs the reproof to him by name, and this before the
rest; that they might see themselves, indirectly at least, reproved also for
following this bad example; I said unto Peter before them all. 4. Though
private sins, which have not broken forth to a public scandal of many, are to
be rebuked in private, Mat. 18. 15. Yet, public sins are to receive public
rebukes; that hereby the public scandal may be removed, and others may be
scared from taking encouragement from those sins to do the like, 1 Timothy 5. 20.
Thus, because Peter did sin publicly before all, Paul, by way of reproof, said
unto Peter before them all. 5. Though the binding power of the Ceremonial Law
was abrogated at Christ's death, and the practice thereof, in some things at
least, left as a thing lawful, and in it self indifferent unto all for a time
after that, (See ver. 4. doct. 1.) Yet the observation thereof, even for that
time, was dispensed with more for the Jews sake, and was more tolerable in them
who were born and educated under the binding power of that yoke, than in the
Gentiles, to whom that Law was never given, and so were to observe it, or any
part of it, only in case of scandalizing the weak Jews by their neglecting of
it, Romans 14. 20, 21. This difference betwixt Jew and Gentile, as to the
practice of the Ceremonial Law, is gathered from the Apostle's way of arguing
with Peter, from the less to the more; If thou, being a Jew, live not as do
the Jews, to wit, in observing the Ceremonial Law, why compellest thou the
Gentiles to live as do the Jews? Whereby he implies, that the observation of
these Ceremonies was more to be comported with in the Jews than in the
Gentiles. 6. It is a piece of unreasonable absurdity in a Minister, for which
he can give no account neither to God nor man, to take liberty of practice to
himself in those things which he does condemn in others, and the contrary of
which he does either by his Doctrine or example at other times constrain them
to, as appears from the question here propounded, If thou live not as do
the Jews, why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews? as if he had
said, Thou can neither answer to God nor man for it. 7. It is no small sin for
Superiors to bind where the Lord has left free, by urging upon their
Inferiors the observing of a thing, in its own nature indifferent, as
necessary; except it be in these cases wherein the Lord, by those circumstances
which do accompany it, does point it out as necessary; such are the cases of
scandal, Act. 15. 28, 29. and contempt, 1 Cor. 14. 40. for, hereby mainly is
Peter's sin aggreged, that he did compel the Gentiles to the necessary
observation of the Ceremonial Law, though the use of it was at that time
indifferent; Why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews? 8. In the
primitive times of the Christian Church, the People of God did wonderfully
subject themselves to the Ministry of the Word in the hand of His Servants, and
much more than People now do: for if the actions of the Apostles compelled men
to do this or that, as Peter's action did compel the Gentiles, what then did
their Doctrine and heavenly Exhortations? Why compellest thou the Gentiles,
etc.?

Verse. 15. We who are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles, 16.
Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the Faith
of Jesus Christ; even we have believed in Jesus Christ that we might be
justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the works of the Law: for by the
works of the Law shall no flesh be justified.
SOme Interpreters do conceive that Paul's speech to Peter does yet continue in
these two Verses; Yea, and some think that it is extended to the end of the
Chapter: but others conceive, that Paul, having closed the narration of what
passed betwixt him and Peter, ver. 14. does here return to speak to the
Galatians: and though those last do seem to have most of reason for them; yet
which of these opinions do stand, it is all one to the main purpose: for, it is
clear that the Apostle does here state and fall upon one of the main questions,
which were betwixt him and his adversaries, to wit, That we are justified, or
accepted of, and declared righteous in God's sight by Faith in Christ, and not
by the works of the Law.

And for the better understanding of the thread and method of the Apostles
dispute, together with the state of the present question, and the sense and
force of those arguments which he makes use of to confirm the Truth in
controversy, We shall premit three things in general, First, the Apostle's
adversaries erred in two things mainly, 1. they urged the rigid observation of
the Ceremonial Law, as necessary by virtue of a divine Precept standing yet in
force, as may be gathered from the Apostle's reasoning, chap. 3. 19, 25. and
chap. 4. 3, 4, 5. 2. As Seducers wax worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3. 13. so they
went higher, and urged the observation of these Ceremonies, as that whereby,
jointly at least with Christ, sinners are justified before God, as appears
from chap. 2. 16, 21. and 3. 11. Now the Apostle addresseth himself to the
refutation of both those Errors: and because the latter Error, to wit, That
sinners are justified by their obedience to the Law, is most dangerous,
therefore he does refute it first, and apart, to ver. 19. chap. 3. And next, he
refuteth that first Error jointly with the other, proving there was no
necessity at all of observing the Ceremonial Law, or any part of that Mosaical
Pedagogie, now under the New Testament, and that it ought not now to be
observed, the date prefixed by God for the observation of it being already
expired, to ver. 13. chap. 5. Secondly, while the Apostle, all-along this
dispute, denies we are justified, or that righteousness and the inheritance
do come by the Law, he understands by the Law, not the whole Doctrine
delivered by Moses upon Mount Sinai; for, the Law, being so taken, was a
Covenant of Grace, as appears from the Preface and Promises of the Decalogue,
and from the Ceremonial Law, which shadowed forth Christ and remission of sins
through Him, Heb. 10. 4, 8, 9. so that Believers under the Old Testament may be
said to have been justified, and to have had righteousness by the Law in this
sense: for, it implies no further than that they were justified according to
the tenor of the Covenant of Grace, as it was wrapped-up in that ancient legal
dispensation. The Apostle therefore takes the Law more strictly, and, in the
sense of his adversaries, for the mere precepts and threatenings of the Law, as
it requires perfect obedience, and curses those who have it not, abstracting
from Christ, and Grace, which were held forth (though but obscurely) in it;
for, in that sense his adversaries maintained justification by the Law, and
therefore the Apostle while he refuteth justification by the Law, must be
understood to speak of the Law in the same sense also, which sometimes he
clearly expresses, while he explaineth his meaning by denying we are justified
by the works of the Law, verse. 16. and chap. 3. 5, 10. Thirdly, that the
Apostle may strike at the root of this their most dangerous Error of
Justification by Works, he excludes all Works in general, not only those of
the Ceremonial Law, but the Works also of the Moral Law; Yea, and all Works of
ours whatsoever, from having influence upon Justification: for, as shall be
observed in the Dispute it self, the Arguments used by the Apostle to prove
that we are not justified by Works, are applicable to the Moral Law equally, if
not more than to the Ceremonial Law; Yea, and do exclude the Works of the
Regenerate, as well as of the Unregenerate: Besides, it is sure that none
professing the Name of Christ, as the Apostle's adversaries did, would have
urged the naked external performance of those Ceremonies, as having influence
upon Justification, except as it was conjoined with internal love to God and
our neighbor, commanded by the Moral Law, and signified, expressed, and some
one way or other advanced by those outward performances: Neither is it
conceivable how they, maintaining a necessity of Faith in Christ, could imagine
that any Works whatsoever, whether done in obedience to the Ceremonial Law, or
to the Moral being such Works only as are done by the power of Nature and
strength of Freewill, without the Grace of Christ, should have justified a
sinner, and made him righteous before God; So that if Paul in this Dispute had
excluded from Justification only the external Works of the Ceremonial Law, and
not the Works of the Moral Law also, or only all Works whatsoever flowing from
the strength of Nature, or, the Works of the Unregenerate, and not the Works of
the Regenerate also, which are performed by the Grace of Christ, he should have
quite mistaken the question, and not at all refuted his adversaries. It does
therefore of necessity follow, that the Apostle reasons against Justification
by Works, done in obedience to the Law in general, and that he affirms we are
justified only by Faith in opposition unto all Works of ours whatsoever; which
he proves by two Arguments in this Chapter. First, because he himself and
other Jews, who, though they enjoyed by birth and education (as being born
Members of the visible Church) many privileges beyond the Gentiles, who were
profane sinners and born aliens from God; and therefore might have expected to
be justified by their good works, if so any could be justified that way; Yet
they (knowing perfectly that all their Works, done in obedience to the Law,
could never justify or make them righteous before God, and that only Faith in
Christ would make them so righteous) even they, who had as much reason to boast
of their Works as any other, had renounced all confidence in their Works, and
betaken themselves only to Faith in Jesus Christ for Justification, and hereby
he leaves unto them to gather what madness it were for those Galatians, or
any other of the Gentiles, to rely upon the Works of the Law, so as to be
justified by them; which he further confirms, as it seems, from Psalm. 143.
-2. affirming that no flesh, whether Jew or Gentile, shall be justified, to
wit, by the Works of the Law, which is here supplied by the Apostle, without
adding to the sense. The like addition of words for explication, without
wronging the sense, is frequently used in the New Testament, where Scriptures
are cited out of the Old, as Mat. 4. 10. compared with Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Heb. 10. 5.
compared with Psalm. 140. 7. Doct. 1. Though every man by nature, is a child of
wrath and enemy to God, Ephesians. 2. 3. as Nature speaks that which is born with
us, and conveyed unto us from our parents by carnal generation, Psalm. 51. 5.
Yet all those who are born within the visible Church, have a right by nature
unto Church Priviledges and to enjoy the external means of Grace and Salvation
as Nature speaks that which is born with us, not of natural generation, but
of free grace, which God is pleased to honor His People with, and to deny unto
others: for, the Apostle here calls himself and others come of Abraham, who
had been from that time upwards the only visible Church, Psalm. 147. 19, 20.
Jews by nature, whereby he does not simply design them to be men of such a
Nation; for, that could make nothing to the Apostle's scope in the present
argument, besides that the Jew is here opposed to sinners of the Gentiles; so
it must relate some way to their spiritual state, neither does it import that
much, as if they had inherent holiness, and were altogether sinlesse by
nature: for, this is contradicted by Scripture, Romans 3. 9. So the meaning must
be, that from their birth, and because of God's love to them in making choice
of them to be a Church to Himself above all Nations, Deuteronomy. 7. 6. they were
(externally at least) in covenant with God, Deuteronomy. 29. 11. whereby they had a
right to all Church Priviledges, as of being under God's special care and
government, Isa. 4. 5, 6. of enjoying the ordinary means of Salvation, as they
were capable of them, Genesis 17. 12. And as it was with the Jews then, so is it
with those that are born within the visible Church now: they are Christians by
birth, to wit, in the sense presently mentioned: for, the visible Church under
the New Testament, and among the Gentiles, has succeeded to those privileges,
which were enjoyed by the Church under the Old, Romans 11. 17. So that even young
Infants are expressly called holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14. to wit, with an external and
federal holiness: and on this account they have right to Baptism, the seal of
the Covenant, which no Infidel can claim, Act. 2. 38, 39. We who are Jews by
nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles. 2. The Doctrine of free Justification
by Faith in Jesus Christ, and not by Works, was early opposed by Satan and
heretical spirits, and no Doctrine so much opposed as it was, and that because
no Truth is more necessary to be kept pure than this is, it being such a
Truth as if it be kept pure, several other Truths are kept pure also; and
if it fall, many other Truths do also fall with it: Therefore is it that Satan
did so much labor, and yet labors to bear it down: for, the defacing of
this Truth was mainly aimed at by the false Apostles among those Galatians, as
appears from the Apostle his setting of himself so much to defend it; That we
might be justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the Works of the Law,
says he. 3. Concerning the nature of Justification, we learn several things;
First, That Justification is not the Lord's making one, who was before unjust,
to be just by working of habitual and inherent righteousness in him, as the
Papists do take it, confounding Justification and Sanctification, contrary to
Scripture, 1 Cor. 6. 11. But it is a judicial action, whereby the Lord
absolveth the sinner from death and wrath, and adjudgeth him to life eternal:
for, the word expressing this grace here, is a judicial word taken from Courts
of Justice, which, being attributed to the Judge, is opposed to condemn, Romans
8. 33, 34. and so signifies to absolve, and give sentence: neither does the
Scripture ever make use of this word in any other sense, where the
justification of a sinner before God is spoken of; Knowing that a man is not
justified, etc. and that we might be justified. Secondly, The ground whereupon,
and the cause for which sinners are thus justified or absolved from wrath, and
adjudged to life eternal, is not any Works which they do in obedience to the
Law of God, whether Ceremonial or Moral: for, Works are excluded, while he
says, A man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the Faith of
Jesus Christ; it is not, except by the Faith, etc. as if Works were only
excluded, when Faith is not joined with them, as the Papists do read it; but
the word is well turned here by the adversative particle, But, as it is
frequently in Scripture. See chap. 1. 7. Mat. 12. 4. So that Works are simply
excluded, and Faith established, as only having hand in this businesss: which
is more plainly asserted afterward; That we might be justified by the Faith of
Christ, and not by the Works of the Law: by which are meaned both the Works of
the Moral and Ceremonial Law, as we cleared in the Exposition. Thirdly, The
Works which are excluded from having hand in Justification, are not only those
which are done before conversion, but also which follow after, and flow from
the working of God's Spirit in us; even those Works are imperfect, Isa. 64. 6.
and so cannot make us completely righteous, and we do owe them to God in the
mean time, Luke 17. 10. and so they cannot satisfy divine Justice for the
failings of the bypast time, They are the work of God's Spirit in us, Philip.
2. 13. and so we can merit nothing at God's hand by them: for, He excludes the
Works of the Law in general; now the good Works of the Regenerate are such, as
are commanded by the Law, and done in obedience to the Law, besides that those
false Apostles did admit a mixture of Faith and Works in Justification, so that
if the Apostle had not excluded even Works which flow from Faith, they might
have quickly agreed upon the point; Man is not justified by the Works of the
Law. Fourthly, That, through virtue whereof we are thus justified and absolved
by God, is the righteousness of Jesus Christ, performed by Himself, while He
was here on Earth, both in doing what we should have done, Mat. 3. 15. and
suffering what we ought to have suffered, Gal. 3. 13. which righteousness is
not inherent in us, but imputed to us, Romans 5. 17, 18, 19. as the sum of Money
paid by the Cautioner, stands good in Law for the principal Debtor, So we are
said to be justified by the Faith of Christ, or Faith in Jesus Christ, as
laying hold upon His righteousness, which is imputed to us, as said is, and by
which only we are made righteous. Fifthly, Though Faith be not alone in the
person justified, but is ever accompanied with all other saving graces; for, it
works by Love, chap. 5. 7. Yet Faith is that only grace which has influence
in our Justification: for, all other Works, even those that flow from Grace,
are excluded, and only Faith admitted to have hand in this business; A man is
not justified by the Works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ, and,
that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the Works of the
Law. Sixthly, Faith has influence upon our justification, not as it is a Work,
or because of any worth which is in it self, more than in other graces, or, as
if the act of believing, whether it alone, or jointly with other graces, were
imputed unto us for righteousness, but only as it lays hold on Jesus Christ,
and gives us a right to His Righteousness, through the merit whereof alone we
are justified: for, it is by the Faith of Jesus Christ, or, Faith receiving
(Joh. 1. 12.) and resting on Jesus Christ (Isa. 26. 3, 4.) that we are
justified; besides that all Works of the Law, or commanded by the Law, are here
excluded, and by consequence Faith it self, as it is a work, is excluded also.
Seventhly, This way of Justification by Free Grace accepting of us for the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ, and not because of our own worth, is common to
all who ever were, are, or shall be justified, whether good or bad: the most
eminent and best of men must quit the conceit of their own righteousness, and
rely upon Him who justifies the ungodly by Faith: for, even those who were
Jews by nature, Paul and the other Apostles, betook themselves to this way,
Even we (says he) have believed in Jesus Christ, and the Scripture cited by
Paul, speaks universally of all; For by the Works of the Law shall no flesh
be justified. Eighthly Before man be justified through virtue of this imputed
Righteousness, he must first be convinced of his own utter inability to
satisfy divine Justice, and so to be justified by any thing which himself can
do: So natural is it to seek for a righteousness of our own and in our selves,
that we will never seek in earnest to the Righteousness of Christ until we be
made to despair of our selves, Romans 10. 3. for, the Apostle shows that this
conviction went before their Justification; Knowing that a man is not justified
by the Works of the Law. Next, he must be convinced also of a worth in Christ's
Merit to satisfy divine Justice, and that this Merit of Christ's is offered to
all, who shall lay hold on it by Faith, so as that it shall stand good in Law
for them in order to their Absolution, as if they had given an equivalent
satisfaction to God's Justice themselves; for, none will venture his immortal
soul upon that, the worth whereof he does not know. Hence the Apostle shows
that the knowledge of this also did preceed their Justification; Knowing that a
man is not justified but by the Faith of Jesus Christ. And lastly, being thus
convinced, he must by Faith receive and rest upon Jesus Christ and that most
perfect Righteousness of His, by making his soul adhere and cleave to the Word
of Promise, wherein Christ is offered, Act. 2. 39, 41. whereupon follows the
real Justification and Absolution of the man, who so does: for, Paul marketh
this as a third thing going before their Justification; Even we have believed
in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified. Doct. 4. The former practices of
ancient Believers, eminent for parts, privileges and graces, who have quit
their own righteousness, and ventured their soul wholly upon this imputed
Righteousness of Christ, laying hold upon it by Faith, ought to be looked on
as a strong argument enforcing us to do the like: for, the Apostle's scope is
to prevail with those Galatians by this argument; We who are Jews by nature,
says he, have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might bejustified. 5. Though
the approved practices of eminent godly persons, may have their own weight in
order to our encouragement to deny our selves and lay hold on Christ; Yet it is
the Word of the Lord which can only quiet a man's conscience in this matter,
and make his mind fully aquiesce to it: for, the Apostle unto their example
subjoyneth a Scripture-confirmation of the Truth in hand; By the Works of the
Law shall no flesh be justified.

Verse. 17. But if while we seek to be justified by Christ, we our selves also
are found sinners, is therefore Christ the minister of sin? God forbid.
HE preoccupieth an Objection, which might have been framed against the present
Doctrine, thus, If the Doctrine of Justification by Christ, does suppose that
even the Jews themselves, who are sanctified from the womb, are equally sinners
with the Gentiles, and that, being unable to attain to Justification by the
Works of the Law, they must only rely on Christ by Faith, as Paul had but
presently affirmed, ver. 16. Then it would seem to follow, that Christ were the
minister of sin, or, that the Doctrine of the Gospel did make men sinners, both
by taking away that Righteousness of the Law, which the Jews thought they had,
and were warranted, as they conceived, by the Scriptures of the Old Testament
so to think, as also by furnishing both Jew and Gentile with an occasion to
cast-by all care of Holiness and good Works, seeing that thereby they were not
to be justified, but by Faith in Christ only (See the like Objection
propounded, Romans 3. 31.) Which Objection the Apostle answers, first, by
repelling the Inference as absurd and blasphemous in this verse; and next, by
confuting it in the following. Doct. 1. The Ministers of Jesus Christ, in
holding forth Truth, would carefully foresee, and prudently take off what
atheistical, loose or erring spirits do usually object against it, to make it
odious: so does Paul here; But if while we seek, etc. 2. It is too usual for
people to conceit too much of their external Church Priviledges, as if by
having them, they had saving Grace, and stood not in so much need of Christ's
imputed Righteousness as others: for, this is that which the adversaries did
stumble at, that the Jews by nature, who enjoyed so many rich privileges,
should be found sinners, and as unable to be saved by their own works as
others: For if while we seek to be justified by Christ, we our selves are found
also sinners. 3. Whatever be a man's privileges otherwise, he must; if so he
would be justified by Christ, take his confidence off them, and reckon himself
equal to the most vile and worthless sinners, in the point of unability to
merit any thing from God by his own Works: for, this is supposed, as that
whereon their Objection is grounded, and Paul does pass it as granted, and
speaks only against their Inference from it; But if while we seek to be
justified by Christ, we our selves are found also sinners. 4. It is no new
prejudice, though a most unjust one, whereby the Doctrine of Justification by
Faith alone, and not by Works, has been unjustly loaded, that of its own
nature it does tend to foster people in sin: The Papists do object so now, and
the false Apostles did so of old; Is therefore Christ the minister of sin? say
they, or, the Doctrine preached by Christ the occasion of sin? 5. To take
occasion from Free Grace, or the Doctrine of it, to live in sin, is, so much as
in us lies, to make Christ the minister of sin, and therefore a thing which
all christian hearts should sk^^ner at and abominate: for, in the place of
saying the Doctrine of the Gospel does occasion sin, it is said, Is Christ the
minister of sin? And Paul does abominate the very thought of it, rejecting it
as most blasphemous and absurd; God forbid, says he: it is a denial, joined
with a detestation of the thing denied. So chap. 3. 21. and 1 Cor. 6. 15. Romans
9. 14.

Verse. 18. For if I build again the things which I destroyed, I make my self a
transgressor.
THe Apostle refuteth the former Inference, next, by some reasons taken from
that indissoluble tie which is betwixt Justification and Sanctification, which
he holds forth in his own person; that he may hereby propose himself an
example unto others. The first, is, that Paul, in preaching the Doctrine of
Justification, had jointly with it pressed the ruin and destruction of sin, as
necessarily flowing from that Doctrine: and therefore if he should again build
up sin, by giving way to the practice of it, he should contradict himself in
what he had preached, not walking according to the Doctrine of the Gospel, but
contrary to it: and so himself should be the transgressor, and the Gospel free
from giving him any occasion so to be. Doct. 1. The Doctrine of Justification
by Free Grace, cannot be rightly preached, except the Doctrine of Mortification
and destroying of sin be jointly preached with it: for, the same Faith which
lays hold on Christ for Righteousness, does rest upon Him also for grace and
strength to subdue corruption and sin, Act. 15. 9. and if He be not employed
for the latter, He will not bestow the former: thus sin and corruption were
those things which Paul destroyed, in so far as he did hold forth the most
solid and ready way how to get them destroyed, while he taught the Doctrine of
Justification; If I build again the things which I destroyed, 2. From this it
follows, that the untender lives of those who profess this Doctrine, do not
reflect upon the Doctrine, as if in it self it did give occasion or
encouragement unto them so to live; but upon themselves, who do not make the
right use of that Doctrine, but abuse it, and walk quite contrary to what is
prescribed by it: for, so does Paul infer; For if I build again the things
which I destroyed, I make my self a transgressor; or, the fault is not in the
Doctrine, but in my self.

Verse. 19. For I through the Law am dead to the Law, that I might live unto God:
HEre is a second Reason by preoccupation of an Objection; for they might say,
The Doctrine of Justification, as taught by Paul, did free Believers from the
Law, Romans 7. 4. and therefore did give them encouragement to sin. The Apostle
answers, by granting they were freed from the Law, but denies that inference
deduced from it, upon two reasons: and his Answer does furnish us with three
Doctrines, which will further clear the meaning of the words. First, Paul and
all Believers are dead indeed to the Law, that is, so, as they put no
confidence in their obedience to it for their Justification, Philip. 3. 9. so,
as they are freed from the condemning power of it, Chap. 3. 13. and as by its
rigorous exaction of perfect obedience under hazard of the curse, which we were
not able to perform, it did make us desperate and careless, and so did
occasionally provoke and stir-up corruption in the heart, Romans 7. 5, 6. I am
dead to the Law. Secondly, It is the Law it self, which makes them thus dead
to the Law; the curse of the Law putting them so hard to it, that they are made
to despair of getting Heaven and Salvation by their obedience to it, Romans 3.
20, 21. and are forced to fly unto Christ, by being in whom, they are freed
from condemnation, Romans 8. 1. and get their corruption so far mortified, as
that it takes not occasion to sin the more from the Law's discharging of sin
as it was wont, Romans 6. 14. For I through the Law am dead to the Law And,
thirdly, Though Believers are delivered from the Law in the former respects;
Yet not as it is the rule of an holy life: for, the very end of their freedom,
is, That being so delivered, they might, by virtue of the Spirit of Christ
dwelling in them, live righteously and holily to the glory of God: for, says
he, I am dead to the Law that I might live unto God. By all which, it does
evidently appear, That the Doctrine of Justification in it self, does give no
encouragement to sin: which answers the Objection, and refuteth the
blasphemous Inference, which is made, ver. 17.

Verse. 20. I am crucified with Christ. Nevertheless I live; yet not I, but
Christ lives in me; and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the
Faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave Himself for me.
HEre is a third Reason to the same purpose with the former, showing more fully
that justified persons are most strictly tied to mortify sin and lead an holy
life, if so they walk according to the prescript of the Doctrine of
Justification which was taught by Paul: for he, and by consequence all real
Believers, were crucified with Christ, to wit, the old man of their indwelling
corruption, Romans 6. 6. it did receive the stroke of death by His death, He
having by death redeemed them from the slavery of it, Tit. 2. 14. which
crucifixion with Christ, does not destroy the natural life of Believers; for so
Paul shows he did live: only the old man of corruption does not live in them,
so, as to act them in what they do, but Jesus Christ does live in them, He
being united to them, as the root to the branches, or head to the members, and
furnishing them with spiritual life and motion, whereby the very natural life,
which they live, and those things which concern that life are ordered and gone
about by virtue of strength drawn from Christ, by Faith in Him: and the
consideration of Christ's love to them, and His dying for them, because he
loved them, is a great inducement unto justified persons so to live. Now, this
being true in Paul, and in some measure in all Believers, and seeing the
principles of the Doctrine of Justification did bind all to this, It is
evident, that to affirm this Doctrine did tend to foster sin, is but a
foulforged calumny. Doct. 1. As Jesus Christ did die a most shameful, painful
and cursed death upon the cross, Gal. 3. 13. so in His dying He did stand, not
as a private, but as a public person in the room and place of all the Elect;
for He was their surety, Heb. 7. 22. and died for them, Job. 11. 50. so that
when they lay hold upon Him by Faith, and thereby are made one with Him, Ephesians.
3. 17 the cross and passion of Christ, as to all those benefits which were
purchased by it, whether in order to the removal of the guilt of sin (Mat. 26.
28.) or to the subduing of its strength, and quickening of them in the way of
holiness (2 Cor. 5. 15.) or to the purchasing of life eternal for them, (Joh.
3. 16.) is as verily made theirs, as if they had been crucified in their own
persons: for, Paul says of himself, as an instance of all Believers, I am
crucified with Christ. 2. The former confideration of the Believer's right to
Christ's purchase, in order to the subduing of sin, lays a strong engagement
on him, and gives a great encouragement unto him to oppose, resist, and set
about the mortification of sin in himself: for, Paul makes this an argument to
prove that the Doctrine of Justification, in its own nature, is no friend to
sin; because, according to the principles thereof, the justified person is
crucified with Christ. 3. God's infinite wisdom has found out the way whereby
the threatening of death (Genesis 2. 17.) is fulfilled in the Elect, so that they
die, and yet their lives are spared; they die, and yet they live: for, they are
reckoned in Law to have died, when Christ their Surety died for them; so that
He was taken, and they go free, Joh. 18. 8. thus is that riddle solved, which
is here propounded by Paul, I am crucified with Christ, yet I live. 4. Though
notwithstanding of fulfilling the threatening of death upon the Elect, they do
live; yet upon their believing in Jesus Christ, the old man of corruption and
power of sin is so far weakened in them, that it does not bear the chief sway
in their heart, to command, execute, and order all their actions, as formerly
it did, Genesis 6. 5. for, thus is that other riddle solved, which is here
propounded, Nevertheless I live, yet not I, to wit the old I: the body of death
and corruption did not live in him, but was mortified, and the dominion thereof
removed, Romans 6. 14. Do. 5. The Doctrine of Justification by Free Grace,
revealed in the Gospel, lays on strong obligations upon the justified person
to set about the whole duties of Sanctification, not only those, which relate
to the mortifying of sin, but also to his quickening in the way of grace: both
those must go together, and the justified man is obliged to both, and furnished
with help and encouragement from the Doctrine of Justification to set about
both: for, Paul shows they were both conjoined in himself; the first, while
he says, Not I live; the second, while he says, Christ lives in me: whereby
is meant his following the motions of Christ's Spirit, as the guide of his
life, Romans 8. 1. and this he speaks of himself, as a thing that he was
obliged unto, and furnished for by the Doctrine of Justification which he
taught; otherwise he should not have refuted the calumny of his adversaries. 6.
That Christians may live the spiritual life of grace, they must, 1. be united
to Christ, and have Christ dwelling in them by Faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. for, speaking
of the spiritual life which he lived, he supposes Christ to be in him; But
Christ lives in me. 2. Besides this union with Christ, there must be a
communication of influence from the Spirit of Christ to excite them unto,
(Cant. 5. 2.) enable them for, (John. 15. 5.) make them persevere (Philip. 1.
6.) and effectually to order and direct them in (Philip. 4. 13.) the practice
of every thing that is spiritually good: for, this is to have Christ living in
them, to wit, as the head in the members, or root in the branches, which do
furnish the members and branches with all things necessary for life and growth:
and Christ's quickening of Believers in the way of grace, is frequently see
forth by similitudes drawn from those, Col. 2. 19. Joh. 15. 5. 3. The Believer,
if so he would live this spiritual life, must not only have the habit of Faith
in his heart, but also must keep it in daily exercise, so as first thereby to
try what he is to do, if so it be warranted by the Word of Truth, and how it is
to be circumstantiated, Romans 14. 23. Secondly, thereby to draw furniture from
the Spirit of Christ for exciting, enabling, and directing him in the way of
duty, 2 Cor. 3. 5. And, thirdly to apply pardoning mercy for covering the
defects of duty, when he has gone about it, and for removing the guilt of all
his other sins, Mat. 6. 11. for, this is to live by the Faith of the Son of
God, or, in the Son of God, which Paul speaks of as a necessary ingredient in
this spiritual life. 4. This spiritual life, and life of Faith, must be
extended not only to spiritual duties, and of God's immediate Worship, but also
to all the actions of our natural and temporal life, in so far as they fall
under a Command, even to our eating and drinking, 1 Cor. 10. 31. duties of our
lawful employments, Heb. 11. 33. and to our carriage under crosses, Heb. 11.
24, 25. for, by the life which Paul lived in the flesh, is meaned this natural
life, Heb. 5. 7. 1 Pet. 4. 2. and his living this spiritual life of Faith, was
extended even to the things of that life; The life which I now live in the
flesh, is by the Faith of the Son of God. Doct. 7. As Jesus Christ did give
Himself a Ransom for the Elect, (See chap. 1. 4.) so no worth in us, no good
which He expects from us, or need which He stood in of us, but only love in
Him to us did move Him so to do; He loved me, and gave Himself for me. 8.
Though the full persuasion and assurance of Christ's special love unto, and His
dying for me in particular, is not the very essence and being of saving Faith,
Ephesians. 1. 13. for, saving Faith may be without it, Isa. 50. 10. Yet it is a thing
which may be had without extraordinary revelation, the Spirit of God enabling
the Believer to discern in himself those graces (1 Cor. 2. 12.) which are set
down as marks of His special love and favor in Scripture, 1 John 3. 14, 18,
19, 21, 24. and bearing witness with His Spirit that he is a child of God,
Romans 8. 16. and this assurance should be aimed at in the right method by all, 2
Pet. 1. 10. for, Paul, speaking in the name of other Believers, shows he had
attained it; Who loved me, and gave Himself for me, says he. 9. This full
persuasion and assurance, in its own nature, is so far from making those, who
have it, loose the reigns to wickedness and security, that upon the contrary,
it serves as a strong incitement to make them mortify sin, and live that
spiritual life of Faith which is here spoken of: for, it served for this use
unto Paul; I live by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave
Himself form.

Verse. 21. I do not frustrate the grace of God: for if rightebusnesse come by
the Law, then Christ is dead in vain.
HAving removed the objection, the Apostle proceeds to establish
Justification by Faith, and not by the Works of the Law, by a second argument,
to this purpose, If we be justified by the Law, or works done in obedience to
the Law, Then those two absurdities would follow, 1. God's free grace and
favor should be rejected, despised, frustrated and made useless, (for the
word signifies all these) and the reason of the consequence lies in this,
That if Justification be by Works, Then it cannot be by Grace, Romans 11. 6. 2.
Christ's death had been in vain without any necessary cause or reason, if the
Justification of finners could have been attained by Works or by any other
mean. Doct. 1. They who have attained unto the persuasion and full assurance of
God's favor and love in Christ, ought above all others, to maintain the glory
of His Grace and Mercy in saving of sinners freely, not admitting of any thing,
whether in practice or opinion, whether in themselves, or, so far as is
possible, in others, which may incroach upon it, obscure it, or weaken the
thoughts of the excellency of it in the minds of men: for, Paul, who was
persuaded of Christ's love, ver. 20. does look upon this as his duty, flowing
from that assurance; I do not frustrate the Grace of God, says he. 2. The
joining of Works with Faith in the matter of Justification, is a total
excluding of God's Free Grace and favor from having any hand in this Work:
for, Grace admits of no partner; so that if Grace do not all, it does
nothing; if any thing be added to it, that addition makes Grace to be no
Grace, Romans 4. 4. for, the Apostle, reasoning against those who would have made
Works to share with God's Free Grace and favor in Justification, shows his
joining with them in that opinion, would be a total rejecting, and making
useless of God's Grace; I do not frustrate the Grace of God. 3. That the
Apostle does exclude in this dispute from having any influence in
Justification, the Works, not only of the Ceremonial, but also of the Moral
Law, appears from this, That he opposes the Merit of Christ's death, to all
Merit of our own, whether by obedience to the one Law, or to the other; neither
can any reason be given for which our meriting by obedience to the Ceremonial
Law makes Christ to have died in vain, which is not applicabl to the Moral
Law: For, if righteousness come by the Law, then Christ died in vain. 4. That
he excludes also, not only the Works of the Moral Law, which are performed by
the natural and unregenerate man, but also those which the Godly do perform by
virtue of Faith drawing influence from Christ, appears from this, that the
Apostle uses this argument taken from the uselesnesse of Christ's death, not
against the unconverted Jews, (who had not received the Gospel, and so would
easily have granted, that Christ was dead in vain) but against those who had
received the Gospel, and so would never have pleaded that any Works done by a
natural man, but those only which flow from the Grace of Christ, could justify
a sinner; and yet Paul reasons against those, If righteousness come by the
Law, then Christ is dead in vain. 5. That he does exclude also all Works of
ours whatsoever from being the meritorious cause of our Justification, not only
in whole and their alone without the Merit of Christ, but also in part and
jointly with His Merit, appears from the former ground that he is reasoning
against professed Christians, who doubtless did give Christ's Merit and Death
some share at least in Justification; else the absurdity, which is deduced from
their Doctrine by Paul, should have had no weight with them, as being no
absurdity in their mind; Then Christ is dead in vain. 6. If there had been any
other way possible in Heaven or Earth, by which the Salvation of lost sinners
could have been brought about, but by the Death of Christ, then Christ would
not have died; our disease was desperate as to any other cure: for, while he
says, If righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain, he
affirms two things, 1. That to suppose Christ has died in vain, or without
cause, is a great absurdity no ways to be admitted of. 2. If the Justification
and Salvation of sinners could have been attained by Works, or any other mean,
then His Death had been in vain; and so that it were an absurd thing to suppose
he would have died in that case.

CHAP. III.
IN the first part of this Chapter, the Apostle (having sharply rebuked these
Galatians for their defection, ver. 1.) uses five other Arguments to prove
that we are justified by Faith, and not by Works. First, They had received the
saving Graces of God's Spirit, by hearing the Doctrine of Justification by
Faith, and not by Works, ver. 2. Which Argument, is further urged, ver. 3, 4.
and enlarged unto their receiving these other miraculous Gifts of the Spirit by
the means of that Doctrine, and as confirmations of it, ver. 5. Secondly,
Abraham was justified by Faith, ver. 6. From which he infers, that Believers
are Abraham's children, ver. 7. and that all of them, whether Jew or Gentile,
must be justified by Faith also, ver. 8, 9. Thirdly, Those who seek to be
justified by the Law, are under the curse of the Law; and therefore not
justified, ver. 10. Fourthly, Scripture testifies that men shall be justified
by Faith, ver. 11. Whence he infers and proves his Inference, that
therefore they cannot be justified by the Law, ver. 12. Fifthly, Christ's
redeeming of us from the curse of the Law, and all the fruits following upon
His Death, are received by Faith, ver. 13, 14.

In the second part of the Chapter, he answers some Objections, and jointly
shows the date prescribed by God, for keeping the Ceremonial Law, was now
past. Object. 1. It seems the way of Justification by Faith in the Promise
made to Abraham was changed by the Law given upon Mount Sinai. He answers by
a similitude taken from humane Covenants, ver. 15. that the Covenant of Grace
made and ratified by God with Abraham in Christ, could not be altered nor
abrogated by the Law, which was given so long after, ver. 16, 17, 18. Object.
2. The Law seems to be given in vain and to no purpose, if it do not
justify. He answers by showing another end for which the Law was given, to
wit, for the discovery and restraint of sin; and that God's design was not,
that people should be thereby justified, ver. 19, 20. Object. 3. The Law
seems then to be contrary to the Covenant-promise, if the one discover sin,
and the other forgive and cover it. He answers, first, retorting the
Objection against the Propounders, to wit, that by their way the Law would be
contrary to, and destructive of the Promise, ver. 21. Secondly, showing the Law
in discovering sin, and condemning for it, was subservient to the Promise,
while it did necessitate guilty sinners to believe, and apply the Promise, ver.
22. Object. 4. It seems the Ceremonial Law, and the whole ancient
dispensation ought to be observed under the Gospel for the same use and end at
least. He answers, showing the Law was for good use to the ancient Church,
ver. 23. which he illustrateth by comparing the Law to a Schoolmaster, ver. 24.
but denies that therefore it should be observed now; because the Church was
come to perfect age, and so could not be any longer kept under a
Schoolmaster, ver. 25, 26. Object. 5. It seems Circumcision at least ought to
be observed; seeing it was not added upon Mount Sinai, but instituted long
before. He answers, showing that Baptism does serve for all those spiritual
uses now, which Circumcision did serve for then; and consequently that
Circumcision was not to be any longer practiced, ver. 27, 28, 29.

Verse. 1. O Foolish Galatians, who has hewitched you, that you should not ohey
the Truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth,
crucified among you?
THe Apostle (being to insist further upon the former dispute, lest their
assertions had been thereby rendered dead and dull) quickens them a little, by
inserting a sharp reproof, wherein he charge them with folly, in that they
had suffered themselves to be seduced, by a sort of spiritual sorcery or
witchcraft, unto disobedience to the Doctrine of the Gospel; which disobedience
he aggregeth from the perspicuity and plainness in which that Doctrine was
preached unto them, even such, as if Christ, together with His bloody passion,
had been drawn and painted upon a board before them. Doct. 1. The Minister of
Jesus Christ, when he is called to insist upon the clearing-up of Truths unto
the understanding, whether positively, by showing what is revealed in Scripture
concerning them, or, controversally by refuting contrary Errors, would mix his
discourse with an occasional word of Exhortation, Reproof, or somewhat of that
kind, which may tend more immediately and directly to excite and quicken the
affections of hearers, lest they otherwise wax dull and languish: for, Paul
casteth-in a sharp reproof in the midst of his dispute, O foolish Galatians,
etc. 2. Where the precious Truths of the Gospel are preached, and disobeyed,
People neither laboring to be persuaded of the Truth in their understandings,
Act. 17. 32. nor to prize it in their heart and affections, Matthew. 11. 17. nor
to practice it in their life and conversation, Matthew. 7. 26. this is a sin, the
evil whereof cannot be sufficiently aggreged, or spoken against, as being a sin
against the remedy of sin, Heb. 2. 3. for, this is the fault, for which the
Apostle does so sharply reprove those Galatians, even that they did not obey
the Truth: the word signifies, the not believing of, and disobedience to the
Truth when it is believed. 3. Heretics, who by fair words deceive the simple,
(Romans 16. -18.) are a kind of spiritual Sorcerers; and Heresy and Error is
spiritual Witchcraft: For, first, as Sorcerers, by deluding the senses, make
people apprehend that they see what they see not; So Heretics and erring
spirits, by casting a mist of seeming reason before the understanding, do
delude it, and make the deluded person believe that to be Truth which is not,
chap. 1. 6, 7. And secondly, as Sorcerers, in what they do of that kind, are in
a singular manner assisted beyond the reach of their own ability and skill by
the Devil, who really does the thing upon the Sorcerers practicing of some
Satanical ceremonies, which are prescribed unto them by the Devil, as a
watchword whereat he is ready to answer: So heretical spirits are often more
than ordinarily assisted in drawing of multitudes after them, and this by
Satan's concurring with them, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. Thus the Apostle, speaking of that
influence which false Teachers had upon them, in drawing them from the Truth,
he says, Who has bewitched you? It Is a word borrowed from the practice of
Witches and Sorcerers, who, being assisted by the Devil, use to cast mist
before the eyes to dazzle, and so delude them. 4. For a people to have the
Gospel among them, and not to make use of it, but to reject it, and make
defection from it, argues them to be fools indeed, whatever be their wisdom
otherwise in things relating to this present life: for, the Doctrine of the
Gospel contains saying Wisdom, which makes wise unto Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.
15. which Wisdom they reject. Thus Paul calls them foolish Galatians, because
they obeyed not the Truth. 5. Though neither Ministers, nor any other, ought to
charge men with folly, with a mind to reproach them, or in way of private
revenge, Mat. 5. 22. Yet the Minister of Jesus Christ, or any other who has a
Call to it, may upbraid a man with folly, if, first, the party reproved be
guilty of folly, as those Galatians were. Secondly, if the reproof flow from
love and compassion in the person who does reprove, and an honest desire after
the sinner's good, as it was here: for, he casts not up their folly in
passion, but in compassion, desiring nothing but their good and amendment.
Thirdly, if the reproof carry along all lawful and allowed moderation with it,
as here, he calls them not wicked, but more gently, foolish or imprudent, and
withal lays the great weight of their sins upon their Seducers, who had
bewitched them. And, fourthly, That the reprover not only himself do know that
there is reason so to charge them, but also hold forth these reasons to them,
that they may be convinced also: for, so does Paul, he demonstrateth their
folly, from that they obeyed not the Gospel, which was so plainly preached
among them; O foolish Galatians, etc. Doct. 6. Ministers ought not to rest upon
a coldrife way of preaching Truth, Mat. 7,-29. but are to endeavor the
delivery of it, with that perspicuity and plainness, Col. 4. 4. that power and
liveliness, 1 Cor. 2. -- 4. as it may penetrate the conscience of the hearers,
and be so clear and evident to them, as if it were pictured and painted out
before their eyes: and in order to this, they would not only labor to
understand thoroughly what they preach, 1 Timothy 1. 7. but also to believe it
themselves, 2 Cor. 4. 13. and to have their own affections in some measure
warmed with love to it, 1 Timothy 1. 15-. And above all, would labor with God,
that the effectual operation of His Spirit may come along with what they
preach, 1 Cor. 2. -4. that so the Truth delivered may be the more lively, and
convincingly represented to the hearers: for, Paul did so preach; Jesus Christ
was evidently set forth, crucified among them, before their eyes: He did so
represent Christ and Him crucified to their ears, by the preaching of the Word,
as if they had seen Him with their eyes. 7. Though Jesus Christ and His
sufferings are to be painted out, vively represented and pictured by the plain
and powerful preaching of the Gospel; Yet it does not follow, that they are to
be artificially painted with colors upon stone or timber, for religious use:
for, God commands the former, but condemns the latter, Exodus 20. 4. And,
the graven image is but a teacher of lies, Hab. 2. 18. Doct. 8. The more
clearly and powerfully that the Gospel has been preached among a People, their
defection from it, and not giving obedience to it, is the more aggreged: for,
Paul aggregeth their not obeying the Truth, from this, that before their eyes,
Jesus Christ had been evidently set forth, crucified among them.

Verse. 2. This only would I learn of you, Received ye the Spirit by the works
of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith?
THe Apostle, having stirred them up to attention by a reproof, does now return
to his former dispute, proving that we are justified by Faith, and not by
Works, (See chap. 2. 16.) And this he proves, first, because the Spirit of
Regeneration and other saving Graces of the Spirit of God (called here the
Spirit, as being fruits of the Spirit, chap. 5. 22.) were wrought in those of
them, who were regenerate, not by the works of the Law, that is, by the
Doctrine of Justification by Works, but by the hearing of Faith, that is, by
hearing the Doctrine of Justification by Faith: for here, as usually elsewhere,
(See chap. 1. 23.) Faith is taken for the Doctrine that is believed: And for
the truth of this assertion, he appealeth to their own conscience and
experience, leaving them to gather, that therefore they were justified and
reconciled by the Doctrine of Faith, seeing God bestows His Spirit upon none
but such as are reconciled unto Him, Romans 5. 1, 2, etc. Doct. 1. There is not
ordinarily any Church so corrupt, but God has some who are truly gracious
among them: for, Paul's Argument supposes that the Spirit, and saving graces
of the Spirit, were in some of those Galatians, because of whom, he speaks
generally unto all; Received ye the Spirit? says he. 2. Even those who are
truly gracious, may stagger strangely in reeling times, and be in a great
measure overtaken with the most dangerous Errors of the times, though they
cannot totally (1 Pet. 1. 23.) nor finally (Isa. 54. 7, 8.) fall away: for,
Paul speaks even to them who had received the Spirit, as to those who were
taken with the common Errors; Received ye the Spirit? 3. As Regeneration and
saving Grace is the work of God's Spirit in the Elect; So the ordinary mean
whereby He conveyeth Grace to the heart, is, by hearing the Word preached: for,
they had received the Spirit by the hearing of Faith. 4. Though the hearing of
the Law preached, does work conviction of sin, terror of conscience, and legal
contrition, Act. 2. 37. whereby the heart is in some sort prepared for
receiving of the Gospel; Yet the Law, as distinct from the Gospel, and as it
presses perfect obedience in order to our Justification before God, (in which
sense it was mistaken by the false Apostles, and is so spoken of in this
dispute; See upon chap. 2. 15.) can never be a mean of begetting Grace in the
heart; for so it drives the soul to despair, and works wrath, Romans 4. 15.
Thus the Apostle affirms, they received not the Spirit by the works of the
Law. 5. It is the Gospel preached and heard, which the Lord makes use of, as a
mean for conveying Grace to the heart, being first convinced of sin and misery,
by the preaching of the Law, Act. 2. 37, 38. for, the Gospel offers Christ
freely, from whom, being laid hold upon by Faith, we do all receive Grace for
Grace, Job. 1. 16. Thus the Apostle affirms they had received the Spirit by
the hearing of Faith. 6. Though a gracious heart, may be overtaken with Error,
as said is, (See Doct. 2.) Yet there remains somewhat of conscience in vigor
with them, in so far as that being appealed unto, about the truth of things
weighty, and which belong to the reality of God's work in their heart, and the
way of His working in them, they dare not readily lie, and contradict their own
known experience: for, Paul at least supposes so much, while he does appeal to
their own conscience and experience how saving Grace was wrought in them; This
only would I learn of you, Received ye, etc. 7. Our Justification before God,
and the renovation of our natures by the Spirit of God, are so much conjoined,
that the Doctrine, which, through God's blessing, is the mean of working the
former, is also the only Doctrine appointed of God, for holding forth the right
way of attaining the latter: for, Paul argues, that the Doctrine of
Justification without Works, is divine; because that Doctrine was the mean of
conveying sanctifying Grace unto their hearts; as appears from the scope of
the Argument here used, Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by
the hearing of Faith?

Verse. 3. Are ye so foolish? having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made
perfect by the flesh?
HEre is an Inference from the former Verse, That seeing their beginning in the
way of Christianity was spiritual, (the Doctrine of Justification by Faith
having communicated the Spirit of Regeneration, and other Graces to them, as
ver. 2.) it should be an act of extreme folly and madness in them to quit that
Doctrine, and to embrace the Doctrine of Justification by Works, as if they
could be perfected by it; seeing it is but a fleshly dead Doctrine, and
therefore is here called flesh, because flesh and corrupt nature do plead and
stand for it, Romans 10. 3. and because it does produce no spiritual effect, but
rather the contrary in the soul, who does embrace it, Romans 7. 5. Doct. 1. The
Text speaks nothing against the Doctrine of Perseverance, as if those who
were once renewed, and truly spiritual, might lose the Spirit of God
altogether, and turn fleshly: For besides, first, that the Apostle does not
positively assert, that they were changed already, but only, by way of
question, holds out the hazard which should follow upon their change.
Secondly, he speaks not of a change of qualities or dispositions from good to
bad, but in their judgment, from the Doctrine of Faith, here called the Spirit,
to the Doctrine of Justification by Works, here called flesh. Thirdly, though
he did imply a change of qualities and disposition from Spirit to flesh, and
from holiness to sin, as a consequence of this change of judgment and opinion;
Yet there is nothing here importing that any total or final change of that
kind, either had fallen, or could fall upon those who were truly gracious. 2.
The Doctrine maintained by the Papists now, That Faith in Jesus Christ does
begin our Justification, in so far as it disposes us unto good works, and that
by those our Justification is completed, is no new error, but that which has
been held of old by these Heretics, who had seduced the Galatians, and whom
Paul here refuteth: for, he supposes, that in answer to the present argument,
they might readily affirm, that though the Doctrine of Faith (here called the
Spirit, as 2 Cor. 3. -- 6.) did begin the work; yet the Doctrine of Works, here
called flesh, did perfect it; Having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made
perfect by the flesh? 3. The forementioned Doctrine, has so many absurdities
following upon it, That the embracing of it does argue no less than folly and
madness: for, Justification by Faith and Works, cannot consist, Romans 11. 6.
much less can the former take its perfection from the latter, the more noble
from that which is more base: hence Paul condemns it of folly; Are ye so
foolish (says he) having begun, etc. 4. Our after-carriage, and walking in the
things of God and religious matters, ought to be conform to our good
beginnings, which we once had in those; and the contrary hereof, is
incomparable folly and madness: for, he says, Are ye so foolish? having begun
in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect by the flesh?

Verse. 4. Have ye suffered so many things in vain? if it be yet in vain.
HE clears what he said of the folly and madness, which is in following the
way presently spoken of, by showing, if they should hold on to seek
Justification by Works, or partly by Faith, and partly by Works, they would
lose all the fruit of their former constancy and sufferings, sustained by them
for that Truth which he did now preach; this he speaks not positively, but as
it were doubtingly, and suspending its certainty, upon the hopes he had of
their amendment. Doct. 1. It is the lot of those who profess Truth, to suffer
many things in the defense of it. See chap. 1. ver. 13. doct. 6. The Galatians
found the truth of this, Have ye suffered so many things? 2. They may suffer
many things for Truth, who afterward will make foul defection from it: for, as
the example of others, particular interest, wrapped up in the public, and the
general applause which sufferers for Truth do receive from the lovers of Truth,
will make even Hypocrites suffer much; so continued sufferings, will make even
the godly faint for a time; yea, the best, being left to themselves, in an hour
of tentation, will turn their back upon Truth, so that no engagements by a
profession, no experience or remembrance of that joy and sweetness, which they
have found in the way of Truth, nor yet their former sufferings for Truth, will
make them adhere unto it: for, these Galatians had suffered many things for the
Doctrine of Justification by Faith; yea, and had found much sweetness and
satisfaction in it, chap. 4. 15. and yet now they have made defection from it;
Have ye suffered so many things in vain? 3. Afflictions and sufferings for the
Truth, are very useful and profitable to the sufferers, though not to satisfy
God's justice for sin, neither in its guilt nor punishment, neither eternal nor
temporal; for, these are fully done away in Christ, Isa. 53. 5. Yet for other
ends, as for the trial of their Faith, 1 Pet. 1. 7. for conforming them to
Christ their head, Philip. 3. -- 10. who was a man of sorrows, Isa. 53. 3. for
making them die to the world, chap. 6. 14. and to fit them for Heaven;
afflictions and crosses being the beaten way which leads to it, Act. 14. 22.
for, while he says, Have ye suffered so many things in vain? he imports
their sufferings would have been useful for them, if they themselves had not
hindered it. 4. Whatever have been the sufferings of a people or person for
Truth, they are all in vain, lost, and to no purpose, as to any thing which can
be expected from God to the party who has suffered, if so he make defection
from, and turn his back upon Truth afterward: for, Paul insinuates this as an
undoubted Truth, while he says, Have ye suffered so many things in vain? 5.
Though these who have suffered much for Truth, should afterward make defection
from it, we are nevertheless to keep charity toward them, as hoping God will
give them repentance, and reclaim them: Yea, all our sharpness toward them,
whether in aggreging their sin, or in holding out the terrible consequences
which are deserved by, and probably will follow upon, their sin, ought to be
wisely tempered, by expressing those charitable thoughts which we have of them:
for, so does the Apostle here, while, speaking of these Galatians, who had
formerly suffered much for Truth, and threatening them for their present
defection with the loss of all those advantages which they might have expected
from their sufferings, the suspendeth the certainty of the threatening, upon
their hoped-for repentance; If it be yet in (...), says he.

Verse. 5. He therefore that ministers to you the Spirit, (...) works
miracles among you, does He it by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of
Faith?
HE again returns to the Argument for Justification by Faith, set down, ver.
2. and enlarges it thus. That the Lord had not only accompanied that Doctrine
among them with the fruits of the Spirit of Regeneration and saving Graces,
wrought by it, but also with other extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, such as
the working of miracles, speaking with strange tongues, curing of diseases,
which were so many confirmations, that the Doctrine was of God. Doct. 1. Though
the saving Graces of God's Spirit, are conveyed to the hearts of hearers, by
the preaching of the Gospel; Yet God is the author and worker of them, and the
Gospel only a mean by which He works: for, having spoken of their receiving
the Spirit, when he first propounded this Argument, ver. 2. he does here in the
resuming of it, explain how they received it, to wit, by God's bestowing of it;
He therefore that ministers to you the Spirit. 2. When the Doctrine of the
Gospel, as it is now dispensed under the New Testament, did first break up, the
Lord, to confirm the Truth thereof, did accompany the preaching of it with the
working of miracles (which properly are works above natures strength, and so
could be wrought by none but God) and this, that hereby the truth of the
Doctrine might be confirmed, which being once sufficiently done, there is no
further use for miracles now: for, the Apostle shows that miracles were
wrought among the Galatians, by the hearing of Faith, and that this was one
Argument of the divinity of that Doctrine, while he says, He that works
miracles among you, does He it by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of
Faith? 3. So strong and provalent is the spirit of Error, where it is letten
loose, and so weak are the best in themselves to resist it; that for love to
Error they will quit Truth, though formerly never so much confirmed and sealed
unto them, by the saving fruits of God's Spirit in their hearts accompanying
it: for, though these Galatians had the Doctrine of Justification plainly
preached, ver. 1. and sealed to them by the saving Graces of God's Spirit, and
by many miracles wrought among them; yet they make defection from it: He
therefore that ministers to you the Spirit, and works miracles among you,
etc.

Verse. 6. Even as Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for
righteousness. 7. Know ye therefore, that they which are of Faith, the same are
the children of Abraham.
HAving put a close to that Argument, which he brought from their own
experience, proving that we are justified by Faith and not by Works, he adds
another from a Scripture-example of Abraham, to confirm the same Truth, who,
though he did abound in many virtues and good works, yet he was not justified
by these, but by Faith only; which he proves by the testimony of Moses, Genesis
15. 6. where it is affirmed, that Abraham believed in the Lord, to wit, not
only by giving assent unto the Promise spoken of immediately before about the
multiplication of his seed, and giving unto them the Land of Canaan, Genesis 15.
5, 7. but by assenting unto, and embracing of the prime Promise of the Covenant
made by God with him, that in the Messiah, who was to come of him, he himself,
and the Nations were to be blessed, Genesis 12. 3. of which Promise, this of the
multiplication of his seed was but a dependent, and the means to effectuate it;
which Faith of Abraham's, or the thing believed and laid hold upon by Abraham's
Faith, to wit, the obedience of the Mediator the blessed Seed. was imputed unto
him for righteousness, or accepted of God as his obedience for his
Justification, ver. 6. from which he infers, or rather, the matter being so
evident, he exciteth themselves to infer the conclusion, which he intends to
prove, That only they who are of the Faith, or seek after Justification by
Faith, are children of Abraham, by following of his steps, and succeeding to
him in the inheritance of that blessing of free-gifted Righteousness, and
Justification thereby, which he enjoyed; for, an equivalent phrase to this
here, is that which is, ver. -- 9. They are blessed with faithful Abraham,
ver. 7. Doct. 1. Though saving Faith has for its general object, the whole
Word of God consisting of Histories, Threatenings, Commands and Promises, both
of temporal and eternal blessings; for, Faith gives firm assent unto the whole
Word, because of that divine Authority which reveals it, Act. 24. -14. yet
the principal object of justifying Faith, is the Word of Promise holding forth
Christ and His Righteousness, as the meritorious cause of the Believers
Salvation: for, this Promise which Abraham did believe, and the Faith whereof
was imputed to him for righteousness, had Jesus Christ in its bosom, it being a
Promise of giving unto Abraham a numerous seed, Genesis 15. 4, 5. and so a Promise
of Jesus Christ to come of him, in whom all the Nations (Act. 3. 25.) and
Abraham himself (ver. -- 9.) were to be blessed: Even as Abraham believed God.
2. That it may go well with a soul, and be accepted in God's sight, who can
endure no unclean thing, Hab. 1. 13 --. it is necessary that it be clothed
with some righteousness of one sort or other: for, Faith was accounted unto
Abraham for righteousness. 3. It being wholly impossible for fallen man, to
attain unto that personal, perfect righteousness, which the Law requires,
Romans 3. 10, etc. the Wisdom of God has found out another way of making him
righteous, to wit, that, whereby Faith is imputed, reckoned or accounted unto
him for righteousness: for, Abraham's Faith was accounted unto him, to wit, by
God, for righteousness. 4. Faith is not in a proper sense imputed to the
Believer for righteousness, as if the work of Faith it self were imputed to
us, and accepted of God, whether freely, or because of the merit of Christ, for
our total and perfect righteousness, but it is imputed in a figurative sense,
with respect had to that which Faith apprehends and lays hold upon, to wit,
the obedience and sufferings of Jesus Christ, these being laid hold on by
Faith, become our righteousness, Romans 5. 19. and 10. 4. for, the Apostle, all
along this Chapter, opposes Faith and Works: now his Arguments would be of
no force, if Faith did justify as a work, and for any worth in it self; It was
accounted to him for righteousness. 5. In the matter of Justification, Faith is
opposed not only to those Works which go before Conversion, but to those also
which follow after it, and are the real fruits of God's Spirit in the Believer:
all Works, whether of the one sort or other, are excluded; for, even to Abraham
many years after his Conversion, when he had abounded in good Works, and many
gracious Virtues, (Genesis 12, 13, 14, chapters) his Faith was accounted for
righteousness. 6. As there is a second and reiterated Justification of one and
the same person in this sense, that upon our renewed apprehending of the
Promise by Faith, the sentence of our absolution and adjudication to life
eternal, is also renewed; so this second Justification is not upon the account,
or for the merit of our good Works, no more than the former. It is always
Faith that justifies: for, Abraham who was justified long before, upon a
renewed act of his believing, has his Faith of new, and not his Works, imputed
to him for righteousness. 7. The Godly under the Old Testament, and the Godly
under the New, are justified one and the same way: as we are justified freely,
Romans 3. 24. so were they, Isa. 43. 25. as we are justified fully, and absolved
both from the guilt and punishment of sin, 1 John 1. -7. Romans 8. 1. so were
they, Isa. 53. 5. otherwise the Apostle could not argue from Abraham's
Justification to ours, as he does here; Know ye therefore (says he) that they
which are of the Faith, etc. 8. They who are of the Faith, or who seek after
Justification by Faith, are Abraham's children and his seed; they who are
Members of the visible Church, and profess the Doctrine of Faith, are his
children outwardly, because they walk in the steps of their father Abraham, by
professing of, and assenting to that Doctrine of Faith, which he believed, Romans
4. 12. whereby they have title to the Covenant of Grace, Act. 2. 39. Romans 11.
16, 17. which title of theirs to the Covenant, implies a right to enjoy all
divine Ordinances, (Act. 2. 38, 39.) whereof they are capable, and from which
they do not debar themselves by ignorance, (1 Cor. 11. 28.) or scandal, Mat.
18. 17. It implies also all external Church Priviledges leading unto
Salvation, Romans 9. 4. Yea, and a right to Salvation it self, upon God's terms,
required in the Gospel, Joh. 3. 16. In which respect, Salvation is said to be
of the Jews, Joh. 4. -22. They again, who do not only profess the Doctrine of
Faith, but also embrace it in their hearts, by the grace of saving Faith, are
Abraham's children inwardly; because, they have not only a title to the
Covenant of Grace, but also come up to the conditions required in it; and so do
walk in the steps of saving Faith and Repentance, wherein Abraham walked, who
is held forth as a pattern and father for imitation unto others, whereby they
enjoy not only outward privileges, but also saving benefits and blessings, and
have not only a conditional, but an absolute and actual right unto Heaven and
Glory, the covenanted Inheritance of Abraham's children, Heb. 11. 12, 13, 14,
15, 16-. This distinction of Abraham's children outwardly and inwardly, is
founded upon, Romans 2. 28, 29. and is necessary, as for the right understanding
of other places of Scripture, so of this. They which be of the Faith, are the
Children of Abraham.

Verse. 8. And the Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen
through Faith, preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall
all Nations be blessed. 9. So then they which be of Faith, are blessed with
faithful Abraham.
BEcause the former consequence from Abraham's Justification to ours, might be
questioned to hold in the Gentiles, who were not of Abraham's posterity,
therefore the Apostle does clear it from the words of the Promise made to
Abraham, Genesis 12. 3. that in him, or, in his seed, Jesus Christ who was to come
of him (Genesis 22. 18.) all the Nations, or Gentiles, were to be blessed; which
Promise, he shows, was no other than the Gospel or glad tidings, that all the
blessings to be purchased by Christ Abraham's seed, (among which Justification
by Faith was one) were to be bestowed by God upon the Gentiles, and that the
Scripture, or Spirit which speaks in Scripture, fore-knowing, to wit, in the
Decree, that God was to do so, did contrive the Promise in these words, of
purpose that it might bear so much, ver. 8. from which he infers, that all
Believers indefinitely, the Nations not excluded, but included, do partake of
all those saving blessings which Abraham did partake of, by Faith, among which,
free Justification was the chief; for of that is the question, ver. 9. Doct. 1.
That Scripture is not an invention of man, but the Word of the allknowing God,
appears from this, that several things are foretold therein, which had their
accomplishment a long time afterward, according as they were foretold, the
knowledge of which things at so great a distance of time, could not be in any
but God, Isa. 41. 22, 23. for, the calling of the Gentiles, and their
Justification by Faith, was foretold about the space of two thousand years
before it fell out; And the Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the
Heathen through faith. 2. The foreknowledge of future events, at the greatest
distance, does most properly and peculiarly belong unto God; which does always
suppose His Will and Decree, that such things shall come to pass; in which
Decree of His, He does foreknow them, Act. 2. 23. Whatever foresight of this
kind is in any of the creatures, they have it by borrowed light from Him, and
(as we say) by lighting their Candles at His Torch: for, the foreknowing that
the Gentiles would be justified by Faith, is attributed to Scripture, or the
Spirit of God speaking in Scripture; And the Scripture foreseeing, etc. 3. The
calling of the Gentiles, and their attaining to Salvation by freegrace, and all
the spiritual privileges of Abraham's seed, was a thing hardly credible at the
first breaking-forth of the Gospel, the case of all Nations, except the Jews,
seemed to be so desperate and damnable, Ephesians. 2. 11, 12. Hence the Apostle sees
it necessary upon all occasions almost, to clear, that the calling of the
Gentiles had ground from Scripture, as here, The Scripture foreseeing that God
would justify the Heathen by Faith. 4. Hence we learn several things, tending
to the right understanding of that Promise made to Abraham, Genesis 12. 3. In
thee, or in thy seed (Genesis 22. 18.) to wit, Christ, all Nations shall be
blessed; As, first, That the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham, whereof this
Promise is one Article, was extended not only to Abraham's carnal seed, but to
all Believers in every place, even among the Gentiles: for, in thee all Nations
shall be blessed. Secondly, All men by nature, and considered without respect
had to, and as not having interest in this gracious Covenant made with Abraham
in Christ, are destitute of all blessings, under the drop of God's wrath and
curse, Ephesians. 2. -- 3. and so are really cursed: for, this is imported, while he
says, in thee, and not otherwise, all Nations shall be blessed. Thirdly, That
we who by nature are cursed creatures, should be freed from the curse, and do
partake of the contrary blessing, it comes to pass by virtue of that gracious
Covenant made with Abraham: and more particularly, it is through Jesus Christ
Abraham's seed, in whom we, being ingraffed by faith, are delivered from the
curse, ver. 13. for, In thee, or in thy seed (Genesis 22. 18.) all Nations shall
be blessed. Fourthly, The Blessings promised to Abraham's seed, in the Covenant
made by God with him, were not only temporal, carnal, and appertaining to this
life, but heavenly and spiritual. The former indeed were often inculcated upon
the Ancient Church, Deuteronomy. 28. 2, 3, etc. not, as if these had been all, or the
main Blessings of the Covenant, but as they were shadows only of things more
heavenly, Heb. 11. 14, 15, 16. for, the Apostle explaineth one part at least of
the Blessings promised, to be Justification by Faith; The Scripture foreseeing
that God would justify the Heathen by Faith, says, In thee shall Nations be
blessed. Fifthly, The man who is justified by Faith, is a blessed man; and
there is no blessedness under the Sun comparable unto this, for a man to have
his sin pardoned, Psalm. 32. 1. and the Righteousness of Christ imputed unto
him, and so to be placed in a state of favor with God: for, the Apostle
expounds the Blessing promised, by being justified: The Scripture foreseeing
that God would justify the Heathen by Faith. Sixthly, This Promise made to
Abraham, contains in it the sum of the Gospel, to wit, the glad tidings of
all spiritual blessings, and particularly of a free-gifted Righteousness,
purchased by Christ, to be bestowed upon all who by Faith should be ingraffed
in Christ, and that the Gentiles should have access in the days of the
Gospel, to these Blessings among the rest: for, the Promise holds out all
this; and Paul calls the revealing of this Promise, the preaching of the
Gospel; The Scripture preached before the Gospel unto Abraham. Seventhly, The
Gospel therefore is no new Doctrine, but the same in substance with that which
was taught to Abraham, and to the Church under the Old Testament: for, says
he, The Scripture preached before the Gospel unto Abraham. Eighthly, Though the
Gospel, or glad tidings of Salvation, was not unknown to the Ancient Church;
yet it was but a very small glimmering light which they had of it, in
comparison with what we do now enjoy: all that Scripture records Adam and the
Patriarchs to have had of it, was in that obscure Promise, Genesis 3. 15. and all
that Abraham had of it, was in this Promise here mentioned, which, though it
was much clearer than the former, because the daylight of the Gospel under the
New Testament, was then drawing nearer; yet it was far short in clearness and
plainness of these Gospel-promises which we do now enjoy, as Joh, 3. 16.
Scripture preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all
Nations be blessed. Ninthly, The blessing of Justification by Faith, and of
other spiritual favors promised to the Nations in Abraham, was such, as
Abraham was not the author of it, but a sharer in it with the rest of those to
whom it was promised: so he infers from the Blessing promised to Abraham,
That we are blessed with faithful Abraham. Doct. 5. Eminent Privileges
bestowed by God upon particular persons, do not exempt them from walking to
Heaven in the common pathway with others, if so they look for it at all: for,
Abraham, though highly privileged to be the father of Believers, ver. 7. in
whom all Nations were to be blessed, Genesis 12. 3. yet behoved to enjoy the
Blessing, not because of his own merit, but freely and by Faith as well as
others, as is imported in the Epithet of Faithful, given to Abraham; We are
blessed with faithful Abraham; not with circumcised virtuous Abraham. 6. God,
in bestowing of Blessings promised upon condition of Faith, does not so much
look upon the greatness of Faith, as the truth and sincerity of it: for,
though every one who are of Faith, believe not so strongly as Abraham did; yet
they are blessed with faithful Abraham.

Verse. 10. For as many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse: for
it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are
written in the book of the Law to do them.
HEre is a third Argument, to prove that we are justified by Faith, and not by
Works; because they who seek to be justified by the works of the Law, are under
the curse of God, and so not justified; which he proves, because according to
Scripture (Deuteronomy. 27. 26.) the Law pronounces the curse upon every man, who
fulfilleth not the whole Law in every tittle or jot of it: now he takes it for
granted that none fulfill the whole Law, and so does leave unto them to gather
that the Law does fasten the curse upon all who seek Justification by it. Doct.
1. That Paul does mean the Works not only of the Ceremonial Law, but also of
the Moral, all alongs this dispute, while he excludes Works from being the
cause of Justification, appears from the Scripture here cited, which is
verified mainly in the Moral Law, as it appears from these sins in
particular, against which the Levites were to denounce the curse, all of them
being transgressions of the Moral Law, Deuteronomy. 27. 15, 16, etc. to the end: For
it is written, Cursed is every one. 2. Fallen man, is so far from attaining to
a state of favor with God and happiness here or hereafter, by any Works which
he can do; that when he has done the utmost, even of what his natural strength
or renewed faculties of grace can reach, if he seek to be justified by it, he
remains under God's curse and wrath, notwithstanding of all: for, the Apostle
affirms universally of all, that are of the works of the Law, that is, who
seek to be justified by works done in obedience to the Law, (for therein was
the great controversy) that they are under the curse. 3. The cursed estate of
man by nature through sin and misery, together with that impossibility he lies
under, to be recovered from that woeful estate, and to regain a state of favor
with God by any work of righteousness which he does, is a thing known, not by
the discoursing of natural reason, which, being blind in the things of God,
cannot judge aright neither of its own misery, nor of the way of recovery from
it, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The knowledge of those is borrowed from Scripture Light,
whose sentence alone is to be stood to in this matter: hence Paul appealeth to
Scripture for probation of what he has herein affirmed; For it is written,
says he, Cursed is every one. 4. Every sin, even the least, as being a wrong
done against God, (Iam. 2. 11.) who is infinite in all His Attributes (Job 11.
7, 8, 9.) and a transgression of His holy and righteous Law (1 John 3. 4. Romans
7. 12.) deserves no less than that the curse of God should light upon the
sinner; under which curse is comprehended all the miseries of this life (Lam.
3. 39.) death it self, (Romans 6. 23-.) and the pains of Hell for ever, Mat. 25.
41, 46-. for, so the Scripture cited affirms, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things, that is, who transgresses in one thing. 5. There
is no person whether rich or poor, noble or ignoble, learned or unlearned,
whose sin deserves not the forementioned curse: The consideration indeed of
the person of some sinners, does aggrege their sin beyond the sin of others,
Romans 2. 17. to 25* but no consideration of the person of any can so far
extenuate his sin, as to make it not deserving of God's wrath and curse: for,
says he, Cursed is every one, without exception, who continues not. 6. Not
only sins of commission, or doing of that which the Law forbids, but also
sins of omission, or the leaving undone of what the Law commands, do deserve
the curse: for, says he, Cursed is every one, not only who does what the Law
forbids, but who continues not in all things that are written in the book
of the Law to do them. 7. It is not the bare knowledge of our duty, nor yet a
fair profession of love and respect to our duty so known, which comes up to
that exact righteousness, that the Law requires under hazard of the curse;
there must be practice also according to that knowledge: for, Cursed is every
one who continues not to do them. 8. This real obedience and practice that the
Law of God requires under hazard of the curse, is universal, extending it self
to the conscience-making of all duties commanded, together with the way wherein
they are commanded, Mat. 15. 8. and to the abstaining from all sins forbidden,
together with their occasions, Job 31. 1. for, Cursed is every one who
continues not in All things, he says not, in some things only. 9. This
obedience required, is also constant, from the first minute of a man's life, to
the hour of his death; so that though he should but once sin, he is under the
curse; for, Cursed is every one who coutinueth not to do them. 10. It is
altogether impossible for any one of fallen mankind, either of himself (Joh.
15. -5.) or, by any grace received in this life (1 John 1. 8.) to keep the Law
perfectly, or to attain to that exact measure of righteousness, that the Law
requires; which appears, not only from what the Law requires, as it has
been formerly cleared, but also from this; Paul takes it here for a confessed
and granted conclusion: for, if any could keep the Law, then every man who
seeks to be justified by the works of the Law, should not be cursed,
providing they did what they could, as Paul here affirms, seeing the Law does
curse none but those who do not keep the Law; For as many as are of the works
of the Law, are under the curse: for it is written, etc. 11. Though every man
does break the Law, and so deserves that curse, which is pronounced against
sin by the Law; Yet all are not left to perish under this curse, some are
delivered from it, to wit, those that are of Faith, or, who by Faith lay hold
on Jesus Christ for righteousness, who was made a curse for them, ver. 13.
such having fled from the sentence and curse of the Law, and laid hold on the
Covenant of Grace revealed in the Gospel, shall be judged not by the Law, but
the Gospel, which admits of the Righteousness of a Cautioner imputed
(Philip. 3. 9.) instead of an exact personal righteousness, required by the
Law: for, says the Apostle, As many as are of the works of the Law, are under
the curse, and so, not they who are of Faith. 12. Those who do not betake
themselves to the Covenant of Grace, must stand and fall according to the
sentence of the Law, or Covenant of Works; and therefore seeing the Law does
curse them (as not having come up to the exact righteousness required in it)
cursed are they, and cursed shall they be: for, says he, They who are of the
Law, or, seek Justification by the Law, are cursed; because the Law seeks
more than they can perform.

Verse. 11. But that no man is justified by the Law in the sight of God, it is
evident: for, The Just shall live by Faith. 12. And the Law is not of Faith:
but, the man that does them shall live in them.
IN these Verses is the fourth Argument, to prove the negative part of the main
Conclusion, to wit, That no man is justified in God's sight (who judges not
according to outward appearence, but according to Truth, 1 Samuel 16. -7.) by his
personal obedience to the Law; and that because righteousness and life comes
from Faith, as he proves from Habbak. 2. -4. and therefore not from the Law,
ver. 11. The force of which consequence, as the Apostle declares, does ly in
this, that the Law is not of Faith, that is, the way of Justification, which
the Law prescribes, (to wit, the Law, as strictly taken for the mere precepts,
legal promises, and threatmings of the Law, See chap. 2. ver. 15.) does not
consist with the way of Justification by Faith; because the Law promises life
to him only who observes what the Law prescribes, and so has a perfect
inherent righteousness, as he proves from Lev. 18. 5. but Faith conveyeth
life to him who is destitute of that righteousness, if he believe on Him that
justifies the ungodly by Faith, as he has cleared frequently before (See Romans
4. 5.) and so does not express it now, ver. 12. Doct. 1. There is a twofould
Justification of a sinner, one which is in the sight of God, and is here
expressed, whereby he is reputed and stands righteous and just in the
estimation of God the Judge, whose judgment is unerring, and always according
to Truth, Jer. 11. 20. Another, which is before men, and is here employed,
whereby the sinner is reputed and stands righteous in the estimation of men,
whose judgment, as flowing from charity (1 Cor. 13. 7.) and grounded upon
outward appearance (2 Samuel 16. -7.) may frequently err and be deceived; But
that no man is justified in the sight of God. 2. Though God do not justify
any, or esteem of him as righteous for any works done in obedience to the Law;
Yet that a man may be justified in man's sight because of his works, is not
here denied by the Apostle: for, Justification before men is nothing else, but
a charitable judgment past upon the person, that God has justified him by
Faith; which judgment is grounded upon the evidences of the person's faith,
manifested in the fruits of good works, Iam. 2. -18. But that no man is
justified by the Law in Gods sight, etc. 3. The spirit of Error being once
given way to, does so far blind the understanding (Isa. 44. 20.) that it cannot
see, and so far engage the will and affections to the maintaining of it (2 Timothy
4. 3.) that the person erring will not see what Scripture says against that
Error, though it be never so evident to an indifferent eye: for, though the
maintainers of Justification by Works, would not, or could not see it; yet the
Scriptures, even of the Old Testament, did give clear testimony against that
Error, and for the contrary Truth; It is evident, (says Paul) for, the Just
shall live. 4. The Doctrine of Justification by Faith, and not by Works, is no
newfangled opinion, the Scriptures, even of the Old Testament, give testimony
to it, as the only way of Justification before God, which then was: for, Paul
proves, that none are justified by the Law, from an Old Testament-Scripture,
cited out of Hab. 2. -4. The Just shall live by Faith. 5. The Scripture cited,
teaches, first, That the way of justifying a sinner, or of making him
righteous under the Old Testament, and under the New, is the same; and
therefore we may safely draw arguments from the one to the other: for, so does
the Apostle here, It is evident: for, The Just shall live by faith. Secondly,
Faith in God, and His Promises, especially these wherein Jesus Christ and His
Righteousness are offered, is that which makes a sinner just and righteous in
God's sight; for, the words may be rendered thus, The Just by Faith shall live;
so that they show what that is, which makes a man just and righteous. Thirdly,
The man who is thus just by Faith, is recovered from that state of death,
wherein every man by nature lies, Ephesians. 2. 1.) and does live; which life of
his, does also flow from faith: for, both righteousness and life are here
ascribed to faith; The Just shall live by Faith. Fourthly, This life by Faith,
which the Believer does enjoy, is such, as furnishes him with comfortable
throughbearing in the midst of hardest dispensations, without apostasy and
fainting, in so far as he does not walk by present sense, but takes up God as
reconciled to him in Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 18. and looks upon his present cross,
as an evidence of God's fatherly love, Heb. 12. 6. and knows it will have a
blessed event to him in God's way and time, Romans 8. 28. and that his life is
hid with God in Christ, Col. 3. 3. far above the reach of any trouble; for,
this is the Prophet's scope, from whom this place is cited, even to show that
the Just shall so live by Faith, as to ride out the storm arising from the
present trouble, which was to overwhelm others, (See Hab. 2. 4.) The Just shall
live by Faith. Fifthly, This life of the Believer which he enjoys by Faith,
though it be begun here in the knowledge of God and Jesus Christ, Joh. 17. 3.
and in freedom from the deserved sentence of death, Romans 8. 1. whereupon
follows a right to eternal life, Joh. 3. 3. and in the lively practice of all
commanded duties, to which the Believer is enabled by drawing life and virtue
out of Christ through Faith, Philip. 4. 13. Yet, this life is not circumscribed
with the present time, it is to be perfected afterward in Glory, so that the
life flowing from Faith, is a lasting, never-ending, evercontinuing and eternal
life: for, the Promise is extended unto all imaginable future duration, without
any restriction: The Just shall live by Faith.

From Verse. 12. Learn, 1. Though the Law and Faith, or the Gospel which is the
Doctrine of Faith, be not contrary each to other (both of them being the Truths
of God) but are mutually subservient one to another in many things, the Law
making sin known, Romans 3. -20. the Gospel holding forth the remedy of sin, Joh.
1. 29. the Law pointing forth our need of Christ, Romans 10. 4. and the Gospel
giving us an offer of Christ for life and righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30. The Law
again holding forth those duties wherein the man, made righteous by Faith,
ought to walk, and to testify his thankfulness, Ephesians. 5. 1, 2. and the Gospel,
or Faith in Jesus Christ offered in the Gospel, furnishing him with spiritual
strength to walk in these duties, which the Law prescribes, 2 Cor. 3. -6. Yet,
the Law and Faith are mutually inconsistent in the point of Justification; so
that if Justification be sought by the works of the Law, it cannot be had by
Faith; and if it be had by Faith, it cannot be attained by the works of the
Law; there can be no mixture of Law and Gospel, Faith and Works in this matter:
for, in this sense the Apostle affirms, The Law is not of Faith. 2. The Law
does offer life to none upon easier terms than perfect obedience, and the
constant and universal practice of whatsoever the Law prescribes; for, the
voice of the Law is, The man that does them, to wit those things that the Law
enjoyneth, shall live in them, or attain eternal life by his so doing. 3. The
way of Justification by Faith, does wholly exclude our doing and works, and
those of every sort, from having influence as causes or conditions, either in
part or in whole, upon our Justification before God: for, the Apostle proves
the inconsistency of the Law and Faith in the point of Justification from this,
that the Law suspendeth our right to life upon the condition of doing and
works; and therefore the way of Justification by Faith, must wholly exclude
Works, else the Apostle should not cogently have proved the thing intended, to
wit, That the Law is inconsistent with Faith, from this, That he who does them
shall live in them.

Verse. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree:
14. That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus
Christ: that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through Faith.
HE adds a fifth Argument to prove the affirmative part of the main
Conclusion, to wit, That we are justified by Faith; and withal shows how
Faith does justify, not for any merit or worth in it self, but as it receives
Jesus Christ, whereby all the blessings purchased by Him, are applied to
Believers: for, the Apostle, obviating an objection, which he foresaw might
arise from ver. 10. (to wit, If the Law do curse all men, how then are any
freed from the curse?) shows, that Jesus Christ has delivered us from God's
wrath, or the sentence of the Law's curse, by taking upon Himself the curse due
to us, while He was obedient to death, even the death of the cross, Philip. 2.
8. Which kind of death was pronounced to be accursed, as he proves from Deuteronomy.
21. -23. This is contained ver. 13. And hence he shows a double fruit did
flow: the first, to the Gentiles, the blessing of Church Priviledges, divine
Ordinances, and of Reconciliation, Adoption, Grace here, and Glory hereafter,
promised to the Nations in Abraham, Genesis 22. 18. being now purchased by Christ,
and residing in Him as the Head and Fountain, did come through Him to the
unrighteous Gentiles, who before the time of Christ's death were strangers to
Christ, and to Abraham's blessing purchased by Christ, Ephesians. 2. 12. The second
fruit of Christ's death, did accresse to the Jews (among whom he reckons
himself) jointly with the Gentiles, who being by Christ's death joined in one,
did enjoy the Promise of the Spirit, or the spiritual Promise, as being now
denuded of these earthly and external Ceremonies, wherewith it was veiled
formerly, and set forth in its native and spiritual beauty and luster: both
which fruits of Christ's death he shows are conveyed unto, and enjoyed by
both Jews and Gentiles only by Faith: So that the Apostle in these two Verses,
does not only prove the main Conclusion, That Faith, laying hold on Christ, is
that which delivers from the Law's curse, and which conveyeth Abraham's
blessing, together with the Covenant-promise, unto us, and so does justify us;
but also indirectly, and (as it were) at the by, hinteth at two other Truths,
tending also to clear the main controversy between him and his adversaries,
which therefore he is to assert more directly afterward, to wit, first, That
now after Christ's death, the Gentiles being called by the Gospel, were to be
joined in one body with the Jews, and both of them to make up one seed to
Abraham, and equally to partake of Abraham's blessing, whereof free
Justification through Faith, spoken of, ver. 9. was a main part. And, secondly,
that the Covenant-promise (that God would be a God to Abraham and to his seed,
Genesis 17. 7.) was now after Christ's death to be held forth more clearly and
spiritually, the types and shadows of earthly Ceremonies, and of that legal
Dispensation, under which it was formerly hid, being laid aside.

From Verse. 13. Learn, 1. The threatenings of the Law, denouncing a curse
against those who yield not personal obedience to it, did not exclude or forbid
a Surety to come in the sinners room, and to undergo the curse due unto Him:
for, though it be clear from ver. 10. that the Law does curse all; yet this
impeded not, but Christ might come to redeem us from the curse of the Law,
being made a curse for us. 2. Every man by nature, the Elect not excepted, Ephesians.
2. -3. are under the sentence of the Law's curse, whereby in God's justice they
are under the power of darkness, (Col. 1. 13.) slavery and bondage to sin and
Satan, (Ephesians. 2. -2.) so to remain until they be cast in utter darkness, Jude,
13. except delivery and redemption do interveen: for, while it is said, Christ
has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, it is supposed that by nature we
are under it. 3. There is no delivery of enslaved man from this woeful bondage,
but by giving satisfaction, and by paying of a price for the wrong done to
Divine Justice, either by himself, or by some surety in his stead; God's
fidelity (Genesis 2. 17.) His righteous nature (Psalm. 11. 6, 7.) and the inward
desert of sin (Romans 1. 32.) do call for it; for, Christ has redeemed us from
the curse of the Law: the word signifies to deliver by giving a price. 4. It
is not in the power of fallen man to acquire a ransom for himself by any thing
he can either do or suffer, whereby Justice may be satisfied, and he delivered
from this state of slavery and bondage. The redemption of the soul is precious,
and cease for ever (to wit) among men, Psalm. 49. 8. for, if man could redeem
himself, Christ had not been put to it to redeem us from the curse of the Law.
5. Jesus Christ the second Person of the blessed Trinity, has undertaken this
great work of redeeming captive-man from his slavery and bondage, and
accordingly has accomplished it. The work was indeed undertaken at the
appointment of all the Persons, Luke 1. 68. to whom also the price was paid,
Ephesians. 5. 2. only the execution of this work, was by that wise design of sending
the second Person in the flesh to become man; that so he might not only have
right as our near kinsman, Ruth 3. 12, 13. but also be fitted to redeem, as
having a price to lay down for our ransom, Heb. 10. 5. Christ has redeemed us.
1. Our Redeemer, Jesus Christ, is true God, who being man's Creator, and having
entered a Covenant of friendship with man at the beginning, by virtue whereof He
had interest in man, not only as His creature, but as one in state of
friendship with Himself; from which blessed state man did fall, Eccles. 7. 29.
and so brought himself and all his posterity (1 Cor. 15. 21 --) to this state
of bondage wherein he now is: for, so much is imported, while Christ is said to
redeem; Redemption being properly of those things which once were our own, but
for the time are lost; Christ has redeemed us, says he. 7. This work of man's
Redemption, undertaken and accomplished by Christ, was a Redemption properly so
called; our freedom and delivery being obtained, not by power or strong hand
merely, nor yet coming from the sole condescension and pity of the injured
party, without seeking reparation for former injuries, but by the payment of a
sufficient price, and by giving a just satisfaction to a provoked God; as
appears not only from the word rendered redeem; which, as said is, signifies
to buy with a price, but also from this, that the price is condescended upon,
to wit, Christ's undergoing the curse of the Law due to us; and this He did for
us, that is, not only for our good, but also in our room and stead: for, by His
undergoing this curse, we are freed from it, so that although to buy or redeem,
be sometimes taken improperly, and does signify to obtain a thing without any
price, Isa. 52. 3. yet what is presently said, and other circumstances do
evince, that in this work of Redemption performed by Christ, the word must be
taken properly for a delivery obtained by a payment of a just price; Christ
has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us. 8. The
price paid by Christ, in order to our redemption, was no less than His
undergoing that curse of the Law, which was due to us: whence it follows that
Christ's sufferings, by way of satisfaction, were not only in His body, but
also in His soul: He did not only wrestle with the fear of death, Heb. 5. -7.
but was also deprived of that joy and comfort, or the sense and feeling of
God's favor and help, which He formerly enjoyed; and had His own sad conflicts
and agonies arising in His Soul hereupon, Mat. 27. 46. which, though in us they
would necessarily produce sin, yet in Christ they did not, Heb. 4. -15. because
of His most pure nature, Heb. 7. 26. for, He was made the curse of the Law for
us. Now the curse of the Law did reach to the terrors of the soul, as well as
to the pains of the body. 9. Though Jesus Christ, as considered in His own
Person, was altogether holy and innocent, Isa. 53. -9. and always, even when
He was made a curse, most beloved of the Father, Mat. 3. 17. yet being
considered as our Surety (Heb. 7. 22.) and sustaining our person, He was the
object of sin-pursuing justice, and no more spared than if we our selves who
sinned, had been in His place: for, the Text says, He was not only accursed,
but made a curse, in the abstract, to show how greatly he was accursed in
death; neither was this execration only in respect of man, who indeed did judge
Him execrable, Isa. 53. 3, 4. but also in respect of God, as appears by the
testimony alleged out of Deuteronomy. 21. 23. for, though the Apostle, intending the
sense only, and not the words, omitteth the mentioning of God; Yet in the place
cited we have it thus, He that is hanged, is accursed of God. 10. The
malefactor among the Jews, who was adjudged to end his life by hanging on a
tree, was pronounced by God to be a curse, or accursed; not as if every one who
died that death, even notwithstanding of their repentance, had been rejected of
God, and condemned, Luke 23. 39, 43. but partly, because that was a most odious
and infamous death in it self, as being aflicted only for atrocious and heinous
crimes; and partly, because it was foreordained of God, that Christ our Surety
should end His life by that kind of death, in order to our redemption and
delivery from the Law's deserved curse; for which cause mainly, God was pleased
to pronounce that kind of death accursed above any other; as appears from the
Apostle's alleging this Scripture, to clear that Christ was made a curse for
us; It is written, says he, Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree.

From Verse. 14. Learn, 1. So wonderful is God in working, especially in that
great work of our Redemption, that He brings about one contrary by another;
He gives life by death, and the blessing by the curse; and frequently in His
way of working, our choicest mercies do come through greatest miseries: for,
Christ was made a curse, that the blessing of Abraham might come upon the
Gentiles. 2. The blessing promised to Abraham, and to the Nations in Abraham,
or rather in Christ Abraham's seed, (Genesis 22. 18.) was not of temporal things
only, as of Corn and Wine, of a fat and rich soil: these were only the shell,
but the kernel of that Promise were blessings of another sort, even spiritual,
such as Grace here, and Glory hereafter; which appears from this, that before
this blessing could be conveyed to Abraham's believing seed, a price of infinite
value behoved to be paid for it, a price too precious to purchase any temporal
blessing by; for, even Christ was made a curse, that the blessing of Abraham
might come upon the Gentiles. 3. The spiritual blessing of Grace here and Glory
hereafter, promised to, and in Abraham, as it was purchased by Christ at a dear
rate, so it resideth and is exstant in Him, who is as it were the storehouse,
wherein the blessing is laid up (Col. 2. 3.) and the dispenser of it unto
Abraham's seed (Act. 5. 31.) in whom Believers are truly blessed (Genesis 22. 18.)
and from whose fullness we do all receive, and Grace for Grace, Joh. 1. 16.
for, says the Text, That the blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles
through Jesus Christ; or, as it is in the Original, in Jesus Christ: So that
this blessing is still in Him, as the fountain and dispenser of it. 4. Though
Jesus Christ was the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, Rev. 13. -8.
in so far as remission of sins and life eternal, were bestowed upon Believers
under the Old Testament, through the merit of His death, even before He
actually died, Romans 3. 25. it being sufficient, in order to these effects, that
it was transacted between the Father and the Son, that He should die, Isa. 53.
10. and that it was certainly known by God that He would die, Act. 15. 18. Yet,
there were some effects of His death, and those of great advantage to the
Church, both of Jews and Gentiles, which were kept in store, and in Gods wise
dispensation not to be actually bestowed, until the time of His death; As,
first, in relation to the Gentiles, the real making-over of Abraham's blessing
unto them, whereby they were made one actual seed unto Abraham with the
believing Jews, was to follow upon Christ's death, God having so provided, and
not to go before it: for, Christ was first made a curse, by being hanged on a
tree, before the blessing of Abraham did come upon the Gentiles. Secondly, in
relation to both Jew and Gentile, the Covenant-promise made to Abraham and his
seed (Genesis 17. 7.) which before Christ's death was veiled over with many carnal
Ceremonies, and lay hid under the many reiterated Promises of temporal
blessings and an earthly Canaan, Genesis 15. 7, etc. was after Christ's death to be
made more clear, the vail of Ceremonies and earthly blessings to be removed,
and the promised blessings of Righteousness and life everlasting to be held
forth in their spiritual beauty and luster: for, upon Christ's being made a
curse, he says, We, to wit, not only the Gentiles, but the Jews also, of whom
Paul was one, do receive the promise of the Spirit, that is, after the manner
of speaking used by the Hebrews, the spiritual promise, in opposition to those
external rites and shadows under which it did formerly lurk. Doct. 5. Though by
the grace of saving Faith, a Christian believes to be true whatever he knows
to be revealed in the Word, Act. 24. -14. and is in some measure (especially
when Faith is lively) affected, and does practice according to what each Truth
calls for, yielding obedience to the Commands, Romans 16. -- 26. trembling at
threatenings, Isa. 66. -2. and embracing the Promises of God for this life
(Psalm. 23. 1.) and that which is to come, Heb. 11. 13. Yet, the principal acts
of Faith, as it is saving and justifying, are the accepting and receiving of
the Promise, and of Christ's satisfaction to the Father's justice, held forth
in the Promise: for, Paul, speaking of Faiths part in Justification, sets
forth the exercise of it thus, That we might receive the promise by Faith. 6.
Faith does justify and make us blessed, not for any worth in it self, as if
the work and merit of Faith were reckoned to us for righteousness, but because
it is the instrument, and, as it were, the hand of the soul, whereby we receive
the Promise, and Christ in the Promise, whose satisfaction alone is our only
righteousness before God, Rom, 5. -19. for, that Paul is to be understood thus
all alongs this dispute, appears from these two Verses, wherein he ascribes
our delivery from the curse, and partaking of Abraham's blessing, to Christ's
merit, or to His being made a curse for us, giving unto Faith only the
receeiving and embracing of that satisfaction, as it is offered in the Promise;
That we might receive the Promise through Faith, says he.

Verse. 15. Brethren, I speak after the manner of men: though it be but a man's
Covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man disanulleth, or adds thereto. 16.
Now to Abraham and his seed were the Promises made. He says not, And to seeds,
as of many; but as of one, And to thy seed, which is Christ. 17. And this I
say, that the Covenant that was confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law
which was four hundred and thirty years after, cannot disanul, that it should
make the Promise of none effect. 18. For if the inheritance be of the Law, it
is no more of Promise: but God gave it to Abraham by Promise.
THe Apostle, having confirmed the truth of his Doctrine by several Arguments,
does in the second part of the Chapter, answer some Objections, and jointly
herewith refuteth the other Error, maintained by his adversaries, about the
necessity of observing the Ceremonial Law; showing, that however the Law, or
the legal way of dispensing the Covenant of Grace prescribed unto Moses upon
mount Sinai, was for good use, so long as by God's appointment it was to stand
in force; yet, Christ being now come in the flesh, the date, prefixed for its
continuance, was now expired, and so the Christian Church of Jews and Gentiles
wholly freed from the observation of it.

The first Objection, as may be gathered by his Answer, was to this purpose,
That granting what the Apostle had said concerning Justification by Faith in
the Promise, and not by Works, did hold true, before the Law was given by
Moses; yet afterward that way of Justification seems to have been altered,
and Justification by Works established according to the tenor of the Law given
by God on mount Sinai, seeing that latter Acts and constitutions do not only
stand in force, but also abrogate the former, in so far, at least, as they are
inconsistent with the latter.

The Apostle answers by a comparison, which he shows is taken from humane
affairs; and, first, sets down the similitude to this purpose, That a
Covenant or Paction made among men for preserving mutual peace and friendship,
being once confirmed by Oath, and other usual solemnities, cannot without
imputation of levity or injustice be disannulled and quite broken, neither can
any condition destructive to the former, be added to it, ver. 15. And,
secondly, That he may apply this similitude with greater evidence and force, he
first shows, the nature of that Covenant, made by God with Abraham, did
consist in Promises, wherein the blessing promised is given freely, and not for
the merit and worth of our obedience and works (as the word rendered Promise
does signify) and next he shows, that all Abraham's seed, not only those who
lived before the giving of the Law, but those also who lived after; and not
only the Jews, but also the Gentiles were comprehended in the Covenant, and to
partake of the promised Blessing, according to the tenor of it; which he
proves from the formal words of the Covenant-tender, which express all those
who were to partake of the covenanted Blessing, by the name of Abraham and of
his Seed, in the singular number, to show, that it is under one and the same
consideration, that they all are his seed, and do partake of his promised
Blessing; otherwise, if it had been Gods purpose to convey the heavenly
Inheritance unto some upon their Faith in the Promise, and unto others for the
merit of their Works, Then the Promise should have been made unto his Seeds in
the plural number, as pointing at the different grounds of this their spiritual
relation unto Abraham, and not unto his Seed in the singular; which seed of
Abraham, is here called Christ, to wit, Christ mystical, which comprehends
Christ the Head, and all Believers, whether before the Law or after, whether
Jew or Gentile, as the Members of that Body whereof Christ is the Head: all of
which are designed by the name of Christ, as 1 Cor. 12. -12. Col. 1. 24. and so
here, to show, that not Moses, not the Law, not Works, but Christ, the Promise,
and faith in Christ, and the Promise is the bond and ty of this Union
pleaded-for in Abraham's seed, ver. 16. Thirdly, He applies the similitude
taken from the unchangeablnesse of humane Covenants, and infers, that much
less can that Covenant which was made with Abraham and his seed be abrogated,
or any condition destructive be added to it by the Law, which was given four
hundred and thirty years after: which consequence, is enforced by four
Considerations, 1. It was a Covenant made with Abraham, not by a man like
himself, but by God. 2. It was not only made, but long before ratified and
confirmed, both by the Oath of God, Heb. 6. 14. and other more than ordinary
solemnities, Genesis 15. 9, 10, etc. And, 3. a Covenant, not only made and
confirmed, but a Covenant confirmed in Christ, or, (as the Original will bear)
looking toward Christ, as Him alone, upon whom the fulfilling of that Covenant
did depend, Genesis 22. 18. So that if this Covenant had been abrogated, whether
by the Law or any other thing, there had been no necessity of sending Christ.
And, 4. because this Covenant, upon Gods part was a free absolute Promise, the
performance whereof did not depend upon the works of the other party, and so
their unworthiness could be no pretense for the abrogation of it: this
inference from the comparison, is ver, 17. And, fourthly, Because some, in
following forth the present Objection, might have urged, that though the giving
of the Law did not fully abrogate the way of Justification by Faith in the
Promise; Yet this much behoved to be granted, that the Law and Works were to be
conjoined, at least, with the Promise and Faith in the point of Justification;
Therefore the Apostle answers, ver. 18. that even this much cannot be
granted; and that because Works and Faith, Law and Promise are inconsistent as
to the point of conveying a right to the covenanted Inheritance, so that if the
works of the Law have any influence upon our Justification, and right to
Heaven, the free-gifted Promise made of God to Abraham, and Faith in that
Promise can have none, and thus the confirmed Covenant should yet be abrogated;
the absurdity whereof he has already shown, to wit, ver. 17.

From Verse. 15. Learn, 1. Though the Servants of Jesus Christ will be
necessitated sometimes to use some more than ordinary sharpness of speech in
their reproofs toward the People of God committed to their charge; yet they are
carefully to guard, lest their affections be imbittered against them, and would
always keep love and affection toward them; yea, and testify their love to
them, even when they do most sharply reprove them: for, the Apostle, though he
upbraided these Galatians with folly, ver. 1. Yet here he testifies, that
nevertheless he loved them, while he calls them Brethren; Brethren, I speak
after the manner of men. 2. It is not only lawful, but also exceedingly
conducing for the edification of hearers, that Ministers make use of
similitudes and examples, taken from things natural, (1 Cor. 15. 38, etc.)
artificial (Iam. 3. 7.) or from common custom among men, for clearing or
confirming of spiritual Truths to the understanding, and for enforcing the
practice of some spiritual duty upon the will and affections, 1 Cor. 9. 24.
for, similitudes from things earthly, as being more notour unto us, do conduce
much, not only to illustrate things spiritual, but also to bring them
frequently to our remembrance afterward, especially, when those earthly
things, from which the similitude is taken, do occur in our daily employments:
Hence the Apostle professes he would speak after the manner of men, that is,
he would make use of a similitude taken from the custom of men in their civil
affairs for clearing of the Truth in hand. 3. As it is lawful for men, whether
particular persons or Nations, to enter a Covenant or paction for keeping of
mutual peace and friendship, and to confirm their Covenant so made by
subscription, oath (1 Samuel 20. 16, 17.) and other lawful and accustomed
olemnities, (Genesis 31. 51, etc.) that hereby it may be the more esteemed-of as
sacred and inviolable: So it is a mark of extreme inconstancy, and carries
with it the guilt of high perfidie for those who have once entered such a
Covenant, to disanul, alter, or add to it at their pleasure, or to stand to it
no longer than it makes for their own advantage: for, says he, Though it be
but a man's Covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man disanulleth, or adds
thereto: No man, to wit, even the men themselves who made the Paction; else the
similitude would not quadrate to the Truth, for illustration whereof it is made
use of, to wit, that even God Himself that made the Covenant with Abraham and
his seed, could have no such purpose in giving the Law, as to alter and
abrogate that Covenant, as is clear from ver. 17.

From Verse. 16. Learn, 1. The Covenant of Grace made with Abraham and his
spiritual seed, is a Covenant of promise, wherein the thing promised is freely
bestowed, and not from the merit or worth of our obedience and works; and
herein the promises of this Covenant do differ from the promises of the Law or
Covenant of Works: for, by the Promises, which signify a free promise, is
meaned the Covenant of Grace; to Abraham and his seed were the Promises made:
the word signifies a free promise. 2. This Covenant of Grace is also a
Covenant of Promises, as containing many Promises; for, although it sometime
have the name of a promise, in the singular number, as ver. -- 17. from that
comprehensive and chief Promise, I will be a God unto thee, and to thy seed
after thee, Genesis 17. -7. yet it contains a numerous number of other promises,
which are as so many rivulets and streams, flowing from that fountain-promise
presently mentioned, even the Promises of the life that now is, and of that
which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. for, says he To Abraham and his seed were the
Promises made. 3. This Covenant of Grace, or Promise, was entered by God with
Abraham, as accepting the tender of it, not only for himself, but for his seed,
whereby all his natural issue, excepting those only who were expressly excepted
by God (to wit, all the posterity of Ishmael and Esau, who continued and waxed
worse in the apostasy of their forefathers from Abraham's God, Romans 9. 7, 13.)
were comprehended within the Covenant, by virtue whereof, though none did
attain Salvation, but those only who did come up to the conditions of the
Covenant, whereupon Salvation was tendered, to wit, Faith (Habak. 2. 4.) and
Repentance (Isa. 55. 7.) yet all of them did enjoy the privilege of Ordinances
(Genesis 17. 10.) and had Salvation offered unto them, (Joh. 4. 22.) not
absolutely, but upon Gods terms revealed in His Word, to wit, if only they
would believe and repent: hence, says the Apostle, To Abraham and his seed
were the Promises made. 4. As the Christian Church of the Gentiles is Abraham's
spiritual seed, as well as the Church of the Jews, and was looked upon as his
seed in that Covenant-promise made to Abraham and his seed, Genesis 17. -5.
compared with Rom 4. 16, 17-. So it is under one and the same consideration
that both Jew and Gentile, and all who reckon spiritual kindred to Abraham are
his seed, to wit, as they follow the steps of his Faith, and at least do
profess that Doctrine of free Justification by Faith, wherein Abraham walked,
Romans 4. 12, (See the distinction of the seeds, or children, ver. 7. doct. 8.)
for, seeing the Promises, spoken of in the Text, were made to his seed, it
seems they cannot be that Promise, which aimed principally at Christ, In thy
seed shall all Nations be blessed, Genesis 22. 18. but the Promises made to his
seed, the Church, and chiefly that Promise, I will be a God unto thee, and to
thy seed, Genesis 17. -7. besides the mentioning of seed in the singular number,
were not an argument of any weight, to prove that Christ personal was only
meaned in the Promise, seeing seed is a word collective, and may comprehend a
number under it, even in the singular number, as the words Flock, Army, and
such like; so it seems most probable, that by the seed here is meaned Christ
mystical, or Christ with His Body the Church, made up both of Jew and Gentile,
who reckon spiritual kindred unto Abraham, upon one and the same account; and
therefore are designed in the Promise by seed, and not seeds; He says not, And
to seeds, as of many; but as of one, and to thy seed. 5. So strict and near is
that union which is betwixt Christ and the Church, that not only is He the
Churches Head (Ephesians. 1. 22.) but also as the Church is His Body and fullness,
Ephesians. 1. 23. So Christ is mystically and virtually the fullness of the Church,
in so far as it is He dwelling and working in them by the efficacy of His
Spirit, who separateth them from the world, makes them one mystical Body among
themselves, and one with Himself, and works all their works in them, even
those which belong to Him, not only as the Head, but, which also belong to
them, as Members of the Body, 1 Cor. 12. 11, 12. for, hence is it, that the
whole believing seed of Abraham, is here called Christ, He being the bond of
their union, Joh. 17. 21. the fountain of their life and motion, Joh. 4. 14.
and the active immediate principle from which all their spiritual actions do
flow, Joh. 15. 5. And to thy seed, which is Christ, says he.

From Verse. 17. Learn, 1. That though God might have dealt with man by way of
soveraignity, as an absolute Monarch, enjoining to man his duty, without giving
him any ground to hope for a reward of his service; yet He has been graciously
pleased to wave such right, and to deal with him by way of covenant, or paction
and agreement, upon just and equal terms, prescribed by God Himself, in which
God promises true happiness to man, and man engages himself by promise for
performance of what God requires: for, as these are the terms in general upon
which God did ever enter any Covenant with man; so the Apostle supposes, that
Gods dealing with man is by way of a Covenant, while he says, And this I say,
that the Covenant that was confirmed before of God. 2. So merciful is God, that
after the Covenant of Works, made with man before the fall, was broken by Adam
(Genesis 3. 6.) and made useless unto all his posterity, as to the obtaining of
Heaven and happiness by it, ver. 10. he was graciously pleased to enter a
Covenant of Grace with fallen man, to deliver him from the estate of sin and
misery, and to bring him into an estate of salvation by a Redeemer, Romans 3. 21,
22. This is that Covenant here spoken of; The Covenant that was before
confirmed of God in Christ. 3. Though the Covenant, or Paction, entered by God
with the Church, before Christ came in the flesh, did differ in the way of
administration, and in some considerable circumstances, from that Covenant
which God has entered with His people in the days of the Gospel, upon which
account they are distinguished by the names of Old and New, (Heb. 8. 13.) First
and Second Covenant, Heb. 8. 7. yet both these Covenants are one and the same
in substance, and do fully agree in all the essential parts: for, the Apostle's
intent, is, to prove, that we are justified under the New Testament, by that
Covenant, which was confirmed before of God in Christ unto Abraham, four
hundred and thirty years before the Law. 4. So prone is fallen man to
misbelieve the truth and reality of Gods offer in the Covenant of Grace, Joh.
4. 48. and especially to question the making out of that offer to himself in
particular, Psa. 88. 4, 5, etc. and so willing is God to have all doubts of
that kind fully satisfied, Heb. 6. 17-. that though His gracious word of
promise be of it self worthy of all acceptance and trust, 1 Timothy 1. 15. yet He
has been graciously pleased to add all those confirmations unto His
Covenant-grant, which are used among men, who being most suspected would most
gladly be trusted. He has committed it to writing, Joh. 20. 31. confirmed it
by witnesses, (Heb. 2. 3.) with miracles (Heb. 2. 4.) by oath (Heb. 6. 13, 17.)
and by seals, Mat. 26. 28. and 28. 19. compared with Romans 4. 11. for, says he,
The Covenant that was before confirmed of God. 5. The Covenant of Grace had a
special relation to Jesus Christ, as well under the Old Administration as under
the New; He being that Seed of the Woman, who was to bruise the head of the
Serpent, (Genesis 3. -15.) and in whom all the Nations of the earth were to be
blessed, (Genesis 22. 18.) and the substance of all those ceremonial shadows, (the
practice whereof was then enjoined) Col. 2. 17. and being the thing signified
in all their Sacraments, 1 Cor. 5. 7. 1 Cor. 10. 4. and God's design in giving
the Law, being to drive men to Christ for righteousness, Romans 10. 4. for,
says he, The Covenant was confirmed before of God in Christ, or, tending
toward Christ, as the Original will bear. 6. The knowledge of
Scripture-chronologie, whereby we know not only those things which are
mentioned in Scripture-story, but also the time when every thing did fall out,
so far as may be gathered by the Scripture it self chiefly, is necessary and
profitable for the better understanding of God's mind in diverse parts of His
Word: for here, the Apostle observes the time when the Law was given, and
lays the great stresse of his argument upon it, whereby he proves, that the
Law could not disanul the Covenant of free grace, made with Abraham, even
because the Law was four hundred and thirty years after the Covenant was
confirmed of God in Christ: The beginning of which space of years, is to be
reckoned from the first solemn sanction and confirmation of the Covenant by God
to Abraham, Genesis 15. 8, etc and the close of it was at the giving of the Law
upon mount Sinai, which was the first year of Isreal's coming out of Egypt,
Exodus 19. 1. Doct. 7. God's intent in giving the Law, and urging exact
obedience to it under hazard of the curse, neither was, nor is, that hereby
people should be taken-off from seeking righteousness and life eternal only by
faith in the Promise, or, that they should set about the practice of duties
commanded by the Law, as that which was to make them righteous before God: the
Law was given for other ends, as the Apostle does after declare; but not for
this: for, he shows here, that Gods design in giving the Law, could not
disanul the Covenant made with Abraham, or, make the Promise of none effect.

From Verse. 18. Learn, 1. So subtle is the spirit of Error, that it will seem
to cede somewhat to Truth, as hereby intending to prejudge the Truth more than
if it had ceded nothing: for, the oppugners of Justification by Faith, did
sometimes give Faith some place in Justification, and pleaded only for a joint
influence of Works and Faith, of the Law and the Promise: which conceit of
theirs, the Apostle does here refute; For, if the Inheritance be of the Law, it
is no more of Promise. 2. The state of Grace and Favor with God here, and of
Glory hereafter, is the inheritance, portion and heirship of the Lord's People;
there being no temporal worldly inheritance which can sufficiently furnish the
heart with satisfaction, Psalm. 4. 6, 7. of which spiritual and heavenly
Inheritance, the Land of Canaan was a type: for, the Apostle speaking of
Justification, and all the spiritual blessings which flow from it, calls them
the Inheritance, by way of excellency; If the Inheritance be of the Law. 3.
There are only two ways of attaining a right to this Inheritance; one, by the
Law, or by Works done in obedience to the Law, chap. 2. 16-. which was the
tenor of the Covenant of Works; the other, is by the Promise, or, by Faith in
Jesus Christ offered in the Promise, chap. 2. -16-. according to the tenor of
the Covenant of Grace. The Apostle speaks of these two ways here, If the
Inheritance be of the Law, it is no more of Promise. 4. There can be no mixture
of these two, so that a right to Heaven should be obtained, partly by the merit
of Works, and partly by Faith in the promise; the one of those removes the
other: for, says he, If the Inheritance be of the Law, it is no more of
Promise. 5. The only way of attaining right to this Inheritance now since the
fall, is, by God's Free-gift, without the merit of Works: for, God did give it
to Abraham, the father of all* justified persons: the word signifies, He gave
it freely, without respect had to Abraham's works. 6. The tender and offer of
this gracious gift, is made in the promises of the Gospel; which, being laid
hold upon by Faith, do entitle the Believer to the tendered Inheritance, 1 John
5. 10, 11, 12. for, says he, God gave i^ by Promise.

Verse. 19. Wherefore then serves the Law? It was added because of
transgressions, till the seed should come, to whom the promise was made, and it
was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator. 20. Now a Mediator is not a
Mediator of one, but God is one.
HEre is a second Objection, to wit, If the Law, or works done in obedience to
the Law, do not justify. Then it seems the Law has been given by Moses upon
mount Sinai in vain and to no purpose: which Objection is expressed in a
Question, the meaning whereof, is, For what end was the Law at that time
delivered, containing such a number of precepts, enjoining so many moral,
judicial and ceremonial duties, promising life unto the obedient? Lev. 18. 5.
and threatening God's wrath and curse to the disobedient, Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
wherefore was all this, if the inheritance of life eternal come not by the
works of the Law? The Apostle answers, showing, first, one main end for which
the Law was added to the Promise, and so much inculcated at that time, to wit,
for the discovery (Romans 3. -- 20.) and restraint of sin, Numb. 15. 39. and for
the more throughconviction of the sinners lost and cursed estate in himself
because of sin, Romans 3. 19. He shows, secondly, that this servile and
childish discipline, as having more of terror than love in it, was to continue
only during the infant-state of the Church, until at Christ's coming in the
flesh that spiritual seed of Abraham, to whom the Promise was made, should
appear complete in its principal parts, and both Jew and Gentile be gathered
into one Body. But, thirdly, lest he should seem to debase the Law too much, he
commends it, partly from the ministry of the Angels used therein, Heb. 2. 2.
Act. 7. 38. and partly from the mediation of Moses, who did communicate the
Word of the Law from God to the people, Deuteronomy. 5. 5. Which latter, as it serves
to commend the Law, so also to enforce the Apostle's main scope, to wit, That
the precepts and threatenings of the Law were only added because of
transgressions, and that God intended no such thing, as thereby to hold forth
to the people of Israel a Covenant of life upon condition of obedience to what
the Law required, seeing there was a necessity to make use of Moses, as a
mids-man, to speak between God and the people; which did argue them to be
conscious to themselves of their own guilt, and therefore durst not approach
unto God, Exodus 20. -18, 19. And therefore, fourthly, The Apostle proves this
consequence, (ver. 20.) from the office of a Mediator, which is not used but
only betwixt disagreeing parties, whence he leaves them to gather that it had
been altogether in vain for God to have entered a Covenant for life, upon
condition of works, with such a guilty sinful people, as could not fulfill the
condition required in that Covenant; and consequently could reap no advantage
by it, especially seeing, as he expressly affirms, God is always one,
consonant to Himself, and does not dispense with one jot of that perfect,
universal and constant obedience, required as the condition of obtaining
Salvation according to the tenor of the Covenant of Works, Deuteronomy. 27. 26.

From Verse. 19. Learn, 1. So bent are men upon the abuse of things, in
themselves good, (whether divine Ordinances, or any other gift bestowed by God
upon them) that they cannot difference betwixt the right use and the abuse of
these things, and are apt to conclude, if they may not abuse them to gratify
some one lust or other, that they can serve for no use to them, and so are
given by God in vain: Thus the false Apostles concluded, that if the Law was
not given to justify, it was wholly useless; Wherefore then serves the Law?
say they. 2. As the Moral Law (Genesis 13. 8.) together with the powerful working
of Gods Spirit in the Regenerate, (Genesis 39 9.) and Gods restraining grace,
(Genesis 20. 6.) the discipline of the Church, (Genesis 9. 25.) and the power of
Magistracy which then was (Genesis 9. 6.) did serve to discover and restrain
transgressions, and to convince sinners of their lost estate because of sin,
before the Law given upon mount Sinai, and do yet serve for the same uses and
ends to the christian Church: So the Lord was pleased in renewing the Covenant
of Grace with His People upon mount Sinai, to cast it in such a legal mould, as
that hereby He might bring down the pride of that stiff-necked people, and the
more effectually convince them of sin, and of God's curse due to them for sin:
which legal dispensation of the Covenant, did stand in this mainly, that the
duties and curses of the Law were held forth frequently, fully and clearly,
Exodus 20. 2, etc. Deuteronomy. 5. 6, etc. 27. 15, etc. and 28. 15, etc. and the
Promises chiefly of eternal life; yea, and of Christ and remission of sins, but
sparingly, and for the most part very obscurely under the vail of earthly
shadows and ceremonies, 2 Cor. 3. 13. and under some dark prophecies, Isa. 53.
7, 8. compared with Act. 8. 34. And besides all this, there was a yoke of other
duties, over and above the duties of the Moral Law, laid upon them, to wit, the
duties of the Law both judicial and ceremonial, Exodus 24. Lev. 1. and obedience
to them most strictly urged, and that under hazard of the same so much
reiterated curse, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. for, says he, The Law was added, to wit, on
mount Sinai, and added to the Covenant-promise made to Abraham, because of
transgressions. Now, he cannot mean the Moral Law, as to the substance of it;
for, that did perpetually sound in the Church ever since it was a Church, even
before Moses, Genesis 18, 19. and so it was not then added: neither does he mean
by the Law, that whole Doctrine, which was delivered from God upon mount Sinai;
for, that Doctrine did contain in it a Covenant of Grace, the very promise of
salvation and pardon of sin through the Messiah to come, Luke 24. 29. which was
formerly made to Abraham, only it was clothed with a more legal dispensation;
and so the Law taken so generally, cannot be said to have been added. It
remains therefore, that by the Law, which was then added to the Promise
because of transgressions, must be meaned that legal dispensation of the
Covenant of Grace, set down in the body of this second Doctrine, whereby it did
at the first view, and without very accurate inspection, appear to be a
Covenant of Works, although it was really a Covenant of Grace. 3. This legal
dispensation of the Covenant of Grace, was not to continue always in the
Church, but until the partitionwall being broken down at Christ's death (Ephesians.
2. 14, 15, 16.) the Gentiles should be called unto the fellowship of the
Church, and, together with the Jews, make up one complete seed unto Abraham:
then was the yoke of judicial (Genesis 49. 10.) and ceremonial duties (Act. 15.
10.) to be taken off; the vail of shadows and dark prophecies, whereby Christ
and free grace were hid and covered, to be laid aside, 2 Cor. 3. 11, 12. And
though the duties of the Moral Law are yet to be pressed (Col. 3. 18, etc.) and
the curse of the Law to be denounced against all who are in their natural
estate, Col. 3. 6. yet covenanted grace and furniture for duty, Joh. 1. 17. and
Christ's becoming a curse for us, to redeem us from the curse of the Law, are
more clearly held forth now in the days of the Gospel (ver. 13.) than they
were formerly: for, says he, It was added because of transgressions, till the
seed should come, to whom the Promise was made. 4. The Gospel is so to be
commended and preferred unto the Law, as nothing of that honor and respect
which is due unto the Law, be taken from it; and the Doctrine of the Law and
Gospel are to be so bounded, as neither may encroach upon the other: for, left
Paul in setting limits between the Law and the Gospel, should seem to vilisie
the Law, he commends it from this, That it was ordained by Angels in the
hand, or, by the ministry and service, of a Mediator. 5. Though Moses was the
Mediator here spoken of, (Deuteronomy. 5. 5.) yet it follows not, that Angels and
Saints are Mediators in Heaven; for Moses was present with the people, and
ordained a Mediator by God for this one act, which was to relate and report the
Law from God to the people: now it can carry no show of reason, from this to
conclude, that therefore the Saints, who are absent in Heaven, and so are
ignorant of us, (Isa. 63. 16.) or, that either Saint or Angel should be
constituted Mediators to report our prayers and the secrets of our hearts unto
God, especially seeing no Scripture does prove that any such office is put upon
them by God; It was ordained in the hand of a Mediator.

From Verse. 20. Learn, 1. Conscience of guilt presents God as terrible, and
takes away all confidence from the guilty sinner to approach in a friendly
manner by himself to a provoked God: for, no intercourse can be between God and
His people, when they are not one, but differ by reason of His peoples sin: A
Mediator is not of one, says he: there was a disagreement through sin, which
called for a Mediator. 2. The Covenant of Works, entered with Adam in the state
of innocence, was immediate, no Mediator interveening to make them one, wherein
it differs from the Covenant of Grace, Heb. 8. 6. for, God and man, before
the fall, were one, and no disagreement betwixt them because of sin; and so
there was no use for a Mediator in the Covenant that was then made: for, A
Mediator is not a Mediator of one, says Paul. 3. No man can attain to Heaven,
or reap, any advantage by a Covenant of Works, except he were perfectly holy,
and as free of sin as Adam was before his fall: for, the Apostle, proving that
God made no Covenant of Works with them upon mount Sinal, and that they could
have reaped no benefit by such a Covenant, thinks it sufficient to evince,
that they were then a sinful people; which he evinceth from this, that they
stood in need of a Mids-man betwixt God and them; Now a Mediator is not a
Mediator of one, says he. 4. The Lord in all His dispensations is always one,
and like to Himself, without any shadow of turning, Iam. 1. -17. His work and
way of dealing, may, and has changed, even His way of dispensing the Covenant
of Grace to His Church, Heb. 8. 8, 9. but He remains unchangeable, there
being no change of that kind which He has not foreordained by His
unchangeable decree, Ephesians. 1. -11. Thus he says, God is one, that is, with
relation to the present scope; If any plead a right to Heaven, for the merit of
their works, God will abate nothing of what He Himself did once prescribe and
require of man in the Covenant of Works.

Verse. 21. Is the Law then against the Promises of God? God forbid: for if
there had been a Law given which could have given life, verily Righteousness
should have been by the Law. 22. But the Scripture has concluded all under
sin, that the Promise by Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that
believe.
Follows the third Objection, to wit, If the Law be given to discover and
condemn for transgressions, as is affirmed, ver. 19. Then it is contrary to the
Covenantpromise, which does cover and pardon sin, quicken and justify the
sinner. He answers, 1. by denying and rejecting the consequence as absurd and
abominable. 2. By retorting the Argument against the Adversaries themselves:
for, if the Law, or, if our works done in obedience to the Law, could procure
eternal life, as they affirmed, Then our righteousness before God, should
consist in Works, or, the Law should justify; leaving them to gather, that
this would suppose the former Covenant by promise to be abolished and quite
destroyed by the Law; so that, according to their Doctrine, the Law was both
contrary unto, and destructive of the Promise, ver. 21. 3. He answers
directly, showing the Law, called here the Scripture, (or, that Scripture, as
it is in the Original) while it convinces, accuses and condemns all mankind
for sin, and so concludes and incloseth all men under sin, and the curse due
to sin, as the Judge does the malefactor in prison, is not contrary, but
subordinate and subservient to the Promise, in so far, as that hereby the
guilty sinner, (being made to lay aside all confidence in his own
righteousness, Romans 7. 9.) does flee by Faith in Jesus Christ for a refuge to
the Promise; and so the thing promised, to wit, Righteousness and Salvation,
becomes the sinner's, and is conveyed upto him, to wit, upon his believing.

From Verse. 21. Learn, 1. It is the way of Heretics to set Scripture against
Scripture, and to make one Scripture seem to contradict another, except their
erroneous sense and interpretation of Scripture be received, as intended by the
Spirit of God: for, these false Apostles did affirm, if so the Law did not give
life, but did only discover and accuse for transgressions, then God's mind in
the Law should have been contrary to His mind revealed in the Promise: Hence
Paul propounds this question unto himself to answer, Is the Law then against
the Promises of God? 2. However Heretics may labor to fasten such absurdities
upon Truth, as if it were contrary to some other parts of God's mind revealed
in Scripture; yet their bold allegations will be found always false, and Truth
to be ever most consonant, and never contrary to it self: for, so the Apostle
shows of the Truth in hand; God forbid, says he: 3. There are some sins
(chiefly those that do most directly reflect upon any divine perfection, or
attribute of God) the very first motions whereof, ought to be entertained with
abhorrency and detestation; and this either when a tentation to commit such
sins is presented to us, Job 2. 9, 10. or, when the guilt of them, as already
committed, is intended to be unjustly fastened upon us: for, when Paul's
adversaries would have charged him with making the Law to contradict the
Promise, and so God to be changeable, and not consonant to Himself; he
rejects this blasphemous charge with a God forbid; an expression frequently
used by the Apostle to set out his high indignation against somewhat, wherewith
his person or doctrine was charged, Romans 3. 4. 6. Romans 6. 2. Doct. 4. As these
absurdities, wherewith the adversaries of Truth are ready to brand the Truth
unjustly, do oftentimes by direct and just consequence most directly follow
upon that Error, which they themselves maintain: so, in order to the refutation
of Error, (besides the alleging of such Reasons and Scripture-Truths as do
directly overthrow the Error) it is lawful and also convenient, to present
those absurdities which do natively flow from it; that in these the absurdity
of the Error it self may be seen, seeing no absurd and false position can be
drawn by just consequence from that which is a Truth: Thus the Apostle,
refuting that error of Justification by Works, does charge it with that
absurdity which his adversaries did labor to fasten upon the contrary Truth,
even of being contrary to the Covenant-promise, while he says, If there had
been a Law given which could have given life, verily righteousness should have
been by the Law, and so the Promise had been abolished and made useless. 5. No
man can attain to life eternal, being destitute of some righteousness, whereby
he may be made righteous: for, according to the Apostle, If the Law could give
life, to wit eternal life, it behoved also to have given righteousness; verily
righteousness should have been by the Law. 6. So exact and full is that
righteousness that is required in order to life, (See ver. 10.) and so far
short do all mankind come of that righteousness in themselves, Romans 3. 23:
that no works of our own, done in obedience to the Law, can amount to that
righteousness: for, he speaks of it as a great absurdity once to imagine,
that righteousness should have been by the Law. 7. Whoever maintain a
life-procuring righteousness by Works, they do in effect abolish and destroy
that Free Grace held forth in the Promise, in so far as they make the Promise
useless and in vain, ascribing that to Works, which is the proper effect of
Grace in the Promise, and which cannot be effectuated by our imperfect Works;
for when, according to the strain of the argument, it would have been said,
Verily the Law should have been contrary to the Promise, in its place, and as
the equivalent of that, he says, Verily righteousness should have been by the
Law.

From Verse. 22. Learn, 1. Though all men by nature (...) under sin (Romans 3.
10.) and the deserved curse of the Law because of sin, Ephesians. 2. 3. yet, it is a
matter of no small difficulty to convince any man of, or to affect his heart
sensibly either with the one or the other: for, the work of the Law its
accusing, convincing or condemning the sinner for sin, is compared to the work
of a Judge detaining a malefactor in prison, which is not effectuated but with
a kind of force and violence: The Scripture has concluded all under sin; the
word carries a metaphor, taken from a Judge his imprisoning of malefactors. 2.
The Scripture, especially the Law of God in its strict commands, large
accusations, and most severe threatenings, does serve abundantly to convince all
mankind to be heinous sinners, and under the drop of God's terrible curse for
sin, and this so forcibly, that there is not the least wicket patent for him,
whereby he may either deny his sin, or escape deserved wrath, by any thing
which can be performed by himself: for, The Scripture, or, that Scripture, to
wit, the Law especially, has concluded all under sin, as in a most strict
prison or dungeon; for, so the word bears: and although by the Law here, be
mainly and firstly meaned that legal dispensation of the Covenant of Grace,
which stood in force during the time of the Old Testament, (See ver. 19. doct.
2.) that thereby this conviction might be the more effectually brought about;
yet the pressing of the duties of the Moral Law, and inculcating the curse
thereof upon those who are in an unrenewed estate, do serve to conclude all
under sin yet, Luke 13. 3. Doct. 3. The Law of God does serve to convince all
men, not only that they are sinners, but also that all their actions, counsels,
endeavors, and whatsoever proceeds from any of their unrenewed faculties
(Genesis 6. 5.) are altogether sinful, and most justly deserving God's wrath and
curse: for, he says, The Scripture has concluded all (not only all men, but
all things, to wit, all things proceeding from men) under sin. 4. So ignorant
are men of Gods righteousness revealed in the Gospel, and so averse are they
from closing with it, when it is made in some measure known, Joh. 5. 40. So
bent are they to establish their own righteousness, according to the Law, Romans
10. 3. that until the Law of God convince them of their altogether sinful and
cursed estate by nature; yea, and that they can do nothing but sin, they will
never be induced to quit all confidence in their own righteousness, and flee,
by Faith in Jesus Christ, for obtaining of righteousness and salvation,
according to the tenor of the Gospel and Promise: for, God did not only under
the Old Testament, but also does under the New (Act. 2. 37.) use that piece of
divine artifice, to conclude all under sin, that the Promise (or, thing
promised) by Faith in Jesus Christ may be given: the Promise is not given,
because none will take it, until that concluding under sin precede. 5. The
Lord's design in pressing the duties, and thundering out the curses of the Law
for disobedience, is merely this, that sinners being hereby convinced of their
cursed estate in themselves, and made desperate of obtaining Heaven and
Salvation by their own Works, may be in a manner prepared, and, as it were,
necessitated, by Faith to embrace that free-gift of Salvation held forth
through Christ in the Promise: for, says he, The Scripture has concluded all
men under sin; not of purpose to condemn us, but that the Promise by Faith of
Jesus Christ might be given unto them who believe. 6. The heavenly inheritance,
and all the other blessings promised in the Covenant of Grace, do not belong
promiscuously unto all whom the Law concludes under sin, but only to those who
by Faith do embrace and close with them as they are offered in the Promise:
for, says he, That the Promise, (or, the thing promised) might be given to
them that believe. 7. That Faith which entitleth to the Promise, is not a
general faith in God as Creator, such as the faith of Turks; but it is Faith in
Jesus the son of Mary, Mat. 1. 25. who is that Christ or Messiah, who, being
promised under the Old Testament, (Isa. 7. 14.) is now come under the New: it
is this Faith relying on Christ, who by His merit has purchased the thing
promised, Isa. 53. 5. which gives a right unto the Promise: for, to specify
what Believers they are to whom the Promise is given, he adds, by the Faith
of Jesus Christ.

Verse. 23. But before Faith came, we were kept under the Law, shut up unto the
Faith, which should afterward be revealed. 24. Wherefore the Law was our
Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by Faith. 25.
But after that Faith is come, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster. 26. For
ye are all the Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus.
IN these words the Apostle answers a fifth Objection, and does more directly
handle that point concerning the abrogation of the ceremonial Law; yea, of the
whole Mosaical Dispensation, now, under the days of the Gospel: The
Adversaries might have objected, Seeing the Law, or that legal Dispensation of
the Covenant of Grace, was so useful unto the ancient Church, and so
subservient to the Promise, as is affirmed, ver. 22. Then why did Paul cry down
the use of it, especially the practice of the ceremonial Law now? The Apostle
answers by distinguishing times, and shows, that before Faith came, whereby
he means not the grace of saving Faith, (for, that was always in the Church,
Heb. 11. 4, etc.) but either Christ, called Faith, because He is the object of
Faith (in which sense He is called our hope, 1 Timothy 1. 1.) or, the full
manifestation of the Doctrine of Faith, which was about the time of Christ's
death and ascension: he grants (I say) that before that time, the use of the
Law was first necessary to the Jews, because they were by the Law, as by a
military guard, kept, to wit chiefly, from being mixed with other Nations,
whether in Religion or Policy, Ephesians. 2. 14. Secondly, It was saving to them, in
so far as it did shut up, conclude, and enclose them, as it were, in a prison,
(for it is the same word, and that same purpose more fully expressed, which is
ver. 22.) under sin and the curse due to sin, that hereby they might be in a
manner prepared, and, as it were, necessitated to embrace the Doctrine of
Salvation by Faith in Jesus Christ, which was then but darkly, Mat. 11. 11. and
afterward more clearly revealed, the full revelation whereof, they were by
this mean, kept more intent upon, ver. 23. Which latter use of the Law, he
illustrateth and concludes, by showing the Law, as a Pedagogue or
Schoolmaster, did with much rigor and servitude, govern and rule the Church
then in her infancy and childhood, and thereby did lead the Elect unto Christ,
that they might be justified by faith. The Apostle having thus showed (ver. 23,
24.) that the Law, that is, the legal dispensation of the Covenant of Grace,
was for good use to the ancient Church, denies that therefore the use of it
should be continued now, when the doctrine of Faith is clearly manifested; yea,
by the contrary, he shows it was then to be abrogated, and the Christian
Church freed from the observation of it, because it exerced only the office of
a Schoolmaster over children, and so can have no authority over the Church, and
especially Believers now, ver. 25. which he proves from this, That the
Christian Church, and all of them, to wit Jew and Gentile, were like a son come
to age, because of their Faith in Christ Jesus already come; and so was to be
dealt with no longer as a child under a Schoolmaster, ver. 26.

From Verse. 23. Learn, 1. Though there was Gospel, or the Doctrine of Salvation
by Free Grace, held forth, to be laid hold upon by Faith, unto the ancient
Church, ver. 8. yet it was ^o obscurely and sparingly propounded then, and so
clearly and largely manifested now, That the Scripture speaks as if that
Doctrine had not been at all in the Church then, but only revealed now in the
days of the Gospel: for here, he calls all the time of the Old Testament,
the time before Faith came, or before the Doctrine of Free Grace, the object of
Faith came, and that this Faith was afterward to be revealed, to wit, because
it was but sparingly revealed then. 2. Besides other differences betwixt the
administration of the Covenant of Grace under the Old Testament, and under the
New, this was one, the old administration was extended only to the Jews, Psalm.
147. 19, 20. and to some of other Nations, who, forgetting their own People,
(Psalm. 45. 10,) joined themselves to them; but the new is extended to all
Nations, Mat. 28. 19. for, this difference is here hinted at, while the Apostle
(speaking of those who were under that old dispensation, ver. 23, 24.) speaks
of them in the first person, We were kept under, etc. We, that is, the Nation
of the Jews, whereof Paul was one; but, speaking of those who are under the new
Dispensation, he mentions not only the Jews, under the pronoun of the first
person, We, ver. 25. but also the Gentiles, under the pronoun of the second
person, Ye, ver. 26. for ye, says he, to wit, the Galatians of the Gentiles,
are all the Children of God. 3. The administration of the Covenant of Grace
under the Old Testament by so many Rites, Sacrifices, Ceremonies, such a system
of politic Laws, such rigid pressing of moral duties, with the annexed
promises of eternal life, and threatenings of Gods wrath and curse, (the
Gospel-promise all the while being hid, as it were, behind the curtain) among
other uses, did serve for a hedge, or a place of military defense, to keep that
ancient People, of whom Christ was to come, distinct and separate from all
other Nations, as a besieged city is guarded by walls, ditches, and armed
soldiers from the irruption of enemies: for, this is aimed at while he says,
We were kept under the Law, to wit, as by a military guard; for so the word
signifies. It Is true, they were also kept from going astray, either in
Religion, or in life and conversation; but that use of the Law was mentioned,
v. 19. Doct. 4. The hard servitude wherewith the ancient Church was pressed, and
under which she was, as to her outward estate, as it did forcibly constrain the
Elect among them, to quit their own righteousness, and to betake themselves
for righteousness and life unto Faith in the promised Messiah, as knowing
somewhat from Scripture (Hag. 2. 6, 7. compared with Heb. 12. 26, 27.) that
then the Church should be eased of that hard servitude and bondage: for, in
both these respects, the Law did shut them up unto the Faith afterward to be
revealed, making them close with the Doctrine of Free Grace for Salvation by
Faith in the mean time, and earnestly to expect the full revelation of it by
the Messiah, Job. 4. 25.

From Verse. 24. Learn, 1. The Church of God, considered as a politic body, and
with relation to her different state in several times, has some resemblance to
the age of a man, as having had her infancy under the Patriarchs, her childhood
under Moses, and her perfect age under the Gospel: which different states, and,
as it were, several ages of the Church, did arise, partly from the Churches
rudeness and incapacity to comprehend spiritual Truths in their native beauty
and luster, which were always the greater, by how much the Church was nearer
her beginning: and partly, from the different measure and degrees, wherein the
promise and way of Salvation by the Messiah, were made known to the Church; the
manifestation whereof, was first very obscure, Genesis 3. 15. but afterward
always more and more clear, until at last, according to the foregoing
prophecies, (Mal. 4. 2.) The Sun of Righteousness, at Christ's incarnation,
death and ascension, did arise with healing under his wings: The Apostle
points at those several ages of the Church, while he represents the Jewish
Church as a child under a pedagogue in this verse, and more fully, chap. 4.
ver. 3. and the Christian Church, as men of perfect age, and so no longer under
a Schoolmaster, ver. 25, 26. Doct. 2. The Lord's visible way of dispensing
Grace and covenanted Blessings by external means, has not been always one and
the same, but diverse according to the temper and complexion of His Church in
her several states and ages; so that as the Churches state was more rude and
earthly, or more polished and spiritual, the Lord did train her up under a more
rude or spiritual form of Worship; thus the Church, while in her infancy and
childhood, was under a Pedagogue, whose charge is to attend children; The Law
was our Schoolmaster; but now, being come to grown age, she is no longer under
a Schoolmaster. 3. The Lord's way of dispensing Grace under the Old Testament,
as it is set down in the Law given by Moses, was very suitable to the childish
and infant-state of the Church, the Lord dealing with them in a way much like
to that, whereby Schoolmasters do train up children at Schools: for, under this
dispensation there were, first, a whip and rod, to make the refractory stand in
aw, even the frequent inculcating of God's curse (Deuteronomy. 27. 15, etc.) and
comminations of temporal calamities (Deuteronomy. 28. 16, etc.) and also many
ceremonial penances, in their many washings and purifications, Lev. 15. through
the whole chapter. Secondly, there were allurements also for those, who were of
better and softer natures, to gain and keep them in obedien^^ such as did befit
the state and condition of that People, even frequently reiterated promises of
temporal blessings, (Deuteronomy. 28. 3, etc.) and also an earthly inheritance, Isa.
1. 19. Thirdly, there were restraints also from the use of things (in their own
nature indifferent) put upon them, under fore certifications, (Lev. 11. through
the whole) thus to try their obedience, to bow their wills, and so to make them
tractable and obedient in these other (...) weighty things of the Law, 1 Cor.
9. 9, 10. And lastly, though their dignity, as sons, was not altogether
keep(...) up from them, 2 Cor. 6. -16, 18. yet it was but fell(...) made mention
of; and the Promise, the charter of their inheritance, kept up under a dark
vail, 2 Cor. 3. 13. and they themselves made to serve under hard servitude and
bondage, as if they had not been sons but servants, chap. 4. 3. Wherefore the
Law was our Schoolmaster, says he. 4. God's great design and scope in all this
pedagogy of the Law, was, that thereby souls might be directed unto Christ, and
made to close with Him for righteousness, Romans 10. 4. The frequent inculcating
of the Moral Law and Promises of life upon their obedience, did convince them
how far they were from that exact righteousness, which God required; and that
therefore they behoved to seek for righteousness some-where else, which was
enforced by the threatenings of the Law, showing that otherwise they would
perish. The Ceremonies, Sacrifices, and frequent Washings, did also tend to
this, even to convince them of, and to keep their eye fixed upon their own
filthiness and deserved damnation, and to make them seek for righteousness,
satisfaction to provoked Justice, and the expiation of their sin, in that alone
sacrifice of the death and blood of Christ, Heb. 9. 9, 10, 11. for, says he,
The Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ. 5. The Godly, under the
Old Testament, were justified by Faith, laying hold upon Christ for
righteousness, even as we are now: for, says he, The Law did bring us to
Christ, that we might be justified by Faith.

From Verse. 25. Learn, 1. The proposing unto our selves to bring about a good,
necessary and spiritual end, is not sufficient to justify our use-making of
whatsoever means, we may conceive to be, or sometimes have been approven of
God, as conducible for that end, except those means have a present stamp of
divine approbation for the using of them; God's end is to be endeavored by His
own means: for, though the bringing of us to Christ for righteousness be as
necessary now under the Gospel, as it was under the Law, and though the
pedagogy of the Law of Moses was an approven mean for bringing about that end
under the Old Testament; yet Paul will not grant, That therefore it should now
be made use of in order to that end, because under the days of the Gospel, the
ty of divine authority enjoining the use-making of that Schoolmaster, is
ceased; But after that Faith is come, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster,
says he; and therefore are not to subject our selves unto him. 2. Though the
curse of the moral Law is to be denounced against all impenitent sinners in the
Christian Church, that hereby they may be constrained to flee unto Christ for
righteousness, Joh. 3. 36. and the precepts thereof are to be urged upon the
Regenerate, as the rule of their obedience, Ephesians. 6. 1, etc. and though the
exact righteousness, required in the Law, does serve as a glass, wherein even
the Renewed may see their manifold failings, Romans 7. 14, etc. and so be
necessitated to betake themselves daily to the blood of sprinkling for pardon,
Romans 7. 25. (In which respects, the moral Law may be called a Schoolmaster,
even to the christian Church, and a Schoolmaster to bring them to Christ) yet
the christian Church is fully freed from that legal dispensation of the
Covenant of Grace, which was added to the Covenant-promise upon mount Sinai,
which what it was, is explained, ver. 19. doct. 2. and ver. 24. doct. 3. For
after that Faith is come, we are no more under this Schoolmaster, says he.

From Verse. 26. Learn, 1. The Church of God under the New Testament, as to her
outward state, is in a state of Sonship or Adoption, which notes her freedom
from that rigor and servitude, under which the ancient Church was through the
outward legal dispensation of the Covenant of Grace, chap. 4. 3. and the truly
godly have some peculiar dignity added in relation to the grace of Adoption
over and above what Believers under the Old Testament had, in so far as the
vail of that legal dispensation being removed, the generality, at least, of
Believers now have more ready access to the Covenant-promise, and a clearer
insight in, and knowledge of all those privileges, which belong unto them as
the sons of God, Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24. for, taking what the Apostle says of
their being the children of God in both or either of those respects, his
intended scope is brought about, which is to show, That the christian Church is
not under the pedagogy of that Mosaical dispensation, even for, or, because ye
are all the Children of God, says he. 2. Though Faith in the Messiah to come,
did entitle Believers under the Old Testament, to the dignity of Sons and
Daughters to the Lord Almighty; yet Faith in Jesus Christ already come, does
add some peculiar dignity of Sonship upon the christian Church, and especially
upon Believers in it, even that which is presently mentioned in the preceding
Doctrine, the Lord having been pleased to make the Churches full growth, and
utmost perfections, (as to her privileges, and outward state and measure of
access) to tryst with His Son's coming in the flesh, that so His entry to the
world might be more stately, as being accompanied with such a measure of royal
munificence, Heb. 11. 40. for, says he, Ye are all the children of God by
Faith in Jesus Christ, to wit, already come.

Verse. 27. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ. 28. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free,
there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. 29. And
if ye he Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the
Promise.
THe Apostle (having proved that the christian Church is freed from the
mosaical dispensation, which was added to the Promise upon mount Sinai) seems
in these verses, not only to confirm that, which he had presently asserted, of
our being the children of God by Faith, because we are baptized into Christ,
have put on Christ, are one in Christ; but also and mainly, to obviate an
Objection yet more made use of by the false Apostles in behalf of Circumcision,
which was not added upon mount Sinai unto the Promise, but given to Abraham
with the Promise, as the initiatory seal of the Promise, Genesis 17. 10. whence,
it seems, they argued, That notwithstanding all that which was added upon mount
Sinai, was now abrogated; yet Circumcision was to be kept in the Church, as
that without which none could be Abraham's seed, or an heir according to the
Promise. The Apostle's Answer comes in effect to this, That Baptism into
Christ, that is, which seals and signifies our ingraffing into Christ, (Romans
6. 4.) was substituted in the place of Circumcision, and sufficient for
compassing all those ends, for which Circumcision was instituted; and that
because they who are baptized into Christ, do put on Christ, and so are in a
manner incorporate, and make one body with Him, as a man is incorporated with
his garments, from which the word is borrowed, ver. 26. Which incorporation of
the christian Church, and making all the members thereof one in Christ, he
shows is effectuated without any respect had to any difference of Nations,
conditions worldly, or distinction of sexes, leaving them to gather, that
Circumcision (which, by virtue of its institution, did serve for keeping up a
distinction between Jew and Gentile, (Exodus 12. 48.) could have no influence
upon this business, ver. 28. From all which he concludes, Seeing Baptism does
testify and seal up Christ's interest in those who are baptized, as His and
their union with Christ, who is the real Head of the blessed Race, through whom
alone Abraham and his seed were to be blessed, That therefore ipso facto, and
without any more ado, they were Abraham's seed, and apparent heirs of that
heavenly inheritance, given unto Abraham by promise, and so, that there was no
necessity, in order to this end, of joining them to the blessed Nation by
Circumcision, as the ancient Proselytes were, and, as the false Apostles
alleged, should yet be practiced, ver. 29.

From Verse. 27. Learn, 1. Though Circumcision the initiatory Seal, and leading
Sacrament of the Covenant under the Old Testament, (Exodus 12. 48.) be now
abolished with the rest of that ancient dispensation; yet, seeing the Church of
God, even under the New Testament, is not wholly spiritual, but in part earthly
and carnal, (Romans 7. 14.) standing in need to be instructed and confirmed in
spiritual Truths by things sensible and earthly, Joh. 3. 12. it has therefore
seemed good unto God to enjoin the celebration of some Sacraments in the
christian Church unto the end of the world, Mat. 28. 19, 20. which are in
signification more clear, and in use less painful and burdensome; and
particularly, He has substituted Baptism in the place of Circumcision, which
does serve for all these spiritual uses now, which Circumcision did serve for
then, to wit, all these uses which were of common concernment to the Church at
all times, and not peculiar to the dispensation which then was: for, the
Apostle, clearing how Circumcision was now abrogated, does show how Baptism
does it in all those necessary uses for which it did serve; For as many of you
as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. 2. Among other uses for
which Baptism does serve, this is the first and chief, to signify and seal up
our ingraffing into, and union with Christ: there is an external visible union,
consisting in external covenanting, and serious profession of christian Truths,
either personally or parentally, which is sealed up to all visible Professors
absolutely; for, they are in Him externally, Joh. 15. 2. There is a real and
saving union signified and sealed up unto all the Regenerate absolutely; for,
they are in Him savingly, Romans 8. 1. and to all the Members of the visible
Church conditionally, if so they come up to the terms which Scripture calls
for, as necessary in order to union with Him, to wit, saving Faith: for, this
much the Apostle does import, by saying, we are baptized into Christ, even that
our ingraffing into Him is signified and sealed by Baptism. 3. Baptism does
also signify and seal our putting on of Christ, to wit, by Faith; for, by
Faith we make application of Christ unto our selves, Joh. 6. 40. and Christ so
applied, serves for the same use to the soul, which garments do serve to the
body; He covers our loathsome nakedness, Rev. 3. 18. and is also for an
ornament unto us, Ephesians. 5. 27. He communicates heat and warmness, even those
sweet refreshing influences of His Spirit, for life and godliness, Cant. 1. 2.
and 2. 5, 6. And Christ is thus, and for these ends put on in Baptism; partly,
because Baptism engages all who are baptized, to put Him so on, Romans 6. 4. and
partly, because those who are baptized inwardly by the Spirit, as well as
outwardly by Water, do actually and really put Him on, 1 Pet. 3. 21. As many as
are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ; It Is a metaphor taken from
garments which men put on to cover, adorn, and keep themselves warm.

From Verse. 28. Learn, 1. Though Christian Religion abolish not those civil
distinctions, which are between Nation and Nation, Master and Servant, 1 Pet.
2. 18. or the dignity of the one sex above the other, 1 Cor. 11. 7, 8, 9. Yet
it lays no weight upon any of these as to the point of access unto Christ
and use-making of Him. Whatever Nation, rank, or sex a person be of, it is all
one in this matter; none are debarred from Christ, nor yet the more accepted by
Him for any of these things; for, having spoken of putting on Christ, he
subjoyneth, there is neither Jew nor Gentile, Greek, etc. 2. After, and upon
Christ's coming in the flesh, the door of Free Grace has been much more
enlarged beyond what it formerly was; so that the Greek and Gentile have all
restraints taken off, and a like ready access with the Jews to Jesus Christ:
for, the Apostle's main scope in this verse, is to show, that there is no
difference now between Jew and Greek; and by consequence, that Circumcision,
which was one main part of the partition wall betwixt them, was not any longer
to stand in force; and what is spoken of the bond and free, male and female,
seems to be added for illustration and confirmation of this Truth only,
except he does also hint, that those restraints which were upon bondmen, and
the female sex, as to the enjoying of some privileges under the Old Testament,
(Genesis 17. 10. Lev. 22. 10.) were now also taken off; There is neither Jew nor
Greek, bond nor free, male nor female. 3. There is an union among all those who
are baptized, whereby they make up, as it were, but one man, to wit, all
visible Church Members of all Nations, of every condition, and of both sexes,
make up one politic Body, having by divine appointment the same Laws,
Government, the same kind of Office-bearers, and spiritual Courts, and enjoying
the same privileges, 1 Timothy 6. 13, 14. And all real Believers make up one
mystical and spiritual Body, as being animated, acted and ruled by one and the
same Spirit of Jesus, Act. 15. 8, 9. for, says he, They are all one, or, one
man. 4. The bond and ty of the Churches union, is Jesus Christ. And according
to the nature of that union, which is between Him and them, whether external
and by a profession only, or internal and by virtue of saving Faith also, So is
the nature of that union which is among themselves, either external or
political only, or internal and mystical also; and the more that any be united
and kept near to Christ, he will be at greater nearness unto these who are
Christ's: for, having spoken of their putting on Christ, he subjoyneth, ye are
all one in Christ Jesus.

From Verse. 29. Learn, 1. By virtue of our Baptism, and our putting on of
Christ in Baptism, a right and interest in, and over us, does accresse to
Christ, so that we become in a peculiar manner His, seeing in Baptism we enter
an open and professed engagement to be wholly and only the Lord's: for, in
place of resuming, If ye, being baptized into Christ, have put on Christ,
(which was the foundation of the present inference laid down, ver. 27.) he
resumeth, If ye be Christ's, implying the one of these does follow upon the
other. 2. The Christian Church, or all who are given over unto Christ in
Baptism, are Abraham's seed, and heirs of the promised inheritance, to wit,
with regard had to that distinction of seed, ver. 8. doct. 8. And hence it
follows, that the charter of this inheritance, or the Covenant betwixt God
and His People, has been always for substance one and the same, and that the
Church of the Old and New Testament are both one, even the self-same seed of
Abraham, differing in nothing further than a man of perfect age, does differ
from himself being a child, and that there is but one Faith, one Salvation,
and one way of obtaining the same, under both Testaments: for, says he, If ye
be Christ's, ye are Abraham's seed, speaking to the Christian Church. 3. Though
all those forementioned, be the same under both Testaments, yet there are some
accidental differences, whereof one lies in the different ways of
incorporating persons unto that blessed society to whom the heavenly
inheritance does appertain, which then was by being circumcized, in evidence of
their subjecting themselves wholly to that burdensome administration, under
which the Church then was; But now it is sufficient to be baptized, and by so
doing to subject our selves unto Christ: for, (in opposition to the false
Apostles, who still maintained that none could be Abraham's seed, except they
were circumcised, and would subject themselves to the Law of Moses) the Apostle
affirms, If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, etc.

CHAP. IV.
IN the first part of this Chapter, the Apostle does further clear the
Church's freedom from that ancient Policy of the Jewish Church by the
similitude of a Pupil, and his Tutors; which similitude is propounded, ver. 1,
2. And applied, first, to the Churches bondage under the Old Testament, ver. 3.
and secondly, to her freedom from that bondage under the New, ver. 4, 5.
whereof he gives an evidence, to wit, God's bestowing upon them the Spirit of
Adoption, ver. 6. and so concludes the dispute, ver. 7.

In the second part, he labors upon their affections, first, by a sharp
reproof for their defection, which he aggregeth, ver. 8, 9. and gives some
instances of it, ver. 10. and hinteth at the great hazard they were in because
of it, ver. 11. Secondly, by a most affectionate insinuation, wherein he
exhorts them to be affectionate toward him, and shows how dearly he
affected them, ver. 12. enforcing the former, and evidencing the latter, from
his thankful acknowledgement how affectionate they were once to him for the
Truths sake, to ver. 17. And obviateth an objection taken from that intense
affection which the false Apostles seemed to carry unto them, by showing
wherein their zeal and affection was defective, ver. 17. and the nature of true
zeal, ver. 18. Giving evidences, that this true zeal and affection was in
himself toward them, ver. 19, 20.

In the third part, he confirms and illustrateth the whole preceding dispute
by the history of Abraham's family. And first, he prefaceth, desiring them to
make the Old Testament judge in this controversy, ver. 21. Secondly, he
propounds the typical history, ver. 22, 23. Thirdly, he expounds the
mystery of the two Covenants prefigured by the history, ver. 24. 25, 26.
Fourthly, he confirms the truth of this mystery from Scripture, ver. 27.
Fifthly, he makes application of the whole purpose, first, for information of
the way to attain the heavenly inheritance, ver. 28. Secondly, for consolation
against present persecutions, to the end.

Verse. 1. NOw I say, that the ^eir as long as he is a child, differs nothing
from a servan^, though he be lord of all. 2. But is under tutors and governors,
until the time appointed of the father.
THe Apostle (being yet further to clear the Churches freedom from that legal
external policy of the ancient Church, whereof he spoke so much, chap. 3. ver.
19, etc.) does use another similitude taken from a pupil, and his tutors and
curators. And, first, having made a transition usual to him, when he is more
fully to explicate any former purpose, (See chap. 5. 16. 1 Cor. 15. 50.) he
sets down the similitude in these verses to this purpose, That a child
though he be heir and owner of all his fathers inheritance in hope, and as to
right, yet so long as he is a minor, and under age, he differs nothing from a
servant in point of subjection, and as to free government and enjoyment of his
rights and goods, ver. 1. and this because he himself is ruled, and his estate
managed by tutors and curators; the continuance of which subjection, the
Apostle shows is ordinarily limited unto the time prescribed by the father,
longer than which the heir is not to remain in that state of subjection to his
tutors, ver. 2. There are indeed other limits of childrens minority prefixed by
the Law, besides the Will of the father; but he mentions this, because it
only does quadrate to the present purpose, for which the similitude is made use
of.

From this usual custom among men, approved of here by the Spirit of God, being
considered in it self, and without respect had to that spiritual purpose unto
which it is applied afterward. Learn, 1. So licentious is youth, where there
is no restraint, and so foolish, as being destitute of experience, and more
ruled by the inundation of impetuous passions than force of reason, That it is
much conducing (both for a man's self, and for the public good of the society
among whom he lives) he be first subjected unto others, and made to obey as a
servant, (whereby in progress of time he may attain some wisdom and
experience) before he have absolute power to dispose of his own estate, and
obtain dominion over others; otherwise it could not be so generally agreed unto
by all parents, and in all nations: that the heir as long as he is a child
should differ nothing from a servant, which the Apostle speaks of as an
approven custom, and excepted against by none. 2. It is the duty of parents, as
to provide a competent portion for their children whereupon they may live, when
they themselves are dead and gone, so to do what in them lies to secure their
portion for them; lest it be delapidated by their childrens folly, or any other
way rendered useless unto them: for unto this end are tutors and curators
provided by the father unto the child; But he is under tutors and governors.
3. Though parents are not to give unto their children just cause of irritation,
Col. 3. 21. yet they ought not to please them to their hurt, but in some things
must cross their humor, to wit, especially when their so doing tends
evidently to their childrens good: for, though the heir, even when he is a
child, would affect liberty, and absolute dominion over his own estate; yet
the wise parent must keep him under subjection to tutors and governors. 4. It
is no small mercy unto children when God does prolong the life of parents
until they themselves attain to so much age and experience, as may enable them
to manage their own affairs; seeing otherwise their person and estate must come
under the tuition, government, and reverence of others, who possibly may prove
their unfriends: for, they must even be under tutors and governors. 5. Parents
would labor to carry themselves with so much equity, wisdom and straightness
in providing a worldly portion for their children to live upon, as they do not
disoblige those with whom they have commerce; that so they may with some
measure of confidence commit the tuition of their children and means to the
care and oversight of others, even those whom they shall be necessitated to
appoint for tutors and governors. 6. It is the wisdom of parents to place no
such trust of their children and means upon any, though otherwise never so much
trust-worthy, but that they be limited in, and at a set time be obliged to give
an account of their trust. Power and trust is a thing so dangerous, that if it
be at the entrusted partie's option, there are but few who willingly do part
with it: Therefore, as for one reason, it is marked here, as a part of the
father's providence to prescribe a time, longer than which his child is not to
be under tutors and governors; Until the time appointed by the father, says he.

Verse. 3. Even so we, when we were children, were in bondage under the elements
of the world.
HEre he applies the similitude, showing the Church when she was in her
infant-state under the Old Testament, was kept in bondage and subjection under
that rigid and strict administration or outward policy which then was, and
served for an A B C, or, a rough Rudiment, whereby the ancient Church was
instructed, for the most part, by resemblances taken from earthly and wordly
things. The first Doctrine which arises from his use-making of an earthly
similitude to clear a spiritual Truth, is already marked, chap. 3. ver. 15.
doct. 2. Learn, 2. The Church of God under the Old Testament, was in a state of
nonage, and as an infant or child, first, for quantity, as being contained in
narrow bounds, once of one family, Genesis 4. 3, 4. and at most, but of one
nation, Psalm. 147. 19, 20. Secondly, in understanding; for although some
persons were then endued with more excellent gifts of wisdom and knowledge,
than any now, such as Abraham, David, etc. And though many, even under the New
Testament, are but in understanding children and babes, Heb. 5. 12. yet
(considering the more clear revelation of the Gospel, which now is, 2 Cor. 3.
18.) we not only have an opportunity of attaining to much more knowledge now,
than they had then, Matt. 13. 7. but also the generality of Christians are much
more knowing of Gospel-mysteries than the body of the Jewish Church was, Mat.
11. 11. Yea, and those of them who excelled most in knowledge, did see but afar
off, Deuteronomy. 18. 18. and through a cloud of many dark Ceremonies, Heb. 9. 9.
which now are removed: for, speaking of the Jewish Church before Christ came,
of which himself was one, he says, When we were children. Doct. 3. The ancient
Church was also in a state of bondage: not as if the Godly among them had not
been heirs by Faith of the heavenly Inheritance, and partakers of the
privilege of Adoption, (for so the similitude should not hold, which compares
the Church then to a child who is heir, and by right, lord of all things) but,
first, they were tied to a number of ceremonial observances, or worldly rites
and figures, which were a kind of bondage and slavery to the outward man, Act.
15. -10. Secondly, their inward man was under some degree of bondage also, in
so far as by the rigid administration which then was, duties were with much
strictness pressed, and covenanted influence for through-bearing in duty, and
grace for pardoning their neglect of duty but sparingly revealed, Joh. 1. 17.
We, when we were children, were in bondage, says he. Doct. 4. The multiplying
of bodily significant rites in the matter of Worship, is a bringing of the
Church unto a kind of bondage, and a reducing of her to a state of infancy and
minority: for, therein did consist a great part of that bondage wherein the
ancient Church was, even that they were under the elements of the world.

Verse. 4. But when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth His Son
made of a woman, made under the Law, 5. To redeem them that were under the Law,
that we might receive the adoption of sons.
HE applies the similitude yet further unto the Churches freedom from the
forementioned bondage, which he shows was brought about at the time resolved
upon by God, as most fit for that business; as which time, and in order to the
purchase of this freedom, God sent His own Son, the second Person in the
blessed Trinity, to the world, who was in a miraculous way incarnate, as being
conceived in the womb of a virgin (Isa. 7. 14.) without the company of any man,
Mat. 1. -18-. and being so incarnate, did subject Himself both to the precepts
(Mat. 3. 15.) and curse of the Law, Philip. 2. 8. This is, ver. 4. Whereby was
brought about, first, the delivery and redemption of those who were under the
Law, to wit, of all the Elect, from the curse of it (chap. 3. 13.) and of the
whole Church in general from that rigor and servitude under which she was as to
her outward state, Ephesians. 2. 15-. for, except this be taken-in under the
redemption spoken of, the Apostle's main scope (which is to put a difference
betwixt the Church under the Old Testament, and the Church under the New, as to
her bondage and freedom) should not be touched; especially seeing Believers
then, were redeemed from the curse of the Law, as well as Believers now, Habak.
2. -4. And, secondly, hereby was procured our receiving or enjoying the
Adoption of sons, whereby is not meaned only the benefit of Adoption in it
self, (for Believers under the Old Testament were the adopted children of God,
Jer. 31. -9.) but also, and mainly a clearer manifestation of that privilege,
and a more free use and fruition of it, whereby the Godly under the New
Testament do not only attain to a clearer insight in their Adoption, and the
dignity following upon it, Romans 8. 15. but also to the actual enjoyment of
their Inheritance in part, or of the graces of God's Spirit in a greater
measure than the ancient Church did, Jer. 31. 33, 34. which is held forth as a
consequence of our freedom from that rigorous discipline and government under
which they were.

From Verse. 4. Learn, 2. The time when God in His providence bestows a mercy
upon His Church, or particular Believers in the Church, (1 Pet. 5. -6.) will,
upon an exact survey of all circumstances, be found the full time, in so far as
it is in the most considerable respects the fittest time for the bestowing of
it, which holds also with the time wherein He afflicts His People, 1 Pet.
1. 6. He does all things well, and in season, Psalm. 94. 18. for, in place of
saying Christ was sent unto the world at the time appointed of the Father,
relative to that part of the similitude, which is, ver. -2. he says, When the
fullness of time was come, God sent forth His Son. 2. We are not to wonder, or
curiously enquire, why Jesus Christ did come no sooner to the world, or why the
Churches delivery from her external bondage was so long delayed, seeing all
these things were so ordered of God, and did come to pass in the full and fit
time; When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth His Son. 3. Jesus
Christ had a being and subsistence before His incarnation, He was even from all
eternity truly God, Prove. 8. 23. for, He is first sent forth before He was made
of a woman. 4. The Father cannot but accept the obedience of Christ in name of
those for whom it is offered, and who do lay hold upon it by Faith; seeing
Christ did not come of Himself, but was sent by the Father to pay, in obedience
to the Law, that He might redeem those that were under the Law: for, God sent
His Son, to wit, not by dispatching Him from one place to another (for the Son
being God, is present in all places, and can be absent from none) but by making
Him appear invested with the humane nature, which before He was not. 5. Jesus
Christ is Gods Son in a way proper to Himself alone as being His only Son by
nature, Joh. 1. 14. the eternally begotten Son of the Father, Psalm. 2. 7. and
the express Image of the Father's Glory, Heb. 1. 3. for, it is of Him he
speaks, while he says, God sent His Son. 6. It behoved our Mediator to be
true man, God's unchangable justice so requiring, that the same nature which
sinned should also suffer for sin: for, He was made of a woman. 7. Christ's
humane nature was miraculously formed by the holy Ghost in the womb of a virgin
without the company of any man; whence it follows, that He was free from the
guilt of Adam's first sin, and consequently of original sin, which descends
from Adam unto all his posterity, who come of him by ordinary generation, Genesis
5. 3. but Christ did not so come of him; for, He was made of a woman, and not
begotten by a man, Mat. 1. 18. 8. The body of Christ was not created in Heaven,
and conveyed to the womb of the virgin, and from her to the world without
taking of its substance from her, as water is conveyed through a conduit, but
it was framed in the virgin and of her substance: for, He was made of a woman.
9. Though there be two natures in Christ, as being both God and man, yet He is
but one person; for, the same Son who was sent by the Father is made of a
woman. 10. By virtue of this personal union of the two natures in Christ, those
things which are only verified in the one nature, are attributed unto, and
spoken of the whole Person; for, to be made of a woman (which agrees only to
the humane nature) is ascribed to the Person of the Son; God sent forth His
Son, made of a woman. 11. Jesus Christ being thus incarnate, was in respect of
His humane nature, while in the state of humiliation, truly subjected to the
Law, and accordingly conformed Himself unto it, whatsoever Law it was whether
general or moral, which all men are obliged unto, Luke 2. 5^. or more special,
positive, and ceremonial, which the Jews and children of Abraham were bound to
obey, Mat. 3. 15. or yet more particular of a Redeemer and Savior, which He
Himself only was obliged unto, even to die for us, Psalm. 40. 6, 7, 8. for,
says the Apostle, He was made under the Law. 12. Though Christ, as He was a
creature, whose will cannot be the supreme Law, was thus bound to subject
Himself to the Law; yet it does not follow hence, that therefore He did not
fulfill the Law for us, but for Himself only, because this obligation did flow
from His taking-on the humane nature, which He did freely and for our good:
for, upon His being made of a woman, He was also made under the Law, otherwise
He was free from the Law.

From Verse. 5. besides what is marked upon chap. 3. ver. 13. Learn, 1. Not only
Christ's death and sufferings, which commonly go under the name of His passive
obedience, but also His active obedience to the Law, in all those things, and
those things only wherein we were obliged, is imputed unto us as our
righteousness and price, whereby we are redeemed from the Law's curse: for, He
was made under the Law, that He might redeem them that were under the Law. So
that the price of our Redemption and His subjection to the Law, are of equal
extent. 2. As all men by nature are under the curse (Ephesians. 2. 3.) and irritating
power of the Law (Romans 7. 5.) and the Jewish Church were under that ancient
rigid dispensation of the Law, binding them chiefly to the observation of many
costly and burdensome ceremonies; (See ver. 3.) so no less was required in
order to a Redemption, whether from the one or the other, than the incarnation
of the Son of God, and His obedience (both by doing and suffering) to the whole
Law of God: only with this difference, the Elect were redeemed under the Old
Testament from the curse and irritating power of the Law, by virtue of Christ's
obedience, while it was yet to be actually performed: for, though it be
otherwise in natural causes, yet a moral cause, not present in being, but only
supposed as future, may have its effect: but the Redemption of the Jewish
Church from that rigid dispensation of the Law, was not effectuate before
Christ was actually incarnate, and did give real obedience to the Law, God
having so ordered that those legal shadows should not evanish until Christ the
substance of them did come: for, it is with relation to this, as a main part of
his present scope that the Apostle says, God sent forth His Son, to redeem
them that were under the Law. 3. The outward administration of the Covenant of
Grace under the Old Testament, had some infl^ence upon the ancient Church, even
as to the inward state of particular Believers, in so far that though the Godly
then did partake of the same spiritual blessings whereof we partake now; yea,
and some particular persons were endued with greater gifts of the Spirit than
many now are; Yet greater plenty and abundance of Grace is bestowed upon the
Church in the time of the Gospel, if we respect the body of the Church and
Faithful in general, than was bestowed before Christ came: for, the Apostle
putting a difference betwixt those two times, speaks of receiving the
adoption of sons, as a thing proper to the days of the Gospel; not as if the
Spirit of Adoption had been altogether withholden from the ancient Church, but
because it was then tempered with the spirit of servitude, the way to Heaven
not as yet clearly manifested, Heb. 9. 8. and is now bestowed in a more ample,
clear and plentiful measure; for, it is not unusual in Scripture that this
should be affirmed of one, and as it were tacitly denied of another, which is
more illustrious in one than in another, though it be common to both, Mat. 15.
24. according to which rule the following sixth verse must be expounded.

Verse. 6. And because ye are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of His Son
into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.
HE gives an evidence of their having received the adoption of sons in a more
clear and plentiful measure under the New Testament, to wit, God's sending
forth the holy Spirit, the third Person in the blessed Trinity, and making Him
manifest His presence by His special and supernatural gifts in the hearts of
Believers, whereby they were enabled like little children to own and incall
upon God as their Father; and this without any distinction of Jew or Gentile,
which seems to be hinted at by the two epithets given to God, both signifying
the same thing, the one Abba, a Syriack word, which language was then commonly
spoken among the Jews, the other a Greek word, rendered Father, which was most
commonly used among the Gentiles: Now this of God's sending forth His Spirit
under the New Testament, is not to be so understood, as if He had not been sent
forth into the hearts of Believers under the Old Testament, but that He is now
poured-out in a greater measure, Joel 2. 28. Doct. 1. There are three Persons
in the blessed Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Spirit, all spoken of
here; God has sent forth the Spirit of His Son. 2. The Spirit here spoken of,
is not a naked quality, or operation and work only, but a person subsisting of
Himself, as appears from this, that He is said to be sent forth, which
agrees only to persons; God has sent forth the Spirit of His Son. 3. He is a
divine Person, and no mere creature; for He dwells in the hearts of all
Believers, which can be said of no person but God; God has sent forth the
Spirit of His Son into your hearts. 4. The holy Spirit proceeds both from the
Father and the Son; for, He is sent by the Father, and is the Spirit of His
Son; and is so called here, because the Apostle is to evidence their sonship by
the operation of this Spirit; which sonship of theirs, is grounded upon Christ,
Romans 8. 17. Doct. 5. Whoever have this high dignity of Adoption conferred upon
them, must also have the Spirit of God given to reside, not in their brain
only, to fill them with the gifts of knowledge, as He may be in Hypocrites,
Mat. 7. 22. but in their hearts also, by making a gracious change there, Ephesians.
4. 23. to be diffused from thence, as from the first principle of life, (Prove.
4. 23.) through all the faculties of the soul, and members of the body, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. for, says he, Because ye are sons, He has sent forth the Spirit
of His Son into your hearts. 6. According as Beleivers do attain to a larger
insight in this excellent benefit of Adoption, and a greater measure of the
fruits of it, there will be a proportionable measure of the Spirit's
in-dwelling and manifesting of Himself in His gracious operations, especially
in His assisting and furnishing for the duty of Prayer: for, he proves they
had received a clear insight in this privilege of Adoption, and the more free
use and fruition of it, because the Spirit was more plentifully bestowed to
dwell in their hearts; And because ye are sons, says he, God has sent forth,
etc. 7. Though the exercise of Faith, Love, Hope and other graces in the duty
of Prayer, and at other occasions, does flow from the renewed, soul, as the
proper inward and vital cause of those actions, so that properly we, and not
the Spirit of God, are said to believe, repent, pray, etc. Romans 10. 10. Yet,
because the Spirit does not only create, and preserve those gracious habits in
the soul, (Ezekiel. 36. 26.) but also exciteth the soul to act, and assisteth it
in acting according to them. Philip. 2. 13. without which actuating, exciting
and assisting grace, habitual grace in us could do nothing, Joh. 15. - 5.
Therefore is it, that the exercise of those graces is ascribed to the Spirit of
God, as the external efficient cause thereof; for which reason, our
affectionate and believing Prayers are ascribed here unto Him; God has sent
forth the Spirit of His Son, crying, Abba. 8. There is an holy vehemence and
fervor required in Prayer, opposite to careless formality, and deadness: for,
praying is here called crying, which is an usual evidence of fervency and
earnestness; and the doubling of the word Father, makes for the same purpose;
Crying, Abba, Father, or, Father, Father. 9. This holy vehemence and fervor
consists not so much in the lifting up of the external voice, as in the
inward bensal and serious frame of the spirit; it is a cry, not of the mouth,
but of the heart; Into your hearts, crying. 10. Besides this fervency and
earnestness requisite in Prayer, there would be also a confident familiar
owning of God, joined with reverence to Him as a Father: for, the Spirit makes
them to call upon Him by the name of Abba, Father.

Verse. 7. Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son; and if a son, then
an heir of God through Christ.
HEre he concludes from what is said, first, That under the New Testament we
are no more servants, as being redeemed from that legal yoke of bondage, under
which the ancient Church was; And, secondly, That we are sons, and by
consequence heirs of God, which is verified mainly in real Believers under the
New Testament, in so far as they are sons come to age, and heirs past tutory,
actually partaking of their father's inheritance in a larger measure than
Believers did under the Old Testament, as was explained, ver. 5. All which
privileges are bestowed upon us through Christ, and through virtue of His
coming unto the flesh. Doct. 1. It is a safe way of reasoning upon the
observation of the saving effects of God's Spirit in our selves, to conclude
that we are in a state of grace, even the adopted Children of God: for, the
Spirit of God by the Apostle does so reason in this place, Because He has sent
forth His Spirit into your hearts: wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a
son. 2. The rare privileges which are bestowed upon Believers chiefly under
the New Testament, as they do exceed in some degrees those, which the
generality of Believers enjoyed under the Old; so they are many, and all of
them so linked together, as in one golden chain, that where one of them is, the
rest are also: and it is our duty, having attained to know our enjoying of any
one of them, thence to gather that we have all the rest: for, the Apostle
reckons a number of such privileges, which, as to the degree wherein they
are bestowed, are proper to the days of the Gospel, and does always from the
former infer the latter; Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son; and
if a son, then an heir of God. 3. Though the natural Son of God be only one,
even Jesus Christ, the only begotten of the Father, Joh. 1. 14. yet every man
who has the Spirit of God dwelling in his heart, is His son by grace and
adoption, even they who by nature are children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. for, from
God's sending forth His Spirit into their hearts, he concludes, Wherefore thou
art a son. 4. Our right to the heavenly inheritance, as also the possession of
it, whether that which is begun here in the Kingdom of Grace, or, which shall
be completed hereafter in the Kingdom of Glory, does follow upon our sonship
and adoption; so that God, of rebels does first make up sons, and then none can
challenge Him of injustice for bestowing upon us the inheritance of children;
And if a son, then an heir of God, says he. 5. As none since the fall ever
was, or shall be lifted up to that high dignity of being sons and daughters to
the Lord Almighty, or could lay any just claim to Heaven and Glory as his
inheritance, but by virtue of Christ's obedience and death, whereby all those
high and precious privileges, being formerly forfeited and lost, were again
recovered: So, the actual exhibition of Christ in the flesh, and the real
payment of the price by Christ, did bring with it (God having so appointed) a
larger measure and higher degree of those privileges to be bestowed upon
Believers after that time, than was ordinarily enjoyed by Believers formerly:
for, he is speaking here mainly of that higher degree of freedom, and of that
more evident and clear fight of, and right to the inheritance, together with
the fuller measure of its possession in the Graces of God's Spirit, which is
proper to the days of the Gospel; and shows all this comes through Christ,
to wit, His actual incarnation, obedience and death.

Verse. 8. Howbeit, then when ye knew not God, ye did service unto them which by
nature are no gods. 9. But now after that ye have known God, or rather are
known of God, how turn ye again to the weak and beggarly elements, whereunto ye
desire again to be in bondage?
THe Apostle (having now sufficiently confirmed by Scripture and Reason, the
Church's freedom from that ancient legal dispensation, and more especially
from the Ceremonial Law) does now, in the second part of the chapter, labor
upon their affections, to work them up toward the embracing of this Truth,
both by sharp reproofs, and most affectionate insinuations.

And first, that he may fasten a reproof upon them for their begun defection
the more convincingly, he shows, when that legal dispensation was in force,
they, to wit, the Galatians who were of the Gentiles, were ignorant of the true
God, and worshipped for gods those things which by nature and really were no
gods, but in opinion only; and consequently they were not born or brought up
under the pedagogy of the Law, as the Jews were, who therefore might pretend
some excuse for their unwillingnesse to depart from it, which those Galatians
could not, ver. 8. And secondly, that he may make their defection yet more
inexcusable, and convince them of great ingratitude to God in it, he mentions
the happy condition which they were brought unto before they made this
defection, to wit, they had attained to the knowledge of God in Christ, and
this not by any industry of their own, Romans 9. 16-. or for any merit or worth
in them, Deuteronomy. 7. 7. but were herein prevented by mercy in God, who had first
known them, having from all eternity elected (Ephesians. 1. 4.) and in time
effectually called them to the knowledge of Himself, Gal. 1. 15, 16-. Thirdly,
from those grounds he does with a kind of admiration at their ingratitude and
folly, fall upon them with a sad reproof for their turning again, and desiring
to be in bondage, and under subjection to the observation of those Mosaical
Elements, or Ceremonies, (See ver. 3.) which he calls weak, as having never
had any power in themselves to produce any spiritual effect, Heb. 9. 9. and now
under the Gospel have not so much as any figurative or sacramental use, which
formerly they had, as being shadows of Christ to come, Col. 2. 17. he calls
them also beggarly and poor, as not being able to afford any solid consolation
unto those who observed them: now the Apostle calls their defection a turning
again, and desiring to be again in bondage; not as if they had been ever under
that yoke formerly (for, this were contrary to ver. 8.) but it was a going
backward from that measure, toward which they had already advanced; and the
word again, relates to their act of turning, and desire of bondage, for they
had been under bondage formerly, to wit, unto Idolatry, from which they were
converted: But it does not relate to the weak and beggarly elements under which
they never had been, ver. 9.

From Verse. 8. Learn, 1. However Nature's light does serve to make us know
there is a God, and that He ought to be served, Romans 1. 19. yet all the
knowledge of God thereby attained, is nothing else but ignorance, in so far as
it leaves us destitute of the knowledge of God in Christ, without which there
is no salvation, Act. 4. 12. for, in this respect, these Galatians are said to
have been ignorant of God, while they lived in gentilism, although even then
they had some knowledge of God, as other Gentiles had, Romans 1. 19. Howbeit,
them when ye knew not God. 2. When people are destitute of that knowledge of
God which the written Word affords, or though they have it, yet will not
follow it, but give themselves up to be guided by those notions of a Deity with
which the light of Nature does furnish them, they cannot but miscarry far in
their apprehensions of God, and in the nature of that worship which is due unto
Him: for, the Galatians, following this guide, did worship plurality of false
gods, when they ought to have satisfied themselves with that one only true God,
Mat. 4. 10. Ye did service unto them which by nature are no gods. 3. Men are
naturally inclined to feign some representation of the Godhead unto themselves
by things which incur in the outward senses, whether Sun, Moon, Stars, Gold,
Silver, Wood, or Stone, that hereby at first they may be only kept in
remembrance of God, Exodus 32. 1. from which they do easily advance further to
give divine worship unto those images and representations, and so do service
unto those who by nature are no gods, as these Galatians did. 4. There is not
any kind of religious worship or service, under any name whatsoever, to be
given unto any creature, but to God only, as the giver of it would not commit
idolatry: for here, the doing of service unto those who by nature are no gods,
is condemned, and it is the same worship and service, as is clear to any who
understand the first language, which the Papists affirm may be given to Saints
and Angels. 5. It is not unprofitable, but very necessary sometimes for
converted Christians, to be put in remembrance of that sinful and miserable
case wherein they were before conversion; and this, as for other reasons, so,
that hereby they may be made to prize, highly esteem, and be thankful to that
free grace which showed pity on them: for, so the Apostle minds them of the
time when they knew not God. 6. The more of outward engagements unto a sin or
error by education, or former instruction, are lying upon a people or person,
they are in some sense the more excusable, and, at least, to be pitied, Act.
17. 30. and the fewer engagements there be of that kind, they are the more
inexcusable, and the less to be pitied: for, he aggregeth the sin of those
Galatians in hankering after the Jewish Ceremonies, from this, that then, or in
the time of the Churches minority (spoken of, ver. 3.) they were not under that
yoke, and so not engaged by education and former instruction to adhere unto
them, as the Jews were; Not knowing God, they served them which by nature were
no gods.

From Verse. 9. Learn, 1. Such are the riches of mercy in God, that He does
sometimes convert and save the most debauched and graceless sinners; and
therefore we are not to despair even of such: for, these Galatians, who did
once serve idols, were afterward made to know God, as the word signifies, and
were known of God. 2. People would labor to inform themselves in the knowledge
of God according to the written Word, as they would remove an otherwise
invincible bar standing in the way of their conversion; for, God can neither be
served, obeyed or trusted upon, except He be known: Hence the converted state
of these Galatians, is set forth by their knowing of God; But now after ye have
known God. 3. Then is God known aright and savingly, when He is known in Jesus
Christ, according as He is held forth in the Gospel, without whom, God is a
consuming fire, and in and through whom, He is well pleased, Mat. 3. 17. for
then, and not while then, are the Galatians said to know God, when they knew
Him in Christ revealed in the Gospel; But now after ye have known God. 4. So
tender ought we to be of God's honor in the work of man's conversion, as that
we maintain or affirm nothing which may, though but seemingly, ascribe the
praise of that work, either in whole, or in part, to man's own free will,
industry and pains, or withdraw any part of it from the alone efficiency of
Gods powerful and free grace, who works in us both to will and to do, Philip.
2. 13. Hence the Apostle, having spoken of their knowing God at their
conversion, which might seem to attribute somewhat to themselves, he adds by
way of correction, or rather are known of God, ascribing thus the whole work of
their conversion to God's preventing grace. 5. Sinners in an unconverted state,
are such of whom God takes no notice or knowledge, to wit, so, as to be
familiar with them, or to communicate special and saving blessings upon them;
as also the contrary is employed to be the privilege of true Converts, while he
says those Galatians, now converted, were known of God, which implies, that
before conversion they were not known of Him in the sense here meaned: Or
rather are known of God. 6. The more of mercy has been received by a people or
person, and particularly the greater measure of knowledge they have attained
unto, their after declining is capable of the more sad and weighty aggravations,
but chiefly the scandalous failings of the truly Regenerate, are extremely
heinous: for, he mentions their knowing God, and being known of God, hereby
to aggrege their apostasy and defection. 7. Holy zeal will teach a man to
speak with so much contempt, as reason will afford him warrant for, of any
thing which is so pleaded for, as to incroach upon the honor due to Christ, or
upon any of His Offices, whatever respect has been due, or yet is, to that
thing otherwise: for, though the Levitical Ceremonies were once to be
religiously observed, as a part of divine Worship leading to Christ, chap. 3.
24. and though they were even at this time, when the Apostle wrote, to be held,
and were held in some esteem, the free use of them being permitted to the weak
Jews until they should have an honorable burial, Romans 14. 3, etc. and this
justly, because they were once a divine Ordinance; yet when the false Apostles
did urge them upon the Gentiles, whether as a part of necessary commanded
Worship, thereby incroaching upon Christ's royal and legislative Power, and
tying the conscience where He left it free, or as a part of their
righteousness before God, incroaching thereby upon Christ's Priestly Office,
whose obedience and suffering is our only ransom and righteousness, Ephesians. 5. 2.
the Apostle is bold to give them the name of weak and beggarly rudiments. 8.
People may advance very far in the way of Christianity, and yet make a foul
retreat afterward in the course of defection and apostasy; which contributeth
nothing to that foul error of the total and final apostasy of the Saints, (See
chap. 1. ver. 6. doct. 6.) for, these Galatians, after they were known of God,
turned again to the weak and beggarly elements. 9. Though Apostates and authors
of defection pretend to never so much of reason to justify their apostasy and
declining, Romans 3. 31. and 6. 1. Yet, upon an exact survey, all their reasons
will appear to be mere pretenses, and their practice so absurd and irrational,
that men of composed spirits, and not demented as they are, cannot but wonder
at it: for, the Apostle falls upon their defection, not without admiration at
their absurdity and folly, How turn ye again to the weak and beggarly elements?
says he. 10. As defection and apostasy is a voluntary sin, and usually
flows from an itching desire after newfangled Errors, arising from a kind of
loathing at old Truths, 2 Timothy 4. 3. so, the more a man is carried with the
full bensal of affection and desire toward a sin, he is the more guilty before
God; for, their sin is aggreged from this, that they desired again to be in
bondage: the word rendered desired, signifies to will a thing earnestly and
with great desire.

Verse. 10. Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years:
HE gives an instance or example of those elements, unto which they had
turned, to wit, their observing such distinctions of times for sacred use, as
were observed by the Jewish Church, according to God's direction by Moses; and
he gives instance of a fourfold distinction of times, first, in Days, such
were their Sabbaths, and newmoons, Numb. 28. 9, 11. Secondly, Months, to wit,
the first (Numb. 28. 16.) and the seventh, Numb. 29. 1, etc. Thirdly, Times or
seasons, whereby are meaned their anniversary feasts, as the Passe-over, Exodus
12. 3, etc. Penticost, Lev. 23. 16. and feast of Tabernacles, Lev. 23. 24.
Fourthly, Years, to wit, every seventh year of release, Lev. 25. 2. and the
fiftieth year of Jubilee, Lev. 25. 8. Doct. 1. A Minister is not to insist upon
the reproof of sin in general, but would wisely condescend upon some particular
instances of those sins whereof the party reproved is guilty: for, hereby
reproofs are more convincing, piercing, and not so easily slighted, or
forgotten as otherwise: thus the Apostle gives an instance of the sin formerly
reproved, in their observing days, and months, and times, and years. 2.
Though the placing of some difference among days and times be lawful, as the
keeping one day of seven holy to the Lord above the rest, according to the
fourth Command, and the setting a part of some times and seasons for certain
civil uses, as sowing, reaping, keeping Fairs and Markets, Genesis 8. 22. as also
the occasional sanctifying of some days when God calls us to it, for the
work of humiliation, or thanksgiving, Mark 2. 20. Yet all superstitious
observation of days (See upon Col. 2. 16. Doct. 5.) is unlawful, as being
here condemned either expressly or by consequence; Ye observe days, and
months, etc.

Verse. 11. I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labor in vain.
HE concludes the former reproof, and makes it nervous and peircing, by
showing their defection was such, as if continued in, would render all the
great pains and labor, which he, as a Minister of Christ, did undergo amongst
them, to be for no purpose and in vain, as to any good which they should reap
by them; in a word, it would condemn them: and to make his reproof the more
taking, he does sweeten it somewhat, while he expresses their hazard, not as
one unconcerned, and caring nothing for it, but as a tender father forecasting,
and fearing what may hurt his dearest child. Doct. 1. The Office of the
Ministry, being faithfully gone about, will not be found a life of ease, but
has so much of toil, labor, fainting and weariness going alongs with it, as
any other employment whatsoever: for, Paul expresses the conscientious
discharging of his Ministry by a word, signifying not simply to labor, but to
labor painfully, with much travel, toil, strife, and earnestness, even until
fainting and weariness; Lest I have bestowed upon you labor, says he. 2. A
Minister ought not to satisfy himself in this, that he has done his duty,
without further care what fruit his labors have upon the people; but he must
also be no less anxious and solicitous about the success of, and the peoples
profitting by his pai^^, than he was concerning his own through-bearing in the
exercise of his Calling before the People; for, Paul did fear lest he had
bestowed his labor in vain upon them. 3. The most lively Preachers and
painful Ministers, will sometimes see so little fruit of their labors, and so
much iniquity among the People of their charge, as may furnish them with just
grounds to profess their fears, that few or none are saved by their Ministry:
for, even Paul does fear lest he had labored in vain among those Galatians. 4.
A faithful Minister is not to sit down discouraged, and quit his station upon
his observation of little or no fruit of his labors amongst the People, but
must hold on in his duty notwithstanding, as knowing his labor will not be
lost as to himself and from the Lord, Isa. 49. 4. for, Paul cease not to
warn, reprove and instruct these Galatians, although he feared lest he (...)
labored in vain among them. 5. It is hardly conceivable how men can live and
die, maintaining both in opinion and practice the doctrine of justification
either in whole, or in part, by their own works done in obedience to the Law,
and yet be saved: for, Paul conceives his la(...) should be in vain among
those Galatians, and consequently that they would be damned, if they did
continue in th^^ error chiefly, whereby they joined the works of the Ceremonial
Law with Christ in the point of justification.

Verse. 12. Brethren, I beseech you, be as I am; for I am a ye are, ye have not
injured me at all.
THe Apostle, knowing that these Galatians were alienated in their affections
from him, and fearing lest from his present severity and sharpness toward
them, they should apprehend that he was alienated from them also, Therefore he
sets himself to cure both the certain evil, and feared mistake; and this by
requesting them, as Brethren, that they would keep intimate affection toward
him as to another self, or as if he had been themselves; for, so much does the
expression (be as I) bear; and assures them that he was so affected toward
them, even the same which he formerly was, and that his present severity did
not flow from hatred, or a spirit of private revenge against them, seeing they
had never done any personal injury to him, to wit, but in so far as they had
wronged Christ and Truth; and therefore leaves it unto them to look upon him,
as a man who was pleading the cause of Christ, and not venting any private
grudge of his own. Doct. 1. Though the Servant of Jesus Christ must use
severity in the way of reproof and rebuke toward those who are gone astray;
yet, because people are apt to conceive, that his so doing does flow from an
imbittered spirit, and so to slight both him and his rebukes, (2 Chronicles. 18. 7.)
therefore he would in wisdom sometimes mix his severity with gentleness, and
his rebukes with exhortations and entreaties, as looking not so much upon what
their sin deserves, as what is most convenient for gaining them to repentance:
Hence the Apostle, having sufficiently rebuked them, comes now to request and
entreat; Brethren, I beseech you, says he. 2. As Error above any other sin,
does estrange the person erring from any who oppose them in their way, though
they were even their most faithful Pastors: So it is the duty of Ministers not
to be careless whether they have the affection of such or not, upon pretense
that no cause of disrespect is given by them; but they are to follow on upon
their erring people, and beg their favor and affection, if it cannot be
otherwise gained; and this mainly for the people's profit, and that hereby
they may be put in a capacity to do them good: for, Paul, apprehending that
these erring Galatians were estranged from him in their affections, he beggeth
their favor, while he says, I beseech you, be as I am. 3. The mutual love and
affection betwixt a People and a Pastor, ought to be so intimate, as if they
both were but one person, every one minding the good of another, as of
themselves, constructing aright of the actions of another, as they would have
others construct of their own, and rejoicing at the advantage, and grieving for
the hurt of one another, as if it were their own; and this because Satan does
by all means labor to drive in some wedge of jealousy to rent them asunder,
that so the Minister may be useless unto the People, and they a heart-break
unto him: this intimacy of affection, is here intreated-for by Paul from the
Galatians, Be as I am; and was made conscience of by him toward them, for I am
as ye are, says he. 4. It is no small part of that divine wisdom required in a
Minister, so to hate, and testify against the sins of People, as not to relent
in his respect to their persons; so to persecute their ill, as to remain
tenderly affectionated toward their good: for, thus did Paul; I am as ye are,
says he. 5. As People are apt to apprehend that the zeal of a Minister against
their sin, does flow from a spirit of revenge and spite against their persons
for some real or apprehended injury done unto him by them: So it is most base
and sinful for a Minister to intend and sharpen his zeal, even though against
sin, from any consideration of that kind; and a thing, the very groundless
suspicions whereof, he would labor to wipe off: for so does Paul here, by
showing they had done him no wrong; and therefore it could not be in reason
supposed, that in his sharp rebukes he was venting his spleen, or a spirit of
private revenge; Ye have not injured me at all, says he.

Verse. 13. Ye know how through infirmity of the flesh, I preached the Gospel
unto you at the first. 14. And my temptation which was in my flesh ye despised
not, nor rejected, but received me as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus.
15. Where is then the blessedness you spoke of? for I (...) you record, that
if it had been possible, ye would have plucked out your own eyes, and have
given them to me.
THe Apostle insisteth to clear that he was not changed in his affection
toward them; and withal, by showing how affectionate they were once to him
for the Truth's sake which he did preach, he points at their great
inconstancy, if so he may, even by setting forth their deserved praises, make
them ashamed of their present estrangedness unto him, and put on the same
affection toward him and to Truth, which once they had, according to his
proposed scope, v. 12. In order to which, he declares they were so far from
doing him any personal injury, for which they might apprehend him to bear them
at hatred, that upon the contrary, they had shown much love and reverence unto
him; which he clears, 1. by bringing to their remembrance, how that when he
came to preach the Gospel first unto them, while they were yet in paganism, he
did preach through much infirmity of the flesh; whereby is meaned, not only his
humble way of deportment in his whole Ministry without the show of humane
wisdom and authority, (as weakness or infirmity is taken, 1 Cor. 2. ver. 3.
compared with ver. 1.) but also and mainly those many sufferings he did undergo
from the enemies of the Gospel among them, which Paul calls elsewhere his
infirmities, 2 Cor. 12. 10. and they are called of the flesh, because his
flesh, or outward man, was most afflicted by them, the spirit, or inward man,
being underpropped by God, 2 Cor. 4. 16. This is contained, ver. 13. Which
sufferings are described from the end which God proposed to Himself in them,
which was Paul's tentation, or trial, to wit, of his faith, patience,
constancy, and other graces. 2. By acknowledging with thankfulness their
respective carriage toward him all that time; particularly, they did not
despise his sufferings, as taking no notice of them, neither did they reject
him, or his Ministry, because of his sufferings; but did receive him, and the
Truth delivered by him, though an afflicted persecuted man, with as much
reverence and obedience, as if it had been preached by an Angel, or by Christ
Himself in His own Person: this is all he means by their receiving him as
Christ Jesus; for, if they had given him the honor due unto Christ in other
respects, he would not have made mention of it without detestation, (See Act.
14. 14.) This is ver. 14. And 3. having, as it were in a parenthesis, mentioned
how happy a people they then were, even by their own grant, and this with a
kind of exclamation (for the words do read, How great, or, of what sort was the
blessedness? etc.) he clears their respect to him yet further, by testifying
it was not counterfeit and in words only, but real, and so fervent, that they
were ready to have bestowed any thing upon him which possibly they could, and
might tend to his advantage and encouragement in the work of the Gospel, even
their very eyes not being excepted, if so it had been possible, that they being
plucked out, could have been useful unto him. This is contained, ver. 15.

From Verse. 13. Learn, 1. It seems good unto God to commit the heavenly
treasure of the Gospel unto earthen vessels, and to exercise those whom He
imployeth to preach the Gospel, what, with the sense of their own infirmities
from within, what, with heavy trouble from without; that so, while nothing
appears in them to outward appearance, but what is subject to reproach and
contempt, we may ascribe the glory of any good which is done by them, not to
men, but to God, 2 Cor. 4. 7. for, this is the ordinary lot of other Preachers,
which Paul shows here was his, even that through infirmity of the flesh he
preached unto them. 2. When the Gospel comes first into a place, then
especially does Satan stir up all his malice, and all that interest which he
has in wicked men, for creating trouble unto those whom God imployeth in the
preaching of it; if so he may give the Gospel a dash, at its very first entry:
thus Paul preached the Gospel at first through infirmity of the flesh; whereby
is meaned mainly, if not only, those hard sufferings which he did meet with, as
appears from the name of tentation, or trial, which he gives to this
infirmity, ver. 14. Doct. 3. It is the duty of called Ministers to go on with
courage in the Work of the Lord, notwithstanding of any discouragement of that
kind, receiving manfully the first onset chiefly of Satan's fury, as knowing
their ceding to him will make him more cruel, and their resisting of him will
make him flee from them, Iam. 4. ^7. for, Paul, even through infirmity of the
flesh, preached to them at first. 4. Whoever do thus set their face against the
fury of persecuters, it shall be no grief of heart, but matter of joy unto them
afterward, to call to mind what hardships they have been made to undergo of
that sort, as finding the Truth preached by them to have been thereby confirmed,
and their own fidelity in their Calling, and to the good of souls, manifested,
and the power of God made known, by making His Truth spread the further, the
more it was opposed: for, Paul calls to mind his sufferings, when he preached
the Gospel, as not being ashamed of them, because thereby all the advantages
presently named were attained; Ye know how through infirmity of the flesh, I
preached the Gospel.

From Verse. 14. Learn, 1. God's design in measuring out an hard lot and great
opposition to those who are engaged in the work of the Ministry, is not to
discourage, but to try them, by making His grace in them shine the more
clearly, the more they are put to exercise it under their hardships and
straits: for, Paul calls his infirmity or sufferings, his tentation or trial
(See Iam. 1. 2. Luke 8. -13. and 22. 28.) and my tentation which was in my
flesh. 2. As it is too ordinary for those who are at ease, to contemn, neglect,
and be careless of the heavy afflictions and sufferings of others, chiefly of
the Ministers of Jesus Christ, as if they were wholly unconcerned in what they
suffer: So it speaks much to the commendation of a People, when they lay to
heart, and take notice of the sufferings of their faithful Ministers, as if
they were their own, and do sympathize with them under all their hardships:
for, he commends the Galatians from this, that they despised not his
tentation, or trial and affliction; the word signifies, they did not set it at
naught, as not worthy to be taken notice of, and so they have been duly
affected with it. 3. So little love have men naturally to the Gospel, that they
are ready to take occasion from any thing, to make them cast at it: even the
necessary trials and afflictions, with which God sees fit to exercise the
Preachers of the Gospel, are sufficient ground for many to reject both the
persons and doctrine of Ministers: for, Paul, commending these Galatians for
their not rejecting of him, because of his infirmities, shows the contrary
sin to be very ordinary; Nor rejected, but received me, says he. 4. It is high
matter of commendation unto a people, when the outwardly base and contemptible
condition of Ministers does not diminish any thing of that due respect which
they owe to the Message which they carry: for, these Galatians are commended
from this, that notwithstanding of his tentation, they rejected not, but
received him as an Angel of God. 5. The faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ,
are to be held in high estimation for their works sake; so that as (all due
respect being given unto their persons, 1 Timothy 5. 17.) the doctrine of Truth
preached by them may be received with as much faith and reverence, as if an
Angel from Heaven, or Christ Himself were the Preacher of it; for, they are
Ambassadors in Christ's place, 2 Cor. 5. 20. and the Word of God is always
truth and worthy to be received, whoever do preach it, neither does it borrow
any intrinsic authority from the person of the Preacher: Hence the Galatians
are commended, that in this respect they received Paul as an Angel of God, even
as Christ Jesus. See Luke 10. 16.

From Verse. 15. Learn, 1. The only thing which makes a people happy, is to
have the doctrine of the Gospel (which is the mean of our reconciliation with
God in Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 18.) preached among them, and to receive this
Doctrine, and the faithful Preachers of it, with all due reverence, love and
subjection. The enjoying of honor, riches, and abundance of outward peace, is
no blessedness, being compared with this, Psalm. 4. 6, 7. for, the Apostle
speaks of these Galatians while they were in that case, What, or, how great
was then your blessedness? 2. Injuries received afterward will not obliterate
the inward sense, or mar the outward acknowledgment of favors formerly
received in a thankful mind: for, though the Galatians had done no private
injury to Paul, ver. -- 12. yet, in their defection from Truth, they had
wronged him for the Truth's sake, and notwithstanding he proclaims those
evidences of their love and respect, which he had received formerly both in the
former verse, and more expressly here, while he says, I bear you record, ye
would have plucked out your eyes, etc. 3. The love and reverence which People
owe to Ministers, ought not to be verbal, and in profession only, but real
also, even such as may evidence it self in the hearty bestowing of any thing
which may be for their encouragement, or for advancing the Work of God in their
hands: for, Paul proves these Galatians had received him as they ought, from
their readiness to impart unto him all things necessary and possible for his
encouragement; Ye received me, says he, for I bear you record, ye would have
plucked out your eyes. 4. Though, as is usually said, Charity begins at home,
and we be commanded to love our neighbor only as our self, Mat. 22. 39. Yet
there is a certain case, in which we must consider our neighbor, not only as a
neighbor, but as a special instrument of God, and thus we are in some respects
to love and prefer him unto our selves; and especially when he is an instrument
employed by God for the defense and propagation of the Gospel, we ought to be
ready to forsake the dearest things we have in the world, though it were our
own hands, eyes, feet; yea, and our very life, if so it may promote the Work of
God in his hands: for, in this case, it is not our neighbor, but Christ and
the Gospel which we prefer unto our selves, according to Mat. 10. 37. Hence,
because Paul was such an instrument, the Galatians are commended for their
readiness to pluck out their own eyes, and to give them to him. 5. The wisdom
and goodness of God has so provided, that the hands, eyes, and other members
of our body, being cut off, or plucked out, cannot be serviceable, or useful
unto the body of any other, hereby preventing the cruelty and tyranny of the
greater sort, who would make no scruple to mutilate the bodies of their
inferiors, if those mutilated members could serve for any use to themselves
afterward; for, says he, If it had been possible, they would have plucked out
their own eyes, importing, it was impossible, not simply to pluck them out, but
that their eyes, being plucked out, could serve for the same use to him for
which they did serve unto themselves.

Verse. 16. Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth?
THe Apostle concludes from what he has said of their former kindness to
him, that he was not now turned their enemy, nor estranged in his affection
from them, (for, the interrogative has the force of a vehement denial) and
that they had no reason to think so of him, this only excepted, that with much
candor and ingenuity he had declared the Truth unto them, in opposition to the
Errors of the false Apostles; the absurdity of which reason, is also imported
by the interrogative propounded to them. Doct. 1. For Christians to entertain
malice, or a spirit of private revenge one against another, as it is in any
case sinful; so when there has been no personal injury offered, it is
abominable; and hardly can it be conceived, that a man of conscience will be
guilty of it: for, Paul, having declared that they had done him no injury, but
shown much love and reverence unto him, denies that there was any just reason,
why they could so much as conceive that he was turned an enemy unto them; Am I
therefore become your enemy? 2. When men are once engaged in a sinful course,
and especially in the way of error, they are so dementate with it, that they
can put no difference betwixt it and themselves; they have common friends and
enemies; and whosoever is an enemy to it, is looked upon by them as an enemy to
themselves: for, Paul, by telling the Truth in opposition to their Error, is
looked upon as an enemy; Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you
the Truth? 3. However a faithful Minister will readily be mistaken for his
freedom and ingenuity in the reproof of sin, as if he were an unfriend and
enemy to the person reproved (when really he can give no such evident proof of
his love and respect, Psalm. 141. 5.) he is nevertheless to go on in his duty,
laboring to obviate all such mistakes and prejudices, as he best may: for,
Paul cease not to tell them the Truth, although he was looked upon as an
enemy for his so doing, only he labors to clear them of their mistake; Am I
therefore become your enemy, etc.

Verse. 17. They zealously affect you, but not well: yea, they would exclude
you, that you might affect them. 18. But it is good to be zealously affected
always in a good thing, and not only when I am present with you.
THe Apostle, in further prosecution of the former purpose, obviateth an
objection, arising from that fervent zeal, or that intense love joined with
serious endeavors to oppose, and a kind of indignation against any thing that
might prove hurtful unto them, which the false Apostles seemed to carry
toward them, beyond what Paul did; so that yet they had reason to doubt of his
affection to them. The Apostle answers, It was true indeed that the false
Apostles pretended great love to, and zeal for them, but their zeal was not of
the right stamp, as not having that which is truly good for its object, to wit,
the edification of those for whom they seemed zealous, but rather their
destruction, while all their zealous endeavors did tend to exclude them, and
rent their affection from Paul himself, and other faithful Pastors. And again,
as their zeal did deviate in the object, so also in the scope proposed, which
was, not to gain these Galatians to Christ, but popular applause to themselves;
and that Paul, and such as Paul was, being cried down, they alone might be
doted upon with a blind kind of zeal and affection, ver. 17. but lest, by
condemning their false zeal, he should have seemed to cry down all zeal,
therefore he discovers what true and praiseworthy zeal is, and this, as it
seems, with an eye to his own practice, whose zeal toward those Galatians,
first, was so ordered, that the thing whereunto his zeal for them did carry
him, was in it self good, and for their good and edification. Secondly, it was
constant, so that distance of place, which occasioned an alteration in them
toward him, had not made him to alter toward them, ver. 18. Doct. 1. See
chap. 1. ver. 7. doct. 5. concerning his suppressing the name of the false
Apostles, whereby he shows more of indignation toward them, nor he could
have done by giving them any designation, though never so base; They zealously
affect you. 2. Heretical Preachers and Seducers will be exceedingly fervent
and zealous for their erroneous opinions, and pretend much love and affection
to the People of God, while they are about to make them embrace their Errors:
for, says he, They, to wit, the false Apostles, zealously affect you. 3. Every
thing which goes under the name of zeal, or which truly has much of zeal and
fervency in it, whether for opinions, or persons, is not to be approven, there
being so much of sinful zeal which an hypocrite may have, and therefore is not
to be valued or regarded; So does the Apostle speak of their zeal, They
zealously affect you, but not well. 4. There is a renting zeal, which carries
the person wherein it is, with a violent fervor to rent the Church of Christ,
and to create prejudices in the minds of people against their faithful Pastors
while they extenuate their good, 2 Cor. 10. 10. and above measure aggrege their
sins and infirmities; all such zeal is sinful, and unworthy to be taken notice
of: for, the Apostle proves that their zeal was not good from this, that it
carried them to rent those Galatians from Paul, and the Body of the Christian
Church; They would exclude you. 5. There is a self-seeking zeal, when men,
pretending much love to God and to the good of souls, are really hunting after
the breath of applause to themselves, and that they alone may have greatest
weight in peoples affections, all such zeal is also sinful: for, he condemns
the zeal of the false Apostles, because their great design in what they did,
was to make those Galatians zealously to affect them. 6. As the great design of
false Teachers, and the upshot of all their most zealous and fervent
endeavors, is, to gain credit among the people to their opinions and persons;
So the usual method whereby they walk for attaining this end, is, first to
alienate the minds of people from their own Pastors, that so they themselves
may be looked upon as only worthy to have room in peoples affections; for, this
was the method of the false Apostles, They would exclude you, to wit, from us,
that you might affect them, says he. 7. The Ministers of Christ would so
condemn the counterfeit of saving graces, which may be found in hypocrites, as
that they do not in the least measure reflect upon the real graces of God's
Spirit, which are found only in true Believers: for, Paul having condemned
their false zeal, falls immediately upon the commendation of true zeal; But
it is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing. 8. It is not
enough that the thing which we do, be in it self good, except our affections be
somewhat warmed with love to the duty, and stirred up with an holy indignation
and revenge against any thing which would divert us from it: for, this is that
zeal which is here commended, It is good to be zealously affected, says he. 9.
It is required in godly and approven zeal, first, that it be orderly, neither
making nor upholding rents or schisms in the Church, and betwixt the People of
God and those who are over them in the Lord: for, the false ungodly zeal of the
false Apostles, is condemned from this, that they would have excluded those
Galatians from Paul. Secondly, that it be sincere, as aiming, not at base and
selfish, but approved ends, such as God's glory, 2 Cor. 11. 2. our own (Rev. 3.
19.) and our neighbors salvation, Col. 4. 13. for, their zeal is condemned
from this, that their great design in all they did, was to make the Galatians
affect them. Thirdly, that it be according to knowledge (Romans 10. 2.) as
choosing right and approven means for bringing about the proposed end, and not
putting forth it self indifferently upon every thing good or bad without
choice; for, says he, It is good to be zealously affected in a good thing.
Fourthly, that it be constant, not intending or remitting according as more of
prosperity or adversity does attend the making conscience of our duty (Joh. 6.
26.) but always one and the same, notwithstanding of any extrinsecal change of
that kind; for, says he, It is good to be zealously affected always. Doct.
10. A Minister would labor to have his conversation so christian, that, if
need require, he may give his own practice for an instance, or example of any
duty which he presses upon others, as Paul does here; for, having required
constancy in zeal, he hinteth at his own practice, who was zealous for their
good always; and not only when he was present with them.

Verse. 19. My little children, of whom I travel in birth again until Christ be
formed in you, 20. I desire to be present with you now, and to change my voice,
for I stand in doubt of you.
HE does yet further pursue the intended scope, which is to persuade them of
his affection to them, by making it yet more appear, that his zeal for them was
of the right stamp, and not like that of the false Apostles, In that, first, he
was at great trouble and pains for their good, such as are the pains of a woman
in travel. Secondly, his design in all his labor and pains, was, not so much
to make them affect him (which was all that his adversaries sought after) as,
to get the image of Christ (which being once wrought in them by the means of
his Ministry, was now marred by their defection) again repared in them, and its
lively lienaments drawn upon them: which expressions of his entire affection,
are much sweetened by the affectionate style of little children, given unto
them; So that his whole discourse does breath out no less affection than that
of a tender mother toward her dear child under some languishing disease or
consumption, ver. 19. And thirdly, that he desired vehemently to be with them
face to face, which was no great evidence of any hatred to them, especially
considering the end of his desire, to wit, that being more fully acquainted
with their case, he might accommodate himself in his speaking to them, whether
in meekness or severity, unto their temper; and that because, being now at a
distance, he could not understand their temper so exactly, and therefore was
somewhat perplexed, and in doubt how to deal with them. All which, do express
to the life, how tender, constant, sincere, and well-ordered his affection and
love was toward them, ver. 20.

From Verse. 19. Learn, 1. There ought to be such a conformity betwixt the heart
and the tongue, that the tender and warm expressions of kindness uttered by our
tongue, may be undoubted evidences of that real kindness and respect which is
seated in the heart; otherwise fair words are but foul flatteries, abominable
both to God and man, Prove. 27. 14. for, Paul does speak to these Galatians most
affectionatly, as a mother to her dear children, wherein he would have them to
read his very heart; My little children, says he. 2. The Ministerial Calling,
is an employment of no small labor and pains, partly, because of much labor
and diligence which is required to fit a man for that employment, and for every
part of it, 1 Timothy 4. 13, 15. Act. 20. 20. and partly, because of many outward
troubles and persecutions which do usually attend the faithful discharging of
it, Mat. 10. 17. but mainly, because the object of that employment is the
charge of people, with relation to their spiritual and eternal concernments,
(Heb. 13. -17-.) in which, as people are most apt to miscarry, so their
miscarrying therein is most dishonorable unto God and dangerous to themselves;
and therefore the Minister, whose charge does ly about those, and makes
conscience of his charge, cannot but be much exercised even to weariness, and
the wasting of his natural spirits with a tide of contrary affections, as hopes
and fears, joy and sorrow, desire and indignation, etc. 2 Cor. 11. 28. Hence
Paul sets forth the measure of his ministerial pains by the travel of a
woman with child; Of whom I travel in birth, says he. 3. Though it be God
only, who by His own almighty Power does beget us to that new and spiritual
life of Grace, Iam. 1. 18. 1 Cor. 3. -6. yet, He makes use of called Ministers
as the ordinary means and instruments, by whose ministry His Spirit does
effectually work, and bring about the conversion of sinners, Romans 10. 17. and
therefore the honor and title of being spiritual fathers and mothers is
conferred upon them; hence it is that Paul not only calls them his little
children, but also says, he did travel in birth with them, whereby he
compares himself to a woman in travel, and the work of the Ministry to the
travel it self, by the means whereof children are born to God. 4. Though those
who are once regenerated, cannot totally fall away from grace, so as to stand
in need of a second regeneration (for, the seed of God abides in them, 1 John
3. 9.) yet, they may so far fall away, as that the new man of Grace in them
will be much marred, and all lively evidences of their regeneration, ly under
ground and in the dark, and so, as that to outward appearance there will be
nothing of the life of God in them: for, though Paul says not, he be got them
again; yet, be did travel in birth with them again, that so Christ might be
formed in them: which supposes, that the Image of Christ in them was much
darkened, the beauty thereof marred, and their spiritual life and motion hid
and hardly discernable, as the life and motion of an unborn child in the womb.
5. The great end of a Minister's pains, and that, which not being attained, he
is not to cease, or to rest satisfied, is not so much his own exoneration, as
to have a near conformity to Christ, and the draughts of His Image, consisting
both in knowledge (Col. 3. 10.) and holiness (Ephesians. 4. 24.) wrought in the
hearts and lives of his hearers: for, this was aimed at by Paul; Until Christ
be formed in you, says he.

From Verse. 20. Learn, 1. The presence of a Pastor with his Flock, is so
necessary in order to the entertaining of mutual affection, and the suppression
of prejudices when they are yet in the bud, and before they come to any great
height, and in order to a Minister's better uptaking of the peoples case and
condition, and to his application of suitable and seasonable remedies; that,
(though a Minister may sometimes be necessarily withdrawn from his Flock, yet)
he ought always have a desire to be present with them, without neglecting any
occasion, when it offers, of returning to them; for, thus was it with Paul, I
desire to be present with you. 2. A Minister ought to take notice, so far as is
possible, of the several conditions and dispositions of his People; that hereby
he may know, how to carry himself, and to speak to them in that way which he
conceives will be most gaining upon every one, admonishing some, reproving
others, comforting and instructing some, and sharply threatening others: for,
this we conceive is meaned by Paul's changing of his voice, in order to which,
he desired to be present with them; that so knowing their case, he might the
better fit his speech to their condition. 3. As the People of God are not all
of one, but of different tempers, some being more tractable, and some more
obstinate, some more soft and easy to be wrought upon by the Word, and some
more obdured, some more subject to heartlesse discouragements, and others to
high and lofty unsobernesse of spirit; So that way of dealing in a Minister
which will be profitable for the one temper, will not be so for another: for,
Paul, being ignorant of their present temper, stood in doubt of them, as
fearing, if he did not fall upon a right way of dealing with them, he might do
them more hurt than good. 4. Though a Minister may sometimes have reason to
doubt what way to take with a people in order to their gaining, and be not a
little perplexed, lest there be not success answerable to his pains; yet he is
not to give over, but must go on, doing what is likeliest, and depending upon
God for success: so does Paul here; for, though be stood in doubt of them, or
was perplexed for them, yet he sends this Epistle to them.

Verse. 21. Tell me, ye that desire to be under the Law, do ye not bear the Law?
IN the third part of the Chapter, the Apostle confirms and illustrateth the
truth of the whole preceding disputation concerning our Justification by Faith,
and not by Works, and the abolishing of the ancient legal Dispensation of the
Covenant of Grace, and this by the history of Abraham's family, whereby he
shows the Lord did prefigure not only the doing away of that ancient
Dispensation under the days of the Gospel, but that also so many as did adhere
unto it, (being considered as it was set in opposition to the Covenant of
Grace, by those who sought to be justified by the works of the Law) were kept
under the bondage of sin and wrath here, and at last should be banished from
the face of God. And, on the other hand, that a more clear dispensation of the
Covenant of Grace should succeed under the New Testament, and that those who,
according to the tenor of that Covenant, did seek to be justified through
Faith in Christ, should be the children of God, free from the bondage of
Ceremonies and of God's wrath here, and possess the heavenly inheritance
hereafter.

In order to this, the Apostle first prefaceth in this verse. by citing his
adversaries and all others, who of their own accord, without and contrary to
God's Command, did put themselves again under the yoke of the Mosaical Law, and
sought to be justified by the Works thereof, (otherwise all Believers are under
the Moral Law as the rule of their life, Ephesians. 6. 2.) he prefaceth (I say) by
citing all such to hear what the Law it self, or that Scripture which is a part
of those five Books of Moses which are called the Law (Romans 3. 21.) does say to
this purpose: and withal he taxes them indirectly for their not understanding
the scope of the Law, and of the doctrine relating to it, notwithstanding of
their pretending so much to the knowledge of it. Doct. 1. The Minister of Jesus
Christ, is so far in the spirit of meekness to condescend to the humors of
those, who oppose themselves, in order to their gaining, as that he always
keep up his authority amongst and over them, as an Ambassador in Christ's
stead, 2 Cor. 5. 20. for, Paul, having for condescendence and tenderness
carried himself to them, as an affectionate mother, does now carry the matter
with more authority, citing and commanding them to hear a clear refutation of
their error; Tell me, says he. 2. So ignorant are all men naturally of that
righteousness which is of God by Faith, that when it is offered they do what
they can to reject it, and (such is their pride and madness) go about to
establish their own righteousness by Works, betaking themselves to stand or
fall according to the sentence of the Law and Covenant of Works; for, the
Galatians were thus mad, who, rejecting the offer of Christ's righteousness in
the Gospel, desired to be under the Law, to wit, so as to be dealt with by God
according to the sentence of it. 3. The Doctrine of the written Law, is so far
from giving any patrociny to that dangerous error of Justification by Works,
That this error arises mainly from ignorance of the Law, and chiefly of that
which is the scope of the Law, to wit, Christ for righteousness, Romans 10. 4.
for, Paul does point at the reason of their so great desire to be under the
Law, even their not hearing the Law, so as to understand it; Do ye not hear the
Law, says he.

Verse. 22. For it is written, that Abraham had two sons, the one by a
bond-maid, the other by a freewoman. 23. But he who was of the bondwoman, was
born after the flesh: but he of the freewoman, was by promise.
THe Apostle, in the second place, propounds the typical history of Abraham's
family, taken from, Genesis 16, and 21. chapters. The sum whereof is, that as
Abraham had two sons, to wit, Ishmael and Isaac, (he had also several others by
Keturab, Genesis 25. 2. but these two are only mentioned, as being appointed by
God to prefigure the present purpose) the condition of which two sons did
differ in two things, first, That the one, Ishmael, was born of a bondwoman or
servant, to wit, Hagar, Genesis 16. 1. 15. and so was but as a servant himself,
and not the heir, Genesis 21. 10. The other, Isaac, was born of a freewoman to
wit, Sarah, (Genesis 21. 2, 3.) who had been never a servant, but mistress, and
joint in the government of the family with her husband, and therefore Isaac
himself was no servant, but a freeman, even the heir, ver. 22. A second
difference did ly in the principle of their generation and birth; for, Ishmael
was born after the flesh, or by the ordinary strength of nature, his mother
Hagar being a young woman and fit for conception, Genesis 16. 2. but Isaac was not
conceived nor born from any such principle, Sarah his mother being ninety years
old when she conceived, Genesis 17. -17. and so, according to the course of
nature, unfit for conception, Heb. 11, 12. but he was born by promise, or by
virtue of that promise made to Abraham, Genesis 17. 16. and the miraculous
operation of God, ver. 23.

From this history of Abraham's family, considered in it self, and leaving the
mystery prefigured by it, to its own place. We Learn, 1. The best of men are
not perfect, there having been some things even in the holy Patriarchs, which
were not commended, but only tolerated by God, as a lesser evil for prevention
of a greater. Such was their polygamy or marrying of more wives than one, which
though contrary to the first institution of Marriage (Mal. 2. 15. and Mat. 19.
4, 5, 8.) yet was practiced by many of the Patriarchs, as not knowing, or at
least not considering what sin was in it, being blinded, partly by the tyranny
of common custom, and partly by that great desire which they had to multiply
their posterity, that if it were possible the Messiah might have descended of
their line: Thus even Abraham had two wives, a bond-maid, and a freewoman. 2.
The best of men are in no small hazard to be so far overpowered with tentations
to mis-belief under the delayed performance of divine Promises, and the want of
all lawful probable means for the performance of them, as to close with sinful
means for bringing of it about, and to repute themselves free from guilt in so
doing, as if a good and necessary end could commend a sinful mean for
attaining to it: for, Abraham, having a promise that the blessed Seed should
come of him (Genesis 12. -3.) and having waited for a child until Sarah his wife
through age had lost all hopes of conception, is moved, at her desire, to go-in
unto Hagar his bond-maid, that he might obtain seed by her (Genesis 16. 1, 2.)
rather than the Promise should ly unperformed; The one by a bond-maid, says
he. 3. The Lord stands not in need of our sinful means for bringing about of
His own gracious work toward us: for, after that Ishmael is sinfully begotten
upon the handmaid, the Lord makes Sarah conceive a son miraculously, in whom
the Promise was to have its accomplishment; The other by a freewoman. 4. The
Lord has placed in the natures, as of beasts and birds, so of men and women,
an ordinary power of generation and conception, whereby one generation may
succeed to another, until the heavens be no more, and that men who cannot live
any long space of time in their own persons, may in a kind perpetuate their
life and memory in their posterity unto all succeeding generations; Thus
Ishmael was born after the flesh, or by the ordinary strength of nature. 5. As
the power of God is engaged to give a being and subsistence unto every thing
contained within the compass of a Promise, Isa. 46. 11. So it does accordingly
perform, even when all ordinary means and second causes do fail, and become
useless for bringing about the thing promised: for, a promise being made to
Abraham, that Sarah should have a child, she conceives and bears Isaac, not
after the flesh, or according to the ordinary course of nature, but through
virtue of that Promise; But he of the freewoman, was by promise, says he.

Verse. 24. Which things are an Allegory; for these are the two Covenants; the
one from the mount Sinai, which gendreth to bondage, which is Agar. 25. For
this Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and answers to Jerusalem which now is,
and is in bondage with her children.
IN the third place, the Apostle expounds the mystery which was lurking
under, and prefigured by the former history. In order to which he shows, that
those things, or the Scripture presently cited is an Allegory, that is,
besides the literal historical sense of the words, God intended that the
purpose contained in them should shadow forth the state of His Church in the
following particulars, So that Abraham's two Wives did represent the two
Covenants, to wit, the old Covenant, or the Covenant of Grace under the old
Administration, (Heb. 8. 7.) which Covenant was greatly mistaken, and did
degenerate unto a plain Covenant of Works, in the sense of many who did adhere
unto it. 2. The new Covenant or the Covenant of Grace under the new
Administration, Heb. 8. 8. The first of which Covenants he shows was
prefigured by Agar the bondwoman; and he describes it, 1. from the place
where it was first given, to wit, upon mount Sinai. 2. From the like effect
produced by it with that of Agar, to wit, that as Hagar, so this Covenant
especially as it was generally mistaken for a Covenant of Works, did beget
children unto bondage, that is, they who adhered to that Covenant, so taken,
were not thereby freed from their bondage to sin, Satan, and God's wrath (chap.
3. 10.) and were of a servile mercenary disposition, as doing whatever they did
in God's service, not from love, but slavish fear, and of purpose to merit
Heaven by their good works, Mark 10. 17. This is ver. 24. And, (having, as it
were in a parenthesis, shown the fitness of the former resemblance, because
mount Sinai, where the old Covenant was first delivered, is also in God's
providence called Agar by the Arabians) he describes this Covenant thirdly,
from those, who in the time of the Apostles did tenaciously adhere to it, by
showing that the earthly Jerusalem, or the Jewish Church, not, as she was in
her best times, but in that present age did answer, that is, as the Original
does bear, was in the same rank, or did keep a kind of harmony and concord with
that Covenant, because that Church, and the members thereof, called here her
children, did remain in a servile condition, which he showed before, was the
fruit of adhering unto this Covenant, as it was now adulterated and corrupted,
ver. 25. Now, though the Spirit of God makes use of the history of Abraham's
having two wives, to set forth a spiritual mystery, not condemning his fact;
yet, this does not justify his polygamy, no more than injustice in stewards is
justified by the parable, Luke 16. 1. it being sufficient that the Word of God
does condemn polygamy elsewhere, Mal. 2. 15. and Mat. 19. 4, 5, 6. Doct. 1.
Though there be only one genuine sense and meaning of every place of Scripture,
which is sometimes expressed in proper (Genesis 1. 1.) sometimes in figurative and
borrowed speeches, Luke 13. 32. (otherwise, if Scripture had more meanings than
one, it should be ambiguous and doubtsom) yet this hinders not, but that the
sense of Scripture may be sometimes not simple, but composed, so that there is
one thing signified immediately by the words, and another thing immediately by
the purpose comprehended in the words, and but mediately by the words
themselves, as it is in types and allegories: for, this history did immediately
set forth the state of Abraham's family, and the state of Abraham's family did
shadow forth the state of God's Church in the particulars aforementioned;
Which things are an Allegory, says he. 2. Though the Spirit of God speaking in
Scripture, gives us express warrant to expound some places of Scripture, as
holding forth, by way of type or allegory, some further purpose, than what the
words do either in their proper or usual acception bear; yet it does not follow
hence, that we may without such warrant expound other Scriptures after the same
manner, or hold forth our witty inventions of that kind, as a part of the
meaning intended by the Spirit of God in those Scriptures: for, the Spirit of
God expressly shows, that this Scripture, or, those things are an Allegory. 3.
It is a very usual way of speaking in Scripture, whereby the name of the thing
signified, is given to that which does only signify and represent that thing;
So is it in the words of the institution of the Lord's Supper, Mark 14. -22.
and so is it here, where the Apostle, speaking of Abraham's two wives, says,
Those are the two Covenants; not that they were essentially such, but because
they did represent and prefigure them. 4. Though the Covenant of Grace, entered
by God with sinners in Christ, has been but one for substance in all ages of
the Church, Heb. 13. 8. yet, there has been diverse ways of administrating it,
one especially under the Old Testament, and another under the New: hence is it,
that this one Covenant is held forth as differing from it self, and as if it
were not one, but two; for, those are the two Covenants, says he. 5. The
Covenant of Grace, as it was dispensed under the Old Testament, (because the
Law, and the curse of the Law, was then much pressed, and the grace contained
therein but darkly propounded) was therefore generally looked upon as a
Covenant of Works, and the most part did so rely upon it, and expect life from
it (...) for, the Apostle speaks of the Covenant made on Sinai, in this
sense, while he says, it did gender unto bondage, to wit, as it was mistaken
for a Covenant of Works; and how it is said in that sense to gender unto
bondage, is cleared in the Exposition; The one from the mount Sinai, which
gendreth unto bondage. 6. Hagar, Sarah's bondmaid, did fitly represent and
prefigure the Covenant of Grace, as it was delivered upon mount Sinai, not only
for the reasons contained in the Text, but also because as Hagar was once a
second wife to Abraham, and Ishmael her son for a while Abraham's presumed
heir, Genesis 17. 18. yet, after she began to contest with her mistress Sarah (Genesis
16. 4.) and her son to persecute Isaac the child of promise, both mother and
son were cast out of Abraham's family, and deprived of all hope of any
inheritance in the Land of promise, Genesis 21. 9, 10. So, the Law of Moses, or
the Covenant given by God upon mount Sinai, while it was rightly used as a
Pedagogue leading to Christ, it did bring forth children to God, heirs of the
heavenly inheritance, such were all sincere Believers under the Old Testament;
but when it was abused, and set up as a Covenant of Works in opposition to the
Covenant of Grace, it did then bring forth children unto bondage, and those who
did so adhere unto it, were detained under damnable slavery, and cut off from
Christ, Gal. 5. 2. for, the Apostle, showing that this Covenant was prefigured
by Agar, does hint at one reason which leads us to seek after more; Which
Covenant, says he, is Agar: for Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia. 7. No Church or
People has Religion so firmly established, which in progress of time may not
make such apostasy from it, as that there will be a vast difference betwixt
what they once were, and what they now are: for, such a Church was Jerusalem
once, Psalm. 76. 1. 2. but now her case was much altered; Therefore, says he,
this Covenant does answer, or keeps concord with Jerusalem, not which once
was, but now is (importing there was a foul change to the worse) And is in
bondage with her children.

Verse. 26. But Jerusalem which is above, is free, which is the mother of us all.
THe Apostle, having shown that Hagar did prefigure the first or old Covenant,
does now briefly describe that second or new Covenant which was prefigured in
Sarah: First, by declaring where that Covenant did reside, or who adhered to
it, to wit, Jerusalem which is above, whereby is not meaned the Church
triumphant in Heaven; for, it is clear he speaks of a Church, whereof
Believers upon earth are members, even the Militant Church, especially of the
truly regenerate, claiming to life according to the tenor of the Covenant of
Grace, although the Catholic Church-visible be not excluded, seeing it is a
Church begetting children to God by the use of Ordinances, and is here called
Jerusalem, because that City was a type of the true Church, for her
compactnesse and order (Psalm. 122. 3.) beauty (Psalm. 48. 2.) and divine
protection which did attend her, Isa. 31. 5. and this Church is said to be
above, because her original is from Heaven, Iam. 1. 17. and the lively members
thereof have their conversation in Heaven, Philip. 3. 20. Secondly, by showing
the state wherein those who adhere to this Covenant are; a state of freedom
from sin, (Romans 6. 18.) the curse of the Law (Romans 8. 1.) and the yoke of that
ancient legal dispensation, Ephesians. 2. 15. Thirdly, by declaring who are the
children of this Covenant, or members of the true Church adhering to this
Covenant, even all sincere Believers, whether Jews or Gentiles. Doct. 1. The
Lord does never so far give way to the spirit of error and rage of persecution,
but even in the worst of times He has some who do keep their garments clean,
and hold up a banner for Truth, notwithstanding of all contrary endeavors for
the utter extirpation of it: for, though Jerusalem, the usual place of Gods
abode, was at this time in bondage with her children, a very receptacle of
Christ's enemies (Act. 8. 1.) and chief head of all that opposition which was
against the Gospel, Act. 9. 2. yet, God wanted not a Church, even Jerusalem
which is above. 2. As freedom from God's wrath and curse may be attained and
enjoyed under bodily bondage and oppression: so, being attained, it makes the
attainer truly free, so that all his other bondage is not to be valued much:
for, the true Church, though for the time heavily oppressed in her members,
ver. -29. of whom some were also in a state of bodily servitude, Col. 3. 22.
yet, because of her freedom from God's wrath and curse, she is said to be free,
as if this bondage being removed there had been none remaining; Jerusalem which
is above, is free. 3. Though those who are regenerate, do owe their new birth
to God their Father only, in so far as the virtue and power whereby they are
brought from death to life is only His, Ephesians. 1. 19. and neither
Church-Ministry, nor any created power whatsoever, can by any proper efficiency
reach this so divine and supernatural an effect; yet, the Church is the mother
of all the Regenerate, in so far as she is gifted with Ministers (1 Cor. 12.
28) whose office is to dispense the Word, which Word, being blessed of God, is
both the seed of this new birth, 1 Pet. 1. 23. as also the food and milk (1
Pet. 2. 2.) whereby the newborn children are nourished: for, in this sense the
Apostle says, Jerusalem is the mother of us all. 4. Though no Church, no, not
the Church universal, which is most properly our mother, ought to be heard and
obeyed, further than her Commands do agree with the Commands of God our Father,
Act. 4. 19. yet, we are still to give her respect and reverence, as also to
employ our parts and graces, and all that is ours, for the defense and
advancement of her just interest in our places and stations, and that because
she is the mother of us all.

Verse. 27. For it is written, Rejoice thou barren that bear not; break forth
and cry, thou that travellest not: for the desolate has many more children than
she which has an husband.
THe Apostle, in the fourth place, confirms the truth of the former mystery
by a Scripture taken out of Isa. 54. 1. where the Prophet does direct his
speech to the Christian Church under the Gospel, as she was to be in her
beginnings, and about the time of Christ's incarnation and sufferings (whereof
he had most clearly prophesied, chap. 53.) and having designed her by the name
of a barren woman that bears not, and travelleth not, because of the paucity
of Converts to the Christian Faith at that time; and of a seemingly desolate
woman without an husband, because of the cross and persecution, which she was
then to be under, he exhorts her to rejoice, and to express her joy against
all contrary discouragements; and that because her state should be changed, and
she made a more fruitful mother, by a numerous accession of converts to the
Christian Faith from among the Gentiles, than the Jewish Synagogue her self,
who formerly had enjoyed God's grace and presence, and at that time should seem
to be more owned of God because of the great prosperity, multitude of
followers, and outward beauty attending her beyond the Christian Church. Doct.
1. The supreme Judge, by whom all controversies of Religion are to be
determined, and in whose sentence we are to rest, is the holy Spirit speaking
in Scripture: for, Paul in this present controversy appealeth to Scripture;
For it is written, says he. 2. It is not the Church's lot to be always alike
fruitful in bringing forth children to God; she has her barren times, wherein
the labors of Christ's Ministers are attended with little success, and but
very few are converted by their pains and this even sometimes when outward means
are such, as may be most promising of fruitfulness, the Lord hereby
inculcating this necessary Lesson, That the great work of converting souls
depends not upon most promising means, 1 Cor. 3. 6. for, the Prophet, having
an eye mainly (as we showed in the Exposition) to the first beginnings of the
Christian Church, when Christ Himself was a Preacher, Romans 15. 8. calls her
by the name of barren that bears not, that travelleth not. 3. The Lord will
sometimes for good and necessary reasons (expressed, chap. 1. ver. 13. doct.
6.) give His Church and People so far over to the rage of persecuters, and own
them as little under trouble to the view of the world, as if He had no interest
in them as their Lord and Husband: for, in this respect, the Apostle calls
the Christian Church desolate, that is, without an husband in appearance; For
the desolate, etc. 4. A false declining; yea, an apostate Church may be, to
outward appearance, much more owned of God, as to the multitude of followers,
external beauty, outward prosperity and freedom from the cross, than the true
Church; So that none of those things are infallible marks of a true Church:
for, the Jewish Synagogue, because of those things, seemed to have an husband,
when the Christian Church was desolate; Than she that has an husband. 5. The
wise Lord has thought it fit to make His Church, and real Believers in the
Church, liable, as to their outward condition mainly, to great variety and many
changes, it being almost impossible that we who are of such changeable tempers
our selves, should bear any one condition right for any long time together, and
not miscarry one way or other under it, Psalm. 55. -19. for, the Church, for
that time barren and desolate, was to have many children; The desolate has,
or, as the words may also read, shall have many children. 6. It is the duty of
God's People to compose their affections, especially those of joy and sorrow,
suitably to God's various way of dealing with them: for, the Church, before
barren, and therefore sad, is to change her sorrow into joy upon God's changing
His way of dealing with her; Rejoice thou barren: for the desolate has many
more children. 7. The enlargement of Christ's Kingdom, and gaining of many
sinners to God, together with the weakening of Satan's interest in the world,
ought to be entertained with much joy: for, says he, Rejoice, break forth and
cry: for the desolate has many more children than she that has an husband. 8.
So many are the discouragements of the Godly, and so many causes of grief,
which are as heavy weights and strong bars to bear down and keep in their joy,
That this duty of rejoicing is not easily come at, even when God in His
gracious providence gives reason for it: Hence the command is inculcated in
several words, Rejoice, cry, and break forth; which last, supposes that many
restraints from this duty are lying-on, which must be broken-through before the
heart can attain to it.

Verse. 28. Now we, Brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of promise.
THe Apostle, in the last place applies this typical history, and the
scriptural confirmation of the mystery prefigured by it. And first, by
asserting what himself really was, and what in charity he yet conceived many of
them at least to be, he shows the only way of attaining the heavenly
inheritance, as children, to be by virtue of the Covenant-promise, in
resemblance of Isaac who was so begotten, ver. -23. and tacitly implies, that
it is not attained by virtue of our own natural endeavors, or fleshly
privileges, whereof the Jewish Synagogue and her followers did boast, (chap.
6. ver. 12-) and wherein they were represented by the child of the bondwoman,
Ishmael, ver. 23-. Doct. 1. A Minister ought to prosecute general Doctrine so
far, until it be brought home to the particular state and case of his hearers,
by pertinent and close application, as that wherein the life and power of
preaching does mainly consist, 1 Timothy 5. 20. for, Paul rests not until he
make application of the Doctrine in hand; Now we, Brethren, as Isaac was, etc.
2. The humors of people are sometimes so ticklish, that a Minister has need
to proceed to the work of applying general Truths unto them with that wariness
and circumspection, as to point out their duty, and what he would have them to
be, rather by showing his charitable thoughts of them that they are so already,
than by any direct up-stirring of them to it: for, so does Paul here point at
their duty of quiting confidence in the flesh, and of betaking themselves to
Faith in the Promise, by showing he did in charity judge of them as those who
had done so already; Now we, Brethren, are children of the promise. 3. That any
of Adam's lost seed, who are by nature children of wrath, do become the
children of God, and heirs of eternal life, is only by virtue of the gracious
promises of the Covenant of Grace, in so far as, first, they are begotten into
a new and spiritual life, not from any principle of natural strength and vigor,
Romans 9. 16. but by the force of those Promises, enlivened by the Spirit of God,
2 Cor. 10. 4. And secondly, their right to Heaven arises, not from any works
which they do, Tit. 3. 5: but from Faith in the Promise, Joh. 3. 16. for, in
this sense we are called children of the promise.

Verse. 29. But as then he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was
born after the Spirit, even so it is now.
HE applies the present purpose, in the second place, for consolation to the
true members of the Christian Church, against those persecutions which they
sustained from the false Apostles, and such others as adhered to the Jewish
Synagogue, and to the doctrine of Justification by Works, first, by showing
that the like persecution did befall Isaac, and was prefigured by those bitter
mockings which Isaac, who was begotten by the power of Gods Spirit, according
to the tenor of the Promise, did suffer from Ishmael, who was begotten by the
ordinary strength of nature, and boasted in his carnal outward privileges,
(See Genesis 21. 9.) As it was then, so it is now, says he. Doct. 1. It has
been, and yet is the ordinary lot of God's Children, to suffer hard things from
the men of this world, the Lord having seen it most fitting, that by the cross
they come to their Crown, and through many tribulations enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, Act. 14. 22. for, Paul speaks of persecutions, as a thing common
to the Church in all ages; But as then, even so it is now, says he. 2. The
sorest persecutions and troubles which the Godly endure, do frequently come
from those who are otherwise tied unto them by most strict and nearest
relations, of kindred, acquaintance, or such like; This being Satan's aim
herein, that their sufferings may have so much the more of bitter gall and
wormwood in them, as they are inflicted by such, from whom better things in
reason might have been expected, Psalm. 55. 12, 13. for, Isaac is persecuted by
his brother Ishmael; But as then he that was born after the flesh persecuted
him who was born after the Spirit. 3. Amongst those other persecutions, which
the Godly must endure, the scourge of tongues is one, and not the least,
especially when godless men, taking occasion from their low condition, do mock
at their interest in God, and labor to shame them from their confidence, as if
the Promise of God were of none effect: for, Ishmael's mocking of Isaac, being
yet a child, spoken of, Genesis 21. 9. (wherewith was doubtless joined his
mocking of the Promise made to Isaac) is here called persecution; He that was
born after the flesh persecuted, etc. 4. Whatever wicked men may pretend; yet
the true rise of all their malice and opposition to those who are truly godly,
is their inward antipathy to the work of Grace in the Godly, which they
themselves want: for, so much is hinted at by the description here given of
Ishmael the persecuter, he was born after the flesh, he had no more than what
the power of nature did carry him to; and of persecuted Isaac, he was born
after the Spirit, or by the power of the Spirit of God, whereby he did prefigure
those who are truly regenerate, which are born not of blood, nor of the will of
the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, Joh. 1. 13. Doct. 5. This may
furnish with no small encouragement and comfort under hardest sufferings, that
nothing befalls us but what is common to men, and has been the Church's
ordinary lot in former ages: for, this is Paul's scope, even to comfort
Christians under their present sufferings, because Isaac did endure persecution
as well as they; But as then, even so it is now, says he.

Verse. 30. Nevertheless, what says the Scripture? Cast out the bondwoman and
her son: for the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the
freewoman.
HE comfort them, secondly, from this, That the Jewish Synagogue, and those
who adhered thereto, prefigured by Agar and Ishmael, should be cast out of the
Church of God from the society of the Saints, and from the inheritance of life
everlasting, according as was shadowed forth by the like sentence of ejection
from Abraham's family past upon Hagar and Ishmael, at first by Sarab, (Genesis 21.
10.) and authorized afterward by God Himself, Genesis 21. 12. Doct. 1. The Child
of God can have no solid comfort against, nor yet be sufficiently guarded from
stumbling at the outwardly prosperous state of the wicked, or the afflicted
state of the godly, until he consider what is God's mind revealed in Scripture
either of the one or the other: for, the Apostle, to comfort them against the
wicked their prosperity and persecution flowing from it, does lead them to Gods
mind in Scripture; Nevertheless, says he, what says the Scripture? 2. Though
God be slow to anger, and is not easily provoked wholly to dissolve and cast
off a Church, or People, who were once named by His Name, even when they turn
persecuting apostates; yet if they be not gained by His long-suffering
patience, but, notwithstanding, go on to persecute truth, and to maintain their
damnable heresies, He will quit them at the last, by suffering them to make
total apostasy from Him: for, the Jewish Synagogue, though persecuting Truth,
and maintaining Justification by Works, and several other Errors, was not yet
cast off by God, but was to be rejected shortly after this, as is not obscurely
hinted at by the Apostle while he cites this Scripture, leaving the
application of it unto themselves, Cast out the bondwoman and her son, etc. 3.
As it is no small disadvantage to Truth, and to those who do maintain it, when
their persecuting adversaries do lurk under the mask of God's true Church, and
are generally taken for such: So it is no less comfort when God takes off
that mask, and makes it appear unto the world, that they are not the Church of
God, but the Synagogue of Satan: for, the Apostle's scope, is, to comfort the
Christian Church, that the Jewish Synagogue, who for the time gave out her self
and was generally taken for the true Church, and thereby procured no small
authority to her erroneous doctrine and way, should shortly be cast out, and
not have so much as the face of a Church; What says the Scripture? Cast out
the bondwoman. 4. There is no Salvation, nor any hope of Salvation unto any
who are without the true Church: for, the Jewish Synagogue being once
un-churched, her children, and those who adhered in all things to her, were
debarred from the heavenly inheritance, as Agar and Ishmael once being cast out
of Abraham's family, Ishmael was thereby debarred from having any part in the
promised Land; Cast out the bondwoman and her son: for the son of the
bondwoman shall not be heir, etc. 5. The Doctrine of Justification by Works,
when it is not only doctrinally maintained, but also practically walked in, does
exclude the maintainer of it from having any part in the Kingdom of Heaven:
for, so much was prefigured by the son of the bondwoman, against whom a
sentence is passed, that he shall not be heir with the son of the freewoman.

Verse. 31. So then, Brethren, we are not children of the bondwoman, but of the
free.
HE comfort them, thirdly, from this, That they who for the time were
persecuted by the Jewish Synagogue, were not children of the bondwoman, or
members of that company and society, which was prefigured by Hagar, and so in
no hazard from the former terrible sentence, but being children of the
freewoman, or members of that Church which was prefigured by Sarah, they had
right to the heavenly inheritance; whereby, as by all which he has formerly
said, he does indirectly exhort those Galatians to quit their present error of
seeking after Justification by Works, and their tenacious adherance to that
ancient Pedagogie of Moses, as they would not exclude themselves from the
heavenly inheritance. Doct. 1. As a Minister must sometimes denounce most
terrible judgments against the obstinate and godless; So he ought most
carefully to guard such denunciations as those; lest they to whom they do not
appertain make application of them, and be discouraged by them: for, Paul does
guard the former denunciation, while he says, So then, we are not children of
the bondwoman. 2. The heavy denunciation of fearful judgments to come upon
any, are speaking warnings unto us to flee from that way wherein those have
walked who are so threatened: for, having shown that the bondwoman with her
son, were to be cast out, he infers, So then we are not children of the
bondwoman, but of the free, which has the force of an indirect exhortation to
quit all relation unto the bondwoman, as they would escape the threatened
judgment.

CHAP. V.
IN the first part of this Chapter, he exhorts them to persist in their
Christian Liberty, from the bondage of the Mosaical Yoke, and chiefly, that
they would not seek after Justification by these Ceremonial Observances: In
order to which the observation of the Ceremonial Law was mainly urged by the
false Apostles, Act. 15. 2. Which exhortation he presses, 1. directly;
because, first, Christ had purchased that liberty, ver. 1. Secondly,
Circumcision did deprive the person circumcised of all benefit by Christ, ver.
2. Thirdly, it engaged him to keep the whole Law, and so made his Salvation
impossible, ver. 3. Fourthly, seeking after Justification by these Observances,
was a renouncing of Christ, ver. 4. Fifthly, Paul, and other converted Jews,
sought not to be justified by these, but by Faith, ver. 5. Sixthly, the Command
enjoining Circumcision, had now ceased, ver. 6. Next, he presses the
exhortation indirectly, first, by reproving them for their defection, ver. 7.
and by obviating two objections, ver. 8, 9. Secondly, by professing his hope of
their recovery, ver. 10. Thirdly, by refuting a calumny spread of himself, as
if he had preached Circumcision, ver. 11. Fourthly, by wishing the prime
seducers were cut off, ver. 12.

In the second part of the Chapter, he exhorts them to use their liberty
aright; for which he gives two rules, 1. They would not give license to their
fleshly corruptions. 2. They would serve one another by love, ver. 13. The
latter of which he inforceth Because first, love is the compend of all duty,
ver. 14. Secondly, dangerous effects would follow upon the want of it, ver. 15.
and prescribes an help for reducing the first rule in practice, to wit,
walking in the Spirit, ver. 16, 17, 18. And having cleared what it is to
fulfill the lusts of the flesh, v. 19. 20, 21. and what to walk in the Spirit,
from the respective effects of both Flesh and Spirit, ver. 22, 23. he uses one
argument against fulfilling the lusts of the flesh; because they were engaged
to crucify them, ver. 24. and another, for walking in the Spirit, because they
all pretended at least, to regeneration, and the first principles of a
spiritual life, ver. 25. and concludes with a dehortation from ambition,
provoking and envying one another, ver. 26.

Verse. 1. STand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.
THe Apostle, first, exhorts them steadfastly, constantly, and against all
contrary opposition, to maintain both in judgment and practice the former
doctrine of the Churches freedom, especially from the Levitical Ceremonies.
Secondly, he dehorteth them from coming under that intolerable bondage, which
did attend the making conscience of those ceremonial observances, Act. 15. 10.
and had some resemblance with that bondage of Idolatry, under which they
formerly were, with relation to which, he says, be not again entangled. See
chap. 4. ver. 9. Thirdly, he inforceth the exhortation more directly by six
arguments, The first whereof, which is in this verse, is, Because Christ had
purchased this freedom to the Church by His Blood. Doct. 1. Then only is it
seasonable to labor upon the affections of an erring people by exhortation and
reproof, when sufficient pains have been first taken to inform their
judgments, and by strength of reason to convince them of their error:
otherwise exhortations, persuasions, and reproofs will prove but poor and weak
arguments: for, Paul uses this method here, while having formerly gone about
by Scripture and Reason to convince them of their Error, he does now exhort
them; Stand fast therefore, etc. 2. Every man by nature is a bondslave, as
being under the bondage of sin (Romans 6. 17-) Satan (Ephesians. 1. -2.) the curse of
the Law, Gal. 3. 10. The Jews moreover were under bondage to the Ceremonial
Law, the observing whereof was a bondage because of the great trouble, pain in
the flesh and expense which did attend the observation of it; and therefore it
especially is meaned by the yoke of bondage in this place. See Act. 15. 10.
for, while he says, Christ has made us free, he supposes a
foregoing-bondage. 3. Jesus Christ, by his obedience and death (chap. 4. 4, 5.)
has purchased freedom and liberty unto His Church; a liberty not to do evil,
Romans 6. 1. nor from the yoke of new obedience, Mat. 11. 29. nor from the
cross, Mark 8. -34. nor yet from that due obedience and reverence which
inferiors ow to superiors, Col. 3. 22. Romans 13. 1. but from the dominion of
sin, Romans 6. 14. the tyranny of Satan, 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26. the curse (Gal. 3.
13.) and irritating power of the Law, Romans 7. 5, 6. from observing the
Ceremonial Law of Moses, Col. 2. 14. and much more from subjecting our
Consciences to the Rites, Doctrines, Ceremonies and Laws of men in the matter
of Worship, Col. 2. 20. for, says he, Christ has made us free. 4. The
consideration of the worth and price which Christ has put upon our freedom and
liberty in all the forementioned particulars, even such as He has given
Himself for the purchase of it, ought to indear it unto us so much, as that
contrary to all opposition, and to the utmost of our power and abilities, and
upon all hazard whatsoever, we may with courage and constancy, in our places
and stations, stand to the defense of it: for, so much does the Apostle enjoin,
saying, Stand fast therefore to the liberty, and that because Christ has made
us free. 5. Though civil liberty and freedom from bodily bondage be so much
desired, that even before we be called to it, we are ready to break all bonds
and aspire to be at it, Jude ver. 8. Yet, so ignorant are we of that worth,
which is in spiritual liberty and freedom from spiritual bondage, that hardly
can we be excited to seek after it, or made to stand to it when it is attained,
but are in daily hazard to return to the fleshpots of Egypt, preferring our
former bondage to our present liberty. Hence the Apostle finds it necessary
to inculcate this duty so much of standing to the liberty, and of not being
entangled again with the yoke of bondage. 6. Multiplicity of external Rites and
significant Ceremonies in the matter of Worship, is not only a burden and yoke
to the conscience, hard to be born, but also an intangling and insnaring yoke,
especially when folk do place all their religion in these, so that when once
the conscience has stooped to take on this yoke, hardly can it again be shaken
off, the truth whereof does hold in Rites and Ceremonies, which are even
appointed of God, but much more in those, which are appointed only by men: for,
the Apostle calls the Ceremonial Law a yoke, and such as would entangle them;
Be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage; he alludeth to oxen whose
necks are tied to the yoke with cords, or somewhat else, that they may not
shake it off.

Verse. 2. Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall
profit you nothing.
HE adds a second argument to enforce the exhortation, wherein, having
opposed his own Apostolic Authority for confirming the truth of what he is to
say against all who would contradict it, he affirms that the observing of any
one Ceremony, and especially of Circumcision, (to wit, as of a thing, which
ought of necessity to be done, and as a part of a man's righteousness necessary
to salvation; in which sense it was pressed by the false Apostles, Act. 15. 2.)
did cut off the observer from all benefit by Jesus Christ. The reasons of which
sentence, are, first, the holding up of Circumcision, and by consequence the
whole bulk of that Mosaical Dispensation, did say in effect that Christ was not
yet come, seeing all those were to be done away at His coming, Heb. 9. 10.
Secondly, Christ must either be our whole righteousness and complete Savior,
or not at all, Act. 4. 12. Isa. 42. 8. So that by joining Circumcision with
Christ, as a necessary part of their righteousness, and a cause of salvation,
Christ did cease from being a Savior to them at all. Doct. 1. A Minister of
Jesus Christ ought not to satisfy himself in this, that, what he speaks is
pertinent and apposit to the present purpose, but would also endeavor, that
those to whom he speaks may with attention and faith receive it off his hand,
In order to which, it is not inconvenient that all-alongs his discourse he
labor to quicken their attention by speaking somewhat for that very end,
especially when he is to utter any Truth of singular concernment, or from
receiving whereof he apprehends the hearers may be somewhat averse: for, such
a truth is here delivered by Paul, and therefore he prefixes a note of
attention to it; Behold, says he. 2. A Minister ought to be so confident of
the truth of his doctrine, and of his own authority from Christ to deliver it,
that although his doctrine be contradicted, and his authority undervalued, he
may yet with boldness assert both the one and the other: for, though Paul's
Apostolic Authority was questioned, (See upon chap. 1. ver. 12.) and the Truth
which he here holds forth much contradicted, Act. 15. 2. Yet he opposes his
own Authority for the confirmation of this Truth against all who would oppose
it; Behold, I Paul say unto you, if ye be circumcised. 3. That Paul, in this
dispute, excludes from Justification, not only works flowing from the strength
of man's free will, without grace, but also those which flow from a gracious
root wrought in the heart by Christ, appears from this, that those against
whom he disputes professed faith in Christ, (and so could not maintain that
the works of a natural man, destitute of Christ, did justify) otherwise, this
had been no cogent argum(...)t to refute their opinion, that if they were
circumcised, Christ should profit them nothing. 4. Many do profess Christ who
shall receive no saving advantage by Him, especially they who rely upon any
thing besides Him, or jointly with Him, as the meritorious cause of their
salvation: for, says he, If ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing.

Verse. 3. For I testify again to every man that is circumcised, that he is a
debtor to do the whole Law.
HEre is a third Argument, to which also Paul premitteth his Apostolical
Authority, seriously affirming, and by a public profession confirming, (for so
the word rendered testify does signify) that whosoever now (Christ the
substance being come) did observe Circumcision (to wit, in the way wherein it
was urged by the false Apostles, Act. 15. 2.) he was thereby engaged to keep
the whole Law, and this, the whole Ceremonial and Judicial Law, (Circumcision
being the initiatory Sacrament engaging the Receiver to the whole Mosaical
Pedagogie, Exodus 12. 48.) and the whole Moral Law, and that under the hazard of
condemnation. The reason whereof, is, That no less than universal and perfect
obedience to the Law in all its precepts is required unto this, that a man be
justified by Works, Gal. 3. 10. Doct. 1. Of how much the nearer concernment
unto the salvation of hearers any Truth is, the Minister of Christ ought so
much the more to insist upon it, and with so much the greater seriousness and
fervency to inculcate and press it, as a matter of life and death; that people
may know he believes, and therefore speaks, and consequently may be the more
moved with what he speaks: for, Paul speaking of a Truth, the not-receiving
whereof would have condemned those Galatians, he does with much vehemence
insist upon the pressing of it; I testify again, says he, to every man that
is circumcised. 2. Because it is a matter of no small difficulty to get those
reclaimed who are engaged in an evil course, Jer: 13. 23. therefore frequent
testimonies would be given by Christ's Ministers against them in it; that
hereby the guilty party may have the less of ease and peace in their way, and
thereby, through God's blessing upon His own mean be made to quit it, 2 Timothy 2.
25. And at least, the Lord's Servants may be the more exonered, Ezekiel. 3. 19.
and others of the Lord's People preserved from being infected with that sin,
which they do so much and so frequently testify against, 1 Timothy 5. 20. for, in
order to those ends. Paul (having once, and oftener, both in this Epistle, and
by his preaching, doubtless, while he was with those Galatians, testified
against this dangerous error of theirs) does here give further testimony
against it, while he says, For I testify again to every man. 3. It is wholly
impossible for any mere man to keep the Law of God perfectly in this life, and
to obtain salvation by so doing, Paul takes this for granted; otherwise this
argument, that circumcision did engage them to keep the whole Law, under hazard
of condemnation, had not been cogent; He is a debtor to do the whole Law. 4.
Though Believers in Jesus Christ be not delivered from their obligation to the
least duty which is required by any precept of the Moral Law, Mat. 5. 19. yet,
they are not under that exact rigor and condemning power of the Law, whereby
eternal wrath is denounced against the sinner for the meanest breach of the
Law, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. for, while he speaks of their being debtors to do the
whole Law, as a sad terrifying consequence of their being circumcised, it must
be understood not simply of their obligation to obedience, but of an obligation
under the penalty of the Law's curse; and hereby it is imported that sincere
Believers are not under this obligation, else the argument were of no force.

Verse. 4. Christ is become of no effect unto you, whosoever of you are
justified by the Law; ye are fallen from Grace.
Follows a fourth Argument, to wit, Whosoever did observe the Levitical
Ceremonies as they were pressed by the false Apostles, or sought to be
justified by their observing of them, they by so doing had renounced Christ,
and all benefit to be had by Him, (for, the word rendered Christ is become of no
effect to you, signifies, ye are made void of, and separated from Christ) and
had fallen from the way and doctrine of Free Grace: for, Grace here seems to
be taken for the doctrine of Grace, as Tit. 2. 11. The reason of the
consequence, is, that Grace and Works are not consistent in the justification
of a sinner; if the one have any hand in it, the other has none, Romans 11. 6.
Doct. 1. Those sad consequences mentioned here, and in the preceding verses, do
not strike against the observing of Circumcision simply, and at all times and
cases, (for, even at this very time the observance thereof was tolerated to the
weak Jews, Romans 14. 6. and to some of the stronger sort also, as of a thing at
that time indifferent to them, for eschewing the offense of the weak, Act. 16.
3.) but as it was pressed by the false Apostles, even as the cause of a man's
Justification before God: for, to be circumcised, and to be justified by the
Law, are equivalent phrases in the Apostle's meaning, as is clear from ver. 2,
3. compared with this; Whosoever of you are justified, or seek to be justified
by the Law. 2. To make apostasy from Christ, and the Gospel once received, is
of more dreadful consequence, than the not receiving of Him, or not reaping
any profit by Him at all: for, having spoken (ver. 2.) of their receiving no
advantage by Christ, as one bad consequence of their being circumcised, which
was common to them with those who never professed the Name of Christ, he does
here mention their apostasy from Christ and Grace, as another bad consequence,
which he reserveth to the last place, as being more formidible than any of the
former; Ye are become separate from Christ, ye are fallen from Grace. 3. The
Apostle's consequence, whereby he infers, that they who seek Justification
by Works, are fallen from Grace, does no ways prove that the truly Regenerate
can really or totally fall from God's grace and favor: for, by Grace is meaned
the doctrine of Grace. Besides, their falling from Grace is only conditional,
and suspended upon their seeking Justification by Works, in which damnable
error the truly Regenerate cannot finally, at least, persist, Mat 24. -24.
although for a time they may be overtaken with it; Whosoever of you are
justified by the Law, ye are fallen from Grace.

Verse. 5. For we through the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by
Faith.
HE adds a fifth Reason, to wit, That Paul himself, and other Jews who before
their conversion to the Christian Faith were circumcised, being now converted
and taught by the holy Ghost, did renounce all confidence in their own works or
carnal privileges, whether Circumcision or any other, and did look for Heaven
(called here Hope, because it is the object of our hope, as Tit. 2. 13.) only
by virtue of that righteousness of Jesus Christ which is laid hold upon by
Faith. Doct. 1. The riches of a Believer, are not so much in possession, as in
expectation and hope; We wait for the hope, or, for Heaven hoped for. 2. None
have right to Heaven here, or shall enjoy it after this, who are wholly
unrighteous, and destitute of all righteousness; for, it is called the hope of
righteousness, as being attained unto by the Righteous only, and by virtue of
their righteousness. 3. No personal righteousness of our own, does entitle us
to this blessed hope and heavenly inheritance, Tit. 3. 5. but only the
righteousness of Christ imputed to us, Romans 5. 19. and apprehended by Faith,
which therefore is called here Righteousness through Faith. 4. It is only the
inward efficacious teaching of God's Spirit, which can sufficiently instruct us
in the knowledge of this imputed righteousness by Faith, and make us with
security and confidence venture our eternal well-being, and hope of Heaven upon
it: for, says he, We through the Spirit, or being taught by the Spirit of God,
do wait for the hope of righteousness. 5. The experience and example of other
exercised gracious Christians, ought to be of great weight to incline our
judgment and affections toward an assenting unto, and embracing of those
Truths, from which they have drawn spiritual consolation: for, Paul does
reason, that they ought to receive the doctrine of Justification by Faith,
because he himself, and other believing Jews did venture their salvation in
that bottom; For we wait for the hope of righteousness through Faith. 6. The
example of none, though of never so much reputation in the Church, is to be
followed as an absolute rule, but in so far only, as their practice is approven
by the Spirit of God speaking in Scripture, Isa. 8. 20. for, Paul, to make his
example a sufficient rule for them to follow, shows he did nothing but as he
was taught by the Spirit of God; For we through the Spirit wait, says he.

Verse. 6. For in Jesus Christ, neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision, but Faith which works by love.
HEre is his sixth Reason, which militates not only against the observing of
Circumcision, and those other Levitical Ceremonies, as a part of a man's
righteousness before God, but also against the necessity of observing them at
all; Because in Jesus Christ, or, in the state of the Church under the Gospel
after Christ was manifested in the flesh, neither the observing of these
things, nor the neglect of them, did commend a man to God, as acceptable
service to Him; the service which He now requires, being only a true lively
Faith, evidencing it self to be such by the fruits of a new life, comprehended
under the love of God and our neighbor, Romans 13. 8. Doct. 1. Though
Circumcision and the rest of those Levitical Ceremonies were once enjoined, and
accordingly to be practiced as a necessary part of Worship, Genesis 17. 10, 11. so
that the performance of them in the way required, was service acceptable to
God, Genesis 8: 20, 21. and the neglect and contempt of them, was in a high
measure detestable, Exodus 12. 19. Yet, Christ being come in the flesh, who was
the substance of all those shadows, (Col. 2. 17.) the command whereby they were
enjoined did cease, they remaining for a season chiefly to the Jews, and some
of them also to the Gentiles, (Act. 15. 29.) in their own nature indifferent,
so that the using or not using of them (except in the case of eschewing
scandal, Romans 14 21. and of bearing testimony to the doctrine of christian
liberty, Gal. 2. 3, 4.) did neither commend a man, nor make him guilty before
God: for, says he, In Jesus Christ, neither Circumcision avails any thing,
nor Uncircumcision. 2. To impose the ty of a Command upon any thing as a
necessary part of divine Worship, wherein the Word has left us free, or to
subject our selves to any such Command, is a receding from, and a betraying of
that liberty which is purchased unto us by Christ: for, he makes their
receiving of Circumcision as a necessary part of Worship, a receding from this
liberty; because now in the days of the Gospel there is no command from God to
be circumcised: For in Jesus Christ (says he) neither Circumcision avails
any thing, nor Uncircumcision. 3. The ceremonial Law being abolished under the
New Testament, Christians are not left destitute of work, and idle: for, though
in Jesus Christ, neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision;
yet, Faith, which works by love, avails. 4. The sum of a Christian man's
task now under the Gospel, is the exercise of Faith, which is the great Command
of the Gospel, 1 John 3. 23. and of Love, or new obedience; for, Love is the
fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13. 10. neither is the use of the Sacraments, and
of other pieces of commanded Worship hereby excluded; for they are helps of our
Faith, Romans 4. 11. and a part of those duties of love which we owe to God, as
being enjoined by the second Command: for, says he, in Christ Jesus avails
Faith that works by love. 5. Though Faith only does justify, there being no
other grace which concurreth with it in this work, Gal. 2. 16. Yet, Faith is
not alone in the heart, no not when it does justify; but is always
accompanied with the grace of Love to God and our neighbor: for, in Christ
Jesus no Faith avails any thing, or will be owned by Him as true and saving,
but that which works by Love. 6. Though Faith and Love be always conjoined;
yet, Faith, in order of nature, at least, has the precedence; it being
impossible that we can discharge any duty of Love to God, or our neighbor,
sincerely or acceptably, before we close with Christ for the acceptance of our
persons by Faith, Heb. 11. 6. and thereby draw covenanted furniture from Christ
for through-bearing in our duty, 1 Timothy 1. 5. for, says he, Faith works by
Love, or is efficacious, and puts forth its efficacy in Love, as the fruit
thereof.

Verse. 7. Ye did run well, who did hinder you, that ye should not obey the
Truth?
HE further presses the former exhortation indirectly, by four Arguments,
first, By commending them for their former forwardness in the embracing of
this now controverted Truth (which he calls their running well, or, with a
sort of beauty and comeliness; for so much does the word signify) and showing
no satisfying reason could be given for their present defection from it, and
from walking according to it. Doct. 1. A christian life is like to a course, or
race, from Earth to Heaven by the way of Holiness and all commanded duties,
especially the exercise of Faith and Love; and therefore we ought to carry our
selves in this way, as those who run in a race (See Philip. 3. 13. Doct. 4.)
for, the Apostle sets forth their progress in Christianity by a metaphor
taken from Runners in a race; Ye did run well. 2. It is very ordinary for new
Converts to be carried-on with a greater measure of affection and zeal, and to
make swifter progress in this christian course, than others, or they
themselves afterward, when they are of older standing; The newness of the
thing, the first edge which is upon their affections not yet blunted by change
of cases, and multiplicity of duties, and Gods restraining for a time the
violent assault of multiplied furious tentations, until they be a little
confirmed and engaged in his way, together with His affording a more plentiful
measure of His sensible presence at first, than afterward, do all contribute
hereto: for, those Galatians at, and for a season after their first conversion,
did run, and run well. 3. As those who once made good progress in the ways of
God may afterward sit up, their after-carriage proving no ways answerable to
their promising beginnings: So, when it falls thus out, it is matter of a sad
regrate unto beholders, and of a deserved reproof unto the persons themselves:
for, thus was it with those Galatians, whose defection is matter of
astonishment to Paul, and of a sad rebuke to them; Ye did run well, who did
hinder you? 4. No satisfying reason can be given, for which any, who once did
enter the way of truth and holiness, should alter his course, take up an halt,
or make defection from it, and thereby cause the ways of God to be evil spoken
of, 2 Pet. 2. 2. for, Paul's question, Who did hinder you? imports that none
in reason could have hindered them. 5. When people fall remiss and lazy in
giving obedience to known Truth, they are upon the very brink and precipice of
defection unto contrary Error, and of apostasy from the very profession of
Truth: for, therefore the Apostle does challenge them for not obeying the
Truth, though their apostasy from Truth be mainly intended; implying, that not
obedience to Truth, and apostasy from it, are near of kin each to other. 6.
The serious consideration of a man's former forwardness in the ways of God,
and how little reason can be given for his present backsliding and remissness,
is a strong incitement to do the first works, and by future diligence to regain
what he has lost by his former negligence: for, the Apostle's scope, is, to
incite toward a recovery of their lost liberty by the consideration of those
two, Ye did run well, who did hinder you?

Verse. 8. This persuasion comes not of Him that calls you.
HE preoccupieth an objection; for, lest happily they had said, They were fully
persuaded in their conscience, that the way wherein they now were, was approven
of God; he reponeth, that whatever persuasion they might have of that kind, it
was but a mere delusion, as not coming from God, who had called them to
christian liberty, ver. 13. but from the Devil and his emissaries. Doct. 1. The
greatest untruths and foulest errors may be attended, in those who vent them,
with no small measure of confidence and persuasion, that they are undoubted
Truths: for, Paul does here speak against such a persuasion in those Galatians;
This persuasion comes not of Him, says he. 2. There is much persuasion and
confidence, whereof God is not the author, and especially that, which takes
darkness for light, and error for truth: this persuasion is not of God, or
real, but a strong delusion, arising from arrogance and self-conceit in the
person erring (2 Timothy 3. 2, 4. compared with ver. 6.) together with his strong
engagements from credit, profit, or some other lust, to follow that error,
which do blind the understanding, 2 Timothy 4. 3. but especially from the
powerful working of Satan, who blinds the minds of those who believe not the
Truth, 2 Cor. 4. 4. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10. for, says he, This persuasion comes
not of God. 3. Whatever persuasion comes not of God, and is not grounded upon
the Word of Truth, is not to be valued, but looked upon as a delusion, with
howmuch-soever confidence it be vented: for Paul regards not their persuasion
upon this ground; It is not of Him that calls you, says he. 4. This may
evidence persuasion or confidence, not to be of God, or real, but a mere
delusion, when that thing, the truth or lawfulness whereof we seem to be
persuaded of, is contrary unto that which we are called unto of God, by virtue
either of our general or particular calling: for, the description here given of
God from His calling of them, imports, their opinion was contrary to that
christian liberty, to which they were called of God; and therefore persuasion
about it, was not to be regarded; This persuasion comes not of Him that
calls you, says he.

Verse. 9. A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.
HE obviateth a second objection; for, if they should have said, There was no
reason why Paul should make so much noise, seeing they had not embraced the
whole Jewish Religion, but did only observe some Ceremonies thereof, and
nevertheless remained constant in the Christian Faith; yea, and possibly, that
even this much was not common to them all, but the deed of some few only. He
answers by a similitude taken from Leaven, That a little false doctrine (to
which leaven is compared, Mat. 16. 12.) may easily in progress of time corrupt
a man's judgment in every other point of Doctrine, and that a small number of
scandalous or seduced persons, (to whom leaven is compared, 1 Cor. 5. 6.) may
very speedily infect the whole Church. Doct. 1. When they who are overtaken
with sin and error cannot any longer hold off conviction, or defend their
practice by strength of reason, it is ordinary for them to mince and extenuate
the sin of which they are convinced, and to make but small matters of greatest
offenses: for, the similitude here used, supposes there was an ap^nesse in
them thus to extenuate their error; A little leaven, says he. 2. It is the
duty of Christ's Ministers, not only by force of reason to endeavor a sinners
conviction, that his way is sinful or erroneous, but also to forecast those
shifts, whereby the sinner being convinced of his sin or error, may readily go
about to extenuate it; and having found them out, to show the vanity and
lightness of them: for, the Apostle does forecast, that readily they would
extenuate their sin from this, that it was but a little one, and makes their
extenuation to be without ground, showing that a little leaven leaveneth the
whole lump. 3. The Church of Christ, and every particular member thereof, ought
carefully to resist and watch against the very first beginnings and occasions
of sin, but especially of error; The Church by laboring authoritatively to
convince the gainsayers, Tit. 1. 9 and by timeous and prudent application of
Church Censures, in case of incorrigible obstinacy, Tit. 3. 10. and every
particular Christian by laboring to be established and fixed in the Truth,
Col. 2. 7. lest he be carried about with every wind of doctrine, Ephesians. 4. 14.
and by avoiding all unnecessary commerce and fellowship with those who are
carried away with a spirit of error, 2 John 10. for, the least of errors, and
the smallest number of seduced persons, are here compared to leaven, a little
quantity whereof does secretly insinuate it self, and insensibly convey its
sournesse unto the whole mass or lump.

Verse. 10. I have confidence in you through the Lord, that you will be none
otherwise minded; but he that troubles you, shall bear his judgment, whosoever
he be.
HE does indirectly press the former exhortation, secondly, by showing his
confidence grounded upon charity (1 Cor. 13.) that through the Lords gracious
working with them, they should be reclaimed from their Error, and made yet
again to embrace the same Truth, which he did preach; But withal, lest from
this his charity to them, they should conclude the Error wherein they were, was
not very dangerous; therefore he shows his just indignation against it, by
denouncing deserved wrath and judgment to be inflicted, partly, in this life,
partly, in eternal death, against their prime seducers, without any exception,
save that of repentance, which is to be understood in all threatenings, Jer. 18.
7, 8. Doct. 1. A loving Minister, and zealous for the good of souls, when he
has to do with those who are overtaken in a fault, will of necessity be tossed
with the tides of contrary affections, and, as it were, divided betwixt the
exercise of hopes and fears: love in Paul, did stir up both those affections,
by making him fear the worst of those Galatians in the preceding verses, and
yet hope the best of them here; I have confidence in you through the Lord,
says he. 2. The Minister of Jesus Christ is not to despair of their recovery
who do oppose themselves; but ought in charity to hope the best of all men, so
long as they are curable: I have confidence in you through the Lord, that ye
will be none otherwise minded, says he, which was not a confidence of Faith
grounded upon a word of promise, and therefore infallible; but a confidence of
charity and love to their good, which made him hope, that God would bring about
their deliverance, wherein, though the event should have disappointed him, yet
he had not transgressed, seeing that in our judgment of persons, where things
are doubtsom, we are commanded to hope the best so far as may be, 1 Cor. 13. 7.
Doct. 3. It is convenient also that a Minister sometimes make known unto the
people that charitable confidence which he has of their recovery, The
knowledge whereof may not only furnish the people themselves with some heart
and courage to set upon their duty arising from their Ministers hopes and
confidence, but also commend their duty and make it lovely to them, as being
pressed upon them by one, who has evidenced his love and charity toward them
by that his confidence. Besides, it is looked upon as a thing disgraceful, to
disappoint those, who from love to, and desire after our good, do hope the best
of us: Thus Paul makes them know his confident hope of their recovery; I have
confidence that you will be (...) otherwise minded, says he. 4. As the sinners
first conversion from sin to holiness is God's work, Ephesians. 2. 5. So the
recovery of a sinner from his backsliding and defection, is no less a work of
infinite Power, Psalm. 51. 10. and the only work of God: for, the Apostle,
speaking of his confidence of their recovery, does rely not upon their
strength, but on the Lord for bringing about the thing hoped for; I have
confidence in you through the Lord, says he. 5. A Minister would so make known
to people his charitable confidence of their recovery from sin and error, as he
may not thereby give them ground to conceive that he is not much displeased
with their sin, and so render them secure under it, as making a sleeping pillow
of those his hopes: for, the Apostle, having shown his charitable confidence
toward the seduced people, does evidence how dangerous their error was,
notwithstanding, by denouncing Gods judgment against their prime seducers; But
he that troubles you, shall bear bis judgment, says he. 6. How the native and
ordinary effect of error is to trouble the Churches peace, See Chap. 1. Verse.
7. Doct. 3. But he that troubles you. 7. Though there were not a Christian
Magistrate to inflict civil punishment upon seducers, and those, who by drawing
disciples after them do trouble the Churches peace, or, though the Christian
Magistrate do not make conscience of that, which is his duty herein, Romans 13.
-4. yet, such evil doers as those may certainly expect their deserved judgment
from God, either here, or hereafter to be inflicted, either immediately by
Himself, Zech. 10. 7. or mediately by some one instrument or other, Zech. 13.
3. for, though there was now no Christian Magistrate to punish such; yet Paul
with much confidence affirms, He that troubles you, shall bear his judgment.
8. So just is God, that when He makes inquisition for blood in His day of
vengeance, He will suffer no impenitent transgressor, how subtle soever, escape
His most accurate search, nor yet pass free from the dint of His avenging
stroke, who-ever he be for parts, power, or estimation: for, he speaks in the
singular number, he that troubles you, to show, that every one, and, as it
were, apart, and one by one, should be taken notice of, and shall bear his
judgment, whoever he be, that is, without exception of persons.

Verse. 11. And I, Brethren, if I yet preach Circumcision, why do I yet suffer
persecution? then is the offense of the cross ceased.
HE presses the exhortation, thirdly, by refuting a calumny, whereby, as it
seems his adversaries would have made people believe, that Paul, by
circumcising Timothy, to prevent the stumbling of the weak Jews (Act. 16. 3.)
had declared himself to be of the same judgment with them in the present
controversy. And he answers, denying that he did urge Circumcision to be
observed by the Gentiles at all, (Act. 21. 25.) nor yet by the Jews in the
sense of his adversaries, and gives two evidences of the truth of his denial;
First, if he had preached Circumcision, the Jews would not have persecuted him,
as they constantly did. Secondly, they would not have taken offense at the
preaching of the Gospel, or of Salvation through Christ crucified, which is
here called the Cross, or doctrine of the Cross, as 1 Cor. 1. 18. The truth
of both which consequences lies in this, that the great reason why the Jews
did persecute the Apostle, and were such enemies to his doctrine, was his
preaching down of Circumcision, and the whole frame of that ancient legal
administration, under which they were born and educated, Act. 21. 28. Doct. 1.
It is the ordinary lot of faithful Ministers, to be subject unto slander and
reproaches, not only in respect of their lives, Romans 3. 8. but also in respect
of their Ministry and Doctrine, as if they were Heretics: for, even Paul is
reported of as a preacher of Circumcision, which is supposed, while he says,
If I yet preach Circumcision. 2. So active are heretical seducers, as they
leave no mean unessayed which may serve to confirm and establish their seduced
followers, if it were even to spread reports of their chiefest opposits, that
they are secretly and underhand of the same opinion with themselves, and that
sometimes they declare their judgments to that purpose: for, so did they report
of Paul, as is here supposed; If I yet preach Circumcision. 3. The faithful
Minister of Jesus Christ, though he be maliciously and basely reported of,
ought not to render evil for evil unto those who have invented or entertained
such reports, but to return love for their hatred, and good for their evil,
laboring more to vindicate himself, than to rub disgrace upon them, whereby he
shall heap coals of fire upon their head, Romans 12. 20. for, so does Paul, while
he labors only to clear himself to those Galatians, among whom he was
misreported of giving them the affectionate style of Brethren; And I, Brethren,
if I yet preach Circumcision, why do I yet suffer persecution? 4. While we
labor to clear our selves from false imputations or calumnies, we had need to
use much circumspection in declaring the matter of fact, lest we fail in any
one circumstance and so be found liars, while we go about to justify our
selves; for, Paul is thus circumspect while he denies not that he did
circumcise any (for he circumcised Timothy, Act. 16. 3.) or that he did ever
preach Circumcision (for he did so while he was a Pharisee, Gal. 1. 13, 14.)
but that he did preach the observing of it now as a thing necessary to
salvation; If I yet preach Circumcision, says he. 5. A faithful Minister
neither ought, nor will conceal any part of necessary Truth, which he is
otherwise called to preach, though he certainly know, he will incur hazard,
loss and persecution from men because of it: for, Paul knew he was persecuted
by the Jews for his preaching against Circumcision, and yet he preaches; Why
do I yet suffer persecution? 6. Neither is he to conceal any part of necessary
Truth, when the eminent hazard of peoples salvation call(...) for the preaching
of it, though imbittered enemies should take occasion from his preaching of
that one Truth to reject all Truth: for, Paul preaches down Circumcision,
though the Jews did take occasion from his so doing to reject the whole Gospel:
for, says he, Then, to wit, if he had preached Circumcision, the offense of
the Cross is ceased. 7. If men once place Religion and Worship in rites,
ceremonies, and such external observances, the most substantial Truths of God
and duties of Christianity, will not bear so much weight with them in progress
of time as the meanest of those: for, though Paul did preach Christ sincerely,
1 Cor. 1. 23. and urged obedience to all the duties of the Moral Law, Romans 13.
8, 9. yet, seeing he did not preach Circumcision he was persecuted by the Jews,
who placed Religion in such external performances: Yea, they reject and stumble
at the doctrine of Salvation preached by him, because he would not preach
Circumcision also; Why do I yet suffer persecution? then is the offense of the
Cross ceased: which implies, that his not preaching Circumcision, was the
cause why they persecuted his person, and stumbled at his doctrine.

Verse. 12. I would they were even cut off which trouble you.
HE presses the exhortation, fourthly, by a wish that their prime seducers,
who troubled their outward and inward peace, were cut off from communion with
the Church, by the sword of Excommunication: whereby he shows both, that
their sin deserved to be so censured, and that the good of the Church, if her
present distemper could have born it, did require that this censure had been
inflicted. Doct. 1. The Lord Christ, King and Head of His Church, has placed
power and authority in the Church-guides (Joh. 20. 23.) being conveened
together (1 Cor. 5. 4.) to cut off from the body of the Church, by the sword of
Excommunication, incorrigible and obstinate offenders, for the destruction of
the flesh, that their spirit may (...) (...)ed in the day of the Lord Jesus,
and that the Church be not infected by the contagion of their sin, 1 Cor. 5. 5,
6. for, by this cutting off, is meaned Excommunication, as the similitude of
leaven (ver. 9.) does teach, being compared with 1 Cor. 5. 6. in which chapter
Excommunication is spoken of, and the Apostle alludeth to that phrase of
cutting off from Gods People, frequently used in the Old Testament, as Genesis 17.
14. which did express the censure of Excommunication then in use among the
Jews; and the Apostle's wishing, that they were even cut off who troubled them,
supposes that there was power to cut off such in the Church, if the exercise
of that power had been seasonable; I would they were even cut off. 2. The
spirit of Error may so far prevail among a People, that the exercise of
discipline can hardly attain its end amongst them, to wit, the shaming of the
person censured (1 Cor. 5. -5-) and the preservation of the Church from being
leavened, 1 Cor. 5. 6. In which case the Servants of Christ would proceed with
a slow pace, and in all lenity and wisdom to the inflicting of Church Censures,
lest the person censured, and the multitude seduced by him, be thereby
hardened, and the Ordinance it self exposed to contempt; and therefore would
rather doctrinally declare, what censures such persons deserve, than actually
inflict the censure it self: for, though Paul by himself alone, had power to
cut off and excommunicate, 1 Timothy 1. 20, yet, the infection had so spread it
self in this Church, and the general distemper was so great, that he satisfies
himself with a wish, declaring thereby what their sin deserved, and proceeds
no further; I would they were even cut off, says he.

Verse. 13. For, Brethren, ye have been called unto liberty; only use not
liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another.
THe second part of the chapter begins in this verse, wherein the Apostle,
having given a reason of his former wish, ver. 12. (even because those seducers
did hinder the course of their vocation, burdening them with the observances of
such things as are contrary to Evangelical liberty, to the enjoyment whereof
they were called by God) he exhorts them to take heed of running to the other
extreme of abusing their Christian liber^y, as if they were thereby freed from
all obligation to serve God or man in any thing, and gives two Rules to direct
them in the right use of their liberty, first, They would not use their liberty
for an occasion to the flesh; where, by flesh is not meaned the substance of
our fleshly bodies, but the power of sin and corruption which is in every man,
Ephesians. 2. 3. and is seated not only in our carnal fleshly appetite, but in all
the powers of the soul, even the understanding (Romans 8. 7.) and will, or
rational appetite, (Col. 2. -18.) not being excepted. So the sense of the Rule
prescribed, is, That they would not take encouragement from this doctrine of
Christian liberty to give license unto the power of sin and corruption within
them to break all bonds, and to fulfill its own lusts. Secondly, That they
would by love serve one another; or, that notwithstanding of this purchased
liberty, every one without exception of persons would from the fountain of love
employ himself in all the duties of love for bringing about the good of his
neighbor, and by consequence would straiten, or enlarge himself in the use of
his liberty, as might be most conducing to his neighbors spiritual
edification, Romans 14, 13, 15. 1 Cor. 8. 9. Doct. 1. There is not any one thing
which ought to be more desired and endeavored by an honest Minister, than that
the People of God committed to his charge, do in some measure walk answerably
to their christian calling, and nothing ought to stir up his zeal and
indignation more, than when they either actually walk, or are tempted to walk
in a course contrary unto it: for, thereby they not only mar the fruits of the
Gospel to themselves, (see ver. 4.) but also cause it to be evil spoken of by
others, 1 Timothy 5. 14. Hence is the Apostle's zeal so hot against the false
Apostles, as that he wishes them to be cut off, even because they tempted
those Galatians to undergo a yoke of servitude contrary to that state of
liberty, unto which they were called; For, Brethren, ye have been called unto
liberty, says he. 2. Such is the power and subtilty of inbred corruption, as
that it perverteth the nature even of those things which are best, and takes
occasion from them to do wickedly: for, there is hazard, lest occasion be taken
by corrupt nature, even from the doctrine of christian liberty, to break all
bonds, and to become licencious, as is supposed, while he says, Only use not
liberty for an occasion to the flesh. 3. The Minister of Jesus Christ ought
with great circumspection to guard and cautionate the Truth delivered by him,
and especially such Truths, as not being sufficiently guarded may readily be
mistaken, and made use of for the encouragement of corrupt nature in any vice
or error: for, such was this doctrine of christian liberty, and therefore the
Apostle does seasonably guard it, Only, says he, use not liberty for an
occasion to the flesh. 4. That our christian liberty purchased by Christ, may
be used aright, it is required that we do not abuse it as an occasion of
fleshly liberty, whether, first, by making those things indifferent and free,
which God has not made free, as the Gentiles did fornication, 1 Cor. 6. ver.
12, etc, Or, secondly, by the immoderate and excessive use of things in their
own nature indifferent, as of meat, drink, apparel, which is frequently
condemned, See Romans 13. 13. for, the Apostle prescribes this as one rule for
the right use-making of christian liberty; Only use not liberty for an occasion
of the flesh. 5. It is not sufficient for the right use-making of christian
liberty, that we do not from thence take occasion to sin our selves, but we
must also labor carefully to guard, lest by the offensive and undiscreet use
of liberty we give offense, and minister occasion of sin and stumbling unto
others: for, he prescribes this as a second rule, that in the use of their
liberty they would by love serve one another, having an eye especially upon
their neighbors spiritual edification, Romans 14. 13, 15, Doct. 6. This freedom
and liberty purchased by Christ, does not loose the ty of any necessary duty,
which we are under, whether to God or man. The yoke of duty is no ways
repugnant unto, but very consistent with christian liberty: for, the Apostle,
having at large exhorted them to stand to this liberty, he subjoyneth, by love
serve one another. 7. Though Christianity does not abolish the civil
distinction of masters and servants, Ephesians. 6. 5, 9. And though all Christians be
in some respects the Lords freemen, 1 Cor. 7. 22. yet, they are all (even the
greatest not being excepted) mutually servants one to another, in so far as
being fellow members of one body, (1 Cor. 12. 27.) they ought not to live unto
themselves only, but to spend themselves in their respective employments, for
the spiritual and civil advantage of the whole body, and of every particular
member thereof, so far as their capacity and calling (2 Cor. 8. 12, 13.) do
reach: for, the Apostle enjoyneth unto all without exception, serve one
another. 8. It is not sufficient we do those things which are in themselves
materially good, or conducing to our neighbors profit and advantage, except
what is done of that kind do flow from the fountain of christian love toward
him, 1 Cor. 13. 2, for, says he, serve one another by love. 9. There is no
duty so onerous in it self, or so far below us in our esteem, but the grace of
love, being lively in the heart, will make us pleasantly stoop unto it, if it
were even to serve the meanest person in the world: for, he commands all,
even the greatest, to serve one another by love; importing, where love is not,
this service will hardly be undergon, and that love will make it easy.

Verse. 14. For all the Law is fulfilled in one word, even in this: Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self.
HE inforceth the last Rule by two Reasons, first, This serving one another by
love, is the most compendious way to keep the whole Law, seeing the whole Law is
summed up in that one Word or Precept, (for the ten Precepts of the Law are
called so many Words, Exodus 34. 27.) of loving our neighbor (that is, every
one without exception, to whom we have any opportunity offered of doing good,
Luke 10. 36, 37.) and that, with as much sincerity as we do our selves: Now,
love to our neighbor, is called the fulfilling of the Law, not as if love to
God were not thereby commanded also, Mat. 22. 37. but because love to our
neighbor supposes love to God, and flows from it, as a stream from the
fountain, 1 John 5. 1. and is an evidence of it, 1 John 4. 21. Doct. 1. Though
Believers in Jesus Christ be delivered from the condemning sentence of the Law,
Romans 8. 1. yet, not from the directing power thereof. The Law does always
remain a rule of our new obedience, though it cease from being a Judge either
to justify, or condemn us: for, the Apostle inforceth the duty of love from
the authority of the Law, which does enjoin it; for, all the Law is fulfilled
in one word, etc. says he. 2. Love to our neighbor is a most comprehensive
duty, as comprising not only inward affection, but also outward action, and
extending it self to all the duties both positive and negative, which are
enjoined by the whole second Table; (See Mat. 22. 39.) love thy neighbor as
thy self. 3. There is not any of whatsoever rank or condition, whether friend
or foe, (Mat. 5. 44.) to whom we do not owe the affection of love, and the
conscientious discharge of all those duties, which are commanded in the second
Table; for, we are commanded to love our neighbor, (that is, as Christ
explaineth, Luke 10. 36, 37.) every man as opportunity does offer. 4. As the
Precepts of the second Table do enjoin every man to love, and go about all
other commanded duties toward his neighbor; so also toward himself: For,
although that inordinate and excessive love to self (which is in every man by
nature, and whereby a man does so love himself, as that he postponeth Gods
glory and his neighbors good to the fulfilling of his own fleshly lusts) be
nowhere commanded, but expressly guarded against, Mat. 10. 39. Yet, there is a
lawful orderly love to self, which is enjoined unto every man: so as that by
all lawful means he labor to maintain what honor God has put upon himself
according to the fifth Command, and to preserve his own life according to the
sixth Command, and so forth of the rest: for, the Command to love our neighbor
as our self, supposes we ought to love our self, to wit, with subordination to
God. 5. The love, and other duties flowing from love, which every man is to
carry unto, and to discharge toward himself in subordination to God, have the
force of a rule and measure unto that love which we owe unto others, so as that
we are to love them, first, for God and His Command, 1 John 4. 21. Secondly, in
subordination to God, Mat. 10. 37. Thirdly, in sincerity, there being both
affection, and action flowing from affection in our love to Him, 1 John 3. 18.
for, so we do, and ought to love our selves; Now the Law commands to love our
neighbor as our selves.

Verse. 15. But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not
consumed one of another.
HEre is a second argument, to enforce the exercise of mutual love, taken from
some dangerous effects, which, doubtless, had already followed in part among
those Galatians, occasioned by their debates and controversies, and would yet
follow more upon the want of love, to wit, first, Their bitter strifes,
backbitings, railings, and reproaches, set forth by the biting of wild beasts;
And, secondly, other real injuries, by fraud or violence, which seem to be
pointed at, by devouring, which is more than biting: And lastly, as a
consequence of the two former, a total vastation and consumption of the whole
Church. Doct. 1. As it is a matter of no small difficulty to entertain love
among the members of a Church, when they are divided in opinion and judgment
about religious Truths; So where love grows cold, Church-divisions have
ordinarily sad and scandalous effects, which argue little of a tender frame of
heart in those who have them, even such as are here mentioned, biting, and
devouring one another. 2. However a sectarian spirit does ordinarily pretend to
much sobriety and meekness, especially when it first appears, and has but
few to give it any countenance, Romans 16. 18. yet, so soon as it has gathered
strength, and gained many followers, it has been always found most bitter and
cruel: for, the effects of this renting schismatic spirit among those
Galatians, were no less than biting and devouring one another. 3. In time of
Church-divisions, though that party which is for truth and piety be always the
most sober, Jude v. 20. 21. yet, considering that even they have much
unmortified corruption apt to be provoked by the insolency of their schismatic
adversaries there is no small hazard, lest even they vent much of fleshly zeal
and passion, and while they are defending Truth, become guilty of several
miscarriages, and so be rendered much the worse of their contests and divisions:
for, the sin which he does partly reprove, and partly guard against, was
mutual, and of both parties; If ye bite and devour one another, says he. 4.
When schism in a Church is not only maintained on the one hand with fleshly
passion, strife, reproaches, and other real injuries, but when it is also
oppugned upon the other hand, not so much with the sword of the Spirit the Word
of Truth, as with the same fleshly and sinful means, Then especially is schism
the forerunner and procuring cause of desolation and ruin to both parties,
and to the whole Church; and this not only because of that hemous guilt which
is in it, but also that stumbling blocks are thereby multiplied, which cannot
but prevail mightily to make men doubt of all Truth, and in end prove
nulli-fidians: for, the Apostle holds this forth as the consequence of their
biting and devouring one another, Take heed, says he, lest ye be destroyed one
of another. 5. As it is a matter of great difficulty to make men of credit and
parts, being once engaged in their contentious debates, to project the
consequences of their so doing further than the hopedfor victory against their
contrary party, Act. 15. 37, etc. So it were no small wisdom, before folk
meddle with strife, so as to engage their fleshly passions in it, however they
may be otherwise provoked, seriously to project and consider what woeful, sad
and dangerous effects may follow thereupon to the Church of God: for, says he,
Take heed, lest ye be destroyed one of another.

Verse. 16. This I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the
lust of the flesh.
HE returns to the first Rule given, ver. 13. (to w^^, That they would not
use their liberty for an occasion (...) the flesh) by a transition usual unto
him when he is further to insist upon any thing formerly spoken (See chap. 4.
ver. 1.) and furnishes them with an help for reducing that Rule unto practice,
to wit, Walking in the Spirit, or following the motions and directions of the
renewed part, or new-man of Grace in the heart (for which the word Spirit, when
it is opposed to flesh, is usually taken, See Joh. 3. 6.) the fruit of their
walking thus he shows should be their mortifying, and keeping at under the
flesh, or their corrupt and unrenewed part, in so far, as though the lusts, or
first inordinate motions of inbred corruption (for so is lust taken in the
tenth Commandment) wo^^ not be totally suppressed, yet they should not be
fulfilled, or brought unto the complete act, with deliberation and consent,
which does more fully speak that which is, ver. 13. concerning their not using
liberty for an occasion to the flesh. Doct. 1. There is not any possibility of
getting the power of inbred corruption subdued, or the lusts of finfull flesh
curbed to any saving purpose by a natural man, or by any man without a work of
saving Grace wrought in his heart by the Spirit of God: for he prescribes unto
them walking in the Spirit, as the only remedy against fulfilling the lusts of
the flesh, which supposes that the Spirit, or the work of saving Grace and
Regeneration wrought by the Spirit, must be first in them. 2. The prevailing of
corruption over Christians, even to the accomplishing of the outward acts
thereof after deliberation (which sometimes has come to pass, as in David and
others) does not prove that they never had a work of Grace, or that they have
totally fallen from it, but only that they walk not in the Spirit; the motions
and directions of the renewed part are not obeyed, but quenched; the power
whereof, wherewith the renewed faculties are endued is not exercised, and
hereby God is provoked to withdraw His actuating Grace, so that our lusts, once
in part mortified, cannot but gather strength, and range abroad in the soul
without any effectual resistance: for, Paul says not, if ye have the Spirit,
but if ye walk in the Spirit, ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. 3.
The sin of lust and covetousness, as it speaks the first motions of
corruption, whether in our understanding, will, or sensual appetite, toward
unlawful and forbidden objects, namely, such motions as are sudden, and run
before our deliberate consent, they cannot be wholly abandoned by the child of
God in this life, no not, though he use the utmost of diligence and
watchfulness: for, upon their walking in the Spirit, he does not promise that
those lusts shall not be in them; only, they shall not fulfill the lusts of the
flesh. 4. It is a Minister's duty to insist so far upon any point of necessary
Truth, until he make it, so far as he is able, sufficiently plain according to
the capacity of the hearers, as also if the Truth in hand contain a practical
duty, the practice whereof is attended with many difficulties, he is to insist
upon it until he furnish the hearers with some pertinent helps and motives unto
that duty: for, so does Paul insist upon that Truth delivered, ver. 13. This I
say then; and by insisting does explain it, ye shall not fulfill the lusts of
the flesh; and furnishes them with an help how it shall be practiced, Walk in
the Spirit, says he.

Verse. 17. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other: so that ye cannot do the
things that ye would.
HE proves that their following the motions of the renewed part, should keep
the unrenewed part at under, by two arguments; first, Because the renewed, and
unrenewed part, or Spirit and Flesh, do lust against, uncessantly oppose and
labor to suppress one another, by reason of that great contrariety, which is
betwixt those two principles, as being of a different original, Job, 3. 6. and
supported and assisted with contrary powers, ver. 19. and 22. whence he shows
it does follow, that we cannot completely effectuate neither the good nor the
evil which we would; the flesh always opposing that which we would according
to the direction of the Spirit; the Spirit again opposing what we would
according to the direction of the flesh: which latter is the conclusion he does
here prove, as it is expressed, ver. 16. Doct. 1. As a Minister ought to point
at some helps unto the People for their better discharging of any difficult
duty; So he ought to make it appear that those are helps indeed, and how they
contribute for the more easy practicing of the duty pressed; otherwise they
receive no encouragement thereby, neither to set about the duty, nor to make
use of those helps in order to the duty: for, the Apostle having prescribed an
help for keeping the flesh at under, does here demonstrate clearly, that the
thing prescribed does really help, as appears from the scope. 2. As the
regenerate man has a renewed principle of Grace in all the faculties and
powers of the soul, wrought in him by the Spirit of God; So he has in all
those some remainder of corruption yet unmortified, whereby his whole mind,
will and affections are partly spiritual, partly carnal, both flesh and Spirit
are in him; For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, says he. 3. None of
those powers or principles in the regenerate man, are dead, dull, or merely
passive, but both of them are working and active; for, the flesh lusts, and
the Spirit lusts, whereby is meaned, that both of them do sway and incline
the whole man to work in a way congruous to their respective natures, the one
to good, and the other to evil. 4. The activity of these two active principles
is in a flat opposition the one to the other; so that in one and the same man,
and while he is about one and the same action, there is a conflict and battle
betwixt these two contrary parties, Romans 7. 19, 21. The flesh lusts against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh. 5. As there is a mixture of both
these principles in all the powers and faculties of the regenerate man; So
there is a mixture of their respective influence and efficacy in every action
of his, whereby, though there be a prevalency of the one above the other in
some actions; yet there is not one action to which both of them do not
contribute somewhat: if not by a causal influence; yet by some measure of
active resistance; For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh. 6. Hence it follows, that as the actions of the regenerate
are not perfect and free from a sinful mixture; So there is some difference
betwixt his worst actions, and those same actions as gone about by the
unregenerate man, even this, that the flesh does not advance with a full gale,
but meets with the contrary tide of resistance from the Spirit in some
degree: for, as the flesh lusts against the Spirit, so the Spirit lusts
against the flesh: and ye cannot do the thing that ye would, says he. 7.
Though unregenerate men may have somewhat like to this spiritual combat, even a
conflict sometimes betwixt the natural conscience, and rebellious affections,
Romans 2. 1. yet they have not this same very combat here spoken of, wherein one
faculty is not carried against the other, but every faculty, as it is flesh, is
carried against it self, as it is spirit; now that this combat is not in the
unregenerate man, appears from this, that he is wholly flesh, Genesis 6. 5. and
not at all spirit, And this combat is betwixt flesh and spirit; for, the flesh
lusts against the spirit. 8. The mutual resistance and opposition of those
two parties, flesh and spirit, in the regenerate man, as it begins at the
very first rise of every action in the understanding, will, or affections; So
it continues and waxes always more fierce, as the action is carried-on
toward its full accomplish meant by the executive faculties: for, says he, Ye
cannot do the things that ye would; importing, that our willing of good or
evil, is more free from this opposition (though not altogether free) than our
actual doing or accomplishing of it, being so willed. See Romans 7. -18.

Verse. 18. But if ye be led by the Spirit, ye are not under the Law.
HE proves the same conclusion, secondly, showing that they who are led and
guided by the regenerate part, or an inward principle of grace within (which it
all one with walking in the Spirit, spoken of, ver. 16.) are not under the Law,
whereby is not meaned, that they are not under the Law as a rule and guide of
new obedience; for, both the Word and the Spirit do guide, as shall appear from
the first Doctrine; but they are not under the condemning (Romans 8. 1.) nor yet
the irritating power of the Law, whereby the more that unregenerate men are
urged unto rigid obedience by the Law, the more does their corrupt nature spurn
and rebel, as being desp(...) to get all done which the Law enjoyneth. This
irritating power of the Law is spoken of, Romans 7. 5. Now, they who are led by
the Spirit, are not thus under the Law, because unto such a fountain of Grace
is opened-up for enabling them in some measure to do what the Law enjoyneth,
Phil. 4. 13. and for pardoning them wherein they fall short, 1 Job. 2. 1, 2. So
that corruption in them is not so much irritated by the Law as in the
unregenerate, and by consequence the lusts of the flesh are not fulfilled, as
was expressed, ver. 16. Doct. 1. The regenerate part, or new man of Grace,
performs the office of guide and leader to the godly in all their actions
which are truly spiritual, In so far as, first, it self is ruled by the Word,
and to be tried by the Word, Isa. 8. 20. which Word alone is the external light
and lanthorn to direct our steps, Psalm. 119. 105. as the light of the Sun or
candle is to the eye. Secondly, the work of Grace it self, as the understanding
is thereby illightned, is the internal light whereby the regenerate man does
spiritually understand the things of God revealed in Scripture, 1 Cor. 2. 12.
as by the internal light of the eye we discern those things which are made
conspicuous by the external light of the Sun or candle. Thirdly, the same work
of Grace, as the will and affections are thereby renewed, being actuated by the
continual supply of exciting grace from the Spirit of the Lord, is a
strengthening guide to all spiritual actions, by whose influence alone the
regenerate man (who as to any principle of nature and freewill within himself,
is not sufficient to think any thing, 2 Cor. 3. 5.) is rendered able, and made
actually to walk in the ways of God. Philip. 2. 13. for, while he says, If ye
be led by the Spirit, he supposes the office of the Spirit, and regenerate
part is to guide and lead. 2. The natural man, so long as he remains in that
state, is so much a slave to his sinful lusts, That those things which are
appointed of God to curb and make them weaker, are so far from bringing about
the end proposed, that his lusts are thereby enraged and made more violent:
for, the Apostle (being to prove that those who are led by the Spirit do not
fulfill the lusts of the flesh; which is laid down to be proved, ver. 16.)
says, such are not under the Law, to wit, the strict and rigid exaction of the
Law; importing, that the rigidity of the Law, which of its own nature tends
to restrain sin, and to make it weaker, is turned by the unregenerate man unto
an occasion for the fulfilling of his lusts.

Verse. 19. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, 20. Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred,
variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditious, heresies, 21. Envyings,
murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like: of the which I tell you
before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things,
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.
FOr the better understanding and observing of the rule delivered, ver. 13. use
not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, he makes a Catalogue of some works
of the flesh, which were best known to those Galatians: And, first, he
declares the nature and condition of those works, that though the inward root
of concupiscence from whence they flow, be hid, and therefore it is not easy
to convince a man that he is led by it; yet those effects and works of the
flesh are evident and patent, so that a man may pass judgment upon the
prevalency of flesh and concupiscence in his heart, when those its effects do
break out in his life. Secondly, he makes a particular enumeration of
seventeen of those works, expressly showing that there are several other works
of the flesh besides these, only he thinks it sufficient to have instanced
these, and these rather than others, because probably they have been too
commonly practiced among the Galatians: which works of the flesh here
enumerated, are, First, Adultery, or the sin of filthynesse betwixt parties,
whereof one at least is married. Secondly, Fornication, or the sin of
filthiness betwixt parties both free from the yoke of marriage. Thirdly,
Uncleanness, under which are usually comprehended all other sorts of filthy
lusts, and particularly that against nature, Romans 1. 24. Fourthly,
Lasciviousness, or wantonness, whereby is meaned all petulant and wanton
behavior, tending to excite the lust of filthiness, whether in our selves or
others. These are, ver. 19. Fifthly, Idolatry, a sin whereby religious worship,
due to God only (Mat. 4. 10.) is given unto those which by nature are no gods,
chap. 4. 9. or, whereby the true God is worshipped in, or before Images, Exodus
32. 4, 5. The former idolatry is forbidden in the first Command, the latter in
the second. Sixthly, Witchcraft, or a devilish art, whereby certain men or
women having under some violent fit of a tentation entered a covenant, either
express or implicit, with the Devil, are enabled by the Devil's assistance
upon their using certain rites and ceremonies prescribed by him, to work things
strange and wonderful, so far as God permits. Seventhly, Hatred, or, as the
word signifies, enimity and hatred in the heart toward our neighbor, joined
with a rooted desire to do him hurt, whether for apprehended or real injuries.
Eighthly, Variance, or contention and strife by disgraceful and opprobrious
words, arising from the forementioned enimity and alienation of hearts.
Ninthly, Emulations, not that good emulation whereby we strive to excel others
in that which is good, not for love of applause or other by-respects, but
merely from the love which we carry unto that which is good; this is commanded,
1 Cor. 14. 12. but carnal emulations, whereby we are grieved at the good which
is in others, not so much from hatred to their good, as because it
overshadoweth us, and therefore is joined with a desire to outstrip them in
that good, which we are grieved for, wherein it differs from envy. Tenthly,
Wrath, whereby, according to the force of the word in the original, is meaned
that sudden passionate commotion, and perturbation of the affections, through
apprehension of an injury offered, transforming a man to a very beast, and
thrusting him forward to act some mischief, Luke 4. 28, 29. Eleventhly, Strife,
which, as it differs from the eight work of the flesh formerly mentioned,
does signify a certain kind of litigious striving, probably about civil rights
and interests, which, when it is for trifling matters, or in defense of
unrighteousness, (1 Cor. 6. 8.) or separated from a spirit of Christian
meekness and condescendence (1 Cor. 6. 7.) is a work of the flesh here
condemned. Twelfthly, Seaitions, or renting of those into diverse factions, who
ought to be joined in one common society: (for so much the word in the Original
does hint at) which renting work, when it falls out in the State, is called
by the name of sedition, and in the Church by the name of schism, especially
when there is a rent not only in opinion, but also in affection and design or
endeavor, each party laboring to countermine the other. Thirteenthly,
Heresies, which are somewhat more than simple schism and faction, 1 Cor. 11.
18, 19. even gross and dangerous errors voluntarily held (Tit. 3. 11.) and
factiously maintained by some person or persons within the visible Church (Act.
20. 30.) in opposition to some chief or substantial Truths grounded upon, and
drawn from the holy Scripture, as the places cited, and the notation of the
word in the Original will in a good part bear. These are, ver. 20.
Fourteenthly, Envyings, which are those base passions, whereby we grieve at the
good and prosperity of others, without any endeavor to attain unto that good
our selves. Fifteenthly, Murders, or slaughters, which frequently follow upon
the for(...), whereby is not meaned the execution of public justice upon
malefactors; for, that is commanded, Lev. 24. 21. but the satisfaction of
private revenge, by shedding of blood, and the taking away of our neighbor's
life unjustly, though under pretense of public justice, 1 King. 21. 13.
Sixteenthly, Drunkenness, when men do drink wine, or strong drink excessively,
and beyond that measure which fitteth them both in soul and body for the
service of God, and duties of their calling. Seventeenthly, Revellings, The
word does usually signify excess of belly-chear in riotous feasts, joined
with all sorts of lascivious behavior. The Apostle, having made this
enumeration, that he might terrify them from the practice of those evils,
gives them timous warning now by Letter, as he had done formerly by Preaching
when he was with them, that impenitent persisters in these and such like sins,
should never inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, and by consequence should be
eternally damned, Mat. 25. 41. I say, impenitent persisters; for, this and all
such threatenings are to be understood with the exception of repentance, Jer.
18. 7, 8. Doct. 1. It is not sufficient that a Minister, having divided his
hearers in two ranks, to wit, spiritual and carnal, or renewed and unrenewed,
denounce eternal wrath to the latter, and promise God's favor and life eternal
to the former; but it is also necessary, that he give evident and
discriminating marks of both, and of the one from the other, whereby every one
may be in some measure enabled without mistake to judge of his own inward
estate, and so to know whether the judgment denounced, or mercy promised, be
his allotted portion: for, the Apostle gives such discriminating marks of
flesh and Spirit, from their respective effects; The works of the flesh are
manifest, says he; and, ver. 22. the fruit of the Spirit is love. 2. As it is
not sufficient for a Minister to condemn and reprove sin in the general,
without condescending upon some particular instances and examples; because
general doctrine is not so well understood, and especially in the reproof of
sin, it is looked upon almost by every hearer as if he himself were not
concerned in it: So in the matter of instances and examples (because he cannot,
neither were it convenient to enumerate all) such would be condescended upon as
are best known, and most commonly practiced among those to whom he preaches:
for the Apostle gives such instances of the works of the flesh, as for the
most part, the present defection, schism and distemper flowing from thence,
which was among those Galatians, did carry them unto Idolatry, heresy,
variance, strife, etc. and, as it seems, all the rest have been but too
commonly practiced amongst them, as adultery, fornication, etc. 3. Sin has
seated it self, not only in the sensual appetite, but in the more noble
faculties of the soul also, namely our understanding and will; so that the
whole man is corrupted by nature, and altogether flesh; for, the works of the
flesh here enumerated are of three sorts, according to those three parts of
corrupt flesh, or nature, to wit, our reason, will, and sensual appetite: So as
some of them are seated in, and have their rise from each of those; the four
first, Adultery, fornication, uncleanness and wantonness, and the two last,
belong to the sensual appetite, Idolatry and heresy to blind and corrupt
reason; Witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions,
envyings, murders, belong partly to the depraved will, and partly to the
sensual appetite. 4. Not only are grossly scandalous evils, works of the flesh,
excluding those who are guilty from the Kingdom of Heaven, such as Adultery,
witchcraft, etc. but also such sins, as being seated in the heart, do not break
forth to the view of the world, of which sort are hatred, emulations, envyings:
for, even they that do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. 5.
There is no sin so gross, as being against all piety, conscience, and the very
light of nature it self, which people have not need to guard against, and
Ministers to deter them from by the terrible denunciations of God's heavy
judgment against those, who shall be found guilty of such like; And that
because the seed of all sin is in every man, Romans 3. 10, etc. And there is no
sin, into which a man given over of God will not fall, when he is tempted to
it, Exodus 10. 27. for, the Apostle thinks it necessary to scar them even from
Adultery, witchcraft and murder, by showing that they who do such things shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God. 6. That a Minister may bear down and suppress
sin amongst the people committed to his charge to any purpose, it is necessary
he inveigh by just and necessary reproof, not only against the gross and
external acts of sin and wickedness, but also against the first motions and
conception of those sins in the heart, and every thing which may prove an
occasion of breaking forth in those grosser evils; for, the Apostle sets
forth the evil not only of Adultery, fornication and uncleanness, but also of
wantonness; not only of witchcraft, but also of hatred and variance, which
often prove tentations unto witchcraft; and not only of murders, but also of
wrath, envyings, emulations, strife: all which make way for murders. 7.
Ministers are God's watchmen, Ezekiel. 3. 17. and therefore are bound to give
faithful and timous warning unto every man of his spiritual hazard; lest
otherwise the blood of people be required at his hands: This made Paul often to
forewa^^ both presently, and in time past, that they who do thos^ things shall
not inherit the kingdom of God. 8. Though former warnings have not the expected
success; yet, the Minister of Christ, must not faint nor despair, as if there
were no hope; but ought to renew his zeal, and reiterate those very same
warnings and threatenings, as not knowing when the Lord may give the long,
wishedfor blessing, 2 Timothy 2. 25. Thus did Paul; Of the which I tell you
before, as I have also told you in time past. 9. As life eternal and the state
of glory to be enjoyed after this, is a Kingdom, because there shall be an
order betwixt King and subject there, the one commanding, the other obeying,
without any hazard of rebellion and faction, Mat. 6. -10. There shall be
perfect freedom from all oppression and slavery there, Ephesians. 4. -30. Yea, every
subject shall enjoy a kingdom and wear a crown there, Iam. 1. 12. So this
Kingdom is given, not for our merit or works, but by right of sonship and by
virtue of our adoption, even as the inheritance is conveyed unto the heir: for,
says the Apostle, speaking of Heaven, They shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God. 10. Though there be a mixture of sheep and goats, wheat and tares, godly
and ungodly in the visible Church, Mat. 13. 29, 30. yet in Heaven there shall
be no such mixture, no unclean thing shall enter there; for, they who do such
things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, says Paul.

Verse. 22. But the fruit of the Spirit is Love, joy, peace, longsuffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, 23. Meekness, temperance: against such there is
no Law.
THe Apostle, in like manner, for the better understanding, and the more easy
practicing of the remedy prescribed against fleshly lusts, ver. 16. He gives a
catalogue of some of those gracious virtues, and the exercise of them, which
flow from the Spirit, or the root of Grace in the heart: And having called the
former instances (ver. 19.) only works of the flesh, he designeth these by the
name of fruits of the Spirit; because they are acceptable to God, Romans 12. -1.
and profitable to the man himself, 1 Timothy 6. 6. as savoury and wholesome fruit,
which the works of the flesh are not, Romans 6. 21-. Next, he enumerateth nine of
those fruits, not as if they were not more, for there are many more virtues than
those, as knowledge, hope, patience, 2 Pet. 1. 5, etc. but, because those are
virtues standing almost in direct opposition to the former vices, and such as
for the exercise thereof he wished chiefly among those Galatians; Which are,
first, Love, or an holy affection whereby we love God for Himself, (Mat. 22.
37.) and our neighbor in, and for God, 1 Job. 4. 21. Secondly, Joy, that holy
affection of the soul, delighting it self, and taking pleasure in those things,
and in that measure which God allows. Thirdly, Peace, or that concord and
agreement which a reconciled soul has with God, Romans 5. 1. and which he
endeavors to have with all men in God, Heb. 12. 14. Fourthly, Longsuffering,
whereby we moderate anger, do patiently bear, and forgive even many injuries,
Col. 3. -12, 13. Fifthly, Gentleness, or kindness, whereby we labor to be
affable and pleasant unto our neighbor, and easy to be entreated, even when
he has wronged us, Romans 12. 14. Ephesians. 4. 31. Sixthly, Goodness, a virtue
whereby we are inclined to communicate what good is in us for the advantage of
our neighbor both in his spiritual (1 Pet. 4. 10.) and bodily (Gal. 6. 10.)
estate. Seventhly, Faith, whereby we conceive in this place is understood not
so much justifying faith, and faith toward God, which is the root and fountain
of all those fruits, (ver. -6.) as faith and fidelity toward men, whereby from
a renewed heart and for God's glory we speak nothing but truth, Ephesians. 4. 25. and
make conscience to perform whatsoever is undertaken by us, Psalm. 15. -4.
Eighthly, Meekness, a virtue whereby we moderate anger, so as that we are not
provoked but for just causes, and not more or longer provoked than the Word of
God allows, whereby also we do speedily restrain and suppress anger when it
has transgressed the just bounds, Ephesians. 4. 26. Ninthly, Temperance, or
continency, whereby our fleshly appetite is kept within bounds, in seeking
after honor, meat, drink, pleasure or riches. Lastly, The Apostle, having made
this enumeration, that he may excite the Galatians to the practice of those
virtues, he commends them from this, That the Law was not made against them
or the practisers of them, either to condemn or accuse them. In which words, by
a figure, or flowr of speech, more is to be understood than is spoken, as Psalm.
51. -17. even that the Moral Law (concerning the standing whereof, as to its
directing power, there was no controversy betwixt Paul and his adversaries)
does expressly command and commend them, which could not be said of those
ceremonial abstinences or performances, so much urged by the false Apostles.
Doct. 1. There is no way for gracious virtues, or the fruits of the Spirit to
grow and thrive in our heart, unless the works of the flesh be set against,
and in some measure mortified: these thistles and weeds must be plucked up,
else they draw the sap and strength of the heart from the good grain: The
Apostle's method points at so much, while he engages them to mortify the
works of the flesh in the first place, and next commends unto them the fruits
of the Spirit; But the fruit of the Spirit is Love, joy, peace, etc. 2. It is
not sufficient that we set about the work of mortification and curbing of sin
and vice, but must also endeavor to have the heart replenished with the
contrary gracious virtues; otherwise sin, being as it were overpowered, may
lurk for a season, but will afterward revive and take strength, Mat. 12. 44,
45. for, the Apostle, having engaged them to mortify the works of the flesh,
does now excite them to the exercise of gracious virtues; But the fruit of the
Spirit is Love, joy, peace, etc. 3. There is no virtue truly saving and
acceptable to God, but that which flows from the grace of regeneration. The
virtues of the Heathen, how excellent soever they seemed to be, were but
shadows of saving virtues, as not coming from a clean fountain, a gracious root
in the heart, Jo^ 14. 4. nor yet levelling at the right end, God's glory in the
chief place, Col. 3. 17. but some other thing inferior to that, Act. 24. 26.
Besides, they were not done in faith, and so could not be acceptable to God,
Heb. 11. 6. for, the Apostle calls all those which are virtues indeed, the
fruits and effects of the Spirit; But the fruit of the Spirit is Love, joy,
peace, says he. 4. If we compare the graces of God's Spirit with the works of
the flesh, there will appear such a beauty in the one, such deformity in the
other, such solid satisfaction and contentment in the one, and such
disquietnesse and vexation of spirit in the other, that laying aside the
difference which is betwixt them by reason of their original and event, those
other considerations may serve abundantly to make us fall in love with the
graces of God's Spirit, and abominate the works of the flesh: for, the works of
the flesh, are Adultery, witchcraft, hatred, strife, envyings, murders; but the
fruit of the Spirit, is Love, joy, peace, long-suffering, etc. 5. We are to
judge of persons and practices, by thinking well of them, or otherwise, not
according to the common esteem in which they are among men, 1 Cor. 4. 3. but
according to the esteem that God has of them, and according to what the Word
of God, which is the absolute rule of right and wrong, Truth and Error, does
pronounce concerning them: for, Paul judges it sufficient to commend the
practice of those virtues from this, that the Law of God did commend them, and
approved of those who made conscience of them; Against such there is no Law,
says he.

Verse. 24. And they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the
affections and lusts.
THe Apostle, in this Verse, adds a new Argument to enforce the practice of
that first Rule given, ver. 13. and cleared, ver. 19, 20, 21. to wit, that they
should not give occasion to, or fulfill the lusts of the flesh; because those
who are Christ's, as they all professed themselves to be, have by virtue of
Christ's death, crucified and put to death their fleshly corruption, with all
its sinful motions, whether they be sinful affections and passions, such as
those, whereby the man's mind does suffer, is troubled and afflicted, as malice,
envy, anger, and the like; or whether they be sinful lusts, such as these
which are stirred up by fleshly carnal baits and pleasures, as motions to
intemperance, uncleanness, and such like. Now those who are Christ's, are said
to have crucified all those, because every one who professes the Name of
Christ, has engaged himself by his profession and covenant sealed in Baptism
so to do, Romans 6. 3, 4. and the truly Regenerate, besides this engagement by
profession, have actually begun this work: so that though this body of corrupt
flesh be in them; yet by His Spirit (Romans 8. 13.) and by imitating His Cross
(Romans 6. 6.) they are upon the work of mortifying it, suppressing the
endeavors, and smothering the effects of it, Romans 6. 12. Doct. 1. All they who
are led by, and walk in the Spirit, or who are truly regenerate, and who are
actually engaged in the work of mortifying their corrupt nature, are Christ's
in a peculiar manner, to wit, by right of donation from the Father, Joh. 6. 37.
by right of emption or redemption, 1 Cor. 6. 20. and by right of resignation,
all such having actually resigned themselves unto Christ, as a mansion for Him
to dwell and walk in, 1 Cor. 6. 19. and in every thing to be guided by Him,
Act. 9. 6. for, the Apostle uses those expressions indifferently as being of
equal extent, Walk in the Spirit, ver. 16. and if ye be led by the Spirit, ver.
18. and in this verse, they who are Christ's, have crucified the flesh. 2. The
work of mortification strikes at all sin, and spares none, as well pleasant
sins, whereby fleshly lusts are satisfied, as other more vexatious evils,
whereby the mind does in a kind suffer, and is afflicted: for, speaking of this
work, he says, They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, that is, the
root of corruption, and then they have crucified all its branches, not only
affections, or vexing passions, but also desirable lusts. 3. There is not any
argument more moving or effectually exciting unto the work of mortification
with a sincere Christian, than that which is taken from his engagement to it by
profession, and the first beginnings thereof wrought in him already by the
Spirit of God; for, this is the Apostles scope, that they would not walk in, or
fulfill the lusts of the flesh, because all of them were engaged by profession
to crucify the flesh, and some had actually begun to do so already; They that
are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, says he.

Verse. 25. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit.
HE inforceth also the remedy prescribed against fleshly lusts, ver. 16. and
cleared, ver. 22, 23. even that they would walk after the Spirit; because they
who live in the Spirit, or are made partakers of that new life of grace in
Regeneration, Joh. 3. 5, 6. (according as they all professed themselves to be)
must of necessity walk in the Spirit, by following in their life and
conversation the motions and directions of the new-man of grace in the heart.
The force of which consequence lies in this, that as the principle of life is
within, whether flesh or spirit, so must the actions, fruits and effects
flowing from that principle be. Doct. 1. The Minister of Jesus Christ is not to
bind heavy burdens upon the Lords People, without so much as touching them with
one of his little fingers himself, Mat. 23. 4. but ought to lay the edg of
every necessary exhortation unto his own heart with the first, and thereby to
evidence, that as he does not look on himself, as free from the yoke of duty no
more than others; So he sincerely intends by his own practice to hold forth a
real copy of that which he presses upon others, 1 Timothy 4. 12. for, Paul
directs this exhortation to himself as well as to them; If we live in the
Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit, says he. 2. The Lord's method in
bestowing grace upon graceless sinners, is first, to infuse the principles of
a new life, or gracious habits and powers in the soul; and next, to actuate
these powers, making them actually to do those works which are spiritually
good: Spiritual motion and action presupposes a principle of a spiritual life,
as a thing previous unto, and different from it: for, says he, If we live in
the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. 3. To walk in the Spirit, or to
follow the conduct of God's Spirit, and of His gracious work in us, is a far
other thing, than to cast by the rule of the Word, and to follow only whatever
motions or impressions are set home with any forcible impulse upon our spirits,
as if those were the motions of the Spirit of God, which may happily be motions
of our own corrupt flesh, or suggestions from Satan, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. This
walking in the Spirit here exhorted unto, is walking orderly and by rule, even
by the rule of God's Word, Isa. 8. 20. for, so much does the word in the
Original import, which signifies to walk orderly, by rule, by line, by
measure, as Soldiers do march into the battle; Let us walk in the Spirit,
says he. 4. Though a man cannot pass sentence upon his state before God,
whether it be good or bad, by some more or fewer particular acts of his life, 1
King. 8. 46. yet he may and ought to pass sentence upon it according to his
way, and the ordinary strain of his life and conversation. A godless
conversation argues a carnal heart destitute of all spiritual life, and a
pious conversation does argue a renewed heart, and a principle of spiritual
life within: for, so much will the Apostle's reasoning bear, If we live in the
Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit.

Verse. 26. Let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one another, envying
one another.
THe Apostle (having hitherto prosecuted and enforced the use-making of that
first rule given, ver. 13. for directing them in the right use of Christian
liberty) returns now to prosecute the other rule, By love serve one another;
And in this Verse dehorteth them from some vices, which do wholly impede this
service of love, especially from ambition, or an itching desire after vain
glory, estimation and applause; which vice is usually attended with other two,
first, provoking of others, chiefly inferiors, by reproaching and doing of real
injuries to them, as being nothing in the vainglorious man's esteem, he
esteems so much of himself. Secondly, envying of others, chiefly superiors
and equals, in so far as any thing in them does seem to eclipse that glory and
esteem of which the vainglorious man is so much desirous. Doct. 1. Though a
man may lawfully carry a due regard unto, and have a care of his own good name
and estimation among others in its own place, Romans 12. -17. especially that
hereby he may be kept in a better capacity to do good unto those with whom he
does converse, Mat. 5. 16. Yet, desire of applause and approbation from men is
sinful, and to be eschewed, when we seek after, and are satisfied with
applause or esteem for those things which are not in us, 2 King. 10. 16 or
which are not worthy of so much esteem as we do seek for, Amos 6. 13. or are
not praiseworthy at all, as not being commended of God, Philip. 3. 19. or when
we seek after applause from men, even for things praiseworthy, not in
subordination to, but equally with, or more than the honor of God, (Mat. 6.
2.) or to be approven of Him, Joh. 12. 43. for, this is the desire of vain
glory, from which the Apostle dehorteth; Let us not be desirous of vain glory,
says he. 2. How this desire of vain glory impedeth love and peace, and how all
glory of this kind is but vain or empty glory, See Philip. 2. Verse. 3. Doct. 2,
3. Doct. 3. This lust and desire of vain glory is so subtle, as taking its rise
sometimes from those things in us which are good, 2 Cor. 12. 7. and so
desirable, as tending to make others prostrate themselves before the idol of
those apprehended or real excellencies in us which we our selves do so much
adore; that the best of men, and those who are endued with excellent graces,
gifts and privileges, have need to guard and watch, lest even they be
overtaken with it: for, therefore, as one reason, does Paul include himself in
this exhortation; Let us not be desirous of vain glory. 4. Though it be lawful
and praiseworthy to provoke and excite one another to love and good works,
Heb. 10. 24. chiefly by our good example and forwardness in every commanded
duty, 2 Cor. 9. 2. yet, when by doing of real injuries unto others we provoke
and excite corruption in them to take some sinful course for their own ease or
redress (1 Samuel 25. 33, 34.) we are herein guilty, and that not only of
committing sin our selves, but of being the occasion of sin unto others, and
therefore would eschew it: for, this is it the Apostle forbids, even
provoking one another. 5. In setting against any sin, we would look not only
upon that sin alone, but also upon those other possibly less pleasant and
baser sins, which of necessity do accompany it; that so our indignation may be
heightened the more against it, as carrying with it a train of such attendants:
for, here the Apostle, dehorting them from the desire of vain glory, that he
may make them the more to detest it, holds forth the necessary dependence
which two other vexations and base evils have upon it; Provoking one another,
envying one another, says he.

CHAP. VI.
IN the first part of this Chapter, he presses the exercise of mutual love, in
two exhortations. And, first, he exhorts them to endeavor the reclaiming of
those who were fallen, ver. 1. and to bear patiently with the sinful
infirmities one of another; because, first, hereby they should obey the Command
enjoining mutual love, ver. 2. Secondly, self-conceit, which marreth the
exercise of this duty, is but a self-deceiving, ver. 3. And therefore he
prescribes a remedy against that evil, to wit, self-searching; And inforceth
it, because, first, they should attain to such gloriation as God allows of,
ver. 4. And secondly, every man must give an account of his own actions to God,
ver. 5. In the second place, he exhorts unto beneficence in the general, and
especially toward their Ministers, ver. 6. And, having held forth God for a
party unto those who neglect this duty, he does press it from the similitude
of sowing and reaping, ver. 7. which he enlarges, and applies to an harvest
of death and corruption to be reaped by those who do evil, and of life eternal
by those who do well, ver. 8. whence he inforceth perseverance in the study of
beneficence, promising the expected fruit of their so doing in due time, ver.
9. and so concludes the exhortation, pressing upon them the use-making of the
present opportunity, ver. 10.

In the second part, he concludes the Epistle; first, insinuating how much he
loved them, ver. 11. Secondly, insinuating that the false Apostles were not
acted from love to them, but from hypocrisy, worldly policy, ver. 12. and from
vain glory, ver. 13. Thirdly, he opposes his own truly Christian carriage to
those sins of the false Apostles, showing he gloried only in the cross of
Christ, and that the world, and applause from men were undervalued by him, ver.
14. Of both which he gives two reasons, first, nothing worldly is accounted of
by Christ, but the new creature only, ver. 15. Secondly, glorying in Christ,
and in the study of piety, and of the new creature, is the only rule, in
walking according to which, there is peace, ver. 16. Fourthly, The Apostle
(having discharged any to trouble him further, whether by their errors, or
calumnies, seeing the standing prints of his sufferings did abundantly refute
both, ver. 17) saluteth them with his ordinary farewell-wish, ver. 18.

Verse. 1. BRethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual,
restore such an one in the spirit of meekness; considering thy self, lest thou
also be tempted.
THe Apostle, having (chap. 5. ver. 26.) dehorted from some vices which do
wholly impede that service by love, which is enjoined, chap. 5. 13. he does in
the first part of this Chapter, exhort them to several duties, in which the
exercise of mutual love does consist. And first, he speaks to those who are
spiritual, that is, such as had received a large measure of spiritual graces,
whereby they were preserved from the subtle snares of sin and Satan, which had
intrapped others; and who are called strong, Romans 15. 1. and perfect, to wit,
comparatively, Philip. 3. 15. Those he exhorts to endeavor the reclaiming
and restoring (both to the sense of God's pardoning grace, and to amendment of
life) of all such who were overtaken, and as it were, inconsideratly and
suddenly surprised with any sin (for, the active Verb of the word overtaken, in
the Original, signifies to do a thing preposterously and in have, 1 Cor. 11.
21.) And in order hereto, that in the use of all means undertaken for this end,
whether of admonition, reproof, or necessary correction, they would exercise
the grace of spiritual meekness, suppressing all fleshly passions, and
revengefull affections. Which exhortation he inforceth by two arguments: the
first whereof is laid down by way of admonition in this Verse, that every man,
even the best, while he deals with the faults of others, would enter in a
deep consideration of his own frailty, and how easily under a tentation he may
be surprised with the same, the like, or a greater sin. Doct. 1. Though it be
very ordinary for men to bear too much with sin both in themselves and others,
1 Samuel 3. -13. Yet there is another sinful extremity to be avoided, to wit,
when under pretense of hatred to, or just indignation against the sins of
others, we give them over as incorrigible, and cannot admonish, reprove, or in
any thing carry our selves toward them in the spirit of meekness: for, says
the Apostle, If aman, or, as the word may also read by way of obviating an
objection, Though a man be overtaken in a fault, restore such an one, etc.
which supposes that some were apt to think themselves freed from the duty here
commanded toward a person so overtaken; and the Apostle shows, that
nevertheless they were bound to restore him, and deal meekly with him, even
though he were overtaken in a fault. 2. This sin of too much rigor and severity
toward the sinful failings and escapes of others (though it pretend to zeal,
Isa. 65. 5. yet) has its rise from pride and ambition; while the rigid
critic, and lofty censurer of another man's faults does not so much seek after
his brother's amendment, as to beget in the minds of others a good opinion of
himself, as if he were singular for holiness and hatred of sin above others:
for, the connection of the two Chapters does show that this sin here guarded
against, has some kind of dependence upon vainglory; Let us not be desirous
of vainglory, chap. 5. 26. And, if a man be overtaken in a fault, restore him
in the spirit of meekness. 3. The Minister of Jesus Christ would labor so to
digest his exhortations unto duties, that his very expressions and convey of
them being fitted to the purpose in hand, may be as so many forcible motives to
bear-in that duty unto which he exhorts: for, the Apostle, being here to
enforce the exercise of love and meekness upon those Galatians in the recovery
of those who had fallen, calls them Brethren, thereby expressing his love to
them, and minding them of that love they ought to carry one to another, as
being Brethren; and designeth the person to be restored by the common name of a
man, thereby pointing at the common frailty of mankind, to show his falling in
sin is rather to be pitied, than made a wonder of; and withal transferreth the
guilt of the sin in a great measure from the person himself to the subtilty of
Satan and violence of the tentation by which he was surprised and overtaken;
every one whereof does does serve as a motive unto that pity and meekness unto
which he exhorts; Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, says he. 4.
Though those who are so maliciously obstinate in sin, that lenity and meekness
prevails nothing in order to their reclaiming, are to be used with more
severity and rigor, 1 Cor. 4. 21. Yet others, concerning whom we have not
ground in charity so to judge, but rather that they are surprised by the
violence of some prevalent tentation, ought to be more gently dealt with: for,
they are only such, whom the Apostle will have to be used with a spirit of
meekness; If a man be overtaken in a fault, restore such an one, etc. 5. So
subtle and assiduous is Satan in tempting, 1 Pet. 5. 8. So ready is corruption
in us to close with a tentation so soon as it is presented, Ephesians. 2. 2. that if
the child of God be not all the more circumspect and diligent, Mat. 26. 41. he
cannot choose but be surprised, as it were unawares, by some one sin or other,
and be thereby made to dishonor God, and to lay a stumbling block before
others: for, Paul supposes it as a thing incident unto all men to be thus
surprised, while he says, If a man be overtaken in a fault. 6. Though it be
the duty of all men to endeavor the reclaiming of those who are lying under
un-repented guiltiness, (for the Command is given unto all, Lev. 19. 17.) yet,
the more holy men are, and the further they have advanced in the ways of
piety, they are the more obliged to go about this duty, chiefly, because they
are in a better capacity to discharge it; as being less tainted with sin than
others, and so having more freedom to reprove; as also being more knowing how
to go wisely about that difficile duty, and more willing to perform it than
others, whose knowledge and love to God's glory and their neighbors good,
comes short of theirs: for, the Apostle directs this exhortation mainly to
such as had received a greater measure of grace than others; Ye which are
spiritual, restore such an one. 7. The greater store of graces and gifts a man
has received, he stands the more obliged to lay out himself and all his
receipts for the spiritual good and edification of others; providing always he
move in his own sphere, and transgress not the bounds of his calling, Heb. 5.
4. for, Paul lays this task of restoring the backsliden Christian chiefly
upon those who had received a greater measure of grace and spiritual enduements
than others; Ye which are spiritual, restore such an one. 8. As scandalous
sins, and erroneous opinions being fallen into by a child of God, do mar that
orderly frame of the inward man, which he did before enjoy, wasting the
conscience and eating out the edge of all his former tenderness, 1 Pet. 2.
-11. So the person who has fallen in such sins, does ordinarily prove backward
to be reclaimed, and very ticklish to be meddled with by others for that end; as
a man who has a bone dis-joynted can hardly endure to have it touched: The
word rendered restore such an one, does bear so much, as signifying to set in
joint the dislocated members of the body, So that sin puts the soul as it
were out of joint. 9. As it is the duty of all, and especially of those who are
spiritual, to endeavor the reclaiming of any who are so fallen, by admonition
(Mat. 18. 15.) reproof (Lev. 19. 17.) prayer to God on their behalf, Iam. 5.
14, 15. (all which, and other means in order to the same end, are to be gone
about by private Christians by virtue of that ty which christian charity, and
their mutual relation one to another, arising from their being members of one
body, do lay on; and by public Ministers and Church-guides, by virtue of that
authority wherewith Christ the King of the Church has invested them, Ephesians. 4.
11, 12.) So in the use of all these means, every one is to carry himself with
much skill and tenderness, if he would attain the proposed end: for, says he,
Ye who are spiritual, restore such an one, or, set him in joint again; It is a
phrase borrowed from Chirurgians, who, being to deal with a dis-joynted bone,
will handle the same with skill and tenderness. 10. The grace of meekness,
whereby we moderate inordinate anger, and speedily repress revengeful
passions, before they come to any great height, Ephesians. 4, 26. as it is the work
of Gods Spirit in us; so the exercise of it is most necessary toward those who
are fallen, and that all the means we use in order to their reclaiming be
seasoned therewith, as being in nothing transported with the fury of rage and
passion, but only acted with zeal to God, love to the person fallen, and with
sanctified reason; for, thereby we evidence we are seeking the recovery of our
brother, and not insulting over him; we are laboring to help him, and not
seeking to disgrace him: for, says he, Restore such an one in the spirit of
meekness, or, in meekness, whereof God's Spirit is the author. 11. There is
no man, no not the most spiritual, who can promise unto himself immunity from
being set upon with strong tentations unto gross and scandalous evils, or that
he shall stand when he is tempted, if he be left of God under the tentation:
for, he bids even the spiritual man consider himself, lest he also be
tempted; whereby he holds forth not only a possibility that the spiritual man
may be tempted, but also of his yielding to the tentation, when it should be
presented, otherwise the argument had not been of such strength to enforce upon
him the exercise of meekness toward those who are overtaken in a fault. 12.
As those who do most rigidly and uncharitably censure the faults of others, are
usually greatest strangers to their own hearts, and very little sensible of
their own infirmities: So the serious consideration of our own weakness, and
how the root of our neighbors sin, and of all other sin is in us (Romans 3. v.
10, to 20.) how we stand by grace (Psalm. 94. 18.) and how, if God would suffer
the tempter to break loose upon us, we should so much exceed the sins of
others, as they exceed ours: The serious consideration, I say, of all those,
though it should not bind us wholly up from reproving sin in others; yet, it
should cause us exceedingly to mix and temper our severity toward their sin
with the exercise of meekness, pity and compassion toward their person: for,
the Apostle, to enforce the former exhortation of restoring their fallen
brother in the spirit of meekness, does enjoin, consider thy self, lest thou
also be tempted. 13. So prone are we to entertain good thoughts of our selves,
that it is a matter of no small difficulty to make a man reflect upon himself,
and enter upon a serious consideration of his own frailty and weakness, and of
every other thing which may keep him low in his own eyes, without insulting
over, or despising of others, as appears from Paul's changing of the number:
for, having said, Ye who are spiritual, restore, etc. in the plural number;
here he says, considering thy self, lest thou also, etc. in the singular;
which he does to give the greater force and sharper edge to his admonition, as
knowing he was pressing a duty, which very hardly, and not without difficulty,
would be obeyed.

Verse. 2. Bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.
THe Apostle, first, enlarges the former exhortation, both as to the persons
exhorted (for now he exhorts not only those who are spiritual, but all of
them) And also as to the duty exhorted unto, which is extended not only to an
endeavor of reclaiming those who were overtaken in a fault, but also, to the
tolerating and bearing patiently with the sins and infirmities of others,
until they be amended, and the sinner reclaimed: which sins are designed by
the name of a burden; partly, because some such sins are a burden and weight to
the sinner himself, either by reason of his grief and sorrow for them, if he be
a penitent, Act. 2. 37. or by reason of that vexation and trouble which some
sins, as wrath, malice and envy, do bring to the natural spirits even of the
impenitent sinner, Job 5. 2. Prove. 14. 30. And partly, because some such sins,
though not felt by the sinner himself, are yet heavy burdens unto those who
converse with him, as his curiosity, backbiting, self-seeking, and such like,
Prove. 16. 28. Secondly, he inforceth the exhortation, thus enlarged, by a
second argument, to wit, That hereby they did fulfill the Law, or command of
mutual love, which he calls the Law of Christ; not as if love to our
neighbor had not been enjoined before Christ came in the flesh; for, it is a
prime piece of the Law of Nature, imprinted upon the heart of man at the
Creation, and was renewed again by God Himself upon mount Sinai, 1 John 2. 7.
But because, first, Christ did renew this Command, not only by freeing it from
the false glosses and interpretations of Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 5. 23,
etc. but also by pressing it in its spiritual beauty and nature, having laid
aside and abolished the external cover of Mosaical Ceremonies (Ephesians. 2. 15.)
under which it was veiled, 1 Cor. 9. 9, 10. In which respect mainly it is here
called the Law of Christ, in opposition to the false Apostles, who pressed so
much the Mosaical Law of Ceremonies. And, secondly, because Christ did press
this Law, so renewed, in a singular manner upon His followers, as a mark of
true faith in Him, Joh. 13. 35. And thirdly, because Christ did fulfill this
Law in His own person, and thereby left an example of it unto us, 1 John 3. 16.
Doct. 1. As there are none free of sinful infirmities, which are burdensome
sometimes to themselves, and frequently unto others: So we ought not to break
the bond of common society, which we are otherwise tied unto, because of
those: but are to persist in it, patiently bearing those infirmities which we
cannot otherwise help: for, says he, Bear ye one another burdens. 2. This
duty of bearing with the infirmities of others, does well consist with the use
of such lawful means as God has prescribed, whether to the Magistrate for
restraining sin, by punishing those who do evil, Romans 13. -4. or, to Ministers
and private Christians, in order to the sinner's reclaiming by admonition,
reproof, and such like: for, this duty of bearing one another burdens, must
agree with, and cannot be contrary unto, that other duty prescribed, v. 1.
which is to restore the sinner unto that state wherein he was, so far must we
be from giving him countenance, or partaking with him in his sins. 3. A
compassionate frame of spirit, made evident by our meek and patient deportment
toward those who are overtaken in a fault, without neglecting any duty we owe
unto them, does afford the guilty sinner no small ease under his weighty
exercise, and tends much both to his preservation from fainting under
heartlesse discouragement (if his conscience be touched with the sense of his
guilt) and to carry on the work of his conviction and amendment: (if he be yet
going on securely in his sin) for, the Apostle, having exhorted to such a meek
and patient deportment toward those who are overtaken in a fault, he calls
it here a bearing of their burden, or an affording of help to them under it;
Bear ye one another burdens. 4. There is no such evidence of love to our
neighbor, as when it kytheth in our serious endeavors for bringing about his
spiritual good, and in taking the most effectual condescending and affectionate
way in order to his reclaiming from sin, together with our supporting of him,
and sympathizing with him under his spiritual weights: for, the Apostle
calls this a fulfilling of the Law of Christ, or of mutual love, as if that
Law did call for this only; And so fulfill the Law of Christ, says he. 5. In
what sense and measure the child of God does attain to evidence his love to
his fallen brother by his serious endeavors to restore him unto the enjoyment
of God's favor, and to an holy and blameless conversation, and by his bearing
with him under his infirmities, in order to his recovery, in that same sense
and measure he attaineth to fulfill the Law; whence it follows, because he is
not able to do the former perfectly, and so as to come short in nothing for
matter, or manner, (Iam. 3. 2.) but only sincerely, and without dissimulation,
Romans 12. 9. therefore neither can he keep the Law perfectly, but only in
sincerity, and in his honest aim and endeavor, Psalm. 119. 6. for, says he,
Bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.

Verse. 3. For if a man think himself to be something, when he is nothing, he
deceives himself.
THe Apostle, in further prosecution of the former exhortation, does fall upon
the sin of self-conceit and arrogance, which causes men contemn others, and
carry themselves with a kind of supercilious disdain toward such as are
overtaken in a fault, contrary to what he had exhorted them unto, ver. 1, 2.
And, first, he tacitly dehorteth them from this vice, by showing the man who is
puffed up with a conceit of his own enduements above others, and to the
despising of others being compared with himself, does deceive himself, and
makes his own mind to err in passing judgment of himself (as the word does
signify) and gives a reason of this assertion, because every man, even the
best is nothing, as having no good in himself, and of himself, 2 Cor. 3. 5. for
which he ought to be puffed up, and to despise others because of their
infirmities. Doct. 1. Then are duties pressed unto some good purpose by the
Lord's Ministers upon His People, when a discovery is made of those lurking
evils which do withhold from the practice of those duties, and pains are taken
to set them upon the task of subduing such evils, if they would come speed in
the conscientious practice of the commanded duty: for, Paul, having exhorted to
restore those who are fallen, and to bear one another burden, he does now
dissuade them from the sin of self-conceit and arrogance, as that which does
impede the practice of that duty; If a man think himself to be something, says
he. 2. As it is ordinary for men to conceit too highly of themselves, whether
by apprehending those excellencies to be in themselves, which really are not,
Prove. 26. 16. or, by overvaluing those excellencies, parts and other
enjoyments, which they really have, above their just worth and esteem, Ezekiel.
28. 3. or, by looking on them, not as receipts from the Lord, but only as they
are their own, or the fruit of their own industry or purchase, Ezekiel. 28. 4, 5.
So, where this sin of self-conceit is fostered, it makes the guilty person an
insolent contemner of all others, a proud insulter over their infirmities; as
taking occasion from those, to conceive so much the more highly of himself:
for, this is the sin of a man's thinking himself to be something, which Paul
supposes to be a common evil, and speaks against it, as that which makes a
man carry himself insolently toward others, especially those who are overtaken
in a fault, as appears from the connection, If a man think himself to be
something. 3. Error in judgment has sometimes its rise from some unmortified
and raging lust in the heart and affections, the prevalency whereof does bias
the understanding, and in progress of time does unperceivably incline it to
assent unto those opinions as Truths which may most gratify those unmortified
lusts: for, says he, He who thinks himself something, deceives himself, or,
makes his mind to err; for so the word signifies: importing hereby that
those violent lusts of self-conceit, pride and arrogance, did make them
apprehend some real worth to be where there was none, whereby they might have
somewhat to feed upon. 4. For a man to be deceived by himself, is of more
dangerous consequence than to be deceived by any other, especially when a man
deceives himself by having better thoughts of himself than there is ground or
reason for; for hereby are men not only vainly puffed up by their fleshly mind,
Col. 2. -18. but also made to cry Peace, peace, when sudden destruction comes,
Mat. 7. 22, 23. for, the Apostle insinuates there is no small hazard in
self-deceiving, while he makes this alone a sufficient argument to dissuade
from self-conceit and arrogance, even that he who thinks himself to be
something, deceives himself. 5. As every man considered in himself is nothing,
being destitute of all good, Romans 7. 18- yea, though he be considered in all
his enduements both of Nature and Grace; yet he has nothing for which he ought
to conceit of himself, and despise others; for, what has he which is not
received? 1 Cor. 4. 7. yea, and what he must be comptable for, how he does
employ it? Luke 12. 48. So the serious consideration of this truth would be a
singular engine to batter down those high mountains of self-conceit, which are
ready to exalt themselves in a man's heart by reason of his apprehended or real
excellencies, gifts or graces: for, Paul makes use of this consideration to
convince them how vain any high thoughts of that kind were; If any man seem to
himself to be something, when he is nothing, says he; which last sentence is
spoken of all men generally, and serves for an argument to prove that the
self-admirer, is a self-deceiver, seeing every man is nothing.

Verse. 4. But let every man prove his own work, and then shall be have
rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another.
SEcondly, The Apostle strikes at one root and cause of self-conceit and
arrogance, to wit, our comparing our selves with others who are worse than our
selves (for, we may, and ought compare with those who are better than our
selves, that so we may be humbled, 2 Cor. 10. 12. but this comparing with those
whom we esteem worse than our selves, occasioneth self-conceit, Luke 18. 11.)
Now Paul takes them off this way, exhorting them to prove, and try their own
work and carriage by the rule of Gods Word, without comparing it with the
carriage of others (for, so they behoved to try the work of others also) and
that they would so prove their own work, as to approve it, and find matter of
approbation in it, if it were to be found, (for, the Greek word rendered prove,
signifies also to approve, as Romans 14. 22. 1 Cor. 16. 3.) Which exhortation is
enforced by two reasons; first, Hereby they should find matter of such
gloriation and boasting as God allows of, even in themselves alone, that is,
in the testimony of a good conscience, 2 Cor. 1. 12. and should not need to
borrow matter of boasting from the sins of others, which the Lord does no ways
approve of, 1 Cor. 5. 2-. Doct. 1. As a man who would set against a sin to
purpose, and with success, must search out, and set against every other sin
which does ordinarily prove an occasion of that sin which he intends to
subdue and mortify; So the Minister of Christ, in the reproof of sin, ought to
point forth unto the Lord's People those things which are the fuel and
occasion of such and such sins, and press upon them an abstinence even from
those: for, the Apostle, having dissuaded (ver. 3.) from selfconceit, does here
point at the occasion of that sin, even their comparing themselves with others,
whom they judged worse than themselves, and disswadeth them from that also,
while he says, But let every man prove his own work. 2. As it is the duty of
every man without exception, to reflect upon his own actions, and to take an
exact trial of them by the touchstone of Gods Word, Psalm. 119. 9. not only if
for the substance of the action they be commanded or warranted in His Word,
Isa. 29. -13. but also if they be done in the right manner, Luke 8. 18. that
is, if they come from the root of a renewed heart, (Mat. 7. 18.) have their
rise from right motives (Phil. 1. 15.) and be directed to the right end, God's
glory in the first place (1 Cor. 10. 3.) or not: So he ought not to rest
satisfied with a simple probation and trial of his actions, except he find them
to be such after trial, as he may upon just grounds approve them, and approve
himself to God in them, 2 Timothy 2. 15. for, says he, Let every one prove, and
so, as he may safely approve, his own work, as the word signifies; and such a
probation must be here meaned, otherwise the Apostle's consequence should not
follow upon a man's proving his work, even that he shall have rejoicing in
himself. 3. Though Civil Magistrates and Church-guides are to prove, even
judicially, the work of others, who are committed to their charge, Romans 13.
-3,-4. Tit. 3. 10. and though private Christians are also bound to prove all
things by a judgment of christian discretion, that so they may hold what is
good, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. and be provoked unto love and good works, Heb. 10. 23.
but not, that they have whereat to carp, Psalm. 56. 5, 6. or whereby to be
lifted up with an high and vain conceit of themselves above others, 1 Cor. 5.
2. yet the great thing whereabout our most accurate and daily search and trial
should be employed, is, our own actions, and by proportion our own spiritual
state, 2 Cor. 13. 5. and frame of heart, Psalm. 26. 2. Yea, those, and only
those are to be the object of our trial, when the end proposed in our trial,
is, to find out matter of boasting in the testimony of a good conscience, and
from which we may conclude, that we are approved of God: for, this is the end
of the trial here enjoined; and therefore says he, Let every man prove his own
work. 4. This work of self-trying, and proving of our own work, being seriously
and frequently gone about, would tend exceedingly not only to curb those lofty
thoughts which we have of our selves, but also to divert from those
uncharitable, censorious and base thoughts which we have of others because of
their infirmities and failings: for, the Apostle opposes this duty as an
antidote to that sin of self-conceit before reproved, and by consequence does
press it as an help to that duty of tenderness and compassion toward those
who are overtaken in a fault, enjoined, ver. 1, 2. But, says he, let every man
try his own work. 5. It is in some cases and respects lawful for men to glory
and boast in themselves, or in the good things of God bestowed upon them, that
is, not only to rejoice because of them, but also to express their joy, 2 Cor.
1. 12. and to expect approbation and applause from men because of them, 2 Cor.
12. 11. providing they glory in them, as evidences of God's love to them, and
so, as they may thereby assure their hearts before Him of their interest in His
favor and good will, 1 John 3. 19. and as enduements fitting them to serve
God, by promoting His glory in their own salvation, and their neighbors good,
and in every other duty which they are bound to in their station, 1 Cor. 15.
-10- and as they are fitting occasions to incite themselves or others, to give
that glory to God which is due, Mat. 5. 16. providing also that they glory in
them (to wit, in so far as this gloriation imports a seeking approbation to
themselves) but sparingly, 2 Cor. 11. -16. and for the most part as of
necessity and to maintain their uprightness before men, when it is unjustly
called in question, 2 Cor. 12. 11. Joh 27. 4, etc. and that they be not puffed
up with conceit of themselves, as if those good things did proceed from
themselves alone, and not from God, 1 Cor. 15. 10. and that the approbation
which they expect, be not endeavored as their furthest design, Mat. 6. 2. but
as a mean of rendering them the more capable for promoting God's glory in their
place and station, 1 Timothy 3. 7. and most especially, providing that they glory
not in those things, as if thereby they could merit the favor of God and
eternal life; which boasting is condemned, Romans 4. 2. In these respects, and
with these limitations it is lawful for men to glory in themselves: for, the
Apostle speaks of this way of glorying as an allowed consequence of a man's
proving of his own work; Then, says he, he shall have rejoicing (or boasting)
in himself alone. 6. That a man may warrantably and upon good grounds thus
rejoice in the good things of God bestowed upon him, especially so, as thereby
to assure his heart before God, it is not sufficient that he compare himself
with others, and find himself to be better than those, but he must try himself
by the rule of God's Word, and after trial find himself approved by it; else
his boasting is naught and vain, even a deceiving of himself: for, the Apostle,
speaking of this warrantable gloriation and boasting, affirms it to be the
consequence of a man's proving his own work, and that it must be in himself,
and not in another.

Verse. 5. For every man shall bear his own burden.
HEre is a second argument, enforcing upon every man the duty of trying his own
work rather than to be narrowly prying into the infirmities of others; because
every man must bear his own burden, or give an account of his own actions to
God, Romans 14. 12. for, the Lord will pass sentence upon men whether by
absolving or condemning them, not as they have been better or worse than
others, but as they shall be found in themselves absolutely considered, and
without any respect had unto others, See 1 Cor. 3. -8. which does not militate
against the tenor of the Gospel, affirming that Believers shall be reckoned
with by God, as they are clothed, not with their own righteousness, but with
the unspotted righteousness of Christ their Cautioner, Philip. 3. 9. for, it
is evident from the scope, that the Apostle excludes only the infirmities of
other sinful men, like unto our selves, from being the rule, according to
which God will pass sentence, and not the righteousness of Christ apprehended
by faith. Doct. 1. That a man may prove an happy interpreter of Scripture, and
find out the mind of God's Spirit therein, it is necessary he do well
understand the scope of the Spirit in that place, the sense whereof he
intends to find out; the observing whereof will serve as a thread to conduct
him in falling upon the genuine and literal meaning of the particular words and
sentences, and will preserve him from making the Scripture in hand thwart or
contradict any other part of sacred Truth, which without observing of the scope
he may readily fall in: for, this verse seems at the first view, to
contradict that direction given, ver. 2. but the sense of both being collected
from the scope, that seeming contrariety will evanish; for, by bearing one
another burdens, ver. 2. must be meaned a bearing by way of sympathy,
christian for bearance, and diligent use of means for reclaiming the person
fallen; for, that is it which the Apostle is pressing there, as appears from
ver. 1. and in this sense every one ought to bear one another burdens: But by
bearing our burden, in this verse, is meaned a bearing by giving an account to
God for our own actions (otherwise it should not be a cogent argument to
enforce the exhortation propounded, ver. 4. Let every man prove his own work)
and in this sense every man shall bear his own burden. 2. How light soever that
men's sins do seem unto themselves when they are committed, yet they will be
found not light, but heavy, when they come to reckon with God about them: for,
the giving an account of our actions to God, goes under the name of bearing a
burden, Every man shall bear his own burden. 3. So righteous is God that He
will call no man to an account for the sins of others, but only for his own,
except he has made those sins of others his own sins also, by not doing his
duty to impede the committing of them, Ezekiel. 3. 18. or by following of, and
walking in them, Exodus 20. 5. compared with Ezekiel. 18. 14, 17. or by not
mourning to God for them, 1 Cor. 5. 2. for, says he, Every man shall bear his
own burden. 4. It were our wisdom frequently to mind that great Account which
we must give to God, and to busy our selves most in and about those things
whereof He will crave an account of us: hence the Apostle makes this a reason
why men should be most employed in proving their own work, and not in accurate
prying into the carriage and infirmities of others; because it was their own
work, whereof they behoved to give an account to God; For every man shall bear
his own burden, says he.

Verse. 6. Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate unto him that
teaches, in all good things.
IN the second place, the Apostle exhorts them unto beneficence, which may be
looked upon as another piece of that serving one another through love, enjoined
chap. 5. -13. and because love to the Word growing cold among those Galatians,
by reason of their schism and the prevalency of error, it is probable that the
due respect which they did owe to their Ministers, was much decayed, except to
such only as were of their own faction and way, Therefore, in the first place,
he exhorts unto beneficence toward their Ministers, directing his speech to
those who were catechized, that is, taught familiarly by word of mouth, as when
children are taught the first principles of Religion; for, so the word, rendered
is taught, does signify: or, more generally (as the word is here rendered, and
taken elsewhere, 1 Cor. 14. 19. Romans 2. -18.) those who are instructed, or
taught whether more familiarly and plainly, or more profoundly in the Word,
whereby may be meaned either the Word of God in general, or of the Gospel in
particular, which frequently is called the Word by way of excellency (See upon
Philip. 1. 14. Doct. 1.) Those he exhorts to communicate, and to give a share
unto their Ministers of all their temporal goods, to wit, so much as might
serve for their creditable maintenance. Doct. 1. The Lord Christ has appointed
two distinct ranks and sorts of people to be in His visible Church, some who
are to be taught, fed, ruled and watched over, such are all private
Church Members; and some who are to be Teachers, Pastors, Guides and Watchmen
over the Flock by virtue of their public Office in the House of God, the
honor whereof is not to be taken by any man unto himself, except he be called
as Aaron, Heb. 5. 4. And are all Teachers, 1 Cor. 12. 29. Let him that is
taught, communicate unto him that teaches. 2. As it was necessary that some
should be Teachers in the House of God; so the wisdom of God has thought it
fit, because of our weakness (Deuteronomy. 5. 23, etc.) to teach us not by His own
immediate Voice from Heaven, nor yet by glorious Angels, but by the Ministry of
men like unto our selves, and those not usually of the greatest sort, but of
such as stand in need of the peoples benevolence for their worldly subsistence,
and this that the glory of converting souls may be ascribed not unto creatures,
but unto God, 2 Cor. 4. 7. for, so much is imported, while he says, Let him
that is taught, communicate unto him that teaches. 3. As it is the duty of
Christ's Ministers to teach and instruct the Lord's People, not so much by
their writings, as by vocal preaching and word of mouth; So the thing wherein
they are to be instructed, is the knowledge not of humane writings, but of the
Word of God contained in Scripture; there being no word or writing besides,
which has a promise of such a blessing to accompany it, as this Word has (See
Romans 1. 17. 2 Timothy 3. 15, 17. Heb. 4. 12.) for, says he, Let him that is
taught (or instructed by word of mouth) in the Word, meaning the written Word
of God. 4. Seeing Christ's Ministers are to bestow themselves wholly in the work
of the Ministry, 1 Timothy 4. 15. and not to be entangled with the affairs of this
life, 2 Timothy 2. 4. and seeing they are the Lord's Instruments, by whom He
conveyeth the richest blessings, even those which are spiritual, unto His
People, 1 Cor. 9. 11. Therefore the People of God among whom they spend their
strength, are bound even by common equity to give them worldly maintenance,
that they may neither be diverted from, nor discouraged in that most necessary
and painful work of watching over souls, Heb. 13. 17. for, says he, Let him
that is taught, communicate unto him that teaches, in all good things. 5. This
worldly maintenance, which people are bound to give unto their Ministers,
though it should be moderate, and such as may not through its abundance
occasion pride, luxury and prodigality in their Ministers; yet it would be
liberal, and creditable, even such as may not only supply their pinching
necessities, but also as thereby they may be sustained in a way creditable unto
the Gospel whereof they are Ministers, 1 Timothy 5. 17. and may have wherewith to
supply the necessities of the indigent, 1 Timothy 3. -2. and to educate their
children so, as afterward they may sustain themselves, and be profitable
members both of Church and Commonwealth, 1 Timothy 5. 8. for, he commands the
people to communicate to their Ministers in all their temporal good things; he
says, in all, and therefore liberally, though not lavishly. 6. Though the
Civil Magistrate be obliged to provide some set and public allowance for
upholding the Gospel and Ministry thereof; this way coming nearer to the order
appointed by God for maintaining the Priesthood under the Law, Numb. 35. 1,
etc. and being free of several inconveniences, which can hardly be avoided in
the way of giving voluntary contribution by every one who hears the Gospel,
toward those who preach the same: yet, in case the Magistrate provide not such
public allowance for them, or, if turning persecuter, he take that which is
already provided by the Law for that use from them, Then it is the duty of
every one who is taught in the Word, to maintain their Preachers by liberal
contribution out of their own means, so far as is necessary for him that
receives, and as he is able to spare who gives: for, this was the case of the
Church in Paul's time, being under persecuting Tyrants; And therefore he
commands, Let him that is taught, communicate unto him that teaches, in all
good things. 7. The Churches maintenance is only due unto such Ministers as
have abilities to preach the Gospel, and are faithful and diligent Laborers
in the Word, according to those abilities wherewith they are endued; And
therefore, though private men are not hereby warranted to withdraw the ordinary
and allowed maintenance from their Ministers upon pretense that they are either
not able, or not painful, Mat. 23. 2, 3. yet it concerns those whom Christ
has entrusted to be Overseers of His House, to be careful that such who are
either really unfit, or unwilling to preach, be removed from their Charge, and
not suffered to eat up the Churches maintenance, feeding themselves, and
starving the souls of people committed to their charge: Therefore the Apostle,
while he pleads for maintenance to a Minister, does describe him from the
actual exercise of his Calling, Let him communicate to him that teaches.

Verse. 7. Be not deceived, God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows, that
shall he also reap.
THe Apostle, supposing that those who were averse from the duty of beneficence
to their Ministers, did color their own avarice and naughtiness with a number
of seemingly plausible excuses taken from their pretended indigence,
multiplicity of other burdens, and such like, he speaks to such witty
cheaters as these in this verse, desiring them to advert, that though they
might stop the mouths of their honest-hearted Ministers, (as not knowing how,
or not being willing to contradict them in what they affirmed) and might mock
them for their simplicity afterward; yet they had another party to deal with
in this matter, even God Himself, who would not be deceived, or mocked with
their lying pretexts and excuses, and forbids them to deceive or flatter
themselves by thinking otherwise; and so proceeds to press the duty of
beneficence toward Ministers, by an argument expressed in a similitude taken
from sowers of seed, who may expect an increase in the time of reaping
according to what they have sown; whether it be much seed, or little, good seed
or bad: So accordingly as men's actions are, whether good or bad, (which are
compared to seed, Prove. 11. 18. and 22. 8.) and more particularly as they
employ their temporal goods (the employing whereof is also compared unto
sowing, 2 Cor. 9. 6.) whether for good and pious uses, or for pampering their
fleshly lusts (as he brancheth forth this sowing in the following 8. verse) so
they might expect an answerable reward, or punishment from the Lord, to wit,
either here, or hereafter; for, thus is the same similitude expounded, 2 Cor.
9. 6, 7, 8. Doct. 1. As the sin of backwardness in people to bestow any thing
for upholding the Gospel in the public Ministry thereof, is very common, and
has begun early in the Christian Church; So the Minister of Christ, may not
upon pretense of modesty, as being unwilling to kyth much in that wherein his
particular advantage is any way concerned, suffer this sin to go unreproved
more than others; seeing it tends so much to the Gospel's prejudice, and that
it is excess of modesty which impedeth the practice of a necessary duty: for,
Paul observing this sin to have been too common, even in his time, does sharply
admonish and rebuke those who were guilty of it, while he says, Be not
deceived, God is not mocked. 2. Neglecters of duty, and chiefly of expensive
duties, such as is that of giving competent maintenance to the Ministry, are
very quick and witty to find out pretexts and excuses to color their sin, and
so to siele the eyes of those whom they have to do with; and this all, that
they may enjoy the profit of sin, and yet eschew the shame and imputation of it
before men: for, Paul does here meet with such witty excuses, and with those
who made use of them; Be not deceived, God is not mocked. 3. Though God be
always the sinners party, whatever sin he does commit, Psalm. 51. 4. yet, seeing
Ministers are Christ's Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5. 20. and that the contemning or
discouraging of them by withholding competent maintenance from them does so
directly tend to the utter overthrow of Religion and decay of all public
Worship; therefore He is in a singular manner party, and will kyth Himself to
be so unto all who are guilty of so doing: for, the Apostle represents the
Lord as the party whom they had to deal with, while he says, Be not deceived,
God is not mocked. 4. Though subtle wits may so excuse their sin, as thereby to
cast such a blind before the eyes of men, as they will hold them innocent, or
at least cannot know how to fasten guilt upon them; yet the allseeing eye of
God cannot be so fieled: He knows the thoughts afar off, Psa. 139. -2. and
discerns the very intents of hearts, Heb. 4. -12. and therefore cannot be set
off with plausible pretexts: for, it is in this respect he says, God is not
mocked, as they mocked men by making them give credit unto their lying excuses.
5. Then does a man most dangerously deceive himself, when he rests satisfied
with this, that he has conveyed his fraudulent and covetous practices so
handsomely that men shall find nothing for which to blame him, as if, because
short-sighted man cannot find him out, that therefore he shall escape the
accurate search of the allseeing God; for, the Apostle affirms they would be
deceived, if they did entertain any such thoughts of God; Be not deceived, God
is not mocked. 6. Though men do usually give all that for lost which they
bestow for maintaining the Gospel, and for pious uses; yet it is not so, but
shall be returned unto them in God's appointed time with increase, if not in
things of the same kind, yet in things equivalent to, and better than those:
for, so much does his comparing beneficence of this kind to the seed sown
import; Whatsoever a man sows, that shall be also reap. 7. The reward which
God has freely promised unto the good works of His People, and more
particularly unto their cheerful, liberal and christian beneficence, is not to
be despaired of: nor yet the justly deserved judgment denounced against the
wicked for their evil works, and chiefly for their nigardly withholding a part
of what God has given unto them from charitable and pious uses, is to be
doubted of, though both of them be long deferred: for, both the promised reward
and threatened judgment, are compared to the reaping of the harvest, which does
most certainly, though not immediately, follow upon the sowing of the seed;
Whatsoever a man sows, that shall be also reap. 8. As the faith of a reward
to be freely given, according to the promise, unto our works of charity and
beneficence, is a strong encouragement to fruitfulness in works of that kind;
So it is lawful for Christians to have an eye to this reward, as a motive
whereby to work up their backward hearts unto a willing compliance with
expensive duties of that sort: providing, first, it be not looked at as a thing
to be merited by their good works, Romans 6. 23. Nor, secondly, as the only or
chief motive, 2 Cor. 5. 14. for, the Apostle by this similitude does mind them
of the promised reward, as an argument exciting them unto beneficence;
Whatsoever a man sows, that shall be also reap.

Verse. 8. For he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption:
but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.
What the Apostle spoke generally concerning that proportion which shall be
betwixt a man's future reward, and his present work, he does now, following the
same metaphor of sowing and reaping, make it more clear by distinguishing
several sorts of sowers, seeds, grounds, and several sorts of harvests
answerable to each of those: The plain meaning whereof, is, 1. That carnal and
unregenerate men, who take no other care but to spend their wit, strength,
time, and particularly their means upon the service of their own fleshly lusts,
(such as are reckoned forth, chap. 5. 19, 20.) they shall at last reap no fruit
thereby but corruption, that is, eternal perdition (for, corruption is here
opposed unto eternal life) and this they shall reap from the flesh, that is,
their own inbred corruption, which, with the sinful effects thereof, is the
true seed of death and perdition. And, secondly, that renewed and spiritual
men, who employ their whole life, study and labor, and particularly their
worldly substance for advancing the works of the Spirit, whether in themselves
or others, (such as are reckoned forth, chap. 5. 22.) and particularly, for
upholding the Gospel and a painful Ministry, they shall receive the reward of
eternal life; and this from the Spirit, that is, the grace of God in them,
which is the true seed of eternity, not by way of merit, as destruction and
corruption follow upon the flesh, but from God's mercy and free gift, as the
Apostle does in plain and proper terms put the difference, Romans 6. 23.
according to which this metaphorick allegory must be expounded, and may not be
set in opposition to it. Doct. 1. The whole world are comprised in one of two
ranks: they are either sowing to the flesh, living in their unregenerate state,
and in slavery to their lusts, whose end shall be perdition; or, they are
sowing to the Spirit, truly regenerate, and employing themselves for the
advancing of things spiritual, whose end shall be eternal life; There is no
neutral or midstate: for, Paul distinguishes all in these two, He that sows
to his flesh, and he that sows to the Spirit. 2. It may be frequently
observed, that they who have not an heart to part with any thing of their
temporal goods for God and pious uses, but plead present poverty, necessity
and fear of future want, when God does call them to any thing of that kind, are
notwithstanding most profuse and lavish in spending their means to make
provision for the flesh, and to uphold the beastly lusts thereof; for, he that
sows not to the Spirit, sows to his flesh. 3. Though carnal men do think
their own way the only wisest, while they spend their wit and substance for
attaining present profit, pleasure and preferment, and do judge the way of the
Godly, but mere folly, while they employ their strength and means for things
spiritual, and such as God's honor is mainly concerned in, and are not
attended with an income of worldly advantage, but rather of loss and
detriment; yet the end shall prove, that those who thought themselves only wise
men and gainers, have been but mere fools and greatest losers, and that those
others, whom they looked upon as madmen and bad managers of their worldly
affairs, have been the greatest gainers and wisest adventurers; for, he that
sows to his flesh, shall reap corruption; but he that sows to the Spirit,
shall reap life everlasting. 4. The state of the wicked after death, is a state
of corruption, wherein though the substance of their soul and body shall not be
annihilated, but shall be upheld unto all eternity by the mighty power of God
in the midst of unutterable torments, Mark 9. 44. yet all their glory, pleasure
and gain wherein they placed their happiness, and for attaining whereof only,
they spent their time and strength, (Psalm. 49. 11.) shall then be consumed, 2
Pet. 3. 10. and they themselves made to languish and pine away under the wrath
of an highly provoked and then unreconciliable God, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. for, says
he, The wicked shall reap corruption, meaning their state after death. 5. The
state of the Godly after death shall be a state of life, the life of Grace
being then swallowed up and perfected in the life of Glory, which consists in
perfect freedom from sin and misery, Ephesians. 5. 27. in unconceivable joys, Psalm.
16. 11. and the full enjoying of God, 1 John 3. 2. which happy state of theirs
shall be eternal, they shall never weary nor yet be deprived of it: for, says
he, the Godly shall reap life everlasting. 6. Whatever sin a man commits, it
is most properly his own work, as flowing from the root of his own corrupt
flesh; but the good which he does, is not so properly his own as Gods, in so
far as it flows from the Spirit of God and habits of Grace, which were
wrought in him by the self-same Spirit, Philip. 2. 13. Col. 3. 10. for,
speaking of the flesh, he sets it forth by the appropriating Pronoun his; He
that sows to his flesh; but not so, while he speaks of the Spirit, He that
sows to The Spirit, not to his spirit.

Verse. 9. And let us not be weary in well doing: for in due season we shall
reap, if we faint not.
THe Apostle, from what he has presently spoken of the reward of eternal life,
attending those who sow in the Spirit, infers the former exhortation
propounded, ver. 6. and enlarges it, by recommending unto them, according to
the sense given of the former similitude, the study of good works, and
especially of beneficency in the general, under the name of well-doing; whereby
he means not only the outward work, but also the doing of it in a right
manner, Mat. 6. 1. etc. and that they would persevere to the end in that study,
notwithstanding of all contrary discouragements, without base and cowardly
ceding unto them; and inforceth the exhortation by putting it above all
question, that they shall gather the fruit which God had promised, though not
presently, yet in the due time, that is, the time which God does judge most
convenient; but withal, he adds a condition of reaping in due time, required
on their part, to wit, if they continued constant in well-doing, even the same
unto which he had exhorted them in the former part of the verse. Doct. 1. As
all men by nature are exceedingly backward from entering the course of
well-doing, and especially of exercising beneficency toward those whom God
has ordained to be objects of it, Mark 10. 21, 22, 23. So, considering the
many discouragements which occur to a man while he is in this course of
beneficency, what from his own corruption, what from the unworthiness,
ingratitude and multitude of objects, and what from the coldrife disposition
and bad example of others, who are equally if not more able, there is no small
propensnesse in all to sit up in that course, and to give it over immediately,
or soon after they have entered it: for, Paul supposes such a propensity, and
guardeth against it, while he says, Let us not be weary of well-doing. 2. It
is not enough that men do so far subject themselves to the authority of God
speaking in His Word, as once to enter the way of obedience, and to endure for
a season, Mark 4. 17- until possibly they attain to a name for piety, Rev. 3.
-1. or meet with some unexpected discouragement or tentation, Mark 4. -17. But,
they must also persist in their begun course so long as they have any being,
Psalm. 104. 33. for, says he, Let us not be weary in well doing. 3. That
Christians may eye the promised reward, and with what provisions they may have
their eye upon it, as a motive to obedience and peseverance; (See ver. 7. doct.
8.) for, the Spirit of God does encourage them from this, that in due time they
should reap. 4. Though God has promised a rich reward from free grace unto His
Peoples sincere and willing obedience; yet, He has reserved the date and time
for the actual bestowing of that reward unto Himself; So, that though it be
long delayed, yet they have not ground to challenge Him for breach of promise,
as sometimes even His dearest Saints under a violent tentation have gone very
near to do, Psalm. 77. -8. for, says he, Ye shall reap, but when? not
presently, but in the due and proper time, to wit, that which God does judge to
be such. 5. Though God, as said is, does not limit himself to a determinate
time when He will make His People enjoy the wished-for fruits and comfort of
their laborious, expensive and long persisted-in obedience; yet the time made
choice of by Him for His so doing, whether in this life, or immediately after
death, is always the due and proper time, and has a fitness in it in some
respects, all circumstances being well considered, for the bestowing of that
mercy beyond any other time: for, he says, Ye shall reap in due, or proper
time; the word rendered time, signifies properly an opportune time, the very
article or point of time which determines the fittest opportunity for doing
any business; and the epithet added, does intend the signification, as if he
had said, an opportune opportune time, or most opportune time. 6. That a man
may upon just grounds, and with confidence expect the good thing offered and
contained in a conditional promise, he must of necessity come up in his
practice to that condition and qualification which is called-for in the
promise; Hence the Apostle exhorts them not to weary, because the promise of
a reward includes their not wearying as a condition; Ye shall reap, if ye
faint not: where by fainting we must not understand every slackning and
remitting somewhat in our course; for, this befalls sometimes the choicest
Saints of God, Psalm. 73 2, etc. but such a fainting as makes the fainter
totally and finally abandon the ways of God, which is not incident to the real
child of God, Mat. 24. 24.

Verse. 10. As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men,
especially unto them who are of the household of faith.
HE does yet again repeat, and so closes the former exhortation unto
beneficency, as a conclusion drawn from the former arguments; And first, he
presses the use-making of the present opportunity which they had of exercising
this grace; which relates, 1. mainly to the whole time of this life, as that,
which being ended, all opportunity of doing good by those, who did ever until
then neglect to do good, does end with it. And 2. to some parts of that time,
in which there is more ready access unto duties of that kind, than at other
times. And secondly, he shows the persons unto whom they should do good,
first, to all men whomsoever; next and especially unto those, who, being
conjoined by the ty of one common Confession of Faith in Jesus Christ, are
Members of His Church, which is as it were His Household, 1 Timothy 3. 14. Doct. 1.
The Minister of Christ who would speak pertinently and edifyingly unto his
hearers, must not hand-over-head deliver every Truth as it comes to his mind
without any method, or dependence of purposes; but, having such a scope
proposed unto himself to aim at, whether the illustration and confirmation of a
truth, or the enforcing of a duty, or the reproving of sin, or confutation of
error, he would digest in his mind, and accordingly deliver in preaching all
his other purpose, so as it may be best subservient unto that scope, whether as
illustrations, confirmations from Scripture and Reason, or as motives, helps,
cautions, or arguments, etc. Yea, and for the better help of peoples memory,
and better carrying along of their attention, with the thread of his whole
discourse, he would frequently inculcate and reassume that which is
principally intended by him in his discourse, and to which all the other pieces
of it are subservient: for, so does the Apostle propose, ver. 6. the enforcing
of beneficency, as the scope he aims at, making all he has said in the
following verses one way or other subservient unto it, and does frequently
reiterate the exhortation it self, ver. 6. ver. 9. and here, As we have
opportunity, let us do good. 2. The servants of Jesus Christ should so press
the duties of beneficency upon others, as not to exoner and keep themselves
free from that duty, who ought to be examples unto the Lord's People, as in
every duty, so chiefly in those of beneficency, 1 Timothy 4. 12. because People
being more averse from such expensive duties than from any other, do more
readily snatch at every thing which may excuse their neglect, and will judge no
excuse more plausible than that even their Ministers do neglect all duties of
that kind; therefore the Apostle, both in the former verse and in this,
includes himself in the exhortation; Let us not weary, and, let us do good,
says he. 3. As there are some fit opportunities offered unto us by the
providence of God for doing our duty in any kind, and especially for this duty
of beneficency, such as our meeting with convenient objects, whose necessity
calls for our help, Isa. 58. 7. and our being fitted with abilities to do them
good, 2 Cor. 8. 14. So because those opportunities are in passing, and being
past, will not possibly return; therefore are we to look upon them, as a
pressing call from the Lord to set about the duty, and ought without delay or
foreslowing, close with that call: for, all this is imported by saying, As we
have opportunity, let us do good, seeing, as we show, this opportunity relates
in part to some pieces of our time in this life, in which we have more ready
access to the duties of beneficency than at other times, and it has the force
of an argument to press the duty, as supposing it will not always last. 4. As
all opportunities of this kind are confined within the narrow precinct of this
present life, there being no possibility of doing good in the way which we now
do it, or, of being benificial unto others after this life, the time of
repentance, of making sure our election by well-doing, of making our peace with
God, is then past, and where the tree falls there it lies, Eccles. 11. 3.
So, because the time of this life is uncertain (Iam. 4. 14.) therefore we ought
to bestir our selves in the use-making of the present time, as not knowing how
soon our time may end, and all opportunity of doing good come to an end with
it: for, so much is imported in the words, as this opportunity does hold out
the whole time of this life, As, or, while we have opportunity, let us do good.
5. This duty of beneficency is to be extended unto all men, even our very
enemies nor excepted, as their necessity does require, Exodus 23. 4, 5. and our
own ability may furnish, 2 Cor. 8. 12. and that because of Gods own example,
Mat. 5. 45. and the ty of one common nature betwixt them and us, Isa. 58. 7.
for, says he, Let us do good unto all men. 6. As the Church is God's family
and household, whereof He himself is the head and master, (Ephesians. 3. 15.) His
Ministers are stewards, to dispense the bread of life, (1 Cor. 4. 1.) and
particular Christians are members of this family, orderly conjoined, and knit
together by the profession of one common Faith in Christ Jesus; and therefore
the Church is but a small number, a family, even an handful in comparison of
the world, Luke 12. 32. And being Christ's family, cannot but be cared and
provided-for by Him, 1 Timothy 5. 8. So the members of this family are in a
special manner obliged to love one another, and to evidence their love by being
beneficial one to another under their necessities and straits (in which God
does suffer often even those of His own family to fall for their own good, 1
Pet. 1. 6.) and that as for other reasons, so because of that near relation
under which they stand, as being children and domestics of one family which is
the Lord's: for, says he, Do good especially unto them who are of the household
of faith, the designation which he gives them of one household containing the
force of an argument, 7. There is an order to be kept in the exercise of our
beneficency; And this, first, that it be exercised to those of our own family,
1 Timothy 5. 8. Secondly, to our parents, 1 Timothy 5. 4. Thirdly, to our kindred, 1 Timothy 5. 8-. And, fourthly, among strangers, unto those who profess the same
Faith with us, and among those, to such who do evidence most the reality of
their Faith by the fruits of a good life, 1 Timothy 5. 9, 10. And lastly, unto all
men whosoever when occasion offers: for, the Apostle does express the two
last links of this order, and thereby gives ground for searching out the rest
from other Scriptures; Do good unto all men, but especially to them which are
of the household of faith; he says, especially, because the comparison is among
those who are strangers, and not under any relation of kindred to us.

Verse. 11. Ye see how large a Letter I have written unto you with mine own hand.
THe Apostle, in the second part of the Chapter, being to conclude the Epistle,
does first insinnate how much he truly loved them, and desired their salvation,
As it appears, 1. from his writing so large a Letter to them: 2. from his
writing of it with his own hand, whether because his straits were such that he
had not a Secretary to write for him, whom he might trust; or, that he might
hereby prevent the calumnies of the false Apostles who might have objected that
this Epistle was not Paul's, if he had employed a Secretary or Scribe, as he did
in writing his other Epistles (Romans 16. 22.) subscribing the Salutation only
with his own hand, 1 Cor. 16. 21. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 17. So that though he wrote
larger Epistles to some other Churches, yet he never wrote with his own hand so
large an Epistle unto any Church as unto these Galatians. Doct. 1. The Minister
of Jesus Christ ought to refuse no toil or pains whereby he may reduce a
straying people, and any way advance the good of souls committed to his charge:
for, Paul, in order to the reclaiming of those Galatians, notwithstanding of
his other manifold distractions, and of the eminent hazard wherein he was for
the time, does undergo the great trouble of writing so large a Letter with his
own hand. 2. It is nothing contrary to christian modesty and sobriety, but very
lawful in it self, and advantageous for the Lord's People that a Minister make
known unto them sometimes, (though but sparingly, and as it were occasionally)
what great pains he has been at for bringing about their spiritual good,
providing this be not done from ostentation and desire of vainglory, 2 Cor.
10. 18. but from a purpose hereby to excite the people to bring forth fruits
answerable to his pains: for, in order to this end, the Apostle does modestly,
and as it were on the by, propound to their consideration what pains he had
been at in writing this Epistle; Ye see, or, consider ye (for the word will
read both ways) how large a Letter I have written unto you with mine own hand.
3. The greater pai^s are taken upon a people in order to their salvation by
Christ's Ministers, they ought to be the more persuaded of their affection and
love, and take the greater pains in making use of the labors of such
Ministers, for working out their own salvation themselves; otherwise the more
laborious Ministers are, the more inexcusable shall people be, and their
condemnation the greater, Mat. 11. 22. for, the Apostle, to persuade the
Galatians how much he loved them, and that they might be excited to bring forth
fruits answerable to his pains, does show how large a Letter he had written
unto them with his own hand.

Verse. 12. As many as desire to make a fair show in the fles^, they constrain
you to be circumcised: only lest they should suffer persecusion for the cross
of Christ.
SEcondly, in the Conclusion of the Epistle, the Apostle insinuates that the
false Apostles were not acted from love to those Galatians in their so much
urging Circumcision upon them, as a thing whithout the which they could not be
saved, whereby they laid upon them a kind of necessity, and constrained them to
be circumcised, and shows three principles from which they did herein act,
two whereof are in this verse; first, from hypocrisy, or a desire to make a
fair outward show of Religion by observing those fleshly and carnal rites, such
as Circumcifion, difference of meats, legal purifications, and the like,
enjoined by the ceremonial Law. Secondly, from pusillanimity, or a politic
design to eschew persecution from their Countrymen the Jews, and from the
Civil Power, at the instigation of the Jews (Act. 18. 12, 13.) for preaching
the sincere doctrine of the Gospel concerning Christ crucified, which is here
called the Cross of Christ: (See chap. 5. ver. 11.) the fury of which
persecuters was much abated toward such Christians as did observe the
ceremonial Law of Moses, the preaching down whereof, of any other thing, did
inrage them most, chap. 5. 11. Doct. 1. Though an external profession of
Religion (Romans 10. -10.) and the practice of such external rites (1 Cor. 11.
24.) and other ordinances of divine worship as God has commanded, (Col. 3.
16.) are to be made conscience of; yet, when the practice of those external
things is opposed to the inward substantial duties of Religion, the former
being rested upon without the latter, (Mat. 15. 8.) or, when the practiser
affects a vain show, and to be reputed religious because of those things,
much more than to be religious really and indeed, Mat. 6. 16. this is the sin
of hypocrisy loathsome both to God and man; and that especially when people
affect a show from the practice of those rites which are not commanded of God:
for, this is condemned here in the false Apostles, that they desired to seem
exceedingly religious, and to make a fair outward show of Religion by observing
such carnal rites as God had now abolished under the Gospel; As many as make a
fair show in the flesh, says he. It is ordinarily observed, that the zeal of
those who are carried away with the spirit of error themselves, and whose great
work is to seduce others, does most run out upon the externals of Religion,
thereby affecting a fair show, and to be reputed as men singular for piety and
devotion; that so they may deceive the simple, who take all for gold that
glistreth, Romans 16. -18. So those Apostles desired to make a fair show in the
flesh. 3. An erring conscience is of great force, and mightily prevalent with
erring persons to make them follow the dictates thereof; It being usual for
such to pretend conscience as a reason why they cannot subject themselves to
Truth, God in His holy Justice does give them over to a spirit of delusion, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. and makes conscience to be their snare, when it imbraceth
darkness for light, Isa. 5. 20. and uncessantly vexes them until they
execute its most unreasonable, irreligious, unnatural and sometimes most
blasphemous commands, Joh. 16. 2. Jer. 32. 35. for, the false Apostles did
constrain them to be circumcised, mainly, because by teaching the absolute
necessity of Circumcision to Salvation, (Act. 15. 2.) they possessed their
consciences with that erroneous opinion, and their consciences so misled, did
constrain them to follow its dictates. 4. As persecution does ordinarily follow
upon the sincere preaching of the Gospel; So, when persecution for the Gospel
waxes hot, there are usually many found, who, to decline a suffering lot, do
tamper with the persecuters of Truth, though not by total apostasy from Truth,
yet by coming a great length in making shipwreck of faith and a good
conscience, only to gratify those who persecute the truth, and to break the
edge of their rage and fury against themselves: who, notwithstanding, will
labor to keep up their credit in the Church of God, as if they were acted from
no such politic design, but from a principle of light and conscience: for, so
those false Apostles constrained others to be circumcised, pretending
conscience for their so doing, when their design was, only lest they should
suffer persecution for the cross of Christ. 5. Though Heretics and every one
who are carried away with a spirit of error, pretend to conscience, as that
which they desire to follow, and dare not contradict in what they hold; yet
very frequently such, especially they who are seducers of others, do but make a
pretext and shelter of conscience to cover their pride, politic designs, love
to ease in a troublesome time, pusillanimity of spirit, fear of persecution,
and a desire of vain glory, by which they are acted more than from any
principle of conscience: for, those false Apostles pretended to light and
conscience, as the rule of what they did, Act. 15. 2. and yet they did it only,
says Paul, lest they should suffer persecution for the cross of Christ; and,
ver. 13. That they may glory in your flesh. 6. However they who persecute
others for Truth do also pretend to conscience, Isa. 66. 5. yet, they are often
found to be men destitute of conscience, and more politic than conscientious,
even in those things wherein they pretend most to conscience, in so far as they
do dispense with some professors of Truth, if so they come but a little toward
them, and comply with them in some things only, though not in all things, as
intending hereby to work them up to a greater length in progress of time: for,
so the persecuting Jews did not molest those Christians who were circumcised;
though they did otherwise profess faith in the Messiah already come, whom the
Jews had crucified, as is clear from this, They constrain you to be
circumcised; only, lest they should suffer persecution for the cross of
Christ. 7. As a desire to eschew a suffering lot and persecution even for Truth
by all lawful means, is no ways sinful, but commanded, Mat. 10. 23. and
commendable, Prove. 22. 3. So, to dispense with the least jot of Truth, and to
embrace the smallest of Errors contrary to Truth, that hereby the greatest of
sufferings might be eschewed, is blameworthy, and extremely sinful; seeing the
least of sins has more of evil in it than the greatest of sufferings, Those
are our affliction, but not our sin: for, the Apostle condemns his
adversaries, not that simply they had labored to eschew persecution, but that
they constrained others to be circumcised; only, lest they should suffer
persecution for the cross of Christ.

Verse. 13. For neither they themselves who are circumcised keep the Law, but
desire to have you circumcised, that they may glory in your flesh.
THe Apostle, first, makes good his former charge against his adversaries, to
wit, That they urged Circumcision not from zeal to the Law of God, and from
conscience, but from a politic base design; because they made no conscience to
keep the Law themselves, that is, neither the moral Law, which they
transgressed daily by their wicked and licentious lives, Philip. 3. 18, 19. nor
yet the ceremonial Law, the keeping whereof they urged so much upon others, but
did usually and without challenge neglect it among themselves, and where they
knew none were to publish it abroad, Mat. 23. 4. Secondly, he mentions the
third principle from which they were acted in their so vehement urging of
Circumcision upon others, even their ambition and desire of vainglory, that
they might have whereof to glory and boast in the multitude of Proselytes among
the Gentiles, who received Circumcision in their flesh at their instigation,
and thereby did evidence that they were converted, or rather perverted unto
Judaism. Doct. 1. As we would not lightly, and without evident cause charge any
with hypocrisy, dissimulation, and pretending of zeal for God, and respect to
conscience, when there is no such thing in reality and truth; So this is ground
sufficient for any to susspect, and for those who are otherwise called unto it,
to affirm, That they who give little o(...)o evidence of zeal to God, or
respect to conscience in the ordinary strain of their conversation, are not
acted from zeal and conscience in those particulars wherein they would seem
most zealous and conscientious: and more especially, when Ministers do make
bold without challenge to neglect those things, the practice whereof they
press most vehemently upon others, it cries aloud that they are men destitute
of conscience, and that they speak and preach, not because they believe, but
for other base ends: for, Paul, having charged his adversaries with hypocrisy
in their so much urging of Circumcision, ver. 12, he gives a reason for his so
doing, to wit, their godless conversation and careless neglect of those
things which they so much pressed upon others; For neither they themselves who
are circumcised, keep the Law. 2. The Word of God in the mouths of His
Servants, is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, so as
it enters in upon a man's very soul and spirit, and makes that difference
appear which is betwixt his false (though fair) pretenses, and his real (though
foul) intentions, the latter whereof lay lurking under the former; but this
searching Word takes off the visard, and makes them appear in their foulest
colors: for, the Word of God in Paul's mouth, discovers the secret foul
intent even of the very hearts of his adversaries, having laid aside their fair
pretexts; They desire to have you circumcised, that they may glory in your
flesh, says he. 3. Where the spirit of schism and Church-renting has once
possessed a soul, it causes the man in whom it is to refuse no pains, trouble,
or toil, for gaining of many followers, and to look upon those whom he so
gains as so many trophies of his victory, and speaking proofs of his
unparalleled abilities and parts, wherewith he is so much taken up himself that
he cannot dissemble his earnest desire to have all others taken up with
admirationat them also: for, those schismatic Church-renters (chap. 4. ver.
17.) did desire, yea (ver. 12.) constrained men to be circumcised, that they
might glory in their flesh.

Verse. 14. But God forbid that I should glory save in the cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world.
THirdly, in the Conclusion, the Apostle does oppose his own truly christian
and apostolic conversation and carriage to those sins of hypocrisy, carnal
policy, and vainglory, which he has shown to be in the false Apostles: And,
first, in opposition to their vainglory, mentioned, ver. -13. he declares
that the matter of his gloriation and boasting was only in the cross of
Christ, that is, the all sufficient, expiatory and satisfactory sacrifice of
Christ upon the Cross with the whole work of our Redemption, which is also
hereby synecdochically understood, and rejects all other sorts of boasting,
as a thing abominable; for, so much does his usual expression, God forbid,
import, Romans 3. 4, 6, 31. and 6. 2. Secondly, he shows, in opposition to
their hypocrisy and desire to make a fair show in the flesh, that by Christ,
or by His Cross (for the article in the Greek language may relate to either)
the world was crucified to him, that is, all that is in the world, and in so
far as it is opposed to the Kingdom of Christ, as honor, riches, pomp,
pleasure, the favor, fear, wrath, praise or dispraise of men, all were
undervalued and despised by him, to wit, in comparison of Christ and the
excellency and worth of His sufferings, Philip. 3. 8. and hereby also he was
crucified unto the world, that is, undervalued and despised by the men of this
world; for, to be crucified in both sentences, signifies the same thing, even
to be contemptible and undervalued, as those were who died by that ignominions
and cursed death upon the Cross, Deuteronomy. 21. 23. Doct. 1. It is praiseworthy in
a Minister, and advances much the conviction of those whose sins he reproves,
when his own carriage is so exemplary, as the holding forth of it may point out
their duty, and wherein they come short of their duty: for, the Apostle, having
mentioned the sins of his adversaries, ver. 12, 13. does here hold forth his
own practice, wherein, as in a glass, they and others might see their duty in
opposition to those sins; But God forbid, says he, that I should glory, etc.
2. Though the goodness or badnesse of men, who maintain and labor to
propagate opinions, are not sufficient arguments to prove either the truth or
falsehood of what they maintain; seeing even the Godly may err, and men,
otherwise carnal, may discern what is Truth or Error, right or wrong, in some
particulars better than they, 2 Samuel 24. 2, 3. yet, when Truth is already
demonstrated to be Truth, and Error to be Error by sound and solid arguments
from Scripture and Reason, then is it lawful and opportune to compare the
pious conversation of those who are for Truth, with the impiety, pride, and
vainglory of those who are for Error, that hereby some taking weight may be
added unto those former arguments, especially in the minds of those who are
prejudged against the Truth; for, the Apostle, in the body of the Epistle
having confirmed his own Doctrine, and refuted the Error of his adversaries by
solid and nervous reasons, does now in the conclusion compare his own life with
theirs, and opposes his christian ingenuity and freedom from vainglory, to
their hypocrisy, baseness and vanity: and this to make his former arguments
weigh more with those prejudicate Galatians, as appears by comparing the two
former verses with this and those which follow; But God forbid that I should
glory, etc. 3. Though it be lawful in some cases for men to glory in the good
things of God bestowed upon them (See ver. 4. doct. 5.) yet it is altogether
unlawful; yea, no less than abominable, to glory in any thing, so as that we
place our confidence in it, for making us accepted to, and righteous before
God, but only the merit and satisfaction of Jesus Christ, the accomplishment
whereof was upon the Cross, Joh. 19. 30. for, in opposition to the false
Apostles their boasting in Circumcision, as the meritorious cause of their
Salvation, (See chap. 5. ver. 4. doct. 1.) does the Apostle here say, God
forbid that I should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. 4. A
holy heart, which has experimentally tasted the worth that is in Christ,
cannot easily think upon Him, and especially upon His Satisfaction and
Sufferings, but it must be enlarged toward Him, and have high thoughts of that
excellency and worth which is in Him, joined with an earnest desire of a more
near union with Him, and with an acquiescence in Him as its own, if so the
heart be already persuaded of interest in Him; yea, and will sometimes express
those thoughts of Him to the full, when occasion is offered to make any mention
of Him: for, so Paul, having occasion to speak of Christ, designeth Him so as
he expresses not only those high thoughts which he had of His Excellency and
worth, while he calls Him Lord, and Jesus, and Christ, but also the
acquiescing of his heart in Him as his own, while he says, Our Lord Jesus
Christ. 5. The cross and sufferings of Christ effectually applied by faith,
have that much power and virtue in them, as to make all things worldly, even
the very applause and glory of the world, contemptible unto, and to be actually
abhorred by a sincere Believer, in so far as the power, terror, beauty,
allurements, credit, pleasure, or profit of those things would interpose to mar
that high esteem he ought to have of Christ's satisfaction and sufferings, or
his right use-making of them, or his seeking after God's glory as the chief end
of all his actions, and above all those things: for, in those respects, the
world was crucified, or as a dead carrion to Paul, wherein he could take no
pleasure, and this by Christ, and the virtue of His sufferings, and nothing
else; By whom, or, by which cross, the world is crucified unto me. 6. The more
that high esteem of, and glorying in Jesus Christ does grow in the heart of
any, the more will our account of all things worldly, being compared with Him
and opposed to Him, decay: And where esteem of those things is upon the growing
hand, that high account which ought to be had of Jesus Christ cannot but be
decaying much; for, with Paul, I glory in the cross of Christ and the world is
crucified to me, did go together. 7. As a man truly godly, and renewed by the
Spirit of Christ, and in so far as he is renewed, at least, cannot but be
unsavory unto, and vilipended by the world and wicked men in the world; So
this also does come from the death and sufferings of Christ, not indeed, as
from a working cause, (for, Christ by, His death does work no such malicious
disposition in wicked men toward His People) but as from an occasion; for,
from those gracious effects flowing from the Spirit of Christ, and wrought in
those who are renewed, wicked men do take occasion to hate, abhor, and to take
no pleasure in them, no more than they were the dead carrions of some notorious
malefactors put to a shameful death by the hand of Justice; By whom, says he,
I am crucified unto the world.

Verse. 15. For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature.
HE gives a reason why he gloried only in the cross of Christ, and not in
those fleshly privileges, or ordinances, and why the world was crucified unto,
and undervalued by him, to wit, because those things which were matter of
gloriation to the false Apostles, and by making an outward show whereof they
gained the world's applause (one instance whereof he gives in Circumcision,
and illustrateth it by its contrary uncircumcision, under which may be
comprehended the simple want of this ordinance, and all other things which the
uncircumcised Gentiles boasted of, as wealth, wisdom, strength, policy, and
whatsoever is glorious in the eyes of the world) all which things he affirms
to be of no account or worth in Christ Jesus, to wit, so as to make a man
accepted of Christ, or to evidence his acceptance by Him, or interest in Him;
and withal, shows that the new creature, or the renovation of the whole man
by God's omnipotent creating power in knowledge, (Col. 3. 10.) righteousness
and true holiness (Ephesians. 4. 24.) is only that, in opposition to those external
and worldly things, which makes a man acceptable to God in Christ, and
especially does evidence his acceptance by, and interest in Christ. Doct. 1.
As those things are most applauded unto by men of this world, which are most
remote from, and have least relation unto Jesus Christ, and peoples interest in
Him; So for that reason, a godly heart will be more dead unto, and less taken
up with applause from them, whether he have it or want it: for, Paul gives
this for a reason, why the world was crucified unto him, Even that those things
which had most of the world's applause, did no ways evidence a man's interest
in Christ, as the new creature did, as appears by the causal particle for:
For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision. 2. Though other things besides the work of Regeneration and
saving Grace, such as wealth, honor, wisdom, strength, are of good use for the
affairs of this life, Eccles. 9. 15. Yet, none of these, nor any other thing
else, if separated from the work of saving grace, are of any worth or account
to commend us to God, or to evidence a saving interest in Jesus Christ and in
those saving benefits which are purchased by Him: for, in this respect he
says, In Jesus Christ neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision. 3. As we are so far dead in sins and trespasses, (Ephesians. 2. 1.)
that no less than almighty creating power is requisite for working of a
gracious change in us; So this gracious change, thus wrought, does reach the
whole man, his soul and all the faculties thereof, his body and all the members
thereof are renewed and changed, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. for, this gracious change has
the name of a new creature, importing it to flow from God's creating power, and
that it is extended to the whole man. 4. This gracious change of the whole man
is for singular use and advantage to the man who has it, though not to give
him a right to Christ, or to justify him, except in so far as the grace of
Faith is included in it; for, Faith alone does entitle a man to Christ, (1 John
5. 12, 13.) and justify him, Gal. 2. 16. yet to evidence unto his own
conscience that he has that right, and is a justified person, 1 John 3. 7, 14.
for, with respect to this, he says, That in Jesus Christ a new creature does
avail, with a little variation of the sense and meaning from that which we gave
of almost the same words, chap. 5. ver. 6. because his scope there is somewhat
different from what it is here.

Verse. 16. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and
mercy, and upon the Israel of God.
HE adds a second reason, whereby he commends not only that glorying in the
sufferings and satisfaction of Christ, as the only sure ground to build our
Faith for salvation upon (spoken of, ver. 14.) but also the study of piety, and
of becoming a new creature, (whereof, ver. 15.) as the only rule according to
which all ought to walk in their several employments. And, secondly, does
excite all men to walk according to this rule, by a most sure prediction and
promise of a double fruit to be reaped thereby, even Peace, that is, peace with
God, peace with their own conscience, and so much of peace one with another,
and of sanctified prosperity (which also goes under the name of peace, Genesis
28. 21) as God should see convenient for them, Psalm. 84. -11. and Mercy, that
is, God's favor, the fountain of the former peace, which should furnish them
with a timous remedy to all their evils and misery. And, thirdly, because the
false Apostles did glory much themselves, and boulstered up their followers
much with this, That they were the only true Israelites, as being joined to the
People of God by Circumcision, to whom those promises did belong; he shows
that they who followed this rule, though they were not Israel according to the
flesh, Romans 2. 28. yet they were the Israel of God, the only true Israelites,
Joh. 1. 47. as being the children of Abraham by faith, chap. 3. 7. for, the
particle and, in this place, must be exegetick of one and the same thing, as
Ephesians. 1. 3. and not copulative of diverse. Doct. 1. The rule of a Christian
man's walk, whether in relation to faith or manners, is not left indifferent
for every man so as he may choose what rule pleases him best; neither is it
left arbitrary unto any man to impose a rule of walking upon others, but there
is a fixed, determinate rule condescended upon by God for all, which no man may
either add to, or take from: for, says he, As many as walk according to this
rule, meaning a determinate, fixed rule. The word in the original is borrowed
from Architectors who try their work by rule and square: now, whatever is
defective, and requires addition; or superfluous, and requires diminution, is
not a perfect and just measure or rule. 2. Though this rule and canon of faith
and manners be the whole Word of God contained in Scripture, 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20,
21. Yet, the grace of Faith in Jesus Christ, and repentance unto life, are a
doctrinal sum of this rule, if we mean the Doctrine of Faith and Repentance;
or, a practical sum, if we mean the graces themselves; there being no point of
Truth taught, and no duty pressed in the whole Scripture which one way or other
relates not to one of these two: for, while he says, As many as walk
according to this rule, it is all one upon the matter, whether by the rule he
mean the Doctrine contained in the whole Epistle, which is one and the same in
substance with the rest of Scripture, or the graces of Faith in Christ, called
(ver. 14.) glorying in the cross of Christ, and of repentance unto life,
called (ver. 15.) the new creature, although it be more probable, he mean the
latter. 3. This rule of faith and manners, contained in the Scripture, is
unchangeable, and ever to remain as that to which all men in all ages, to the
end of the world, ought to make themselves conform: for, the word rendered walk
in the original, is in the future tense, as relating to all time; As many as
shall walk according to this rule. 4. So accurate and orderly is this rule in
it self, Psalm. 119. 96. So ignorant are we of it in many particulars relating
both to faith and manners, Psalm. 119. 18. And so many and subtle are those
tentations which Satan sets on foot to make us transgress and flight this
rule. Ephesians. 6. -11. that there is great necessity of circumspection, accuracy
and attention unto those who would rightly walk according to this rule: for,
the word rendered walk, signifies to walk orderly, attentively, as Soldiers
when they keep rank; As many as walk according to this rule. 5 Even those who
walk according to this rule, are not so much freed from sin and misery, but
they stand in need of mercy; yea, all their receipts do come in the way, not of
merit, but of undeserved mercy; for, mercy relates to sin, misery; and to them
that walk according to this rule, there is a promise not only of peace, but
also of mercy, and of peace flowing from mercy; Peace shall be upon them, and
mercy, says he. 6. As tender walkers according to this rule may expect
sufficient encouragement and reward, even in this life, and such as may
counterballance all contrary discouragements and hardships which usually occur
in that way; So their encouragements are not from the world, but from above,
descending from Heaven, and therefore such as cannot be hindered by the malice
of men: for, peace shall be upon them, and mercy, says he; the word rendered,
upon them, is emphatick, and imports that those blessings fall down upon them
from above. 7. It is not sufficient for a Minister of Christ who would comfort
and encourage weak Christians (who are otherwise apt to be discouraged through
multitude of tentations in their Christian course, Heb. 12. 12.) that he find
out, and apply such precious Promises as are pertinent to their case, but he
must also endeavor their satisfaction in this, that they are in the number of
those to whom such promises do belong, and who with God's allowance may lay
hold upon them, and draw out that comfort which is contained in them, otherwise
the discouraged person will look upon it as presumption to apply any of those
precious Promises, Psalm. 77. -2. though otherwise he most gladly would: for,
the Apostle shows, that those who walk according to this rule, and to whom he
promises peace and mercy, are the Israel of God, to whom such Promises were
made and do appertain; And upon the Israel of God, says he.

Verse. 17. From henceforth let no man trouble me, for I bear in my body the
marks of the Lord Jesus.
THe Apostle (having now sufficiently vindicated his Doctrine, and justified
his practice, especially from those calumnies which were spread of him, as if
he had preached Circumcision, chap. 5. 11.) does here by his Apostolical
Authority discharge any whomsoever to occasion further trouble to him, or
unnecessary diversions from the great work of the Gospel, whether by speaking
against his Doctrine, or by spreading, or entertaining calumnies and slanders
of him, especially that formerly spoken of; and this because the manifold
sufferings which he had endured from the Jews his countrymen and others, for
his sincere preaching of the Gospel, without any mixture of Jewish Ceremonies
(2 Cor. 11. 24) the marks, skars, or prints whereof, which were yet visible and
to be seen in his body, did sufficiently witness and seal the truth of his
Doctrine, and especially did abundantly refute that former calumny: for, if he
had preached Circumcision, he should not have been so persecuted, chap. 5. 11.
and hereby also he opposes his own practice and courage to the pusillanimity
of his adversaries, and their base desire of eschewing a cross for the
speaking of truth, ver. -12. Doct. 1. Though it be the duty of Ministers to
contend for Truth against Error, Jude, v. -3. and to wipe off that disgrace
which adversaries intend by unjust imputations and calumnies to fasten on their
persons, Romans 3. 8. yet the spending of much time in those eristick debates,
may create no small trouble and heartbreaking vexation to their spirits, as
diverting them exceedingly from that far sweeter, and in some respects far more
profitable work both to themselves and others, even of preaching the positive
and practical Truths of the Gospel unto their hearers, and of feeding by
meditation upon those Truths themselves: for, Paul, speaking of their
contradiction to Truth, and calumnies against his person, says, From hence
forth let no man trouble me; importing his wrestling with those, did by way of
unpleasant diversion trouble him, and so as they consumed his strength; for, so
much does the word, rendered trouble, signify. 2. When the mouths of heretics
and slanderers cannot be stopped with reason and fair persuasions, but rather
they prove more insolent, it is the duty of those who have authority, wisely to
make use of it, for putting them to silence: for, so does Paul, having used
abundance of reasons and persuasions already by his Apostolic Authority,
command, From henceforth let no man trouble me. 3. As it is the lot of Christ's
most eminent Servants to meet with base and disgraceful usage from raging
persecuters, as if they were the basest of slaves, malefactors, and the very
off-scourings of men; So, whatever hard measure His Servants do receive from
such, the Lord Christ will look on it as done to Himself; He will own their
sufferings, wounds, and akars of those wounds, as His own, and allows His
suffering Martyrs to look so upon them also, and that because they are
inflicted for the profession of His Name, 1 Pet. 4. 14. and because of that
strict union which is betwixt Christ and Believers, whereby He and they are
only one mystical Christ, Ephesians. 1. 23. for, Paul had received stripes and
wounds, the marks whereof did afterward remain in his flesh; the word
signifies the prints and marks of such stripes as slaves and malefactors used
to be beaten with, and those he calls the marks of Christ; I bear in my body
the marks of the Lord Jesus. 4. Though men of this world do but judge basely of
those who suffer for Christ, and of their sufferings, together with the prints
and memorials of their sufferings, as they do judge of the stripes and skars of
those who are justly beaten for their faults, Act. 24. 5. yet the person who
has suffered, will not be ashamed of, but rather in a holy manner will glory
in the very prints and marks of those stripes and wounds which he has received
for the name of Christ: yea, it is the duty of all to think the more honorably
of that person, seeing those are the marks of Christ: for, Paul does in a manner
boast of those his marks which were imprinted by his persecuters of purpose to
disgrace him; I do bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus. 5. Though
wicked heretics may suffer much before they renounce their erroneous opinions,
So that a man's suffering for his opinion will not presently prove his opinion
to be truth; yet when other strong arguments from Scripture and Reason are
already made use of by a Preacher to confirm the truth of his Doctrine, this
may add weight to all his other arguments, and argue his sincererity and
uprightness in the defense of his Doctrine, even that with courage and
constancy, and that frequently, he has sealed the truth of it by his
sufferings: for, the Apostle, having already spoken sufficiently in reason for
the defense of his Doctrine against his adversaries, does now make mention of
his sufferings for the Truth as an additional argument to stop the mouths of
those who did oppose his Doctrine, and question his sincerity in the defense of
it; From henceforth let no man trouble me, says he; for I bear in my body the
marks of the Lord Jesus.

Verse. 18. Brethren, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.
Amen.
FOurthly, the Apostle concludes the Epistle with his ordinary farewell-wish;
wherein, having designed them by the name of Brethren, he wishes that God's
grace and favor with all spiritual benefits flowing from it, and purchased and
conveyed to them through Jesus Christ (therefore called the grace of Jesus
Christ) might reside both in the effects and sense of it in their spirits and
whole soul, and affixeth his Amen as an evidence of fervency and confidence in
his wish, and as a confirmation of the whole Doctrine delivered by him in this
Epistle. Besides what is already observed upon the like farewell-wish in the
close of the Epistles to the Philippians and Colossians, Hence Learn, 1. The
more of prejudice a Minister does apprehend to be in a people or person against
himself and his doctrine, he ought to endeavor the more by affectionate
insinuations, and by frequent and seasonable reiterating of loving
compellations, the rooting out of those prejudices: for, besides all the
insinuations which he has used toward, and lovely compellations which he has
given to those Galatians, so much possessed with prejudice against him, chap.
4. 16. he designeth them by the name of Brethren, in his farewell-wish, which
he does to no other Church, except to that of Corinth, 2 Cor. 13. 11. who at
that time had deep prejudice against him also; Brethren, the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ. 2. The main thing in people for which Ministers ought to care,
and which should be most adverted unto by people themselves, is the spirit and
inward man, as that for which God does mainly call, Prove. 23. 26. and being
kept right, will command the outward man and keep it right also, Prove. 4. 23.
and without the concurrence whereof, all that is done in the service of God, is
nothing but detestable hypocrisy, Mat. 15. 8. for, the Apostle wishes the
grace of God to be with their spirits, by seating it self there, that it may
command the body and all the members thereof from thence, The grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ be with your spirit, says he.

FINIS.
A brief Exposition of the Epistle of Paul to the Ephesians.
The ARGUMENT.
PAul, having planted a famous Church at Ephesus, (Act. 19. 1, 10, etc) a prime
City in the lesser Asia, Rev. 1. 11. and having foreseen by the Spirit of
prophecy, that though this Church (as appears from the strain of the whole
Epistle) was for the time free from schism, and constant in the doctrine of the
Gospel; yet false teachers in progress of time would arise among them to
pervert them, Act. 20. 29, 30. And fearing also, lest his own present
sufferings (he being now a prisoner at Rome, chap. 3, 1.), should make them
faint and sit up in their christian course, chap. 3. 13. Therefore, and upon
these occasions be writes this Epistle unto them. His scope wherein, is, to
excite them unto constancy and further progress in faith and piety, as
appears from the subject matter of the whole Epistle, and more especially
from chap. 3. 13, etc. and chap. 4. 1. In order to which scope (after the
Inscription, ver. 1, 2. chap. 1.) he propounds to their view a short sum of
the doctrine of faith and salvation by Christ, which he does several ways
illustrate, commend, extend both to Jew and Gentile, and guard from contempt
occasioned by the cross, exhorting them of times indirectly to cleave unto it,
and make progress in the knowledge of it, to the end of chap. 3. After which,
he inciteth them to the study and practice of holiness, both in the general
and special duties of a christian life, chap. 4, 5. and to ver. 21. of chap. 6.
And so (having recommended some private affairs of his own to the care of
Tychicus, ver. 21, 22.) he concludes the Epistle with almost the same
salutation by which be made his entry to it, ver. 23, 24.

CHAP. I.
IN the first part of this Chapter (after the Inscription, ver. 1, 2.) the
Apostle unfoldeth the grounds and causes of the salvation of sinners, ascribing
all unto God's free grace in Christ: which he does, first, generally, by way of
thanksgiving unto God, ver. 3. Secondly, more particularly: and first, he
treats of the grounds, causes and means of salvation, as they were prepared
in the eternal decree of election; which he describes from those ends which
God intended in that decree, as our sanctification, ver. 4. our adoption or
glorification, ver. 5. and the glory of His grace, ver. 6. Next, as they were
purchased by Christ in the work of redemption, ver. 7. And lastly, as they are
applied unto the Elect in their effectual calling, ver. 8. which is illustrated
from the mean made use of for bringing it about, to wit, the revealing and
publishing of the Gospel, ver. 9. and from the end intended by God in the use
of this mean, even the gathering together in one of all the scattered Elect,
ver. 10. And thirdly, he clears yet further the former doctrine concerning
the freedom of God's grace through Christ in our salvation, by giving some
instances of it, 1. In the believing Jews, ver. 11, 12. Next, in the believing
Gentiles, ver. 13, 14.

In the second part of the Chapter, he does indirectly incite them to constancy
and progress in the knowledge of this doctrine; first, by showing how he
blessed God, and prayed unto Him for them, ver. 15, 16. Secondly, by holding
forth a short sum of his prayer unto God on their behalf, even that God would
bestow a greater measure of wisdom and saving knowledge upon them, ver. 17, 18
-- whereby they might know those good things, which they were to partake of in
Heaven, ver. -18. together with the working of Gods mighty power in, and
toward Believers, ver. 19. Thirdly, by commending this power of God unto them,
from its mighty working in order to Christ's exaltation, ver. 20. which exalted
state of Christ, he shows, does include power and superiority over all
creatures in general, ver. 21, 22-and over His Church in particular, ver. -22,
23.

Verse. 1. PAUL an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, to the Saints
which are at Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus: 2. Grace be to you,
and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.
IN these two Verses is the Inscription of the Epistle, containing, first, a
description of the Penman; from his name Paul, from his office an Apostle, and
call to his office, by the will of God. Secondly, a description of those to
whom the Epistle was directed, from the place of their habitation, at Ephesus,
and their spiritual state, they were Saints and faithful, ver. 1. Thirdly, the
Apostle's usual salutation, or comprecation, whereby he prays for grace and
peace unto them, ver. 2.

Besides what has been already observed upon the Inscriptions of the Epistles
to the Galatians, Philippians and Colossians, Learn, 1. The wisdom of God has
judged it most convenient to teach His People, not immediately by Himself or by
the ministry of Angels, but of men like unto our selves: hereby to try His
Peoples obedience, Mat. 10. 40. and because their infirmity could not well
endure the ministry of others, Exodus 20. 19. For, Paul is employed by God to
instruct those Ephesians by writing this Epistle; Paul an Apostle by the will
of God, to the saints. 2. It does not follow hence, that every man who thinks
himself sufficiently gifted, may take upon him the office of the Ministry,
except he be called unto it of God: for, Paul shows he was called to the
office of an Apostle before he did meddle with it; An Apostle of Jesus Christ
by the will of God. 3. The power of God not only can, but also frequently does
gather and preserve a Church to Himself, even where Satan's seat is, and
wickedness of all sorts does most abound: hereby fulfilling what was long
since foretold (Psalm. 110. -2.) that Christ should rule in the midst of His
enemies; for, there was a Church of Saints even at Ephesus, a City famous for
Idolatry and Witchcrafts, Act. 19. v. 19, 24, 34, 35. To the Saints which are
at Ephesus. 4. Even those who are Saints and Believers, do stand in need of
God's grace and favor both to pardon and subdue sin, seeing the best of them
are but sanctified in part, 1 Cor. 13. 12. having the dregs of corruption
always remaining, and frequently stirring in them, Romans 7. 23. for, the
Apostle's wish in behalf of the Saints at Ephesus and faithful in Christ
Jesus, is, Grace be to you.

Verse. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ.
THe Apostle's scope being to establish those Ephesians in the sincere doctrine
of the Gospel already received by them, and for this end to unfold the grounds
and causes of their salvation, together with the freedom of God's grace in
Christ, upon which salvation (with all its causes, and every step tending
toward it) is founded, he does first propound the grounds and causes in
general, and this not warshly, and in a coldrife manner, but with an open
mouth, and a more enlarged heart, by way of thanksgiving to God, whom he
describes from his twofold relation to Christ, as being the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ: for, the particle and, in this place, is not copulative
of things different, but exegetick of one and the same thing, as Psalm. 18. 46.
And first, He is a God to Christ, chiefly because of the Covenant of Redemption
betwixt God and Christ as Mediator, the mutual conditions of which Covenant
are, Is. 53. 10, 11. Joh. 6. 39, 40. And, secondly, He is the Father of Christ,
to wit, not only as Christ is God, by an eternal and unspeakable generation,
Psalm. 2. 7. but also, as Christ is Man, God is His Father by virtue of the
personal union of the two natures in Christ, Luke 1. 32 --. The reason of which
his thanksgiving to God he shows to be Gods bestowing of real blessings upon
Believers, and those not common or temporal only, but special and spiritual
blessings, which tend to a spiritual and supernaturalend; and those not
sparingly, but fully, and with an open hand, even all blessings, and this in
heavenly places, that is, from Heaven His glorious Throne; or, because those
spiritual blessings shall not be consummated and fully perfected, until
Believers be in Heaven: all which blessings, he shows are bestowed upon
Believers in Christ, He, as our Head, Attorney and Advocate (1 John 2. 1.)
having received those blessings in our name, and for our behoof, Ephesians. 2. 6. by
whose merit also they are purchased, Isa. 53. 5. In whom, and by virtue of our
union with Him and right to Him, we have a right to such of those blessings as
we have not yet actually received, 1 John 5. 12. and do come to the possession
of these which we already enjoy, Joh. 1. 16. Doct. 1. Though we cannot bless
the Lord, as He blesses us by bestowing real blessings and favors upon us,
which before we wanted, Genesis 24. 35. there being such a fullness of
blessedness in God, as nothing can be superadded, Joh 22. 2. Yet it is our
duty to bless Him so, as that being convinced of that blessedness, of those
excellencies which are in Him, and favors which are bestowed upon us by Him,
we do not only esteem highly of Him because of those, Luke 1. 46. but also
express this our high esteem, and that not only in words, whether by speaking
to God Himself in the duty of prayer and praise, Psalm. 104. 1. or by speaking
of Him, and to His commendation unto others, Psalm. 34. 3, 4, etc. but also and
mainly in our life and actions, 1 Cor. 10. 31. for, Paul does here bless the
Lord; Blessed be God, says he. 2. It is a looking to God with respect had to
Jesus Christ, which inflameth the heart with such a mixture of love and
admiration at His excellencies and worth, that it must of necessity break forth
in blessing of Him: God considered without Christ being a consuming fire, to
whom there can be no confident approaching by sinful creatures, neither in the
duties of prayer, nor of praise; but the vail of Christ's flesh does break the
beams of His terror, so that we may steadfastly behold His attributes and
excellencies, rejoicing in them, and blessing Him for them: for, Paul, while he
blesses God, does look upon Him through this vail; Blessed be God, and the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. 3. A holy soul, truly sensible of his lost
condition by nature, and of God's mercy in his delivery from that woeful state,
cannot seriously think, or speak of that subject, but his heart must be
inflamed with love to God; yea, and break forth in praises and thanksgiving to
Him, when occasion offers: for, so does Paul, Blessed be God who has blessed
us with all spiritual blessings. 4. Though we are bound to bless the Lord even
for temporal favors, and things necessary for the life which now is, Psalm.
107. 8. yet a renewed heart is most taken up with, and blesses God most for
spiritual blessings, and such as concern our eternal welbeing, those being not
only most durable, Job. 6. 27. but also most discriminating betwixt the
regenerate and unregenerate, Eccles. 9. 1. 1 John 3. 14. for, Paul blesses God
for these blessings; Who bath blessed us with all spiritual blessings. 5. God
is the author and worker of all spiritual blessings in a special manner, in so
far as He produces them not by a general providence actuating and concurring
with natural principles and powers for producing of such and such effects, (as
He is the author even of common blessings, health, riches, honor, and such
like Psalm. 75. 6, 7.) but by his special grace, whereby He creates in the
heart (by nature, dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2. 1.) a power to do good,
Ezekiel, 36. 26. and actuateth that power, making it to work, Phil. 2. 13. for,
the Apostle ascribes the production of all spiritual blessings to God, while
speaking of God he says, Who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings. 6.
Though God, considered as Creator and merciful upholder of His own creatures,
does bestow temporal blessings upon the world, even upon those who never heard
of Christ, Psalm. 17. 14. yet, spiritual blessings, such as the saving graces of
faith, hope and love, come from God, being considered not as Creator, but in,
and with relation to Jesus Christ, who behoved to purchase those blessings of
new, before fallen man could acquire either a right unto them, or possession of
them: for, says Paul, it is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
has blessed us with all spiritual blessings; and again, He has blessed as in
Christ. 7. Spiritual blessings, to wit, those of them which are absolutely
necessary to salvation and eternal blessedness, are linked together, and
cannot be separated: where God bestows one of those, He bestows all, there
being a necessary concatenation among them all, Romans 8. 29, 30. so that they
either co-exist, or at least in God's due time do follow one upon another,
Philip. 1. 6. for, says Paul, He has, blessed us with all spiritual
blessings. 8. Though there be some spiritual blessings, such as perfection in
holiness, and the full enjoying of God in glory, the possession whereof is not
attained unto by Believers so long as they are here on earth, 1 Cor. 13. 12.
yet, because of the Believer's undoubted right unto those blessings (1 Cor. 3.
21, 22.) and God's unchangeable purpose to bestow them, Psalm. 84. 11. and
because of the first fruits and earnest of those blessings already bestowed
upon the Believer (See ver. 14.) and of Christ's having taken possession of
those in the Believer's name, chap. 2. 6. he may be as much assured of his full
enjoying of them, as if he had them already in hand: for, says Paul, He has
blessed us with all spiritual blessings, as if all, none being excepted, were
already enjoyed. 9. Spiritual blessings are of an heavenly rise and nature,
there being no second cause upon earth, or among things created, which does
concur with God in bringing them to pass, as in the production of other
natural effects: for, as the word is well rendered, in beavenly places, and
better than in heavenly things; so it seems the bestowing of those spiritual
blessings, is ascribed to God in heavenly places, mainly because their original
is only from Heaven, and not from earth; With all spiritual blessings in
heavenly places.

Verse. 4. According as He has chosen us in Him, before the foundation of the
world, that we should be holy, and without blame before Him in love.
THe Apostle, in the second place, treats of those spiritual blessings more
particularly, and so does branch forth at large that reason of his thanksgiving
to God presently mentioned, and this in pursuance of the former scope, which is
to show, that salvation with all its causes do flow only from God's free grace
in Christ; that so the Ephesians might be firmly rooted and confirmed in the
faith of this Truth. And, first, he speaks of those blessings as they were
prepared and appointed for Believers in God's eternal decree of Election and
Predestination, to ver. 7. In this verse he shows, first, That these
spiritual blessings are bestowed upon Believers in time, not by chance, or
rashly, not from any worth in the receiver, but according as God had
foreordained in His decree of Election, whereby, before the foundation of the
world, that is, from all eternity (See Joh. 17. 24) He did choose some of
mankind to eternal life (Mat. 25. 34.) passing by others, and did choose them
in Christ, not as if Christ's death had moved God to love and elect; for, His
electing love did move Him to give Christ for sinners, Job. 3. 16. Neither did
He choose them in Christ, as if they had been considered by God as already in
Christ by faith, and that because of their faith thus foreseen, they had been
elected by Him; for, so faith should not be a fruit flowing from election, but
a condition prerequired in the person to be elected, which does contradict this
same very Scripture, affirming that all spiritual blessings (whereof faith is
one) do flow from, and are bestowed according to the decree of Election: He did
therefore choose them in Christ, as in Him, whom He did in one and the
self-same decree choose to be the Head of the Elect, and chief foundation-stone
of all that precious building, His own House and Church, 1 Pet. 2. 6. and by
whom that glory, and all things tending to that glory unto which He did choose
them, were to be purchased; that so (without doing injury to provoked justice)
they might be applied unto, and actually bestowed upon the Elect; for, so is
this purpose more clearly expressed, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9. Secondly, he illustrateth
this decree of Election from the nearest end which God did design to be brought
about by it, even the sanctification of the persons elected, whereby they
should be rendered blameless before men, and sincere and upright before God, and
that in love, to wit, in the duties of love to their neighbor, flowing from
love to God, Mat. 22. 37, 39 by which love, as a touchstone, the soundness of
their sanctification should be tried. Doct. 1. As God from all eternity has
chosen some of mankind, and firmly decreed to bestow upon them eternal life,
Luke 12. 32. so there are others whom He decreed not to save, but to condemn.
In which latter decree, and much more in the former, God has done nothing
unjustly; seeing as sovereign Lord over all the creatures He has absolute
dominion to dispose of them as He pleases, Romans 9. 19, 20, 21. and though sin
in the reprobate was not the cause of God's decree of reprobation, Romans 9. 11,
12, 13. yet it is the cause of the reprobates condemnation, so that his
condemnation is just: for, says he, He has chosen us: which implies, some
were not chosen, seeing where all is taken there is no choice. 2. Though no man
(except he who has sinned that unpardonable sin, Mat. 12. -32.) can certainly
know he is a reprobate; there being no marks, except that alone, set down in
Scripture, by which reprobation can be certainly known; Yet, the Elect may
attain to the assured knowledge of their own election, seeing God has set down
in Scripture, the marks and evidences of election, Joh. 6. 37. and has
promised to give His Spirit unto His own, whereby they may infallibly discern
these marks, at least, at sometimes in themselves, 1 Cor. 2, 12. for, although
the Apostle does pronounce those Ephesians to be elected according to the
judgment of charity only, which believes the best of others, where nothing
appears to the countrary, 1 Cor. 13. 7. yet, he behoved to have some undoubted
persuasion of his own election, before he could warrantably conclude himself to
be elected, seeing not charity, but certain knowledge is the principle from
which a man ought to judge of himself, 2 Cor. 13. 5. As He has chosen us in
Him, says he. 3. Though the doctrine of Election and Reprobation be such, as
the unlearned and unstable are apt to wrest and stumble at to their own
destruction, 2 Pet. 3. 16. yet, it is not wholly to be suppressed and locked up
in silence from the Lord's People, but would be soberly, and prudently
sometimes propounded unto them; and that because of the many and great
advantages which may be reaped, not only by the doctrine of election, such as
the assurance of salvation, Romans 8. 29, 30. strong incitements unto holiness,
2 Pet. 1. 10. and courage under crosses of all sorts, Romans 8. 38, 39. but also
by the doctrine of reprobation, as contributing much to promove the salvation
of the Elect, by making them hate sin more, Psalm. 119. 119, 120. and prize the
kindness and good will of God more, which made choice of them, passing by
others as good as they, Romans 9. 22, 23. for, the Apostle propounds this
doctrine to the whole Church, and insisteth upon it, According as He has
chosen us in Him, etc. 4. As electing love in God is of an old standing, even
from all eternity, and therefore most free; there being nothing in the Elect,
before they had a being, which might draw His love toward them: So the Lord
can, and usually does keep His purposes and thoughts for good to a people or
person for a long time hid, before He do discover them, and make them known:
for, He had set His love upon these believing Ephesians from all eternity,
which yet lay hid from the beginning of the world, and did not kyth until
their effectual calling; He has chosen us before the foundation of the world.
5. The Lord bestows spiritual blessings in time, according to what He has
inacted in that His eternal decree of election before time; So that every elect
soul shall most undoubtedly enjoy those blessings: And all of them (even Faith
it self not being excepted) do flow from Election, and are bestowed upon the
Elect, because they are elected unto them: for, says he, God has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings, according as He has chosen us in Him. 6. God did
not choose or elect us, because we were holy, or because He did foresee we
would be holy, but that we might be holy; so that neither foreseen holiness,
good-works, nor foreseen faith, were the causes of Election, but effects and
fruits flowing from it: for, says he, God has chosen us that we should be
holy. 7. God has elected none to enjoy everlasting glory after this, but such
as He has chosen to be holy here: And therefore a man may safely and certainly
conclude he has been elected from all eternity, if he be sanctified and
renewed by the Spirit of holiness in time: and whatever assurance of Election
is pretended unto by any who lead an unholy life, it is but a strong delusion,
a vain presumption, and no wellgrounded persuasion; for, He has chosen us, as
to Heaven and glory, so also that we should be holy. 8. This real and saving
holiness, from which a man may conclude his own Election, is joined with an
honest endeavor after such a conversation as is blameless and obnoxious unto
no just reproof from men: It is not only inward and in the heart, but outward
also, and in the hand and tongue: for, says he, He has chosen us, that we
should be holy and without blame, to wit, from men, as the word is taken, Luke
1. 6. 1 Timothy 3, 2. Doct. 9. Where this real and saving holiness, the fruit of
electing love, is, there will not only be a blameless conversation before men,
but also sincerity of heart before God, which does not imply perfection in
holiness, (for none should then be holy before Him in this life, 1 King. 8.
46*) but ingenuity and singleness of spirit, opposite to a double heart and
hypocrisy, even such ingenuity, as a man dare appeal to God to judge of his
honest endeavor after that in reality and in deed, which he pretends unto in
the ways of God; for, those words before Him, express such sincerity of
heart, (See 2 King. 20. 3. Psalm. 18. 23.) we should be holy before Him. 10.
Sound holiness and sincerity of heart, are most manifested in the duties of
love to our neighbor, flowing from our love to God; for, external duties of
Religion may be diligently followed, even by hypocrites, Isa. 1. 11. And the
inward substantial duties thereof are not so easily discerned, neither by
others nor yet by our selves, as when they are accompanied with the painful
and conscientious practice of those duties, which love to our neighbor does
enjoin: for, therefore does the Apostle give an instance of this holiness in
love, rather than in any other duty; And without blame before Him in love.

Verse. 5. Having predestined us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ
to Himself, according to the good pleasure of His will.
IN this Verse, the Apostle does first express Gods eternal decree of
Election, formerly mentioned by another word, to wit, Predestination, which
sets forth the same decree and purpose, together with its eternity and
extent, not only to the end proposed by God, but to the whole progress of
convenient means, by which the end intended was infallibly to be brought about.
Secondly, he further describes this decree of Election and Predestination from
another end, which God designed to be brought about by it, even the Adoption of
children by Jesus Christ, to be bestowed upon the Elect: whereby is meaned not
only that begun Adoption which Believers possess here, Joh. 1. 12. and whereby
they have a right to the heavenly inheritance, Romans 8. 17. but also and mainly
that complete and perfect Adoption, whereof the Elect shall partake hereafter,
even the actual possession of their glorious inheritance: See the word so taken
Romans 8. 23. He describes it also from the causes moving God to elect any, or
one more than another, which are set down, first, more briefly, to himself, it
is better rendered in himself: whereby are excluded all causes moving God to
this act, without Himself. Secondly, more largely and expressly, to wit, God's
absolute and sovereign will, swayed with favor and goodwill toward those whom
He did choose. Doct. 1. God has not only decreed to set forth the glory of His
mercy, by bestowing Heaven and Glory upon some of mankind, Luke 12. 32. but, in
that same wise and eternal counsel of His, He has forecasten and accordingly
decreed by what means and helps the person so elected may come to Heaven, and
shall undoubtedly obtain it. And therefore none can warrantably expect that
this decree of Predestination will bring them to Salvation, if they live in the
profane neglect and contempt of those means which do lead unto it: for, the
force and usual acception of the word predestined, is extended to the means
as well as to the end; Having predestined us. 2. No not the Elect themselves
are children to God by nature, they are not born sons, but made to be sons by
grace and adoption, who before were heirs of hell and children of wrath, Ephesians.
2. -3. for, a child by adoption is opposed to a child by nature; men are not
said to adopt their own children, but strangers, Exodus 2. 10. Now God has
predestined the Elect unto the adoption of children. 3. God is graciously
pleased in time, not only to call and justify those whom he did choose for
Himself before all time, Romans 8. 30. but also to make them partakers of the
grace of adoption, whereby a further dignity is put upon them than formerly
was, even that being already drawn out of nature to grace in their effectual
calling, and reconciled to God in their justification, they are now advanced to
the dignity of sons and children to the most High, and have a right to all the
privileges of sons, as the Spirit of Adoption, whereby they cry Abba, Father,
Romans 8. 15. fatherly pity from God under their infirmities, Psalm. 103. 13.
protection from the rage of enemies, Prove. 14. 26. provision and furniture for
their straits and necessities, Mat. 6. 30, 32. necessary chastisment from God
as their Father, Heb. 12. 6. and a right to the inheritance of life eternal,
Heb. 1. 14. not only as they are friends with God, and clothed with a perfect
righteousness, which they have by justification, but as God's own sons and
heirs; which inheritance, being once possessed, their adoption, which is now
but begun, shall be full and complete, Romans 8. 23. for, says the Apostle, He
has predestined us unto the adoption of children. 4. Besides those other
differences which are betwixt God's adopting of the Elect to be His own
Children, and one man's adopting of another to be his son and heir, this is
one; Men do adopt children, because they have none of their own, but God does
not adopt the Elect from any such indigence or want, as having a natural Son of
His own, even Jesus Christ the only begotten of the Father: for, the Apostle,
having spoken of the Adoption of the Elect, does presently make mention of
Jesus Christ the Son of God by nature; Unto the adoption of children by Jesus
Christ. 5. That any of those who are children of wrath by nature, are advanced
to that excellent dignity of being Children by adoption to the most High, and
of enjoying all the forementioned privileges of children, it is through Jesus
Christ the Mediator, in so far as He having purchased Heaven the inheritance of
children by His own merit, He has absolute right and title unto it to bestow
it upon whom He pleases, Mat. 28. 18. And having united the Elect by faith
unto Himself, and thereby given them a right and interest in Himself, they not
only become the sons of God, Joh. 1. 12. but are made heirs and coheirs with
Christ, Romans 8. 17. and so do enjoy a right to the heavenly inheritance through
Him: for, says he, having predestined us unto the adoption of children by
Jesus Christ. 6. As God has in His eternal decree of Election firmly resolved
and determined to bestow this high privilege of Adoption upon the Elect, both
begun Adoption here, and complete Adoption, or the actual installing of them in
Glory hereafter, and by consequence did decree to give them saving Faith also,
seeing Adoption flows from it, and depends upon it, Joh. 1. 12. So,
whomsoever He has decreed to lift up to this high dignity of sons, He has
decreed also to renew their nature, and to make them holy; that so their
carriage may be suitable to their state and privileges: for, says Paul, (ver.
4.) He has chosen us, that we should be holy; and here, having predestined
us unto the adoption of children. 7. All was in God Himself, and nothing
without Himself which moved Him to elect and choose those whom He did set His
love upon; so that neither foreseen works, or the right use of natural parts,
Ephesians. 2. 10. nor foreseen faith, Act. 13. 48. nor yet the merit of Christ, 1 John 4. 9. nor outward respects, such as nobility, wisdom, riches, 1 Cor. 1.
26. yea, nothing present or to come in heaven or earth did move Him to choose
any, or one more than another: for, says he, God predestined us in Himself;
whereby are excluded all causes moving God to this act without Himself. 8. God
has absolute power and sovereign right to dispose as He will of all His
creatures, even of reasonable creatures; and this not only in their temporary,
but also in their eternal concernments: which sovereign will of His, is the
supreme sinlesse cause why God did elect some to glory; yea, and why He did
pass by others, Romans 9. 18. for, the Apostle, condescending upon the reason
why God did design some for grace here and glory hereafter, does pitch upon
this sovereign will of His; According to the good pleasure of His will. 9. The
Lord God has sweetly tempered His absolute dominion and sovereign will, with
rich favor and condescendency toward those whom He did elect: His will to
them was good-pleasure and good will, In so far as when He might have fitted
them for destruction as He did the reprobate, Romans 9. 22. or never have given
them a being, or but the being of beasts, to be annihilated after death, or
have drawn out their life to all eternity upon earth, allowing them some
tolerable contentment there, every one whereof would have been a favor, being
compared with the state of damned reprobates; yet, His good will has bee^ a
better will to them, whereby He has decreed to give unto them a rational being
with a short Lease of a miserable life here, and endless joys and pleasures at
His right hand for evermore, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. for, says the Apostle, He has
predestined us, not simply according to His will, but according to the good
pleasure of His will.

Verse. 5, To the praise of the glory of His Grace, wherein He has made us
accepted in the Beloved.
THe Apostle (having already described the decree of Election from two of those
ends which God proposed unto Himself to be brought about by it, to wit, the
sanctification (ver. 4.) and glorification of the Elect, ver. 5.) does here in
further pursuance of the former scope, mentioned upon ver. 3. first, further
describe this decree from a third and supreme end which God therein designed
most, which is, That as His grace, or freedom of His love toward the Elect, is
glorious and praiseworthy in it self, and therefore called the glory of His
Grace, or His glorious Grace, according to the custom of the Hebrew language:
So it might be acknowledged to be such, and set forth as such, especially by
the Elect themselves. And, secondly, That he may clear how deservedly this
Grace ought to be praised, having already showen that it was the fountain-cause
of our Election before time, ver. 5. he does now declare that this same grace
and good will in God, is the only cause why God does in time manifest that His
eternal love in the effects thereof, by making the Elect lovely, and fit to be
accepted of by God as f^iends through Jesus Christ the beloved, and by
accepting them both in their persons and actions, and being reconciled to them
accordingly; for, the word signifies both to make accepted, and to accept.
Doct. 1. That grace, free-favour and good will which God does manifest in
saving of lost sinners, is altogether glorious, as having many and singular
excellencies in it. It is an ancient grace, ver. 4. most free, Hos. 14. 4.
omnipotent, Joh. 12. 32. and a most liberal grace, Psalm. 84. 11. and therefore
a grace so glorious, that no created understanding can conceive, much less
tongue can express those mavelous, ravishing, and transcendent excellencies
which are in it, Ephesians. 3. 19. for, he calls it the glory of his grace, or his
glorious grace. 2. It is the duty of all the Elect to praise, admire, and
highly to esteem of this glorious grace, and to testify this their high esteem
of it both by word and work, in the whole strain of their life and
conversation, This grace being so glorious and praiseworthy in it self, so
rich and beneficial toward us, and this duty of praise being all which we can
bestow, Psalm. 116. 12, 13. and God does call for from us in way of
thankfulness for this His glorious grace, Psalm. 50. 15. for, seeing God in
Election did propound to Himself the up-stirring of the Elect to praise the
glory of his grace, it must needs be their duty to praise it. 3. This eternal
decree of Election and Predestination is so contrived, that when it is made
known, matter of praise to God's glorious grace is abundantly manifested in it:
for, its rise is of grace, preventing all actual or foreseen worth in those
who are elected, (See ver. 4. doct. 6.) and all the midses, whereby the
execution of this decree is carried-on to its utmost period, are also of grace,
(See ver. 5. doct. 1.) So that all-alongs it breaths grace, and nothing but
grace: for, He did choose us to the praise of the glory of his grace; and
therefore matter of praise, for grace behoved to be manifested in His choosing
of us, when it is revealed, otherwise He should not have taken a convenient
mean for bringing about the intended end. 4. That great and supreme end, which
God intended most to be brought about by this eternal decree of Election, (and
to which the other two ends, formerly mentioned, to wit, the sanctification and
glorification of the Elect, are but subordinate means for bringing of it about)
was, that hereby Men and Angels might see matter of praise and thanksgiving
unto His rich mercy and free grace, and be excited to set forth the praises
thereof accordingly; not, as if He stood in need to have His glory
acknowledged, or praised by creatures, nor as if their praising of Him could
add any perfection to Him, who was completely glorified in Himself from all
eternity, Joh. 17. 5. but He holds forth matter of His own praise, that the
Elect may be perfected in praising of Him: for, says the Apostle, God has
predestined us to the praise of the glory of his grace. 5. There ought to be
a sweet concord and harmony betwixt a Ministers doctrine and practice, his hand
and tongue would jointly preach and press the same Truth; for, so his doctrine
shall have greater weight with hearers, when he does commend and seal the truth
of it by his own example and practice; Thus Paul, while he is pointing out the
duty of the Elect to be the praising of God's glorious grace, he himself is
practicing this duty; for, as is clear from ver. 3. he is speaking all-alongs
of this purpose by way of praise and thanksgiving to God. 6. Though the Elect
from all eternity are loved by God with His love of benevolence, whereby he
willed good unto them, and decreed to bestow good upon them, ver. 4. Yet there
is a love of complacency, or delight in God, whereby He not only wills good
unto the persons so beloved, but accepts of them, acquiesceth in them, as in
His own children and friends reconciled to Him, and delights Himself in His
own graces bestowed upon them, in which respect the Elect, as being children of
wrath by nature, are not from eternity beloved of God, nor accepted of by Him;
yea, not before they be effectually called, and reconciled to God through faith
in Jesus Christ, Heb. 11. 6-. for, Paul speaks of Gods making us accepted and
lovely, or of His accepting us, as of an action done in time, Wherein He has
made us accepted in the Beleved. 7. Whomsoever God has elected before time,
those He accepts of, and is well pleased with in time, both in their persons
and actions, if they be good, having first made them lovely and fit to be
accepted of by Him: which He does by working in them a conformity (both as to
their state and actions) with the rule, according to which He does accept; not
the rule prescribed by the Law, which requires no less than a perfect and
personal righteousness in order to our acceptance by God, Gal. 3. 10. but
the rule prescribed by the Gospel, which admits the imputed righteousness
of a cautioner in place of a perfect personal righteousness whereby our
persons are accepted and made lovely to God, Romans 5. 19. and of sincerity in
our actions in place of perfection, whereby they are also accepted, Psalm. 119.
6. for, says Paul, speaking of the Elect, He has made us accepted. 8. That
same grace, free-favour and good will, which moved God to elect us before time,
moves Him also to make us accepted, lovely and well-pleasing to Himself, and
to accept of us in time; whence it follows, that as the eternal decree of
Election was most free, and in nothing dependent on our works; So that work of
God, whereby He draws souls out of nature, cloatheth them with Christ's
righteousness, and bestows grace upon them, is wholly free also as to us,
and comes only from His most free grace without respect had to any worth of
ours: for, says he, Wherein, or, in which grace, whereof he spoke formerly as
the fountain-cause of Election, He has made us accepted. 9. Christ is beloved
and accepted by the Father, being considered even as Mediator, in so far as
that He was sent and entrusted by the Father to discharge that office, Joh. 5.
30. and carried Himself in the discharge of it according to what was enjoined
by the Father, Heb. 10. 7. and did finish all in order to the redemption of the
Elect, which He had undertaken to the Father, Joh. 19. 30. for, the Apostle,
speaking of Christ as Mediator, calls Him Beloved; He has made us accepted
in the Beloved. 10. Christ as Mediator is so much beloved of the Father, That
all the Elect being once effectually called, are made lovely and acceptable to
God through Him; Neither does God accept of the persons or actions of any, but
through Him who is Jehovah our righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. and being laid hold
upon by faith, we who are in our selves unrighteous, are made righteous, 2 Cor.
5. 21. and the sinful failings of our best actions hid and covered in Him; So
that both our persons and actions are accepted: For he has made us accepted in
the Beloved. 11. God's free grace, and Christ's merit are no ways
inconsistent, but do well agree together as the procuring causes of our
acceptance and reconciliation with God: for, though Christ has purchased a
state of favor and friendship unto us by the payment of an equivalent price;
yet all comes from grace unto us, in so far as it was grace in God that made
him give his Son to die for us, Joh. 3. 16. So it was grace in Christ that made
him undertake to die in our place, Joh. 10. 18. And it is no less of
free grace, that the price paid by Him is accepted of in our name, Joh. 33.
24. for, the Apostle does mention grace and Christ's merit, as the joint causes
of our being accepted; Wherein, or, in which grace he has made us accepted in
the Beloved.

Verse. 7. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of
sins; according to the riches of his grace.
THe Apostle (having already spoken of those spiritual blessings, mentioned
ver. 3. as they were prepared, and appointed for Believers in God's eternal
decree of Election) does now speak of them, as they were purchased by Christ in
that great and mavelous work of redemption, by showing, first, That Jesus
Christ has given a ransom, even his own blood, in satisfaction to divine
justice for our wrongs, whence flows our redemption from sin, Satan, and
God's wrath, which is begun here, Romans 6. 22. and shall be completed hereafter
at the last day, Romans 8. 23. Secondly, he explaineth this great benefit of
redemption by the forgiveness of our sins in justification, which is an effect
of redemption, as redemption is taken for the laying down of the price by
Christ, and a principal part of redemption, as it speaks our actual delivery
and freedom through virtue of that price. Thirdly, he shows the impulsive
cause which moved God to bestow such a benefit, even the riches of that same
grace and free-favour in God formerly spoken of: By all which he carries on
his main scope, which is, to confirm those Ephesians, that salvation and all
the steps leading to it do flow from God's free grace in Christ. Doct. 1. All
men, the Elect themselves not being excepted, are by nature under slavery and
bondage to sin, Joh. 8. 34. Satan, Ephesians. 2. 2. and to God's wrath, Joh. 3. 36.
for, redemption presupposes bondage; In whom we have redemption. 2. There was
no delivery to be had from this bondage by prayer and entreaty, nor by exchange
of prisoners, as in wars, nor yet by strong hand and mere force; but by paying
of a price, not to Satan, who detaineth the Elect in slavery, as a rigid
Tyrant, or merciless Jailer, from whom they are delivered by force, Heb. 2.
-14. but to God, Ephesians. 2. 2. whose justice was wronged by the sins of the Elect,
and therefore behoved to be satisfied: for, redemption, according to the force
of the original word, is a delivery by ransom and price. 3. Jesus Christ is
that Person by whom we have redemption from the forementioned slavery; this
work by the counsel of the whole Trinity being put over upon Him, as one, who
not only had right both of property to redeem the Elect being His creatures,
Heb. 1. 10. and of kindred, Lev. 25. 48. as being our brother, and of the same
nature with us, Heb. 2, 14-. but was also fitted to be our Redeemer, (a price,
to wit, His humane nature being put in his hands to lay down, Heb. 10. -5.) and
was able to redeem, as being also God, whereby His sufferings, as man, became a
ransom of infinite value, Act. 20. -28. for, by saying, In whom, or, in Christ
we have redemption, he says, that we have it by Him. 4. We have this
redemption not only by Christ, but also in him, which holds also in
forgiveness of sins; He being the common storehouse, wherein the Elect have
all their spiritual blessings treasured up, even before they take their
spiritual being from Him, or get those blessings actually applied unto them, as
Adam's posterity have their original guiltiness, whence all actual
transgressions flow, treasured up in Him, before they take their natural being
from Him, Romans 5. 12. As also because this redemption and the fruits of it are
not actually applied to the Elect until they be in Christ, and by faith united
to Him, Joh. 3. 36. for, says he, In whom, meaning Christ, we have redemption
and forgiveness of sins. 5. The wrong done to infinite justice by our sin was
so great, that nothing performed by Christ could be a sufficient ransom in
order to our redemption, except he had crowned all his other actions and
sufferings by laying down his life and undergoing a bloody and violent death:
for, We have redemption through his blood, to wit, not as excluding his former
obedience, Romans 5. 18, 19. nor yet his other sufferings, especially his
soul-sufferings, Isa. 53. 10. but as being the head-stone and completing of
all, Joh. 19. 30. Doct. 6. Sin is a debt, as being a wrong done against God,
obliging the sinner to repair God in his honor, or otherwise to underly the
wrath of a provoked God for ever, Romans 6. 23-. for, the word forgiveness, in
the Original, and as it is used in Scripture, is taken from those who are
loosed out of a prison for debt; The forgiveness of sins. 7. There is no
delivery from this debt of sin, and obligation to wrath because of sin, but by
pardon and forgiveness. It is an infinite debt, and so cannot be satisfied by
finit creatures: for, thus does Paul express the way how the debt is removed,
even by forgiveness of sins. 8. Though the guilt of sin be removed by
forgiveness, and therefore freely, as to us; yet, that sin might be thus
freely forgiven with the good leave of provoked justice, forgiveness of sin
was purchased at a dear rate by Christ: for, as we have redemption through his
blood, so also forgiveness of sins. 9. Jesus Christ has this rich treasure of
forgiveness of sins, which he has bought by his blood, laid up in himself; so
that whenever a sinner sensible of this weighty debt does lay hold upon
Christ by faith, and is thereby ingraffed in Him, his sins are freely pardoned,
and his debt remitted: for, In him, says he, we have forgiveness of sins. 10.
As that grace, favor and good will, which God manifested in the salvation of
sinners is a rich, copious and abundant grace: so nothing argues the riches of
this grace more, than that from it do flow such excellent effects, as, the
giving of Christ the Son of God to redeem slaves and rebels, together with
forgiveness of sins; they being infinite wrongs, and there being many of them
in every pardoned sinner, Psalm. 19. 12. And those not only ordinary
infirmities, but sometimes also heinous transgressions, Psalm. 51. 14. and yet
free grace pardons all, and this not only in one, but in all Believers, in
all ages, and does yet remain as full and overflowing in God, to pardon
self-condemned sinners as ever; all which, does argue no less than a copious,
rich and abundant grace: for, the Apostle, speaking of grace with relation to
those two, redemption and forgiveness, which flow from it, he calls it a rich
grace; According to the riches of his grace, says he.

Verse. 8. Wherein the has abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence.
THe Apostle does, thirdly, speak of those spiritual blessings, which were
prepared in Election, and purchased in that excellent work of Redemption, as
they are conveyed and applied unto the Elect in their effectual calling,
whereby he carryeth-on his forementioned scope, in showing, That as God did
give evident proofs of his free grace and favor in all the former steps
tending to salvation; so he had manifested the abundant riches of his grace in
the effectual calling of those Ephesians, in so far as his eternal love, which
was before always hid in a decree, did no longer contain it self, but
overflowed in its effects toward them, or in them, as the word may be rendered:
which effects, wrought by Gods grace in them, he shows to be all wisdom and
prudence, under which are comprehended all the saving graces of God's Spirit in
Believers, if we take, as we safely may take, wisdom for the saving knowledge
of divine mysteries, and of such religious truths as are only to be believed
and fall not under practice; And prudence, for that grace and virtue, whereby
we know our respective duties both to God and man, and our actions and
practices are ruled and ordered according to the prescript of God's Word: for,
so the words are taken, Col. 1. -9. Doct. 1. Whosoever are elected from
eternity, and for whomsoever Christ did give a ransom to provoked justice in
the fullness of time, all such in God's due time have the effects of God's
eternal love, and of the price paid by Christ applied unto them, and wrought
in them, even the saving graces of God's Spirit: for, upon those Ephesians, who
were elected, ver. 4. and redeemed, ver. 7. did God bestow the gracious effects
of his eternal love, by working saving grace in them; He has abounded toward
us in all wisdom and prudence. 2. That those spiritual blessings which were
prepared for us in Election and purchased in the work of Redemption, are
applied unto us, and we made actually to partake of them, It is the alone work
of God in our effectual calling; there being not so much as either power or
goodwill in us, who by nature are dead in sins and trespasses, to accept of
Christ, or of any thing purchased by him, until God do quicken us: for, the
Apostle, showing how the Ephesians were made partakers of those blessings, he
ascribes this work wholly to God, making them but mere patients in it; He has
abounded toward us, or in us, as a full fountain runs over and waters the
adjacent ground. 3. As the same free grace, and nothing else, which moved God
to elect us before time, and send his Son to redeem us in time, does make him
also in our effectual calling to work in us those graces, and to give unto us
an actual right to all those spiritual blessings which we were chosen unto, and
which were purchased for us; So nothing less than abundant and overflowing
grace is hereby made manifest to be in God; considering that there is not only
a simple want of good will, but also an utter averseness from closing with his
gracious offer, Mat. 23. -37. and that not only there is nothing in the Elect
before effectual calling more than in the Reprobate, which might move God to
bestow those excellent blessings upon them, but also much to scare him from
ever meddling with them, Ezekiel. 16. 3, etc. unless where sin abounded, grace did
much more abound, Romans 5. -20. for, the Apostle, speaking of God's bestowing
grace upon the elect Ephesians, does ascribe his so doing to his abounding
grace; Wherein, or, in which grace (formerly spoken of) he has abounded
toward us. 4. All men by nature are destitute of saving wisdom, that is, the
saving knowledge of divine mysteries, and things heavenly; seeing there be many
such things the light of nature reveals nothing of, Mat. 16. 17. And though
the light of Scripture does reveal them; yet the natural man cannot look upon
them, as real truths, 1 Cor. 2. 14. and so as thoroughly to venture his
salvation upon them, Joh. 5. 40. for, he shows, that at their effectual
calling God did abound toward them in wisdom, importing, that until then they
had it not. 5. Though the Lord does not bestow upon all, whom he effectually
calls, the same measure of saving knowledge, 1 Cor. 12. 4. yet he bestows
upon every one so much as is necessary unto salvation, and as does serve for an
earnest of that full and perfect knowledge of God, which they shall enjoy
hereafter: for, says he, He has abounded toward us in wisdom. 6. All men by
nature are also deprived of saving prudence, there being many duties which the
natural man cannot be convinced of to be duties, Mat. 5. 29, 39, 44. and many
things required to the acceptable performance of every duty (Romans 14. 23. Col.
3. 17.) the necessity whereof he can be as little convinced of; but chiefly,
there being such impotency, and disorder in his will and affections, that he
can least of all practice according to what he knows of his duties, Genesis 6.
5. for, he shows, that at their effectual calling God did abound toward
them in prudence, thereby importing, that until then they had nothing of that
grace. 7. As God bestows this grace of prudence in some measure upon every
one whom he effectually calls; So wisdom and prudence, if they be sanctified
and saving, go always together: a man cannot believe well, except he also live
well: Though, to speak of them otherwise, as they are not saving graces, but
only civil and moral virtues, they may be and often are separated: for, He has
abounded in wisdom and prudence, says he. 8. Though God does not perfect the
work of grace in the Elect at the first instant of their conversion, but
carries it on by degrees toward perfection, until death, Philip. 1. 6. yet
even then he bestows the seeds and habits of every grace and saving virtue
upon them. This new man of grace is not lame, nor wants any of his members,
Gal. 3. 10. for, therefore, says Paul, He has abounded in all wisdom and
prudence.

Verse. 9. Having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his
good pleasure, which he has purposed in himself.
THe Apostle does illustrate the former benefit of effectual calling, from the
mean which God makes use of for bringing of it about, to wit, His making known
the doctrine of the Gospel, which is here called a Mystery, (as elsewhere, See
Ephesians. 6. 19. 1 Timothy 3. 16.) that is, according to the use of the word in
Scripture, a religious and sacred secret; and this also he shows does flow
from the same good-pleasure and free grace formerly spoken of, the manifesting
whereof was firmly resolved upon by God in his eternal purpose, being moved by
nothing so to do without himself. Doct. 1. The Gospel, or doctrine of salvation
through free grace, is a sacred secret, transcending the reach of ordinary
knowledge, a very mystery, even such, as nothing could be known of it either
by Man or Angels, before it was revealed, Ephesians. 3. 10. and such, as was but
sparingly revealed before Christ's incarnation, even to the Jews only, and to
some few proselytes, Psalm. 147. 19, 20. and such as remains a thing hid, even
after it is revealed, unto natural men whose minds the god of this world has
blinded; So, as though they can discourse of, and preach the Gospel, Mat. 7.
22. yet, they do not believe it, 2 Cor. 4. 4. Yea, and it is a mystery, even
to Believers themselves, if their knowledge here be compared with what it shall
be hereafter, 1 Cor. 13. 12. for, by the mystery of his will, he understands
the Gospel, and chiefly, as it was now clearly manifested both to Jew and
Gentile, chap. 3. 6. Secondly, this mystery of the Gospel now revealed,
contains and manifests God's will concerning the salvation of lost sinners:
though not his secret will, or decree, concerning those whom in particular he
intends to save, 2 Timothy 2. 19 -- Yet his revealed will, holding forth the way
of our duty, and the course condescended upon, by which, and not otherwise,
sinners shall be saved: for, hence it is called the mystery of his will. 3.
The ordinary mean, whereby God does call the Elect effectually, and convey the
graces of his Spirit unto their graceless hearts, is the revelation of the
Gospel, and his making of it known, chiefly by the public preaching thereof,
Romans 10. 14, 15. for, the Apostle, having already spoken of God's bestowing all
saving grace upon them, does here condescend upon the mean made use of by him
in that work; Having made known unto us the mystery of his will. 4. There is
nothing which moves God to reveal his Gospel unto one people, and not to
another, or more obscurely to one, and more clearly unto another, but only his
own good will and pleasure so to do: neither does the Lord any thing contrary
to justice hereby, seeing he is not obliged to send the Gospel unto any, Romans
11. 35. and all have more knowledge of God by nature than they make good use
of, Romans 1. 21. for, this alone is here given as the reason of his making known
the mystery of his will even according to his good pleasure. 5. So careful is
God to maintain the interest of his free grace in our salvation, as being the
only supreme and fountaincause thereof; that he thinks it not sufficient once
to assert, in the general, that salvation and all the means and steps tending
toward it, do flow from his free grace, but that this be again and again
inculcated, and (all the particular steps which lead to salvation being
condescended upon) that his free grace, favor and good will be held out as the
fountain of each step in particular: for, the Apostle does so, and that by an
heavenly and divine artifice, sliding down from one step to another, from
Election to Redemption, and from Redemption to effectual calling, and from
effectual calling unto God's bestowing the outward mean of salvation, the
Gospel; not only ascribing all to God's free grace, but making grace the
mid-link of the chain, whereby he joyneth the several parts of his discourse
together; so, ver. 8. Wherein he abounded; and here, According to the good
pleasure of his will, and which he purposed in himself, as having no cause
without himself to set him on work. 6. As the decrees of God are firm, fixed
and unchangeable; So he does nothing in the matter of man's salvation, even to
the least circumstance, but what he has decreed to do: which (as will appear
from ver. 11.) does hold in all other things which God does: for, by God's
purpose is meaned his eternal decree with respect had to its stability and
unchangeablenesse, there being neither want of foresight, nor of power in God
to occasion the alteration of his purpose, which are the causes why men are
frequently necessitated to alter theirs; and this purpose and decree, is spoken
of here as the rule according to which God of his good pleasure did make known
the mystery of his will unto those Ephesians, in order to their salvation;
Which he had purposed in himself, says he.

Verse. 10. That in the dispensation of the fullness of times, he might gather
together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are
on earth, even in him.
HEre is the intended effect which God did aim at in His gracious purpose of
making fully known the mystery of the Gospel, both to Jew and Gentile, to wit.
That at the full time and season, which God had dispensed, measured out, and
pitched upon, as most fitting for the business in hand, (to wit, the time of
Christ's incarnation and sufferings, Gal. 4. 4.) He might gather together in
Christ all His own Elect (whether already glorified or yet upon earth) who
before were separated from God, and one from another, and might make them one
with God, being united with Christ their head by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17-. and one
among themselves, being united by love, Col. 3. 14. Now, the Apostle affirms
this gathering of all the Elect, was to be in the fullness of times: for,
though many of them were already actually gathered and glorified, to wit, the
things in Heaven before that time; yet the exhibition of that, by virtue
whereof they were gathered, was at, and not before that time, to wit, the time
of Christ's incarnation, obedience and sufferings, Heb. 9. 15. Doct. 1. All
mankind by nature, and being considered in themselves, are under a fearful
dissipation and scattering: Sin has rent and separated them from God, from
man, and from the blessed Angels: for, gathering presupposes a foregoing
scattering; and the word rendered gather together in one, being taken from a
word which signifies the head of a natural body, or a short sum of a sparse
discourse, and so signifying here to gather together under one head, to wit,
Christ, and unto one sum and body amongst themselves, it supposes that they
are separated from God, from Christ, one from another, and from the Angels
also: for, they were to be gathered into one body with those; That he might
gather together in one, etc. 2. The Lord has not left all mankind in this
woeful separation and scattered condition: but, as He has firmly purposed and
decreed from all eternity; so in time He sets about to gather together some
of scattered mankind, and to unite them to Himself, one to another, and to the
blessed Angels: for, the word rendered to gather, implies a gathering unto all
these, as is said; And he has purposed in himself, -- that he might gather
together in one. 3. The gathering together of the scattered Elect, and making
of them one with God and among themselves, does not depend upon the choice of
their own free will, which could do no other but refuse to be gathered, Mat.
23. 37. and so Christ should not have seen of the travel of His soul and been
satisfied, contrary to what is promised, Isa. 53. 11. But upon the fixed and
unchangeable purpose of God, which engages His Omnipotency to make them
willing to be gathered, Psalm. 110. 3. and therefore they shall be infallibly
gathered: for, the Apostle, as appears from the context, makes this gathering
depend on Gods purpose; He has purposed in himself, -- that he might gather
together in one. 4. It is only God, who by His omnipotent power does gather
together the scattered Elect, and makes them one with Himself, and with one
another in Himself. We do so much love to wander, Jer. 14. 10. that we would
live and die estranged from God, if the Lord by strong-hand did not reclaim us
from our wanderings, for, says Paul, He has purposed in himself, -- that he
might gather together in one. 5. The preaching of the Gospel, and making known
that blessed mystery, is the mean which God makes use of in this work of
gathering the scattered Elect: because, though our actual gathering be an act
of Gods omnipotent power; yet, He deals with us as with rational creatures,
by giving us an offer of His friendship, commanding us to accept of it as it is
offered, and in the mean time sending forth his power with the command, whereby
He makes us to accept, Act. 16. 14. for, as is clear from the connection, God's
end intended in making known the mystery of his will, is, That he might gather
together in one. 6. As God is the great Master of his own House and Family,
which is the Church, to whom He dispenses and distributeth all her mercies,
comforts and crosses with no less; yea, with infinitely greater care, wisdom
and foresight, than any man does care, provide for, and govern his own family;
So, among other things, He dispenses and orders times and seasons for his
Church, as not only having fixed in his eternal counsel the general periods of
the Churches time, how long the Church should be in her state of infancy, how
long under the bondage of the Law, and how long she shall continue in her more
grown and perfect age under the Gospel; but also the time and season for
bestowing of particular mercies, and inflicting corrections and chastisements:
for, the word rendered dispensation, signifies the way of administrating the
affairs of the family by the master thereof, and the times come under those
things, which are administrated by God; That in the dispensation of the
fullness of times. 7. As every time chosen of God for bestowing of any mercy,
is the full and fittest time for his bestowing of it; So the time of Christ's
incarnation is in a special manner the full time, and fullness of time; and
that not only because it was that full time which God had appointed in his
decree, and, for reasons known to his own unsearchable wisdom, condescended
upon as the most fitting time for that great work; but also, because all the
foregoing prophecies, promises and types of the Messiah, were fulfilled in
those times, Luke 24. 27. and the will of God concerning man's salvation was
then, and not till then fully revealed, Heb. 1. 2. for, the Apostle calls
those times, the fullness of times; That in the dispensation of the fullness of
times. 8. Though the benefits purchased by Christ, and particularly that of
effectual calling, and gathering together unto God those whom sin did separate
from Him, be intended for, and accordingly does light only upon few, Mat. 7.
14. Yet the Gospel, and Promise, by which Christ and the benefits purchased by
Him are revealed, is drawn up in the most comprehensive expressions: And this
of purpose, that none may hereby be excluded from laying hold upon that
gracious offer, but such as do exclude themselves, Joh. 5. 40. for, says he,
That he might gather together in one all things, both which are in heaven, and
which are on earth: by which broad expressions are meaned only the Elect (for
there is an universality and world even of those, 2 Cor. 5. 19.) and not all
the creatures, not Devils or Reprobates, Joh. 17. 9. yea, to speak properly,
not yet the elect Angels, who being never separated from God by sin, cannot be
gathered to him by Christ, though they may improperly and in some respects be
said to be so; to wit, because of those advantages which they have by Christ,
as that they are now most perfectly and inseparably united with God, without
hazard of being separated from Him, Mat. 18. 10. and have attained the
knowledge of that wonderful plot of Man's Salvation through Jesus Christ,
which was a mystery even to them, Ephesians. 3. 10. and a greater measure of joy
than formerly they had, upon Christ's converting and saving of lost sinners,
Luke 15. 7, 10. Doct. 9 All who belong to God's purpose of Election, and who
are, or shall be gathered together in Christ, are either in heaven or earth:
Paul knew no purgatory, or third place for the souls of the Elect to go unto
after death, to endure the temporal punishment due to their sin: for, he
divides those all things, which were to be gathered, into things in heaven,
and things on earth. 10. There is an union betwixt the Saints departed now in
heaven, and those who are yet alive upon the earth, so as they make up one
mystical body under one head, Christ, to whom the Saints departed are united
(though not by faith, 1 Cor. 13. 10.) yet by sense, as we are united to Him by
faith: and as they are united to Christ, so also one to another, and to us by
love: for charity never fails, 1 Cor. 13. 8. from which union there flows a
communion betwixt them and us, whereby they do pray for the Church in general,
Rev. 6. 10. (though not for the particular conditions and persons of men upon
earth, whereof they are ignorant, Isa. 63. 16.) and the Godly upon earth do in
heart and affection converse with them in heaven, Philip. 3. 20. desiring
continually to be dissolved and to be with Christ, Philip. 1. 23. (though they
are not to pray unto them, or give them religious worship, Rev. 19. 10.) for,
says he, That in the dispensation of the fullness of times, he might gather
together in one, things in heaven, and things on earth. 11. Jesus Christ is
that person, in, and by whom we are gathered together unto God by faith in Him,
and to the Angels, and also among our selves by the grace of love; He having
united the two dissentient parties, God and man, in His own Person, Mat. 1.
-23. and having satisfied justice for that wrong which caused the rent, Isa.
53. 5. and working in us by His Spirit those graces of faith and love, whereby
we are made one with God and among our selves, Act. 5. 31. and having by His
death taken away that wall of partition and enimity which was betwixt Jew and
Gentile, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15, 16. it being also necessary that we be in Him by
faith, before we be united to God through Him; for, the Apostle is so much
delighted with this Truth himself, and would so gladly have it well known and
believed by others, that he does inculcate it twice in this one verse. That he
might gather together all things in Christ, and again even in Him.

Verse. 11. In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being predestined
according to the purpose of Him who works all things after the counsel of his
own will. 12. That we should be to the praise of his glory, who first trusted
in Christ.
THe Apostle, having hitherto spoken of all the Elect in general, does now make
application of the former doctrine, first, to the Jews, and next to the
Gentiles: and hereby he does yet further, and thirdly, enforce the
forementioned scope, while he shows in effect, that the prerogative of the
Jews above the Gentiles made not grace the less free to them, and that nothing
which the Gentiles could pretend to beyond the Jews, made it less free to them
either And, first, he applies it unto the Jews, whereof Paul was one; and
therefore he speaks of them in the first person, We. And, first, he shows,
that they, to wit, Believers among them (as is explained, ver. -12.) had, in
Christ and by virtue of His merit and intercession, obtained an inheritance, to
wit, of Heaven and Glory, Col. 1. 12. and by consequence, all the
forementioned blessings which lead to it; and this not from their own merit or
free choice, but freely, and as it were by lot, wherein least of man is seen:
for, the word signifies, to obtain an inheritance by lo^, in allusion to the
division of the land of Canaan among the Tribes, which was by lot, Josh. 14. 2.
Secondly, he shows the reason why they had obtained this inheritance, not
their own worth; but because God had predestined them to it in His
unchangeable decree of Election: and withal does clear, that God did call them
freely and according to His purpose to the enjoying of this inheritance,
because He works all things according to his most wise and free purpose, and
therefore this also, ver. 11. And, thirdly, he expresses the end which the
Lord proposed to Himself in calling them to enjoy this inheritance, even that
thereby His glorious Attributes, manifested in that work might be acknowledged
and praised, especially by them whom He had called; whom he describes from
this, that they were the first who trusted or hoped in Christ: for, as the
Gospel was first preached among the Jews, Mat. 10. 6. Act. 13. 46. so, many
among them did embrace the Gospel, and were converted by it at the first, and
before there were any considerable number of Converts among the Gentiles, ver.
12.

From Verse. 11. Learn, 1. It is the duty of Christian Ministers, as to preach
sound doctrine, so to make prudent application thereof to the several sorts and
conditions of hearers: for, the life of preaching, is, impertinent and lively
application, in so far as if the Wor^ be left unapplyed by the Preacher, People
will either not apply it at all, or otherwise misapply it, by taking to
themselves that which belongs not to them: therefore the Apostle, having
spoken of the freedom of Gods grace toward all the Elect in general, does make
particular instance of the freedom of it, first, in the Jews here, and next, in
the Gentiles, ver. 13, 14. In whom also we have obtained. 2. As Believers are
God's portion and part of the world, even the lot of His inheritance; so they
do obtain from Him a lot and share in an inheritance incorruptible and
undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for them, 1 Pet. 1. 4.
for, the word, rendered we have obtained an inheritance, may either signify,
that they were taken for a lot and inheritance passively, or that they had
gotten a lot and inheritance actively. 3. Every Believer has already obtained
this glorious, excellent and heavenly inheritance, though not in personal
complete possession, 2 Cor. 5. 6. yet, by right (Joh. 3. 16.) in begun
possession (Joh. 17. 2, 3.) and by complete possession in their head Christ,
Ephesians. 2. 6. for, the Apostle speaks in the by past time, We have obtained an
inheritance. 4. This heavenly inheritance does come to believers not by their
own merit or worth, but freely and without their deserving or choice, as those
things which come by lot: All the causes bringing it about, whether God's
eternal electing love, or Christ's merit and the application of it, are free
as to us, and were set on work without any active influence as from us; for, as
we show, the word signifies to obtain by lot, and therefore freely; We have
obtained an inheritance. 5. Jesus Christ the Mediator is that person, in whom
Believers have this heavenly inheritance: as they have all their other
spiritual blessings leading to heaven in Him; so also heaven it self, He has
purchased it, Heb. 9. 12. He makes us lay hold upon it by faith, when it is
offered in the promise, Joh. 12. 32. we must be in Him before we get a right to
it, and therefore He is the way to heaven, Joh. 14. 6. He has taken possession
of heaven in our name, as our Attorney, Joh. 14. 2, 3. for, says he, In whom,
which relates to Christ, we have obtained an inheritance. 6. Those, who seem
the worthiest people of any other, do come to heaven no other way than the most
unworthy, that is, freely, and as it were by lot: for, he says, We also, that
is, even we Jews, who might seem to have somewhat whereon to rely in our
selves, have obtained an inheritance freely. 7. As none come to heaven, but
such as are from eternity predestined to it by God; So all those things,
whether they be mercies, (Genesis 50. 20.) or crosses, (Amos. 3. -6.) which come
as it were by chance to us, or without our foresight, are well foreseen, and
wisely ordered by God: for, he mentions Predestination, and God's purpose to
bestow this inheritance, which came to them, as it were by lot, and without
their foresight; We have obtained an inheritance, being predestined according
to the purpose. 8. The providence of God is extended to all things whatsomever,
neither is there any thing which falls not under His efficacious working: He
not only gave a being unto all things created at the beginning, Genesis 1. 1. but
does continue them in their being, Heb. 1. 3. and concurreth with all the
second causes in their working, Act. 17. 28. yet so, as God is not the author
of sin: because, though the real action, to which sin adhereth, be from God,
Joh 1. -21. yet, the deformity of that action, in so far as it is a
transgression of the Law, seeing it is not a real being, but a deficiency from
being; no real effect, but a defect, Therefore it is not from God, but from the
sinner only: for, says he, speaking of God, Who works all things: which
cannot be restricted to the forementioned blessings, but must be extended to
all things whatsoever, seeing it is clear the Apostle does argue from the
general to the particular, He works all things so, and therefore those things
also. 9. As God is an absolute worker, sovereign Lord of all His actions, and
bound to give a reason unto none for what He does, His will being His only rule
by which He works; So His will is always joined with, and founded upon the
light of counsel and wisdom; and therefore He can will nothing but what is
equitable and just: for, the Apostle holds forth those two principles, from
which God's working does flow, infinite wisdom, pointed at in the word counsel,
and absolute freedom and soveraignity over His actions, pointed at in the word
will; Who works all things according to the counsel of his will. 10. As God
does in time work all things; so from all eternity, by the most wise and holy
counsel of his will, He has ordained whatever comes to pass: Yet so, as
violence is not thereby offered to the will of the creatures, nor the liberty
of second causes, especially of the wills of men and Angels, taken away, but
rather established, Act. 2. 23. and 4. 27, 28. for, says he, Who works all
things according to the counsel of his will, that is, as He has most wisely
and freely decreed. 11. Though counsel and advice be ascribed to God in his
decrees and works, in so far as there is nothing willed or wrought by Him, but
what is well, wisely and most righteously done; yet, we would advert, lest we
attribute to God upon this ground any thing savouring of imperfection, as if He
did consult or deliberate concerning things to be done, as men do from
ignorance, or doubtfulnesse of what is most convenient, and therefore do,
first, consult and advise about the best expedient, and then make choice
accordingly; There is no such doubtful inquisition, or previous deliberation
in God in order to his working; His will alone is in stead of all counsel and
deliberation, seeing his most holy will has all equity, wisdom and
righteousness joined with it, so that there is nothing more required to make
an action be well, wisely and advisedly done, than that it be willed of God:
for, the Apostle says not, He works all things according to the will of his
counsel, as if counsel and deliberation went before, and the choice of the will
followed after; but, after the counsel of his will, showing, that His willing
of a thing to be done, is in place of all further consultation about it.

From Verse. 12. Learn, 1. As God's giving grace unto graceless sinners, His
drawing them out of nature to the state of grace, and bestowing the heavenly
inheritance upon them, is a work which sets forth the glory of God's most
excellent Attributes, of mercy, goodness, justice, power and beneficence, and
gives occasions unto beholders to set forth his praise in all those, though
the man himself upon whom this work is wrought, were silent, the very work
should speak for it self; So it is the duty of those especially, whom God has
so dealt with, to take occasion from his gracious work in them to set forth the
praises of Him, who has called them out of darkness to his mavelous light,
1 Pet. 2. -9. They are not always to dwell upon complaints of themselves, but
sometimes would mount up in the high thoughts of His commendation and praises:
for, this is the end designed by God in calling them to obtain this
inheritance, even that we should be to the praise of his glory: which words may
be taken both passively, the praise of His glory was to be manifested in them,
and actively they themselves were to set forth His praises. 2. The more early a
man does close with Christ and embrace Him by faith, as He is offered in the
Gospel, the less he does protract and delay his so doing, the more of praise
to God's glorious Attributes is manifested in him, and the more of obligation
does ly upon him to set forth God's praises, who has so early broken the yoke
of his slavery to sin and Satan: for, their trusting, and first trusting in
Christ before others, is spoken of as a mean conducing to His praise, and
engaging them to it; That we should be to the praise of his glory, who first
trusted in Christ. 3. That any do believe in Christ at all, and that some do
believe in Him sooner, and others later, depends not upon any difference in
the persons themselves, but upon God's purpose, counsel and good pleasure: for,
their trusting, and first trusting before others, is subservient to the end,
which was proposed by God, to wit, the praise of His glory. Now, the necessary
means, and the end intended, do depend upon one and the same purpose, so that
if God have decreed the end, He must also have decreed the means tending to
that end; That we might be to his praise, who first trusted in Christ. 4. The
Gospel, when it is preached to a People, though never so godless and obdured,
will not want its own saving fruits among some of those to whom it is preached:
God uses not to send His Gospel unto a People of purpose to harden all, and to
make them inexcusable; but because there are some belonging unto the election
of grace, who are to be converted by it: for, as the Gospel was to be preached
first to the Jews, because of the promise made to the fathers, Romans 15. 8. So
when it was preached it wanted not fruits among them, though they were a People
to be cast off, enemies unto all good, had crucified the Lord Jesus, 1 Thessalonians.
2. 15, 16. for, they were of those Jews who first trusted in Christ. 5. It is
no small privilege for any, wether person or people, to be trusters in Christ,
before others, it is a matter of their commendation, Romans 16. -5. it glorifieth
God, in so far, as their example and experience may prove an encouraging motive
unto others, 1 Timothy 1. 16. it carries with it several advantages: for, the
sooner a man does close with Christ, he will get that work done the more
easily, he is the sooner freed from slavery to Satan and his own lusts, he is
the sooner capacitated to do the more service to God, and his great
concernments are the sooner out of hazards: for, Paul makes it a prerogative
and privilege, which the Jews had beyond the Gentiles, even that they first
trusted or hoped in Christ.

Verse. 13. In whom ye also trusted after that ye heard the Word of Truth, the
Gospel of your salvation: in whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed
with that holy Spirit of promise, 14. Which is the earnest of our inheritance,
until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise of His glory.
THe Aposte applies the former doctrine, in the second place, to the believing
Gentiles in the person of those Ephesians, That hereby he may show they were as
much in the debt of God's free grace for salvation, as the believing Jews. In
order to which he holds forth, first, the benefit which they had received
from Christ, even the same which he show was bestowed upon the believing Jews,
to wit, the heavenly inheritance, and all those other spiritual blessings which
lead to it: for, as it is necessary that some word be added to the beginning of
this verse for making good sense; so it seems the word, trusted, taken from
the close of ver. 12. cannot be it: for, the word rendered there, first trusted,
is but one in the Original, and cannot be applied unto the Gentiles, as not
being the first who trusted in Christ; And therefore it is safer, and more
apposit also unto the Apostle's scope to repeat that word (which is v. 11.)
have obtained an inheritance, especially seeing he is applying here to the
Gentiles, what he had applied there to the Jews; the principal part whereof,
and that upon which all the rest spoken of there does depend, is their
obtaining an inheritance. Secondly, he sets forth the mean whereby they
obtained this excellent benefit, even their hearing of the doctrine of the
Gospel, which he describes from its excellent nature, as being the Word of
Truth, and from that great good which it reveals and offers, even
salvation. Thirdly, he mentions a work of God's holy Spirit upon their hearts
after they had believed, which is here called sealing, by a metaphor taken from
the use of Seals and Signets among men, which are chiefly used for putting a
difference betwixt true Writs, and those which are counterfeit; so that this
work here called sealing, did serve to evidence the truth and reality of
somewhat which might otherwise have been questioned, and particularly, with
relation to the Apostle's present scope, it did serve to evidence the reality
of their right to the glorious inheritance, the truths of the Gospel, and the
sincerity of their closing with, and believing of, the Gospel: now the work of
God's Spirit, which makes all this evident, and therefore has the name of
sealing, is mainly His renewing and sanctifying work, and especially His
carrying-on of that work, whereby He imprinteth the image of Himself, which is
holiness (Ephesians. 4. 24.) upon Believers, as an impression of the draughts and
lineaments of the Seal, are by sealing put upon the thing sealed; so, 2 Timothy 2.
-19. the grace of sanctification and departing from evil is called a Seal,
though those other works of God's Spirit in Believers, whereby He gives them
sense of His presence, comfort and joy unspeakable flowing from it, and full
assurance, may be looked upon as less principal parts of this Seal. Fourthly,
(ver. 14.) by the metaphor of an earnest, which is used among Merchants for
ratifying of their bargains, he shows a use, for which the bestowing of the
holy Spirit upon them, and His sealing of them by His sanctifying grace, did
serve, even to be an earnest of the heavenly inheritance, the full possession
whereof being delayed until the last day, God gave unto them His holy Spirit
with His saving graces, as an earnest, or some small beginnings, and a part of
that glory which shall then be revealed; that hereby He might assure them of
their obtaining the whole in due season. Fifthly, he shows the date and time
how long they were to content themselves with the earnest, even until the
redemption of the purchased possession, that is, until the day of judgment, at
which time those who are purchased by the blood of Christ, and are His
possession and peculiar people, shall obtain complete redemption and full
delivery from sin and misery; In which sense redemption is taken, Romans 8. 23.
And sixthly, he shows the end which God purposed unto Himself in all this,
even the same which he mentioned formerly, ver. 12- to wit, the praise of His
Glory.

From the benefit which those Gentiles received, (besides what is marked upon
the parallel place, ver. 11-) Learn, 1. Though it was the prerogative of the
Jews above the Gentiles that Christ was first preached unto them, and
accordingly some of them did first trust in Him, (See ver. -12.) yet God has
made both Jew and Gentile equally to partake of all other things, as well of
those which concern salvation it self, as of the means and way of attaining to
it: for, the same Christ, the same free-gifted inheritance through Christ, and
the same Gospel which was bestowed upon the Jews, are also bestowed upon the
believing Gentiles; In whom ye also have obtained an inheritance, says he. 2.
It is a thing highly observable, and much to be taken notice of, that the
Gentiles, who were profane dogs, (Mat. 15. 26.) not a people, (Deuteronomy. 32. 21.)
without God, (chap. 2. ver. -12.) should be set down at the childrens table,
and have full access to free grace and salvation, and all spiritual blessings
tending to salvation equally with the Jews, who were God's only People,
separated to Him above all People, Exodus 19. 5. to whom did pertain the
Adoption, Glory, Covenants, etc. Romans 9. 4. for, Paul cannot speak of this
without an also, which is a note of exaggeration, and heightneth the purpose,
as a thing very observable; In whom ye also have obtained an inheritance.

From the mean whereby they attained this excellent benefit, Learn, 1. The
hearing of the Gospel, which supposes the public preaching of it, (Romans 10.
14.) is the ordinary mean whereby faith is wrought, and consequently a right is
conveyed unto the heavenly inheritance, in so far as the Gospel so preached
does not only propound and make known to the understanding the object of saving
faith, which was before hid; but the Lord also, at, or after the hearing of
this Gospel preached, does work the grace of faith in the hearts of the Elect,
Act. 16. 14. for, says he, Ye obtained an inheritance, after that ye heard the
Word of Truth, the Gospel. 2. The Gospel is the Word of Truth, not only because
it contains nothing but truth, (for, so the whole Scripture is the Word of
Truth, Psalm. 19. -9-) but also the Truths of the Gospel are most excellent
Truths, as being most remote from ordinary knowledge, Mat. 16. 17. most
profitable to lost sinners, Tit. 2. 11. and do manifest the praise of God's
glorious Attributes (Luke 2. 14.) more than any other Truths: besides, the
Gospel does clearly hold forth the truth and substance of all these dark and
legal shadows, Joh. 1. 17. for, by the Word of Truth he means the Gospel, as
he presently clears; After ye heard the Word of Truth, the Gospel of your
salvation. 3. As the doctrine of Salvation is the doctrine of the Gospel, or
glad-tydings to lost sinners; (for, the word rendered Gospel, signifies a glad,
or good message) So the doctrine of the Gospel is a doctrine of Salvation, as
not only revealing Salvation, and a possible way for attaining to it, which the
Law does not, Gal. 3. 21. but also being the power of God to Salvation, Romans 1.
16-. and the mean which God does bless for making us embrace by faith the
offer of Salvation, Romans 10. 14, 15. and for working all other saving graces in
the Elect, Col. 1. 6. for, the Apostle calls this doctrine the Gospel, or
glad tidings, of Salvation. 4. It is not sufficient to know that the Gospel is
a doctrine of Salvation in general, or unto others only; but every one would
labor, by the due application of the promises of the Gospel unto themselves,
to find it a doctrine of Salvation to them in particular: for, Paul hinteth at
so much, while he says, not simply, the Gospel of Salvation, but of your
Salvation.

From the Spirit's work of sealing following upon believing, Learn, 1. As the
Gospel preached, and heard, does not profit unto Salvation, except it be
believed; so the Truths of the Gospel, and Jesus Christ that good thing offered
in those Truths, is that in the whole Word of God which saving faith does
chiefly close with, and rely upon, and is fully satisfied with: It finds
death in threatenings, a burden of work in precepts, but in Christ and the
Gospel it finds the way to Heaven made patent, even a way how the sinner may
be saved and divine justice not wronged: for, the Apostle, having spoken before
of their hearing the Gospel, does add, In whom, to wit, Christ; the words may
also read, In which, to wit, the Gospel, ye believed. 2. Though none can
actually believe before the Spirit of God come to dwell in them, bringing
alongs His royal train of habitual graces, and the habit of faith amongst the
rest, unto the heart with Him; And therefore is He called the Spirit of Faith,
2 Cor. 4. 13-. yet, upon the actual exercising of the grace of Faith, the
Spirit of God does more fully manifest Himself to be dwelling in Believers, by
His carrying-on the work of sanctification in them, for their greater comfort,
and further strengthening of their faith: for, says he, After ye believed, ye
were sealed with that holy Spirit. 3. Whoever have rightly closed with the
Gospel, and Christ in the Gospel, by believing, will have the grace of
sanctification and holiness of life following upon their so doing, as also
sometimes some measure of joy, peace and, sensible comfort: for, as I cleared,
by the seal is meaned those graces; And after ye believed, ye were sealed,
says he. 4. Even real Believers have need of confirmation and sealing, as
being oftimes exercised and tossed with several doubts and scruples, both
concerning the truth of the Gospel, and promise in general, Mark 9. 24. and the
reality of their own closing with, and interest in the Promise, Psalm. 88. 14.
for, therefore is it, that after those Ephesians had believed they were sealed,
hereby to evidence the truth of the Gospel, and the sincerity of their
believing the Gospel; After ye believed, ye were sealed. 5. The Lord has
provided, and accordingly does bestow sufficient means upon Believers whereby
all their forementioned doubts may be solved, and they abundantly satisfied;
for, besides the writing of the Promise upon their hearts, and the outward
seals of the Covenant of Grace, or Sacraments, which are visibly dispensed by
Christ's Ministers, there is an inward seal, to wit, the saving Graces of God's
Spirit, together with growth and increase in those, imprinted by the Spirit of
God upon the hearts of Believers in order to their confirmation, although they
sometimes cannot perfectly discern, nor exactly take up the draughts and
lineaments of it; After ye believed, ye were sealed. 6. The saving graces of
God's Spirit wrought in a Believer, and exercised by him in all sorts of holy
duties, and especially growth in grace, is a most convincing evidence, not only
that the Word of the Gospel, by which holiness is wrought, is the undoubted
Truth of God: for, this is the witness by water, spoken of, 1 John 5. 8. there
being no other thing but the Truth of God able to produce such strange and
supernatural effects as those; but also it serves to evidence the reality of
the man's interest in the promise, and of his right to the heavenly
inheritance, in whom those saving graces and the fruits of holiness are, seeing
holiness of life is the inseparable effect of saving faith and interest in the
promise, Act. 15. 9. for, by the Seal is meaned mainly the graces of
sanctification, and, as was shown, they get that name: because, as Seals do
confirm public Writs, and make them appear to be authentic; so the saving and
sanctifying graces of the Spirit do confirm to those, in whom they are, the
Truth of the Gospel, and the sincerity of their faith in Christ; In whom after
ye believed, ye were sealed. 7. Our doubts and scruples, whether concerning the
truth of the Promise in general, or our own particular interest in the Promise,
ought not in reason make us suspend our believing in Christ and the Promise,
until we first be sealed and sanctified, and so receive sufficient
confirmation; but on the contrary, we are, first, to set our Seal to God's
Truth, by believing and venturing our salvation upon it, and then we may expect
next to have God setting His Seal upon our heart in order to our confirmation:
for, that is the order here set down; In whom after ye believed, ye were
sealed. 8. The sanctifying of our natures, and adorning of our hearts with
saving graces, together with any confirmation in the truth of the Promise, or
of particular interest in the Promise which Believers receive from these, is
the work of God's Spirit only: for, it is ascribed to Him here, and with
relation thereto He is called the holy Spirit, not only because He is
essentially holy, and very holiness it self, but also the author of
sanctification, and of all saving graces in Believers, Gal. 5. 22. and the
Spirit of promise, not only, because He was promised to be abundantly
poured-out upon Believers under the New Testament, Act. 2. 16. but also His
office is to seal and confirm by His gracious operations the Promises of the
Gospel to Believers, Romans 8. 16. Ye were sealed, says he, with the holy Spirit.

From that use, for which the holy Spirit with his saving graces was bestowed
upon them, Learn, 1. As the Spirit of God is a person subsisting, and not a
created gift or grace; so this holy Spirit does not only bestow His gifts and
graces upon Believers, but also comes Himself unto them, and dwells in them:
In so far, as though He be not personally united with them, as the divine
nature is with the humane in Christ; yet He is not only with them in his
essence and being, as He is present everywhere, Jer. 23. 24. nor yet in
respect of His working by a general providence only, as He is present even with
wicked men; for, in Him they live, move and have their being, Act. 17. 28. but
He resideth in them, as in his own Temple by his special and saving operations,
whereby He not only bestows upon them the habits of all saving graces at
their first conversion, Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26. but does also by his immediate,
strong and special influence daily preserve those graces in life, (Joh. 10. 28,
29.) actuate them, (Philip. 2. 13.) and ordinarily makes them to grow, (Hos.
14. 5.) for, whereas the word Spirit in the former verse is in the neuter
gender^ he repeats it here by a masculine relative (which would be better
rendered who than which) to show that the Spirit is a person subsisting: Which
Spirit, he says, is given us for an earnest of our inheritance. 2. Heaven and
glory is the only portion and inheritance of Believers; all their enjoyments
earthly, though never so great, being but mean, fading in themselves, and
liable to spoiling and vastation from others, so that this inheritance, which
is incorruptible, fades not away, and is reserved in the heavens (1 Pet. 1.
4.) is only worthy to be looked upon as their inheritance: for, the Apostle
calls it our inheritance, by way of excellency; Which is the earnest of our
inheritance. 3. As the right unto this inheritance is made-over unto Believers,
upon their resigning themselves to God by faith, in way of covenant and
paction, Isa. 55. 3. So the Lord has thought it convenient not to give them
the possession of it presently upon their right, but to delay it for a season,
that in the mean time they may exercise their hope in longing after it, Philip.
1. 23. And God may get glory from the heirs of heaven here upon earth, and
among earthly men, by being the means of salvation unto some, Mat. 5. 16. and
of conviction and just condemnation unto others, Heb. 11. 7. for, the metaphor
of an earnest, used among Merchants, when the sum covenanted is not presently
given, does bear so much; Who is the earnest of our inheritance. 4. As even
Believers are apt to doubt, if ever the covenanted inheritance shall be
bestowed and actually enjoyed by them; So the Lord is most willing to do all
which in reason can be required, for removing all doubts of that kind; and more
particularly He gives them an earnest, or a part of this covenanted
inheritance in hand, to assure them of his purpose to bestow the whole in due
time: for, the metaphor of an earnest does bear this also, the end of giving an
earnest being to assure the receiver of the giver's honest purpose to perform
all that he has promised, which otherwise might be called in question; Who is
the earnest of our inheritance. 5. The Spirit of the Lord sealing Believers,
and those saving graces of the Spirit, which he works in sealing, do serve
for the same uses in relation to the Covenant of Grace, wherein heaven and
glory is promised to Believers, for which an earnest does serve in a civil
bargain: for, as the earnest is a part of the sum, and usually but a small
part, and yet may assure the receiver of his obtaining the whole; So the Spirit
and His work of grace received here, is begun glory, Joh. 17. 3. and though but
a small part of it, 1 Cor. 13. 12, 13. yet the smallest measure of grace may
assure the man who has it, of his obtaining the full possession of glory in
the day of the Lord Jesus, Philip. 1. 6. hence the Apostle calls the Spirit
with his graces this earnest; Who is the earnest of our inheritance.

From the time how long the use of this earnest was to continue, Learn, 1. As
real Believers are Christ's possession in whom He dwells, Ephesians. 3. 17. and whom
He manureth and makes fruitful, Joh. 15. -2. So He has purchased them, to
wit, by paying a price to provoked justice, 1 Cor. 6. 20. and by force from
Satan their old possessor and master, Heb. 2. 14, 15. and purchased them for
this end, that He might possess them: for, speaking of Believers, he calls
them a purchased possession. 2. Though the redemption and delivery of Believers
be already begun, and their bonds loosed in part, Col. 1. 13. yet their
complete redemption is but to come, to wit, from sin at death, Heb. 12. -23.
and from misery, not until the last day; then, and not while then shall their
bodies be raised up in glory, and their redemption be full and complete, Romans
8. 23. for, the Apostle speaks of their redemption as of a thing yet to come;
Until the redemption of the purchased possession. 3. As this earnest, even the
holy Spirit with His graces, being once given, cannot totally be lost; So, if
this day of redemption were once come, there shall be no further use of an
earnest: the covenanted inheritance will then be fully possessed, and
consequently no place left for fears or doubts about the obtaining of it; for,
he says, the Spirit was to be an earnest until the redemption, and so He must
continue with them until then, but was not to serve for an earnest any longer;
Who is the earnest until the redemption of the purchased possession.

From the end proposed, see what is already observed upon ver. 6. and ver. 12.

Verse. 15. Wherefore I also, after I heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus, and
love unto all the Saints, 16. Cease not to give thanks for you, making mention
of you in my prayers.
THe Apostle, in the second part of the Chapter, taking occasion from what he
heard of those Ephesians, breaks forth in thanksgiving and prayer to God for
them, whereby he prosecuteth his main scope: in so far, as that by every
sentence, and word almost, he does breath forth the high esteem which he had of
God's free grace in Christ, and thereby does confirm their faith; besides that
while he prays for their perseverance, and growth in the faith and knowledge
of saving truths, he does indirectly, at least, excite them to persevere and
make progress in the same.

And, first, having shown the good report which was brought unto him of those
spiritual graces, which were eminent in them (whereof he instanceth two, which
are the sum and compend of all the rest, and does illustrate them from their
principal object, faith in Jesus Christ and love to all the Saints) ver. 15. he
makes known unto them what was his exercise upon their behalf, even that
(being incited by the consideration of these spiritual blessings bestowed by
God upon them, and mentioned, ver. 13, 14. and by the report which he had of
them, ver. 15.) he made conscience to continue in the duties of thanksgiving
and prayer to God for them, ver. 16.

From Verse. 15. Learn, 1. It is not sufficient that Christ's Ministers do press
duties upon the Lords People, having convincedly cleared unto their consciences
the equity which is in those duties; but they must also hold forth unto them a
copy of that obedience, which they so much press, by their own example and
practice: for, so the Apostle, having abundantly cleared, ver. 13, 14. that the
Lord's converting and sealing of those Ephesians did call upon them to praise
the glory of His grace, he himself does here put hand to this work; Wherefore,
says he, I cease not to give thanks for you. 2. It is a great encouragement to
bless the Lord, and to pray unto Him in behalf of those who are making
conscience of these duties for themselves: for, while he says, I also give
thanks, he supposes they were doing the like, and that he was encouraged from
thence. 3. Grace is like a precious ointment, whose savor cannot be hid: the
report of it, where it is in life, will spread, and make his name, who has it,
savoury unto such, as are truly gracious themselves: for, Paul, though at a
great distance being now at Rome, heard of their faith in Jesus Christ, and
love to all the Saints. 4. It is the duty of Christians to be joyfully
reporting and speaking of the grace of God and good which is in others;
providing it be wisely done, that is, first, sparingly, and so as not to place
all our own Religion in speaking of the Religion of others. Secondly, not
rashly, or without such grounds in the person whom we commend, as charity at
least may rest upon. Thirdly, impartially, and not factiously crying up some,
and decrying others, who are equally deserving, Jude -16. for, Paul's hearing
of their faith and love, implies, that some had reported to him of that good
which was in them. 5. Even in the best Churches in those primitive times, who
were most commended by the Apostles, every one had not faith, and so is it yet;
All are not Israel who are of Israel, Romans 9. 6. for, the word rendered their
faith, in the Original, is, the faith which is among you; he could not say
positively that all of them had faith, but faith was among them. 6. Saving
faith is an excellent fruit of the Gospel preached among a People, without
which the Word cannot profit, Heb. 4. 2. and by which we are united to Christ,
and have right to all the spiritual blessings purchased by Christ, who is the
chief object of faith, whom it does apprehend, as He is offered in the Promise:
for, Paul does mention their faith in Jesus Christ as an excellent
praiseworthy fruit of the Gospel, for which he blesses God; After I heard of
your faith in Jesus Christ, says he. 7. The grace of love to our neighbor,
with the duties thereof flowing from love to God in the first place, (1 John 4.
12.) is an excellent praiseworthy fruit of the Gospel preached among a People,
especially, when the Saints have most of this love as resembling God most. And
when their love is laid forth upon Saints, as they are Saints, and for the
reality or appearance of God in them, and not for other by-respects only, or
mainly; and in a word, when it is extended unto all Saints: for, Paul does
mention their love to the Saints and to all Saints, as another excellent
praiseworthy fruit of the Gospel, for which he blesses God; After I heard of
your love unto all the Saints. 8. As the graces of faith in Christ, and love to
the Saints, are always conjoined, they being in a manner the two legs of a
Christian, without any one whereof he cannot walk, and the other is but dead
and withered, I am. 2. 17. so faith in its exercise has the precedence of
love, faith being the fountain from which the streams of love do flow; in so
far, as faith laying hold upon God's love in Christ, inflameth the heart with
love to God; which love to God consists in keeping of His Commandments, 1 John 5. 3. and the chief of God's Commands, next unto love to Himself, is, that
we love our brother, 1 John 4. 21. for, the Apostle here, as elsewhere, Col. 1.
4. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 4. conjoyneth these two graces, and gives faith the precedence;
After I heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and love to all the Saints.

From Verse. 16. Learn, 1. As the duties, both of thanksgiving and prayer, ought
to be made conscience of by Christians; so the practice of these two duties do
well together: for, each of them does contribute for the help of another; in so
far, as thanksgiving to God for favors received, does notably tend to
suppress that fretting, quarrelling, impatient humor, which often venteth it
self against God in our prayers, Psalm. 77. 7. compared with 10, 11. and the
exercise of prayer does elevate the heart somewhat toward God, and so in some
measure warm the affections with love to God, Psalm. 25. 1. and thus disposes
much for the duty of thanksgiving: for, the Apostle makes conscience of both
those duties, and that jointly; I cease not to give thanks in my prayers. 2. It
is not sufficient for Christians once to begin well, and break off fair in the
practice of those duties; but they must continue in them; there being always
abiding reasons both for thanksgiving and prayer; and, when there is a lazy
falling off from the practice of them for a time, it is usually found a task of
greater difficulty to begin of new, than it was at first: for, the Apostle
says, I cease not to give thanks in my prayers: he ceased not, to wit, so far
as his other necessary employments and duties of his calling did permit: for,
what we do frequently, and always when occasion offers, we are said to do it
without ceasing. 3. The Ministers of Jesus Christ especially, ought not to be
puffed up with any success, which the Lord is pleased to give unto their
labors, or sacrifice to their own drag or net, Gal. 6. 13. but would ascribe
the praise thereof to God, who alone makes His People to profit, Isa. 48. 17.
for, Paul, hearing of their faith and love, ceased not to give thanks for them
to God. 4. As it is the duty of one Christian to pray for another, and
especially of a Minister for his Flock; So our prayers for others will avail
little, except we be daily making conscience of praying to God for our selves:
for, says Paul, I make mention of you in my prayers: he had his own ordinary
prayers for himself, wherein he did remember them. 5. As to the occasion of his
praying for them, see upon Col. 1. 9. doct. 1.

Verse. 17. That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give
unto you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation, in the knowledge of Him: 18. The
eyes of your understanding being enlightened --
THe Apostle, in the second place, gives a short sum of his prayer unto God
for them. And, first, he describes God the Father, unto whom he prays, to be
the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, to wit, as Christ is man, Psalm. 22. 10. as He
is our Mediator, Psalm. 40. 8. and with relation to that Covenant of Redemption
betwixt God and Christ as mediator, Heb. 2. 13. And the Father of glory; so
called, because He is in His own nature infinitely glorious, Psalm. 145. 5. the
fountain of the whole Godhead, and all the divine Attributes in the Son (Psalm.
2. 7.) and holy Ghost, Joh. 14. 26. for, glory is sometimes taken for the
Godhead and divine Attributes, Joh. 2. 11. and because He is the first cause of
all that glory which is in any of the creatures, Psalm. 8. 5. And lastly, He is
the object of all glory, to whom all glory is due from the creatures, Psalm. 19.
1. Secondly, he shows what he sought in prayer, even wisdom, or a further
increase of that wisdom and saving knowledge of divine mysteries, whereof the
Spirit of God is the author, mentioned ver. 8. together with a clearer insight
in Scripture where those mysteries are revealed by the same Spirit. Which
wisdom he shows, does mainly consist in the saving, believing, and operative
knowledge of Him, that is, of Jesus Christ, ver. 17. And having more clearly
expressed what he means by this Spirit of wisdom, even the removing of the
natural blindness of their understandings, and enduing them with a clear
discerning in the things of God, ver. 17- he does illustrate it further from
those ends, for the attainment whereof he would have this wisdom bestowed, as
shall be cleared afterward. Hence Learn, 1. The more painful and laborious
that others, whether Ministers, parents, friends or neighbors, are for
bringing about our salvation and spiritual good, we ought to be so much the
more excited to painfulnesse and diligence about the same thing our selves;
else their pains will not only do us no good, but also much hurt, the Lord
usually judicially plaguing the man, whom every one would have doing well, only
himself will not: for, the Apostle shows that he prayed, and what he prayed
for from God unto them, not to gain applause from them; (for that is condemned,
Mat. 6. 5.) but that he might excite them unto prayer for themselves, and to
endeavor after those things which he sought; Making mention of you in my
prayers, that God may give you, etc. 2. Though we are not of necessity to stint
our selves unto a set form of words in prayer, Romans 8. 26. yet, we would have
set purposes condescended upon, and a certain scope to aim at in prayer, so as
we may be able to give an account of what we pray for, whether in behalf of our
selves, or of others; otherwise we can neither expect, nor observe the return
of our prayers: for, Paul, setting down the sum of his prayer, shows he took
notice of those things which he prayed for; even that God may give unto you the
Spirit of wisdom, says he. 3. Our prayers would be directed unto God only, and
neither to glorified Saints, who are ignorant of us, Isa. 63. 16. nor yet to
the Angels, who (though they be near unto us, 1 Cor. 11. 10. yet) know not the
secrets of hearts, Jer. 17. 10. and so are unfit to receive our prayers;
besides that there is no warrant in Scripture for praying unto any such, but to
God alone: hence the Apostle directs his prayer unto God, Even, that the God
of our Lord Jesus Christ may give unto you. 4. We ought to draw near to God,
especially in the duties of prayer, whether for our selves or others, with
confidence and reverence (the one not marring the other) and in order hereto we
are so to conceive of God, and express such conceptions of ours concerning
Him, as may most strengthen our faith in the expectation of what we seek, and
may strike our hearts with reverence toward God, from whom we seek: for, those
epithets which Paul gives unto God, do tend to strengthen his faith, while he
calls Him the God of our Lord Jesus Christ; and to breed deep reverence in
his own heart toward God, while he calls Him, the Father of glory, or
glorious Father. 5. That we may have access unto God with boldness through
Christ in prayer, it is necessary to renew that act of faith whereby we apply
and appropriate Christ unto our selves, that so being made one with Christ
(Ephesians. 3. 17.) we may be looked upon by the Father, as clothed with His
righteousness, Phil. 3. 9. whereby both our persons and imperfect prayers shall
be accepted of by God through Him, Heb. 11. 4. for, Paul, whose practice here
is a directory for prayer, does appropriate Christ to himself as his own
Christ; The God of our Lord Jesus Christ. 6. It is necessary also in order to
the same end, that in closing with Christ we do not part or divide Him, but
appropriate to our selves the fullness of all those perfections which are in
Him; this being an evidence of the sincerity of our closing with Him, and no
less than whole Christ being necessary to cover all those imperfections, to
bear us up under all those discouragements, to help us under all those
infirmities which we are encompassed with in our approaches to God: for, Paul
does appropriate Christ to himself under such titles as hold forth His complete
fullness, to wit, of Lord, which implies His power and soveraignity over all
things for the Believers good, Philip. 2. 9. 10, 11. Of Jesus, which signifies
a Savior, and points forth His great work and errand to the world to save
sinners, Mat. 1. 21. And of Christ, which signifies anointed, and so points
at His threefold Office unto which He was anointed and furnished in order to
that work, Psalm. 45. 7. The God of our Lord Jesus Christ. 7. As wisdom, or the
saving knowledge of divine mysteries, is necessary unto a Christian; So, even
those who are effectually called, and have a good measure of this grace
already, ought not to sit down upon the measure received, but would constantly
aspire after more of it, as being yet ignorant of many things, and not
sufficiently rooted in the knowledge of those things, which they already know,
1 Cor. 13. 9. for, while Paul prays for a greater measure of wisdom unto
those Ephesians, toward whom God had already abounded in all wisdom, ver. 8.
he does indirectly excite them to endeavor to grow in this grace; May give
unto you the Spirit of wisdom. 8. The wisdom and knowledge which Christians are
to seek after, is not at all that carnal wisdom, which is enimity to God, Iam.
3. 15. nor yet chiefly that natural wisdom, or knowledge of the hid mysteries
of nature, Eccles. 1. 17, 18. nor yet that wisdom or knowledge of divine
mysteries, which is only a gift, and flows from a common influence of the
Spirit, 1 Cor. 8. -1-. but that whereof the Spirit of God by His special
operation and influence is author and worker, and is more than a gift, even the
grace of wisdom, which is not acquired by our own industry and pains only, nor
yet puffs up, neither is it weak and coldrife, not warming the heart with
love to the thing known, as the gift of wisdom is: but this grace of wisdom
comes from above, Iam. 3. 17. by the use of other lawful means, Prove. 2. 1,
etc. and must be sought from above, Iam. 1. 5. It humbles the man who has it,
Job 42. 3, 5, 6. it is operative upon the heart, and works love unto the
thing known, Joh. 4. 10. for, the Apostle prays, that God would give them the
Spirit of wisdom, that is, whereof the Spirit of God is author by His spiritual
grace. 9. Spiritual things, the object of this heavenly wisdom and knowledge,
are not, for the most part, conclusions drawn from natures light; but are
revealed and made known by the Spirit of God, to wit, either in an
extraordinary, immediate way, without the help of humane means unto the
Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 3. 5. or, in an ordinary and mediate way by the
help of Scripture, and blessing of God upon the pains of public Teachers, and
such other means as He has appointed for attaining to the mind of God revealed
in Scripture, 2 Timothy 3. 15, etc. for, jointly with the Spirit of wisdom he
seeks the Spirit of revelation, implying, that this wisdom cannot be had
without revelation. 10. The sum of all saving wisdom, is, to know Christ, and
what Scripture speaks of Him as a complete Mediator; and so to know Him, as
that we acknowledge Him; which speaks somewhat more than our simple knowing
of Him, even a knowing of Him as our own, and with special application to our
selves, and so, as we give due honor, respect and reverence unto Him: for,
though we are said to know even strangers, and those whom we contemn and
despise; yet we are not in strict phrase of speech said to acknowledge any, but
these of near relations, or whom we prosecute with that respect and honor
which is due unto them, as the servant is said to acknowledge his master. Now,
Paul gives this as the sum and compend of saving wisdom, while he says, In
the knowledge of Him, to wit, of Christ, or, in the acknowledgement of Him, as
it is in the Original. 11. It is not sufficient for attaining this grace of
wisdom, or saving knowledge of divine truths, that those truths be plainly
revealed by the Spirit of God in Scripture; there must be also a removal of
that natural darkness and blindness which is in our understandings, whereby
we may be enabled to take up that which is revealed, even as to the beholding
of colors by the outward sense, there must not only be an outward light to
make the object conspicuous, but also the faculty of seeing in the eye: a blind
man cannot see at noonday, nor yet the sharpestsighted at midnight. Thus for
the taking up of things heavenly, the Apostle prays both for a Spirit of
revelation, to make those truths conspicuous, and for a new power of discerning
in the understanding, that they might be able to take up the truth so revealed:
The eyes of your understanding being enlightened. 12. The natural faculties of
the soul are not destroyed in conversion, so as if from that time forward the
renewed man did nothing, and the Spirit of God residing in him did all things:
no, they are only renewed by the implanting of new gracious habits and
dispositions in them, so that our wit, will and affections being renewed,
quickened and wrought upon by the Spirit of God, do also themselves work,
Philip. 2. -12. for, Paul prays not that their understanding might be
destroyed but enlightened; The eyes of your understanding being enlightened.

Verse. 18. -- That ye may know what is the hope of His calling, and what the
riches of the glory of His inheritance in the Saints.
HEre is one of those ends, for attaining whereof, the Apostle would have this
wisdom bestowed upon them, even that they might know those good things, which
they were to partake of in Heaven: which are, first, summarly propounded under
the name of hope, taken here for the object of hope, or things hoped-for, as
Romans 8. -24-. Col. 1. 5. and the hope of their calling, because at their
conversion they were called to the participation of those things; next, more
fully explained, while they are called an inheritance, which is most excellent,
as being both rich and glorious, and appertains only to the Saints and those
who are renewed by the Spirit of God; for, the particle rendered in the Saints,
does signify, in, or, amongst, and is so read, Act. 26. 18. Doct. 1. As
effectual inward calling, whereby we are made a willing people in the day of
God's power (Psalm. 110. 3.) is only Christ's work by His Spirit upon the hearts
of the Elect, making them to give hearty obedience to the outward call by the
mouth of His Ministers; So by this work he opens unto them a large door of
hope, and calls them, who were before without hope, to partake of an
excellent and glorious inheritance, which is here called hope, or the thing
hoped-for, and the hope of calling, they being called to the enjoyment of it,
which calling is also called His, to wit, God's, or Christ's, because it is His
work; What is the hope of His calling. 2. Though those who are effectually
called, do receive some part of that happiness, unto which they are called,
presently, and in hand, to wit, those excellent benefits of justification,
adoption and sanctification, and such others as do either accompany, or flow
from those in this life, 1 Cor. 6. 11. yet, the great and chief part of it is
not given then in present possession, but reserved in the heavens for them, 1
Pet. 1. 4. so that they have it only in hope: for, therefore is it called the
hope of their calling, a thing only hoped-for. 3. Though those excellent
things, which are not yet possessed, but only hoped-for by Believers, are known
in part and in general, 1 John 3. -2. even so far, as the knowledge which we
have of them is sufficient to terminate our hope; (otherwise if they were
wholly unknown they could not be hoped-for) yet so excellent are those things
in themselves, and therefore remote from our knowledge, and so much are we
taken up with trifles and childish toys, that even true Believers, and they
who know most, and have their thoughts most exercised about them, are in a
great part ignorant of them: they neither know them fully, nor particularly,
Isa. 64. 4. So that heaven and glory will be found another kind of thing, than
ever entered in the heart of man to think upon or look after, 1 Cor. 2. 9. for,
he prays, that even the called Ephesians might know what is the hope of His
calling, implying that they were yet in a great part ignorant of it. 4. That
measure of knowledge which may be attained here of those excellent things
hoped-for, should be carefully endeavored and diligently sought after by
Believers, as being of great concernment to make them seek after these things
being so known, Philip. 3. 14. to sweeten the bitterness of their cross, Romans
8. 18. furnish them with matter for sweet meditation upon heaven and things
heavenly, Philip. 3. 20. and to make them more vehemently long and desire after
the actual possession of those things, Philip. 1. 23. for, Paul's praying for
wisdom, that they may know the hope of His calling, implies, that much more
themselves ought to seek after the knowledge of it. 5. As those excellent
things which are now hoped-for, and really to be enjoyed in the other life, are
of the nature of an inheritance, which is not purchased by us, but freely
bestowed upon us; so they are properly Christ's inheritance, who has proper
right to it, as being the natural Son of God, and by virtue of His own
purchase; but the right which we have is communicated to us through Him, In
whom we have received the adoption of children, and so are made heirs and
coheirs with Christ, Romans 8. 17. for, the Apostle, explaining what those
things hoped-for are, calls them an inhe^^ritance, and His inheritance; And
what the riches of the glory of His inheritance. 6. This heavenly inheritance
is a rich inheritance, as wanting nothing to make the state of those who enjoy
it completely happy, and giving full satisfaction and contentment, Psalm. 17.
15. and therefore it is called the riches of his inheritance, that is, after
the manner of speech much used among the Hebrew^, A rich inheritance. 7. It is
also a glorious inheritance, there being nothing there but what is glorious:
The sight shall be glorious; for, we shall see God, as we are seen, 1 Cor. 13.
12. the place shall be glorious, 2 Cor. 12. 4. the company glorious, all the
glorified Saints and Angels, Heb. 12. 22, 23. our souls and bodies shall be
glorious, Philip. 3. 21. and our daily exercise shall be glorious, even to give
glory unto God for ever and ever, Rev. 7. 9, 10. for, therefore it is called
the glory of his inheritance, or, his glorious inheritance. 8. Though
sanctification and holiness do not merit this heavenly inheritance, seeing it
comes to us freely, and as it were by lot; (as the word signifies) yet none
have present right to it, nor yet shall have possession of it afterward, but
only the Saints, even they who are renewed and inherently holy: Without
holiness none shall see God, Heb. 12. -14. for, he says, it is an inheritance
in the Saints, that is, whereof only Saints are possessors. 9. That we know and
acknowledge Christ aright, it is necessary to perpend much, and thereby
endeavor to know how useful a person he has been and is unto us; what great
rich and glorious things He has purchased for us, and does preserve in heaven
for our behoof: for, he mentions their knowing the hope of His calling, as
one end or part of that wisdom which consists in the knowing or
acknowledgement of Him, spoken of, ver. 17. That ye may know the hope of his
calling, etc.

Verse. 19. And what is the exceeding greatness of His power to usward who
believe, according to the working of His mighty power.
HEre is another of those ends, for attaining whereof, the Apostle would have
this wisdom bestowed upon them, even that they might know somewhat of that
which they partake, at least in this life, to wit, the greatness of God's
power, which He exerceth in and toward Believers, in His bestowing upon them
saving grace, and carrying-on of that work in despite of men and devils from
step to step, until grace shall be crowned in glory, and they actually
installed in the possession of that rich and glorious inheritance: and he
represents and describes this power, first, from its greatness; it is
great, and so great, that sufficient words cannot be found to express the
greatness of it, it is superlative, and hyperbolically great; for, so the word
in the Original signifies. Secondly, from the object toward whom this power
is exercised, to wit, Believers. And, thirdly, from the principle and fountain
from whence this powerful working flows, even God's own natural and infinite
power: which he describes from two epithets, It is mighty; yea, almighty, so,
as nothing is too hard for it, Genesis 18. 14-. and it is a working power, or
efficacious in working, and so as it cannot be resisted, where it is employed
to work, Isa. 27. 4. Doct. 1. So unworthy is any of the lost sons of Adam of
this heavenly inheritance, Ephesians. 2. -3. so great and insuperable are these
difficulties which are in their way to it, Ephesians. 6. 12. and so weak and impotent
are they to get them overcome, 2 Cor. 3. 5. that no less than the omnipotent
power of God working omnipotently is required to make them meet for it, and
bring them to the actual possession of it; and therefore only the consideration
of this mighty power can answer those doubts wherewith sense of weakness and
unworthiness will furnish a man against the possibility of his ever attaining
to it: for, what is here spoken of God's power, seems to be subjoyned,
thereby to point forth the way, how that rich inheritance is attained, and to
solve those doubts which they might have had against their coming to it; And
what is the exceeding greatness of His power. 2. They, and they only shall
come to possess this heavenly inheritance after time, who partake of the
working of His mighty power upon their hearts in time: for, having spoken of
that rich and glorious inheritance, he speaks here of the exceeding
greatness of His power toward those who believe: whereby he shows not only
how we come to that inheritance, but also who those are, who shall come to it.
3. The power which God exerces in converting and carrying-on the work of grace
to glory in the Elect, is not only great, but exceeds all contrary power
which might impede that work; so, that there is no power in the devil, the
world, in sin, nor death, which this power does not overcome; yea, nor any
impotency in the Elect themselves, which this greatness of power will not help
and strengthen: for, he calls it the exceeding greatness of His power. 4.
There cannot a more pregnant proof be given of God's omnipotent power in
working, than what He gives in converting sinners from sin to holiness, and
carrying-on the work of grace in them against all opposition, until they come
to heaven: The creation of the world, and working of miracles, is no more
evident proof of His omnipotency in working than this is: for, he instanceth
the exceeding greatness of His mighty power, not in any ^f those things, but
in His working toward Believers; Toward us who believe, says he. 5. So
averse are men by nature from believing in Jesus Christ for righteousness, so
great an enemy is Satan to the grace of faith above all other graces, Luke 22.
31, 32. that no less than the working of God's exceeding great and mighty
power is required for working us up to the grace of faith, and the exercise of
it: for, his designing them by the name of Believers, while he speaks of the
exceeding greatness of this power, implies so much; Toward us who believe.
6. Those only are most fit to speak of God's powerful and gracious working in
hearts, who have found somewhat of that work in themselves: such will speak
both more confidently, and more thoroughly of this work, there being somewhat of
God's work in hearts, which cannot be so fully attained by mere reading or
hearing, except experience serve as a commentary to understand what is read and
heard, Psalm. 34. 8. for, therefore, says he, not, toward those who believe,
but Us who believe, including himself, to show he spoke of this power, not as a
stranger to it, but from experience, that they might believe him the rather. 7.
This mighty power of God in its working toward Believers, is extended unto all
times, without restriction unto any difference of time, either bypast,
present, or to come: It has wrought in their first conversion, and bringing
them to believing, Joh. 6. 44. it does work by preserving them in the state of
grace, Luke 22. 32. by actuating their graces in them, Philip. 2. 13. and
making them to grow, Cant. 4. 16. and shall continue with them always working
until their graces be perfected, and they completely glorified, Philip. 1. 6.
for, he expresses no difference of time wherein it works, only that it does
work; And what is the exceeding greatness of His power to usward who believe.
8. God's omnipotent and efficacious power, which belongs unto Him naturally
and essentially as He is God, is not only the fountain and principle from
whence His powerful operation toward Believers does flow, but also the rule
according to which He does work; so that He is not only omnipotent, who
works, but also He works omnipotently, and therefore irresistibly: for,
says he, The greatness of His power to usward who believe, is, according to
the working of his mighty power. 9. Even those who are Believers, in whom this
mighty power has already wrought, may be in a great measure ignorant of the
exceeding greatness of it: they are destitute even of the notional knowledge
of it in a great part, because of the mysteriousnesse of the subject, Joh. 3.
8. and their little acquaintance with the Word, which reveals the way of
God's working in souls, Psalm. 77. and 88. but chiefly of experimental
knowledge; there being much to be wrought in them by His mighty power, whereof
they can have no experience as yet, Philip. 3. 21. there being much also
already wrought in them, and they know it not, but doubt of it, Job 9. 11. for,
though it be a mighty working power; yet it has a meek, sweet, (Phal. 110. 3.)
secret, (Cant. 5. 4.) and therefore a not easy discernable work; Thus those
believing Ephesians were in a great part ignorant of this power, else to what
purpose did the Apostle pray that they might know what is the exceeding
greatness of his power? 10. The experimental knowledge chiefly of God's way
of working in, and toward Believers, is to be carefully sought after, as being
of great concernment to make us thankful to God for His gracious working in us
where it is known and felt, Psalm. 116. 8, 9, etc. as also in order to our own
comfort arising from that our knowledge, Psalm. 116. 7. and to strengthen our
faith and hope in God, Romans 5. 4. for, while Paul prays for the knowledge of
this mighty working power to them, he teaches them to seek after this
knowledge themselves; That ye may know what is the exceeding greatness of his
power. 11. This experimental knowledge of God's power, is an eminent part of
spiritual wisdom, and of our knowing and acknowledging of Christ aright: for,
he prays, that they may know what is the exceeding greatness of his power,
as one end or part of that spiritual wisdom, which consists in the knowledge
or acknowledgment of Him, spoken of, ver. -17.

Verse. 20. Which He wrought in Christ when He raised him from the dead, and set
Him at his own right hand in the heavenly places.
THe Apostle, in the third branch of this second part of the Chapter, taking
occasion from what he spoke of the exceeding greatness of God's power in
Believers, ver. 19. falls out upon a commendation, and more large explication
of that mighty power, taken from one of its admirable effects toward Christ,
in exalting Him from His low condition, whereby he does yet prosecute his main
scope; for, what greater confirmation could be given unto their faith in
Christ, than the making known unto them, how highly exalted Christ is, and that
the same divine power, which exalted Him, had wrought, was working, and would
continue to work in them, until all those glorious things, which they had now
only in hope, should be actually bestowed upon them? And, first, that he may
commend and clear that mighty Power, according to which God did work in the
believing Ephesians, he does briefly propound two things, which were wrought by
it toward the exaltation of Christ; first His resurrection from the dead;
Secondly, His being set at the right hand of God in heavenly places, whereby is
set forth that high glory and dignity, which after Christ's resurrection and
ascension was put upon Christ, as God-man, far surpassing the glory of all
things created, Philip. 2. 9. together with that high power and authority,
which the same Christ God-man has obtained over all things to dispose of them
for the Churches good, 1 Pet. 3. 22. which glory and authority of Christ is
only visible in the Heavens, and therefore it is said to be in heavenly places;
because Christ's humane nature, through which His Deity does shine and manifest
it self, is only in Heaven, Act. 3. 21. although the effects of this His power
and authority may be and are perceived elsewhere, Act. 2. 33. And that this is
intended to be held forth by Christ's sitting at the Father's right hand, is
clear, not only from the places presently cited, and the Apostle's own
explication, which he subjoyneth in the verses following, but also from the
phrase it self, which cannot be proper; seeing God has neither right nor left
hand properly, Joh. 4. 24. and so must be a metaphor borrowed from Kings and
Princes, who do set those at their right hand, whom they highly honor, 1 King.
2. 19. or, place in any office of chief authority and trust, Mat. 20. 21. Doct.
1. As our Lord Jesus was once among the dead; So He did rise again from death,
(See upon Gal. 1. ver. 1. doct. 7.) for, says he, When He raised Him from the
dead. 2. The raising of Christ from the dead, as it was the Father's work; So,
considering what an eminent person Christ was, and how low He was brought,
Philip. 2. 6, 7, 8. and what a height of honor He was exalted unto, Philip. 2.
9. 10. and that He did sustain our person in dying (the iniquities of us all
being laid upon Him, Isa. 53. 6.) and in rising again from death, Ephesians. 2. 5, 6.
All those, I say, being considered, this work of raising Christ, was an effect
of God's extraordinary and mighty power: for, as he ascribes the raising of
Christ to the Father, which does not contradict those Scriptures which affirm
Christ to have risen by His own power, John. 2. 19. and 10. 17. because it is
one and the same power which is in both Father and Son, they being one only
God, 1 John 5. 7. So he does ascribe it to the working of His mighty power,
spoken of, verse. -19. and related unto in this, while he says, Which, or
according to which He wrought in Christ, when He raised Him from the dead. 3.
The selfsame omnipotent power, which wrought in, and toward Christ's
exaltation in all the steps of it, is engaged for working grace, and
carrying-on the work of grace in Believers, and for performing unto Believers
whatever they have ground to hope-for from His Word: and therefore we may look
upon the several effects and proofs of this power toward Christ, as so many
pledges, that God will against all opposition perform whatever He has
undertaken to us: for, He makes that power, whereby He works in Believers,
and whereby He raised Christ from the dead, to flow from one and the same
fountain and principle in God, and the one to be according to the other, while
he says, According to the working of His mighty power, which He wrought in
Christ. 4. This high honor and sovereign power, signified by sitting at the
Father's right hand, was put upon Christ, not before, but after His humiliation
and resurrection from the dead; for, then in His humane nature He did receive
dominion and honor, which He never had until then, as man; and, though being
considered as God, clothed only with His own divine Majesty, He was from all
eternity equal in power and glory with the Father and holy Ghost, Philip. 2. 6.
yet He did not reign as God incarnate, and clothed with our flesh, until
then, having hid His divine glory, so that very little of it did appear under
the infirmities of the humane nature from His incarnation until then, Philip.
2. 7, 8. but then He did manifest His divine glory, absolute power and
authority in a way incomprehensible by us, in and through the vail of His
glorified flesh: for, the Apostle shows those things were done in this order,
while he says, When He raised Him from the dead, and set Him at His own right
hand. 5. Although the divine and humane nature in Christ are not confounded,
but remain distinct both in their essence and operations, each nature doing
that which is proper unto it self, Heb. 9. 14. 1 Pet. 3. 18. yet, so near and
strict is that personal union of the two natures in Christ, that those things,
which are proper only unto the one nature, are ascribed unto, and spoken of the
whole person: for here, though this high honor and trust put upon Christ, was
in some things verified only in the divine nature, in so far as it speaks His
manifestation of His divine glory and exercising His divine authority, as God
incarnate, in, and through the humane nature: And though in some things it was
verified only in the humane nature, in so far as it speaks His obtaining of
glory and power from the Father, which before He had not; yet, the whole of it
is ascribed unto the whole person of Christ God-man, while he says, And made
Him to sit at His own right hand. 6. Though Christ as Mediator be exalted to
such high honor and authority, as no mere creature is capable of; yet, so far
is His humane nature from being made hereby omnipotent, omnipresent, and
consequently equal with God, That even whole Christ, considered as Mediator, is
inferior and less than the Father, Joh. 14. -28. as having received all this
honor and authority from the Father, Matthew. 28. 18. and administrating His
Kingdom in the Father's Name, Joh. 5. 22. which He is also to render up unto
the Father, 1 Cor. 15. 24. for, not only do the Scriptures cited, but also the
phrase here used, prove so much, seeing those whom the King sets at his right
hand do hold their dignity and trust from him, and must be comptable unto him;
And set Him at His own right hand.

Verse. 21. Far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and
every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to
come: 22. And has put all things under His feet, --
THe Apostle, in the second place, insisteth upon that second effect of God's
mighty power, and explaineth what he meaned by the Father's setting of Christ
at His own right hand, even, that which we formerly showed, to wit, that
transcendent glory and dignity, with full power and soveraignity which was put
upon Him. And first, he speaks of that general power and eminency, which He
has over and above all the creatures, by showing that He is exalted in glory,
not only above, but far above the glory of all creatures whatsoever, whether
principality, power, might, or dominion, under which is comprehended every
thing that is excellent among the creatures, whether in Heaven, Earth, or Hell;
for, sometimes good Angels are expressed by those titles, Ephesians. 3. 10. sometimes
bad Angels, Ephesians. 6. 12. and sometimes Civil powers, Tit. 3. 1. And lest any
might apprehend some dignity besides, not comprehended under any of these four,
he adds a general clause, comprising every name, that is, all things
excellent or famous, and worthy to be so named; as famous men are called men of
Name; So that he hereby shows no creature can enter in competition with
Christ in glory, dignity and worth: and withal he extends this glory put
upon Christ in its duration, not only unto this world, but that which is to
come, and shall never have an end, ver. 21. And that he may exalt Christ yet
further, he shows, that He is not only above all creatures in glory, but also
in dominion and soveraignity, the Father having placed all the creatures in a
state of lowest subjection unto Him, even under His feet, to be disposed of as
He sees fit.

From Verse. 21. Learn, 1. The glory and splendour of things created has some
aptness in it, if it be not rightly looked on, or rather we are apt to take
occasion from it to hide and undervalue the glory and excellency of Jesus
Christ; for otherwise the Apostle would not labor so much to set Him high up
above them, and His glory above theirs; Far above all principality and power.
2. Though Scripture give some ground to affirm, that there are different
degrees and dignities among the Angels, Dan. 10. 13. and 12. 1. yet, what are
their different orders, offices and dignities, Scripture does nowhere
determine: neither is there any ground for us to determine from this place:
for, as we show, the Apostle's scope is under those titles, and the general
clause subjoyned, to lay aside, not only Angels, but all civil powers, and all
created dignity whatsoever from competing with Christ in the point of power,
excellency and worth; Far above all principality, and power, and might, and
dominion, and every name that is named. 3. Even the humane nature of Christ,
and His glorified body by virtue of that unspeakable union which is betwixt the
two natures of Christ in one person, is lifted up so high in glory, that the
glory of Kings and Emperors, of Sun, Moon and Stars, of the souls of just men
made perfect; yea, and of glorious Angels, is nothing to it, and less than the
light of a candle being compared with the Sun in his brightness: for, he is
speaking here of that glory, which Christ has by sitting at the right hand of
God, which, as to some pieces of it, does belong to Christ, as man; and of it
he affirms, that it is far above all principality, and power, and might, and
dominion, and every name that is named. 4. As we do then only think aright of
that high glory put upon Christ, when we look on it as matchless, and not only
above, but far, and infinitely far above all that glory, which can be found in
all, or any of the creatures; So the holding forth of Christ in his glory by
the Lord's Servants, is a point of great concernment for the good of God's
People, to make all created glory wax dim and bulklesse, Dan. 3. 16, 17, 18. to
draw their hearts up after and toward Him, Joh. 4. 10. to hearten them against
those discouragements they usually meet with in doing service to Him, Act. 7.
55, 56. and to make them more reverent in their approaches to Him, Heb. 12. 25.
for therefore does Paul so much labor as he cannot well satisfy himself, in
setting forth that high glory wherein Christ is, while he says, He is above,
and far above; and then enumerateth four comprehensive particulars, and adds
a general clause comprising all things, and prefers Christ unto all; Far
above all principality and power, etc. 5. As there is a world to come, when
this is gone, wherein shall dwell righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. 13. So, though
Christ's Kingdom shall cease at the last day, and be delivered up by Him to the
Father, as to the way wherein He does now administer it, by ruling in the midst
of His enemies, Psalm. 110. -2. whom He subdueth and destroys, Psalm. 2. 9. and
gathering-in His Elect by the means of Word and Sacraments, Matthew. 28. 19, 20.
Yet this Kingdom of His shall never cease, but be continued in that world which
is to come without end, as to the glory, majesty, absolute soveraignity and
dominion over all the creatures, which Jesus Christ Mediator, and God
manifested in the flesh shall enjoy for ever and ever: for, these words, Not
only in this world, but in the world to come, do show the duration of Christ's
kingly glory, and are to be referred not to the word named, immediately
preceding, but to God's action of setting Christ at His right hand, far above
all principality, not only in this world, etc.

From Verse. 22- Learn, 1. The Lord has all things at His disposal, to do with
them what He pleases: for, says Paul, He has put all things under His feet,
which He could not have done, except they had been at His disposal. 2. Jesus
Christ, God-man, Mediator, is not only exalted unto high glory and dignity
above all the creatures; but also has received absolute dominion and sovereign
authority over them all, So that all the creatures, even the greatest, are
subjected to Him, and that in the lowest degree of subjection, to wit, some
willingly, as the effectually called and chosen, Psalm. 110. 3 -- others by
constraint, and without, or contrary to any purpose or intention of their own,
being liable unto, and made use of by His overruling power for bringing about
His own glory and His Churches good, Romans 8. 28. Thus devils, reprobates,
crosses, tentations, and all creatures are subjected to Him: for, it seems
those all things, which are under Christ's feet, must be taken universally of
all creatures whatsoever, as being most agreeable, not only to the verse
preceding, where the comparison is made betwixt Christ and all creatures, but
also to Philip. 2. 10, 11. which place is a commentary unto this, He has put
all things under His feet.

Verse. -- 22. And gave Him to be the head over all things to the Church, 23.
Which is his body, the fullness of Him that fills all in all.
THe Apostle, having spoken of Christ's glory and soveraignity in general over
all the creatures, does next hold forth His special dominion and soveraignity
over the Church, by showing, that Christ, over or above all, that is, in a
special manner, is given by the Father to be the Churches head; which is a
metaphor taken from the natural body, to which he compares Christ and his
Church. And, first, he shows that Christ does answer to the head: which
implies an eminency in Him above the Church, His Body Cant. 5. 10. together
with authority and power over His Church to rule and govern her, both visibly
by His own Officers, dispensing the Word and Censures, 1 Cor. 5. 4, and
inwardly, by the powerful operation of his Spirit, Joh. 16. 13. 14. It
implies also oneness of nature betwixt Him and His Church, Heb. 2. 14. and
fullness of perfection, enabling Him to do all the duties of an head to such a
great, necessirous and infirm body, as His Church is, Col. 2. 3. And it
implies a strict union betwixt Him and His Church, as is betwixt the head and
members in the natural body: the tie of which union, as to the Church visible
(which is His visible, political and ministerial body, 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17.) is
the bond of the Covenant of Grace, wherein they are externally, Psalm. 50. 5.
together with a profession of faith in Christ, Act. 8. 37. But as to the
invisible Church of real Believers, they are as to the inward man, animated and
enlivened with that same Spirit, which was poured-forth on Christ, Romans 8. 9.
they have also faith in Him, and love to Him, wrought by His Spirit in them,
Col. 1. 4. Ephesians. 6. 24. and hereby they are united most strictly to Him. And,
lastly, the metaphor implies communication of influence from Christ to the
Church, to wit, an influence of common gifts from His Spirit to the visible
Church, Ephesians. 4. 7, etc. and an influence of spiritual life, motion, and of
saving grace to the invisible Church of Believers, Col. 2. 19. even as the head
is above, and rules the body, is of the same nature with the body, has all
the inward and outward senses with memory and understanding seated in it for
guiding the body, is united to the body, and conveyeth influence for motion and
sense unto the body. And, secondly, ver. 23. he shows that the Church
answers to the rest of the body under the head, and is called Christ's body,
to wit, not His natural, but mystical body: which implies not only the
Churches union with Christ, but union and order also among the members
themselves, together with diversity of gifts and functions, as there are
several members in the natural body. 1 Cor. 12. It implies also their
receiving influence for life and motion from Christ, Ephesians. 4. 16. and the duty
of subjection and obedience due unto Him as head, Ephesians. 5. 24. He shows also
the high honor which is put upon the Church by being Christ's body, even, that
hereby they become Christ's fullness, not as if Believers did add any personal
perfection to Him, who is infinite in perfections, unto whom nothing can be
added; Only, they are members of that mystical body, unto which He of grace
has undertaken the relation of head, so, that the Church is the fullness, not
of personal, but of mystical Christ, as both head and members of that mystical
body are comprehended under that name Christ. See 1 Cor. 12. 12. and therefore,
lest any should think that this expression did imply any want of perfection in
Christ to be supplied by the Church, the Apostle shows, that Christ, as
God-man, Mediator, fills the all of His body the Church (for, the purpose in
hand requires this all to be so astricted) upon whom He bestows a fullness,
partly of gifts, and partly of graces, a fullness answerable to the present
state of childhood and imperfection, wherein we live here on earth; as the
Romans are said to be full of goodness and knowledge, Romans 15. 14 So, that
Christ is so far from borrowing any perfection from His Church, that all her
perfections are but drops falling from that Ocean and fullness of grace which
is in Him, Joh. 1. 16. Doct. 1. As Jesus Christ is the Father's gift unto the
Church; A gift which is offered unto all within the Church, Job. 3. 16. though
not received by all, Joh. 1. 11. but by real Believers, who, by receiving Him,
obtain a right unto Him, Job. 3. 36. with 1 John 5. 11, 12. and to all those
excellent saving privileges, which were purchased by Him, Job. 1. 12. So,
whoever would receive this gift aright, must receive Him as their head, to
quicken them, to rule them, and to be reverenced by them: for, He gave Him to
be head to the Church. 2. The power and superiority, which Christ has over His
Church, chiefly, the invisible Church of real Believers, as head, is of
another kind than that which He has over all other creatures besides, as being
more intimate, amiable, and in a manner more native and natural, and
accompanied with willing subjection in His Church, Psalm. 110. 3-. even as the
superiority which the King's head has over his own body, or his royal consort,
being compared with that which he has over his subjects, or rather his subdued
enemies: for, He gave Him to be head over all to the Church: Over all, that is,
in a singular and eminent manner above the domination which He has over all
other creatures. 3. None in any sense can be an head to the Church, unto whom
the Church in that same sense is not a body; so, that if the Church be not the
Pope's body, the Pope cannot be the Churches head: for, there is a
reciprocation betwixt the head and body in this purpose, as Christ is the
Churches head, so the Church is His body; He gave Him to be head to the Church,
which is His body. 4. None can draw comfort from those sweet relations of head,
husband, king, etc. which Christ has taken upon Him toward His Church, but
they who stand under a correspondent relation toward Him, as being His body,
spouse, and subjects, and who make conscience of such duties as each of these
relations do bind unto: for, as Christ is an head to the Church, so the Church
is His body; Which is His body, says he. 5. As Christ by taking upon Himself
those relations toward His Church, which are found amongst men, does stand
obliged unto those duties, which men are bound to by virtue of such relations,
Psalm. 23. 1, etc. So the Lord's People are allowed, and commanded to search
unto the duties and privileges following upon such relations among men, and
from thence to learn what to expect from Christ by virtue of that relation, and
what honor and privileges they do enjoy by standing under that relation to
Christ: for, from this, that Christ and the Church stand under the relation of
head and body, the Apostle infers that the Church has this privilege of
being Christ's fullness, even, as the shoulders, arms, breast, belly, legs, and
thighs, are the fullness of the natural body, so that mystical Christ made up
of head and members, is not complete and full without the Church, or the least
Believer in the Church; Which is His body, the fullness of Him, says he. 6. In
searching forth the grounds of these similitudes or relations, taken from
amongst men, whereby Christ sets forth to our capacity what He himself is to
His People, we would carefully guard, lest by pressing them too far, we ascribe
any thing to Christ which is not according to the analogy of Faith, or in any
measure dishonorable to Him: for, Paul, having stretched-forth that similitude
of the head and body so far as to infer thence, that the Church is the fullness
of mystical Christ, he carefully guardeth against a mistake, whereby people
might think, that then some perfection were wanting in Christ to be supplied by
His Church, while he says, that Christ fills all in all. 7. As even
Believers in themselves are empty creatures till they be filled, being
destitute of all good which they may call their own, Romans 7. 18. and unable to
help themselves, if it were but with one right thought, 2 Cor. 3. 5. So there
is a supply to the full of all their emptiness in Christ, who is made of God
unto them, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor, 1.
30. and communicates largely and to the full of His own fullness, unto such as
are sensible of their own emptiness, Joh. 1. 16. Psalm. 81. -10. for, He
fills all in all. 8. Before that Christ do thus supply our emptiness out of
His own fullness, He must first be in us, and united to us by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17.
for, He is in all whom He fills; He fills all in all.

CHAP. II.
IN the first part of this Chapter, the Apostle does commend the doctrine of
salvation by free grace, first, from the consideration of that misery, under
which, not only the Ephesians and other Gentiles were before conversion; as
being spiritually dead, ver. 1, following the corrupt custom of the world, and
Satan's suggestions, v. 2. but even the Jews also, as being inslaved to their
own corrupt lusts, v. 3. Secondly, from the consideration of that delivery from
sin and misery, which was common to them both. And, first, he mentions the
first fountain and internal impulsive cause of that delivery, to wit, God's
free grace, ver. 4. Secondly, the several branches of it, as their quickening in
the way of grace, ver. 5. the resurrection of their bodies, and their
glorification in heaven, ver. 6. Thirdly, the final cause of this delivery, to
wit, the manifesting of God's rich grace, ver. 7. And, fourthly, he clears,
and proves they were saved only by grace, by removing all other things
inconsistent with grace from having influence upon our salvation: And that,
first, generally, ver. 8. and then particularly, their good works: because,
first, otherwise they should have had matter of gloriation in themselves, as to
this purpose, the contrary whereof is intended by God, ver. 9. Secondly, power
to do good works was given them in regeneration; So that though they be
necessary, yet they are not meritorious, ver. 10.

In the second part of the Chapter, he makes a more particular application of
the former purpose unto the Ephesians, and in them to all the Gentiles. And,
first, he lays forth that misery, which was in a great part peculiar unto
them, as they were Gentiles; and this both more generally, ver. 11. and more
particularly in five several branches, ver. 12. Secondly, he declares their
present happy estate of nearness to God and His Church through Christ, briefly,
ver. 13. and explaineth more fully that Christ was the peacemaker, and in
order to His making peace had abolished the ceremonial Law, ver. 14, 15- and
shows a twofold necessity of Christ's so doing, both for uniting of Jew and
Gentile in one Church, ver. -15. And for reconciling both of them to God, ver.
16. Thirdly, he shows that this benefit of nearness was published, and
actually communicated unto them by the preaching of the Gospel, ver. 17, which
he proves from the access which both Jew and Gentile had to God, ver. 18. And
lastly, he concludes from what is said, that the Ephesians were now in a
blessed state, comparing the whole Church to a city, a family, ver. 19. and to
a stately edifice founded upon Christ, ver. 20, 21. And showing they were a
part of this building, ver. 22.

Verse. 1. ANd you has He quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins.
THe Apostle (being yet further, to establish those Ephesians in the doctrine
of salvation by free grace in Christ, and for this end, to set forth the
happiness of that estate, in which free grace had placed them) shows the
misery of their former estate before conversion, even that they were dead not
naturally, but spiritually; there being nothing of that spiritual life in them
which consists in the union of the soul with God, Joh. 5. 40. and in a virtue
and power of the soul, flowing from this union, to do those things which are
spiritually good, and acceptable unto God, Joh. 15. 5. even as the natural life
consists in the union of the soul with the body, whereby the man is enabled
to move, speak, and do such other actions as are competent to that life, so
that their spiritual deadness does speak a separation from God, Psalm 53. 3.
and total inability to do any thing which is spiritually good, Romans 8 7. The
efficient and formal cause of which death he shows to have been their sins
and trespasses: whereby under two words used indifferently in Scripture to
express one and the same thing, and both of them in the plural number, is set
forth the multitude of sins under which they lay in this their dead condition,
as their original sin, their actual sins, sins of omission, commission, and
especially their manifold idolatries, which are chiefly pointed at, as those
sins, wherein, not only the Ephesians, but the world in general did wallow
before Christ came in the flesh, Act. 17. 29, 30. Hence Learn, 1. It is not
sufficient that the Servants of Jesus Christ do only preach privileges, and
hold-forth unto Believers that happy estate unto which they are lifted-up
through Christ; It is necessary also, that jointly herewith, they be calling
them to mind their woeful, miserable and lost estate by nature; that, the one
being set foregainst the other, both may more clearly appear in their own
colors, and that those dangerous rocks of growing vain because of what they
now are (2 Cor. 12. 7.) and of turning discouraged and diffident, because of
what they once were (Psalm. 25. 7.) may be eschewed: for, the Apostle, in the
preceding chapter, having spoken much of those high privileges unto which the
Ephesians were advanced by Christ, he does here mind them of that miserable
state wherein God found them; And you who were dead in sins and trespasses. 2.
There is nothing contributeth more to commend the doctrine of free grace to
peoples consciences, and so to commend it, as to make them closely adhere unto
it, both in profession and practice, than the serious perpending of man's
woeful, and altogether hopeless estate by nature: This alone would do much to
scatter all that mist, whereby humane reason does obscure the beauty of this
truth, by extolling man's free will as a co-worker with grace, Romans 3. 19, 20.
and would necessitate the lost sinner to embrace it, and to venture his
otherwise hopeless salvation upon it, 1 Timothy 1. 15. for this is the Apostle's
scope through this whole Chapter, even, from the consideration of the woeful
estate of those Ephesians before conversion, to illustrate this doctrine of
salvation by free grace, and to confirm them in it; And you who were dead in
sins and trespasses. 3. Believers in Jesus Christ are not to look upon their
lost and miserable estate by nature separately, and apart from, but jointly
with, God's free grace and mercy, which has delivered them from that misery;
for otherwise the thoughts of sin and misery may, if God should give way,
swallow them up, Mat. 27. 4, 5. Hence is it the Apostle has so contrived his
discourse here, that allalongs, while he speaks of their misery in the first
three verses, the mind of the Reader is kept in suspense without coming to the
perfect close of a sentence, until God's mercy in their delivery from this
misery be mentioned, ver. 5. for, the Original has not these words, he has
quickened, in this verse: but the Translators have taken them from ver. 5. to
make up the sense, without suspending the Reader so long until he should find
them in their own proper place; And you who were dead, etc. 4. Every man by
nature, and before conversion, is dead, not to sin, (for that is proper to the
Regenerate only. See Romans 6. 2. where the grammatical construction is the same
in the Original with that which is here; only the sense is much different) but
in sin, whereby he is wholly deprived of all ability and power to convert
himself, Romans 9. 16. or to do any thing which is spiritually good, Romans 8. 7.
for, while he says, the Ephesians were dead in sins, before God did quicken
them, he speaks of a thing common to them with others, and therefore he
reckons himself and the other believing Jews with them, ver. 3. And you who
were dead in sins. 5. As the fountaincause of this spiritual death was Adam's
sin, in whom all have sinned, Romans 5. 12. through the merit of whose sin
imputed to us, we are deprived of original righteousness, Romans 7. 18. and a
perverse inclination unto all evil has come in its place, Genesis 6. 5. So every
man's own particular actual sins do lay him lower under this state of death, and
make his delivery from it more difficult, Jer. 13. 23. for, says he, Ye were
dead in sins and trespasses: under which are comprehended, as we show, both
their original and actual sins.

Verse. 2. Wherein in time past ye walked according to the course of this world,
according to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now works in
the children of disobedience.
HE proves they were thus dead in sins and trespasses from their walking in,
and making a daily trade of sin, without striving against it, or any through
remorse for it: which woeful walk of theirs he does illustrate from two guides,
which they followed, and by which they were carried-on, and encouraged in their
sinful course. The first was, the universal corrupt course and custom of the
world (that is of wicked men in the world, Psalm. 17. 14.) in all ages, which
had become a Law for them to walk by; The second guide was Satan, who is here
called a prince; not only, because there being a number of those unclean
spirits, they are joined as one politic body among themselves under one, who
is as prince and head of the rest, Mat. 12. 24. and 25. 41. but also and
mainly, because of that power which all the Devils, and chiefly their head and
prince, have over wicked men in the world, Joh. 14. 30. 2 Cor. 4 4. even over
the children of disobedience, which princely power of his, is described from
the place, where by God's permission he does exercise it, to wit, the region of
the air; he does exercise it also in the earth, and hell, 1 Pet. 5. 8. and
therefore these must not be here excluded, but rather included, as being below
the region of the air. It is described also from the subjects of his kingdom,
to wit, those, who are not only so obstinate in evil, that they cannot be
persuaded by any means to relinquish it (as the word in the Original, rendered
disobedience, implies) but also are judicially given over to disobedience, and
fully under the power of it, which is expressed, while they are called children
of disobedience, according to the custom of the holy language, whereby those,
who are fully given over, and under the power of any vice, are said to be the
children of that vice, Hos. 2. 4. concerning which obstinat sinners the Apostle
affirms that the spirit of Satan did uncessantly and without intermission
work most powerfully in them, by driving them unto all manner of evil without
any stay or hinderance. See Joh. 8. 41, 44. Doct. 1. The depth of man's
natural misery is so great, that even the renewed Children of God cannot reach
it at one view, nor be sufficiently convinced of it, until the Word of the Lord
do frequently inculcate and lay it forth in its woeful parcels, yea, and
bear-in upon them the truth of it by most convincing reasons, taken from their
own sense and experience: for, the Apostle, speaking to the converted
Ephesians, sees a necessity, not only to declare in the general that they had
been dead in sins and trespasses, but also to prove it was so, and to
point-forth that woeful death at large in this verse; Wherein in time past ye
walked, etc. 2. Though even the Regenerate have a body of sin and death
dwelling in them, Romans 7. 24. and do sometimes actually fall in sin, yea, even
very gross sins, 2 Samuel 11. 4. and 12. 9. yet they do not walk in sin, that
is, sin is not to the Child of God, as the way to the travellor, so as to make
it his daily trade and employment, Psalm. 1. 1. or, to sin without any
reluctance flowing from a spiritual principle against that which he knows to
be sin, Gal. 5. 17. And so, as to walk after sin, by making sin, and
suggestions to sin his guide, whom he does willingly follow, Romans 8. -1.
although sin may conquer, and carry him as an unwilling captive, Romans 7. -14.
etc. for, Paul makes their walking in sin an argument to prove that they were
dead in sin, and therefore it cannot fall upon the Regenerate; Wherein in time
past ye walked. 3. Such is the power of converting grace, that it causes men
change their former way and course, though they have been never so much rooted
in it, and habituated to it: for, while he says, Wherein in time past ye
walked, he implies there was a change wrought, and that they did not so walk
in the time present. 4. While Scripture affirms that Christ has taken away
the sins of the world, Job. 1. -29. and is a propitiation for the sins of the
whole world, 1 John 2. 2. it is no cogent argument to prove, that Christ has
died for all and every one in the world; seeing the word world does not always,
when mentioned in Scripture, comprize all who are in the world, but must be
astricted to the universality of some certain kind of people in the world, as
the nature of the purpose in hand will bear: for, here the world, whose course
the unconverted Ephesians did follow, must be the world of unrenewed men only,
and cannot be extended so, as to comprehend the godly and renewed, who were
also in the world; Ye walked according to the course of this world. 5. The Lord
is so far from being moved with the merit or worth of those, whom He does
convert, to bestow converting grace upon them, rather than on others, whom He
leaves in their unconverted state, that He makes this grace of His to fall
upon such as are in no respect better than those whom He passes by: for, those
Ephesians before conversion walked according to the course of this world, that
is, they were behind with none in sin and wickedness. 6. As the general
corrupt custom and example of those with whom we live, or who have lived in the
former ages of the world before us, is a strong incitement and sufficient
excuse in the minds of many to follow the multitude in doing evil without
further enquiry; So it argues a man to be yet in an unrenewed estate, when he
makes the example of others the highest rule, according to which he walks,
and labors to conform himself unto it more than to the will of God: for, the
Apostle shows the general custom and course of the world, was the rule by
which they walked, and an encouragement to them in their walk, and makes this
an argument to prove they were then dead in sins and trespasses; Wherein (says
he) in time past ye walked according to the course of this world. 7. All men in
their unrenewed state, are very slaves to Satan, whose woeful motions and
suggestions they follow, and whom they resemble and imitate in their sin and
wickedness: for, so much is employed, while he says, They walked according to
the prince of the power of the air, that is, the Devil. 8. Though the Devils
and fallen Angels have always an hell, horror and torment in their conscience
wherever they are, 2 Pet. 2. 4. yet they are not always in hell, that place
of torment, which is prepared for Devils and Reprobates, Mat. 25. 41. they are
also present in the earth and air, and there through divine permission have no
small power, even so great, as they are able to move the elements, bring down
fire upon earth, Job 1. 16. raise storms, Job 1. 19. to smite men's bodies with
several diseases, Job 2. 7. yea, and to take away the lives of men (Job 1. 19.)
and beasts, Mark 5. 13. which power of theirs in its exercise, is always
overruled and limited by God, Job 1. 12. and 2. 6. in so far, as His most holy
and overruling providence does thereby bring about His own design and purpose,
which is either to execute deserved judgment upon the wicked, Mark 5. 13, 17.
or, to exercise and try the godly, Job 1. 12, etc. for, Satan is called Prince
of the power of the air, that is, who has power in the air. 9. As the Devils
are of a spiritual nature and substance, and cannot be seen by bodily eyes, but
when they appear clothed with bodies, which belong not naturally unto them,
but for a time are assumed by them, 1 Samuel 28. 14. So, the way by which Satan
does impart his temptations unto us, is not always sensible, but often
unperceivable by the outward senses; he does most certainly tempt to sin, and
yet the tempted sinner perceives him not: for, as this spiritual and
unperceivable way of tempting does follow upon his spiritual and immateriall
substance; So also the words, rendered the spirit which works, may relate
either to his nature, as being spiritual, or to his way of working, while he
tempts, to wit, by way of inspiration and a kind of breathing; the words may
be so constructed as to bear either, though the first be mainly intended; The
spirit that now works, or, his spirit now working. 10. Though there have
been, and yet are some fair flourishes of praisworthy virtues and actions
seemingly good in men unrenewed, Romans 2. 14. yet every unrenewed man, and
chiefly those who are come to age and understanding, are very slaves to sin,
and so addicted to the actual service, though not of all and every sin in
particular (for, that were impossible) yet of some one idol or other, whether
of their pleasure, profit, or credit; that they cannot but go on in the service
of it, without all possibility of being reclaimed by any created strength: for,
so much is employed, while unregenerate men are called children of disobedience,
that is, men addicted and given over to disobedience, so that they cannot be
persuaded to relinquish it. 11. Satan's way of working in, and with obstinate
godless sinners, is most efficacious and powerful: he cannot indeed work any
change upon the will, by creating new principles or habits in it, which before
were not, as God does, Jer. 31. 33. but, he can not only tempt to sin, by
propounding aluring baits and objects to the outward senses, or inward fancy,
which he may do to any man, whether good or bad, 2 Samuel 11. 2. but also, when
God judicially gives over a sinner unto Satan, withdrawing even His
restraining grace from him, Then does Satan multiply his temptations without
any intermission, uses the utmost of created endeavors, whereby and through
God's up-giving the sinner formerly mentioned, and because of the seed and root
of all sin, which is in the sinner by nature, there is no sort of wickedness,
unto the acting whereof Satan will not get him willingly driven and carried:
for, says he, The spirit which now (that is, even in the mean time,
constantly, and without intermitting the shortest moment, or now) works in
the children of disobedience; the word does signify to work with pith and
efficacy. 12. Though even the godly are not free from being tempted by Satan;
yea, nor yet from yielding sometimes to his temptations, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1, 2.
yet, he does not work efficaciously in them, and so, as is described in the
former Doctrine: for, he astricteth this way of Satan's working to unregenerate
men; The spirit that now works in the children of disobedience.

Verse. 3. Among whom also we had all our conversation in times past, in the
lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, and
were by nature the children of wrath, even as others.
THe Apostle does now apply this Doctrine to the Jews, of whom he himself was
one; and therefore he designeth them by the pronoun, We, and affirms them to
have been before conversion equally miserable with the Gentiles. In doing
whereof, and that he may more fully explain this Doctrine of man's misery, he
shows, first, That even they had their conversation among those children of
disobedience, as being no less obstinately rebellious against God, than the
disobedient Gentiles, following the lusts, or the first motions and sudden
flashes of their inbred corruption (here called flesh) which, flowing from
Adams first sin, has infected his whole posterity (Christ alone excepted, 2
Cor. 5-21-) and seated it self in all the powers and faculties of their souls
and bodies, even the understanding and will not being excepted, Romans 8. 7. Col.
2. -18. for, so is the word flesh usually taken in the New Testament, Joh. 3.
6. Gal. 5. 13, 16. Now, all corruption and sin, even that which is in the mind,
is called flesh; because it is conveyed by fleshly generation, Joh. 3. 6. the
fleshly members of the body are the instruments whereby all is executed, Romans
6. 19. and every sin draws the man from God to things earthly and fleshly.
Secondly, he subdivideth this inbred corruption of their natures into two
heads, first, the flesh, particularly so called, whereby, as it is
distinguished from flesh before mentioned, and opposed to the mind spoken of
afterward, must be meaned that corruption, which is seated in the inferior
part of the soul, to wit, the sensual appetite; and next, the mind, whereby is
meaned the most noble faculties of the soul, to wit, the will and
understanding, in so far as they are also corrupted. Concerning both which he
affirms, that even the Jews in their unconverted state were fulfilling their
wills and desires; by which desires of the flesh, as they are distinguished
from the lusts of the flesh formerly mentioned, are meaned their deliberate and
fixed resolution to follow those lusts and suggestions of corrupt flesh, which
accordingly he shows they did fulfill and accomplish to the utmost. And,
thirdly, he points at the root and fountain-cause of this their miserable
slavery and subjection to sin in the lusts and desires thereof, even their
natural sin and misery, whereby they were from nature, that is, from their very
cradle, birth and conception, children of wrath, as being by reason of their
original sin liable to the stroke of God's eternal wrath, and as much liable to
it as the Gentiles were. Doct. 1. There is not any piece of a Minister's task
wherein he has more need of a spirit of wisdom and impartiality, than when he
is about the reproof of sin, and the discovery of peoples vileness by reason
of their wickedness; lest, if herein he respect persons, those whom he
reflects upon most, be irritate, as conceiving themselves to be unequally dealt
with, and lest others, to whom he does apply that convincing doctrine, neither
so directly, nor with such an edge and vehemency, be puffed up in their own
conceit above others: for, the Apostle holdeth-forth the rest of what he has
to speak upon this subject of man's misery by nature, in the person of the Jews;
lest either the Gentiles had been irritated, or the Jews puffed up; Among whom
we all also bad our conversation. 2. Whatever differences may be among
unregenerate men as to things civil, externals in Religion, or the particular
sins unto which they are inslaved; yet all of them are alike vile in God's
sight, children of disobedience, in whom Satan rules and works; in so far as
they are all walking in the lusts of the flesh following inbred corruption as
their guide, and obeying it in some one or other of its lusts: for, though
there was neither civil commerce, nor religious fellowship betwixt the Jews and
Gentiles, Joh. 4. 9. though the Jews had many external religious privileges
which the Gentiles did want, Romans 9. 4, 5. and though some both of Jews and
Gentiles were not enslaved to such vile and fleshly lusts, as others were,
Phil. 3. -6. yet Paul pronounces of himself and all of them, that they were
children of disobedience because one way or other they followed the lusts of
the flesh; Among whom also we all had our conversation in the lusts of the
flesh. 3. They, who in their unconverted estate have led a blameless life
before the world (and therefore have thought their condition abundantly good,
Philip. 3. 7-) will, when converting grace comes, see themselves to have been
as vile and wretched as any. They will not only see, that nothing they did was
truly good and acceptable to God, as not being done in says, Heb. 11. 6-. but
also that the root of all sin was in them, budding out without any check or
restraint, except from respect to self-interest, credit, pleasure or advantage,
Mat. 14. 5. and that the more blameless they were before the world, spiritual
pride did abound the more, Philip. (...). 7- and so were more loathsome to God,
Iam. 4. 6. for, Paul, whose life, even in his unrenewed estate, was blameless,
Philip. 3. -6. being now converted, affirms of himself as well as of others,
Among whom also we all in time past bad our conversation in the lusts of the
flesh. 4. As the unregenerate man is powerfully tempted by Satan, and strongly
encouraged by the common custom and example of others to sin against the Lord;
So there is a corrupt nature within him, which makes him readily entertain
those external incitements, yea, and which would make him do mischief, though
there were not a devil to tempt, nor any evil example to be followed; and
therefore none of those allurements and temptations to sin from without, though
never so strong, does excuse the sinner; seeing they are no more ready to tempt
than corrupt nature in him is willing to be tempted: for, the Apostle, having
spoken of two guides of a natural man's sinful course, which are without him,
the custom of the world, and Satan's suggestions, ver. 2. he adds here a
third, which is within him, and as forward as any of the former; We, says he,
had our conversation in the lusts of the flesh. 5. The whole man, both soul and
body, is infected with sin by nature, so that not only the sensual part, but
even his will and understanding are corrupted by it, there being not only
ignorance, but also mistakes of God and good in the understanding, 1 Cor. 1.
23. a crooked perverseness and averseness from that which is spiritually good,
in the will, Romans 8. 7. for, Paul reckons even the mind, to wit, as it is
corrupted, to be a part of flesh: fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of
the mind. 6. There are several degrees of sin, whereof, as the latter does
carry sin a step further on toward the height, than the former; so the former
makes way for the latter: for, first, there is flesh, or the very inbred
corruption of our natures. Secondly, Lusts of the flesh, these are the first
motions of inbred corruption toward unlawful objects, and such as go before
deliberation and advice, and are forbidden, in so far as they relate to our
neighbor, in the tenth Command. Thirdly, the desires, or wills of the flesh,
which are somewhat more, even the hearts through-consent to the sinful motion,
and a fixed resolution to act it after deliberation and advice, and is that
kind of lust spoken-of, Matthew. 5. 28. And, lastly, the fulfilling those wills
and desires of the flesh, that is, the actual committing of sin so resolved
upon. 7. Every unregenerate man, come to age and discretion, is a slave to sin
in all the forementioned degrees; for, Paul affirms here of himself, the
Jews and Gentiles before conversion, that not only flesh was in them, which did
lust after unlawful objects, but that those lusts did come the length of fixed
resolutions and desires, yea, and that they did fulfill and accomplish them:
for, though civilians do not fulfill the lusts of the fleshly appetite; yet
they fulfill the desires of the mind by their pride, vanity of spirit,
self-seeking and such like; We all had our conversation in the lusts of the
flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind. 8. As all men are
guilty of original sin by nature, and from the first moment of their
conception, Psalm. 51. 5. and therefore, in the course of divine justice, liable
to the stroke of God's vindictive wrath and anger, and this by nature also; So
the misery of unregenerate men is never sufficiently seen, until it be traced
up to this bitter root and fountain, even the sin and misery wherein they were
born: for, his saying they were children of wrath by nature, implies they were
also sinners by nature; seeing wrath does always follow upon sin, and this he
reserveth last, as that which was the root, fountain and head-stone of all
their misery; And were by nature the children of wrath. 9. Though those, who
are borne within the visible Church, have a right to Church Priviledges even
from their birth, and by nature, which others have not (See Gal. 2. Ver. 15.
Doct. 1.) yet all men, whether born within, or without the Church, are alike by
nature, as to the point of original sin inherent in all, and the desert of
God's wrath following upon that sin, which wrath is due to all: for, says he,
speaking of the Jews, We were by nature the children of wrath, even as others,
by which others he means the unchurched Gentiles.

Verse. 4. But God who is rich in mercy, for His great love wherewith He loved
us, 5. Even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ,
(by grace ye are saved)
THe Apostle, having already set forth that miserable state, wherein both Jew
and Gentile were by nature, and before conversion, he does in the second place
hold forth their delivery from that woeful state, and that in such a lively,
ravishing and comprehensive strain of speech, as might not only inform their
judgments, but also work upon their affections to embrace and adhere unto those
truths which he here delivers, according to his intended scope. And, first,
(ver. 4.) he declares God to have been the prime author and efficient cause of
their delivery, whom he calls rich in mercy, to show that He was acted
herein, not from their worth, but His own abundant mercy, which attribute of
mercy does speak His favor and good will, with relation to His Peoples
misery. And withal, he shows that it was only His great and ancient love
toward them, which set His mercy on work in order to their delivery.

Next (verse. 5.) having resumed what he spoke of their miserable case, ver. 1.
(but so, as he applies what was there spoken of the Gentiles only, unto
himself and the other Jews, according to what was held forth, ver. 3.) he
propounds the first branch of their delivery, to wit, God's quickening of them
together with Christ, whereby is meaned the Lord's work of regeneration, and
bestowing upon them a spiritual life of grace, in opposition to that spiritual
death formerly spoken of, together with all those benefits which accompany and
flow from regeneration in this life. And they are said to have been quickened
with Christ, though not in their own persons, (for they were so quickened a long
time after Christ's resurrection, in their effectual calling) but they were
then quickened in their head and attorney Jesus Christ, whose quickening after
death was a sure pledge that they, every one in his own time, should be
quickened also, 1 Cor. 15. 20. and that the virtue purchased by Christ's death,
Romans 8. 11. and to be applied unto them by Him, who is now alive, and lives
for evermore for that end, Heb. 7. 25. And therefore the Apostle expresses
Gods bestowing of this spiritual life upon them, by His quickening them with
Christ. And before he mention the other pieces of their delivery, he does in
the close of this verse. ascribe the whole work of their salvation to Gods free
grace, which is the same in effect with His mercy and love spoken of, ver. 4.
Only it further expresses the freedom of those, in opposition to any merit or
worth in the persons to be saved, which might procure their salvation. Doct. 1.
The Ministers of Christ would not only inculcate the doctrine of sin and
misery, but, having insisted so much upon this subject as may serve to bring
down that high conceit which people naturally have of their own righteousness,
and to convince them of their need of Jesus Christ a Savior, Then is it timous
for them to open up the riches of Gods free grace and good will, to save the
vilest of sinners, and what He has freely done for bringing about salvation to
their hand: for, the Apostle, having set forth unto the life the natural misery
of those Ephesians, does now openup the rich treasures of Gods free grace in
Christ; But God who is rich in mercy. 2. The Lords Ministers when they fall
upon this subject of Gods delivering lost sinners from their natural state of
sin and misery through Christ, they would labor to speak to it so fully,
affectionatly, sensibly, and with such life and power, as that they may not
only inform the understandings of the Lords People in those truths, but also
inflame their affections with love to them, and admiration at the wisdom,
mercy, goodness and other attributes of God manifested in this work: for, so
does the Apostle speak of this purpose, not simply by saying God has quickened
us, but God who is rich in mercy, according to His great love, and so forward
in the two following verses. 3. There is nothing contributeth more to enable a
Minister to speak to the commendation of God's free grace in the salvation of
sinners with that fullness, sense, life and affection, as he ought, than a deep
insight in his own misery, and the great need which he himself does stand in of
God's mercy: for, Paul, in the third verse foregoing, does show how sensible
he was of the depth and breadth of his own misery; hence he does here speak so
fully and movingly to the present purpose; But God who is rich in mercy, etc.
4. The quickening of sinners, and drawing them out of nature unto grace is only
God's work, there being no less required for bringing this about, than
omnipotent creating power; See ver. 10. And there being not only no principle
left in man, who is by nature dead in sins and trespasses, whereby he might
work or concur with God in working toward his own quickening, Romans 9. 16. but
also much to oppose and resist it, 2 Cor. 10. 5. So that in the first instant
of his conversion, and until a new heart be given him, and the seeds and
habits of saving graces infused in him, he is wholly passive, as to any actual
influence upon the effect which is wrought, Jer. 31. 33. for, Paul here,
condescending upon the cause of their quickening, does pitch, not upon their own
free will in whole, or in part, but upon God only, while he says, But God who
is rich in mercy -- has quickened us. 5. This attribute of mercy in God,
whereby without any grief or perturbation of mind, (which accompanies men in
the exercise of mercy) he has a propension and inclination to do good to the
sinful and miserable, so far as His wisdom sees convenient, is the only thing
in opposition unto all that is in a man's self, which moves God to quicken and
bestow grace upon dead and graceless sinners: for, the Apostle, speaking of
God's quickening of those Ephesians, describes Him from His mercy, to show it
was not their worth, but His own mercy, which moved Him to quicken them; But
God who is rich in mercy -- has quickened us. 6. As God is rich and overflowing
in the exercise of this attribute of mercy, which will appear, if we consider
that there is no creature toward which He does not exercise His mercy, Psalm.
104. 24. and that mercy is exercised, not only without, but also often contrary
to the deserving of those upon whom it is exercised, Ezekiel. 36. 21, 22. so there
is nothing wherein God does more manifest the riches and abundance of His
mercy, than in the work of quickening dead sinners, and of carrying-on the work
of grace in them, until it be perfected in glory. The misery (Ezekiel. 16. 3,
etc.) and bad deservings of the object, (Jer. 14. 7.) the great good things
which are bestowed upon those miserable objects, (Luke 12. 32.) the course
taken for satisfying divine justice, that so those good things might be,
without wronging of justice, bestowed, (Joh. 3. 16.) and the multitude of sins,
which mercy covers in those objects, not only before their conversion, (Isa.
55. 7.) but also after it, Prove. 24. 16. All these, and many considerations
besides these, do manifest God to be rich in mercy in quickening of dead
sinners; But God who is rich in mercy -- has quickened us. 7. The highest cause
which moves God to manifest this His rich and special mercy upon any of lost
mankind, and from mercy to quicken them, and bestow His saving graces on them,
was His love toward them: which is no other than His will and resolution to
impart those good things unto them, together with His hearty acquiescence in
the thing, as that wherewith He is well pleased. He did it because He would do
it, resolved to do it, and had pleasure in the doing of it: for, says he, God
who is rich in mercy, for His great love -- has quickened us. 8. As God's love
toward those whom He converteth does not begin when they are converted, but is
of a more ancient, even an eternal rise, chap. 1. 4. So it is not an ordinary,
but a great love wherewith He loves them. The infinite distance betwixt Him and
them (Psalm. 8. 4.) His loving them when they were yet enemies, (Romans 5. 8.) the
great things bestowed by His love (Romans 5. 6, 7, 8.) and His unchangeablenesse
in His love,, even notwithstanding of great provocations to the contrary, Psalm.
89. 33. All these, and many besides these, do abundantly declare, that this
love is a great, wonderful, and matchless love: for, says he, For His great
love, wherewith He loved us 9. The Lord has love to the Elect, even when they
are children of wrath, and liable in the course of justice to the stroke of His
vindictive anger: for, although God could not, with safety of His own justice,
bestow Heaven upon them, when they were actually such; yet nothing hinders,
why He might not love them being such, that is, have a will and fixed
resolution, even when they were liable unto wrath, to bestow Heaven upon them,
having first from that same love given His own Son to deliver them from that
state of wrath; that so what eternal love had resolved to give them, might be
actually bestowed upon them, without doing injury to divine justice: for, ver.
3. he shows they were children of wrath, and here, that God loved them, and
both these before He quickened them; Wherewith He loved us, says he, even in
the bypast time. 10. The doctrine of our natural misery, and spiritual death
through sin, is a lesson most necessary to be learned, which we have no great
pleasure to learn, and which we are prone to forget, as to a deep and lively
impression of it, even when it is learned: for, the Apostle's repeating this
doctrine, almost in the same words, by which he had expressed it, ver. 1. does
hint at all these; Even when we were dead in sins, says he. 11. There is no
application of the doctrine of God's mercy in order to our delivery from sin
and misery, except the doctrine of sin and misery be first applied and taken
with: for, Paul, being to apply God's mercy in quickening sinners, unto himself
and his countrymen the believing Jews, he does first apply the doctrine of
natural sin and misery unto them, while he does now speak of himself and the
Jews also, whereas (ver. 1.) he spoke of the Gentiles only, as appears by the
change of the person; Even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us. 12.
Whatever a man be before his conversion, as to the point of civility and right
use of his natural parts; yet, he is looked upon by God when He comes to
quicken him, as one dead in sins, who can neither help himself, nor merit help
at God's hand: for, therefore does the Apostle assert that they were dead in
sins immediately before, yea, and in the act of God's quickening of them, while
he says, Even when we were dead in sins, He has quickened us. 13. The state of
grace, which sinners, dead by nature, are brought unto at their conversion, and
wherein they continue until death, is a state of life; the sentence of
eternal death which they were liable unto (ver. -3.) being taken off, Romans 8.
1. there being also new principles and powers infused in them at their
effectual calling, whereby they are enabled to do those actions of a spiritual
life, Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. which powers are also continually actuated and excited
to their work by renewed influence from the Spirit of God, Philip. 2. 13. and
accompanied oftimes in their actings with assurance of God's love (Romans 8. 16.)
peace of conscience (Romans 5. 1, 2.) and joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1
Pet. 1. 8. whereby also they have not only a right unto (Joh. 3. 16.) but also
the first fruits and begun possession of eternal life, Joh. 17. 3. for, the
Apostle expresses God's bringing them to, and continuing them in the state of
grace by His quickening of them; has quickened us, says he. 14. Though love and
mercy in God do set Him on work to quicken dead sinners; yet this work cannot
be brought about or accomplished without the intervention of Christ's merit and
intercession, who behoved to satisfy divine justice, and thereby acquire unto
us those things which love and mercy had prepared for us, Isa. 53. 5. seeing
they were all lost in Adam, Romans 5. 15, 16. and who, being now exalted, does
also apply them to us, Act. 5. 31. for, notwithstanding of what was said (ver.
4.) of God's mercy and love, as the inward impulsive causes moving God to
quicken them; yet the Apostle here shows, that their actual quickening had a
necessary dependence upon Christ's merit and mediation, while he says, He has
quickened us together with Christ. 15. That Jesus Christ behoved of necessity to
strike-in with His merit and mediation, hereby to acquire and apply saving
grace and salvation unto us, does in nothing hinder, but that notwithstanding
our complete salvation, from the first step unto the last, does wholly flow
from God's free grace; seeing it was of grace that the Father did send the Son
to die for us, Joh. 3. 16. It was of grace that the Son did undertake, Joh. 15.
12, 13. And it is no less grace, that what He did or suffered should be
accepted in our name, Romans 3. 24, 25. So that all is of grace and free
good will, as to us: for, the Apostle, having pointed at the necessity of
Christ's mediation, in order to their quickening, does presently add, as in a
parenthesis, by grace are ye saved. 16. There is an infallible connection
betwixt converting grace and salvation; so that all those, who are now
converted and quickened, shall be undoubtedly saved: for, what the Apostle
calls quickened in the former part of the verse, he calls saved in the
close, so that he takes the one for the other; He has quickened us -- By grace
are ye saved.

Verse. 6. And has raised us up together, and made us fit together in heavenly
places in Christ Jesus.
HEre are the other two branches of their delivery, to wit, first, The raising
of their bodies at the last day; for, their spiritual resurrection from the
death of sin to newness of life was mentioned, ver. 5. Secondly, Their
glorification in Heaven: both which are yet to come, 2 Timothy 2. 18. Mat. 25. 34.
And yet he speaks of them as already past, when the Father raised and
glorified Christ; because, seeing Christ, in His resurrection and entering of
heaven, did sustain a public person, representing all the Elect, as their Head
and Atturney-generall, Job. 10. 15. Therefore He was judicially looked upon by
God in those actions, as if all the Elect had risen when He rose, and taken
possession of Heaven, when He did enter it: Hence it is, that in the close of
the verse it is added, in Christ, to show we are not yet raised and glorified
in our own persons, but in Christ our Head. And the Spirit of God does choose
to set forth their future resurrection and glorification, by showing these are
already accomplished in Christ their Head, rather than by saying, God shall
raise them up and glorify them, that he may with one and the same labor point
out the dependencie which their resurrection and glorification have upon
Christ's, as the effect upon the cause, the thing promised upon the pledge
thereof, as also the undoubted certainty that those shall come to pass, a
certainty greater than that of a simple prediction and promise, even such
certainty, as the giving of a pledge, and holding forth of an effectual and
necessary cause do give for performance of the thing promised; for, Christ's
resurrection is both a pledge, (1 Cor. 15. 20.) and cause of our resurrection,
Romans 8. 11. which holds also in His glorification.

Doct. 1. The fruits and effects of Gods eternal love and mercy, and of Christ's
merit toward the Elect, are not confined within this present life, but are in a
great part to have their accomplishment after time, when the bodies of
Believers shall be raised up in glory at the last day, and they perfectly
glorified with Christ in Heaven for ever: for, those two fruits of the Fathers
love, and of Christ's merit, even the Resurrection and Glorification of
Believers, are here expressed, while it is said, and has raised us up
together, and made us sit together in heavenly places. 2. Those, and those only
shall partake of the resurrection of the just, which is to life everlasting,
Job. 5. 29- And shall be glorified hereafter, whom God does quicken by
converting grace here: for, those three parts of the delivery of lost sinners,
are of equal latitude; He has quickened us, raised us up, and made us sit in
heavenly places. 3. As it is a thing full of difficulty to be believed, that
after worms have consumed this flesh of ours, it shall be raised up in glory,
and that we, who are heirs of hell, and children of wrath, shall one day reign
with Christ for ever; so those are things, not only sure in themselves, but
which the Lord would have converted and quickened Believers assured of; that so
their comfort under crosses might be more abounding, 2 Cor. 4. 14. with 16, 17,
18. and their courage against death more strong, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 18. and that they
in all things may live as becomes those who not only shall rise, and take
possession of glory in their own persons, but also are already risen and
glorified with, and in Christ their Head, Col. 3. 1, even by having their
conversation in Heaven, while they are yet upon earth, Philip. 3. 20. for, that
they might be persuaded of their future resurrection and glorification, the
Spirit of God does speak of them as already done, viz, in the sense given in
the exposition; He has raised us up together, and made us sit together in
heavenly places.

Verse. 7. That in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his
grace, in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus.
THe Apostle, thirdly, propounds the final cause, or the end intended by God
to be brought about by His gracious working, formerly mentioned, toward those
Ephesians and first Converts among the Jews, even that in all ages succeeding
the present unto the end of the world, God might give an evident proof, and
infallible demonstration (for, so much does the word rendered show signify) of
the exceeding riches of His grace, that is, how far the abundance of His mercy
and favor toward sinners does exceed all expression and created comprehension,
the setting forth whereof to the following ages, was intended by God, not only
for His own glory as chap. 1. 12. ^14. but also for the encouragement of all
vile sinners unto the worlds end, to draw nigh unto God for mercy in Christ, as
being animated hereto by this example and infallible evidence of the exceeding
riches of Gods grace; for so does the Apostle more fully explain his own
meaning, 1 Timothy 1. 16. And in the close of the verse, he shows wherein that
convincing evidence does lie, by giving a short comprehensive sum of all he
has spoken from the beginning of the Chapter, even in God's kindness, that
is, all those effects formerly mentioned of His mercy, love and free grace,
flowing from His good, gentle and bountiful disposition; and this, toward
them, whose misery was formerly described; and through Christ, as the purchaser
and applier of all those. Doct. 1. As there is grace, yea riches and abundance
of grace in God, even such as exceed all expression, 2 Samuel 7. 20. all
comprehension, Isa. 55. 9. yea, and all the sins of creatures, Romans 5. 20. So,
the more a man does dwell upon this sweet subject, his thoughts and
apprehensions of it will be the more enlarged, and his expressions also will in
some measure go alongs with his thoughts: for, the Apostle, having before (ver.
4.) expressed it under the name of riches in mercy, and falling here upon the
same subject again, his thoughts of it are more enlarged, and his expression
does rise accordingly; so that it is now, not only riches, but exceeding riches
of his grace. 2. As it is a matter full of difficulty for those who are
sensible of their own vileness, to believe the exceeding riches of Gods grace
toward lost sinners, and to believe it especially with application unto
themselves, Act. 2. 37. So, the particular instances and examples of Gods mercy
and grace tow(...)ds others, have a peculiar fitness and efficacy in them to
convince us, how exceedingly gracious God is, and so to convince us, as we may
be encouraged to draw nigh to that same fountain of rich grace for pardon and
life unto our selves, 1 Timothy 1. 16. a fitness beyond what is in the simple
doctrinal declaration of those riches of grace; in so far as those instances
and examples do speak, not only that mercy and grace may be had, but that it
has been attained unto, and by those, who in all respects did judge
themselves, and were really as unworthy of it, as unable to lay hold upon it in
the mean time, and to make good use of it afterward, as we do judge our
selves; so that the ice is broken, and the foord ridden before us: for, the
Apostle shows, that God gave such instances of mercy and grace in those
primitive Christians, that he might show forth, as it were, by demonstration
and evidence, the exceeding riches of His grace, and this in order to the
encouragement of others to venture their salvation upon that same grace, as we
show in the Exposition. 3. The more sinful, miserable and wretched they are,
to whom the Lord is gracious, there is the more convincing proof given of the
exceeding riches of His grace, and so a greater encouragement for those who are
yet in their graceless state to roll themselves over upon this His rich grace,
and to expect good from it: for, it was the quickening of such vile sinners,
whose misery is described, ver. 1, 2. 3. which did tend to show forth the
exceeding riches of His grace, which the Apostle also hinteth at, while,
showing wherein that convincing evidence did lie, he says his kindness
toward us: the word, us, is emphatick as to the purpose in hand. 4. It was a
thing resolved upon by God, revealed to His servants, and accordingly made
known by them to the Church, that the glorious light of the Gospel, though
opposed by the fury and industry of men and devils; yet should never be totally
exstinct, but was to be preached, believed, and obeyed in some (...)es at least
of the world throughout all ages to the worlds end: for, the Apostle shows it
was Gods design to have the exceeding riches of His grace shown forth in all
succeeding ages and generations; that in the ages to come he might show. 5.
Gods bypast dealing, whether in mercy, or judgment (1 Corinthians. 10, 6.) are
speaking lessons unto those who are in the ages following, as holding forth
both matter of praise unto God manifested in those, Psalm. 136. 10, etc. as also
matter of instruction, in our duty, to us, 1 Cor. 10. 6. So that the
after-ages, in this respect, are better ages than the former, in so far as the
latter have the advantage of those examples in the former ages, which they
themselves did want; for, the Apostle shows, the benefit of God's gr(...)ious
dealing with Believers in the present age, should accresce unto the following
ages; That in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace.
6. As all those benefits which come to Believers, do flow from the kindness of
God, or His native willingness to employ what goodness is in Him for the good
of His creatures; So, though the effects of His general kindness and
benevolence, which are common to all the creatures, Psalm. 145. 9. do flow from
God, as Creator, in the channel of common providence, Psalm. 104. 28. yet, the
effects of His special kindness, and such as relate to life and godliness,
do all of them flow from God, as reconciled through Christ, and are convoyed
through the conduit of Christ's merit and intercession: for, the Apostle,
summing up all these saving benefits, together with the way how they are
convoyed, he says, In his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus. 7. The
lively and serious consideration of those excellent benefits flowing from Gods
mercy, grace, goodwill and bounty, together with the consideration of the
vileness and wretchedness of those, upon whom those excellent benefits are
bestowed, and of the way which infinite Wisdom, set on work by eternal love,
has found out for convoying those so excellent mercies to such base and
unworthy objects, even the incarnation, obedience, sufferings and high
exaltation of Jesus Christ; I say, it is the consideration of all those
jointly, which tends to set forth most convincingly how exceedingly gracious
God is: for, the Apostle shows this convincing evidence does lie in those
three, first, in his kindness, secondly, toward us, thirdly, through Jesus
Christ.

Verse. 8. For by grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not of your
selves: it is the gift of God:
THe Apostle, Fourthly, While he gives a reason of what is said, ver. 7. (as
appears by the causall particle, for) does sum up all which has been spoken
from ver. 4. in this one comprehensive proposition, that their complete
salvation, from the first step unto the last, did flow from Gods grace and
favor (for, by grace here must be meaned Gods free favor and grace in him,
not the effects of this grace, good works, or grace inherent in us; for those
are expressly excluded, ver. 9.) and withal, that they were so saved by grace,
as faith was not excluded; This grace of faith being the hand, or instrument,
whereby we lay hold upon, and apply to our selves Jesus Christ, and His
righteousness offered freely in the Gospel, in order to our salvation, Romans 3.
25. And, Secondly, Because the establishing of them in this truth, is his main
scope through the whole first part of the Epistle, therefore he does here, not
only explain in what sense salvation does flow from grace, but also does
expressly confirm it by arguments, First, by removing all things in general,
which could be called theirs, whether prerogative, privilege, natural or
acquired worth, from being the meritorious procuring cause of their salvation,
or of any part of it; the truth whereof is more than evident from what is said
of their spiritual death in sins and trespasses, ver. 1, 2, 3. and therefore
he needs not bring any new argument to prove it. Secondly, by asserting from
that same ground, that their salvation was Gods gift, and therefore it behoved
to be free, and of grace, else it could not be a gift. Doct. 1. Though the
ascribing of salvation unto works, is not wholly inconsistent with, and
destructive of Gods grace from having any influence upon salvation, seeing
Adam's salvation, even according to the tenor of the Covenant of works, had
been also of grace in some respect, it being of grace that God did enter any
Covenant with man at all, and of grace also that He did accept, even of man's
perfect obedience so, as upon his performance of it to make him sure of
eternal life; yet the ascribing of salvation, or any part of it unto the merit
or worth of works, does obscure, and is inconsistent with that exceeding riches
of grace, which God intends to set forth by that way of salvation, which is
propounded in the Covenant of Grace: for, the Apostle being here to prove, that
Gods way of saving those Ephesians, was a fit mean to set forth the exceeding
riches of His grace, gives this for a reason, even that their salvation did
flow only from grace, and from nothing in themselves, nor any work of theirs,
So that if it did not flow only from grace, and from nothing in themselves, it
could not demonstrate those exceeding riches of His grace: for, says he, ye
are saved by grace, and that not of your selves; not of works. 2. Whatever
differences may be among several persons in other things; yet all come of Adam
by ordinary generation, are equal, as in their common misery by nature; so in
the way of their delivery from that misery by free grace through a Redeemer,
there being no other name under Heaven given among men, whereby we can be
saved, but the name of Jesus, Act. 4. 12. for, therefore does the Apostle so
frequently change the person in this first part of the Chapter, while he
sometimes speaks of the Ephesians and Gentiles alone in the second person,
as, ver. 1. sometimes of himself, and of the Jews with them in the first
person, as ver. 5, 6. not, as if some part of the purpose did belong only to
the one alone, and some part of it unto both jointly: for in one and the same
purpose he changes the person, as while he gives a reason in this verse, of
what he spoke ver. 7. but rather to show, that the purpose here insisted on,
which is man's misery by nature, and their delivery from that misery by free
grace and Christ, does belong equally to Jew and Gentile: and therefore he
stands not much to which of them he does speak; for by grace are ye saved,
says he. 3. As Believers are in some sense already saved, not only because
they have salvation begun in their new birth, which is a passing from death
unto life, 1 John 3. 14. but also they have complete salvation in right and
title, 1 Corinthians. 3. 21, 22. and in the earnest of it, Ephesians. 1. 14. So, the
whole work of their salvation, from its first step in regeneration unto its
last step in their glorification, does entirely flow from Gods free grace, and
from none of their worth: for, he says, ye are saved, in the time bypast, and
ascribes it to grace, by grace ye are saved. 4. The maintaining of the
interest of free grace in our salvation, as being the alone impulsive cause
thereof, in opposition to our worth, is a thing that the Spirit of the Lord is
very careful of, the glory of His free grace being all which He seeks after
in our salvation, chap. 1. 6. and a thing, which men do naturally incline to
entrench upon, and to rob Him of, either in whole or in part, Romans 10. 3. for,
therefore does the Apostle so frequently show the dependence which salvation
has upon Gods mercy, love and free grace, ver. 4. -5. and here, by grace are
ye saved. 5. Free grace, and faith do well agree in the bringing about our
salvation: neither is salvation the less of free grace, that it is also of
faith; seeing faith is not only a fruit of Gods grace in us, Phil. 1. 29. but
also and mainly, because faith does not justify, or save us for any worth in
it self, or as it is a work, (for, all works are excluded, ver. 9.) but for the
worth of its object, Jesus Christ, and of His righteousness, Romans 5. -19.
which faith apprehends, Philip. 3. 9. for, the Apostle ascribes their
salvation both to grace and faith; ye are saved. by grace through faith. 6.
Though Gods free grace, favor and goodwill does freely bestow that salvation
upon the Elect, which Christ by His merit has purchased; yet the Wisdom of God
has thought it fitting, that this salvation shall not be actually bestowed,
until the person to be saved, do lay hold by faith upon the offer of salvation
in the Gospel, and of Christ's righteousness, whereby salvation is acquired,
that so the heirs of glory may not only have a right to heaven by faith, before
they come to the actual possession of it, Joh. 3. 16. but also be made meet to
partake of that heavenly inheritance, Col. 1. 12. their natures being renewed,
when the habit of faith is wrought in them by God, 2 Corinthians. 5. 17. and their
hearts also being purified by the exercise of that grace, Acts 15. 9. for,
says he, by grace are ye saved through faith. 7. The ascribing of salvation to
Gods free grace, though it does not exclude Christ's merit, and the act of
faith, as embracing the righteousness of Christ (See Doct. 5.) Yet it
excludes all things in our selves, whether dignity of our natures, the
enjoyment of civil, or ecclesiastic privileges, nobility of descent, all our
common, or more special gifts and induements, whether of nature or grace, from
having any meritorious, or causall influence in bestowing, either a right to
salvation, or the possession of it: for, Paul opposes these two, by grace are
ye saved and that not of your selves. 8. As heaven and salvation are Gods gift;
so they are such a gift, as is freely given by God, who is not induced thereto
by any thing in the person to whom it is given, whether sense of benefit
already received, or hope of any benefit to be received from Him in time
coming, which occasioneth the bestowing of gifts among men; salvation is indeed
a gift, but not such a gift: for, it is a gift without all rise from any thing
in our selves; And that not of your selves, it is the gift of God, says he.

Verse. 9. Not of works, lest any man should boast.
HE further explaineth in what sense their salvation did come from free grace,
and proves it by other two arguments, which do also confirm the two former.
The first, taken from the removeall of those things in particular from having
any meritorious, or causall influence upon their salvation, which all men have
a kind of natural propension to rely upon for salvation; to wit, their works,
and those even their good works; for, so does he explain himself, ver. 10.
whence it follows, that they were saved of grace, and not of themselves. The
second is taken from the end aimed at by God in contriving the plot of lost
man's salvation, to wit, that all ground of gloriation might be taken away from
man, as being, in the meanest respect, a savior to himself, and that all the
glory might be ascribed completely unto God in Christ: (See, 1 Cor. 1. 30, 31.)
which end could not have been obtained, except they had been saved by grace,
and not of themselves. Doct. 1. Though the word grace, in Scripture, be
sometimes taken for the saving graces of Gods Spirit in us, 2 Pet. 3. 18. yet,
when salvation is ascribed unto Gods grace, we are always to understand grace
in God, that is, His free favor and goodwill, and not grace inherent in us, or
good works, the exercise of that grace: for, the Apostle establishes grace,
ascribing our salvation to it, and excludes grace inherent and good works,
which were inconsistent, if they were the self same thing; Not of works, says
he. 2. The salvation of Believers does so much flow from free grace, as that
all works of theirs, even their good works, are thereby excluded from having
any meritorious influence upon it: for, even our best works are imperfect, Isa.
64. 6-they are a debt, which we owe unto God, Luke 17. 10. the power and
activity whereby we do them, is given of God, Phil. 2. 13. and therefore we can
merit nothing, and least of all salvation by them at Gods hand; Thus the
Apostle explaineth how we are saved by grace, even so as to exclude all works;
Not of works, says he. 3. Though a man may boast and glory of the good things
which God has given him, in some respects, (See upon Gal. 6. ver. 4. doct. 5.)
Yet the way wherein salvation is conveyed unto sinners, is so contrived, that
no ground is left for man to boast in himself for any thing, which his wisdom,
goodness, power, or worth do contribute for bringing of his own salvation
about, either in part or in whole: From the first step thereof, election, unto
the last, his glorification, man and his worth are still depressed, and God and
His free grace always exalted; for, the Apostle shows this was the end God
did aim at, even least any man should boast. 4. In so far as works, even good
works have place in the matter of man's salvation, so far has man matter of
boasting, and ascribing the glory of his salvation to himself, and holding back
the glory of it from God: for, although good works do come wholly from the
Spirit of God, in so far as they are good; yet they are our works, in so far as
they are wrought by us, being now renewed and enabled to work by influence from
God; and therefore heaven and salvation should in that case be given unto us
for the virtue and worth of somewhat which is ours; for, Paul affirms that
works, even good works, which we are created unto in Christ Jesus, ver. 10. are
excluded from having any causall influence upon salvation; lest any man should
boast, implying, if works were not excluded, man should have ground of
boasting. See, Romans 3. 27.

Verse. 10. For we are His workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
which God has before ordained that we should walk in them.
LEst the Apostle, by commending grace and excluding works from being the cause
of their salvation, should have seemed to justle out works, and an holy life,
as altogether unnecessary; Therefore, in this verse he shows that the study
of good works is of absolute necessity required in those who are to be saved;
because all such, whether Jew or Gentile, (for, he speaks in the first
person, including himself and the believing Jews) are Gods workmanship, that
is, renewed, and made over again by Gods createing power through the
interveening mediation of Christ Jesus, and this of purpose; that they may make
conscience of good works: yea, and further, God, who had predestined them to
heaven, had also decreed and prepared good works for them, as the way wherein
they behoved of necessity to walk in their journey to heaven: which as it
proves the undeniable necessity of good works; so it also confirms that they
neither were, nor could be saved by works; because the power whereby they did
good works, did follow upon their regeneration, and was given them freely by
God. As also, God had prepared good works, that they should walk toward heaven
in them, but not to merit heaven by them. Doct. 1. Believers are Gods
workmanship, not only by natural creation, but supernatural renovation; they
are not only once made, but made over again; not by having the substance of
their soul and natural powers thereof destroyed, and new ones, substantially
different from those, substituted in their place, but by having the vicious
qualities, which were in those, subdued and weakened, and contrary graces and
virtues implanted in their stead, Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24. for, says Paul, we are
His workmanship: the word signifies a thing of His making, whereby he means,
not Gods first making of them as men, but His making of them over again as
renewed men, which appears from what follows, His creating them in Christ,
and unto good works. 2. As the making of sinners over again and new creatures,
is only Gods work; So the power, whereby He so makes us, is no less than
creating power, much like unto that power whereby in the beginning He made some
things of nothing, and some things of preexisting matter, but such as was
wholly unfit and indisposed for those things to be made of it, Genesis 2. 7. 22.
considering, that in this great and mighty work of God He makes those, who
were wholly indisposed to good, and averse from it, (Psalm. 81. 11.) yea
perverse resisters of all motions toward that which is godly and holy, (Job
21. 14.) to be true lovers of it, and walkers in its for, this much is employed,
while he says, we are His workmanship, created, etc. 3. Christ behoved to
strike in as Mediator betwixt God and us, before we could be made this new
workmanship; the life, which we have by this new creation, being purchased by
His death, 1 John 4. 9. and applied unto us by His power, after He is now
arisen from death, Act. 5. 31. The furniture, whereupon the actions of this
life are performed, coming also from Him, Joh 15. -5. for, says he, we are His
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus. 4. Believers are made new creatures, not
to live idly, or to work wickedly, but that they may in the whole course of
their life make conscience of good works: which are not only works of charity,
or duties of immediate worship, but every duty, whether of worship, (Act. 10.
-2.) or of our callings (Act. 9. 36. 39.) whether to God, or man, or to our
selves, (Tit. 2. 12.) which is warranted in the Word as lawful, or commanded
as necessary, (Mic. 6. 8.) gone about by a man regenerate, and in Christ, (Mat.
7. 17, 18.) by virtue of influence from the Spirit of Christ, (Phil. 2. 13.)
for Gods glory, as the main end of the worker, (1 Cor. 10. 31.) and with due
respect had to all necessary circumstances, Psalm. 1.-3 every duty of that kind,
so gone about, is a good work, which Paul says they were created unto in
Christ Jesus, even unto good works. 5. Though many actions of unregenerate men
are materially good, and very useful both for themselves and others, Romans 2.
14. yet no unregenerate man can do any work, which is spiritually good and
acceptable to God: even their good works are but shining sins, as being
destitute of a great part of these necessary requisites unto a good work,
mentioned in the former Doctrine: for, Paul shows that a man must be a new
creature and Gods workmanship, before he can do a good work; for, we are, says
he, Gods workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works. 6. Though good
works be not necessary to merit or purchase salvation; yet are they necessary
unto those who are justified and saved, in several respects, not only as they
are the necessary fruit and end of regeneration, and as they are the way which
leads to heaven (their necessity in both which respects is grounded upon the
present Scripture) but they are necessary also, as evidences of our right to
salvation, 1 John 3. 14. as a guard to preserve peace with our own consciences,
2 Cor. 1. 12. as evidences of our thankfulness to God and Christ, who has
freely saved us, 1 Pet. 2. 9. and for the edification of others, Matthew. 5. 16.
for, the Apostle's scope is to prove, that as we are not saved by works, so
that good works are necessary in other respects; We are created unto good
works, which He has foreordained, that we should walk in them. 7. Christians
are like unto those who walk in a journey from one place unto another, through
a straight and beaten way which lies betwixt, in so far as they advance from
sin (Ezekiel. 18. 31.) to heaven, (Phil. 3. 14.) in the way of holiness and good
works: for, the word rendered to walk, whereby he expresses what should be the
daily exercise of a renewed man, is a metaphore taken from those who travel in
a journey, and he makes the way wherein they walk to be good works; which God
has before ordained, that we should walk in them. 8. The Lord has prepared,
and made ready good works, as a beaten path, wherein His renewed people may
walk without any discourageing or perplexing difficulty, in so far, as He not
only has ordained in His eternal and unchangeable decree, that they shall
make conscience of good works, which seems to be mainly meaned by His
fore-ordaining of good works here spoken of, but He does also hold forth the
rule of good works in His Word, Psalm. 119. 9. and by examples also, which make
the rule more easy to be followed, Heb. 12. 1. He renews their wills, and
furnishes them with inward power and ability to do these works, Ezekiel. 36. 27.
and exciteth and actuateth that power by His renewed influence, thereby making
it to work, Philip. 2. 13. In all which respects, good works may be said to be
prepared by God, as the word, rendered foreordained, may also read; which God
has foreordained, or prepared, that we should walk in them.

Verse. 11. Wherefore remember that ye being in time passed Gentiles in the
flesh, who are called uncircumcision by that which is called the circumcision
in the flesh made by hands.
HEre begins the second part of the Chapter, where the Apostle, for the
further establishment of those Ephesians in the Doctrine of salvation through
free grace in Christ, does more largely insist upon the former purpose
contained in the first part of the Chapter, with a more particular application
of it to the Ephesians, and in them to all the Gentiles. And, first, (by
exhorting them to remember their former misery, while they were in Gentilisme)
he gives; in this and the following verse, a most lively description of their
then miserable state, as first, that they were in the flesh, that is, the flesh
of their foreskine not being cut off by circumcision, they were not only
destituted of that ordinance, but also of all other soul-saving ordinances of
Gods Worship, unto the enjoying whereof, circumcision gave a right and
entrance, Exodus 12. 44. Secondly, This their miserable estate was matter also
of their reproach; the Jews making their want of Circumcision a continual
upcast unto them, which he hinteth at, by showing that the carnal Jews, who
were only circumcised in the flesh by the hands of men, but not in their hearts
by the Spirit of God, did not cease to reproach the converted Christian
Gentiles with uncircumcision, even at that present time, when circumcision and
the rest of those Leviticall ordinances were now abrogated. Doct. 1. Even
Believers having attained to the sense of Gods mercy in Christ, are very prone
to forget that woe and misery, which they were under, before their delivery from
it: for, the watchword here given to those Ephesians, supposes so much;
Wherefore remember, says he. 2. Those who are converted, ought frequently to
remember, and call to mind their sin and misery, under which they were before
God show them mercy, though not to take pleasure in the remembrance of it,
Ezekiel. 23. 19. 21. nor to despair of, or question Gods mercy in order to their
delivery from it: Isa. 1. 18. yet, that hereby they may be provoked to pity
toward others, who are yet in that state, Tit. 3. 2, 3. to greater
fruitfulness in good works for the time to come, Romans 6. 19. and to magnify
the riches of Gods mercy in their delivery from that woeful state, 1 Timothy 1.
13. 14. and that they may be kept humble under their present enjoyments, Ezekiel.
20. 43. for, therefore does the Apostle exhort those Ephesians to remember
their former sin and misery; Wherefore remember, says he, that in times past
ye were. 3. Christians, in order to the more effectual bringing about of the
forementioned ends, ought not only remember that sin and misery, which was
common unto them with others, but also, and chiefly would search out, and call
to mind wherein their sin and misery did exceed the sin and misery of others:
for, Paul bids them here remember that misery, which in a great part was
peculiar unto themselves as Gentiles, and which they had more than the Jews;
Wherefore remember, that ye being in time past Gentiles in the flesh. 4. The
consideration of Gods rich grace through Jesus Christ, whereby alone He
carries on the salvation of lost sinners in all its steps, may be a great
encouragement, and a strong argument to enforce this duty of searching out and
calling to mind our matchless sin and misery: and that because this rich grace
has not only a remedy for all our sin and misery in it, Romans 5. 20. but also
it is most perceived and felt in its sweet and lively effects, when the soul is
most affected with the sense of its own vileness, Luke 15. 21, 22. for, the
Apostle, having spoken of Gods rich grace, whereby we are saved through faith
in Christ, he infers as a conclusion thence, Wherefore remember that ye
being in time past Gentiles in the flesh. 5. Though it is now under the New
Testament no more, but much less miserable to be born a Gentile, than to be
born a Jew, Romans 11. 20. Yet, to have been born a Gentile, and not of Abraham's
race, was once, to wit, before Christ came in the flesh, a sad and miserable
lot: for, when he is calling to mind their former misery, he bids them
remember that they were in time past Gentiles. 6. Those, who are born without
the bounds of the Church, and live not under the drop of divine Ordinances, are
in a poor and woeful case, as being not only under wrath, and destitute of any
actual interest in the blessing (which piece of misery is common to them with
all the unregenerate, whether within or without the visible Church. See ver.
-2.) but destitute also of all those means, whereby the blessing uses to be
conveyed, Romans 10. 14, 15. so that their salvation is not in an ordinary way
possible: for, while he is calling to mind their former misery, he bids them
remember they were Gentiles in the flesh, that is, destitute of Circumcision
the leading ordinance, and consequently destitute of all Ordinances, having no
part nor communion with Gods Church neither outwardly, nor spiritually, as he
explaineth himself, ver. 12. 7. As the contemning, even of outward Ordinances,
is no small sin before God, 1 Samuel 2. 17. with 24. So it is matter of just
shame and reproach before men, which did hold especially in the contempt of
Circumcision under the Old Testament; it being then a seal of the Covenant,
Genesis 17. 10. the outward badge of the Lords people, Genesis 17. 14. and a leading
Ordinance, giving right and entrance to the enjoyment of all other Ordinances,
Exodus 12. 44. and it does no less hold in Baptism under the New Testament,
seeing the Sacraments of the New Testament are of as much worth, as the
Sacraments of the Old; and Baptism serves for the same ends now, which are
presently mentioned to have been the uses, for which Circumcision did serve
then: for, although Paul does only mention expressly, that uncircumcision was
unjustly cast up to the Christian Gentiles by the carnal and hypocritical
Jews in the present time wherein he wrote, yet hereby he would have them to
remember how this was matter of just reproach and upcast unto them, even from
the godly Jews in former times, when Circumcision stood in force, and that this
disgrace and reproach, was a part of their former misery, (See 1 Samuel 17. 26,
36.) who are called uncircumcision, etc. 8. There are two things in every
Sacrament, to wit, an outward action upon the outward man by the outward
instrument, and an inward action upon the inward man by the hand and Spirit of
God; for, so was it in Circumcision, the outward action being here expressed by
Circumcision in the flesh made with hands, which implies there was another
inward action, spoken of Col. 2. 11. 9. There are not a few within the visible
Church, who rest upon the outward action done by man in the Sacrament, as if
that alone were sufficient, and do not seek after that which God does inwardly
work upon the heart: And so do use Sacraments as sorcerers do their charms and
spells, where the bare rehearsing of some set form of words, with such a
composed strain of outward carriage and gesture, is relied upon for the
producing of wonderful effects: for, of this sort were those who are here
called the Circumcision in the flesh made by hands, that is, such who rested
upon the outward action, and sought after no more but it. 10. They have very
frequently least of Religion in reality and effect, who are most puffed up with
the conceit of their own Religion, and make greatest noise about things least
necessary in Religion, or which are in themselves indifferent, as if the
greatest stresse of Religion did ly in those: for, those, who boasted
themselves of their Religion and Circumcision against the uncircumcised
Gentiles, and did place their whole Religion in Circumcision, and the rest of
those mosaicall Ordinances now abolished, were the Circumcision in the flesh
made with hands, that is, such as had only the outward form of Religion, but
not the life and power of it. 11. As it is a great reproach to be despisers of
Ordinances; So it is but a poor credit for people to have Ordinances, if they
rest upon the outside of them, not laboring to have life and power conveyed
from God through them: for, Ordinances, so rested upon, as they will increase
peoples judgment afterward, Mat. 11. 22. So they prove a fearful snare in
the mean time, in so far as they are usually relied upon for salvation, Philip.
3. 7* and occasion is taken from them to neglect all other duty both to God and
man, Jer. 7. 10. for, Paul does here speak of it as a thing disgraceful; who
are called, says he, Circumcision in the flesh made with hands.

Verse. 12. That at that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from the
commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, having no
hope, and without God in the world.
THe Apostle, thirdly, does here branch forth their misery at that time when
they were unconverted Gentiles, in five particulars. First, They were without
Christ, as being not only without all saving and real interest in Christ,
which was common to them with all the unregenerate, whether without, or within
the visible Church, Gal. 5. 2. but also without an offer of Christ in the
Ministry of the Gospel, as they were Gentiles, without the bounds of the
visible Church, Psalm. 147. 20. Secondly, They were aliens from the
commonwealth of Israel, having no union or communion, neither with the
invisible Church of true Believers, which was common to them with all the
unregenerate, Romans 2. ^8. nor yet with the visible Church of Professors, which
was in those times among the people of Israel, Deuteronomy. 32. 8. And this latter
alienation was peculiar to them, as they were unchurched Gentiles, Psalm. 76. 1.
Thirdly, They were strangers to the covenants of promise, that is, the Covenant
of Grace made with Adam after the fall (Genesis 3. 15.) and afterward frequently
renewed with Abraham, Genesis 17. 7. Isaac, Genesis 26. 3. Jacob Genesis 28. 13, 14.
with Israel upon mount Sinai, Exodus 24. 7. and in the plains of Moab, Deuteronomy. 29.
1. etc. and with David, 2 Samuel 23. 5. And therefore it is called Covenants in
the plural number, though it was always one and the same Covenant in
substance; the substantial sum thereof being always comprised in that one
comprehensive and fountain-promise, Genesis 3. -15. or Genesis 12. - 3. which seems
to be here pointedat by the word, promise in the singular number; of which
promise, all the following promises, made to Abraham, David and the rest, were
but branches, or more full explanations. Now, they are said to have been
strangers to this Covenant, not only, because they had no actual interest in
the saving blessings of remission of sins, grace here, and glory hereafter,
which were promised in that Covenant, Gal. 3. 8. (and this was common to them,
with all the unregenerate, Psalm. 50. 16, 17.) But also they had not so much as
this Covenant revealed unto them, neither that it was, nor of what kind, or
upon what conditions it was; neither had they an offer of it by the public
Ministry of the Word, and so were not within the very outward bond of it,
neither had any right to the external privileges of this Covenant, Deuteronomy. 4.
7, 8. which estrangement was peculiar unto them, as they were unchurched
Gentiles, Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12. Fourthly, They were without hope, not only
without that saving grace of hope, which flows from faith laying hold upon
the Covenant of promise, Romans 15. 13. and sustaineth the heart in the patient
and well-grounded expectation of the thing promised and believed, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
8. and this was also common to them with all the unregenerate, Job 8. 13, 14.
But also, they were in a condition so hopeless, that their salvation was not
in an ordinary way possible, as being wholly destituted of those means, whereby
God does ordinarily convert and save sinners, Psalm. 147. 20. and this was
peculiar unto them as they were unchurched Gentiles, Romans 9. 4. Fifthly. They
were without God, or atheists, not as if they had been deprived of all sense of
a Deity, (for they worshipped false gods, Acts 14. 12, 13.) nor yet, as if they
had been without the reach and care of Gods overruling and all-upholding
providence, Acts 17. 28. but they were without the knowledge of the true God,
Gal. 4. 8. or, though they had some confused knowledge, even of the true God,
Romans 1. 19. yet He was not their reconciled God in Christ, Col. 1. 21. neither
did they give Him that worship and glory, which is due unto God, and was
prescribed by Him in His Word, Romans 1. 21, 22. And lastly, He adds, that they
were without God in the world: which words, in the world, may be looked upon,
as a general clause relating to all the particular branches of their misery
before mentioned. And he seems hereby to condescend, what that bypast time
was, wherein all that he has spoken was verified in them, to wit, when they
were in the world, that is, without the Church, as the world is frequently
taken in opposition to Gods Church, Joh. 15. 19. and 17, 14. and especially to
the truly regenerate in the Church, 1 John 5. -19. Doct. 1. As those who are
converted, would frequently call to mind that sin and misery under which they
were when God did call them (See verse. 11. Doct. 2.) so because an abstract
view of sin and misery in the general, does not much affect the heart,
therefore they ought to branch forth and call to mind their misery in its
several heads and parcels, that so they may be the more affected with it: for,
the Apostle, having exhorted them to remember their former misery, he does not
only give them a general view of it, ver. 11. but here does branch it forth in
five particulars, which they were to remember; That at that time ye were
without Christ, etc. 2. For a man to be without an offer of Christ, yea to be
without a real interest in Christ, though there be never so frequent offers of
Him, is a doleful, sad and dangerous case; for, to want a real and saving
interest in Christ, is to want life, (1 John 5. 12.) light, (Joh. 1. 4, 5.)
strength, (Joh. 15. -5.) liberty, (Joh. 8. 36.) and acceptance with God, Mat.
3. 17. And to have a saving interest in Christ, does make a man truly happy,
what ever be his misery otherwise: for, he makes this the first branch of
their misery, and that which virtually compriseth all the rest, even that at
that time they were without Christ. 3. Though Christ from all eternity had a
right unto, and interest in the Elect, they being given over unto Him in the
Covenant of Redemption, Joh. 6. 39. yet they never have, nor can plead any
interest in Him, or in those saving benefits, which were purchased by Him,
until they be effectually called, and do actually believe in Him; for, though
God from all eternity had chosen in Christ those who were truly Godly among the
Ephesians, cap. 1. 4. yet until their effectual calling, they were without
Christ, as without Christ did speak their not having an actual interest in
Him; That at that time ye were without Christ. 4. Though Jesus Christ was not
so clearly manifested unto the Jewish Church, as He now is under the Gospel, 2
Cor. 3. 14. yet, they were not then altogether without Christ, they had Him
revealed unto them, though but darkly in the Word, Genesis 12. 3. and in their
daily sacrifices, which were types and shadows of Him, Col. 2. 17. yea, and the
Godly then had real interest by faith in Him, Joh. 8. 56. and in those saving
benefits, which then were to be, and now are actually purchased by Him, Romans 3.
25. for, the Gentiles are here said, in opposition to the Jews, to have been at
that time without Christ; whereby it is employed, that the Jewish Church was not
without Him. 5. It is no small happiness for men and women to have union and
communion with the Church of Christ; It is even an happiness in its own kind,
and comparatively to be members of His visible Church; for, thereby we partake
of all the privileges thereof, which are Gods special care and government,
Isa. 4. 5, 6. protection, and preservation in all ages, notwithstanding the
opposition of all enemies, Isa. 31. 4, 5. the enjoyment of the ordinary means
of salvation, Psalm. 147. 19. and the external communion of the Saints by
partaking of the same ordinances, 1 Cor. 10. 17. and the mutual gifts one of
another, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 11. together with the offers of Christ and salvation upon
such terms as they are proponed in the Gospel, Act. 13. 38. But it is much more
happiness to be members of the invisible Church of Believers; for thereby we
do partake of all the saving benefits and special privileges thereof: which
are union with Christ, as her head and Husband, Ephesians. 5. 23. 30. communion with
Him in all the saving fruits of His Redemption, relating either to grace here,
or glory hereafter, chap. 1. 3. together with that communion, which Believers
have among themselves, in their mutual partaking of the gifts and graces one
of another, 1 Cor. 12. 25, 26. And to be deprived of all union and communion
with Christ's Church, is a woeful, sad, and miserable case: for, Paul makes
this the second branch of their misery, that they were aliens from the
commonwealth of Israel. 6. So strait and nigh is that union betwixt Christ and
His Church, that separation from, or union with the one, infers separation
from, or union with the other: and in the same respect and degree, wherein men
are separated from, or united with Christ, they are in some answerable respect
and degree separated from, or united with His Church: for, the Apostle
conjoyneth these two, as of equal extent; Ye were without Christ, as being
aliens from the commonwealth of Israel. 7. As the Lord has been graciously
pleased to transact with man about that obedience, which he owes unto God, as
his sovereign Lord and Creator, in the way of Covenant, or mutual paction and
agreement; wherein, for his better encouragement to discharge the duty required
of him, the Lord does assure him of a rich reward, Joh. 3. 16. So, the Covenant
which God has entered with fallen man, is a Covenant of promise, wherein the
thing promised is freely given, and not for any worth in him to whom it is
given: for, as his affirming that the Gentiles were strangers to the Covenants
of promise, implies that the Church was no stranger to the Covenant, but that
God did deal with them by way of Covenant; so the word promise in the
Original, signifies a free promise, where the thing promised is freely
bestowed; And strangers from the Covenants of promise. 8. For men to live and
die without an offer of the Covenant of grace made unto them to be entered by
them, is a woeful, sad, and dangerous case; for hereby they are not only
deprived of all the privileges of the visible Church, mentioned, Doct. 5. to
which the tender of this gracious Covenant unto a people, and their professed
subjection to it, does give right, (the Covenant being the Churches Chartor,
whereby she holds all these privileges, Act. 2. 38. with 39.) but their
salvation in that case is also rendered in an ordinary way impossible, there
being not so much as an offer of it, nor a making known unto them the terms and
conditions whereupon salvation may be had: yea, and further, to be without an
actual interest and right to the saving blessings of that gracious Covenant,
arising from the grace of saving faith, laying hold upon those blessings, and
the offer of them in the Covenant, is a case in some respects no less
lamentable, sad, and dangerous (which is the case of all who are unregenerate,
even though they be members of the visible Church, and so within the outward
bond of the Covenant, and do enjoy the common blessings thereof, (Romans 9. 4.
Matthew. 20. -16.) for, such are not only destitute of an claim and title to any
of those spiritual blessings, which are offered in the rich and precious
promises of this Covenant, Jer. 31. 33, 34. and 32. 39, 40. but also shall have
no advocate to plead for them, Matthew. 7. 23. are bound to fulfill the whole
Law, else they can never be saved, Gal. 5. 3. and have no strength allowed upon
them for the fulfilling of it but their own, (for they are without Christ) must
stand and fall at Gods tribunal, according to that dreadful and terrible
sentence of the Covenant of works, Gal. 3. 10. yea, it shall go worse with them
in the great day, than with those who never heard the Gospel, Matthew. 11. 22. So
that the case of such is most miserable: for, the Apostle makes this the third
branch of their misery, even that they were strangers from the Covenants of
promise, without all title or interest either to the outward privileges, or
saving blessings of that Covenant. 9. As those, who are without the offer of
Christ in the Gospel, without the bounds of the visible Church, and the
external bond of the Covenant of grace, are in a case altogether hopeless;
their salvation being in an ordinary way altogether impossible: So all
unregenerate men, even those who are within the Church, and have no real
interest in Christ, or the saving benefits of the Covenant of grace, by the
grace of faith, and have no union or communion with the invisible Church of
sound Believers, all such are destituted of the true and saving grace of hope
for heaven and salvation, and those other good things promised in the Word,
even that hope which is grounded upon the Word, (Psalm. 119. 49.) and the
mercies of God, (Psalm. 147. 11.) and not upon our own performances, Matthew. 7.
22. and bears up the heart under all discouragements, Psalm. 119. 81. yea, and
sets the man who has it upon the task of purifying his own heart, 1 John 3.
-3. All unregenerate men are destituted of this hope, whatever false hopes,
blind confidence, and daring presumption they may entertain in their hearts,
Deuteronomy 29. 19. for, the Apostle, having affirmed of those Ephesians, that at that
time they were without Christ, etc. he adds they were also without hope, that
is, their salvation was in an ordinary way hopeless, to wit, as they were
without the offer of Christ, and the Doctrine of the Covenant, and they were
destitute of the grace of hope, as being without actual interest in Christ by
faith, etc. and unregenerate; having no hope. 10. To be wholly destitute of
this true and saving grace of hope, is a most woeful, dangerous, and lamentable
case: for hereby men do live in continual hazard of spiritual shipwreck,
being destitute of the anchor of their soul, Heh. 6. 19. hereby they are
exposed to deadly blows from sin, Satan and worldly discouragements, being
destitute of their helmet, Ephesians. 6. 17. hereby they want a necessary spur and
incitement to diligence in duties, 1 John 3. 3. yea, and hereby they cannot
choose but die either in stupid senslesnesse, Job 21. 13. or in desperate
diffidence, Genesis 4. 13. for, he makes this the fourth branch of their misery,
that they had no hope, which includes mainly their wanting the grace of hope;
having no hope, says he. 11. There is no knowledge of God, as we ought, or
enjoying of Him, except we know Him in Christ, and come to Him by Christ: for,
the Apostle makes their being without Christ, and their being without God, to
go together; And without God in the world, says he. 12. As not only profane
avowed Atheists are without God, but those also, who do not know the true God,
and give not to Him that trust, love, fear and joy, above what they give unto
any other thing else, and who do not labor to have Him made their own God; So
to be thus without God, is a woeful, sad, and lamentable case, even the
headstone of all that misery which any creature can be under: for hereby God
remains their enemy, Col. 1. 21. All the creatures are against them, Hos. 2.
18. and they themselves are under the drop of Gods eternal wrath and
vengeance: (See, ver. -2.) for, the Apostle affirms here of those Ephesians,
that before their conversion they were without God, though even then they had
some knowledge of the true God, Romans 1. 19. and he mentions this in the last
place, as the sum and headstone of all their misery, even that they were
without God in the world.

Verse. 13. But now in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes were far off, are made
nigh by the blood of Christ.
HEre begins the second branch of the second part of the Chapter, wherein is
set forth the present happy estate of those Ephesians, together with the way
how, and by whom this happy lot was purchased for them. And, first, he briefly
propounds that blessed change which had befallen them, in so far as they, who
were before afar off, to wit, from Christ, His Church, His Covenant, saving
hope, and from God Himself, not through local distance, Act. 17. -27. but
through want of saving interest, union and communion with God, with Christ and
His Church by faith, hope, love, or professed subjection to Gods Law and
Ordinances, as was explained, ver. 12. they, even they, were now made nigh to
God, to Christ and His Church in the same sense. And withal he briefly
shows, not only the way how all things requisite to that blessed change were
purchased for them, to wit, by the merit of Christ's death upon the Cross,
which was the accomplishment of all His other sufferings and obedience, Joh.
19. 30. but also, how those things so purchased, were actually bestowed upon
them, and applied unto them, to wit, by their being in Christ, and by virtue of
their union with Him.

Now as their distance, and several pieces of their former misery did belong
unto them in two respects; First, as they were without the visible Church;
Secondly, as they were men unregenerate, in which respect, their misery was
common to them with all the unregenerate, whether without, or within the
Church, as was cleared, ver. 12. So what is here, and in the verses following
spoken of their delivery, and present happy state, is in many things, at least,
applicable, not only to their inward state, as being a great many of them
truly regenerate, justified and sanctified, and therefore members of the
invisible Church of Believers; but also by proportion to their outward state,
as being members of Christ's visible Church, whereby they enjoyed many rich
privileges, (See ver. 12. Doct. 5.) And those also purchased by Christ, Ephesians.
4. 8. 11. and conveyed to the visible Church, and every Churchmember by reason
of their visible and political union with him. Job. 15. 2. neither is Scripture
hereby rendered ambiguous or doubtsome, as signifying two diverse things; for,
whether we look to the privileges of true Believers, or of visible
Church Members (the privileges of the latter being the enjoyment of those
blessings in the offer of the Gospel, and a living under such means and
ordinances by which God uses to convey those blessings, the actual possessing
of which, or present right unto which, are the privileges of real Believers)
or if we look to that which gives them a right, each one to their respective
privileges, to wit, the grace of faith, and a mystical and saving union with
Christ upon the part of real Believers, and a profession of the doctrine of
faith, either personally or parentally, and an external and political union
with Christ upon the part of visible Church Members. I say, which of those be
looked unto, we will find so much of likeness and proportion betwixt what
belongs to the visible Church, and what belongs to the invisible, that both
may safely and without ambiguity be taken up as intended by the Spirit of God
to be expressed in one and the same Scripture; though the one more principally,
and the other secondarily, and as it were by proportion. As for example here,
seeing the nighnesse and happiness, which visible Church Members enjoy, is only
comparative, and with respect had to the greater misery of those who are wholly
without the Church; and that it is but a misery and distance, being compared
with that state of nighnesse and happiness which the truly Regenerate are
brought unto; Therefore I conceive, that what is mentioned of the delivery and
blessed state, here spoken of, was verified mainly and fully in the Regenerate
and invisible Church of Believers among them, and but proportionally only and
in part in the visible Church of professors: and therefore I shall only collect
such doctrines as arise from it, being so considered.

Hence Learn, 1. The more nigh the consideration of our miserable and happy
state be set together in opposition the one to the other before the eye of the
soul, it commends and sweetneth our happy state through grace the more: for,
the Apostle's scope being to set forth the happiness of that state, wherein
free grace had placed them, he compriseth all their misery in one word, They
were sometimes far off, and all their happiness in another, they were now made
nigh; And so gives a joint view of them both at once. 2. The People of God are
not so to remember by past sin and misery, as to make them question the fruits
of Gods mercy already received, or to despair of receiving more in time to
come: for, having exhorted them (ver. 11.) to remember their former misery, in
the first place, he exhorts them here to remember that happy estate wherein
mercy had placed them in the next; But now -- ye are made nigh. 3. As it is the
duty of Converts frequently to remember their former sin and misery: (See Verse.
11. Doct. 2.) So also to call to mind, and confidently avow that gracious
change which freegrace has wrought upon them in their conversion; because as
misbelief is ready to call it in question, Isa. 50. -10- So the remembrance and
avowing of it, is most profitable, in order to our own comfort against the
sense of bypast or present sin and misery, 1 Cor. 6. 11. in order to our
incitement to the duty of walking suitably, chap. 4. 1. and to our
encouragement against the fear of all imaginary difficulties, which may occur
in our way to heaven and glory, Philip. 1. 6. and in order to our thankfulness
unto God for His so rich mercy manifested in our delivery, 1 Pet. 2. 9. for,
the Apostle exhorts them to remember this in the second place, That ye who
were sometimes far off, are now made nigh. 4. As converting grace falls often
upon those who are most graceless, and at greatest distance from God, from
Christ and His Church; So it brings those, upon whom it falls, into a state
of nearness to all those, because of these many nigh relations, under which
they stand to God; as of servants, Romans 6. 22. of friends, Col. 1. 21. and
sons, Joh. 1. 12. and to Christ, as of His Spouse, Cant. 4. 8. members, Ephesians. 5.
30. brethren, etc. Heb. 2. 11. And because of these sweet influences for the
life and comfort of grace, which they receive daily from Him, as the members
from the head, Col. 2. 19. because of that near access, which they have unto
God in Christ, both as to their state and performances; whereof ver. 19. And
because of that union, and communion, which they have with the invisible Church
of Believers, the congregation of the firstborn (See Verse. 12. Doct. 5.) for,
with relation mainly to this gracious change, which was wrought upon real
Believers among them in their regeneration, he says, But now, ye, who
sometimes were far off, are made nigh. 5. As this excellent state of nearness
to God and His Church, wherein the truly regenerate do stand, and all those
excellent privileges which flow from it, were purchased for the Elect by no
less price than the blood of Christ, whose blood was the blood of God, Acts
20. -28. and therefore of infinite value; So none of those are actually bestowed
upon, and applied unto the Elect, until they be united to Christ, and in Him
by saving faith, as the branches are in the root, from which they draw sap and
nourishment: for, says he, in Christ Jesus ye are made nigh by the blood of
Christ; they were in Christ by faith, before they attained that state of
nearness, which was purchased by His blood.

Verse. 14. For He is our peace, who has made both one, and has broken down
the middle wall of partition between us: 15. Having abolished in his flesh the
enmity, even the law of Commandments, contained in Ordinances --
THe Apostle being, next, more largely to explain and prove what he has
briefly asserted, that the Gentiles were made nigh to God and His Church by the
blood of Christ, does, first, confirm it by an argument taken from Christ's
Priestly office, according to which He is not only the Mediator for peace, and
peacemaker betwixt God and man, and among men themselves; but He is also our
peace, as being the propitiatory sacrifice, and having purchased this peace
with His own blood, Isa. 53. 5. and so the very cause and reason of this peace,
is in Himself, and nothing extrinsicall to Himself. Secondly, he does prove
that Christ was their peace, by the effect produced by Him, and the matter of
working this effect. The effect it self, is, that where before the Jews and
Gentiles were irrecoverably separated by reason of their different Religion and
religious Rites, He had now united them in one and the same Church, which is
said to have been then done, because it was in part done: for, the rejecting of
Israel, is only in part, Romans 11. -25- but the full accomplishment of it shall
be when all Israel, and the fullness of the Gentiles, shall be called, Romans 11.
-25, 26- The manner of working this effect, is set down in three phrases, all
signifying one thing, though different in regard of diverse considerations.
First, He broke down the middle wall of partition, whereby, as he explaineth
himself in the following verse, is meaned the ceremonial Law, and it is called
the middle wall of partition, or of a hedge and stone-wall (for, the Original
signifies both) with an eye, questionless, to to the wall, which was in
Solomon's Temple between the court of the People and of the Gentiles, which
hindered all manner of passage, sight, or communication betwixt them, Ezekiel. 42.
20. So the meaning is, that in order to this union He did abolish the legal
ceremonies, whereby the Jews were distinguished from the Gentiles, as two
houses, by a mid-wall going betwixt them, or as an enclosed Garden is separated
from an out-field, by an hedge or dyke of rough stones, ver. 14. Secondly, He
did abolish the enmity: by which, enmity is meaned the same ceremonial Law,
and that chiefly because it was the occasion of a perpetual standing strife
betwixt Jew and Gentile, while the Jew reproached the Gentile with
uncircumcision and neglect of Gods worship, Act. 10. 28. the Gentile again
reproached the Jew with circumcision, and the rest of these Legal rites, which
they judged unreasonable, irreligious and absurd, Esth. 3. 8. although those
ceremonial rites may be also called enmity with relation to God, in so far as
the practicing of them by the Jews was a real testimony and confession of their
own guilt, and the enmity which was betwixt them and God. See Collos. 2. 14.
And His withholding them from the Gentiles, was an evidence of His displeasure,
and enmity against them, Ps. 147. 20. and here the Apostle expresses the way,
how Christ did abolish that enmity, or these ceremonial rites, to wit, in His
own flesh, that is, by His death, which He suffered in His flesh, or humane
nature, 1 Pet. 3. -18- Thirdly, he expounds what he meant by the mid-wall and
the enmity, which Christ abolished, even the Law of Commandments in ordinances.
The first of which words, is more general, to wit, the Law, as comprehending,
according to the custom of the Hebrew language, all Doctrine revealed to the
Church, Psalm. 19. 7. and this is astricted by the second word, which is more
special, to wit, Commandments, signifying that Doctrine only, which commands
what should be done, and forbids what should not be done; and both those are
astricted by the third, which is yet more special, to wit, Ordinances, whereby
are meaned those Commandments only, which did relate to Gods external worship,
and were prescribed by God, as so many types and shadows of Christ to come, and
of those good things which were purchased by Him, Heb. 9. 9, 10. So that the
Law and Commandments were only abolished, as to that part of them which was
contained in those Ordinances, ver. 15-.

From ver. 14. Learn, 1. Every man by nature in himself, and without Christ, is
at war and enmity with God, with His Church, and chiefly those in the Church
who are truly regenerate: he cannot be subject unto the Law of God, Romans 8. 7.
And, as therefore he hates the Lawgiver, and those who yield obedience to His
Laws; So he is under the Lawgivers curse, Gal. 3. 10. for, while the Apostle
speaks of making those Ephesians nigh to God and His Church by Christ, he
says, Christ was their peace: which implies that their distance from those
consisted in hatred of, and enimity against them; for he is our peace, says
he. 2. This enmity chiefly, which is between God and fallen man, was
irreconciliable, and impossible to be removed, except Jesus Christ that great
high Priest and Prince of Peace had shed His blood and suffered death, by the
merit whereof, as He has given satisfaction to a provoked God, Ephesians. 5. 2. So
by the efficacy and virtue thereof He subdueth that rebellious disposition
against God, which naturally is in us, Romans 6. 6. and makes us accept the
offer of friendship and reconciliation with God, and yield our selves servants
to righteousness unto holiness, Acts 5. 31. and so upon both hands He makes
peace: for, says he, He is our peace, to wit, by His blood, spoken of in the
preceding verse. 3. The uniting of both Jew and Gentile in one Church, is a
branch of that peace which Christ has purchased with His blood: And that not
only, because their actual union was, according as God in His wise counsel had
decreed, to follow upon Christ's death, and not to go before it (See upon Gal.
3. verse. 14. Doct. 4.) but also in order to this union, the Law of ceremonies
behoved to be abolished, See Doct. 5. and this called for Christ's death; See
verse. 15. Doct. 4. for, the Apostle having asserted that Christ was their peace
by His blood, he gives this as an instance, or effect of His so being, Who
has made both one. 4. From the Apostles designing the ceremonial Law by a
metaphor taken from houses divided by a mid-wall, or from an orchard, garden or
enclosure, separated from the out-field, by a dyke or wall of rough stones, We
learn, several things relating to the nature, use and duration of the
ceremonial Law, which are the grounds of the similitude. And, first, as a wall
is builded by the owner of the enclosure, So the ceremonial Law was of Gods own
appointment, who only had power to choose what part of the world He thought
fit, to be an enclosure for Himself, Deuteronomy. 32. 8. and to appoint these means
and ordinances, whereby He would have them enclosed and separated from others,
Exodus 25. 40. Secondly, as a rough wall is made up of so many hard unpolished
stones, not covered over with lime or plaster; So the ceremonial Law
consisted of many Ordinances, Heb. 9. 10. and those very difficult to be
obeyed, and an untolerable yoke, Act. 15. 10. Thirdly, as a wall or hedge
incloseth a piece of ground for the owners special use, (which therefore is
more painfully manured) and separateth that enclosure from the out-field which
lies about it; So the ceremonial Law did serve to enclose the people of
Israel, as the Lords own garden and vineyard, for bringing forth fruit unto
Himself, Isa. 5. 7. and to separate them from all the world besides, Deuteronomy. 4.
7, 8. as being a worship wholly different from, and contrary unto the
superstitious rites and worship used among the Gentiles, Deuteronomy. 12. 2. and
containing strict injunctions unto the Jews to avoid all conformity with the
Gentiles in their garments, Number. 15. 38. cutting of their hair, Lev. 19 27. and
such like. Fourthly, as a rough wall is but weak and ruinous, as not being
built with cement or mortar, to make it strong, and therefore but to endure for
a season, until the owner think fit to enlarge his enclosure, and take-in more
of the open field; So the ceremonial Law was not to last for ever, but only
for a time, until Christ should come in the flesh, and take in the Gentiles
within the enclosure of His Church, who were before an open field, not
possessed, nor manured by Him, after which there was no further use of the
mid-wall; And has broken down the mid-wall of partition between us, says he,
meaning the ceremonial Law. Doct. 5. So long as the ceremonial Law did stand
in force and vigor, the Jews and Gentiles could not be united into one Church:
for, seeing by that Law the chief parts of Gods worship were astricted to the
Temple at Jerusalem, therefore, though scattered proselytes of the neighboring
Nations did join themselves to the Church of the Jews, and in some measure
observed the way of Worship then enjoined, Act. 8. 27. yet there was a
physical impossibility for the generality of many Nations far remote from
Jerusalem, to have served God according to the prescript of Worship, which then
was: besides, there was such an habituate, and, as it were, an natural
antipathy transmitted from one generation unto another among the Gentiles
against the ceremonial worship; that there was little less than a moral
impossibility of bringing up the body of the Gentiles unto a cordial joining
with the Jews in it: for, the Apostle shows the ceremonial Law behoved to be
abrogated, in order to an union betwixt these two, while he says, Who has
made both one, and broken down the middle-wall of partition between us. 6.
Whoever would make peace betwixt God and himself, or betwixt himself and
others, he ought seriously to think upon those things which stand in the way of
peace, and set about the removal of them, if it be in his power, and chiefly
those evils in himself, of pride, vainglory, self-seeking, and a contentious
disposition, which are great obstructions in the way of peace, Phil. 2. 3, 4.
else, what ever be his pretenses for peace, he is no real follower of it: for,
Christ, intending to make peace betwixt Jew and Gentile, did take away whatever
might have impeded it; He even broke down the middle wall of partition between
them.

From ver. 15- Learn, 1. As Gods people in covenant with Him, ought to be
highly incensed against, and averse from any voluntary entire fellowship with
those who neglect and contemn the Ordinances of Worship prescribed by God in
His Word; So those who are without the Church, yea and all unregenerate men do
look upon the ordinances of Gods Worship, as base, ridiculous and contemptible,
and carry a kind of hatred and disdain to all such as make conscience of them:
for, so the ancient Worship, prescribed in the ceremonial Law, was the
occasion of hatred and enmity betwixt the Gentile, who contemned it, and the
Jew, who made conscience of it. And therefore is here called the enmity; having
abolished the enmity. 2. As the moral Law contained in the Ten Commandments,
was no part of that mid-wall of partition between Jew and Gentile; seeing some
of the draughts and lineaments of that Law are upon the hearts of all by
nature, Romans 2. 15. So there was no necessity to abrogate this Law at Christ's
death in order to the uniting of Jew and Gentile; neither was it at all
abolished: for, the Law abolished, was the Law, not simply, but the Law of
Commandments, and these not all, but such Commandments as were contained in
Ordinances, to wit, the ceremonial Law, as we show in the Exposition; Even the
Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances, says he. 3. As God only has
power and liberty to prescribe what manner of Worship He will be served by; So
He did once give a most observable evidence of this His power and liberty, by
changing that external way of worship, which was prescribed by Himself under
the Old Testament, unto another under the New, although the internals of His
Worship, to wit, the graces of faith, love, hope, joy in God, do remain the
same in both; Matthew. 22. 37, 39. for, He did abolish the Law of Commandments
contained in Ordinances, even all the ancient Worship consisting in rites and
ceremonies, sensible and fleshly observations, which God did then prescribe,
not as simply delighted in them, but as accomodating Himself to the childish
condition of the Church in those times, and has now appointed a more
spiritual way of Worship, as more suitable to the grown age of the Church,
Joh. 4. 21. 23. See further the reasons why the ceremoniall-Law was abolished,
and concerning that state of indifferency, wherein the practice of it was left
for a time, upon Gal. 2. ver. 3. Doct. 2. and ver. 4. Doct. 1. 4. It was
Christ's sufferings and death, which put an end to the Law of ceremonies, and
made the binding power thereof to cease: for, seeing His sufferings were the
body and substance of all those shadows, they neither did nor could evanish
until Christ had suffered, but then they did; it being impossible that a
shadow, and the body, whereof it is a shadow, can consist in one and the same
place; Having abolished in His flesh the Law of Commandments contained in
Ordinances.

Verse. -15. For to make in himself, of twain, one new man, so making peace. 16.
And that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the cross, having
slain the enmity thereby.
THe Apostle, thirdly, for further clearing of what he spoke, ver. 13. that the
Gentiles were made nigh to God and His Church in the blood of Christ, holds
forth two ends, which Christ proposed to be brought about in His abolishing the
ceremonial Law. First, that He might by a manner of new creation make of those
two Nations, of Jew and Gentile, being firmly united to Himself as to their
head, one people and Church, here called one new man, to show the intimacy of
that union, as also the way how they were united, not by bringing any one of
them to the fashions and customs of the other; for, so they should have been
made one old man, but by bringing both off that way of worship whereon they
were: the Gentile, both from the substance and external manner of their
worship, as having been wholly idolatrous, Gal. 4. 8. The Jew, only from the
external manner of their worship, consisting in fleshly and sensible rites and
observations, whereby He made them one new Church, with new Ordinances of
divine worship, even such as the Church now enjoys under the Gospel: and so
he concludes the verse. by showing that Christ did hereby accomplish what he
had spoken of Him, ver. 13, and 14-. Even that He had made peace betwixt the
two Nations, and consequently the Gentiles nigh to the Church by His own blood:
this is ver. -15. The second end why Christ did abolish the ceremonial Law,
was, that He might reconcile both Jew and Gentile, being so united among
themselves in one body, unto a provoked God; which He did by the sacrifice of
His own soul and body upon the cross, by the means whereof he did destroy that
enmity which was betwixt God and man, as well the sin of the Elect both in its
guilt (Romans 8. 1.) and power, Romans 6. 6. which was the ground and cause of that
enmity, Isa. 59. 2. as the ceremonial Law, which was an evidence of it. See
upon ver. 15-. This is the sum of ver. 16.

From Verse. -15. Learn, 1. Union in the Church of Christ, is a thing which
ought to be prized by us highly, and sought after earnestly; and so much, as
there is nothing in our power which we ought not to bestow upon it, and
dispense with for the acquiring and maintaining of it: for, so much was it
prized by Christ, that He gave his own life to procure it, and did beat down
all His own Ordinances which stood in the way of it; He even abolished in His
flesh the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances, for to make, of twain,
one new man. 2. There are no divisions more hardly curable, than those which
are about the Religion and Worship of God, in so far as they engage, not only
the credit but also the consciences of the divided parties: hence one party, so
engaged, does pursue what they maintain, as that wherein Gods honor and their
own salvation are most nearly concerned, and does look upon the other party, as
an adversary in so far at least, to both of those: for, the Apostle, speaking
of Christ's uniting the Jew and Gentile in one Church and Religion, makes use
of a word which shows this was a task of no small difficulty, even such, that
no less than creating power was required to it, while he says, for to make in
Himself, (the word signifies to creat in Himself) of twain, one new man. 3. So
strict and near is that conjunction and union which is especially among true
believers in the Church, that all of them, how far soever dispersed through the
world, do yet make up but one man and one body; as being all, whatever be their
other differences, most strictly united, as members unto one head, Christ, 1
Cor. 12. 27. and animated, as to the inward man, by the same Spirit of God,
residing and acting in them, Romans 8. 9. for, the Apostle shows, that all of
them, whether Jew or Gentile, were made, not only one people, one nation, one
family, but one new man; For to make, of twain, one new man. 4. As the
essential unity of the invisible Church, without which the Church could not be
a Church, does of necessity depend upon, and flow from that union, which every
particular member has with Christ, as Head; seeing the grace of love (whereby
they are knit one to another, Col. 3. 14) does flow from faith, Gal. 5. -6.
whereby they are united to Him, Ephesians. 3. 17. So, the more our union with Christ
is improved unto the keeping of constant communion and fellowship with Him, the
more will be attained unto of harmonious walking among our selves, suitable
unto that essential union which is in the Church of Christ: for, the Apostle
makes the conjunction of Jews and Gentiles in one Church, to depend upon
Christ's uniting of them to himself; For to make in Himself, of twain, one new
man, says he. 5. The peace which ought to be, and which Christ calls for in
His Church, is not a simple cessation from open strife, which may take place,
even when there remains a root of bitterness in peoples spirits, Psalm. 55.
21. but it is such an harmonious walking together in all things as flows from
the nearest conjunction of hearts, and the total removal of all former
bitterness of spirits: for, the peace which Christ did make betwixt Jew and
Gentile, did follow upon His abolishing the enmity, and making them one man; so
making peace, says he.

From Verse. 16. Learn, 1. Union and peace with men, even with good men, is to
little purpose, except there be peace and friendship with God also: for, the
Apostle shows, that Christ, in abolishing the ceremonial Law, did design not
only the conjunction of the Church among themselves, but their reconciliation
with God also, and the former in subordination to the latter; And that He might
reconcile both unto God, in one body. 2. As all mankind have fallen from that
state of friendship with God, wherein they once were before the fall, Eccles.
7. 29. So, the repairing of this woeful breach, and making up of friendship
betwixt God and the Elect, was Christ's great business in the world; for
effectuating whereof, whatever He did or suffered, was in some one way or other
subservient: for, the Apostle shows He suffered in the flesh, abolished the
ceremonial Law, united the two Nations, that He might reconcile both unto God
in one body. The word rendered reconcile, signifies the making up of old
friendship. 3. Though the believing Jews under the Old Testament, were
reconciled unto God, even while the ceremonial Law stood in force, Psalm. 32. 4.
Yet the price, by virtue whereof they were reconciled, could not be actually
paid, to wit, Christ's death and sufferings, except the ceremonial Law had
presently evanished, (See Ver. 15- Doct. 4.) neither could Jew and Gentile be
united together in one body, and so reconciled to God, while that Law was in
force and binding. See Verse. 14. Doct. 5. Therefore, and in those respects, it
was necessary for Christ to abolish the ceremonial Law that He might reconcile
both Jew and Gentile unto God: for, so says Paul, He abolished the Law of
Commandments in Ordinances -- that He might reconcile both unto God in one
body. 4. There can be no reconciliation betwixt God and us, except we be united
by faith to Christ, and to the body of all Believers in Him; So that none can
be one with God who are not of the mystical body of His Church: yea, and in so
far will the sense and sweet effects of reconciliation with God be interrupted
and obstructed, as persons reconciled do give way unto divisions, rents and
strifes among themselves: for, the Gentiles and Jews, being in one body with
Christ and His Church, come to be reconciled unto God; That He might reconcile
both unto God, in one body, that is, being united among themselves in one body
under Christ the head, as is affirmed, verse. 15. 5. As Jesus Christ did
interpose as mediator and peacemaker to reconcile God and us; So He behoved, in
order unto this end, to bear the chastisment of our peace, and to lay down His
life by a shameful, painful and cursed death; that so, the justice of God
being fully satisfied for our wrong, we might enjoy God's peace and favor with
life: for, he shows the mean of their reconciliation, was the cross of
Christ, not the material tree or matter of the cross, but Christ's sufferings
and death upon the cross; That He might reconcile both unto God in one body by
the cross. 6. Christ in suffering Himself to be overcome by death, did fully
destroy sin, death, the ceremonial Law, and every other thing which could
impede the reconciliation of the Elect with God, He, having thereby brought-in
the substance of all those legal shadows, Col. 3. 17. satisfied the justice of
God, and purchased grace and strength, which afterward He was to convey unto
all Believers for mortifying and subduing the body of sin and death in them,
Act. 5. 31. for says Paul, He has slain the enmity thereby, that is, by the
cross, and His death upon the cross; So that by being slain, He slew the
enmity betwixt God and us.

Verse. 17. And came, and preached peace to you which were afar off, and to them
that were nigh.
IN this and the following verse, is contained the third branch of the second
part of the Chapter, wherein the Apostle shows how that excellent benefit of
union and communion with God (...) His Church, purchased by Christ for the
Gentiles, was published, and actually communicated unto them equally with the
Jews, to wit, by the preaching of the Gospel. And, first, he declares that
Christ Himself did preach and publish the glad tidings of that peace and
reconciliation which was purchased by Him on the cross. See ver. 15, 16. And,
secondly, he shows to whom he did publish it, first, to the Gentiles who were
far off, (See Act. 2. 39) being compared with the Jews; as being without the
bounds of the visible Church. Now, Christ preached to the Gentiles, not
immediately and in His own person, Mat. 15. 24. except to some few, who were
first fruits of the rest, Mat. 8. 5, etc. and 15. 28. but mediately and by the
ministry of His Apostles, and their successors, the Ministers of the Gospel,
whom He sent unto them to preach, Mat. 28 19, whose Ministry He does always
accompany by His Spirit, to the conviction of some, and conversion of others;
and therefore He himself is said to preach in them, 1 Pet. 3. 19. Next, to the
Jews, who are said here to be nigh, because they were within the visible
Church, and therefore (though many of them, being simply considered, were far
from God; yet) they were nigh, being compared with the Gentiles, as living
under the drop of the means of grace and reconciliation. Now, he mentions the
Gentiles, first, not as if the Gospel had been first preached unto them, Act.
13. 46. but to show that this privilege of having the Gospel preached, did now
under the New Testament belong equally both to the Jews and Gentiles; And
therefore it was not of any moment which of them were mentioned first, and
which last. Doct. 1. It is not sufficient, in order to our reconciliation with
God, that a price was paid by Christ upon the cross to satisfy divine
justice, but there must also an offer be made of this purchased friendship in
the preaching of the Gospel; that so we may embrace and lay hold upon it by
faith; otherwise the friendship is not actually made, Col. 1. 21. for, the
Apostle, having showed (ver. 16.) that Christ had satisfied divine justice upon
the cross, does here declare how His so doing was published and actually
communicated both to Jew and Gentile; And came, and preached peace. 2. Though
we did commit the wrong which occasioned the enmity betwixt God and us, Col. 1.
21. yet, not only the first motion, but the full prosecution and through
completing of the friendship, comes from God through Christ, in so far as
Christ did not only upon the cross satisfy for our wrong, but also makes an
offer of friendship so purchased, in the ministry of the Word: yea, and
brings us to a closing with the terms upon which it is offered, Joh. 6. 44.
And came and preached peace. 3. As the sum of the Gospel is peace, there being
nothing contained in it but a declaration that peace and reconciliation with
God and His Church may be had, and upon what sweet and easy tea^ms it may be
had, Romans 5. 11. and earnest offers of that peace, made unto all who would
embrace it upon those terms, 2 Cor. 5. 20. together with the duties of
thankfulness, which God does call for from those who accept the offer, Matthew.
11. 29. and the fearful judgments which do await on such who will not embrace
the offered friendship, Heb. 2. 3. So the publishing of this doctrine of peace,
is the gladdest tidings which ever sounded in the ears of lost sinners: for,
the Apostle, speaking of Christ's preaching of the Gospel, says, He came and
preached peace: the word rendered preached, does signify (and accordingly is
translated, Romans 10. 15.) to bring glad tidings. 4. When Christ does send His
called Ministers with an offer of peace and reconciliation unto a people, it is
all one, as if He himself in His own person did come and make an offer of Him;
And therefore the word of reconciliation in their mouth, should be received and
accepted by those unto whom it is offered, with the same readiness, confidence
and reverence, as they would receive it from Christ Himself, Gal. 4, 14. for,
though Christ preached immediately, and in His own person, only to the Jews,
Romans 15. 8. yet the Apostle says He preached also unto the Gentiles, because
He sent His Apostles and Ministers to preach unto them; And came, and preached
peace to you which were afar off. 5. They may be nigh to God as to their
external and Church State, living under the drop of means, and enjoying the
privilege of all divine Ordinances, who are yet unreconciled to God, and
holding up the enmity which is betwixt the Lord and them: for, Christ behoved
to preach peace, even to those who were nigh, to wit, in the respects presently
mentioned, which implies they were not yet at peace with God; And to them that
were nigh. 6. For whomsoever Christ has purchased peace upon the cross, to
those he makes an offer of peace and reconciliation in the preaching of the
Gospel; And therefore He has not died for all: for, the Apostle shows, that,
as Christ purchased peace for both Jew and Gentile, ver. 16. so He came and
preached peace to both; even to you which were afar off, and to them that were
nigh.

Verse. 18. For through him we both have an access by one Spirit unto the
Father.
THe Apostle, thirdly, proves that the Gentiles were effectually called, by
the preaching of the Gospel, to partake of purchased peace and reconciliation
equally with the Jews; because they both had equal access and liberty to
approach unto God in the practice of all commanded duties, as unto their own
reconciled God and Father; for, the word rendered access, has an allusion to
the courts of Princes, where petitioners are admitted unto access to their
Prince, even in the very presence chamber. Concerning which access, he
shows, first, that it is through Christ, He having removed all those
obstructions and impediments which might have marred it. And, secondly, that it
is by the one Spirit of God, who does create, preserve, quicken, and actuate
those graces, in the exercise whereof, they obtained access unto God. Doct. 1.
One main fruit and evidence of reconciliation is access unto God, whereby
reconciled souls have not only liberty to approach unto God in the enjoyment of
all divine Ordinances, (which access is the privilege of all within the
visible Church, whether they be reconciled or not, Psalm. 147. 19.) but also
freedom, and liberty of spirit to approach unto God in the exercise of all
their saving graces, by which they do enjoy communion with God, and especially
in the confident, bold and reverent exercising of their faith, both as to the
change of their state in justification, Romans 5. 2. and as to their
sanctification, and all the duties thereof, Philip. 4. 13. which access to
God, is chiefly attained in the duties of prayer and praise, as having God for
their direct and immediate object. This is that access, which in some measure
flows from peace and reconciliation with God, and is an evidence of it: for,
the Apostle proves, that the Gospel was effectually preached in order to their
peace and reconciliation, because they had access to God; We both have access
to the Father. 2. There can be no access, or familiar approaching unto God by
sinners, who are not in Jesus Christ, and come not to God through Him; seeing
God is a consuming fire unto such, Heb. 12. 29. Their sins having divided
betwixt Him and them, Isa. 59. 2. and so closed up all access unto God, until
Jesus Christ do apply unto them the merit of His death, whereby He blotteth out
their sin, Romans 3. 25. and brings them unto a state of favor with God, and
so makes a patent door for access unto Him, Romans 5. 1, 2. and keeps it
always patent by His continued intercession, Heb. 7. -25. which their renewed
provocations would otherwise daily, and hourly close and obstruct, 1 John 2. 1.
for, says he, through Him, that is, Christ, we both have an access to the
father. 3. Christ is the only Mediator betwixt God and man, by whom alone we
have access and liberty to approach unto God in the exercise of our graces,
whether in the duty of prayer, or any other way, and not by the mediation of
Saints or Angels: for, says he, through him we have an access, or manuduction
to the father. 4. This access, and approaching unto God, is not local by
passing from one place to another; especially seeing there is no place, wherein
access to God may not be had, Joh. 4. 21. 23. but it is spiritual, consisting
in the motion of the heart toward God, in the exercise of saving and
spiritual graces: for, so much is implied, while this access is ascribed unto
the Spirit, as the efficient thereof; We have an access by the spirit. 5. It
is not sufficient, in order to our access unto God, that obstructions be
removed, and a door made patent by Christ's merit and intercession, through
which we may enter; but, such is partly our impotency, Joh. 15. -5. and partly
our averseness from making use of the offered opportunity, Luke 14. 17, 18,
etc. that except the Spirit of God do cause us enter, by creating spiritual
graces in us, Ezekiel. 36. 26. by actuating, and exciting those graces, Cant. 4.
16. and especially by helping our infirmities in prayer, and stirring up a
vehement flame of holy and ardent affections, which may serve, as wings, to
elevate our spirits to God, Romans 8. 26. Except, I say, the Spirit of the Lord
did thus, we could not otherwise have any access unto God: for, he says,
through him we have an access by one spirit. 6. As it is one, and the self
same Spirit of God, who breaths upon the graces of Gods people, Cant. 4. 16.
and thereby gives them access unto God; So it concerns us much, as we would
find access and liberty of approaching unto God, to keep the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace; there being nothing, that marreth access to God,
and fellowship with Him more, than imbittered spirits, and division of heart
among the people of God, 2 Corinthians. 13. 11. for, therefore does the Apostle
mention the one Spirit of God, to show, that the Spirit does unite those among
themselves, upon whom this rich blessing of access is bestowed; We both have
an access by one Spirit. 7. As there are three distinct persons in the
Godhead, the Father, Son, and Spirit; So the enjoying of the Father, is the
highest happiness, which can be attained, and in which the soul does rest
content, when it is attained; the Son again is the way, by which we come to the
Father; and the Spirit our guide, which causes us enter this way, and go
alongs in it: all which is clearly hinted at here; through Him, that is,
Christ, we have an access by one Spirit to the Father.

Verse. 19. Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but
fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God.
HEre begins the fourth branch of the second part of this Chapter, where, by
way of a conclusion drawn from what is said in the six former Verses, the
Apostle sets forth that excellent and blessed state, wherein the Ephesians
now were: which, though in some respects, and in some things at least, by
proportion it may be applied to the state of the visible Church, to wit, in so
far as the members thereof had all those privileges here spoken of in their
offer, upon the terms held forth in the Gospel, and were under the drop of
those means which the Lord does ordinarily bless, and make effectual for
working a saving interest in, and right unto all those: yea, and had a present
actual right to the external part of those privileges; even the visible
Church being in some respects Gods City, Household and Temple, at least, the
suburbs, utter-court, and porch thereof, and having her own answerable
privileges, which are in some measure proportional to those of the invisible
Church; yet, seeing (as was showed formerly upon the exposition of ver 13.)
those excellent things, here spoken of, are not fully, and to their outmost
perfection verified in any, but in the invisible Church and the truly
regenerate, the members thereof; Therefore I shall open up the mind of the
Spirit of God, as aiming mainly at those, and give the meaning of those
excellent things here mentioned, as they appertain chiefly to such, in the mean
time, leaving it unto the judicious Reader to gather from what is said, how,
and in what respects they are applicable unto the visible Church. And so that
we may enter the exposition of the words, The Apostle sets forth their
present happy condition, first, negatively, by showing what they were not,
neither strangers nor foreigners, whereby with allusion to those, who are not
freemen of an Incorporation or City, but either strangers (that is, such who
have neither the freedom of the City, nor a place of habitation in it, but have
their residence far from it,) or foreigners, (that is, such, who though they
have their residence in the City, yet are not freemen, but sojourners for a
season,) he shows that the second branch of their former misery, spoken of,
ver. 12. which includes all the rest (even their being aliens from the
commonwealth of Israel, deprived of all union and communion, either with the
invisible or visible Church) was now removed. Secondly, he sets forth their
present blessed condition positively, under three similitudes, whereof two are
in this verse. In the first, he compares the whole Church, and especially the
invisible Church of true Believers unto a City, and shows that those
believing Ephesians had a right unto all the privileges, and immunities of
that city, the chief whereof are freedom from Gods curse, Rev. 22. 3. and a
right unto eternal life, Rev. 22. -5. And this they had equally with all the
other citizens and free members of that City; for, the chiefest Saints were but
their fellow-citizens. In the second similitude, he compares the same Church
unto an household, or family, and calls it Gods household, affirming, that all
of those believing Ephesians did belong to this household. So that he does
hereby express a greater degree of nearness to, and communion with, God and
His Church, which they had attained unto, than was set forth by the former
similitude; there being a straiter ty of familiarity and friendship between the
members of one family among themselves, and with the master of the house, than
is between the members of one city, whether among themselves, and with their
Magistrates and Rulers. Doct. 1. So apt are even good men to be exalted above
measure with the excellent things of God bestowed upon them, 2 Corinthians. 12. 7.
that it is not safe at any time to think upon those things, except our former
misery and vileness be jointly thought upon also, that so we may be kept
humble: for, the Apostle, while he is of purpose to set forth their excellent
privileges, does not obscurely present their former misery unto their view
also, by saying, ye are no more strangers and foreigners, which implies they
were once so. 2. As it is not an easy matter to convince sinners of their lost
and miserable estate by nature; So it is no less difficulty, when they are
once made truly sensible of sin and misery, to convince them thoroughly of
these riches which are in Gods mercy, and of that blessed estate which they are
brought unto by Gods free grace in Christ: for therefore the Apostle finds it
necessary, not only to assert there was a gracious change wrought in them, ver.
13. but also in the following verses to show forth all the causes of this most
blessed change, from which he does here by an undeniable consequence lay down
this conclusion: Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners. 3.
That we may highly prize, and think aright of Gods mercy in Christ manifested
to Believers, we would look upon it, both in the privative and positive effects
thereof, both in those evils of sin and misery, which He delivers from, and
those saving blessings, whether relating to grace here, or glory hereafter,
which He does confer and bestow: for, so does the Apostle here set forth the
rich effects of Gods grace toward those Ephesians, both negatively and
positively; ye are no more strangers, but fellow-citizens. 4. Though Believers
be strangers in the world, as to their outward condition; some having no
certain place of abode, but driven from their own habitations, 1 Pet. 1. 1. and
all of them being disposed to look upon earth as a strange country, and the
contentments thereof as uncertain, perishing, and therefore not their own, Heb.
13. 14. Yet they are not strangers unto, but citizens of that city, not made
with hands, even the blessed society of the Saints, in which they live, Philip.
3. 20. unto whose privileges they have a right, and shall at last be brought
to the full possession of all its outmost blessings and immunities in heaven,
Joh. 14. 2. 3. for, it is in this respect he faith, ye are no more strangers,
and foreigners. 5. The state and privileges of Gods Church consisting of all
true Believers, are such, as fitly may be represented by some great
Incorporation or City, which is a society of people joined together under one
Magistracy, ruled by the same Laws, enjoying the same common privileges and
immunities, and strongly defended by walls and bulwarks: In like manner all
Believers are united under Christ their supreme Magistrate and Head, Ephesians. 1.
-21. living under one common Law, the will of God revealed in Scripture, which
is also written in their hearts by that one Lawgiver, Jer. 31. 33. enjoying
one and the same common privileges, (not only access to divine Ordinances,
but) of Justification, (Romans 8. 30.) Adoption, (Ephesians. 1. 5.) Sanctification,
(Ephesians. 5. 26.) peace of conscience, (Romans 5. 1.) and a right to heaven, the
inheritance of the Saints, Joh. 3. 16. and all of them having Gods special
protection, Psalm. 91. 1. yea, and salvation for walls and bulwarks, Isa. 26. 1.
for, this similitude, whereby the Church is compared to a city, is employed,
while it is said, Ye are fellow-citizens with the Saints. 6. Though those, who
are federally holy, and externally Saints, (See upon Philip. 1. ver. 1. doct.
5.) are members of this City, as it speaks a society of visible professors,
Psalm. 48. 8. yet only those, who are inherently holy, their natures being
renewed, the seeds of saving grace implanted and growing up unto good works,
only such, I say, are free members of this City, as it speaks the society of
the Church invisible, who enjoy immunity from Gods wrath and curse, with an
actual right unto eternal life: for, that the Saints only are free members of
this City, is employed, while he says, Fellow-citizens with the Saints. 7.
Whatever differences are among Believers, as to their worldly condition, Ephesians.
6. 5, 9. their several functions in the Church visible, 1 Cor. 12. 28. and
their different degrees of gifts and graces, Romans 12. 6. Yet, all of them do
enjoy an equal right to all those saving blessings of the Covenant of Grace,
the Charter of this Incorporation, (Isa. 56. 4.) which are of absolute
necessity to the life of grace here, or of glory hereafter, Psalm. 84. 11. and
without which none can be a free Burgess of this City: for, he makes the
believing Ephesians fellow-citizens with the Saints, even the chiefest of them,
as having the same right with them unto all such immunities and privileges. 8.
As the whole society of the invisible Church chiefly is Gods own great household
and family in a peculiar manner, and is therefore admitted to a most near and
intimate communion with Him, such as a man has with his own domestics, Rev.
3. 20. yea, and is in a special way provided and cared for by Him, 1 Timothy 5.
8. So, whenever a man is reconciled to God by the blood of Jesus Christ, he
becomes a member of this holy and blessed family, and enjoys all the
privileges thereof, whereof this is one, in which it differs from other
families, that in this household there are no mercenary servants, but all the
domestics are sons and heirs, Joh. 1. 12. Col. 3. 24. for, by the household of
God he means the catholic Church, affirming that those Ephesians upon their
reconciliation with God became members of it; And of the household of God, says
he.

Verse. 20. And are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets,
Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone.
IN the third similitude he compares the Church unto an edifice or stately
building, and shows that those Ephesians were a part of it. Which similitude
does hold forth a further degree of nearness to, and communion with God and
His Church, than the former; in so far as the stones of an edifice are most
strictly joined together, both with the foundation and amongst themselves: and
herein he does, doubtless, allude to Solomon's Temple, which did prefigure the
Church of the truly Regenerate.

And, first, that he may with greater clearness set forth this their happy
condition, he does describe this spiritual, stately, and, in several things,
admirable edifice from four things. First, in this verse, from its foundation,
or that which does support the weight of the building, which he calls the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles; whereby is not meaned, that the
Prophets and Apostles in their own persons are the foundation of the Church;
for, they are built, as lively stones, with the rest of the Elect, upon the
foundation, Philip. 3. 8, 9. And therefore we must hereby understand the
foundation, which was laid by them as wise master builders under God, 1 Cor. 3.
9. 10. to wit, the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, or rather Jesus
Christ the sum and scope of their Doctrine, Romans 10. 4. 1 Cor. 2. 2. as the
Apostle expounds himself, 1 Cor. 3. 11. and is clear from Isa. 28. 16. to
which place he does here allude, and which is also more plainly set forth in
the close of this same verse, where the Apostle proves, that they were built
upon that foundation; because Christ is that cornerstone, spoken of, Isa. 28.
16. and Psalm. 118. 22. So that the foundation and cornerstone must be both one
in this place, seeing he infers the one from the other, only with this
difference, that Christ is not only the lowest cornerstone, which lies under
the whole building, and is a part of the foundation, to which cornerstone He
is compared, Isa. 28. 16. but He is also the highest, to which He is compared,
Psalm. 118. 22. Yea, and such a cornerstone as reaches all alongs the angle
from the foundation to the top of the building, binding the two walls of the
Church together, which are the two Nations of Jews and Gentiles: for, the word
in the Original signifies the extreme cornerstone, that is, both the highest
and the lowest, and consequently compriseth all which ly between those two
extremes: neither does the word imply, that there are any other subordinate, or
secundary foundations, or corner-stones, seeing the word is better rendered
extreme corner than chief. Doct. 1. Those excellent privileges bestowed upon
Believers, consisting in, and flowing from union and communion with Christ and
His Church, are of such a spiritual, sublime and divine nature; and we are so
carnal, dull and slow of understanding, that there are no proper significant
words, whereby to express them so as we may understand them: for, therefore is
it, that the Spirit of God does speak of them to us in our own language, and
takes similitudes from things earthly to set them forth, that so we may, at
least, understand somewhat of them, as here he makes use of a similitude taken
from a stately building for that end; And are built upon the foundation. 2. So
excellent and full are those privileges, and so complete is that happiness,
which is enjoyed by Believers, that not any one similitude, taken from earthly
things, can fully, or in any measure satisfyingly set them forth: for,
therefore is it, that the Spirit of God does multiply similitudes to this
purpose, that what is wanting in one, may be supplied by another; as here,
having set forth the happy state of Believers from the similitude, first of a
city, next of a family, ver. 19. he does in this verse add a third similitude,
taken from an edifice; And are built upon the foundation, says he. 3. So
steadable is Jesus Christ unto Believers, and of such universal use, in order
to their being built up in one temple unto God, that there is not any one piece
of a building, by which His steadable usefulness can be sufficiently
represented. He is not only the foundation-stone, who, being the first stone
which was laid in the building, (Rev. 13. 8.) does support this whole
spiritual edifice, Matthew. 16. 18. who was brought so low by His sufferings,
and daily in the preaching of the Gospel, that the meanest Believer may be
rolled upon Him, Matthew. 11. 28. and upon whom the weights of all Believers
great and small do hing, Isa. 22. 24. but He is also the cornerstone, who
reaches from the foundation to the top of this spiritual edifice, and joyneth
Jew and Gentile, the two walls of the Church, together in one, (see ver. 15.)
yea, and all particular Believers are united in Him, Joh. 17. -22, 23. who
breaks the violent blasts of all those storms, which would otherwise
overthrow the edifice, Isa. 25. 4. and use to beat most violently upon the
corners of buildings, Job 1. 19. who also is the choice of the stones of the
building, (as corner-stones use to be, Jer. 51. 26.) as being of more durable
substance, even the great and mighty God, Isa. 9. 6. and is in His humane
nature adorned and polished with a variety and fullness of created graces above
His fellows, Psalm. 45. 7. as corner-stones are more curiously engraven and
wrought than the rest of the building, Psalm. 144. 12. in whose stability and
strength, the strength of the whole spiritual edifice (Matthew. 16. 18.) and of
every lively stone thereof does consist, Joh. 10. 28. as the strength of an
artificial building consists in the goodness of the foundation and corners,
Matthew. 7. 24, 25. for, the Apostle, speaking of this spiritual edifice, gives
unto Christ the place both of foundation and corner, while he says, Ye are
built upon the foundation of the Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
(or extreme) cornerstone. 4. That any man be a part of this spiritual
edifice, and do partake of all those glorious privileges which flow from union
and communion with God and His Church, and are enjoyed by all the lively stones
of this building, he must be built upon Christ the foundation, taking band upon
Him by the cement of lively faith: for, the Apostle, showing that those
Ephesians were a part of this spiritual building, says they were built on
Christ; And are built upon the foundation. 5. There is no closing with, and
taking band upon Christ aright as a foundationstone, or rock for salvation,
except He be conceived and accepted of, as He is revealed and offered in the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament; for, He is called the foundation of
the Prophets and Apostles, to wit, whom they set forth and placed as a
foundation in the Church by their Doctrine and Writings. 6. Though God Himself
be the principal author and builder of this spiritual edifice, Isa. 28. 16. 1 Corinthians. 3. 6. Yet, He imployeth His called Ministers and Servants, as
instruments under Him, for carrying on this work, among whom He did make
special use of the Prophets and Apostles for laying the foundation, in so far,
as they first did reveal and preach Jesus Christ, and commit to writing such
truths concerning Him, as are necessary for salvation, Joh. 20. 31. while other
ordinary Ministers are employed in the preaching of Jesus Christ, as He is
revealed in Scripture, to build up the Elect upon the foundation, which was
laid by them, 2 Timothy 2. 2. for, he calls Christ the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, that is, whom they placed in the Church by their
Doctrine and Writings, by which He makes them to differ from ordinary
Ministers; And are built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. 7.
There is a sweet harmony and full agreement between the Doctrine and Writings
of the Prophets and Apostles: as in all other things; so especially, in holding
forth Jesus Christ for a foundation and rock of salvation unto Believers; the
latter having taught and written nothing, but what was partly prefigured in
types, and partly foretold in prophesies by the former, Acts 26. 22, 23. for,
Paul affirms, that the same foundation, Christ, was laid by both, while he
says, Built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. 8. How little
ground the Papists have from this, or any other Scripture, blasphemously to
teach, that the Pope is the foundation of the universal Church visible, in
whose voice and sentence the faith of all Believers ought to be determined and
built, appears not only from the meaning of the words asserted in the
exposition, but also from this, that all the Apostles are spoken of, as having
equal influence upon this foundation, so that Peter, whose successor the Pope
does plead himself to be, had no privilege in this above the rest; for, he
says, Ye are built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. 9. Though
men are easily moved to combine together in ill, Psalm. 83. 3. as being
naturally inclined to it, Genesis 6. 5. yet, such is the antipathy of every man by
nature unto that which is truly good, Romans 3. 12. and unto all other men in
that which is good; that nothing less was required for uniting all the Elect
among themselves, so, as to make them jointly endeavor the bringing about of
Gods glory in their own salvation, than that Jesus Christ should interpose as
an arbiter with power, causing the parties at variance to be at peace and
become a center, wherein all those scattered lines might meet, and a corner,
wherein the several walls and stones of the building are conjoined: for, says
Paul, it was necessary, in order to this union, that Jesus Christ himself
should be the extreme cornerstone.

Verse. 21. In whom all the building fitly framed together' grows unto an holy
temple in the Lord.
THis stately edifice is described, secondly, from the artificial and
altogether divine structure, and joining together, of all its parts, which is
the beauty of any building. This orderly frame and curious structure of the
Church, consists in these two. First, That the whole edifice, and all its
parts are firmly joined in him, that is, in Christ the foundation, to wit, by
faith; their life being framed according to His prescript and example, Matthew.
11. 29. and their faith embracing Him, according as He is held forth in the
Word, without addition or diminution, Col. 2. 6. even as the whole frame of a
material building is made conform to the foundation. Next, That all the parts
of this edifice are strongly joined together among themselves by the grace of
love, Col. 3. 14. and orderly situate, every one acting toward the good of
another in their several stations, 1 Corinthians. 12. 25. 26. in so far, as they
are regenerate, and consequently are parts of this building, 1 Corinthians. 12. -5-
even as all the parts of a material building have a commodious correspondency
one to another, and thereby are fitly framed together. This edifice is
described, thirdly, from its perpetual increase and growth, flowing also from
Christ the foundation: which growth is to be understood, not only with respect
to the whole body of the Church, which grows by the addition of new converts,
Isa. 54. 3. but also, and mainly to every member in particular, which do
increase and grow in gifts and graces, 2 Pet. 3. 18. And lastly, it is
described from the end intended in rearing up this stately growing edifice,
even to be an holy temple unto God, wherein He may manifest His presence, and
be perpetually served and glorified as it was in Solomon's temple, Psalm. 132.
13. Doct. 1. Jesus Christ does differ from the foundation of all other
buildings in this, that the whole building, and every stone of it does take
immediate band upon the foundation; all Believers being most intimately joined
to Him by faith, and not by the interveening mediation of others, as it is in
material buildings: for, the Apostle shows, that all the building (no part
thereof being excepted) is in Him, while he says, In whom all the building. 2.
As there is a strict conjunction, and a kind of proportion between Believers
and Christ, as also among themselves, even such, as is branched forth in the
exposition of this verse; so a great part of the strength and beauty of the
Church, and of all its parts, consists in this conjunction and proportion;
and nothing is more uncomely than for a Believer to be disproportioned unto
Christ, either in his faith, or practice, and to other Believers in his
coldrife affection to them, or his not acting orderly in his station for their
good: for, the Apostle describes this spiritual edifice from its divine
structure and curious joining of all its parts, as that, wherein a great part
of its beauty and strength does consist; In whom all the building fitly framed
together. 3. As this spiritual edifice does differ from other buildings, that
not only the whole edifice, but also all the parts of it (1 Pet. 2. 5.) are
endued with life; a life, which is wholly spiritual, and flows from their
union with Christ the foundation; So this life of theirs, is, for the time but
imperfect, their spiritual graces having not as yet attained that fullness and
strength which is required: for, the Apostle, while he ascribes a spiritual
growth to all the building, does imply both those, seeing growth supponeth life,
and want of just stature and perfection; In whom all the building grows. 4.
As growth in grace, is a privilege which appertains to all the parts of this
spiritual building who are yet on earth; so this growth of theirs, does flow
from their union and communion with Christ; and the more their union with Him
be improved to the daily extracting of a renewed influence from Him, they
cannot choose but thrive the better in this their spiritual growth: for, the
Apostle ascribes growth to all this building, and growth from their being in
Christ, and virtue coming from Him; In whom all the building grows, and in
the Lord: which words, it seems, are added, to show, that not only the first
beginnings, but also the continued progress and increase of grace do flow from
the Lord Christ. 5. As growth of grace in every particular Believer; So the
increase of the Church in general, by the addition of new converts, does flow,
not from created might, or power, Zech. 4. 6. but from the virtue of Jesus
Christ, who, having the nations given Him for an inheritance, (Psalm. 2. 8.)
will in despite of all opposition, enlarge the bounds of His dominion, until
He attain the full possession of all to whom He has a right: for, this growth
is to be understood also with respect to the whole body, by the addition of new
members; In which respect also the Apostle here says, It grows in the Lord.
6. As all Believers jointly, and each Believer a part, (1 Cor. 6. 19.) are a
temple for the Lord, wherein He does manifest His special presence, and
wherein He will be worshipped, by offering up spiritual sacrifices of prayer,
praises and all the duties of new obedience, 1 Pet. 2. 9. So, that they may be
a temple indeed for this holy God, they must be much in the study of holiness,
as in that which becomes His house, Psalm. 93. 5. for, the Apostle shows that
this whole building grows up to be a temple for God, and an holy temple; All
the building grows unto an holy temple. 7. The more that Believers do
endeavor to grow in grace, without resting upon any measure, they may expect
the more of Gods special presence to be manifested in them, as in His own
temple: for, it is the growing of this building mainly, which makes it fit to
be a temple for God; All the building grows unto an holy temple.

Verse. 22. In whom you also are builded together, for an habitation of God
through the Spirit.
THe Apostle does now, in the next and last place, apply what he has said of
this spiritual edifice, and of the Churches happy estate under that similitude
unto those believing Ephesians in particular, by showing, that even they were
built up together with all other sincere Believers upon Jesus Christ the
foundation, and for this end, that they might be a place of habitation, where
God might dwell, as manifesting His special presence in them, by the saving
operations of His holy Spirit. Doct. 1. That our faith may be saving, and our
comfort solid, it is necessary, not only that we know and believe those
excellent privileges which belong to the Church of God in general: But we
must also, observing the due order, make application of them unto our selves in
particular: for, Paul teaches so much, while, having set forth the happy
estate of all Believers in general, he makes application thereof unto those
Ephesians in particular; In whom also you are builded together, says he. 2.
That this particular application may be made in due order, it is necessary,
that in the first place we make application of Christ unto our selves, laying
hold upon Him by faith; that so being in Him, we may have right unto all those
saving privileges, which are purchased by Him: for, the Apostle shows this
was the order, wherein those privileges were applied unto the believing
Ephesians; they were first united to Christ, and so had access unto all the
rest which follow; In whom also you are builded together for an habitation of
God. 3. That we may rightly apply Christ unto our selves, it is necessary that
we lay hold upon Him in order to all those ends, for which He is offered in the
Gospel, even to those which imply an obligation upon us of duty, both unto
other Believers and unto God: for, those Ephesians were so united to Christ by
faith; that, as a consequence thereof, they were also united one to another,
and to all Believers by love, and made an habitation for God; In whom you are
builded together, for an habitation of God. 4. Jesus Christ does differ from
the foundations of other buildings in this, that every particular Believer is
not only laid upon Him, and supported by Him, as it is in material buildings;
but they are also indented in Him, and hid, as it were, in the clifts of that
rock by saving faith; so that the foundation covers the whole building, and
serves for a refuge from the storm, and a shadow from the heat, Isa. 25. 4.
for, he says not, upon whom, but in whom you also are builded. 5. As all
Believers, how far so ever removed by large distance, are yet most strictly
tied and joined together; So, by taking band with Christ the foundation, they
are fastened one to another, even as the stones of a building: for, he says,
In whom you are builded together: union among themselves did follow upon their
being in Him. 6. The more deeply engaged that any have been before conversion
in Sathan's service and the slavery of their lusts, their after conversion, and
being builded upon Christ for an habitation to God, is the rarer privilege,
the more to be admired and highly esteemed of; for, he says not simply, in
whom you are builded, but in whom you also: which highteneth the purpose, as a
thing wonderful, and hardly credible, the apostle having an eye doubtless to
their former slavery unto Satan and their own lusts, spoken of, ver. 2, 3. 7.
So inseparable is that union, and connection among the Persons of the blessed
Trinity, that the presence and indwelling of one is sufficient to prove the
indwelling of all: for, they are an habitation to God the Father and Son,
because the Spirit did dwell in them and sanctify them; An habitation of God
through the Spirit. 8. Though all the external actions of the Godhead do
belong to all the Persons of the blessed Trinity; Yet some of those actions are
usually ascribed unto one, more than the rest, according as they carry some
proportion and likeness to the personal properties of each person: for, the
sanctification of Believers (in regard of which effect God is said to dwell in
Believers, seeing He thereby does manifest His special presence in them) is
here ascribed unto the Spirit, while those Ephesians are said to be an
habitation unto God through the Spirit.

CHAP. III.
IN the first part of this Chapter (which begins ver. 2.) the Apostle
sets forth the dignity of his Apostolic Office toward the Gentiles, with
his calling to it, and qualifications for it. And, first, he propounds the
matter briefly, that this office was committed to him, verse. 2. Next, he does
more largely illustrate it. First, by showing his qualification and furniture
for this Office, to wit, his knowledge and insight in the mystery of the
Gospel, which He was to preach: for proof whereof, he appealeth to what he had
written in the two former Chapters, ver. 3, 4. and having called the Gospel a
Mystery, he shows the reason why he did so, to wit, because it was not so
known of old, as now under the Gospel, ver. 5. and gives a brief sum of this
mystery, as to that part of it which was most controverted, to wit, the
calling of the Gentiles to the free enjoyment of Gospel-priviledges, ver. 6.
Next, by showing his call from God, and authority to dispense this furniture:
where he takes occasion to extol and magnify his Office, and the grace of
God, which called him to it, from eight distinct considerations. First, from
the gifts wherewith he was furnished to discharge it. Secondly, from the
powerful assistance of Gods Spirit, which wrought in him and by him in the
discharging of it, ver. 7. Thirdly, from his own unworthiness, who was
entrusted with it. Fourthly, from the excellency of the subject matter, which
he was to set forth, even the unsearchable riches of Christ, ver. 8. Fifthly,
from the great benefit, which by his conscientious discharging thereof was to
accresce unto men, even their more clear understanding of that mystery, ver.
9. Sixthly, from the same benefit, which did thereby redound to the glorified
Angels, ver. 10. Seventhly, from the eternity of Gods purpose to entrust him in
that office, for bringing about the forementioned ends, ver. 11. And lastly,
from three excellent privileges, boldness, access, confidence whereof
Believers did partake by the means of his Ministry; as being thereby brought
to Christ, in whom they enjoyed all those, ver. 12. From all which grounds he
dehorteth them from fainting, notwithstanding of his present sad sufferings in
discharging so honorable an employment, ver. 13.

In the second part of the Chapter, he does indirectly incite them to
persevere, and make progress in the experimental knowledge of, and in
communion with Christ, by giving a sum of his fervent prayers unto God for them
to that purpose. The occasion of which prayer, is, ver. 1. his gesture in
prayer, and to whom he did pray, to wit, God, described from his relation to
Christ and the Church, are, ver. 14. 15. The particulars prayed for, are, 1.
Their strengthening in the inward man by the Spirit, ver. 16. 2. Christ's
inhabiting their heart by faith, ver. 17-. 3. Their experimental knowledge and
comprehension of Christ's boundless love, flowing from their firm adhering to
the love of God in Christ by faith, ver. -17, 18, 19- 4. Their full
replenishing with the perfection of all graces in glory, ver. -19. The
conclusion of his prayer contains a description of God, taken from His
almighty power to do above our petitions and conceptions, ver. 20. and a
thanksgiving unto God so described, and upon that ground, ver. 21.

Verse. 1. FOr this cause, I Paul, the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles.
THis verse belongs to the purpose contained in the second part of the
Chapter, which, being begun here, is interrupted until ver. 14. The reason
whereof shall be shown, ver. 2. In the mean time he does here declare the
occasion of his following prayer to God on their behalf to have been, even
that, which he has but presently spoken concerning them, to wit, their being
already builded upon Christ by faith, together with all true Believers; for,
the words, for this cause, relate to the close of the preceding Chapter. And
withal, that his praying to God so fervently for them may have the more
weight, in order to their up-stirring to endeavor after that which he prays
for, he describes himself, who is to pray for them, from his present captivity
and bonds, under which he was at Rome for the truth of Christ, and for the
behoof and edification of the Gentiles: (of whom these Ephesians were a part)
for, Paul being entrusted, in a peculiar manner, to be the Apostle and Doctor
of the Gentiles, 1 Timothy 2. 7. it follows, that all his sufferings, in
discharge of that trust, were for their sake. Besides, that the nearest cause
of his sufferings from the Jews, his chief adversaries, was his carrying of the
Gospel unto the Gentiles, Act. 22, 21, 22. Doct. 1. The pains of Ministers
with, and for the Lords people, are so far from being at an end, when people
are brought to Christ and built upon Him by faith, that even their being
brought this length, does lay a new tie upon their Ministers, both to deal with
God on their behalf, and to labor with themselves so much the more earnestly,
that, not only they do not loss those things which are already wrought, 2 John
ver. 8. but also they may make progress answerable unto their fair beginnings;
lest otherwise they mar their own comfort, Psalm. 51. 12. make the name of God
to be evil spoken of, 2 Samuel 12. 14. and thereby draw down sore corrections
upon themselves, 2 Samuel 12. 10. for, the Apostle his praying so fervently upon
their behalf, and thereby stirring them up to endeavor after that themselves,
which he did pray for, was occasioned by their being built upon Christ for an
habitation unto God; for this cause, says he, I Paul -- do bow my knees, as it
follows, ver. 14. which closes up the sentence begun here. 2. Such powerful
influence has God upon hearts, that He can make those, who for the time are
cruel persecuters of truth, prove afterward famous Martyrs, and sufferers for
it: for, Paul was once a bloody persecuter, Gal. 1. -13. but is now a famous
sufferer; I Paul, the prisoner, says he, or, as it is in the Original, that
prisoner, implying he was no ordinary, but a noted sufferer; his sufferings
being in a manner singular, 2 Cor. 11. 23, etc. 3. Sufferings for Christ and
truth are so far from being cause of just reproach to those who suffer, from
others, or from being matter of shame and blushing to themselves, That they are
rather a glory unto them, yea, and sometimes will be gloried in by them, as
that, wherein their chiefest honor stands: for, Paul, after the example of
Kings and Nobles, who design themselves by their most honorable styles, does,
in place of all, take this one, of a prisoner for Truth, unto himself; I Paul,
the prisoner of Jesus Christ. 4. So far ought people be from stumbling at
truth, because of the oppressed and suffering lot of those who preach it, that
even their sufferings for truth should make their pains the more acceptable,
and add a weight unto the Word of truth in their mouth: for, Paul describes
himself from his present suffering lot, that both his person and pains might
have the more weight and efficacy with them; I Paul, the prisoner of Jesus
Christ. 5. The Lord does sometimes give so far way to the rage of persecuters,
as that the choicest instruments for carrying on His work may be, for a season,
restrained in their liberty, and so laid aside as useless, even in a time when
there is greatest need of their pains and diligence: for, Paul, an eminent
instrument, (1 Corinthians. 15. 10.) was at such a time cast in prison; I Paul, the
prisoner of Jesus Christ. 6. No afflictions or sufferings do loose a Pastor
from his duty toward the Lords people, over whom he is set: But when he is
restrained in his liberty from Preaching to them, he ought even then endeavor
their edification by writting to them, and praying for them: for, Paul, being a
prisoner, does yet write to those Ephesians, and pray for them; I Paul, the
prisoner -- do bow my knees. 7. A prisoner for Christ and truth, has this
advantage beyond all other prisoners in ordinary wars, he is a prisoner, not so
much to those who persecute him, as to Jesus Christ, his own Lord and General:
and that not only, because he suffers in His quarrel, but also he remains
still in His custody, Genesis 39. 21. and at His disposal, who over-ruleth the
rage of enemies so as that they cannot do the meanest prisoner of His any
further hurt than seems good unto Him, Dan. 3. 17. for, in both those
respects, Paul does call himself Christ's prisoner; he was imprisoned for His
sake, and at, and during His overruling will and pleasure; I Paul, the prisoner
of Jesus Christ. 8. The Lord does so out-wit His enemies, as their very
restraining and imprisoning His servants, does, contrary to their intention,
tend to the furtherance of the Gospel; all their sufferings of that sort being
real confirmations of the truth preached by them, Phil. 1. -17. and speaking
examples for others to imitate, Iam. 5. 10. for, Paul shows, that his
sufferings were for the Gentiles, though not for their redemption, 1 Cor. 1.
-13- yet for their good and edification in the mentioned respects; I Paul, the
prisoner-for you Gentiles. 9. This may exceedingly sweeten the sharpest
sufferings of Gods servants, when they consider, they suffer nothing but what
is measured out unto them by their Lord Christ; that their sufferings are not
for evil doing, but for Him and His truth who suffered for them, 2 Cor. 5. 14,
15. and that not only their own salvation, but the salvation also of others, is
some one way or other advanced by their sufferings: for, Paul's sufferings are
sweetened from this, that he was the prisoner of Jesus Christ, and for the
Gentiles.

Verse. 2. If ye have heard of the dispensation of the grace of God, which is
given me to you-ward.
HEre begins the first part of the Chapter, wherein the Apostle, by way of
digression, sets forth the dignity of his Apostolic Office toward the
Gentiles; that thereby he may, not only guard them from stumbling at his
sufferings, as is clear from ver. 13. but also give a reason of what he
presently said, ver. 1. that he was a prisoner for them, to wit, because he had
his Office from God toward them: for, lest they had doubted of the truth of
that assertion, he presently breaks off the former sentence in the very
entry, without putting a close to it, until ver. 14. as judging it more safe
to keep them a little in suspense, and ignorant of that which he began to speak
of, than to leave them with a doubt about the truth of any thing which he had
already spoken; seeing ignorance of things, not yet revealed, is not so
hazardous as misbelief of those truths which was revealed and known.

And therefore, in the first branch of the first part of the Chapter, contained
in this verse, the Apostle does briefly declare, that the Apostolic Office of
dispensing and ministerial distributing the doctrine of free grace and
salvation contained in the Gospel, here (called the grace of God, as, Tit. 2.
11.) was committed unto him with relation chiefly to the Gentiles, and
particularly, to those Ephesians. See upon Col. 1. ver. 25. doct. 3. And as to
the truth of this assertion, he appealeth to their own knowledge and
conscience, if they had not heard it, and were not sufficiently instructed in
it: for, the conditional particle if, implies not any doubt of the thing, but
rather his great confidence, that they nei there could nor would contradict it,
seeing it was a thing publicly known from the history of his conversion, Gal.
1. 22, 23. and doubtless also from his own preaching while he was among them,
Act. 19. 10. Doct. 1. Where a Minister is called, and sent by God unto a
People, not only his Sermons, but also his actions and carriage, yea, his very
sufferings in the discharge of his Calling, are blessed of God to be powerful
preachings for the good and edification ofthose among them, whom God intends
good for: for, Paul proves he was a prisoner for the Gentiles, or that his
imprisonment and sufferings did contribute for their good and edification,
because he was called of God to dispense the Gospel unto them; If ye have heard
of the dispensation -- which is given me to you-ward. 2. The ministerial Office
is not a lordly dominion, but a stewardship, whereby the Lord himself, who is
great Master of that family, (ver. 15.) which is His House and Church, 1 Timothy
3. 15. does entrust some to break and divide the bread of life unto the rest:
which therefore they must do with that measure of faithfulness (1 Cor. 4. 2.)
and wisdom (Mat. 24. 45.) as they may be answerable unto Him who has entrusted
them; for, he calls the ministerial Office entrusted to him, the
dispensation, which signifies the ordering of things belonging to the family
so as may be most for its behoof: and being applied unto God, with relation to
His Church, it signifies a most absolute power to dispose of those things as
He pleases, (so is it taken, Col. 1. 25.) but being applied unto His
Ministers, as it is here, it signifies only a subordinate misterial power, for
which the person entrusted must be countable, such as is the office of a
steward in great families. See 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. If ye have heard of the
dispensation of the grace, etc. 3. The great thing which Ministers are to
dispense and distribute unto the Lords family, is the doctrine of Salvation
through free grace. They are indeed to dispense threatenings also, and to
inculcate the terror of Gods wrath, Mat. 3. 12. Only their great design in all
should be, that people may be thereby fitted to embrace the offer of grace and
salvation in the Gospel: for, the Apostle calls that which he was to
dispense, the grace of God, to wit the doctrine of grace; The dispensation of
the grace of God. 4. The Lords People ought carefully to lay up and remember
what they hear of the Lords Word from, or of His dealing with, His Servants;
that so they may make use of it afterward, when God calls them to it: and
more especially they would not forget what may convincingly clear unto their
consciences a Ministers calling, and his being sent from God unto them; whereby
his doctrine, life, and sufferings may have the greater weight with them: for,
Paul supposes they did perfectly remember what they heard of his calling to
the Gentiles, and therefore does appeal to their testimony, while he says, If
ye have heard of the dispensation, etc. 5. As there is no less concredited
unto called Ministers by God to hold forth unto the Lords People, than the
doctrine of Salvation through free grace, the greatest of all trusts; So
whatever is committed or given by God unto them, is not for themselves alone,
but for the good of those also unto whom they are sent; and therefore God does
usually deal the better with Ministers for the Peoples sake: for, the relative,
which, does relate to the antecedent, grace, and Paul says, This grace, or,
the doctrine of the Gospel, is given me to you-ward.

Verse. 3. How that by revelation he made known unto me the mystery (as I wrote
before in few words, 4 Whereby when ye read ye may understand my knowledge in
the mystery of Christ.)
THe Apostle, being (in the second branch of the first part of the Chapter to
ver. 13.) more largely to illustrate what he did but briefly assert, ver. 2. to
wit, that the Apostolic office of dispensing the Gospel to the Gentiles was
committed unto him, does, first, show, to ver. 7. that he was sufficiently
furnished by God with knowledge and insight in the Doctrine of the Gospel
concredited to him. And in those two verses he declares, not only the nature
of this Doctrine, that it is a mystery, or sacred secret; but also, that it
was made known unto him by God, together with the manner how he came to the
knowledge of it, to wit, by extraordinary revelation from God, and not by
ordinary means, as is more clearly expressed, Gal. 1. 12. and for proof of his
knowledge and insight in this mystery, he refers them to what he has
written succinctly of it in the two former Chapters, in which he has, by a
most divine and ravishing strain, set forth the grounds, causes and means of
salvation, and made application of all both to Jew and Gentile, which is the
very comprehensive sum of this mystery, ver. 3. from which two preceding
Chapters, being diligently perpended, and read by them, he doubts not, but
they should find he had not arrogantly, and without ground ascribed to himself
a great measure of knowledge and insight in that mystery, which he calls the
mystery of Christ; because Christ is the chief subject of the Gospel, 1 Cor.
2. 2. and the very mystery of that mystery, 1 Timothy 3. 16. This is contained,
ver. 4.

From ver. 3. Learn, 1. Whoever are called by God to undergo any office in His
house, they are in somemeasure, greater or lesser, competently furnished and
fitted by Him for that employment: And therefore giftlesse Ministers were never
sent by God; for, Paul, having shown that the Apostolic Office was committed
unto him by God, ver. 2. he now declares how God had furnished him for it; How
that by revelation He made known unto me the mystery. 2. That the Gospel is a
mystery, and in what respects it is so, see chap. 1. ver. 9. doct. 1. He made
known unto me the mystery. 3. The Lord does usually manifest Himself, more or
less, unto His Servants, according to the nature, weight and difficulty of
those employments unto which He does call them: for, He makes Himself manifest
to Paul by extraordinary revelation, because he was to serve Him in an
extraordidary embassage, as an Apostle; How that by revelation He made known
unto me. 4. As Christ's Ministers may sometimes in sobriety speak to the
commendation of their own knowledge, and of their other ministerial abilities,
to wit, when they are necessitated to assert and avow their calling from God;
So it is most safe to speak no further to that purpose, than they have formerly
given some proof of, in discharge of their calling, to which they may appeal,
as an undeniable confirmation of what they affirm; lest otherwise their bare
assertion be taken for vain vaunting and arrogant boasting: for, Paul, being
called to speak of his own knowledge and abilities, as an evidence of his
calling from God, refers them to that proof, which he had given thereof in
his former writings, while he says, As I wrote before in few words. 5. The
Doctrine of salvation revealed unto, and Preached by the Apostles, is contained
in their writings, and therefore there is no necessity of unwritten traditions:
for, the Apostle, proving that this mystery was revealed to him, he does not
refer them to what he had preached unto them for the space of two years, Acts
19. 10. but to his writings, which had been no adequate proof, except he had
written the sum of all which was revealed unto him, at least, of so much as was
necessary for them to know; As I wrote before in few words. 6. The Spirit of God
speaking in Scripture, has comprised large and comprehensive purpose, even the
whole plot of man's salvation, and the sum of man's duty, in a small bulk and few
words; as knowing that reading much would be but wearisomenesse to the flesh,
Eccles. 12. -12. and intending that the gift of interpretation and exponing
Scripture, should have place in the Church, 1 Corinthians. 12. 8. for, Paul, the
penman of the Spirit of God, gives a comprehensive sum of the whole Gospel in
the two first Chapters, with relation to which, he says here, I wrote before in
few words.

From ver. 4. Learn, 1. The brevity of Scripture, and comprehensive largeness
of the purpose contained in it, do not occasion any such obscurity in
Scripture, but by diligent reading the mind of God therein may be found out and
understood: for, notwithstanding, Paul has shown he had comprehended that
whole mystery in few words; yet, says he, Whereby when you read, ye may
understand. 2. The Word of God therefore ought to be frequently read, and
diligently perused by all the Lords people; this being one mean, and second to
none (except public preaching, Romans 10. 14, 15.) which the Lord does bless,
as for other ends, So for attaining to know and understand the purpose and
subject matter contained in the Word: for, Paul supponeth it was their duty to
read what he had written, and shows by reading they should understand his
knowledge in the mystery. 3. Even private Christians, through diligent reading
of Scripture, may attain to such a measure of knowledge and understanding, as
may enable them to judge of the abilities, gifts and doctrine of Ministers:
for, Paul, speaking even to private Christians amongst those Ephesians, says,
Whereby, when ye read, ye may understand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ.
4. Though private Christians are not to sist themselves as public judges of
the doctrine of Ministers, 1 Cor. 14. 32. neither should they delight much in
venting their private judgment, especially their carping censures, Iam. 1.
-19- yet they are not as stupid blocks, without trial and examination, to
receive whatever the Minister says; but ought to pass a private judgment of
discretion upon what they hear, whether it be truth or error, right or wrong,
in so far, at least, as may regulate their own practice in choosing, or
refusing what they hear, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. for, Paul allows unto those
Ephesians to pass such a judgment upon his own doctrine and abilities; Ye may
understand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ.

Verse. 5. Which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, as it is
now revealed unto his holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit.
THe Apostle gives a reason, why he called the Gospel (the knowledge whereof
was revealed unto him) a mystery, and thereby does also prove, that there was
a necessity of extraordinary revelation for bringing him to the knowledge of
it, to wit, because this Doctrine of salvation through free grace by Christ,
and more especially the calling of the Gentiles to partake of this salvation in
all respects equally with the Jews (which is chiefly intended by the mystery
here spoken of, as is clear from, ver. 6.) was not so fully, and clearly made
known in the former ages of the world, unto any of the sons of men, whether
without, or within the Church, as it was now under the Gospel revealed
immediately by the Spirit of God unto the holy Apostles (who these were, see
upon Col. 1. ver. 1. doct. 2.) and the Prophets of the New Testament, (spoken
of, Act. 15. 32. 21. 8, 9, 10. Ephesians. 4. 11.) who being extraordinarily assisted
by the Spirit of God, did not only open up the prophetical Scriptures of the
Old Testament, confirming and proving the Doctrine of the Gospel from these;
but also did foretell things to come. Doct. 1. The children of men are
naturally ignorant of Gospel Truths, and know no further of them, than God is
pleased to reveal and make known unto them: for, the Apostle shows, that the
sons of men were passive, as to the measure of light which was attained unto of
those truths; Which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, as
it is now revealed. 2. The Lord in bestowing grace and the saving knowledge of
Himself, does act as a most free agent, not constrained by any necessity, so,
that He dispenses grace to whom He will, Romans 9. 18. to some more sparingly,
and to others more liberally, whether we compare times with times, or persons
with persons in one and the same time, Romans 12. -3. for, He has revealed the
saving knowledge of this mystery now under the Gospel in a greater measure than
he did formerly; Which in other ages was not made known, as is now revealed,
says he. 3. Neither the Doctrine of salvation through free grace by Christ,
nor Gods purpose to call the Gentiles to partake of this salvation equally with
the Jews, was altogether unknown to the ancient Church before Christ came;
there being several manifestations of the former in the Covenant of Grace, as
it was first revealed unto Adam, Genesis 3. 15. and after renewed with Abraham,
Genesis 17. 7. David, 2 Samuel 23. 5. and commented upon by the Prophets, Isa. 53.
3, etc. and many full prophesies also of the latter, which the Apostles
themselves did make use of to confirm the calling of the Gentiles, as Act. 13.
47. cited from Isa. 49. 6. and Act. 15. 15. cited from Amos 9. 11: for, the
Apostle does not simply deny that the former ages had any knowledge of this
mystery at all, but comparatively; It was not in other ages made known, as it
is now revealed. But, fourthly, neither the Doctrine of salvation, nor yet the
calling of the Gentiles were so fully, or clearly revealed under the Old
Testament, as they are now under the New; both of them being but sparingly
spoken to then, Mat. 13. 17. and what was spoken, for the most part, wrapped up
in a vail of types and shadows, so that they could not steadfastly look to the
end of that which is abolished, 2 Cor. 3. 13. The latter, to wit, the calling
of the Gentiles, being only then foretold, and prophesied of; and therefore
could not be so distinctly, solidly and satisfyingly known, as now when it is
accomplished: Besides that the time when, and the manner how it was to be
accomplished, and particularly, that the Gentiles should have access unto the
Church without an entrance by the door of circumcision. Those (I say) were
either not at all, or but very sparingly revealed, so that even the Apostles
themselves, after Christ's ascension, did doubt and hesitate much about the
truth of this mystery, until it was more fully revealed, Act. 10. 10, etc.
for, says Paul, Which in other ages was not made known, as it is now revealed.
5. As Christ's servants may be sometimes necessitated to speak unto the
commendation of their own receipts from God; So Christian sobriety will teach
them to be so far from disparaging, or undervaluing the receipts of others, to
render themselves thereby the more esteemed of, That they will endeavor to
have others, who are equally deserving, to partake with them in that deserved
esteem, which they challenge unto themselves: for, Paul, having begun to speak
(ver. 3.) of that knowledge of this mystery, which was revealed unto himself,
does here affirm the same of all the Apostles and Prophets; As it is now
revealed unto the Apostles and Prophets. 6. Though God might easily communicate
the knowledge of Himself unto all, whom he intends to save in a way
extraordinary, immediately and without the help of second means, Act. 2. ver.
3, 4. yet, He has rather chosen to communicate His mind so, unto some few
only, who have, some of them, at least, at His appointment (2 Pet. 1. -21.) set
down in sacred Writ what they themselves did immediately receive from God, 1
Job. 1. 1. by which means the knowledge of God may, in an ordinary way, be
conveyed unto others, Job. 20. 31. The Lord hereby preventing Satan's design,
who would otherwise have obtruded upon people his own delusions, in place of
immediate revelations from God, 2 Chronicles. 18. 21. and trying the obedience of
His people, if they will subject themselves unto His will and word in the mouth
of His Servants, Matthew. 10. 40. as also gently sparing their infirmity and
weakness, who could not, one among a thousand, carry aright those
extraordinary manifestations of God unto their spirits, 2 Cor. 12. 7. for,
says Paul, this mystery was revealed by the Spirit, to wit, immediately, not
unto all, but to His holy Apostles and Prophets. 7. As all the Lords Ministers
ought to be inherently holy, not only because of the precept enjoining so much
in a special manner unto Ministers, Tit. 1. 8. but also for the more
successful discharging of their office; seeing the secret of the Lord is with
them who fear Him, Psalm. 25. 14. and the lips of the righteous feed many, Prove.
10. 21. and as all the extraordinary Office-bearers (for what is revealed,
Judas alone excepted) and Penmen of holy Scripture, were really sanctified and
holy; So inherent holiness, without a peculiar illumination of the Spirit of
God, superadded for that end, is not sufficient for giving clear light and
insight in Gospel-mysteries: for, He gives the Apostles and Prophets the
epithet of boly, to show they themselves were so, and all Ministers ought to be
so; and yet this mystery behoved to be revealed unto them by the Spirit, even
to the holy Apostles and Prophets.

Verse. 6. That the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs, and of the same body, and
partakers of his promise in Christ, by the Gospel.
THe Apostle does here give a brief sum of that mystery, which was revealed
unto him, as to that part of it, at least, which was most controverted, to wit,
that the Pagan Gentiles were now called to enjoy, and real Believers among them
actually did enjoy most excellent privileges. As, first, of being joynt-heirs
of the heavenly inheritance with the Believers of the Jewish Nation, Gal. 3.
29. and with Christ Himself, Romans 8. 17. Secondly, of being incorporated with
the Church of God in one mystical body, whereof Christ is the Head. See, upon
Ephesians. 1. -22, 23. And, thirdly, of partaking with the believing Jews of the
Covenantpromise made by God to Abraham and his seed, Genesis 17. 7. so that they
were now within the bond of the Covenant of Grace. He declares also, that all
those privileges were purchased for them, and freely bestowed upon them by
Christ, and by virtue of their being in Him by faith, in whom they had equal
interest with the believing Jews themselves; and that they were brought to this
happy estate by the alone-preaching of the Gospel, and by faith in it, without
the ceremonial Law and Circumcision. All which were mysteries to the ancient
Church. See upon ver. 5. Doct. 4. Hence, Learn, 1. There is a necessary
concatenation among those three, to wit, a right to heaven, union with Christ's
mystical body, and saving interest in the Covenant of Grace. The enjoying of
any one whereof, implies the other two: and if one of those be wanting, the
rest are wanting also: for, the Apostle speaks of them, as mutually depending
one upon another; That the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs, etc. 2. As every
renewed child of God is an heir of the heavenly inheritance; So the multitude
of heirs does not lessen the inheritance, nor make the privilege of being an
heir of heaven the less glorious; yea, it adds unto the glory of it: for, he
places a great part of their privilege in this, not simply, that they were
heirs, but fellow-heirs. 3. It is a great and glorious privilege to be a part
of that mystical body, whereof Christ is Head; and that because of the strict
union, which such have with Christ (See, ver. 17.) and with all Believers in
Christ, Ephesians. 2. -15. and because of that influence of life and spirit, which,
being in Christ without measure, Joh. 3. -34. is communicated unto them, every
one in his own measure; Ephesians. 4. 16. as also because of their interest in all
the common privileges of that body, Romans 8. 30. and in the gifts and graces of
every member thereof, 1 Cor. 3. 22. for, Paul speaks of this, as an excellent
privilege bestowed on the Gentiles under the new Testament, even that they
should be of the same body. 4. It is a privilege no less great and glorious,
to have saving interest in the Covenant of Grace and the promises thereof; for,
thereby we have access to both the former privileges; and all the saving
blessings of that Covenant, comprised in the many large precious, and
comprehensive promises thereof, do become ours: for, the Apostle speaks of
this, as of another excellent privilege bestowed upon the Gentiles, even, that
they should be partakers of His promise. 5. As Jesus Christ has purchased all
those glorious privileges and saving blessings, to which the people of God can
lay any claim, or interest; So there is no actual enjoyment of any part of His
purchase, except by those who are savingly in Christ, and united to Him by
faith: for, this expression, in Christ, speaks both that those things were
purchased by Him, and were enjoyed by their being in Him; partakers of His
promise in Christ. 6. The Gospel (especially when it is preached by a sent
Minister, Romans 10. 15.) is a powerful mean, through Gods blessing, for gaining
ground upon most desperate sinners, and for prevailing with them to close by
faith with Christ, as He is offered; by virtue whereof their state is changed,
and they made holy, happy and blessed: for, the Gentiles, whose desperate case
in time past was set forth, Chap. 2. 12. are now made fellow-heirs of one body,
partakers of His promise in Christ, or being united to Him, and this all by the
Gospel.

Verse. 7. Whereof I was made a Minister, according to the gift of the grace of
God, given unto me, by the effectual working of His power.
THe Apostle, having in the preceding verses declared how he had attained a
large measure of knowledge and insight in the mystery of the Gospel, does now
(in further enlargement of what he did but briefly assert, ver. 2.) show, that
he was called by God to undergo the Apostolic Office of dispensing that
mystery, and does jointly extol and magnify his Office, from eight distinct
considerations, to ver. 13.

And in this verse, having asserted his calling from God to be a Minister of
the Gospel unto the Gentiles, he does magnify this his Office, as also make it
appear, that he was called to it, first, from the gifts both ordinary and
extraordinary, which he was furnished with in the discharging of it. And,
secondly, from the powerful assistance of Gods Spirit, enabling him to
exercise those gifts, notwithstanding of many difficulties, and giving
admirable success to his Ministry both far and near, Romans 15. 19, 20. All
which, to wit, his calling, gifts, and divine assistance, he does ascribe to
Gods grace and free favor. Doct. 1. The very Apostolic Office it self, was no
lordly dominion, or place of honor and ease; but a laborious ministry and
service, wherein the person entrusted, was to bestir himself to the utmost of
his activity and diligence, for the honor of Christ and good of His Church:
for, the word rendered Minister, which Paul here takes unto himself, does
signify a painful, vehement labor, as those who make have in travel,
raising the dust by their celerity and speed; Whereof I was made a Minister,
says he. 2. It is not sufficient warrant for any to meddle with the
ministerial Office, that he has competent gifts fitting him for it, except he
have also ministerial power and authority conveyed unto him, either immediately
by God, as it was in the calling of the Apostles, Gal. 1. 1. or, mediately,
according to that order which God has established in His Church, as is in the
calling of ordinary Ministers, Act. 14. 23. for, Paul distinguishes these two,
his being sufficiently furnished with the knowledge of the Gospel, whereof he
spoke from ver. 3. and his authority and power to preach the Gospel unto
others, of which he speaks here, while he says, whereof I was made a
Minister. 3. Though ability and gifts be not that which makes a man a called
Minister, as said is; yet when men, being otherwise orderly called, are
competently furnished with gifts and enduements, and are accompanied with the
influence of Gods blessing upon the exercise of their parts, it is a speaking
evidence and confirmation of their calling from God, not only unto themselves,
but also unto others who would otherwise possibly doubt of it: for, Paul does
not only magnify his office, but also make it evident that he was called to it
from these two, while he says, I am made a Minister according to the gift
bestowed on me, and by, or, as it is in the Original, according to the
effectual working of His power. 4. As it is required to make a man a Minister,
that he be endued with competent abilities and gifts for that employment; So it
is no less requisite that God do concur with him; otherwise he cannot exercise
his gift, and make use of it for the good of others, 2 Cor. 3. 5. or, though he
exercise it, yet all his utmost endeavors will be fruitless and without
success among the people, 1 Cor. 3. 6. for, Paul shows besides the gift
which he received of grace. God did also concur with him; According to the gift
of the grace of God, by the effectual working of His power. 5. Though the Lord
give competency of gifts unto all whom He calls, yet He gives not unto all
one and the same gift, or in the same measure; but to some a greater, to others
a lesser, as He has more or less to do with them: for, as Paul was singularly
employed; so he had a singular gift, and therefore he says, the gift of the
grace given to me, thereby implying there was somewhat singular in his gift. 6.
So great and many are those difficulties which Ministers have often to wrestle
with, what from without, and what from within, before they can attain to
freedom and boldness in exercising their ministerial gift, Gal. 4. 13, 14. So
difficult is it also to gain ground upon hearts by the ministry of the Word, 2
Cor. 10. -4, 5. that no less is required, either for the one or the other,
than the power of God, His working power, and working effectually with a kind
of pith and energie: for, Paul's necessity called for no less, even the
effectual working of His power. 7. As it is no small grace and favor from God
for any to be imployin the ministerial Calling, and competently furnished with
gifts and parts for that employment, and to have their labors blessed with
success in gaining many souls to God; So a gracious Minister will be ready at
all occasions to acknowledge grace in all these, ascribing all to Gods favor,
and His powerful working in him, and by him, and not to his own dignity,
diligence, or parts: for, so does Paul here; Whereof I was made a Minister,
according to the gift of the grace of God.

Verse. 8. Unto me, who am less than the least of all Saints, is this grace
given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of
Christ.
THe Apostle does extol and magnify his Office, thirdly, from the
consideration of his own unworthiness, which was so great, by reason,
especially, of his enmity to Christ and the Christian Church, while he was
unconverted, 1 Timothy 1. 13. that to his own apprehension, and for what he knew
of himself and others, he was more unworthy, and less to be esteemed of, than
the meanest of Gods children and Saints: and yet the Apostolic office (called
here grace, because it did flow from Gods favor and grace) was bestowed upon
him. And, fourthly, from the excellency of the subject matter, which he was
engaged, by virtue of his Office, to preach and set forth unto the Gentiles,
even the unsearchable riches of Christ, under which is comprehended the whole
Doctrine of the Gospel, wherein are contained such things relating to Christ in
His Person, Natures and Offices, and to the benefits of Justification,
Adoption, Sanctification, of grace here, and of glory hereafter, purchased by
Him, and bestowed upon the Elect; and such things also relating to His manifold
wisdom manifested in His various dispensation to His Church in several ages,
as are not only hid to natural men, but also above the reach of all created
understanding (even though renewed by grace) to comprehend them fully in this
life, until we see as we are seen, 1 Cor. 13. 12. All which things are here
called riches, not only because of that unsearchable abundance, and worth,
which are in the things themselves, but also because they make the Elect (to
whom they are offered, and upon whom they are bestowed) truly rich, Rev. 3. 18-
and possessors of all things, even though they have nothing, 2 Cor. 6. -10.
Doct. 1. Though whenever a sinner does turn to, God, all his sins are freely
pardoned, and in that respect forgotten, and past over by God as if they had
never been, Ezekiel. 18. 21, 22. yet the pardoned sinner himself should not
forget, but so far keep them in memory, as he may be thereby kept humble, and
little in his own eyes, so long as he lives: for, Paul did so much remember
his bypast, and pardoned blasphemies, as that he accounts himself less than
the least of all Saints. 2. Growth in grace, and increase in humility, and in
low esteem of a man's self, do usually go together, so, that most eminent
Christians, considering what they have been before conversion, (1 Cor. 15. 9.)
and what they yet are, because of the remnan(...) of sin dwelling in them,
(Romans 7. 18.) should and will judge themselves the least of all Saints,
according to that deep insight and sense which they have of their own sins,
being compared with the remote view, which they take of the sins of others,
Romans 14. 10. for, so does Paul judge of himself from those grounds; unto me,
who a(...) less than the least of all Saints. 3. Sense of sin, and of
self-unworthinesse, ought so to abase and humble the child of God, as not to
make him question, far less deny, that God has any saving work in him; this
latter not being true humility, but sinful ingratitude, which frequently has
its rise from an unmortified root of crushed pride, though it pretend to great
humility: for, Paul abaseth himself, and yet insinuates that he is a Saint,
while he says, I am less than the least of all Saints. 4. As all Saints are
not of one standing and size, but some greater, some lesser and some less than
the least, except themselves; So it is no small honor and dignity to be among
the least of Saints, and to have a work of saving grace, though but in the
meanest degree; seeing even the meanest of Saints have a choice room in Gods
heart, Psalm. 40. 17. for, while he says, I am the least of all Saints, he
declares he thought it an honor to have any room among them. 5. Deep sense of
sin, and of self-unworthinesse in a child of God, do well consist with a
confident pleading for, and avowing of an interest in, yea, with admiration at,
and extolling of the riches of Gods mercy and free grace toward such an
unworthy wretch, as he is: for, both these were in Paul; unto me, who am less
than the least of all Saints, is this grace given. 6. The Lord in deepest
wisdom does often bestow the rarest gifts and graces upon such, as by reason of
their former wickedness, are most conscious to themselves of their own
unworthiness: yea, and sometimes will employ them in most eminent pieces of
His service, as knowing such have somewhat to keep them humble, and make them
ascribe the glory of what they do unto God, 1 Cor. 15. 9, 10. whereas others
would readily take the glory unto themselves, being puffed up with their gifts
and success, and so should fall in the condemnation of the devil, 1 Timothy 3. 6.
for, God's dealing with Paul, in giving him such excellent gifts, and the
Apostolic office from grace, proves so much; unto me, who am less than the
least of all Saints, is this grace given. 7. The more unworthy that any is,
upon whom the Lord bestows grace, and shows mercy, the glory of His grace
is so much the more set forth, and shines the more brightly: whileas where sin
has abounded, grace does much more abound, Romans 5. -20. for, Paul commends
the dignity of his calling, and the worth of that grace, by which he was called
to that office, from his own baseness and unworthiness; unto me, who am less
than the least of all Saints, is this grace given. 8. It concerns a Minister
much, as to be deeply affected with the sense of his own unworthiness; so,
seriously and frequently to ponder the weight and dignity of that trust, which
is put upon him, and what are the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the
Saints, the dispensing whereof, is committed unto him; that so with greater
fear and reverence, care and diligence he may take heed to his Ministry, which
he has received in the Lord, to fulfill it, Col. 4. 17. for, Paul considers
also the worth of that message, which he was entrusted with, while he says,
that I should preach the unsearchable riches of Christ. 9. Though others of the
Apostles besides Paul, were entrusted to carry the Gospel unto the Gentiles;
yet considering, that he was so fully instructed in the knowledge of this
mystery of the rejection of the Jews, and calling of the Gentiles, ver. 3. and
Romans 11. and had a perpetual conflict with the Jews, through the whole course
of his life in the defense of this truth, as is clear from the Acts of the
Apostles: as also that he has committed more unto sacred Writing to this
purpose for the use and benefit chiefly of the Gentiles, than any of the other
Apostles, Therefore is it that Paul does seem to have been entrusted in a
peculiar manner with the charge of preaching the Gospel unto, and being the
Apostle of, the Gentiles, which appears, as from other places, Act. 26. 17,
18. 1 Timothy 2. 7. so from this, unto me, is this grace given, that I should
preach among the Gentiles. 10. Offices, and competencie of gifts for
discharging any office, are given of God to those who have them, and especially
to Ministers, not to keep them without use-making, Matthew. 25. 27. or, to make
use of them only for gaining applause, or advantage to themselves, 2 Cor. 4, 5.
but that they may employ them for the glory of God, and the good of others:
for, this grace was given to Paul, that he might preach among the Gentiles. 11.
As Jesus Christ, with all that rich store and copious abundance of created
graces and divine perfections which are in Himself, and of satisfactory
fullness which is in those many good things purchased by Him, should be the
main subject of a Ministers preaching, whatever he preaches besides of legal
threatenings or duties, being made to relate some one way or other unto Him; So
Jesus Christ and the riches of the Gospel, are so large a field and subject,
that the most gracious and able Ministers will find daily purpose, and fresh
matter furnished of new, whereof to preach concerning it; yea, and never will
be able to go through it: for, Paul made Christ and the Gospel the main subject
of his preaching, and did find them unsearchable; that I should preach the
unsearchable riches of Christ. 12. Though those hid treasures of wisdom and
knowledge in Christ, and the riches of the glory of His inheritance in the
Saints, and of all those other good things purchased by Him, and offered in the
Gospel, go beyond the reach of all created understanding to know them fully;
yet it is the duty both of Pastors and people to search into them; there being
as much knowledge of those unsearchable riches attainable, even here, as may
encourage all to search, Hos. 6. 4. and nothing being more sweet upon earth,
than to be swallowed up, and overwhelmed in this deep and bottomless gulf of
the unsearchable riches of Christ, when penury of thoughts, and want of
enlarged hearts to comprehend that incomprehensible subject, necessitate the
soul sometimes to succumb under the weight, to stand still, wonder and exclaim,
O the depth of the riches, etc! Romans 11. 33. for, though those riches are
unsearchable; yet Paul did search in them, for he preached them, and
consequently, they to whom he preached, were obliged to search into them also;
That I should preach the unsearchable riches of Christ.

Verse. 9. And to make all men see, what is the fellowship of the mystery,
which from the beginning of the world, has been hid in God, who created all
things by Jesus Christ.
HE does here, first, more fully express what he presently spoke of his
preaching among the Gentiles, as also extol and magnify his office, fifthly,
from the great good and benefit, which was by his conscientious discharge
thereof to accresce unto men, even the making evident unto all men, without any
such distinction of nations or persons, as was kept under the Ministry of
the Old Testament, (Gal. 3. 28.) what that mystery of the union and
association of Jews and Gentiles in one body was, whereby they have joint
interest in the Covenant of Grace, in Christ the Cautioner, and in all those
spiritual blessings purchased by Him. Next, he gives a reason why he called
this communion and fellowship a mystery, and secret; because it was a thing
hid, until the times of the Apostles, in Gods decree, and not revealed, at
least, so fully and clearly, as then it was, (See, ver. 5. doct. 4) and having
made mention of God, he describes Him from His work of creating all things by
Jesus Christ, the eternal word of the Father, Joh. 1. 1. and this most
appositly to the present purpose, to wit, the calling of the Gentiles; as
intending hereby to show, that none has reason to wonder, why God should save
the Gentiles as well as the Jews by Christ; seeing He has equal interest in
them, as having created them both, and that by Christ. Doct. (...). Though the
Lords Ministers ought mainly to labor upon the affections of people,
endeavoring to work them up to such a frame and temper, as the Word of God
does call for, 2 Timothy 4. 2. yet, this also is a considerable part of the
ministerial task, which they would endeavor in the first place, and in order
to their more effectual and orderly moving of the affections, even to make the
Lords people understand the mind of God revealed in Scripture, as well
concerning their sin and misery, as the remedy thereof held forth in the
Gospel, Act. 2. 22, 23, 38, 39. and therefore they would affect great
plainness of speech, dimitting themselves, so far as is possible, unto the
capacity of the meanest: For, Paul shows that the information of the
judgment, was that which he endeavored with the first in the discharge of his
Ministry; And to make all men see, faith he. 2. The Word preached by sent
Ministers, is the Lords ordinary mean and instrument, by which he conveyeth the
saving knowledge of Gospel Truths unto the Elect: and that both by making these
truths evident and plain; that so they may be known, being otherwise hid, Col.
4. 4. and by opening the eyes of their understanding, that they may see, being
otherwise blind, Act. 26. 18. for, the Lord employed Paul in the ministerial
calling, To make all men see, what is the fellowship, etc. The word signifies
both to make a thing evident, that it may be seen, and to give an inward
principle of knowledge unto men, by virtue whereof they may see. 3. The
commission given by Christ unto His Servants to preach the Gospel under the New
Testament, is not astricted unto the Jews only, as it was before Christ came in
the flesh, yea and after His incarnation before the midle-wall of partion
between Jew and Gentile was removed by His death, Matthew. 10. 5. But it is
extended indifferently to all nations under heaven, and to all persons without
exception, as God by His providence shall open a door unto His Servants to go
unto them: for, so is Paul's commission here to be understood, even, to make
all men see. 4. That sinners, lost by nature, may attain to fellowship and
communion with the true Church of God, by sharing with them in all their
privileges and good things purchased by Christ, and in Christ Himself, the
Covenant of Grace, and in all the prayers, gifts and graces of all Believers
through the world, is the gladest tidings that ever sounded in their ears: for,
Paul, having shown (ver. 8.) that his office was to preach (or, as it is in the
Original, to declare good tidings) to the Gentiles, he shows here what those
glad tidings are, even, to make them see, what is the fellowship of the
mystery, that is, what that fellowship is, which they were now admitted unto
with the true Church of God in all her privileges, and formerly was an hid
secret. 5. The written Word of God is such a depth, that the quickest wits
cannot find the bottom of it; there being many things contained in it, at least
by just consequence, which even they, who have their senses exercised in it,
cannot thoroughly discern or collect from it: for, even this mystery, that the
Gentiles should have fellowship with the Church, without entering by the door of
Circumcision, was revealed, though obscurely, in the Scriptures of the Old
Testament, as Paul does gather by consequence from the time of Abraham's
Circumcision, Romans 4. 10, 11. and from Melchisedeck's Priesthood, Heb. 7. 11.
and yet, says the Apostle, this was a mystery, which from the beginning of
the world has been hid in God. So that even the Prophets did not fully
understand it, nor the Apostles themselves until it was more clearly revealed,
Acts 10. 10. 6. Jesus Christ is true God, equal with the Father in power and
glory, having an eternal being before the world was made: for, the Father
created all things by Jesus Christ., to wit, not as by one instrument, but as
one working with Him, and from Him, Heb. 1. 2. Joh. 1. 3. 7. Though the grace
of Redemption be not of equal extent with the work of Creation, there being
many created, whom God will never save, Matthew. 7. 21. yet, Gods equal interest
in all by creation, does abundantly plead His liberty to save whom He pleases,
and to save one as well as another, whatever a spirit of envy in some may say
to the contrary: for, the Apostle's scope in saying God created all things by
Jesus Christ, is, to show, that none could justly stumble at God's saving the
Gentiles, as well as the Jews, seeing He had equal interest in both by creation.
8. The consideration of Christ's Godhead, and of His creating all things, does
contribute much to the faith and right understanding of His discharging the
mediatory Office, in uniting all the Elect to God, and among themselves; in so
far as this consideration does hold Him forth to be one fitted and enabled to
do what is undertaken, and speaks His interest in them as His creatures, and
right to save them, if He please: for, that Paul may further clear this purpose
of uniting Jew and Gentile in one by Christ, he mentions God's creating all
things by Christ as God equal with Himself.

Verse. 10. To the intent that now unto the principalities and powers in
heavenly places, might be known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God.
THe Apostle does magnify his office, sixthly, from the advantage and benefit,
which did thereby redound unto the glorified Angels, called here,
principalities and powers, chiefly, because God makes use of their Ministry
in governing the kingdoms and principalities of this world, Dan. 4. 13, 14.
and, 10. 12, 13. and because of the force and power they have in executing the
will of God, Psalm. 103. 20. and are said to be in heavenly places, not as if
they were never upon earth, Genesis 32. 1. but the place of their ordinary
residence is in heaven, Matthew. 18. 10. Now, the Apostle shows, that this was
one end intended by God to be brought about by his preaching the Gospel unto
the Gentiles, even, that the Church, being hereby gathered of Jew and Gentile,
might be as a glass, wherein these glorious creatures should behold the
manifold wisdom of God, that is, the many and signal evidences of Gods infinite
wisdom manifested in the way of salvation held forth by the Gospel, 1 Corinthians.
1. 24. and in His diverse ways of dispensing grace and salvation in several
ages, Heb. 1. 1. (the Doctrine of salvation remaining always the same for
substance, Heb. 13. 8.) and more especially, as to the present purpose, in His
receiving the formerly profane and idolatrous Gentiles unto fellowship and
society with His Church, having abolished Circumcision and the rest of those
leviticall Ordinances: which is the main subject of all that preceedeth this
Verse in this Chapter. Doct. 1. The glory of free grace, mercy, wisdom and of
other divine attributes, which God intends in the salvation of sinners, is
such a rent, as He will have paid, not only by men, but also by the glorified
Angels: for, Paul makes this one end, why God gave him the Gospel to preach,
even that Angels might therein see Gods glory made manifest, and might
acknowledge it accordingly; To the intent that now unto the principalities and
powers. 2. It is the duty of Christ's Ministers to commend and magnify their
Office, not for gaining praise and esteem to themselves, 2 Cor. 3. 1. but that
the malice of Satan and his instruments may be hereby frustrated, 2 Cor. 11.
12. who labor to bring that sacred Calling unto contempt; that so it may have
the less of success upon peoples hearts, 2 Timothy 3. 8. for therefore is it
that Paul does so much magnify his Office in this and the preceding Verses;
To the intent, that now unto the principalities and powers, etc. 3. This may
commend the Ministers of the Gospel not a little unto men, and beget reverence
in them toward the same, that even the blessed Angels are in some sort
bettered by it, and that it is therefore respected by them: for, Paul
commends his Office from this, that by occasion thereof unto the
principalities and powers, was made known the manifold wisdom of God. 4. Though
Angels be most knowing creatures, as enjoying the immediate sight and presence
of God, Matthew. 18. 10. yet they are ignorant of some things, which, by Gods way
of dispensing the Gospel to His Church, they come to a more full knowledge of:
and therefore, though their present state of happiness does give them full
satisfaction for the time; yet it is capable of some addition, and to be
perfected fully at the last day, even as the torments of the fallen Angels
shall then, and not while then be complete, 2 Pet. 2. 4. for, Paul shows that
by the Church was made known the manifold wisdom of God. 5. Neither the souls
of just men made perfect, nor glorified Angels, though they enjoy the blessed
sight of God, do yet by virtue thereof come to the knowledge of every thing,
which God Himself does know; and therefore it is without ground affirmed by
Papists, that by this mean they know the prayers, which are uttered here on
earth: for, the Apostle, shows that even the blessed Angels are ignorant of
some things, until by the Church was made known unto them the manifold wisdom
of God. 6. Though the wise and eternal counsel of God for bringing lost
sinners to glory, be one and the same, and wholly unchangeable, Psalm. 33. 11.
and though the way condescended upon in that His eternal counsel, by which
sinners shall be saved, has been in all ages one and the same for substance,
to wit, Jesus Christ, Heb. 13. 8. and faith in Him; Heb. 11. 2. Yet, so many
and diverse are those ways, wherein He does execute that counsel in the
several ages of His Church, Heb. 1. 1. and all of them fitted for the age of
the Church, which then was, Gal. 4. 3. So unworthy (2 Cor. 4. 7.) and contrary
(Philip. 1. 19) are those means for the most part, whereby He works the end
intended; So sweet an harmony and concord betwixt infinite mercy and infinite
justice, does appear in this way, each of those rejoicing over the other, and
yet ceding one to another, to the full satisfaction of both, Romans 3. 24. 26. So
variously and wonderfully does he confound the wisdom of men and devils, who
would mar the salvation of the Elect by making them (nill they will they) to
advance it, Philip. 1. 12. And generally all His way is such, that (as it
evidenceth infinite wisdom in God, who has contrived, and does manage it; So)
it contains many evidences of that kind: for, therefore is that, which the
Angels do learn from the way of salvation revealed to the Church, and God's way
of carrying on His people's salvation, called the manifold wisdom of God. 7.
Then do we learn the knowledge of Scripture, and observe Gods way of dealing in
carrying on our own salvation and the salvation of others aright, when we
observe in Gods Word, or works, His manifold wisdom, or some evident proof of
His other attributes: for, this was it which the Angels did learn from Gods
mind revealed in Scripture, and His way of dealing with the Church, even the
manifold wisdom of God.

Verse. 11. According to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus
our Lord.
HE magnifieth his Office, seventhly, by showing, first, that the making
manifest this manifold wisdom of God, in the dispensation of grace both to Jew
and Gentiles by his Ministry, was a thing which God (who works all things
according to the counsel of His own will, chap. 1. 11.) had resolved upon, and
purposed, not of yesterday, but from all eternity, though for wise reasons he
did reserve the making of so much known until the times of the Gospel. Next,
that this eternal purpose, was purposed in Christ, to wit, not only as He was
God equal with, and the eternal wisdom, of the Father, and so did join with
Him in all His decrees and purposes; but also, as Mediator, God-man, by whom
the Father was to effectuate and execute all His purposes for good toward the
Church. See upon Chap. 1. ver. 4. for, the word rendered purposed, may be also
rendered, He made, or, did execute in Christ. Doct. 1. This may commend the
Ministry of the Gospel, and gain respect unto it, that the plot and draught of
man's salvation dispensed thereby, is founded upon the wise and eternal counsel
of God; and therefore such as will endure all the contradictions of sinners, 2 Samuel 23. 5. yea, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against, Matthew. 7. 24,
25. and selfcondemned sinners may safely venture their salvation upon, Matthew.
11. 28. for, Paul does magnify his Office from this, that the message which he
carried, was according to Gods eternal purpose. 2. This may also, upon the same
grounds, commend the Ministry of the Gospel much, that Jesus Christ, being
chosen by the Father for that end, has taken-on, and does daily execute His
mediatory Office for bringing about the salvation of the Elect, according to
the plot condescended upon in Gods eternal purpose, and dispensed by the
Ministry of the Gospel: for, Paul commends his Ministry from this, that God
had purposed, and resolved upon that draught of salvation, in Jesus Christ our
Lord. 3. As God before all time has foreordained in His eternal purpose
whatever comes to pass in time, His works being known unto Him, and
accordingly resolved upon by Him, before the worlds were made, Act. 15. 18. So,
though Gods way of dealing in time with men, and more particularly with His
Church, does alter; yet this infers not any change or alteration in His
purpose, seeing every dispensation remains so long as He has purposed, and
every alteration falls out according to His purpose: for, lest from what the
Apostle spoke of Gods manifold wisdom in dispensing grace and salvation now, in
a way diverse from what He did formerly, any should suspect, that therefore God
had altered His purpose, he shows here all this had come to pass according
to His eternal purpose. 4. As it is but small comfort unto a Minister, that he
is entrusted to carry unto others an excellent message and glad tidings of the
plot and draught of man's salvation surely grounded upon Gods purpose, and
infallibly executed by Christ in all its steps; except he make application, and
take a share of those glad tidings unto himself; So the way for either Pastor
or People to apply the Gospel, and all those rich treasures of spiritual
blessings contained in it unto themselves, is, by taking hold upon Christ, and
pleading a well-grounded interest in Him as theirs: for, if Christ be ours, all
things are ours, Rom, 8. 32. Hence is it that Paul, having magnified his
Ministry and Message, does make application of those precious things which he
was entrusted with, unto himself, by pleading an interest in Christ, as his,
while he calls Him Jesus Christ our Lord.

Verse. 12. In whom we have boldness and access with confidence by the faith
of Him.
HE does magnify his Office, eighthly, from three excellent privileges,
whereof Believers among them (some in a greater, some in a lesser measure, some
at one time, some at another) did partake by the means of his Ministry; as
being thereby brought to Christ, in whom they enjoyed all these 1. Boldness,
or liberty to speak all their mind freely (as the original word does bear)
whereby, as it is distinguished from the other two, is meaned that holy freedom
and boldness, which is in reconciled souls to speak their whole heart to God,
both in the duty of prayer and thanksgiving, and is opposed to misbelief,
terror of conscience, or to whatsoever does straiten the heart, or stop the
mouth in discharging these duties. 2. Access, to wit, unto God, (See chap. 2.
18.) which is larger than the former, as comprehending freedom and liberty of
spirit in reconciled souls to exercise all their saving graces, in the exercise
whereof communion with God does consist. 3. Confidence, or a wellgrounded
persuasion, that both our persons and performances are accepted of God. All
which privileges he shows were enjoyed by them by virtue of their being in
Christ, of whom he spoke, ver. 11. and by the exercise of faith relying upon
Him. Doct. 1. Whatsoever worldly disadvantage may follow upon the preaching of
the Gospel unto a People, Matthew. 10. 34, 35. yet, those excellent and spiritual
privileges which are conveyed thereby unto them who receive the Gospel, may
and ought sufficiently commend the Ministry of it unto all: for, Paul does
here commend his Office from these spiritual fruits which were enjoyed by it,
as their being in Christ, in whom they had boldness, and access with
confidence. 2. And more particularly, liberty and freedom to speak our heart to
God in all our concernments; and access to God, or fellowship with Him in the
exercise of all our graces (all obstructions arising either from the
apprehension of Gods terror, and our own guiltiness; or from our inability,
backwardness of spirit to good; or, from those impediments which the devil,
the world, or our own hearts do create and cast in our way, being removed)
Those, I say, together with confidence, and a well-grounded persuasion that
both our persons and duties are accepted of by God, may and will abundantly
serve to commend the Ministry of the Gospel unto those who have found it
accompanied with such effects to their own hearts, whatever other troubles they
may be under for their receiving of it: for, the Apostle commends his
Ministry from their enjoying of those privileges in particular by the means
thereof; In whom we have boldness, etc. 3. The more a Christian does find his
heart enlarged, and his tongue loosed to speak unto God in the duties of prayer
and praise, he will find the more of access unto, and of fellowship with, God
in the exercise of all His saving graces; and the more a man be restrained of
liberty in those duties, he will readily find himself the more restrained from
the exercise of faith, hope, patience, humility, meekness, or any other of His
saving graces: for, the Apostle conjoyneth boldness, or liberty in prayer and
praises, with access, or freedom of spirit to approach unto God in the
exercise of saving graces; In whom we have boldness and access. 4. A
well-grounded persuasion of our acceptance with God, both as to our persons
and actions, does serve exceedingly to furnish the heart with boldness in
prayer, and with familiar access unto, and fellowship with God; in so far as a
great many of those obstructions, which (...) boldness and access, do arise
from diffidence, misbelieving doubts, or ignorance whether God accepts of us
or not, Romans 10. 14. for, the Apostle speaks of confidence, or of this
well-grounded persuasion, as having some influence upon the other two, while he
says, boldness, and access with confidence. 5. Those excellent privileges
of boldness, access and confidence, are not only purchased and conveyed unto
sinners by Christ; (as was explained in the point of access, chap. 2. ver. 18.
doct. 2.) but also they are enjoyed by none but such as are in Christ, and
united to Him by a lively and saving faith: and all who are not so in Christ,
are estranged from spiritual liberty and boldness in prayer, though they be
never so much flowing in eloquence and discourse: They are estranged also from
access unto God, being banished from His favor and presence, Psalm. 58. 3. and
have no well-grounded confidence, that God does accept either of their persons
or actions, seeing He is well-pleased only in Him, Matthew. 3. 17. for, he says,
In whom, meaning Christ, we have boldness and access with confidence: They
were first in Him, 6. Faith in Jesus Christ (whereby we receive (Joh. 1. 12.)
and rest upon Him for salvation, Isa. 50. 10.) is one thing, and confidence or
persuasion of our acceptance with God is another; the former being the cause,
root and fountain of the latter: For, Paul shows, that confidence flows
from faith, while he says, with confidence by the faith of Him, or faith in
Him. See Gal. 2. 20. 7. As faith in Jesus Christ is that grace which uniteth us
to Him; So it not only goes before our boldness, access and confidence, but
also makes way for, and is the cause of those: and therefore, the more that
faith is kept in exercise, there will be the more of liberty and boldness;
the more of access to God and nearness, and the more of a well-grounded
persuasion of our acceptance by God, and confidence: for, he ascribes their
being in Christ, their access, boldness and confidence unto faith, while he
says, by the faith of Him.

Verse. 13. Wherefore I desire that ye faint not at my tribulations for you,
which is your glory.
THe Apostle, having now sufficiently magnified his Office, does here, in the
third branch of this first part of the Chapter, hold forth his main scope in
all he has spoken from ver. 2. in an exhortation to courage, or a disswasive
from fainting and discouragement in their Christian course, notwithstanding of
his present sad sufferings, who had preached the Gospel among them. Which
disswasive, as it is most humbly and affectionatly propounded; (for the word
rendered desire, signifies humbly to beg and entreat, Act. 3. 2. and 12. 20.)
So it is most vehemently urged from three reasons, 1. Because of the worth and
dignity of his Apostolic Office, spoken of in the preceding verses, and
related unto here, as one reason of the present disswasive, in the illative
particle wherefore. 2. All his tribulations were in a special manner for them,
to wit, not only for their confirmation, and example; but mainly because they
were occasioned by his public asserting the privileges of the Gentiles by
faith in Christ without circumcision, Act. 22. 21, 22. And thirdly, they were
not only profitable unto them in the former respects; but also glorious and
honorable, in so far, as God did herein show how much He esteemed of them, by
sending His Apostles not only to preach unto them, but also to confirm the
Gospel by their sufferings: and that hereby the glorious privileges of the
Gentiles, as to their interest in Christ, and all the blessings of the Covenant
of Grace, were asserted and confirmed in despite of the desperate rage and fury
of the Jews, Philip. 2. 17. Doct. 1. It is an ordinary evil, incident even to
those who have once made swift progress in their Christian course, to faint
and relent in it, so as to give way unto lukewarmnesse and coldrifenesse, in
stead of their former zeal and fervency, Rev. 2. 4. to security and laziness,
in stead of former watchfulness and diligence, Gal. 5. 7. to drouping
discouragement and backwardness, in stead of former courage and cheerfulness,
Heb. 12. 12. for, this is the evil of fainting, which Paul did look upon as
incident to those Ephesians, and therefore disswadeth from it; Wherefore I
desire that ye faint not. 2. As tribulation for the Gospel, whether imminent or
already lying on, does usually make those faint, and turn remiss in their
Christian course, who have not timeously fore-casten trouble before it came,
Mark 4. 17. So when trouble and persecution befalls the Ministers of Christ,
especially those who are primely isntrumental in the work of the Gospel, then
are the Lords people most apt to faint and be discouraged; because that therein
they do frequently with great anxiety and diffidence forecast irrepairable
detriment to the work of God, as if God could not find out other hands to carry
on His work, when such and such are laid aside: for, Paul foresaw that his
tribulation (who, having been such an eminent instrument in the work of the
Gospel, did now every day expect death at Rome) would occasion their fainting,
and therefore he does guard against it; I desire, that ye faint not at my
tribulation. 3. Affliction and tribulation for the Gospel, is a trial not only
to those who are under it, but to others also, who look on, and ate in no less
hazard to be thereby brangled in their confidence, blunted in their zeal, and
rendered remiss in their former forewardness, than the person himself who
suffers: for, Paul is more afraid of their fainting because of his trouble,
than of his own; and therefore does carefully guard against it; I desire that
ye faint not at my tribulation. 4. It is not sufficient for a faithful
Minister, that he labor earnestly to rouse up people from their natural
deadness, and once engage them in the way of Christianity, Ephesians. 5. 14. but he
must also endeavor to keep them moving, when they are so engaged, forecasting
wisely, and laboring to remove carefully what offenses and stumbling blocks
Satan and corrupt flesh may cast in their way to retard them in it, or make
them turn aside from it: Thus Paul wisely foreseeth and carefully labors to
remove that ground of stumbling and fainting, which they were apt to take from
his sufferings; faint not at my tribulations. 5. A faithful Minister,
suffering for truth, will not be so sollicitous for his own concernments
relating to his outward estate, as for the Church and people of God, lest they
be turned aside, or made to faint by reason of his sufferings: for, Paul does
not so much desire, that they would furnish him with things necessary in the
prison, or use means for his delivery from it, as that they faint not at his
tribulations. 6. It is not sufficient that Ministers exoner themselves simply
in holding forth to people their duty, unless they be vehemently serious in
pressing upon them the practice of it: and this especially in hard declining
times, wherein the dead and lukewarm affections of people use not to be easily
wrought upon: for, Paul does affectionately desire, or humbly beg of them (as
the word signifies) that they would not faint. 7. This may sufficiently guard
the Lord's people from discouragement, stumbling, and heartlesse fainting,
notwithstanding the sad suffering lot, which is sometimes measured out unto the
Lords faithful servants for the truths cause, when they consider the excellent
worth of truth, and how those, who suffer for it, have not cast themselves
without necessity upon their sufferings, but were necessitated to meet with
them in the way of their calling: for, from what Paul has said formerly, from
ver. 2. of his calling to preach the Gospel among the Gentiles, and the worth
of that message which he did carry, and was the occasion of his sufferings, he
infers this disswasive, Wherefore, I desire that ye faint not at my
tribulations. 8. This may in reason prevent the fainting and stumbling of the
Lords people at the contempt, reproach, and other hardships, under which they
who preach the Gospel, do for the most part labor, if they would seriously
consider, that all those sufferings are occasioned in a great part by them, in
so far, as if it were not for respect to the souls of people, Ministers might
do much to shift the cross, as well as others: for, Paul labors to prevent
their fainting and stumbling at his sufferings from that consideration; faint
not at my tribulations, which are for you, says he, implying, if he had not
preached the Gospel unto the Gentiles, he might have been free from trouble. 9.
So honorable is it to suffer for Christ and truth; that not only the persons
themselves, who suffer, are thereby honored, Act. 5. 41. But also all such as
have interest in them: and especially the sufferings of a faithful Minister,
are glorious and honorable unto his flock, as testifying Gods high esteem of
them, in sending His servants to suffer for their good: which ought in reason
to prevent their fainting at his sufferings; yea, and make them glory in them,
and take encouragement from them: for, Paul shows, his tribulation was their
glory, and therefore desires them not to faint.

Verse. 14. For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, 15. Of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named.
THe Apostle does now follow forth the second part of the Chapter, which was
begun, ver. 1. and interrupted by a digression until this verse, for such
reason, as was given, ver. 2. And in this part of the Chapter (while he gives
a sum of his fervent prayers to God for them, that they might persevere and
grow in the faith and experimental knowledge of the Doctrine of Salvation
delivered by them) he does not only give an evident testimony of his sincere
affection and endeavor after their salvation; but also labors hereby to
beget the like ardency of affection in them, and so does (indirectly at least,
though most pithily) by the example of his prayers, excite them to persevere
and make progress in the experimental knowledge of, and communion with Jesus
Christ.

In this prayer there is, first, a preface in those verses wherein he does, 1.
repeat the occasion of his prayer, which was mentioned, ver. 1-. and does
relate, as I there show, unto the close of chap. 2. even because they were
already builded by faith upon Christ. 2. He denominateth his prayer from the
outward gesture he used therein, bowing of the knee, thereby expressing the
humble, reverent frame of his heart in prayer. And, 3. he shows unto whom he
did pray, to wit, God the Father, described, first, from His relation to Jesus
Christ, as chap. 1. ver. 17- This is the sum of verse 14. Secondly, from his
relation to His Church, as being the Father by Adoption of the whole Church of
the truly regenerate, whether triumphant in heaven, or militant upon earth,
whether Jew or Gentile, which is here called a family, and said to have its
name from God, as being His Family, Children, Domestics of His household, and
that both in name and thing, the one whereof, is not to be separated from the
other, seeing God bestows not empty names and titles upon any. Now, God is
thus described with relation to the purpose in hand; for, hereby the Apostle
breaks down the arrogance of the Jews, who would have had the whole Church
denominated from, and contained within the Jewish Nation, excluding the
Gentiles, whom therefore Paul does upon all occasions make equal sharers of an
interest in God through Christ with the Jews; and thereby shows his warrant
to pray for perseverance and growth in grace from God, even to them.

From Verse. 14. Learn, 1. It is the duty of Christ's Ministers, as to teach and
admonish the People of God committed to their charge, 2 Timothy 4. 2. So also to
pray to God for them: And that not only in public with them, as being the
mouth of the People unto God, Joel 2. 17. but also in private to the Lord for
them, seeing their own pains cannot profit without the Lord's blessing, 1 Cor.
3. 6. which Ministers ought fervently to seek from God by prayer, else they
have not ground to expect it, Ezekiel. 36. 37. for, Paul, as he taught these
Ephesians; so he prayed for them, and that not only in public, but also in
private, as he here shows; For this cause I bow my knees. 2. It is of no
small advantage unto the Lords People to have such a Minister as is able to
pray, and accordingly does pray pertinently, spiritually, and fervently with
them and for them, By whom, as by their mouth, they may have their several
cases made known unto God more distinctly than can be expressed by many of
themselves, Joel 2. 17. and they themselves are edified and instructed how to
pray with the like affection and fervency, 1 Cor. 14. 19. By whose affectionate
prayers unto God for them, a blessing is drawn down from heaven to make the
Word preached effectual in them, Iam. 5. -16. and they themselves incited and
rouzed up to seek after those good things prayed for unto them: hereby also
they are comforted and encouraged, as knowing their Minister is speaking to God
for them, when he is absent from them, and cannot speak unto them, Philip. 1.
4. and when they through some one distemper or other cannot deal with God for
themselves, at least in any measure satisfactory to themselves, Iam. 5. 14, 15.
for, as Paul's exhortation and doctrine was advantageous unto these Ephesians;
So also were his fervent prayers in order to their being kept from fainting,
and to their up-stirring to endeavor after those good things, which he sought
from God unto them, and therefore does he mention his praying for them in this
place; For this cause I bow my knees. 3. From the Apostle's scope in making
known unto them, what, and how he prayed for them, See a further note, chap. 1.
ver. 17. doct. 1. I bow my knees. 4. Our prayers unto God for others,
especially the prayers of a Minister for his Flock, should take their rise, not
only from their wants, afflictions and sinful infirmities, Iam. 5. 14, 15. but
also from the grace and good things of God already received by them, that they
may persevere and grow in them, and be preserved from abusing them, seeing the
graces of the best are but imperfect, 1 Cor. 13. 9. subject to decay, Rev. 3. 2
-- and may be abused, 2 Cor. 12. 7. for, the Apostle takes occasion to pray
for these Ephesians from the good already received by them, even their being
builded already upon Christ, mentioned, chap. 2. ver. 22. unto which the words,
for this cause, do relate. 5. Though we be not tied by a divine precept or
Scripture-example unto any one gesture in prayer, seeing the Saints have used
several gestures, according to the present frame of their heart thereby
expressed, 1 King. 8. 22. 2 Samuel 12. 16. Luke 18. 13. 2 Samuel 7. 18. and though
God be a Spirit who will be worshipped in spirit and in truth, Joh. 4. 24. and
cares not for the outward man alone, Matthew. 15. 7, 8. yet, seeing God craveth
service both from the soul and body, as having created and redeemed both, 1
Cor. 6. 20. and seeing an outward reverend gesture of the body in prayer, does
not only express and natively flow from a reverend frame of spirit within,
from which the body is acted in other things, but also serves to stir up the
affections in prayer, as being a man's remembrancer what his heart ought to do,
if he would not play the gross hypocrite with God, therefore it is a thing
needful and convenient (if we be not otherwise restrained, Nehem. 2. 4.) to
use some reverend gesture of the body while we are about the duty of prayer:
for, Paul did kneel in prayer; I bow my knees, says he. 6. We ought,
especially in prayer, to draw near to God with deep reverence unto, and high
esteem of, the majesty of God, being joined with low and mean thoughts of our
selves, because of our baseness and unworthiness, seeing God honors them
who honor Him, 1 Samuel 2. 30. and gives grace unto the humble, Iam. 4. -6.
for, Paul did evidence such a frame of heart by bowing his knees when he
prayed. 7. Deep reverence of heart toward the sacred majesty of God in prayer,
may well consist with faith and confident approaching unto God, as a reconciled
father. Both of them ought to be joined together in prayer: yea, and both, when
they are sincere and not counterfeit, do mutually strengthen and intend one
another, so that the more we put our trust in Him, the more will our hearts
fear and adore Him, Psalm. 130. 4. for, the Apostle exercised not only reverence
in his prayer, as is already shown, but also confidence, while he takes up God
as the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of the whole family of Believers
through Him. 8. See further (concerning this title given to God with relation
to Christ) upon chap. 1. ver. 3. in the exposition, and doct. 2. and ver. 17.
doct. 3, 5, 6. unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

From Verse. 15. Learn, 1. As there is but one Church universal, comprehending
all the Elect in all times and places, whether in heaven or earth; So all
within the Church are of one kindred and lineage, descending of one common
father: for, he designeth the Church to be one whole family in heaven and
earth: the word signifies such a family as is the lineage of one man. 2. As
this one Church is Gods family and household; (See chap. 2. ver. 19. doct. 8.)
So all the members of His Church and family are comprehended either in heaven
or earth. Scripture knows nothing of a purgatory, or third place different
from these: for, the Apostle shows this whole family is in heaven and earth,
and named of God. 3. Those near relations, under which God does stand toward
His Church, are founded upon Jesus Christ: and all the benefits flowing from
such relations, are conveyed unto the Church through Him without whom God is a
consuming fire to sinners, and in whom He is a reconciled father unto
Believers: for, the Apostle looks upon God, first, as He is the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and next, as He is the Father of all the Elect; Of whom the
whole family is named, to wit, His children, Joh. 1. 12. and domestics, Ephesians.
2. 19. 4. The near relation which God has to His Church, and His Church to
Him, is sufficient ground and warrant for faith to rest upon Him, and plead
with Him for supply and furniture of all grace, and of every thing needful:
for, shall not He provide for His own children, who has pronounced those among
men to be worse than infidels, who provide not for theirs? 1 Timothy 5. 8. Hence
the Apostle makes this a ground of his confidence to be answered by God in
what he sought in behalf of those Ephesians, even Gods fatherly interest in
them; Of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named.

Verse. 16. That he would grant you according to the riches of his glory, to be
strengthened with might, by his Spirit in the inner man.
THe Apostle does, secondly, particularize those petitions which he put up to
God in his prayer: and they are four. The first whereof, is in this verse, to
wit, That God from the fountain of that in-exhaustible treasure of His divine
attributes (called His glory, Exodus 33. 18. with 34. 6, 7.) and especially of
His mercy and power (which are set forth by the name and epithet of His glory,
or glorious, Ephesians. 1. 6. Col. 1. 11.) would furnish them with a daily increase
of spiritual strength, whereby they might resist the devil, and all spiritual
adversaries in their Christian course, Chap. 6. 12. which strength was to be
wrought by the holy Spirit in their inward man, whereby, as, 2 Corinthians. 4. 16.
is meaned the soul, (not simply in it self, but as living the life of grace),
and those things, which relate to that spiritual life: as the outward man does
comprehend all those things belonging to a man's outward estate; So, in a word,
he prays that they may be strong and flourish in all things which relate to
the spiritual estate of their eternal souls. Doct. 1. From the Apostle his
being able to give an after-account of what he prayed for, see chap. 1. ver.
17. doct. 2. that he would grant unto you. 2. Whatever strength or natural
parts of body, or mind, men naturally have to compass their effairs of this
world, Genesis 4. 20, 21, 22. yet they are wholly destitute of all spiritual
strength and activity for compassing heaven and happiness, and for walking in
the way of holiness, which leads to it: for, the Apostle finds an inlack
of this strength, even in the converted Ephesians; and therefore does seek it
from God unto them: Much more must it be wholly wanting in those who are not
yet converted; That he would grant unto you to be strengthened in the inward
man. 3. Though there be a new principle of spiritual strength wrought in those
who are renewed at their first conversion, Jer. 31. 33. whereby the renewed
heart, being wrought upon by the Spirit of God, does really work that which is
spiritually good, Philip. 4. 13. Yet a constantly-renewed supply of grace and
strength from the Spirit of God, is necessary even to the renewed man, whereby
those seeds of grace already wrought in him may be upheld in their being, Jer.
32. -40. preserved against the furious assaults of raging tentations, Luk 22.
32. a(...)d, and made to do that which is truly good, Philip. 2. 13. and much
more, that hereby grace begun in conversion, may be made to grow and advance
toward perfection, Philip. 1. 6. for, the Apostle prays even for those
converted Ephesians, that they may be strengthened with might in the inward
man. 4. Such is the vanity, lightness, and inconstancy of our hearts in good,
Psalm. 39. -5. our impotencie to resist tentations, Matthew. 26. 34. our
pronenesse to turn from the ways of God, Gal. 5. 7. So strong, so subtle, so
assiduous are our spiritual adversaries, Ephesians. 6. 12. So many are those
difficulties, discouragements, diversions and hindrances, which we have to
wrestle with, and overcome in the way to heaven, Act. 14. -22. that except we
be underpropped and strengthened by Gods almighty power, we cannot stand one
moment, and much less advance in our Christian course: for, therefore does
Paul pray that they might be strengthened with might in the inward man. 5. Even
the regenerate children of God, in seeking increase of strength, and of more
grace from God, must not, if so they would obtain their suit, plead from their
merit, or any good use they have made of their former grace; seeing upon a
strict account it will be found that grace has not been so improven by the
best as it ought, Isa. 64. -6-. But they must seek what they so expect as a
gift from God's free grace without any respect had to their own worth: for, the
Apostle, while he seeks increase of spiritual strength unto those converted
Ephesians, he prays that God would grant, or give it as a gift (for the word
signifies so much) and that from the inexhaustible fountain of His glorious
grace; That He would grant unto you according to the riches of His glory, not,
according to your worth. 6. As all the attributes of God, and especially His
mercy and power, are not only altogether glorious, because the glory of God is
manifested unto the creatures in their several wonderful effects, Psalm. 19.
1, etc. but are also infinite, and without measure, as being indefatigable in
working, wholly insuperable by any impediment or opposition whatsoever, and
inexhaustible by supplying any want in the creature; So in making our
approaches unto God for seeking any good, and especially saving good, it is
most necessary, that we lift our eyes above any thing that is ours, whether our
good, or our evil, and fasten them by faith upon that inexhaustible fountain of
mercy and power in God, whereby, he is not only willing as merciful; but also
able, as omnipotent, to bestow what ever we shall ask according to his will;
for, the Apostle, in seeking spiritual strength for those Ephesians, does look
to the inexhaustible riches of Gods mercy and power, called here His glory;
that He would grant according to the riches of His grace. 7. It is the Spirit
of God, the third person in the blessed Trinity, who, taking up His place of
abode in the truly regenerate, (1 John 4. 13.) does make it His work to renew
their strength by upholding and actuating their graces, and making them advance
from strength to strength in despite of all imaginable difficulties: neither is
there any other strength or might, whether natural or acquired, which can
sufficiently furnish us to rancounter all those difficulties, which are
incident in our Christian course, but that whereof the Spirit of God residing
in us is the author and giver: for he prays they may be strengthened with
might in the inner man from the spirit. 8. Though Christians are not to neglect
their outward and bodily concernments, 1 Timothy 5. 8. 23. yet the spiritual
estate of their eternal souls is to be cared for most, and so much, as if it
go well with that, and if the soul be strengthened with might for carrying on
the concernments thereof, their outward concernments may trouble them the
less: and especially the care of Ministers should be employed about the inward
and spiritual estate of their flock; for, Paul prays they may be
strengthened in the inner man, his care did run most upon that.

Verse. 17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith --
HEre is the second petition of the Apostle's prayer, wherein he seeks that
which is the cause of strengthening and corroboration by the Spirit, spoken of,
ver. 16. even that Jesus Christ by virtue of a continued act of lively faith in
Him, might be perpetually present in His Virtue, Grace and Spirit, working not
only in their tougnes and brains, but also and mainly in their hearts. Doct. 1.
That we may partake of any saving benefit purchased by Christ, and
particularly, that we may be strengthened with might by the Spirit in the inner
man for doing any thing that is spiritually good, it is most necessary that we
partake first of Christ Himself, being most strictly united to Him, and even as
the members are to the head, from which they receive sense and motion. Christ
gives nothing of His purchase unto any, but to whom He gives Himself first, 1 John 5. 11, 12. and to whomsoever He gives Himself, upon those He bestows
all things; Christ in us being the hope of glory, Col. 1. 27. the fountain of
life, Gal. 2. 20. and of all things needful, 1 Job. 4. 4. for, Paul, having
prayed that they may be strengthened with might in the inner man, subjoyneth
the way and manner how this strength was to be conveyed unto them, even by
Christ's dwelling in their hearts by faith. 2. There is a strict conjunction
and near familiarity between Christ and Believers, even such, in some sort, as
is between an indweller, and the house, wherein he dwells, whereby Jesus
Christ, God and Man in one person, is present with the Believer, not in His
substance only, as He is God; for, so He is every where, Jer. 23. 24. nor in
His substance at all, as He is Man; for, so the heavens do contain Him, Act. 3.
21. but by His gracious operation and special influence upon them, whereby He
quickens them, (Romans 8. 10.) rules them (Act. 9. 6.) and lives in them,
Gal. 2. 20. for, he prays that Christ may dwell in their hearts, which
petition is granted, in behalf of all Believers, seeing he prayed in faith. 3,
Though Christ does thus familiarly communicate Himself unto all Believers, so
as to dwell in them by His gracious presence; yet not unto all alike: but unto
some in a larger measure than unto others, according as He works more, and
more effectually in some than in others: for, though Christ did already dwell
in those converted Ephesians, chap. 2. 22. yet Paul does pray that Christ may
dwell in them, which therefore must be understood of a greater measure and
degree of His indwelling presence, than formerly they had. 4. Where Jesus
Christ does once take up His abode and dwelling in the heart, there He
remains constantly and flitteth not: in so far, as though sometimes He
withholdeth that gracious influence of His, which is necessary only to the
wel-being, flourishing, and vigorous thriving of grace in the heart, Cant. 5.
6. yet He never withdraws that influence, which is necessary to the being of
grace, and without which grace would utterly die and perish, Psalm. 73. 23. for,
the word rendered to dwell, signifies to take up a fixed and immovable
habitation, and differs from another word very like unto it, which signifies
to sojourn in a place only for a season, 1 Pet. 1. 17. That Christ may dwell in
your hearts. 5. Though even the bodies of Believers be temples of the holy
Ghost, and consequently of Jesus Christ; for Christ dwells in them by His
Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 19. yet the heart, will and affections of man, are the chief
place of His habitation, wherein He resideth as in His strong citadel, from
which He commands the other faculties and members. And without His presence
there, He cannot have any habitation in any part of the man elsewhere; the
tongue cannot receive Him by speaking, nor the understanding by knowing, nor
the hand by external working, except He be received in the heart, from which
proceed the issues of life, Pro. 4. 23. for, he prays that Christ may dwell
in their hearts. 6. Though Jesus Christ does make His first entry unto, and
dwells in Believers by His Spirit, 1 John 4. 13. whereby He uniteth them to
Himself, quickens and rules them, yea, and works the grace of faith in
them, Joh. 6. 44. yet, faith being so wrought, the Believer does thereby lay
hold on Christ, Philip. 3. -12. gives Him daily employment, Joh. 15. -5. and
Christ being so laid hold upon and employed, remains and resideth in the
Believer: for therefore is it, that he ascribes this indwelling of Christ in
the heart unto faith; that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. 7. Such is
the power and virtue of faith; that those things, which are at furthest
distance, whether in respect of time (Joh. 8. 56.) or of place, are present to
it, and to the heart by it. Even as those things are present to the eye and
ear, which are clearly seen and distinctly heard, though in respect of place
they may be many miles distant, so whole Christ both as God and Man is present
to the heart in His merit, virtue and efficacy, laid hold upon by faith, though
His humane nature be locally present in heaven only, Act. 3. 21. and therefore
there is no necessity, in order to our spiritual life, that His body be
present in the Sacrament, and received by the mouth and stomach: for, He is
conveyed unto, and dwells in the heart by faith, besides that the flesh
profits nothing, Joh. 6. -63-.

Verse. 17. -- That ye being rooted and grounded in love, 18. May be able to
comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and
height: 19. And to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, --
THe third petition follows, wherein the thing prayed for, is an excellent
effect of that spiritual corroboration, flowing from Christ's dwelling in them
by faith, spoken of, ver. 16. 17- even that God would make them grow in
knowledge, especially in the experimental knowledge of his love in Christ.
And, first, he sets down the mean of attaining the thing prayed for, to wit,
their firm and sure laying hold upon, and adhering to the love and free grace
of God in Christ, as it is revealed in the Gospel, by the grace of faith, as
trees are firmly fastened in the ground by their roots, and edifices are built,
and lean upon their strong foundations: for, the two words rooted and grounded,
are metaphors taken from trees and edifices, ver. -17. Secondly, the request it
self, first proponed more obscurely, to wit, that they might be able to
comprehend, or certainly to understand what that love of God in Christ is,
whereof he has presently spoken, and is to speak immediately afterward; and
therefore it is most agreeable to the present purpose, that it be here
understood as the thing which he would have them able to comprehend in its
infinite greatness and full perfection, according to all its dimensions, as of
breadth, whereby it is extended unto all ages, Matthew. 28. 20. and all ranks, 1 Timothy 2. 4. of length, whereby it reaches from eternity to eternity, Psalm. 103.
17. of depth, whereby it stoupeth down to the lowest depths of sin and misery,
and draws sinners from thence, Psalm. 86. 13. and of height, whereby it
reaches up to heavenly joys and happiness, and carries sinners up thither,
Joh. 14. 3. which are the four usual dimensions and measures, according to
which we ordinarily take up the bigness of grea test bodies. And withal, he
shows that this compr ehension, or uptaking of Gods love here prayed for, was
in part attained, and in its full measure attainable after time by all real
Saints and sound Believers; that hereby those Ephesians might be more animated
and incited to aspire unto it, verse. 18. Secondly, the request is proponed more
plainly, to wit, that they might know in some measure, and chiefly from their
own experience, this love, which is here called the love of Christ, not to
seclude the love of the Father, or holy Ghost; but because, the love of the
whole Trinity is conveyed in the effects thereof toward lost sinners through
Christ and His merit, Joh. 3. 16. and concerning this love he affirms, that
it does pass knowledge, or created understanding to know it, to wit, fully,
and in its utmost extent, seeing it is infinite, as God Himself is infinite, ver.
19-.

From ver. -17. Learn, 1. As trees cannot long stand against the blasts of
boisterous winds, except their roots be deeply fastened in some good ground,
and as houses cannot remain long firm and strong, except they be built upon
some sure foundation; So neither can Professors hold out for any space of time
against the furious assaults of many violent tentations, except they be
under-propped by, and rely upon some strong foundation; for, the Apostle
expressing that stability and constancy arising from the faith of God's love,
which he wished for to those Ephesians, by two metaphors taken from trees
deeply rooted, and houses strongly built, does imply, that without the faith of
this love they were as trees without a root, and houses without a foundation;
that ye being rooted and grounded in love. 2. The only sure foundation, whereon
the soul being built and fastened, is able to stand out against the strongest
blasts of most violent tentations, is the unchangeable and free love of God in
Christ revealed in the Gospel, and laid hold upon by faith: and no conceit of
our own righteousness, natural courage, fixed resolutions, or such like,
Matthew. 26. 33. with 70. for, the Apostle would have them rooted and grounded in
love, to wit, the love of God in Christ. 3. As this love of God in Jesus
Christ, is a most firm rock and sure foundation in it self; So it concerns
those, who would be sustained by it against the furious assaults of Satan's
tentations from all hands, to be firmly fastened in, and built upon it: which
is then done, when they do not rest upon the notionall knowledge thereof in the
brain, so as to be able pertinently to discourse of it; but when this
mavelous love, and all the good things prepared by it are laid hold upon by
faith, as they are offered: and this not faintly, but seriously, as we would
grip to a thing upon life and death, 1 Timothy 1. 15. for, Paul would have them
firmly fastened in, and built upon God's love, as trees are rooted in the
ground, and houses are joined with their foundations. And the mean whereby they
were to be so rooted and grounded in God's love, is the grace of faith, as
appears from a parallel place, Col. 2. 7. That ye being rooted and grounded
in love.

From ver. 18. Learn, 1. As they who have found the saving effects of Gods love
in Christ, and consequently cannot but know something of it, do yet know but a
small portion thereof; So the knowledge, and chiefly the experimental
knowledge of this abounding and mavelous love, from the felt and known
effects thereof, is of great concernment unto Believers, and ought to be sought
after by them accordingly: for, this knowledge is not only pleasant, as being
of a subject wonderful, but also edifying, both in order to our comfort, Romans
5. -2. with 5. and to our incitement unto duty, 2 Cor. 5. 14. for, he prays
for a greater measure of this knowledge, even to those converted Ephesians, who
had somewhat of it already; That ye may be able to comprehend what is the
breadth, etc. 2. Our embracing by faith the love of God in Christ, and those
good things prepared by it, as they are revealed and offered in the Gospel, is
a necessary mean for attaining to fuller insight in the admirable nature of
this love: yea, and to the sense and feeling of it, and experimental knowledge
flowing thence: for, he premits their being rooted in the faith of this love,
ver. -17. as a mean for attaining the more full understanding, and especially
the experimental knowledge of it; That ye being rooted -- may be able to
comprehend. 3. This love of God in Jesus Christ to lost sinners, is so large,
(Isa. 55. 8, 9.) so free, (Hos. 14. 4.) and in all respects so wonderful,
Psalm. 31. 19. So narrow are hearts to take it up, and so strange are the ways
of conveying the effects and fruits of this love through a wilderness of
trial and humiliation going before, Deuteronomy. 8. 14, 15, 16. that though it be
revealed in the Gospel, Joh. 3. 16. yet no man can attain to know it so, as
certainly to believe the reality of it, except it be given unto him graciously
of God; and therefore prayer to God, would be joined with the use of other
means for attaining to it, for, Paul does pray to God that they may be able to
comprehend, or certainly to understand and know what is the breadth. 4. We are
not to content our selves with a superficial view of God's free love in
Christ; but ought to take most accurate inspection of it in all its dimensions,
and in all those several respects and ways wherein it is manifested,
endeavoring, at least, to know it so far, as that which is infinite may be
known by finit creatures, and to know it in its outmost capacity, as reaching
beyond all created understanding, upward, downward, to the right hand, and to
the left; that so we may be the more constrained to our duty by it; more
ravished with the thoughts of it, and may draw more solid comfort from it. All
which profitable effects, are obstructed by our narrow thoughts and shallow
apprehensions of Gods love in Christ: for, he prays they may be able to
comprehend it in all its dimensions of breadth and length, depth and height. 5.
As every real Saint, and all who are inherently holy have their allotted
measure from God of the saving knowledge of Gods love in Christ, and shall
attain to the full knowledge thereof afterward; So whatever privilege the
Lord is pleased to bestow upon the Saints in common, we ought to aspire unto
it, and confidently expect to receive it from the Lord: for, as he makes this
comprehension and knowledge, here spoken of, a common privilege of all Saints;
So he does thereby animate and incite the Ephesians to seek and expect it from
God in answer to his prayers; That ye may be able to comprehend with all
Saints. 6. As the love of Christ is the common treasure and allowance of all
Saints, whatever be their different lot in other things; So they who would
clear an interest in this love, must study sanctity and holiness, as that
without which no man can convincingly prove his interest in it, Joh. 14. 21,
23. for, he makes the comprehending of Christ's love, a privilege of those
only who are Saints and holy; Ye may be able to comprehend with all Saints.

From Verse. 19- Learn, 1. The love of God in Christ, and of Christ to lost
sinners, is so rich and unsearchable, (Ephesians. 2. 7.) so vast, boundless, yea,
and infinite, (See ver. 18.) So matchless, and without any parallel to equal
it, whereby we might come to the exact knowledge of it, Romans 5. 7, 8. that not
only the natural man cannot understand it at all, 1 Cor. 2. 14. but even those
who are truly renewed, do not take it up fully, as it is in it self, and so, as
they can express those infinite and unsearchable riches which are in it: they
do but know in part, 1 Cor. 13. 9. for, the Apostle says, this love of Christ
passes knowledge. 2. Though this love of Christ passes knowledge in the sense
presently mentioned; yet every true Believer should endeavor to attain, yea,
and does attain to the knowledge of it in some measure, and so far as is
necessary for their salvation and comfort: for, though this love is
unsearchable, yea, and infinite; yet created understanding may so far comprehend
it, as to know it to be infinite; and that there is not so much known, but more
does yet remain to be known of it. They may know it so, as to stand and wonder
at it, as not being able perfectly to comprehend it: and they may know it thus,
partly, from what the Spirit of God in Scripture, condescending to our capacity
so far as is possible, does speak of it; and partly, from those effects of this
unsearchable love which they do find to be wrought in themselves by it: for,
the Apostle prays they may know this love of Christ which passes knowledge:
hereby implying, that the knowledge thereof may be attained in some measure,
and that it is our duty to seek after it. 3. The infinite and unsearchable
nature of this love of God in Christ to sinners, should be so far from
discouraging Believers to search after the knowledge of it, that by the
contrary we ought to be so much the more encouraged in that search, and this
for the reasons given, ver. 8. doct. 12. for, he adds this of its passing
knowledge, as it seems, of purpose to provoke them so much the more to seek
after the knowledge of it; And to know the love of Christ, which passes
knowledge.

Verse. 19. -- that ye might be filled with all the fullness of God.
HEre is the fourth and last petition of the Apostles prayer, wherein he
prays for the full perfection and accomplishment of all those other things,
which he sought for them in the three former, even that they might be more and
more filled with all the graces of God's Spirit, until they should come to the
complete fullness of grace in glory, when God shall be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.
-28. for, the original does read, that ye may be filled unto all the fullness
of God, even while grace begun here be fully completed in glory hereafter:
which perfection of grace to be attained in the life to come, is called the
fullness of God: not, as if the essence of the Deity were either in whole, or
in part to be communicated unto the glorified Saints, which is incommunicable
unto any creature; but because it flows immediately from that His infinite and
incommunicable fullness, as streams from the fountain, 1 Corinthians. 15. -28. and
does consist in the full enjoying of Him, 1 John 3. -2. Doct. 1. There is a
fullness and compleatnesse in grace attainable even by Believers here, to wit,
such as is sufficient for their present state of travellors and warriors upon
earth, though not for the state of triumphers and possessors in heaven. They
may attain to be complete in Christ, as not only possessing all things by faith
and hope, but being endued also with such a measure of the graces of God's
Spirit, as is requisite to bear them through against, and make them gloriously
victorious over, the chiefest adversaries, Col. 1. 11. Such a fullness is
spoken of, Romans 15. 14. 1 Corinthians. 1. 5, 7. and prayed-for here; That ye may be
filled. 2. All the fullness, and compleatnesse in grace attainable here, is but
an emptiness, being compared with that fullness in glory, which shall be
attained hereafter, called here the fullness of God, and is made mention of as
the journey's end, to be aspired unto and aimed at, as a step far beyond any
fullness which can be attained here: for, he says, that ye may be filled with,
or until, all the fullness of God: where he implies a twofold fullness, the
former attainable here, by which we advance to that other fullness in glory,
which shall be enjoyed herafter. 3. The desires and endeavors of Believers
after Christ and Grace, should not be easily satisfied, nor stand at a stay for
every attainment; but ought to be enlarged, and always advancing toward a
further measure than any thing already received, even to that fullness of grace
attainable here; yea, and the outmost measure of grace here, is not to be
rested upon, as fully satisfying, nor any thing else, until grace be fully
completed in glory hereafter: for, the Apostle, not being satisfied with what
he has asked already, does here pray, that they may be filled even until all
the fullness of God: and hereby teaches them to be satisfied with no less. 4.
The state of Believers in heaven shall be most glorious and blessed, as being
no less than, first, the enjoying of Gods immediate presence by sense, not by
faith or through the glass of Ordinances, which shall then be laid aside, God
Himself being all in all, 1 Cor. 13. 12. And, secondly, the enjoying of His
presence fully, and so far as finit creatures can be capable of that which is
infinite, 1 John 3. -2. for, this is to be filled with the fullness of God,
which shall be attained in heaven.

Verse. 20. Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that
we ask or think, according to the power that works in us.
THe Apostle, lastly, concludes his prayers with an heavenly strain of
thanksgiving to God, whereby he labors, indirectly at least, to persuade
them that he would be answered in those great and large petitions, which he had
put up to God for them, seeing he himself was so much persuaded of it, that he
breaks forth in thanksgiving to God for it, even as if all he sought had been
already granted. And therefore he does labor to persuade them further by that
apposit description, which he gives of God in the first part of this
thanksgiving, taken from God's infinite power, whereby He is able, not only to
bestow more things and greater than we can either express, by seeking them in
prayer, or comprehend in our thoughts, which are oftentimes larger than can be
vented by expressions; but also to bestow those greater things in a large and
abundant measure. And because this of God's power, absolutely considered, had
been a weak ground for faith to lean upon, seeing He is able to do many things
which He does not, Matthew. 26. 53. therefore he gives an instance, or proof, of
this infinite power in what He had wrought in Believers already, by converting,
quickening and carrying on the work of grace to some good length in them,
leaving unto them to gather hence, that the same power would be forthcoming,
and applied unto work for them in time coming, as the exigence of their case
and state should require. Doct. 1. As the duties of prayer and thanksgiving, do
mutually contribute for the help one of another, (See chap. 1. ver. 16. doct.
1.) So we cannot ordinarily be fervent in prayer, but of necessity our heart
will sometimes break forth in thanksgiving to God among hands, occasioned
partly, by those hopes of an answer, which sometimes are in the very time of
prayer suggested by God, Psalm. 6. 8. partly, from the remembrance of mercies
formerly bestowed, which are called to mind in prayer, as arguments to plead
for our present suit, Psalm. 56. 12, 13. and partly, from that felt access to
God enjoyed in prayer, Psalm. 57. 1, etc. with His gracious presence and
assistance communicated to the heart, chiefly when we are discharging that
duty, Psalm. 138. 3. for, Paul, having prayed fervently, does find his heart
constrained to break forth in a song of praise; Now unto him that is able -- be
glory. 2. As we ought not only to pray, but also study what grounds of hope we
may attain, for coming speed in prayer; So we should have such conceptions of
God, and express them to Himself by way of thanksgiving in prayer, as may
furnish our hearts with grounds of confidence, that we shall be heard in what
we seek: for, Paul, in giving thanks to God, describes Him from this, that He
is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, hereby
giving them ground to believe, that the former great things sought by him
should be granted. 3. We ought especially to establish our hearts in the faith
of Gods omnipotency and power to bestow that which we seek, as a main prop for
confidence in prayer, seeing it is above all doubt, that God will do whatever He
is able for granting our petitions, if we seek those things which He has
promised, 1 John 5. 14. and therefore usually the doubts of Believers
concerning God's good will to grant, are but pretenses to cover their shameful
and atheistical doubting about His power: for, Paul, to ground their
confidence in expectation of an answer, describes God from His power, whereby
He is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think. 4. As our
prayers would be well digested, and diligent consideration had of those things
we are to seek, else our prayers are but lip labor of the grossest sort; So
our conceptions concerning things lawful and necessary to be sought in prayer,
go oftentimes beyond our expressions: Eeither we dare not express them, they
are so great, Luke 15. 18, 19. or we cannot express them, they are so many,
that expression is too narrow a vent or passage for them, Romans 8. -26. for, he
joyneth thinking, or conceiving, with asking, and speaks of it as being more
capacious and comprehensive than our asking does reach unto, while he says,
above all that we ask or think. 5. So large is God in His bounty, and so
merciful in His way of dealing with His people, that He does far outstripe not
only their prayers, but also their very conceptions and hopes, in so far as
when they obtain not all they ask, even then they get above what they ask,
delay or disappointment being in that case much better for several reasons
than a present grant: for, says Paul, He is able to do exceeding abundantly
above all that we ask or think. Now he speaks not of His absolute power, but
as it is operative, and working in, and for Believers, as appears from the
instance given; according to the power that works in us, says he. 6. This
superabundant work of Gods mighty power, transcending the hopes and
apprehensions of the most enlarged hearts, is not reserved wholly to be
manifested in the glorification of the Elect; but is manifested already to
every Believer in part; in so far as the work of their conversion at the first,
of carrying on the work of grace in them afterward, of their through-bearing
under, and delivery from crosses and trials, the timous and unexpected trysting
of several comfortable providence with their necessities, are so many proofs
and instances of Gods working above what they do ask, or think; for He is able
to work so, says he, according to the power that works in us. 7. We ought to
look upon the by past instances of Gods gracious and powerful working in us,
as so many confirmations of our faith, that He will work powerfully in us for
the time to come, yea, and above what He has already wrought, according as our
present state shall call for it: for, he makes God's working powerfully in
them at their conversion, an argument to confirm them, that God would work
exceeding abundantly even to the fulfilling of all his petitions for them, the
accomplishment of some whereof, to wit, their being filled with the fullness of
God, was more than any thing already wrought in them; according to the working
of His mighty power, says he.

Verse. 21. Unto him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all
ages, world without end, Amen.
NExt, there is the thanksgiving it self, wherein the Apostle (having his own
heart, doubtless, duly affected and overcharged with high thoughts of Gods
goodness, mercy, power, justice, and other attributes manifested chiefly in
that admirable work of Redemption, whereof he has spoken at length from the
beginning of this Epistle; and having engaged his heart to set forth the glory
and excellency of those praiseworthy attributes, both in word and work) does
further wish that this duty of glorifying God may, and thereby also does
foreprophesie that it shall be gone about by Gods true Church, to wit, among
visible professors, members of the Church, and chiefly, sincere Believers,
(even all such as should find the saving effects of Gods glorious attributes in
their own experience) and this in all ages and generations, so long as the
world should stand, and to all eternity after time shall be ended; and by Jesus
Christ, in whom all their sacrifices of prayers and praises, or of any other
performance, are accepted of God. Doct. 1. The subject matter of a Believers
song of praise and glory to God, is not only those things which God has
graciously done already; but what He is yet to do, together with the
consideration of His power and goodwill to do them: for, the Apostle does here
ascribe glory to God, even for what He was able to do above what they could ask
or think, as appears from the connection of the two verses. 2. As we ought to
make conscience of praise and thanksgiving to God our selves; So, such is the
weight of this duty in it self, Psalm. 106. 2. and so far short does the best
come in it, Neh. 9. -5. so profitable is this duty unto those who do practice
it, Psalm. 147. 1. that we would seriously wish, and accordingly endeavor that
many others would take a lift of it, and join with us in this weighty task of
giving glory to God: for, this is a part of Paul's giving glory to God, even a
wish that the Church may join with him in it; Unto Him be glory in the Church.
3. Though it be the duty of all reasonable creatures to set forth Gods glory,
yea, and all do set it forth one way or other, even damned men and devils in a
passive way, Romans 9. 17. Yet only those are fit to go about this heavenly duty
in a spiritual manner, and only such will make conscience of it, whom God has
separated from the world unto Himself, and upon whom He does manifest the
gracious effects of His praiseworthy attributes: for, he enjoyneth this duty
unto the Church, and especially to real Believers in it, because the Lord does
make His glorious attributes in their gracious effects, manifest only to such,
Psalm. 76. 1, 2. Unto Him be glory in the Church. 4. Praise and thanksgiving is
a duty to be performed, not only by Professors and Believers severally and
apart, but by all of them conjunctly in the assemblies of Gods people, as being
a part of that public homage we owe to God, Psalm. 65. 1. and a(...)an of
mutual edification, Col. 3. 16. for, he says unto Him be glory in the Church.
5. Though the duty of thanksgiving and praise be all which God requires from
us for favors bestowed on us, Psalm. 50. 15. yet, we cannot discharge even this
duty of our selves and acceptably, but by Jesus Christ, through whom we have
furniture and strength to do, Philip. 4. 13. access unto God in doing, Ephesians. 2.
18. and acceptance with God, when we have done either this, or any other duty,
Ephesians. 1. -6. for he says unto Him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus. 6. As
God shall never want glory from His Church; So there shall always be a Church
through all ages to hold up this song of praise and glory to God, against which
the gates of hell shall not prevail, Matthew. 16. -18. neither shall the Church
ever in any age want matter of praise: (the saddest times want not their own
mercies, Ezekiel. 9. -13-) for as this is a wish, so it is a prophecy, that unto
Him shall be glory in the Church through all ages. 7. See further (from the
continuance of this song unto all eternity, and from the Apostles Amen, whereby
he closes the thanksgiving) upon Gal. 1. ver. 5. doct. 3. and 4. World without
end,

Amen.
CHAP. IIII.
THe Apostle, having in the three preceding Chapters given a short sum of
saving doctrine, does now, to ver. 21. chap. 6. exhort them to suitable
practice. And, first, being to press upon them the practice of such duties as
are more general and common to all, as they are Christians, to chap. 5. ver.
22. He does, in the first part of this Chapter, exhort them to unity: and, to
make way for his so doing, he first premitteth a general exhortation to walk
worthy of their vocation, ver. 1. And next, subjoyneth a more particular
exhortation unto such graces, as have a more special influence upon unity, as
humility, etc. ver. 2. and so does fall upon his intended scope, which is to
press upon them the study of unity, ver. 3. Which he inforceth, 1. by an
argument taken from seven things, which are one and the same in the Church and
all the true members thereof, ver. 4, 5, 6. Secondly, by an other argument,
taken from these things which are not one, but diverse, almost in every member,
to wit, diversity of gifts and graces, and their different measures; which
diversity he shows does also tend to union, first, because all those gifts
and different measures do come from one author, Christ, ver. 7. which he
confirms from Psalm. 78. 18. cited, ver. 8. commented upon and applied, ver.
9, 10. And further confirms it, by giving an instance of those several
gifts, in the several offices appointed by Christ in the Church, ver. 11.
Secondly, because they are all given for promoting the same end, the edifying
of the Church, first, propounded, ver. 12. secondly, illustrated from the term
of its continuance by those means, ver. 13. and from two of its fruits, to wit,
preservation from error, ver. 14. and growth in grace, ver. 15. by virtue of
influence conveyed from Christ, ver. 16.

In the second part, he dehorteth them from all impiety and profanity in the
general; first, because unconverted Gentiles did live in those, ver. 17. whose
godless conversation is set forth distinctly in its several branches and
degrees, ver. 18, 19. Secondly, because the knowledge which they had of Christ,
was inconsistent with such a licentious life, ver. 20. which he proves from
three things, which that knowledge did oblige, and strongly incline them to,
first, to mortify the old man, ver. 22. secondly, to have the mind or
understanding renewed, ver. 23. thirdly, to put on the new man in
righteousness and holiness, ver. 24.

In the third part of the Chapter, are six particular precepts, belonging to
the second Table: The first is to abstain from lying, and to speak truth, ver.
25. The second, to moderate and suppress anger, ver. 26. else they did cast
open doors for Satan to tempt them unto some mischief, ver. 27. The third, to
abstain from stealing, and to labor diligently in some lawful calling, ver.
28. The fourth, to abstain from all corrupt communication, and to utter
edifying purpose in their ordinary discourse, ver. 29. because they would
otherwise grieve the spirit, ver. 30. The fifth, is, to abstain from all the
branches, degrees, and effects of sinful anger, ver. 31. The sixth is, to
exercise kindness and tender-heartednesse in mutual forgiveness, ver. 32.

Verse. 1. I Therefore the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that ye walk worthy
of the vocation wherewith ye are called.
THe Apostle does here enforce one general duty, which is a comprehensive sum
of all such other duties as he is to press afterward, and whereof that unity,
unto which he exhorts in the first part of the Chapter, is a special
evidence. Which general exhortation, is, that (supposing that they were
effectually called, at least they took themselves for such, and the better part
were really such) they would walk worthy of their vocation, not, as if they had
been to purchase and merit by their walking, that God should call them: for,
the text holds out, that they behoved to be called, before they could walk
after the manner which the Apostle here presses, and therefore were not to
merit vocation by their walking: See 2 Timothy 1. 9. but that they ought to walk
suitably, and as it becomes those who are dignified with such a calling, as
the word is rendered, Romans 16. 2. Which exhortation is propounded by way of
entreaty, and backed with two arguments. The first whereof, is hinted at in the
illative particle, therefore, and it is taken from that excellent state, in
which free grace had placed them, spoken of in the three preceding Chapters.
The second, is taken from the suffering condition of Paul himself who did
exhort, whose sad sufferings might justly challenge from them obedience unto
those truths for which he suffered, as that which would comfort him much under
his sufferings; and their denial whereof could not but add affliction to his
bonds. Hence Learn, 1. The Doctrine of salvation through free grace in Jesus
Christ, is so far from ministering an occasion of security, ungodliness or
profanity, that there is no stronger argument to induce men to the
conscientious practice of holiness in all the duties thereof, than sanctified
knowledge, saving faith, and the solid consideration of that Doctrine,
especially seeing the principles thereof do many ways engage the Believer to
lead an holy life, Romans 6. 2, etc. and the freegifted salvation offered by it
cannot be embraced, except covenanted strength for through-bearing in the way
of holiness be embraced also, Romans 8. 1. for, he infers the study of
holiness from the Doctrine of salvation through free grace; the former being,
as it were, the native result, and inseparable companion of the latter; I
therefore beseech you, that ye walk worthy. 2. Though there be a necessary
connection betwixt our embracing the doctrine of salvation through free grace,
and the study of an holy life, as said is; yet such is our natural averseness
from holiness, Romans 8. 7. so many are the tentations and difficulties which ly
in our way to it, 2 Timothy 3. 12. that even, the best of men do need the spur of
earnest and vehement exhortation to excite unto it: for, notwithstanding that
Paul holds forth upright practice, as the result of embracing the former
doctrine; Yet he sees it needful to exhort and beseech them, that they walk
worthy of their vocation. 3. A suffering lot for Christ, is such, as those who
rightly improve it, will highly esteem of it, not only in their first
thoughts, and at their first engaging in it, but also, and chiefly in their
cold blood, after a times experience, and in their second thoughts: for, Paul
having boasted (chap. 3. ver. 1.) of his being a prisoner for Christ, he does
here repeat the same, to show he had not reason to eat-in any thing of what he
formerly had said; I therefore the prisoner of the Lord. 4. It sweetneth much
the sufferings of the Saints, that he for whom they suffer is Christ, the Lord,
as being worthy to be suffered for, Act. 5. 41. and mighty in power to support
them under suffering, (Matthew. 10. 19, 20.) to deliver from it, (2 Corinthians. 1.
10.) to better them by it, (Romans 5. 3, 4.) and to reward them freely for it, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. for, Paul comfort himself in this, that he was the prisoner of
the Lord, whom (chap. 3. 1.) he called Christ. 5. The suffering lot of Christ's
Ministers obliges people to yield themselves so much the more obedient in the
Lord unto their Ministry, by walking like the Gospel, there being nothing more
comfortable to His suffering Servants, than when their sufferings are useful
for that end, Phil. 1. 14. and nothing more weighty than when it is otherwise,
2 Timothy 4. 10, 16. for, Paul designeth himself from his sufferings, hereby to
add weight to his exhortation; I therefore the prisoner of the Lord. See more
from this style taken by Paul, chap. 3. ver. 1. doct. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Doct.
6. So ticklish are people to be dealt with in the point of pressing duty, and
so ready to cast at duty, when it is not pressed in a way suitable to their own
mind, 2 Timothy 4. 3. that though Ministers are not to be directed by people, as
to the matter which they preach, 2 Chronicles. 18. 12. 13. yet as to the manner of
bearing-in what is pressed, they are much to condescend to that way, which will
be most taking with, and gaining upon, their humor: and particularly, they are
to press the duties of holiness, with as much of servent, earnest, and
insinuative entreaty, as if it were a matter of their own concernment only, or
as if people by their obedience were to hurt themselves for doing a favor unto
their Ministers; for, Paul does press his exhortation by an insinuative
entreaty, rather than by commanding; I beseech you, the word signifies,
vehemently to entreat. 7. It is no small honor, which God does put upon His
people, when He effectually calls them, and by His omnipotent and
irresistible power (Joh. 12. 32.) does draw these, who were before dead in sins
and trespasses (Ephesians. 2. 1.) from under the power of darkness, and translateth
them unto the Kingdom of His dear Son, Col. 1. 13. giving them actual
possession of the state of grace, with all the privileges accompanying that
state here, 1 John 3. 2-. and a right unto, (Luke 12. 32.) with the well
grounded hope of, glory, to be enjoyed hereafter, Ephesians. 1. 18. for he speaks
of their vocation, as a state of much dignity and honor, requiring a singular
sort of walking answerable to it; That ye walk worthy of the vocation,
wherewith ye are called. 8. So far are we from meriting by our holy and tender
walking, that God shall call us out of nature unto the state of grace, and
consequently bestow a right to heaven and glory upon us, that our effectual
calling does go before our holy walking, as that, without which we cannot walk
one step acceptably in the ways of God: for, Paul supponeth them to be already
called, and from that exhorts them to walk answerably; That ye walk worthy of
the vocation, wherewith ye are called. 9. It is the duty of called Christians,
and will also be their care and study, to have a constant eye upon that
dignity, unto which they are called; that so they may walk worthy of it, and
answerably unto it: which then is in some measure performed, when we have
respect unto all the commandments, Psalm. 119. 6. and do in a special manner
make conscience of all those particular duties, aftermentioned in this Epistle:
for, he exhorts them to walk worthy of their vocation, as their duty
following upon, and flowing from, that dignity put upon them in effectall
calling; Walk worthy of the vocation, wherewith ye are called. 10. But more
particularly, Our carriage and practice cannot be answerable to this excellent
state, to which we are called, except, first, we shake off sloth and
laziness, bestirring our selves in the way of duty. Secondly, as we begin
well, so we hold on without down-sitting and turning aside. And, thirdly, we be
daily advancing, and making progress in our Christian course; for, he
designeth a carriage answerable to this excellent state by walking, which
implies all those three, motion or exercise, constancy in it, and progress
in the way; That ye walk worthy of the vocation.

Verse. 2. With all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, for bearing
one another in love.
HE does, next, exhort unto several graces and duties, the exercise and
practice whereof, are not only branches of that walking worthy of their
vocation, spoken of, ver. 1. and here pressed, as such, but also necessary
helps and means for attaining and entertaining that unity, which he is
afterward to press, as, first, humility, or lowliness, a grace and virtue,
whereby a man, from the sense of his own infirmities (Gal. 6. ver. 1.) and the
uncertainty of outward things which he enjoys, (1 Timothy 6. 17.) does esteem
but meanly and soberly of himself, and of all that is his, Philip. 2. 3.
Secondly, meekness, a virtue, whereby we are rendered tractable, and easy to
be conversed with, I am. 3. 17. whereby also we moderate anger, so that we are
not provoked but for just causes, and not more, or longer provoked than the
Word of God allows, and do speedily restrain and suppress anger, when it
has transgressed the just bounds, Ephesians. 4. 26. Thirdly, long-suffering, which
is the same in substance with meekness: only, it further implies the
continuance of the exercise of meekness, so as it is not interrupted, neither
with length of time, nor with multiplication, nor heightening of injuries,
Matthew. 18. 22. Fourthly, mutual forbearance, flowing from love: for the right
performance whereof, the former three are spoken of as necessary
qualifications, (as appears from the grammatical construction of the words)
and it consists in our pleasant bearing with, and tolerating of whatsomever
is displeasing, or loathsome to us in the carriage of others, though not so, as
to connive at their sin, or to neglect means of reclaming them from their sin,
Gal. 6. 1, 2. yet so, as we do not withhold any necessary duty, which we
otherwise owe unto them, Matthew. 5. 44. or cease from following after peace and
concord with them, Heb. 12. 14. Hence, Learn, 1. How diligent soever a
Christian be in public, or private duties of Gods immediate worship, or in the
duties of his particular calling; yet he dothnot walk answerably to that
excellent dignity unto which he is called, except he be of an humble, meek and
condescending spirit, and do evidence himself to be so, by his digesting of,
bearing with, and passing over the infirmities and failings of those whom he
converseth with, in so far as he do not make a breach upon the peace and unity
of the Church of God: for, he does instance their walking worthy of their
vocation in the exercise of humility, meekness, long-suffering, and in mutual
forbearance, in order to the keeping of unity, in this and the following
verses; With all lowliness, etc. 2. The grace of humility and lowliness, as
it is most beseeming Christians; so it is of necessary use to fit men for the
duty of mutual forbearance in order to unity and peace; in so far, as the
humble man, being conscious of his own infirmities, does know he needs as
much of forbearance from God and others, as others do need from him, Romans 7.
18. and through humility is made to think but meanly of himself, and highly of
others, Philip. 2. 3, 4. and so to eschew vain glory and pride, the usual
occasion of strife, Prove. 13. 10. for, he presses lowliness, in order to
forbearance and unity, while he says, with all lowliness, forbearing one
another, and ver. 3. endeavoring to keep unity. 3. Humility and lowliness is
also necessary to the exercise of meekness and long-suffering; those only
being able to moderate anger, and to restrain the inundations of their
impetuous passions, when stirred and provoked by real injuries, who being
conscious of their own infirmities, do judge but meanly of themselves, and
therefore not too good to have, by the Lords wise and gracious dispensation, a
suffering lot from the wicked and injurious carriage of others, 2 Samuel 16. 10.
for, he presses humility in the first place, as the foundation of, and
entrance unto, all the rest; With all lowliness, and meekness, with
long-suffering. 4. There is an all-nesse, or universality, which ought to be in
the grace of lowliness, first, with respect to the subject: it ought to extend
it self to the whole man, as being seated in the heart, Philip. 2. -3-. and
kything in the outward carriage, Luke 14. 8. Secondly, with respect to all
objects: There must be humility toward God, Acts 20. 19. and humility also
toward men, Philip. 2. 3. and toward all sorts of men, not only superiors
(Levit. 19. 32) but inferiors also, Job 31. 13. Thirdly, with respect to the
grace it self, as being without any mixture of the contrary vice, so far as is
possible, Psalm. 131. 1, 2. and daily growing up toward perfection, 2 Corinthians.
7. 1. Fourthly, with respect to all cases, so as it be exercised in prosperity
(Ezekiel. 16. 49.) as well as adversity: for, says he, with all lowliness, which
note of universality, is often made use of by the Apostle when he would express
a great measure and degree of any gift or grace. See 1 Cor. 1. 5. Philip. 1.
-9. Doct. 5. Meekness and long-suffering, as they differ but little in
substance, and are commendable graces in themselves; so they are notable means
and helps to fit men for the duty of mutual forbearance, in order to unity; in
so far as they do render him, who is endued with them, gentle, affable and
easy to be conversed with, and do moderate anger, which is ready to blow the
bellows of contention and to stir up strife, Prove. 15. 18. for, he exhorts
unto meekness and long-suffering in order to forbearance and unity; With
meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another -- endeavoring to keep
unity. 6. The best of men have their own infirmities, mistakes and failings,
mutually justling and rubbing upon each other, whereby they prove often
unpleasant and burdensome one to another: for, this is supposed, while they are
commanded to forbear one another. 7. It is the duty of Christians mutually to
tolerate, and forbear one another, even when there are real grounds of
displeasure: for, hereby a man overcomes himself, and his own corrupt nature,
which thirsts after revenge, Prove. 16. 32. hereby he overcomes and shameth
his party who did him wrong, 1 Samuel 24. 17. and keeps Gods way in overcoming
of him, Romans 12. 17-, 21. and hereby a man also in some comfortable measure
does entertain peace with others, which otherwise upon every occasion would
blow up and evanish: for, he enjoyneth this mutual forbearance, as a remedy
against the clashing of mutual infirmities, and for entertaining of unity and
peace; forbearing one another -- endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit.
8. This duty of forbearance is to be exercised to the person of our brother,
rather than his faults: we are so to bear with his person, as to endeavor the
bearing down of his sin, by admonition, (2 Thessalonians. 3. 15.) reproof (Levit. 19.
17.) or correction, (Prove. 13. 24.) as we have otherwise access: and yet we
are so to meddle with his faults, as in the mean time we may give due respect
to his person, not irritating, or provoking his corruptions, while we intend to
cure them: for, says he, forbearing one another, which relates to persons
rather than to faults. 9. This duty of forbearance ought to be mutual, and
cannot in reason be expected by any from others to themselves, who are not
ready themselves to repay it unto others; seeing there is no man, who wants
his own infirmities which call for forbearance, Iam. 3. 2. and that every man
is obliged to do, as he would be done to by others, Matthew. 7. 12. for, says
he, forbearing one another. 10. Love to our neighbor, whereby our heart and
inmost affections are inclined and disposed toward him for his good, as they
ought, as it is the great root and fountain of all duties toward others,
without which they are but counterfeit shadows, and not real and sincere, 1
Cor. 13. 3. So it does in a special manner dispose and fit us for this duty of
mutual forbearance; love covers a multitude of sins, 1 Pet. 4. 8. and makes
us bear with many things in the person loved, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 7. which otherwise
flesh and blood would not digest, 2 Cor. 12. 15. for, he holds out love as
the fountain of all the rest, and especially of mutual forbearance; With all
lowliness -- forbearing one another in love. 11. Whence it follows, that
this duty of mutual forbearance ought to flow from a principle of love: and
therefore, though we forbear from necessity, because we dare not do otherwise;
or, from policy, until we get opportunity to right our selves; or, from
respect to our own ease only, lest by resenting injuries and miscarriages, we
create trouble to ourselves; or, if we tolerate, connive at, and foster the
sins of others, under a pretense of forbearing them, which is inconsistent with
love to them, Lev. 19. 17. In all those cases, our forbearance is not
acceptable service to God, nor yet in any case but when it is performed in
love, and from a principle thereof: for, the forbearance he enjoyneth, is,
forbearing one another in love.

Verse. 3. Endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.
HE does now fall upon the main scope of this first part of the Chapter,
exhorting them by all possible endeavors to keep the union of all the members
of the Church, being united together by the holy Ghost, even in heart, and
especially in things spiritual: all which are employed in this unity of the
spirit, and that, in order to this unity, they would be of a peaceable
disposition and deportment, to wit, so as not to make unnecessary ruptures and
breaches upon every difference, whereby they should be firmly knit together, as
the members of one body by its several ligaments and sinnews. Doct. (...). As
there are several sorts of union in the Church, and more particularly, besides
that union which is amongst the members of the invisible Church, the bond
whereof is the saving graces of Gods Spirit, (all of them being united to
Christ, the head, by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. and one to another by love, Col. 3.
14.) There is an union also of the visible Church and the members thereof
amongst themselves: and this is twofold, the one necessary to the being of a
Church and being of a Churchmember, so that a Church cannot be a Church, nor a
man a member of the visible Church without it: the ty of which union is Gods
Covenant with the visible Church, and the Churches professed embracing and
laying hold upon that Covenant, when offered in the Gospel, Psalm. 50. 5. the
other necessary to the welbeing of the Church, which is entertained by unity in
judgment, (1 Cor. 1. 10.) in heart and affection, (Act. 4. 32.) by concurrance
in purposes and actings, Philip. 1. -27. So all those sorts of union, and union
in all those respects, is to be sought after and entertained in the Church:
for, the Apostle speaks indefinitly, Endeavoring to keep the union of the
Spirit. 2. The union which God requires among His People, is not an union in
sin or error, Isa. 8. 12. nor yet a civil union only, in things worldly, upon
politic and civil interests, Act. 12. 20. nor yet a mere outside agreement, or
living together only, Psalm. 55. 21. but an union in heart and spirit, in things
spiritual, and such an union, whereof the Spirit of God is author: for,
therefore is it called the unity of the Spirit; Endeavoring to keep the unity
of the Spirit. 3. The study of keeping peace and unity in the Church, is a most
necessary duty, as being one prime instance of walking worthy of our vocation,
spoken of, ver. 1. and yet such is the restlesnesse of some, and the prevalency
of pride, passion, love to self-interest, and such like dividing lusts in
others, that it is a duty most difficile to be practiced, as being the result
of all those graces, mentioned, ver. 2. and not attainable, even by those who
are endued with those graces, except they apply themselves wholly to it, and
use the utmost of their serious endeavors for that end, as is clear from the
connection of this verse with the two preceding, and from the word in the
original, rendered endeavoring, implying study, diligence and solicitude. 4.
Neither fair pretenses for peace and union in the Church, not seconded, but
rather contradicted, by practice, nor yet some careless endeavors, which are
easily broken by appearing difficulties, are that which God will accept of at
our hands as the duty required for preserving unity in the Church, where it is,
or for restoring unity where it is already lost: there is no less called-for
than the utmost of our serious endeavors for that end, so as we not only
carefully eschew what may on our part give cause of renting, 1 Cor. 8. 13. but
also, that we be not easily provoked when a cause of renting is given by
others, 1 Cor. 13. 5. and that, when a rent is made, we spare no pains, nor
stand upon any thing, which properly is our own, for having it removed, Genesis
13. 8, 9. and that we do not-weary of those endeavors under small appearances
of present success, 2 Cor. 12. 15. for, he bids them seriously endeavor to
keep the unity of the Spirit. 5. So many are the temptations arising from the
corruptions of those among whom we live, to make us neglect this duty of
keeping the union of the Spirit, that except we be of such peaceable
dispositions as to digest many things one in another, which otherwise our
corruptions would make much stir about, we cannot choose but fall at ods, rent
assunder as so many disjoynted legs and arms, and upon every occasion involve
our selves and the Church of Christ in several sad and dangerous broils and
ruptures: for, he calls peace, that is, a peaceable disposition, kything in
all our deportment, the bond, or ligament, whereby the members of the Church
are knit together; in the bond of peace, says he. 6. Whatever differences may
fall out among the members of the Church in the matter of opinion and judgment;
yet they are not presently to break the bond of peaceable walking one with
another by counteractings and factious sidings; but ought to study unanimous
and joint practice in those things wherein there is agreement; and where this
peaceable deportment, flowing from a peaceable frame of spirit, is, it tends
much to preserve what remains of this spiritual unity, and to regain what is
already lost: for, peace with man, which is the peace here spoken of, does
especially consist in our harmonious walking together, flowing from a peaceable
frame of spirit, and is here enjoined as a special mean for keeping the unity
of the Spirit, even in the bond of peace.

Verse. 4. There is but one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one
hope of your calling.
HE does now enforce the former exhortation to unity and peace, first, from an
argument taken from those many things, which are one and the same in the Church
and all the true members thereof: and for this end, does reckon forth seven
unities, which may be looked upon as so many bonds and ties of the essential
unity, especially of the invisible Church; and as so many arguments also, that
therefore all, professing Christ, should not only labor to be one in all
those, as they would evidence themselves to be sincere Believers and members of
that blessed society; but also improve their unity in these, for keeping unity
and peace in lesser differences.

There are three of these unities, which are so many bonds and arguments, in
this verse. The first is, that the whole Church is but one body, to wit, the
invisible Church of real Believers is one mystical body, knit by faith to
Christ their head, Ephesians. 3. 17. and by the bond of love among themselves, Joh.
13. 35. And the visible Church is one politic body, 1 Cor. 12. 27. conjoined
with Christ their head, and among themselves by external covenanting, (Psalm.
50. 5.) and their serious professing of saving truths, Act. 8. 12, 13, with 23.
and this body is but one, the invisible Church without all doubt is so, and the
Catholic visible Church, made up of all Christians and true Churches in the
world, is also one, because they have the same King, Laws, Word, Sacraments of
admission and nutrition, which they visibly subject themselves to, and receive,
and have a grant of the same common privileges from God in the Gospel; and
therefore they are all one visible Church. 2. There is but one Spirit, to wit,
the third Person in the blessed Trinity, who, residing in Christ, the head.
(Isa. 61. 1.) and in all the members (Romans 8. -9.) as the soul in the natural
body, does by His gifts and graces animate, move and govern the Church, the
body presently spoken of. 3. As the Church is one in these two; so their hope,
following upon effectual calling, is also one. Where, by hope is not so much
meaned the grace of hope, as the object of that grace or good things hoped for,
as Col. 1. 5- especially heaven and glory, the common inheritance of the
Saints, Col. 1. 12. which they get not in hand, but only do possess it in
hope, Romans 8. 24, 25. And this hope is said to be one, to wit, for kind and
substance, though there will be different degrees in glory, Dan. 12. 2, 3.
Doct. 1. That the whole Church, and all the members thereof, are but one body,
is a strong argument enforcing the duty of keeping peace and unity; it being no
less absurd and prodigious for Christians to bite and devour one another, than
if the members of one and the self-same natural body, should rise up against,
tear and destroy one another: for, he inforceth the study of unity from this,
That there is one body. 2. That any be a member of this one body, it is
necessary he have the Spirit of God residing in him, whereby he may be
quickened and acted, either by the saving operations of that one Spirit;
otherwise he cannot be a member of the invisible body, Romans 8. 9, 10. Or, by
His common gifts and operations; otherwise a man, come to age and
understanding, cannot be a member, no not of the visible body, 1 Cor. 12. ^1.
for, he makes this one body, and one Spirit of equal extent; There is one body
and one Spirit. 3. That the whole Church, and all the members thereof, are
animated and acted by one and the self-same Spirit of God, is a strong motive
to incite to the study of peace and unity, seeing divid lusts and practices are
among those sins which grieve the Spirit. See ver. 30. 31. and that the
difference of gifts and graces, wrought in us by that one Spirit, are given of
purpose to make each member either useful to another by that wherein it
excels, or indigent of the help of others in that wherein it comes short,
and so to have the same care one of another, 1 Cor. 12. from verse. 14. to the
end: for, he presses unity from this, that there is one Spirit. 4. As an
external call by the ministry of the Word, and professed obedience thereto, is
sufficient to make a man a member of the visible body, and to partake of the
common operations of the Spirit; So that any be of this mystical invisible
body, and quickened and acted by the saving operations of this one Spirit, it
is necessary they be effectually called, and actually translated out of their
natural state to the state of grace: for, he makes their being of this one
body, and having this one Spirit, to be necessarily joined with their calling,
to wit, their being of the visible body, and having the common operations of
the Spirit with the external calling, and their being of the invisible body,
and having the saving operations of the Spirit, with the inward and effectual
calling; Even as ye are called. 5. Though effectual calling be a work of Gods
Spirit, there being none who comes to Christ except the Father draw him, Joh.
6. 44. yet none is completely called, until he yield obedience to Gods call,
and being wrought upon by God, does actually work and concur with God for that
end: for, what he called (chap. 1. ver. 18.) Gods calling, is here expressed to
be their calling, because then only are we called when we obey the call of God;
In one hope of your calling, says he. 6. As those, who are yet in nature, not
effectually called, are in a hopeless state, having no right to heaven and
happiness, and consequently no ground to hope for it, how big soever they be
otherwise in their vain and groundless hopes, Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20. So, effectual
calling, does open to the person'called a large door of well-grounded hope,
that whatever be his misery here, yet he shall be perfectly blessed in the full
enjoying of God for evermore hereafter: for, the called man only has right to
those rich promises, 2 Pet. 1. 3, 4. and God, by calling him, does engage
Himself to perform all that is promised to the called man, according to his
hope, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. with 24. for, therefore are those glorious things
hoped-for called the hope of our calling. 7. The consideration of this, that
called Saints are all of them aiming at one and the self-same prize of their
high calling, and shall live together in glory, should be a strong argument to
make them live in peace and concord, while they are here. Their joint aiming at
one mark should make them of one mind and heart, especially seeing there is that
in glory which will suffice all; and their seeking of one thing needs be no
occasion of strife and emulation, but rather of unity in heart, mind and
affection; for, why should they strive together, who not only are brethren,
Genesis 13. 8. but also are heirs together of the grace of life, 1 Pet. 3. -- 7.
yea, heirs with Christ, Romans 8. 17. and shall one day reign together in glory?
for, he presses their keeping unity from this, that they were effectually
called, and heaven and glory hoped-for would suffice all, and be enjoyed by
all; Even as ye are called in one hope of your calling.

Verse. 5. One Lord, one faith, one baptism,
IN this verse are other three of these unities, which are also so many bonds
of, and incitements to, that unity exhorted unto, ver. 3. First, there is but
one Lord: which title, though it belong to all the three Persons in the blessed
Trinity by right of creation, and accordingly is given to God under the name of
Master, Mal. 1. 6. yet, seeing the unity of the Spirit is spoken to, ver. 4. and
of God the Father, ver. 6. therefore it ought in this place to be astricted to
Christ, the second Person, to whom it is in a peculiar manner due by right of
Redemption; in so far as He has redeemed the Elect from their natural slavery
and bondage under sin, Satan and Gods wrath, to be a peculiar people unto
Himself, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. and hereby has purchased a right to rule over them,
as Mediator, Lord-depute, and Administrator under the Father, Philip. 2. 9, 10,
11. And He is said to be but one Lord, there being none, to whom, either as
partner, or substitute, He will communicate this His glory of dominion and
lordship over His Church, either in whole, or in part, 1 Pet. 5. 3. Secondly,
there is but one faith, where, by faith may be meaned the grace of faith, for
that is also one, in respect of the author God, Col. 2. 12. of the object,
which it apprehends, the whole Word of God, (Act. 24. 14.) and especially
Christ, and the promises, Philip. 3. 9: Yet, by faith is mainly here meaned the
Doctrine of faith, proponed by God to be believed, as Gal. 1. 23. and this
Doctrine is but one, because, though in the several ages of the Church it was
proponed diverse ways, and with considerable variation in some weighty
circumstances, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. yet in substance it has been, is, and ever
shall be the same, Act. 15. 11. Heb. 13. 8. and from Christ's coming in the
flesh, even to the end of the world, it is to remain the same, both for
substance and circumstance, Heb. 12. 27, 28. and though there be different
opinions in the Church about divine Truths revealed in the Scripture, which
occasioneth different faiths, (See ver. 13.) Yet, there is only this one faith
allowed by Christ, neither is there any other faith but this one in true
Believers, if we look to those Truths which are of absolute necessity to
salvation; there is an agreement in those, and one and the same faith of those
in all, whatever may be their differences about other inferior Truths, Act. 4.
12. Thirdly, there is but one Baptism, whereby is meaned neither the Baptism of
affliction, Mat. 20. 22. nor of the extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost, Acts
1. 5. but the ordinary Sacrament of Baptism, the practice whereof is enjoined
by Christ under the Gospel, Matthew. 28. 19. And it is said to be one, not in
respect of the persons administrating, or receiving this Ordinance, but of its
nature and substance, as having the same author, Christ, Matthew. 28. 19. the
same outward element for kind, Act. 8. 36. the same way of administration
enjoined, Matthew. 28. 19. the same ends and uses toward those who are baptized,
Romans 6. 3. 4. Doct. 1. All these, who are of this one body, animated and acted
by this one Spirit, and have well-grounded hope of glory, they must, and do
subject themselves to Christ, as Lord, in so far as they are ruled by His Laws,
Acts 9. 6. and patiently submit to His corrections and chastisements, Heb. 12.
6, 7. for, He makes their being of one body, having one spirit and one hope,
and their subjection to this one Lord, of equal extent; one Lord, says he. 2.
The consideration of this, that the whole Church, and all the Members thereof,
are subject to the dominion of one Lord and Master, Christ Jesus, is a strong
argument for enforcing this duty of keeping unity and peace among themselves;
this being a duty, which not only he did press most vehemently upon His
followers, when He was about to leave the world, and depart from them, Joh. 13.
34, 35. but also did most earnestly entreat the Father for, even that they
might be all made one in Him, Joh. 17. 21, 22. Besides, what a shame is it for
the Servants of one Master to fall at odds among themselves, and thereby
neglect their Masters work committed to them? for, he presses the study of
unity from this, that there is one Lord. 3. The Law, by which the Lord Christ
will have His subjects ruled and governed, is not searched out, and known by
sense or natural reason, but, being revealed in the Word, it is laid hold upon
by faith, and credit given to it, because of His authority who has revealed
it: for, so much may be gathered from his making mention of faith, or the
Doctrine of faith, immediately after he had spoken of the Lord Christ; one
Lord, one faith, says he. 4. The consideration of this, that the whole Church,
and all the true and lively Members thereof, do profess one and the same
fundamental Truths revealed in Scripture, as the only object of saving faith,
and way to salvation, ought to be a strong motive for keeping concord and unity
in all other things, which otherwise might occasion dissension and strife. This
agreement in the main, in the journeys end, and the necessary way, which
leads to it, should make them ashamed to fall at odds and strife about other
things of less importance and moment: for, he presses unity from this, that
there is one faith. 5. The wise Lord has judged it fitting to add the
Sacraments, as seals unto the Doctrine of faith and salvation, contained in
Scripture; that hereby we may be the more enabled to take up and understand
that Doctrine, and be the more affected with it, as having the purpose of it,
not only exhibited and represented to our ear in the Word, but to our eye also
in the Sacrament, and that we may be the more confirmed in the truth of that
Doctrine, as having not only His word and writ for it, but also His seal and
pledge: for, after mention made of the Doctrine of faith, he presently adds
there is one Baptism. 6. The Lord has added Sacraments to the doctrine of
faith, not only for the reasons mentioned, but also for engaging the party
receiver unto such duties as the Doctrine of faith does press upon him; a
Sacrament being as a military oath, whereby we bind our selves to fight under
the Lords banner, and in all things to be for Him: for, he does press them to
duty, even to keep unity, from this, that they were partakers of this one
Baptism. 7. The consideration of this, that the Church and all the Members
thereof are dedicate to God, in one and the same Sacrament of Baptism, unto the
receiving whereof, all do accord, is a strong motive to make them keep peace
and unity in other things, seeing this oneness in Baptism does imply our
communion in all other things, which are signified and sealed unto us by that
Sacrament, which are all those things wherein our salvation is most nearly
concerned, and that by Baptism we are solemnly engaged to go about our Master's
work, Romans 6. 4. and so to eschew all renting, and falling out among our
selves, by which His work is much retarded: for, he makes this another
argument to enforce unity, that they did all partake of one Baptism. Only know,
that though we are not to re-baptize those who are baptized by schismatic
and heretical Churches, even though they err in some fundamental truths, so
long as the substantial parts of Baptism are preserved, though mixed with much
of their own superstitious trash, and therefore in some respect we may be said
to have one common Baptism with them; yet, it does not follow hence, that we
are tied to keep unity with them simply and in all respects. We are only hereby
tied to seek union with them, not by joining in their schism, or damnable
heresies, but by laboring to reclaim them from those: and if they be one in
all the other essential ties and bonds of union here mentioned, as of having
one Lord, one faith, etc. this oneness of Baptism does engage to be willing,
and endeavor, for our part, to keep the bond of peace with them in other
things: for, those seven unities, or bonds, and arguments, are not to be taken
separately, but jointly, as to the pressing of unity: yea, and though they be
not one in all the rest, yet it engages us to own them in those things wherein
they are right and owned by God, providing always we touch no unclean thing, 2
Cor. 6. 17. In these respects, and with those limitations we deny not but unity
should be kept with heretical Churches, even the Church of Rome her self.

Verse. 6. One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in
you all.
HEre is the seventh unity, which is the last bond, or ty, of the Churches
essential unity, and serves also for an argument persuading to keep peace and
unity in other lesser differences: which argument, is, first, propounded, to
wit, all Believers have one common God and Father; for, though God, as Creator,
is the God and Father of all the creatures, Act. 17. 28, 29. yet, seeing the
Apostle is speaking of the union of the Church, and of all the members thereof,
for urging whereof, this consideration of one God and Father of all, is used as
an argument: therefore it seems He is called God and Father with respect to
those, and chiefly to real Believers in the Church, to whom He is God and
Father in a peculiar way. He is their God, by entering a gracious Covenant with
them, whereof this is one article, that He shall be their God, Jer. 31. 33.
that is, all in Him shall be forthcoming for their good: He is their Father
also, by receiving them into the number, and by giving them a right unto all
the privileges, of the sons of God, Joh. 1. 12. Now though this may be meaned
of all the Persons of the blessed. Trinity; not only the first, but also the
second, and the third, being the God and Father of Believers, Joh. 20. 28. Act.
5. 3, 4. yea, all of them being one, and the same God, 1 John 5. 7. Yet, seeing
the Son and holy Ghost, are spoken of before, ver. 4, 5. the first Person is
mainly to be understood here, who is called one God, not secluding the Son and
holy Ghost, who are one and the same God in essence with the Father, but in
opposition to idols, who are no gods, 1 Cor. 8. 6.

This argument or bond of unity, is, next, enlarged in a description of this
one God. 1. From His eminency and dominion above all His creatures. 2. From
His presence and powerful providence, whereby he runs through all the
creatures, upholding them in their being, Heb. 1. 3. directing, disposing and
governing all of them, Dan. 4. 34. and all their actions, Psalm. 135. 6.
Thirdly, from His special presence by the gracious operations of His holy
Spirit with the truly Regenerate, whereby He is said to be in all, to point-out
the intimacy and nearness of His presence in this respect above the former,
and not simply in all, as formerly, but in you all, meaning the believing
Ephesians and such as they were. Doct. 1. As our strongest union is to be one
in God, and our greatest happiness to have interest in this one God; So, by
making use of Christ, as He is held forth in the Doctrine of faith, and sealed
to us in the Sacrament, we may come up to plead interest in God: for, as he
places this unity of having one God, in the last place, because it is most
considerable; so he does subjoyn it immediately to what he spoke of one Lord,
one faith, one baptism: There is one God and Father, says he. 2. The unity of
the Godhead in the Trinity of the Persons, ought to be a strong motive to stir
us up to unity among our selves; seeing there is nothing, wherein we can
resemble God more, Joh. 17. 21, 22, 23. for, the Apostle inforceth the study of
unity from this, that there is one God. 3. This motive for keeping unity, is so
much the stronger, and more moving, when we consider, that this God has
graciously become the common Father of all Believers through Jesus Christ,
whereby they are all the sons and daughters of one Father, 2 Cor. 6. 18. and so
a matter full of shame for them to strive and contend among themselves, Genesis
13. 8. for, he strengthens this argument for unity from this, that this one
God is the Father of all, to wit, of all Believers. 4. Whatever be the other
differences among Believers, and their discouragements arising hence, as that
some are strong, some are weak, some rich, some poor, etc. yet this is a
privilege common to all, which may counterballance all their other inequality,
even that they have all equal interest in one God, and that this one God is
their common Father; and therefore will have a fatherly affection, (Matthew. 7.
11.) pity, (Psalm. 103. 13.) and care of all, Matthew. 6. 25, etc. for, says he,
there is one God, and Father of all. 5. It is the duty of Ministers, when they
are pressing duty to God upon people, and of people, when they would charge
sense of duty to God upon themselves, to set forth and be much taken up with
Gods excellency and greatness; this being a singular mean to engage the heart
unto high esteem of Him, and from esteem to serve and honor Him, Mal. 1. 6.
for, the Apostle, pressing upon these Ephesians the duty of unity, does hold
Him forth in His glory and greatness; Who is above all, and through all. 6.
Gods soveraignity and greatness, does not mar His low condiscendency to supply
the emptiness and necessities of His creatures: for, though he be above all in
dignity; yet He is through all, upholding and overruling all by His powerful
providence. 7. Whatever God is by His common providence unto all His creatures,
He is all that, and much more to His own called people and real Believers: for,
He is through all by His common providence; but besides that, says he, He is
in you all, to wit, by the presence of His Spirit and special grace. 8. From
all those seven unities jointly considered, and the Apostles scope in all,
Learn, 1. The essential unity of the Church, which cannot be broken, the Church
remaining a true Church, and the many things, wherein there is of necessity an
agreement that way, is a strong argument to enforce the study of unity and
peace in other things of less concernment: for, the Apostle does here press
unity, by reckoning seven unities, wherein they did agree, as if he had said
what a shame is it for you, who are so many ways one, to rent in pieces for
those things, which comparatively are just naught? 2. So near and intimate is
that conjunction of true Believers, so many strong and indissoluble are these
spiritual bonds, by which they are knit together among themselves, that, if
they were duly pondered, the hearts of those who fear the Lord, could not
choose but be mutually enlarged, and their affections inflamed one to another,
as to their dearest friends: yea, the most strict of civil, carnal and
natural bonds, should not bind so firmly as those, Matthew. 12. 48, etc. for
they are one body, one spirit, have one hope, one Lord, one faith, one baptism
and one God. And what conjunction or union can be so firm, as what is grounded
upon all those?

Verse. 7. But unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of
the gift of Christ.
HItherto the Apostle has enforced the study of unity, by an argument taken
from those things that are one and the same in the Church and all the true
members thereof. Now, follows the second argument from those things which are
not one in all, but diverse almost in every one, to wit, the diversity of gifts
and graces bestowed by God upon the several members of the Church: which
diversity also he shows does tend to union, because, first, all those several
gifts and their diverse measures, do come from one and the same author, to ver.
12. Secondly, they are all given for promoting one and the same end, to ver.
17. And, 1. in this verse by way of correction, and pre-occupation of an
objection, he holds forth Christ, as the author of all those gifts and
different measures, to this purpose, that notwithstanding of what he said of
those many things, wherein they were one; yet there were other things, wherein
they did differ, which nevertheless were so far from dissolving in reason the
bond of union, that upon the contrary they did contribute much for keeping of
it firm; in so far as, though every true member of the Church had his own
peculiar grace, and in some respects, either as to the substance, or measure of
the grace, differing from the grace of others; yet all those different graces
of the several members, are bestowed by one and the same Christ, and received
in the measure and degree which seems good unto Christ the giver to prescribe
and measure out unto every one: where by grace, is not meaned Gods favor, or
grace freely bestowing, as in other places, (See upon Ephesians. 2. 8-.) but the
fruits flowing from this grace, to wit, grace freely given, as appears from
the instance given (ver. 11.) of this grace in the ministerial gifts and
offices: Which graces are of two sorts, First, saving, which are only in the
regenerate, called grace, because they flow from, and are evidences of Gods
grace and favor, 1 John 4. 19. Secondly, common gifts, called grace, Ephesians. 3.
8. because they are freely given, 1 Cor. 4. 7. The latter whereof is here
chiefly meaned, as appears also from the instance given, ver. 11. because it
is only in those common gifts and graces, wherein real Believers do differ, as
to the substance of them, some being given to one, and some to another, 1 Cor.
12. 8. whereas all have one and the same saving graces, 2 Pet. 1. 1. although
they differ also in the measure and degree received of those, 1 John 2. 13. In
which respect, even saving graces may be also here meaned. Doct. 1. Though the
Lord is not pleased to bestow upon all the Members of the Church an equal
measure of gifts and graces; yet He gives to every one some gift and in some
measure, and those either the common gifts of His Spirit, as to all the Members
of the Church visible come to age, and the right use of common reason, 1 Cor.
12. 11. Or, saving grace also, as to all the truly regenerate, 2 Pet. 1. 3, 4.
for, he says, unto every one of us is grace given. 2. The Lord is pleased to
dispense His graces and gifts to every one, not in the same, but in a different
measure, so that though the same saving grace for substance be given to all the
truly regenerate: yet, it is not given to all in the same measure, nor yet to
any in any measure, who are visible Professors only: and though all have some
common gifts, whereby in some measure they may be made profitable in their
station to the body, yet none has all gifts, nor all the same offices, wherein
they may exercise their gifts, ver. 11. nor yet do all receive the same measure
of those common gifts: for, so much is employed, while he says, Grace is given
according to a measure. 3. The greatest degree of gifts and graces, which God
bestows upon any, is far below that fullness of grace which is in Christ: He
gives unto none so much, but there is always somewhat wanting, and they who
have received most, are capable of receiving more: for, their receiving grace
according to a measure, implies their receipts are capable of increase, and a
difference, as to this, between their receipts and Christ's, Joh. 3. -34. To
every one is given grace according to that measure. 4. The want of some
excellent gifts bestowed upon others, or of that excellent measure of saving
graces, which others have, does not argue a man unregenerate, or wholly
destitute of saving grace: for, the Apostle shows that even those who had one
hope, Lord, Faith, God and Father, and consequently had saving grace, ver. 4,
5, 6. were not all gifted with one and the same, but with a diverse measure of
gifts and graces, while he says, But to every one of us is grace given
according to the measure. 5. Diversity of gifts in the Church, and diverse
measures of saving grace, are an ordinary occasion of division and strife; in
so far, as these dividing lusts of pride, contempt, envy, discouragement, are
apt to take occasion to stir and vent themselves from those different measures:
for, the Apostle his entering upon this argument for union from the diversity
of gifts by the adversitive particle But, does imply that they were prone to
take occasion to rent upon that diversity, and therefore he does jointly
preoccupy an objection against union, and bring an argument for it; But unto
every one of us is grace given. 6. Whatever be men's pronenesse and inclination
to rent and divide because of different receipts and measures; yet that same
diversity, if well considered, would be found to be one of the strongest ties
and bonds of union; in so far as hereby none, no, not the most eminently
gifted, can say he has no need of others, but every one are made mutually
indigent of one another help, and even the meanest in some measure furnished
to be helpful unto others: (See Paul proving this excellently from the
similitude of the different members in the natural body, 1 Cor. 12. 14, etc.)
for, the Apostle's scope in this and the following verses, is to enforce unity
from the diversity of gifts and graces amongst the Members of the Church; But
unto every one of us is grace given. 7. This does also enforce the study of
unity from this ground of diversity of gifts, if we consider, that all we have
of that kind, is freely given, and therefore we are not to be puffed up with it,
nor to abuse it, contrary to the mind of the giver; and that both our gifts and
measures, however diverse, do yet come from one rise, fountain and author, and
therefore we ought to be one in making use of them; and that this one author is
the Lord Christ, God Man; Mediator, in whose hands are all things given of the
Father, Mat. 11. 27. that He may dispense to whom, and in what measure He
pleases, and therefore we are not only not to quarrel for our own measure, it
being His allowance, who does all things well and wisely, Mark 7. 37. but also
ought to employ our gifts and several measures for the edification, and not
the renting of His body, which is the Church: for, the Apostle inforceth unity
from the diversity of gifts upon those considerations, that they were given by
one and the same Christ; But to every one is grace given, according to the
measure of the gift of Christ.

Verse. 8. Wherefore he says, When he ascended up on high, he led captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men.
THe Apostle, secondly, in this first branch of the second general argument
for union, from the diversity of gifts, does confirm, from Psalm. 68. 18. what
he presently said, that Christ is the author and bestower of all graces and
gifts with their different measures. In which place of the Psalm, David does
look through the ark, a type and shadow, to Christ the substance, and in a
prophetical way, speaking of things to come as already past, to point-out the
certainty of their performance, he does foretell that Christ should, in a
triumphant manner, ascend up on high, or unto the heighest heavens (See ver.
10.) and that at, and by virtue of His ascension, He should, first, lead
captivity captive, that is, as he had upon the cross foiled His many enemies,
and begun to triumph over them, Col. 2. 15. So in His ascension He should
continue the triumph, evidently declaring, that He had given a total rout to
all the spiritual enemies of His Church and Kingdom. The expression used to set
forth this purpose, has in it an allusion to conquerors, who, in their
triumphing solemnities, used to drive their captive enemies before their own
triumphant chariots. See this expression used in the same sense, Judge. 5. 12.
And, secondly, following the same allusion to triumphing conquerors, who used
to divide and scatter the spoil, and other magnificent gifts among the
applauding Citizens and Soldiers, he shows that Christ should at, and by
virtue of His ascension, pour-forth and distribute a large measure of gifts and
graces upon His Church and several members thereof: which prophecy, the
Apostle, citing the place with some variation of the words, but keeping close
to the sense and purpose, does show, was now fulfilled by Christ; and
consequently, that Christ is the bestower of all graces and gifts with their
different measures, as was affirmed, ver. 7. Doct. 1. Ministers ought to hold
forth nothing for truth, or press nothing as duty upon the Lords people but
what they may confirm and prove to be such from the authority of God speaking
in Scripture: yea, and it is their duty sometimes to bring forward their proof,
by making express mention of it: for, thus does Paul confirm what he spoke,
ver. 7. by a testimony cited from the Psalms; Wherefore he says, that is,
David, or the Spirit of God, speaking by David, says. 2. As there was much of
Christ revealed in the Scriptures of the Old Testament, though but darkly, and
under a vail of types and ceremonial shadows; So He was revealed and spoken-of
in those Scriptures as true God and Jehovah: for, that which is said, Psalm. 68.
was spoken of God, even Jehovah, as appears from ver. 4. and all along,
which Paul shows here was fulfilled in Christ; Wherefore be says, he has
ascended, etc. 3. Though the very words and phrase of Scripture, are much to be
thought of and closely adhered unto so far as is possible; lest by our
unnecessary casting of Scripture-purpose in an affected strain of words unknown
to Scripture, we lose at length the purpose with the words, 2 Timothy 1. 13. Yet,
the sense and meaning of Scripture, is mainly to be sought-after and kept in
remembrance, so that though we do not call to mind the very words of such a
Scripture, but only the sense, meaning and purpose of it, we may draw comfort,
or information from it, or make use of it otherwise: for, the Apostle here, as
often elsewhere, does not so much adhere to the precise words, as to the sense of
that Scripture which he cites, in so far as where in the Psalm it is said, Thou
have ascended, and received gifts for men, to wit, He received them to be given
to men, it is here, When He ascended, and gave gifts unto men. 4. Our Lord
Jesus Christ, having finished the work which was given Him to do on earth, Joh.
17. 4. did locally ascend unto heaven, carrying His humane nature up thither,
Act. 1. 9. 10. that so He might be exalted in that glory, which He had before
the world was, Joh. 17. 5. and take possession of heaven in our name, Ephesians. 2.
6. and there prepare a place for us, Joh. 14. 2. for, says he, When He
ascended up on high. 5. As Christ did engage in a warfare on our behalf with
many strong and potent enemies, to wit, the devil, the world, sin, death and
hell; So He has carried the day of all, and gained an absolute complete
victory over all, in so far, as, though the Godly must have a battle with
these, Ephesians. 6. 12. yet Christ the Head of Believers, is now above the reach of
hazard from enemies, and consequently Believers in their Head: yea, and they
themselves are above all hazard also, in so far as all their enemies cannot mar
their salvation, Romans 8. 35, etc. Sin and Satan does not reign in them, Romans 6.
12, 14. death has lost its sting toward them, 1 Cor. 15. 55. and become a
passage unto life, Philip. 1. 23. for, by this captivity, which Christ led
captive, is meaned not those whom He delivered from captivity, but whom He
fought against, brought in captivity, and triumphed over, even all His and our
spiritual enemies; He led captivity (or, a multitude of captives) captive. 6.
The constant opposition, which Satan raises against the Church and Kingdom of
Christ, does not so much flow from any principle of hope in him to prevail in
that woeful work, as from his inveterate blinded malice against the salvation
of sinners, so that he cannot but malign and oppose it, though he know he
cannot mar it: for, at Christ's ascension he could not but know, that by all his
malicious cruel actings against Christ, he had effectuate nothing but his own
eternal shame and confusion, seeing that Christ did thereby openly declare He
had led captivity captive. 7. As those, for whom Christ did purchase any good
or advantage by His death, and did manifest His purchasing good for them by His
ascension, were men, and not devils; So not only saving graces, which are given
to the Elect only, but also common gifts, are a part of His purchase, which are
given sometimes to reprobates for the good and edification of His Church,
Matthew. 7. 22, 23. for, both these are comprehended here under gifts, which
being purchased by His death, He did at His ascension in a larger measure than
formerly give unto men, and to men indefinitly, even to rebels, Psalm. 68. -18.

Verse. 9. (Now that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended first
into the lower parts of the earth?
THe Apostle does, thirdly, comment upon, and apply the cited testimony. And,
first, he shows what Christ's ascending unto heaven (to wit, by His own divine
power, otherwise the Apostle's inference in this place should not hold) did
presuppose, as necessarily foregoing, even His previous humiliation and
abasement in all its steps, expressed by His descending to the lowerparts of
the earth; where, the lower parts are to be understood, by comparing not the
parts of the earth among themselves, but earth with heaven, the earth being the
lowest part of the world; and particularly, it points either at His
conception in the womb of the Virgin (See conception so expressed, Psalm. 139.
15.) or at His burial (expressed by a like phrase, Matthew. 12. 40.) wherein the
Apostle's scope is not only to prove, that the former testimony is pertinently
cited, and applied to Christ, but also to press humility in order to unity and
peace from Christ's example, as Phil. 2. 7. Now, Christ is said to have
descended, not properly and locally, as man, (for, before His incarnation He
was not man) but as God, and therefore not properly by changing place, but
improperly, and with respect had to His state, by taking on the humane nature
upon earth, under the infirmities whereof He did for a time hide His divine
glory, so that very little of it did appear, and to some few only, Isa. 53. 12.
Doct. 1. Sacred Scripture is a great depth, containing much more than what is
obvious at the first view; and therefore we are to advert not only to that
which is expressly said in Scripture, but what may be drawn from it by direct
and just consequence: for, Paul does so look on this testimony of Christ's
ascension, as finding another great Truth concerning His previous humiliation
lurking under it, and by just consequence deducible from it, while he says,
Now that He ascended, what is it but that He first descended? 2. It is not
enough for Ministers to cite Scriptures for confirmation of those Truths which
they hold forth to the Lords People, except the Scriptures cited be pertinent,
and the pertinency of them be also made clear and obvious: for, Paul, having
cited a Scripture to confirm somewhat which he said of Christ, does prove the
Scripture cited does speak of Christ, because it implies previous descending
and humiliation in the party spoken of, which can agree to none other of the
Persons of the blessed Trinity, but to Christ only; Now that He ascended, what
is it but that He descended? 3. Such was the love of Christ to lost sinners,
Joh. 15. 13. and to the glory of His own and his Fathers mercy to be manifested
in their salvation, Joh. 17. 4. that He did willingly lay aside His glory,
which He had with His Father before the world was, Joh. 17. 5. by assuming the
nature of man to Himself, and suffering therein the utmost of misery and grief
which the malice of men and devils could inflict, and which seemed good unto
the Father, in order to the satisfaction of provoked justice, to inflict, Heb:
10. 7. for, all this is employed in His descending; and says Paul, Now that He
ascended, what is it but that He descended? 4. Then do we study and know
Christ's exaltation aright, when we do also seriously consider, and think upon
His previous humiliation and abasement: for therein we may see, not only how
low He stooped for our good, but also that He has fully accomplished whatever
He undertook, and is now absolved, Joh. 17. 4, 5. and that the Lords usual way
is with His own, as it was with Christ, to make their deep humiliation and
lowliness of mind go before their highest exaltation and honor, Prove. 15. 33.
for, Paul does read previous humiliation in Christ's exaltation, and thinks upon
both jointly; Now that He ascended, what is it, but that He descended? 5. Then
do we think upon Christ's humiliation and abasement aright, when we consider it
in its greatest depth and lowest step unto which He demitted Himself, even to
the lowest parts of the earth: for therein we may see the greatness of His
love, the depth of our misery, and the full sufficiency of the price paid by
Christ in the state of His humiliation, in order to our delivery; He also
descended first into the lower parts of the earth: by which is not meaned the
place of the damned, nor any place near to that, where the souls of the
Patriarchs were before Christ's death, as the Papists affirm; this being
contrary to Scripture, affirming that Christ's soul was after death to be in
heaven, Luke 23. 43. and that the souls of the Patriarchs were there also, Luke
16. 22, 23, 25, 26. but hereby, as I show in the exposition, is meaned His
conception and burial, with all the other steps of His humiliation
interveening.

Verse. 10. He that descended, is the same also that ascended up far above all
heavens, that He might fill all things.)
THe Apostle, in the explication and application of the cited testimony, does,
next, show what it expressly holds forth, to wit, Christ's ascension; and
illustrates it from this, that the person who ascended, though now made man,
was the same with him who descended to take on the nature of man. 2. That He
ascended to the highest heavens, the seat of eternal glory, far above those
visible heavens, not only in situation, but also in duration and glory, and are
called the heaven of heavens, (1 King. 8. 27.) the third heavens, (2 Cor. 12.
3. 4.) and sometime simply by the name of heavens, Act. 3. 21. And, thirdly,
from the end of His ascending, even to fill all things, not all places, with
His bodily presence, (for Him must the heavens contain, Act. 3. 21.) but that
He might fulfill all prophesies concerning Himself, and all those parts of His
mediatory Office, which were yet to be performed in heaven: and particularly,
that He might fill His Church, and all the members thereof, (which are His all,
even His whole body, Joh. 6. 45.) with a large and plentiful measure of the
gifts and graces of His spirit, Joh. 7. 39. according as was foretold in the
cited testimony. Doct 1. The distinction of natures in Christ after His
incarnation, does not infer a distinction of persons in Him; He remains one
person still: for, the Apostle speaks of Him after incarnation, as of one; He
that descended, is the same also that ascended. 2. Jesus Christ remains one
and the same person after His assuming the humane nature unto Himself with that
which He was before, so that neither is the person of God-man, Mediator, any
third thing, made up, or compounded of both those natures, neither did the
humane nature add any thing, before wanting, to make up, perfect, or work any
alteration in the personal substance of the Son of God: only the humanity of
Christ, being destitute of any personal subsistence of its own, is, as it were,
ingrafted in the second person of the Godhead, the Son of God, and does
subsist in Him: for, Paul shows that He who ascended, being now God-man, is
the same with Him who descended before His incarnation; He that descended, is
the same also that ascended. 3. By virtue of this personal union betwixt the
divine and humane nature of Christ, there arises such a communion of the
distinct properties of each nature, that those things, which are proper only to
the one nature, are ascribed to the whole person: for, the same person is said
here to descend and ascend, though He did descend, to wit, improperly, as God,
not by change of place, but by assuming to Himself the humane nature, and did
ascend properly by change of place, as he was man, and according to His humane
nature; He that descended, is the same also that ascended. 4. Then do we
profitably think on Christ's exaltation, when we extend our selves unto the
utmost to look upon the height of that honor and glory, unto which the humane
nature, assumed by Christ, is now exalted; that so we may be the more taken up
with admiration, Heb. 2. 6, etc. and the more encouraged in hopes of
through-bearing, as knowing that our head and near kins-man is already
possessed of glory, and resideth there, as our great and powerful Attorney and
Agent to mind our everlasting concernments, as His own, Heb. 7. 25. for, Paul
holds forth His exaltation to be considered thus, when in stead of what was
said in the Psalm. He ascended up on high, he says here, He ascended up far
above all heavens. 5. Though Christ did furnish His Church with a competent
measure of gifts and graces, even before His ascension or incarnation, Heb. 1.
1. yet, it pleased the Lord to suspend the pouring forth of His Spirit in such
a large and plentiful measure upon His Church both of Jews and Gentiles,
until Christ, having overcome and spoiled principalities and powers by His
death, had risen again, ascended, and taken actual possession of His Kingdom;
that so the glorious state of His Church and subjects, as it now is under the
Gospel, might not go before, but follow after the glory of their King and Head:
for, says he, He ascended, that He might fill all things. 6. The way of Christ
with His own, especially with His Church in general, is such, that what is sad
and grievous in it, in one respect, is joyous and advantageous unto them in
another; for, Christ's removal of His bodily presence, was sad to His
Disciples, Joh. 16. 6. and yet a forerunner of much good; He ascended, that He
might fill all things. 7. So large, and inexhaustible is that fountain of
fullness in Christ, our exalted Lord, that, though all His followers and
subjects be but empty things in themselves; yet, He can fill, not only one, but
all, and all as well as one, yea and He does really fill them, even here, to
wit, with a fullness answerable to their present state of childhood and
imperfection, a fullness of grace in respect of parts, though not of degrees:
for, this was the end of His ascension, that He might fill all things.

Verse. 11. And He gave some, apostles: and some, prophets; and some,
evangelists: and some, pastors, and teachers.
THe Apostle, fourthly, in this first branch of that general argument for
union, confirms and illustrateth what he spoke concerning diversity of gifts
given by Christ, by giving an instance thereof, not in gifts, but in the
several Offices and Office-bearers in the Church: which is all one, as if he
had given an instance in the variety of gifts, seeing Christ imployeth none in
any office, but whom He does furnish in some measure with gifts answerable to
the employment. Neither does he enumerate all those Office-bearers, which
Christ has appointed in His Church (See others besides, 1 Timothy 5. 17. Acts 6.
2, 3.) but only so many as are sufficient to his present scope, even those who
labor in the Word and Sacraments, whose various gifts are most conspicuous in
the spiritual edification of the Church. Of which he reckons five, and says
of them all, that Christ did give them at His ascension, though He did send
forth some of those, to wit, the Apostles before then, Matthew. 10. 1. Joh. 20.
21. The reason whereof, is, because not only some were then added to the
Apostles, as Act. 1. 26. Act. 9. 15. but also all of them were then solemnly
installed, and publicly confirmed in their office by Christ, in His visible
pouring forth the gifts of the Spirit in an extraordinary measure upon them,
Act. 2. 3, 4. Of which five, there were three extraordinary Office-bearers to
continue for a time only, first, Apostles, the several characters of which
office, see upon Col. ver. 1. doct. 2. to which this one is to be further
added, that an Apostle behoved to have seen Christ in the flesh, 1 Cor. 9. 1.
Secondly, Prophets who those were, see upon Ephesians. 3. ver. 5. Thirdly,
Evangelists, not those who wrote the History of the Gospel, whereof some were
Apostles, as Matthew and John, but others, who being called mediately by the
Apostles (2 Timothy 1. 6.) were their companions in travels, Gal. 2. 1, 3. and
sent out by them, as occasion offered, to settle and water such Churches as the
Apostles had planted, 1 Cor. 3. 6. 1 Timothy 1. 3. and there to remain, not
constantly, but until the Apostles should recall them, 2 Timothy 4. 9. such were
Timothy, Titus, Sylvanus, Apollos and Tychicus, etc. The other two are ordinary
Office-bearers, Pastors and Teachers; I say, two, though the disjunctive
particle some, be not cast in between them: for, they are distinguished, Romans
12. 7. 8. and the exercise of their respective offices, is distinguished also,
1 Cor. 12. 8. so that by the Pastors are meaned those, who, besides their
ability to open up the Text of Scripture in some measure, are chiefly gifted
with the word of Wisdom, wisely, and powerfully to apply the Word for working
upon the affections, as the matter requires; and the Teacher is he, who is
gifted with the word of Knowledge, or ability to open up the mind of God in
Scripture, establishing Truth, and confuting Error, without insisting much upon
particular application: which office, because of the Churches poverty, is
confined to the schools, and the ordinary exercise of it before the people left
upon the Pastor. Doct. 1. As the Father Son and holy Ghost are one and the same
God; so they do all concur in one for bringing about the Churches good: and
this in a special manner, by sending forth Ministers to feed the flock and
furnishing them with competent gifts: for, what is here spoken of Christ, is
some times ascribed to God the Father, 1 Cor. 12. 28. and sometimes unto the
holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12. 11. And he gave some Apostles, etc. 2. It is the
prerogative of Christ the King and head of His Church, to appoint the several
sorts of offices, and Office-bearers in His Church: neither is it in the power
of any whomsoever, whether Kings or Churches, to add to, or diminish from any
thing appointed by Him herein: for, it is the prerogative of Jesus Christ to
have given some, Apostles; some, Prophets, etc. 3. As Christ does put none in
office, but whom He furnishes with gifts; so we are not to exercise our gifts
in a disorderly way, but within the compass of our stations, and in those
offices unto which we are called by God: for, so much does the Apostle teach,
while, proving the variety of gifts, he gives an instance in those diverse
offices wherein those gifts are to be exercised, And he gave some, Apostles;
some, Prophets, etc. 4. The gifts, which God bestows upon His public
Ministers for the work of the Ministry, are the prime and chief of all those
gifts which the Lord Christ does bestow upon His Church, and much to be
preferred to the private gifts of others, in so far especially, as they are the
ordinary mean appointed by God for working saving Grace, Romans 10. 14, 15. for
therefore is it, that the Apostle not only here, but else where, (Romans 12. 6. 1
Co^. 12. 28.) being to give an induction of those various gifts, bestowed by
Christ upon His Church, does begin with, and insist mainly on those gifts,
which are given to His public Ministers and preachers of the Word; He gave
some, Apostles; some, Prophets. 5. A Ministry sent by Christ, and sufficiently
furnished with ministerial gifts for the conscientious discharge of that
calling, is a singular gift of God unto a people, whereby Christ does supply
the want of His bodily presence among them, and brings about the edification
of His Church, as effectually as if He Himself were present upon earth, Joh.
14. 12. for, when Christ ascended up far above all heavens, He gave, in a
special gift to His Church, and as it were in supply of His absence, some,
Apostles; some, Prophets. 6. The Lord Christ has never appointed such an
office-bearer in his house as the Pope, whom Papists call the visible head of
the universal Church on earth, supplying the room and place of Christ now
absent in heaven; nor yet of a Lord prelate, commonly called Bishop, who,
according to the maintainers of that office, is one entrusted with the actual
oversight of many Congregations, and of whole Provinces, with a degree of
authority flowing from their office, over and above all the Ministers of Jesus
Christ within those bounds: for, if Christ had appointed those great Offices
and office-bearers as necessary in His house, how should the Apostle have
passed them over, not only in all other places, where he speaks of this
purpose, but also here, where he is reckoning forth those gifts and offices
which Christ, ascending to heaven, has appointed to supply in a special manner
the want of His bodily presence upon earth? which without all doubt should be
most supplied by those, if they were of His appointment: and therefore, though
the office of ruling Elder and Deacon be not so necessary to be here mentioned;
Yet, those great Offices, the mentioning whereof would have been so subservient
to his purpose, could not be well omitted: Now, none of those are here; for he
gave some, Apostles; some, Prophets, etc. 7. The Lord Christ has not entrusted
all with a public office in His house, but some only, to whom the rest ought
to submit themselves, and obey in the Lord, Heb. 13. 17. Neither are all
Office-bearers entrusted with one and the same office; and therefore not endued
with the same measure of gifts and parts, so that we are not to measure all by
some, rejecting others, who come not up in all things to those: for, He gave
some, Apostles; some, Prophets; some, Evangelists, etc. some only, and not all.
8. The Lord has always raised, and yet will raise up men in His Church
according to what the exigence of the times requires: and though we have not
ground to look for men extraordinary, whether for gifts or office; Yet for men
singularly assisted in their ordinary stations, when the important affairs of
the Church do call for such: for, here, when there were extraordinary things to
be done, the first foundations of the Christian Church to be laid, the Canon of
Scripture to be completed, the Jewish way of Religion, once established by
God, to be put down, the Lord Christ sends forth extraordinary
office-bearers, and extraordinarily assisted: for, to bring all this about, He
gave some, Apostles; some, Prophets; some, Evangelists. 9. So wise and
merciful is the Lord Christ, that He does not overburthen His servants too
much, but where their work goes beyond their strength, He has sufficiently
provided how a part of their burden may be taken on by others: for, the work of
laying the foundations of the Christian Church, being too heavy for the twelve
Apostles, He did allow them co-workers and fellowhelpers, even the Prophets and
Evangelists; He gave some, Apostles; some, Prophets; some, Evangelists, etc.
10. Whatever is done in the Church of Christ according to His order, though
mediately by the hands of men, Christ will own it, as if it were done
immediately by Himself: which holds especially in the Churches calling of fit
men to the work of the Ministry, according to the order appointed by Christ:
for, he makes the calling of ordinary Pastors and Teachers, though it be
mediate only, and by men, to be from Christ, as well as the immediate
extraordinary calling of the Apostles; He gave some, Apostles; some Pastors and
Teachers. 11. As it is needful that both the judgments of people be informed,
and their affections wrought upon, and as God has furnished His servants with
answerable gifts for effectuating both; so we are not to despise either of
those sorts of gifts, neither the sound, plain, able, teaching gift, though it
be not so operative or taking upon the affections; nor yet the pithy, moving,
pastoral gift that works upon the affections, though it be not accompanied
with profound knowledge and great learning in those who have it: for, the Lord
dispenses both those gifts, and oftimes not to the same person; He gave
Pastors and Teachers.

Verse. 12. For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for
the edifying of the body of Christ.
THe Apostle, having thus far enlarged himself upon the first branch of that
general argument for union, taken from the diversity of gifts in the Church, to
wit, because they all came from one and the same author, he does now fall upon
its second branch, enforcing unity notwithstanding the diversity of gifts and
offices, because they are all given for promoting one and the same end: which
end, is, first, propounded in this verse in three different expressions, all
tending much to the same purpose, but with some difference in regard of three
sorts of persons, to whom the ministerial function has reference. First, in
regard of the Saints, or people, the end of the Ministry is to perfect them,
that is, to bring them out of that disorderly, disjoynted and confused frame,
posture and condition wherein they are, and to fix them in a well-ordered,
compact spiritual frame and state, which is attained when they are joined to
Christ by faith, and one to another by love: for, the word signifies to
prepare, fit and dispose things in an orderly frame, Romans 9. -22. and
especially such things as were before rent asunder, Mark 1. 19. or out of their
own due place and order, as disjoynted members, with allusion to which, the
word is used, Gal. 6. 1. Secondly, in regard of themselves who are in office
and accordingly gifted: the end of their gifts and office, is, that they may
labor diligently in all the duties of their calling, which is only a
subordinate end, and relative to the other two as a mean. Thirdly, in regard of
Christ, it is that all Believers, being so perfected and joined together, as
stones of a building, by the work of the Ministry, may become His mystical
body, to whom He will perform all the duties of an head. Doct. 1. That several
offices and various gifts are all given for promoting one and the same end, and
for promoting those ends in particular, which are expressed in the Text, is a
strong argument to keep off emulations and rents, because of those, and to
endeavor after unity and peace; seeing division and strife do mar the
spiritual orderly frame of the Church, divert from the main work of the
Ministry, and obstruct the edification of the body of Christ, and so do cross
those main ends in all respects, for which all gifts and offices are given:
for, the Apostle inforceth unity from the diversity of gifts and offices, upon
this consideration, that all are given for the promoting of those ends, even
for perfecting the Saints for the work of the Ministry, etc. 2. That public
gifts and gifted Ministers are sent to, or continued in any place by God, is
for the sake of the Elect there, and to bring about their salvation: so that
though the Word be preached and Ordinances dispensed, even to reprobates to
make them the more inexcusable, and because they are joined in one civil
society and external Churchfellowship with the Elect; yet if God had none of
His own to be wrought upon by the Ministry in a Congregation, Place, or
Nation, it is more than probable He should not send His Ordinances there at
all: for, all the ends of Christ's sending a Ministry, do relate chiefly to the
Elect, even for perfecting the Saints, for edifying the body of Christ. 3.
Whatever outward, civil order may be among a people destitute of the Gospel;
yet as to their spiritual concernments, they are wholly out of frame, rent and
torn, even a disorderly confused mass and heap, as being at enmity with God,
Romans 8. 7. and destitute of all sound, solid and spiritual unity among
themselves, Romans 3. 13, 14, 15. for, seeing the end of the Ministry is to
perfect the Saints, that is, to bring them to an orderly spiritual frame, it
is supposed, that before a Ministry be sent unto them they are not perfect,
but wholly out of frame. 4. Even the Elect already converted, are sometimes out
of frame, their spiritual faculties, as it were, disjoynted and unable to
move, or stir, Psalm. 51. 10. and one of them rent asunder from another through
prejudices, passion, love to self interest, and such like, Act. 15. 39, for
otherwise there should be but small need of a Ministry toward them, the great
end whereof, is to place those things which are disorderly in a right frame, to
join together things which are rent asunder, to recover strength and motion to
these things which are rendered weak, by being out of their right place, as the
word, rendered perfecting, does signify; for perfecting the Saints. 5. A
public Ministry and the exercise thereof, is the ordinary mean appointed by
the Lord Christ for perfecting the Saints and edifying the body of Christ,
whether by converting those of the Elect who are yet in their unregenerate
state, Romans 10. 17. Or, by confirming and establishing those who are already
converted, Col. 4. 12. and making them to grow, Col. 1. 28. or restoring them
when they are overtaken in a fault, 1 Timothy: 5. 20. and therefore it is a most
necessary ordinance, without which those great ends in an ordinary way cannot
be attained: for, He makes the ministerial offices formerly mentioned, the
means of perfecting the Saints, and of edifying the body of Christ. 6. The
highest office that is enjoyed by any within the Church, is only a Ministry
and service, and not a lordly dominion over the flock of Christ: for, he
calls the forementioned offices, even the highest of them (the office of the
Apostles it self not being excepted) a Ministry, or service; for the work of
the Ministry. 7. Ministers are not called to idlnesse, or to live like lazy
drones wasting the Churches revenue, without executing the office for which it
is given. They are called to work and improve their talents and gifts in that
laborious work of perfecting the Saints and edifying the body of Christ: for,
this he makes the end of those gifts and offices in regard of those to whom
they are given, even the work of the Ministry. 8. The gaining of souls to God,
and carrying on the work of grace in those who are gained to some perfection,
does meet with so much opposition, what from within, and what from without,
what from men, what from devils, and what from a man's own heart, 2 Cor. 10. -4,
5. that the ministerial office which is employed for bringing those about, is
no easy task: It is a work, and such, as, though it be a worthy work, 1 Timothy
3. 1. yet, it is a weighty and laborious work: a work that will take up the
whole man, and being rightly minded, will give the painful and conscientious
Minister little time for any other work, 1 Timothy 4. 15. for, he casts this
second end, relating to the Ministers themselves, in the middle betwixt the
other two; because it relates to them, as a mean to the end; and to show, it
is not naked gifts, or the credit of the office which will bring about those
ends, but the painful exercise and discharge of them; for the work of the
Ministry. 9. The work of the Ministry, if rightly gone about, is an uniting
work of the Church of Christ: Its great end, and to which all its other ends
are subordinate, being to unite souls, as so many stones in a building, or as
so many members in the body, first, to Christ the foundation of this building,
and head of this body, by bringing them up to believe in Him; and next, one to
another, by bringing them up to mutual love, and all the duties thereof, and
especially to mutual for bearance, and the study of unity and peace: for, he
makes this the great and last end of the work of the Ministry, even, the
edifying of the body of Christ, that is, the Church: (See wherefore it is so
called, chap. 1. 23.) The word edifying is borrowed from masons, whose great
work is, having prepared the stones apart, to join them most firmly, both to
the foundation and among themselves.

Verse. 13. Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of
the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ.
IN the next place, he does several ways illustrate and explain what he
presently spoke of that great end intended to be brought about by the Ministry
and ministerial gifts. And first, he illustrateth it in this verse, from the
term of its duration, by showing how long (not all those forementioned offices,
ver. 11. but) that work of the Ministry in edifying the body of Christ, spoken
of, ver. 12. shall continue and last; The term whereof, in a word, is the day
of Judgment: And it is set forth by three expressions, the latter whereof, is
a further explication of the former, and all of them do hold forth that high
degree of perfection, which the Church shall not obtain before that day; And
first, he shows that work is to continue until all the Elect (some whereof
are not yet born, much less called, and some of those who are called, do
differ in many things among themselves) do come or meet (for so the word may
read) in that complete unity, not only of opinion, but also, and especially of
heart and affection, to be manifested in that most perfect and blessed
communion and fellowship, which the Saints shall enjoy, both with Christ, and
amongst themselves in glory, called the unity of faith, as having its first
rise from faith; however faith, as to the distance from Christ implied in it,
shall then cease, 1 Cor. 13. 12. which grace of faith he describes to be the
knowledge of the Son of God; or, as the word signifies, the acknowledgement of
Him, which speaks somewhat more than our simple knowing of Him, even a
knowing Him as our own, and with a special application to our selves, and so
as we give due honor, respect and reverence to Him: See upon chap. 1. ver. 17.
doct. 10. Secondly, He shows what unity of faith he means, even that which
the Church and all her members shall attain to, being come to the state and
degree of perfection in the life to come; which state is here called a perfect
man, or a man come to full and perfect age; because that state shall be to the
Church, and all her lively members, as their ripe and complete age, in
comparison of their infancy, childehood and growing age here in the world.
Thirdly, he shows when the Church shall come to her ripe and manly age, to
wit, when she attaineth that measure of perfection; (called her stature, with
allusion to the ripe age of a man, when he is come to his full stature) That
measure, I say, of perfection, which Christ shall fill them with in glory, or
whereby Christ mystical shall be fully complete, there being none of His
Members then wanting, and all of them come to their perfect growth, or a
measure of perfection answering, though not in equality, yet in likeness and
conformity to that fullness of perfection which is in their head Christ, to
whom all the members of this mystical body shall be in some measure conform in
glory, 1 Cor. 15. 49. This stature of the fullness of Christ may be taken any
or all of those ways, for they all agree in one and the same measure of
perfection. Doct. 1. The edification of the body of Christ, is a work that
shall be continually in motion, and on foot, until all that are given to
Christ of the Father, no not one being wanting even all the Members of this
mystical body, be effectually called and united with Christ the head, and among
themselves, and every one of them attain to their full and perfect measure of
spiritual growth, so, that Christ shall never want a Church of Believers,
while the world endures: for, the term, to which that edifying work,
mentioned, ver. 12. shall continue, is, until we all come to the unity of the
faith. 2. The Ministry of the Gospel is a standing ordinance until Christ's
second coming; neither are there any other Church-offices to be given by Christ
to the Church for edifying His body but those which are already given in the
grant of the Gospel: and therefore those are to continue either more visibly or
hidly in some one place or other, in despite of men and devils unto the end of
the world, Matthew. 28. 20. for, this work of the Ministry in edifying the body,
spoken of, ver. 12. is to continue until we all come to the unity of the
faith. 3. There is none, no, not the most eminent Saints on earth, who are
above the ordinance of the Ministry, so as to stand in no need of it, or to be
without reach of being bettered by it: even Ministers themselves must be
wrought upon, and edified by this Ordinance, otherwise they do not what they
ought in saving both themselves and others, 1 Timothy 4. 16. for, even Paul
reckons himself among those whom the Ministry was to have its due effects
upon, while he says, not ye all, but we all come to the unity of the faith. 4.
As the Elect by nature are far removed from God, from Christ, and one from
another; So their great work, when once converted, should be and in a great
part will be, to tend and advance by degrees toward a complete union and
communion with God, and with one another in God, as the great scope they aim
at, and the point or center, which they propose unto themselves to meet in:
for, the former of those is supponed, and the latter expressed while he says,
till we all come, or meet in the unity, etc, 5. This perfect union and
communion of all Believers. with God, and with one another in God, is not
attained at the first; yea, not in this life, nor before the resurrection:
until then there will be always some alienation and distance, not only from
God, 2 Cor. 5. 6. but also among themselves, and that both in their judgments
and affections, 1 Cor. 13. 9. for, he says, till we come in the unity: which
implies, there will be some time before we come at it, even till the Church be
a perfect man in glory. 6. Diversity of gifts bestowed upon Ministers, and the
exercise of them in the work of the Ministry, is the ordinary mean, appointed
of God for working up the body of Christ to this unity; and therefore ought not
to be occasion unto the people of strife and emulation, schism or faction, 1 Corinthians. 3. 4. much less should they be improven by Ministers for begettting,
or entertaining divisions or rents, either among themselves, or in the Church
of God, Phil. 1. 15, 16. for, he shows the work of the Ministry, (ver. 12.)
diversity of offices (ver. 11.) and diverse measures of gifts and graces, (ver.
7.) are all given to promot this unity; and therefore ought not to raise
division: Till we all meet in the unity. 7. The grace of faith, and the
exercise thereof, is the way wherein the Saints do walk toward this blessed
and perfect union; in so far, as faith uniteth us to Christ, and through Christ
to God and one to another, chap. 2. 15. which union by faith, is a step
toward, and ends in, that perfect union and communion with God and all the
Saints by sight, or sense, which shall be in glory, 1 Pet. 1. 9. And therefore
the exercise of faith, and closing with Christ, would mainly be pressed by
Ministers, and sought after by people, as they would attain to unity, entertain
it being begun here, or meet in that perfect unity hereafter: for, therefore is
it called the unity of faith, as having its rise from that grace; till we all
come in the unity of the faith. 8. As faith in Christ cannot be without the
knowledge of Christ, and such a knowledge, as is a real acknowledging of Him,
implying application and high esteem of Him when he is known; So faith cannot
find a sure foundation in Christ to rest on, while He be taken up, as God equal
with the Father, and consequently endued with sufficient strength and worth for
doing all those things, for which the Believer imployeth Him, for he describes
faith to be the knowledge, or, acknowledgement of the Son of God. 9. The Church
and body of Christ, in respect of particular Believers, the Members of that
body, has its divine different periods of age, as the infancy of the Church
and particular Believers, so called, because of their childish ignorance and
infirmities: this age is spoken of, ver. 14. Next their youth and growing age,
when they are making progress in the way of grace toward perfection: this is
mentioned, ver. 15. And, lastly, their perfect manly age, when grace is fully
perfected in glory, spoken of in this verse. Only they have no declining,
fading, or old age, but shall always remain a perfect man unto all eternity, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. Till we all come in the unity of the faith, unto a perfect man.
See the exposition. 10. As Believers ought to aim at no lower degree of
perfection than conformity with Christ, their glorious head; so they shall at
last attain unto it: they shall be holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from
sinners, as He, Heb. 7. 26. above the reach of all tentations, as He, Joh. 14.
30. their vile bodies made conform to His glorious body, Philip. 3. 21. and
both soul and body confirmed in that glorious state, unto all eternity, even as
He, Romans 6. 9. that so there may be a due proportion between the head and body
of mystical Christ: and when all Believers are from the fountain of fullness
in Christ thus filled with a fullness of perfection, in some measure answerable
unto that which is in Himself, then, and not till then, has mystical Christ
attained His just stature, proportion and fullness: He does in a manner reckon
Himself imperfect, empty and incomplete, so long as one member of His mystical
body is wanting: for, Paul makes the measure of the Churches perfection, or
manly and full stature, to be the fullness of Christ, to wit, that perfection,
which, flowing from Christ's fullness, shall complete Christ mystical, and be
conform to that fullness of perfection which is in Christ: Unto the measure of
the stature of the fullness of Christ.

Verse. 14. That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and
carried about with every wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive.
HE does illustrate the forementioned end of the Ministry, next, by showing
one chief fruit of that spiritual edification, unto which the work of the
Ministry is subservient, even the removal of, and preservation from, that
which is contrary to it, and namely from error and false Doctrines: the hazard
whereof, together with the necessity of guarding against them, is set forth by
three similitudes: the first two do express the temper of those who are
surprised, or in danger to be surprised by error. First, they are as little
children, to wit, for ignorance of what is right, inconstancy in their choice,
and simplicity, or easiness to be deceived, and to credit all. Secondly, they
are as ships destitute of skillful masters, tossed and carried this way and
that way with the tide and contrary winds among the waves and rocks, even so
are they with the tide and winds of contrary and diverse Doctrines and
opinions, sometimes fluctuating and uncertain what to choose, sometimes taken
with one opinion, and presently changeing it with another. The third similitude
expresses the way how such are seduced unto error, to wit, by the pernicious
subtility of seducers, set forth, first, more obscurely, by a comparison taken
from the fraud or sleight of gamsters, who have devices, by cogging a die, to
make it cast up any number they please; So do heretics, by wresting
Scriptures, force them to speak that seemingly which makes for the defense of
their error, 2 Pet. 3. 16. for, the word, rendered sleight of men, signifies
the crafty deceiving of men. Next, more plainly, while that slight, or
deceiving, is called cunning craftiness, to wit, in heretics and seducers:
the word signifies a singular dexterity to do mischief of any kind, acquired
by long use and great meddling in all affairs. And lastly, he shows the end to
which this cunning craftiness does tend, and that wherein it is exercised
most, even in a subtle and compendious way of deceiving the simple and drawing
them from truth to error: for, the words do read in cunning craftiness,
tending to a compendious subtle art of deceiving, or, to deceive by a
compendious art. Hence Learn, 1. One singular mean ordained by God for
preserving us from the infection of dangerous errors and subtle seducers, is
the work of the Ministry; and therefore the work of Ministers is not only to
press holiness, and to reprove vice, but also to contend for the truth, stop
the mouth of gainsayers, and guard the Lords people against infection from
dangerous errors: and people ought to cleave unto their faithful Ministers,
as they would be preserved from being made a prey to seducing spirits: for,
Paul does hold this forth as one fruit of the work of the Ministry, mentioned,
ver. 12. even that we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro with
every wind of Doctrine. 2. Spiritual edification, and walking toward
perfection in glory, does call-for not only holiness of life, but also
orthodoxie in point of truth; heresy and error being as great impediments in
that spiritual building, and as palpable deviations from the way to heaven and
glory, as profanity and vice, 2 Pet. 2-1-. for, having spoken of that great end
of the Ministry, the edification of the body of Christ, ver. 12. as the way to
perfection in glory, ver. 13. he does here speak of infection by error and
heresy, as impediments of that edification, and therefore to be removed; That
we henceforth be no ^ore children tossed to and fro. 3. The most holy and able
Ministers are not more ready to press the sense of humane frailty, with the
necessity of keeping a strict watch against it upon others, than they are to
take with it, and to watch over it in themselves: for, even Paul includes
himself, while he says, that we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and
fro: which implies an acknowledgement, that, at least, he was once such a
child, and that it was necessary for him, as well as others, to quit that
childish temper. 4. As the renewed children of God are once babes in Christ,
and weak in all the parts of the new man, even in knowledge, prudence, patience
and other graces; so they must not be always such, but are to be growing
upwards toward perfection: for, the first of those is employed, and the other
expressed, while he says, That we henceforth be no more children. 5.
Pronenesse to error and easiness to be carried away with every doctrine, which
pretends to Truth, is a mark of one who is not grown in grace, and but a babe
in Christ, if he be renewed at all: for, he calls those children, who are
tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine. 6. That errors and heresies are
not less damnable and dangerous than other sins, appears from this, that the
souls hazard from these is expressed by the hazard of masterlesse ships, tossed
by contrary winds among rocks or beds of sand, while he says, tossed to and
fro with every wind of doctrine. 7. The spirit of error is always turbulent,
and when suffered to walk abroad, does raise most strange commotions, both in
the public state of the Church, while hereby the lovers of Truth are called
publicly to contend for it, Jude ver. 3. and in the hearts of private
Christians, chiefly those who are weak and unsettled, and hereby made to
fluctuate among the rocks of several opinions, and sometimes at last to split
upon some one error or other, Gal. 1. 6. for, so much is employed, while he
compares heretical doctrines to the boisterous winds which drive the ship of
the Church to and fro with every wind of doctrine. 8. There ^s no erroneous
doctrine so hazardous and damnable, but Satan will find out some active spirits
to spread it, and to seduce others unto the embracing of it: for, those are the
men here spoken of, by whose slight and cunning craftines the winds of false
doctrine are made to blow, and carry children to and fro; tossed by the sleight of men. 9. As those whom Satan engages to carry on a course of error and
heresy in a Church, are usually men of parts and gifts, exceeding far in
abilities the generality of the Lords People, whom they intend to seduce, and
as far as men of age and understanding go beyond simple children and babes; So
these, whom Satan thus engages, do usually prove men void of conscience, and
stand not much upon fraud or falsehood, providing they may gain their point:
for, the Apostle calls them men in opposition to those whom formerly he
called children, and shows them to be such men as did make use of slight and
cogging craftiness, and a subtle compendious art of deceiving, for carrying
on their point; by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie
in wait to deceive. 10. Though heretical spirits and seducers of others, are
men void of conscience; Yet they make it their great work to hide their
knavery, and to appear that which they are not, by their large pretenses to
conscience and piety, 2 Cor. 11. 15. hereby to deceive the simple, and to carry
on their woeful design the more securely under that cover, Romans 16. 18. for, he
compares them to cunning gamsters, who carry the matter so dexterously, that
their fraud and knavery do not appear; by the sleight of men: He alludeth to
subtle coggers of dice, as said is. 11. Heretical spirits, and ringleaders of
error, are usually more than ordinarily assisted in their woeful work, and so
as they fall upon dexterous means which they pursue uncessantly, and are
attended with mavelous success oftentimes in so doing; the Lord permitting
Satan so to act them, and to act by them for heightening the trial, and making
a more speedy and through discovery of the unstability of peoples spirits by
those means; for, the expressions here used, do imply their more than ordinary
assistance in all those; by the sleight of men, their cunning craftiness, or
singular dexterity to do any mischief, and their lying in wait to deceive, or,
their deceiving, by a compendious subtle art. 12. However subtle seducers make
a fair show of Reason, Scripture, Piety, and Humility for procuring credit to
their errors, Col. 2. 23. yet the strong and only prop whereupon error leans,
and wherein its great strength does lie, is nothing else but vanity, falsehood,
subtle craftiness and deceit: for, Paul shows that these are the arms of
Heretics whereby they defend their errors, even winds of doctrines, sleight of
men, cunning craftiness, and lying in wait to deceive. 13. That great measure
of parts and gifts with which heretical seducers are frequently endued, their
unwearyed diligence in making use of these their deceits, falsehood and sleights
for gaining their purpose, and the more than ordinary success which they are
attended with in trying times, ought not to discourage the weakest of the Lords
people, or make them despair of standing out against their assaults, but rather
incite them to watchfulness, to seek after knowledge, a spirit of discerning,
solidity in judgment, and stability in truth; that so in the strength of the
Lord they may resist their activity and wiles: for, the latter part of the
verse has an indirect argument in it for pressing the duty contained in the
former, even that henceforth we be no more children, tossed to and fro with
every wind of doctrine, and that because they had to do with the sleight of
men, the cunning craftiness of those who lie in wait to deceive.

Verse. 15. But speaking the truth in love, may grow up into Him in all things,
which is the head, even Christ:
HE does illustrate the forementioned end of the Ministry, thirdly, from
another fruit of that spiritual edification, unto which the work of the
Ministry is also subservient, even to growth in grace, or, that real Believers
by speaking the truth (or rather, as the word signifies, by cleaving to the
truth of heavenly doctrine) and by making conscience of the duties of love and
good works, as the fruit of their sincerity in adhering to truth, may grow up,
and make progress in all christian virtues, until they attain to their full
stature and height of growth, even such a measure of conformity with Christ, as
they be in a manner transformed in Him, and become most perfectly one with Him,
whom he calls here, as often elsewhere, (See upon chap. 1. 22.) the head, to
show a reason, why Believers should grow up in Him, and to through conformity
with Him; even, that so the Members of this mystical body, may be in some
measure proportionable to their head. Doct. 1. The ordinance of the Ministry,
is appointed of God, not only to awake those who are yet in nature, and drive
them to Christ, Ephesians. 5. 14. but also for the good of those who are already
converted, even to make them grow up in grace until they come to perfection;
and therefore none, who live on earth, can justly account themselves to be
above this Ordinance: for, the Apostle shows that also is one end of the work
of the Ministry, that those who are already quickened by it, may grow up into
him. 2. The work of edification intended to be brought about by the ordinance
of the Ministry, is not attained upon souls, though they be preserved free
from Error, except they also know the Truth, adhere to it, and be growing up in
grace, and in making conscience of all the duties of an holy life: for, Paul,
having mentioned one fruit of that spiritual edification, mentioned ver. 12.
to be freedom from error and infection from false teachers, ver. 14. he here
adds another, that speaking, or cleaving to truth in love, we may grow up
into him in all things. 3. Our making conscience to grow in grace, is a
sovereign remedy against the hazard of being surprised with error, and tossed
to and fro with every wind of doctrine, in so far, as then we are so much
busied about our heart, that we have not leisure to be taken up with vain and
giddy notions of an unsettled head: for, Paul, having dehorted them from being
as children tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine, subjoyneth, as a
preservative from that unsettled temper, but speaking the truth in love, we may
grow up. 4. It is not sufficient for these who live under the drop of
Ordinances, to attain to the being of grace, so as they can prove by evident
marks that they have grace; but they must also labor to grow in grace: for,
hereby we glorify God, and speak to the commendation of our Lords table,
whereat we feed, Joh. 15. 8. hereby we attain to the enjoyment of many rich
privileges, which otherwise we are deprived of, 1 John 4. 18. and hereby also
we are more enabled to ride out against a storm in trying times, as appears
from the conhexion of these two verses, teaching, that babes in Christ and
children are tossed to and fro with every wind, when grown and growing
Christians will ride it out: for, Paul, teaching that the end of the Ministry
is to make Believers grow, does show they ought to grow, while he says, But
speaking the truth in love, we may grow. 5. As we do then sincerely adhere to
the truth of heavenly Doctrine, when we make evident our so doing by walking in
all the duties of love, both to God and our neighbor; (for faith works by
love, Gal. 5. 6.) So our love is then truly Christian, and not a fleshly lust,
or moral virtue only, when it is grounded upon truth, and the result of our
adhering to it by faith: for, therefore Paul conjoyneth these two, making the
latter, as it were, the result of the former, while he says, but speaking, or
cleaving to the truth in love. 6. That Christians may grow in grace, it is most
necessary they labor to have both their understanding enlightened with truth,
and their heart and affections inflamed with love, without either of which, our
growth is not Christian and spiritual, but either superstitious and blind,
even a growth in error, if the understanding be not enlightened; or, growth in
pride, conceit, self-love and arrogance, if, the head only being filled with
light, our affections be not inflamed with love to God and our neighbor: for,
therefore he prescribes, that by speaking the truth in love, we should grow
up. 7. This Christian growth must not only be in one thing, but in all things;
in so far, as grace must be growing, not only in all the parts of the soul,
understanding, will and affections; but the whole man also, and all the parts
thereof must grow according to all the ordinary dimensions, or in all Christian
virtues and duties, both of our general and particular calling, 2 Pet. 1. 5.
even as it is in living bodies, who grow equally and proportionally in all
their parts of length, breadth, height and depth; That we may grow up in all
things, says he. 8. Then do Christians grow as they ought, when they are in a
perpetual motion toward Christ, so as to be daily more and more like Him,
incorporate in Him and one with Him; that full conformity with Christ, and that
most perfect union and communion with Him, which shall be attained in glory,
being the mark and scope toward which they tend, and without attaining whereof
they do not sit down satisfied, as if they had enough: for, says he, we may
grow up into Him. 9. Though there ought to be a spiritual emulation among
Christians, so as to strive who may grow most and outstripe others, 1 Cor. 14.
12. Yet there should be no division, envious strife, or carnal emulation among
them upon this account, so as to envy the progress of others, or cast
stumbling blocks in their way to retard them, but an harmonious on-going and
rejoicing in the progress one of another; seeing they are to grow, as the parts
of one body under one head, Christ: for, so much does Paul here teach, We may
grow up into Him, which is the head, even Christ.

Verse. 16. From whom the whole body fitly joined together, and compacted by
that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the
measure of every part, makes increase of the body, unto the edifying of it
self in love.
THe Apostle does illustrate the forementioned end of the Ministry, fourthly,
and jointly inforceth the study of love and unity, by showing how all gifts and
offices do tend to the edifying of the body, and furtherance of that growth,
whereof he spoke, ver. 15. while he describes Christ the Head, presently
spoken of, from His influence upon, and relation to the Church, His body;
wherein he alludeth to a natural living body and the way how it, being orderly
made up of its several members, joined together by nerves and sinews, does
receive life, motion, nourishment and growth from the head and heart, by the
benefit of those bonds and ligaments, whereby the particular members do not
only receive life and nourishment unto themselves, but do also convey them unto
others, so that every member does receive due increase, and thereby the whole
body does come to maturity and growth. In allusion to which way of the natural
growth of the natural body, he shows, first, that by virtue of spiritual
influence drawn from Christ, who is as the head and heart of the mystical
body, the whole body, to wit, that which is militant on earth, or all sincere
Believers, the true and lively members of this body, are joined fitly, or
orderly, every one in his own place and station, and also firmly or compactly
with Christ, and among themselves. Secondly, that they are thus joined, by the
means of spiritual joints and s(...)ews, whereby we are to understand every
thing that joyneth Believers with Christ, and among themselves; and they are
either joints and bonds of inward union and communion, to wit, the Spirit, on
Christ's part, and faith and love on ours; or of external union, to wit, the
Word, Sacraments, and those functions and offices, which Christ has appointed
in His house: yea, and also all natural and civil relations, when they are
sanctified; and they are all called joints of subministration, or supply, (for
the words read better so than as they are rendered, by that which every joint
supplyeth) to show, that those do serve, not only to conjoyn us with Christ,
and among our selves, but also for channels and instruments of communication,
by which, spiritual nourishment and matter of growth is conveyed both unto our
selves and others. He shows, thirdly, that the whole members, and every one
of them, being thus conjoined, do not only themselves, by virtue of that
furniture and spiritual nourishment, communicate from Christ, by the means of
those joints or bonds, make increase and grow, but also make the whole body
thus conjoined to grow, and this according to the effectual working of the holy
Ghost, whereby those joints, or means of conveying spiritual nourishment are
blessed and made effectual to the effect mentioned: which effectual working
and blessing of increase and nourishment following upon it, is not communicated
unto the members or parts without measure, as it was to Christ the Head, Joh.
3. 34. or unto all alike, but in the measure of every part or member, that is,
such a measure as Christ judges sufficient and most convenient to every
member, according to the place and function which they hold in the body, and
the use which he is to make of them for the good of the body. And, lastly, he
shows the end of the growth, and increase of the whole body in all its
members, to be not so much the good and advantage of the particular members, as
the advancement and edification of the body it self, and of the particular
members only, in so far as their edification and growth is carried alongs in,
and contributeth for the edification of the body; and that this flows from
the force and power of the grace of love in all the members, which does not
look to it self only, 1 Cor. 13. -5- but makes every part contribute all what
it is and can do for the benefit of others, and common good of the whole. Hence
Learn, 1. As Christ and Believers make up one mystical body, whereof He is
head, and they members; (See upon chap. 1. 22, 23.) So all things requisite unto
Believers to make them a body, do flow from Christ: their union, order, bonds
of union, spiritual nourishment, and instruments of communication, whereby it
is conveyed, their growth, and measure of their growth, and all is from Him, as
the Apostle does here fully teach: from whom the whole body, etc. 2. As there
is a most orderly and firm union of all the members of this body with their
head, and among themselves; so this union is necessary in order to their
receiving spiritual nourishment and making increase thereby, even as it is in
the natural body, a member cut off, or separated from the rest, cannot be
nourished: for, he says, the whole body fitly joined, and compacted, does make
increase: The first word, fitly joined, does express the orderly frame and
proportion of all the members in this union; The second, compacted, expresses
the firmness of this union. 3. As there are joints and bonds both of the
internal and external union of this body, to wit, such as are held forth in
the exposition, even the Spirit of God, with His special graces and common
gifts; so that God does make use of all those, both as bonds of union, and
instruments of communication, whereby He conveyeth spiritual nourishment unto
the respective members, is a strong argument to scare us from dividing, or
renting upon these, or because of the diversity of those in the several
members: for, he says, the whole body is compacted by every joint; and he
calls them joints of supply, whereby furniture is conveyed: his general scope
wherein, is, to enforce the study of unity, notwithstanding of diversity of
graces, gifts and offices, compacted by that which every joint supplyeth, or,
every joint of supply. 4. There is no true member of this body either dead or
idle, or living, and working only to it self; but what life or nourishment it
has received from the head, that it does endeavor to communicate unto others:
for, he says, there is an effectual working from the Lord in every member,
according to which it makes increase, not only of it self, but of the body. 5.
As there is no member of this body, which receives the essential operation
and gifts or graces of the holy Spirit without measure; and as all receive some
measure, less or more: So it is the duty of all and every one to contribute
for the good of others, and especially for the advantage of the whole body, not
by extending themselves beyond their measure, but according to it; that being
all which God requires: for, he says, the whole body, or all the several
members of the body, do make increase of the body, according to the effectual
working, in the measure of every part. 6. As it is not our improving of our
measure of gifts and graces received, which, of it self, and without the
effectual operation and blessing of Gods Spirit, will bring about the
spiritual good and advantage, either of our selves, or others; so we ought not
on this pretense to ly-by doing nothing, but are to make use of our measure
received, and depend upon the effectual operation of Gods Spirit for a
blessing to our so doing; for he says, increase is made of the body according
to both those, the Spirits effectual operation, and the activity of every part
or member, according to its measure, even, according to the effectual working,
in the measure of every part. 7. As all the lively members of this body do make
increase, and grow in gifts and graces; so that is only true growth, and a
growth, whereof Christ the head is fountain and author, which adds somewhat
to the whole body, and brings advantage to the Church in common, but not that
growth, which seems to bring some benefit to a few, with the disadvantage of
the rest: for, the whole body, or every member of the body, makes increase,
not only of it self, but also of the body, says he. 8. As there is no such
degree of growth attained here, neither by the Church in general, nor its
lively members in particular, but there are degrees yet wanting of their full
and just stature; So the measure of growth, and increase already received,
should be improved by us for attaining a further degree of growth and
advantage, not only to our selves, but also to others, chiefly to the
edification of the whole body: for, he says, every member makes increase of
the body, to the edifying of it self: so that the increase received, is to be
improven for attaining more, even further edification. 9. The more a man do
find himself inclined and constrained to improve in his station, and according
to his measure, all his receipts, whether of saving graces, or common gifts, to
the spiritual advantage of others, and chiefly for the common good of the
whole body, he may the more certainly conclude, that he has the grace of
sincere love and charity rooted in his heart, and is acted by it: for, he
makes love the impulsive cause, why the several members do improve all their
receipts for promoving the edification of the whole Church, while he says, it
makes increase to the edifying of it self in love.

Verse. 17. This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth
walk not as other Gentiles walk in the vanity of their mind.
THe Apostle (being in the second part of the Chapter to dehort them from all
impiety and profanity in the general, contrary to that walking worthy of their
vocation, pressed, ver. 1.) gives an example of that wickedness, from which
he dehorteth them, in the conversation of those other Gentiles, who were yet
unconverted, and living in paganism. And, first, while he does most seriously
and under a grave obtestation by the Lord Jesus Christ, as they would answer to
Him, and evidence their esteem of Him, dehort them from walking as those other
Gentiles, he gives a short sum of that godless conversation of theirs,
calling it a walking in the vanity of the mind, that is, a following and
practicing of whatsoever their unrenewed understanding and mind did teach and
prescribe: to which he ascribes vanity, and calls the mind of unrenewed men
vain, because it is empty of the knowledge of God in Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 14. and
what knowledge it has of God, or of right and wrong, is nothing but evanishing
notions, Romans 1. 21. and wholly unprofitable, as to the attaining of life and
salvation, Romans 1. -20. for, a vain thing, according to the common and
scripture-use of the word, is an empty thing, Isa. 41. 29. an evanishing thing,
Prove. 31. -30- and a thing unprofitable to attain the end intended, Psalm. 33.
17. Doct. 1. To live in a course of profanity, and to be a member of Christ's
mystical body, drawing life, nourishment and growth from Christ the head, are
wholly inconsistent: if the one be, the other cannot be; seeing profanity of
life is not only directly opposite to that new life of grace, which all the
members of that body do live, but also does wholly obstruct the passages
betwixt the head and the members, whereby spiritual influence for life and
growth should be conveyed, 1 John 1. 6. for, the Apostle, from what he spoke of
influence for life and growth conveyed from Christ, the head, to all the
members, does infer here, that therefore, and as they would evidence themselves
lively members of that body, so they would abandon profanity, while he says,
This I say therefore, that ye walk not as other Gentiles. 2. Ministers ought to
be serious in pressing the duties of sanctification upon the Lords people, not
only simply exhorting, but sometimes most gravely obtesting them by that which
is dearest to them: whereby the Lords people may know, that their obedience to
what is pressed, is no trifling matter, but such, as their eternal welbeing is
most highly concerned in: for, therefore does Paul not only say and exhort
them, but also testify and obtest them in the Lord, that they walk not
henceforth as other Gentiles. 3. Our long continuance in sin already, is so far
from being an argument in reason to make us hold on in that course for the time
coming, that, upon the contrary, this very same consideration should be a
strong argument to shame us from it: for, so much is employed in his saying that
ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles: as if he had said, Ye have done so
hithertils, therefore do no more so. See 1 Pet. 4. 3. Doct. 4. Our turning to
God in earnest to expect life and salvation from Him through Jesus Christ, does
call for, and will be attended with, an other sort of conversation than what we
formerly had before conversion, or that natural men, dead in sins and
trespasses, for the present have: for, Paul exhorts these converted Ephesians
not to walk as they themselves sometimes did, nor as the unconverted Gentiles at
present did; I testify, says he, that ye henceforth walk not as other
Gentiles walk. 5. Sense of mercy received from God, is a strong incitement unto
duty toward God: for, he does not obscurely hint at Gods mercy in separating
them from the common lot of other Gentiles, that so they may be the more
incited to eschew what might dishonor Him; that ye henceforth walk not as
other Gentiles. 6. The vileness of sin is such, that it cannot be sufficiently
expressed, and so expressed as to make us abhor it, by doctrine or
word-speaking: therefore it is sometimes profitable to take a look of it in its
vileness, power and tyranny, as it manifests it self in the lives of
unrenewed men, who are captive slaves unto it; providing we so look to it, as
to make us abhor it, and carry at a greater distance from it: for, therefore
does Paul hold forth a map of that wickedness, which he deborteth them from,
in the example of those unconverted Gentiles, that by seeing of it they might
the more abhor it; That ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk. 7. The
conversation of all men unrenewed, is vain and fruitless, as spending their
money for that which is not bread, and their labor for that which satisfies
not, Isa. 55. 2. for, he speaks of all the unconverted Gentiles, that they
walk in vanity. 8. Whatever vanity or wickedness is in the outward
conversation of a natural man, it does wholly flow from the vanity of the mind
and understanding within; and as the mind is, so will the conversation be: and
therefore even the mind it self, the chief seat of reason, is corrupted and
vain, and so vain, that from thence does flow corruption and vanity to the
whole man: for, he ascribes the vanity of their walking to the vanity of their
mind; As other Gentiles walk in the vanity of their mind, says he.

Verse. 18. Having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of
God, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their
heart.
NExt, that the Apostle may the more effectually deter them from walking as
these other Gentiles did, he does more largely and distinctly set forth that
vain and godless conversation of theirs, by showing several branches and
degrees thereof, both inward in their understanding and affections, and outward
in their life and conversation: And, first, he shows, that their
understanding and knowing part, or that part of it, whereby men do reason,
inferring one thing from another, (for so the word signifies) was wholly blind
and darkened, to wit, as to those things which relate to God and heaven, 1 Cor.
1. 21. whatever was their understanding and quickness of judgment in other
things, Genesis 4. 21, 22. yet, in those things they were altogether vain and
wild, Romans 1. 21. And, secondly, that they were estranged from, and wholly
destitute of, the life of God, or that spiritual life, begun in regeneration,
Joh. 3. 3. and consisting in the saving knowledge of God, and the several
pieces of Gods image, Col. 3. 10. called the life of God, because not only God
is the author of it, as He is of our natural life; but also it flows, both
in its being and operation, from the gracious presence of God dwelling in us by
His Spirit, Gal. 2. 20. And, thirdly, he shows that the cause of those former
two, was their ignorance of God, and of those things belonging to the worship
of God and their own salvation, to wit, both simple ignorance, or want of the
knowledge of those things; which ignorance is in all by nature, and ignorance
affected and delighted in, whereby the things of God are judged foolishness, 1
Cor. 2. 14. from which ignorance of theirs did flow a further degree of
darkness in the understanding, and of alienation from the life of God, than
what was natural unto them. And, fourthly, that this their ignorance, with
both the forementioned effects, did flow from their blindness, or rather, as
the Original does read, hardness of heart, whereby their heart, or that part
of the soul, which chooses and refuses good or evil, did obstinately and
against all means used to the contrary, refuse the light of God, which was
proffered unto them, and were wholly inflexible to good, being obdured and
hardened, not only naturally from their birth, Psalm. 51. 5. but also
voluntarily by themselves, Exodus 8. 15. and judicially by God, Exodus 9. 12.
Doct. 1. That the vileness of sin may be sufficiently seen, and so as we may
abhor and detest it, it is not sufficient to take a general view of it, and in
the bulk, except we also dive into the particular branches, pieces and degrees
of it, and by ripping up the womb of that abominable monster, look upon the
vile intrals of it, that so we may be made to detest and hate it with a perfect
hatred: for, therefore Paul, being to deter these Ephesians from walking as
the Gentiles, does not only give a brief sum of their wickedness in the bulk,
ver. 17. but also here, and ver. 19. does more distinctly lay open the several
branches and degrees of it; Having the understanding darkened, etc. 2. Man
considered in his natural state, is so vile and loathsome by reason of sin, that
being rightly anatomized and deciphered, there is nothing to be seen in him but
what may make himself and others to abhor him; there being no part of him,
neither in soul nor body, free from those wounds, bruises and putrefying sores
which sin has brought upon him, as appears by this discovery, which in these
two verses the Spirit of God by Paul makes of him: his understanding is
darkened, his heart hardened, his conscience past feeling, etc. for, he speaks
this of all the Gentiles, who were not yet converted, and consequently of all
men in their unrenewed state: and though all such have not arrived at the
utmost height of that wickedness, which some of those expressions hold forth;
yet that vain mind, spoken of, ver. 17, which is the root of all the rest, is
in every unrenewed man, 1 Cor. 2. 14. and every such man is posting toward all
that wickedness here expressed: yea, and would arrive at the utmost height of
all, if restraining grace did not hinder him, Genesis 20. 6. and therefore in Gods
sight he may be justly charged with all; having the understanding darkened, etc.
3. As every man by nature is wholly unskilful to discern the things of God, or
to improve those lurking principles of the knowledge of a Godhead, and of right
and wrong remaining after the fall (Romans 1. 20.) by drawing solid conclusions
from them, for rules to direct him in the matter of worship, and walking in the
way to salvation; So this unskilfulnesse and darkness of his, does daily
increase, and the longer he lives, and exercises himself in finding out what
is right and acceptable to God in those things, by the direction and guidance
of his natural light only, he is the further from the mark: for, he speaks of
a further darkening of their understanding, than what was natural to them,
even that, which did flow from ignorance and hardness of heart, as is clear
from the construction of the words; Having their understanding darkened --
through the ignorance that is in them. 4. As all men did once in their common
root and first father Adam partake of the life of God, consisting in Gods
image, Eccles. 7. 29. and are now, by Adams fall, from their very conception
and birth, deprived of it, Romans 5. 12, 13, 14. So, the longer they live in
their unrenewed state, they are the more estranged from it, while every sin
they commit does make them in a further degree incapable of it: for, he
speaks of a further degree of alienation from the life of God, than what was
natural to them, even that which was afterward contracted by their ignorance
and hardness of heart; Being alienated from the life of God, through the
ignorance that is in them. 5. Hardness of heart is a woeful evil, and the root
and fountain of several other evils, in so far as when a man does obstinatley
refuse light, and walks contrary to light, and so hardens his heart to do
mischief, he thereby provokes the Lord to give him over to ignorance, and to
lose the small measure of knowledge which he formerly had, Romans 1. 28. And
thus, hardness is the cause of ignorance, and being thus both hardened in
heart, and blinded in mind, he is further removed and estranged from the life
of God, which consists in the saving knowledge of God in Christ, Joh. 17. 3.
and his understanding and reason rendered more dark and unskilful to find out
what is truth or error, right or wrong; the common principles which were left
in him after the fall concerning those things, being now through a continued
custom of obstinacy in sin almost wholly obliterated and blotted out: for, if
we look exactly to the construction of the words, we will find that the
blindness or hardness of their hearts is mentioned as the cause of that
ignorance which was in them, and both hardness and ignorance, as the cause of
their alienation from the life of God, and the darkning of their understandings.

Verse. 19. Who being past feeling, have given themselves over unto
lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness.
HE does here set forth some other, and those higher branches and degrees of
their impiety, profanity and godless conversation, which did follow upon, and
flow from the former. As, 1. They had lost all remorse of conscience, fear of
Gods judgment, and so did sin without inward check or challenge. And,
secondly, which followed upon the former, they gave themselves with the full
consent of their will and benfall of their affections to think upon, and
delight in the fulfilling of their lascivious, perulant and filthy lusts. And,
thirdly, which was the result of all the rest, they acted all sort of
uncleanness with a sort of greediness, and, as it were, striving who should
do most mischief for a prize and reward. Doct. 1. Though original sin has
seized upon the whole soul, understanding, will and affections; yet the Lord
has kept so much of the knowledge of Himself, and of right and wrong in the
understanding of natural men, as they may know in many things, when they sin
and do evil; and so much of conscience, as to accuse or excuse according to the
nature of the fact, Romans 2. 15. whereupon follows either grief, or joy in
their affections, for, while he says, they were past all feeling, and lost all
remorse, he implies they once had it, before they came to that height. 2.
Wicked men may arrive to such an height of sin, as to have no sense of sin, no
grief, nor check, nor challenge from conscience for it: for, this is to pass
feeling, which Paul affirms of those Gentiles; who having past feeling. 3. As
one degree of sin makes way for another; so in particular, hardness of heart,
and obstinacy in sin, do eat out the edge of conscience, making it wholly
senseless and stupid, so that it gives neither check nor challenge for sin:
for, upon their hardness of heart did follow that which is here affirmed; Who
being past feeling. 4. A watching conscience, doing its duty, is the strongest
restraint from sin: and where that is not, all other restraints will serve for
little purpose: for, upon their having past feeling, he says, they gave
themselves over to lasciviousness. 5. When men do give themselves without
check and restraint to think upon their sin with delight, they cannot choose
but fall out in the outward act of that sin, though it were never so gross:
for, upon their giving themselves over to lasciviousness, they gave themselves
also to work all uncleanness. 6. For a man to be given over to
lasciviousness, and to fulfill his beastly lusts without all check or
challenge, it argues a great height of impiety, and such as speaks a man
ignorant of God, judicially hardened in heart, and altogether past feeling: for,
he makes this the result of all the forementioned branches of their
wickedness, even that they gave themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work
all wickedness. 7. As upon senseless stupidity of conscience, through frequent
resisting of light, there follows an unsatiablenesse in sinning, especially
in the sin of uncleanness, that the more a man does sin, he is the more eager
upon sin, and can never have enough of it; So, when a man comes to this, he is
then arrived at the greatest height of sin, unto which ever the Heathens,
destitute of the knowledge of God, did attain: for, this is the highest step of
all, that through hardness of heart, being past feeling, they did not only
simply act uncleanness, but gave themselves to work all uncleanness with
greediness.

Verse. 20. But ye have not so learned Christ:
HE presses the former exhortation, set down, ver. 17. from this, That the
saving knowledge of Christ, wherein they were instructed, was inconsistent with
such a licentious life as those other Gentiles lived in. Doct. 1. The
anatomizing of that vile monster, sin, and setting it forth in its blackest
colors, is not alone sufficient to scare the Lords people from it: but such is
the interest which sin has in the best, and such is their pronenesse to it,
that besides, there must be other strong arguments made use of to keep them
from falling in it: for, the Apostle, having set forth the vileness of sin at
length, sees it necessary here to super add another argument to enforce the
former dehortation; But ye have not so learned Christ, says he. 2. As the
giving of loose reigns to sin, is inconsistent with the state of grace and the
saving knowledge of Christ; So, there is no argument more prevalent with a
gracious heart to keep them up from profanity and loosnesse, than the through
inculcating of this truth: for, among many other arguments Paul makes choice
of this, But ye have not so learned Christ. 3. As true Believers must be
scholars, daily learning somewhat; So the sum of all they have to learn and
know, is Christ, He being the end of the Law, Romans 10. 4. and the great subject
of the Gospel, Col. 1. 27. in whom all the promises are Yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.
20. for, says he, ye have not so learned Christ. 4. There is no remedy or cure
of our natural corruption, and of all those other filthy wounds and sores,
that follow upon it, but in Christ Jesus, being truly known, embraced and made
use of, as He is set forth in the Doctrine of the Gospel. No moral precepts,
though enforced by most strong and moving considerations, can reach the root of
this woeful disease: for, he opposes their learning Christ, as the alone
antidote against that vanity of mind, with all its branches and degrees
formerly spoken of; But ye have not so learned Christ. 5. Accordingly as we are
instructed and learned by Christ; so we ought to walk, and put that knowledge,
which we have of Him and from Him, in practice: for, his scope is to prove they
should not walk so, because they had not learned Christ so.

Verse. 21. If so be that ye have heard him, and have been taught by him, as the
truth is in Jesus.
HE does here limit the former reason, by showing the knowledge which they had
of Christ, was inconsistent with such a licentious life, only upon this
supposall, if so by learning Christ preached, they had been inwardly taught and
instructed by Christ Himself in the truth, and as the truth was in him, who did
not only know the truth, but also practiced what He knew, so that His life was
a true copy of that holiness, which is taught in the Gospel, Matthew. 11. 29.
Doct. 1. It is not every sort of learning Christ, or of knowledge, that may be
had of Christ, which excludes profanity, and is in consistent with a
licentious life. Many do in a sort learn Him and know Him. who abuse that
knowledge they have of Him, for making them sin the more securely, Romans 6. 1.
even those, who turn the grace of God to wantonness, Jude ver. 4. for, he
shows what he spoke of that inconsistency, which is between learning Christ
and the practice of profanity, does not always hold, while he adds this
limitation, if so be ye have heard him. 2. Whatever grounds a Minister has for
charity to judge of all, or any of the Lords people committed to his charge, as
truly gracious; yet he ought to express that his judgment of them, with so
much wariness and caution, as ground may be given unto them to enquire in
their own condition and search, whether it be so: for, Paul, having (ver. 20.)
professed his charitable judgment of them, that they had not so learned
Christ, he gives a limitation here, whereby they might try if it was so; if so
be ye have heard him. 3. That learning of Christ, and knowledge of Him, which
is the only remedy against the power of inherent corruption, is begotten in us
by the ordinary mean of hearing Him preached, and set forth in the public
Ministry of the Gospel, Rom, 10. 14, 15. for, this is one piece of that
condition, which is required to the learning of Christ thus, even if so ye have
heard him. 4. The hearing of Christ preached by sent Ministers, is not alone
sufficient, in order to this effectual learning of Him, but Christ Himself
must teach us inwardly and effectually by His Spirit, else we cannot so learn
Him: for, this is another piece, and the main piece of that condition required
antecedently to their learning of Christ thus, if so ye have been taught by
him. 5. Then do we rightly and savingly learn truth, when the knowledge of
truth attained by our learning, is such, as Christ's knowledge was, to wit, not
theoretick and speculative only, but practical and operative: for, so was His
knowledge of truth, Psalm. 40. 8. and they were to be taught by Him, as the
truth is in Jesus, else they had not so learned Christ.

Verse. 22. That ye put off concerning the former conversation, the old man,
which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts:
HE does, next, show, what it is to be taught by Christ, as the truth is in
him; and thereby confirms what he said, ver. 20. that the saving knowledge of
Christ is inconsistent with a licentious life, in so far as this effectual
learning of Christ, and knowledge of Him, requires from, and effectually
works in, the person so instructed, three things. The first whereof, is in
this verse, to wit, a daily study to put off and mortify the old man, whereby
is not meaned the substance of a man's soul and body, nor yet the natural and
essential faculties of the soul; (for, those of necessity do always remain,
until the man cease to be) but that natural and inbred corruption, which has
infected and polluted all those: which inbred corruption he shows had
manifested it self in their former godless conversation, and does grow daily
worse, and more corrupt, yea, and by little and little brings corruption and
destruction upon the whole man, both in soul and body, where it is given way to
in its deceitful lusts: for, so much does he intend, while he says, it is
corrupt according, or, by deceitful lusts. Now, this inbred corruption, is
here called the old man, and the mortifying of it, is called a putting of it
off, by a metaphor taken from the laying aside and casting off of old garments.
See the reasons for both, upon Col. 3. -9. doct. 1. Hence, Learn, 1. So much
may we reckon our selves to know of Christ, and to be taught by Christ, as we
do practice according to what we know. Those only are best scholars in Christ's
school, who are most tender walkers: for, Paul shows, that to learn Christ,
and to be taught by Him, is, in a word, to practice all the duties of an holy
life, even that ye put off the old man, etc. says he. 2. Then do we set about
the duties of sanctification in the right order, when we begin at the work of
mortification in the first place, and thence proceed to the positive duties of
a new life: the plants of righteousness will not thrive in an unhumbled,
proud, impenitent heart, Joh. 5. 44. for, Paul shows the first part of this
lesson, is, to put off concerning the former conversation, the old man. 3. Then
do we carry on the work of mortification right and to good purpose, when we
single not out some one sin passing by others, but do strike at all sin, and do
not content our selves to lop the branches, but strike at the very root of sin:
for, Paul describes this work to be a putting off the old man, that is, the
bitter root of inbred corruption, in its full latitude and extent; That ye put
off concerning the former conversation, the old man. 4. Though we must begin to
strike at the root of sin within; yet we are not to rest there, but must set
against sin in all its branches; and whoever sets upon sin at the root and
in the heart, he cannot choose but set against the breaking forth of sin in his
hand and outward conversation also: yea, the reality of his fighting against
his inward corruptions, will make it self manifest in an outward change in his
conversation from what it formerly was: for, so much is imported, while he
shows they were to put off the old man, as to the former conversation, not as
if sins of the outward man and conversation only, were to be put off; but
because those are also to be mortified, and the inward work of mortification
does kyth by our putting off of those. 5. The work of putting off and
mortifying this old man of inbred corruption, is to be entered timously, in so
far, as the longer that corruption is spared, it grows worse, and posteth the
person, in whom it is, more swiftly to ruin and destruction: for, Paul does,
indirectly at least, press this duty of putting off the old man, from this
that it is corrupt, or grows worse and worse by its deceitful lusts. 6. This
inbred root of natural coruption, does vent it self in multitudes and swarms
of inordinate lusts and sinful desires, by venting whereof, it does always
acquire the more strength, and secureth its interest more firmly, both in soul
and body: for, he shows, that this old man has lusts, and is corrupted, or
made worse, and more deeply rooted by those lusts; which is corrupted by
deceitful lusts. 7. Sinful lusts are entising and deceitful lusts, in so far
as they promise what they never perform, 2 Pet. 2. 19. and do often cover
themselves under the mask of some laudable virtue, Col. 2. 18. and thus do by
subtilty carry the sinner captive to their slavery, Prove. 7. 21, 22. for, he
calls them deceitful lusts, or, as it is in the Original, lusts of deceit.

Verse. 23. And be renewed in the spirit of your mind.
HEre is the second thing which the effectual learning of Christ does require
from, and work in, the person so taught, even a serious endeavor to have his
mind and understanding more and more renewed, or made new, by getting a new
quality of divine and supernatural light implanted in it; and he calls the
understanding, or rational part of the soul, the spirit of their mind, that is,
the most spiritual part of the soul; or, by an Hebraism, their spiritual mind,
so called, because the mind, or understanding, is less subject to be wrought
upon by the temper and disposition of the body, than the will and affections.
Doct. 1. The principal part of the soul, the very seat of reason, the mind and
understanding in all men, is by nature infected and polluted by this old man of
inbred corruption: for, otherwise there were no need that we should be renewed
in the spirit of our mind. 2. It is not sufficient in order to our effectual
learning of Christ, and being taught by Him, that we cease to do evil, and
labor to mortify our inbred corruption, with the several branches thereof;
but we must also learn to do well, and endeavor to have the whole man adorned
with the several graces of Gods Spirit, making conscience of all the positive
duties of an holy life: for, the Apostle shows their being taught of Christ,
consisted, not only in the putting off the old man, but in being renewed in the
spirit of their mind, and ver. 24. in putting on that new man. 3. See three
doctrines employed in the notation of the word renewed, which signifies to
restore a thing deformed and antiquated, to its ancient form and beauty, upon
Col. 3. vet. 10. doct. 4, 5, 6. Doct. 4. Right information of the mind and
judgment, and the knowledge of truth and duty flowing therefrom, are most
necessary to be sought after by Christians, if so they would lead an holy life:
An erring mind will of necessity, at least in so far, make a crooked heart and
an irregular hand: for, Paul shows that in particular it is necessary to be
renewed in the spirit of the mind.

Verse. 24. And that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness.
Rests the third thing, which the effectual learning of Christ does require
from, and work in, those who are so taught, even that it be their daily task to
put on the new man, that is, to be more and more endued and adorned with new
and spiritual qualities, whereby their mind may not only be renewed, as was
mentioned ver. 23. but also their will, affections and actions. Which renewing
work he shows is carried-on by Gods creating power, after the pattern of His
own Image, which consists in perfect conformity to Gods Law, as well in the
second Table, set forth here by righteousness, as in the first, set forth by
true holiness, or holiness of truth, to wit, that which is wrought by truth,
Joh. 17. 17. and is not counterfeit, but sincere, true and real: which epithet
does also agree to righteousness. Now, those gracious and spiritual qualities,
are called the new man, and said to be put on, as new garments. See the reasons
for both, upon Col. 3. ver. 9, 10. doct. 3. Hence Learn, (...). Where there is
saving knowledge wrought in the mind, sanctified practice in all the duties of
an holy life will follow: for, unto the renewing of the mind, ver. 23. is here
subjoyned the putting on the new man in righteousness and holiness. 2. So
dead and indisposed are we by nature to holiness and grace, that no less than
creating power is required to work it in us: It is neither implanted by nature,
Psalm. 51. 5. nor attainable by any industry or pains of ours, Romans 9. 16. but
is a work of Gods omnipotency, though He make use of means for that end, 2 Timothy
4. 2. for, he says, this new man is created. 3. Only those who are renewed in
knowledge and have their souls adorned with gracious and spiritual qualities
of righteousness and holiness, are like to God; and such, as are most so, are
most like unto Him: for, Paul, speaking of being renewed in the mind, and of
putting on the new man, says, that it is after God, or, (as it is more
plainly, Col. 3. 10.) after the Image of God; Which after God is created, says
he. 4. The Image of God consists, not so much in the natural substance, or
faculties of the soul, or the abilities of it, (for those are in a wicked man)
as in spiritual gifts and graces, even conformity with God in true knowledge,
righteousness and holiness: for, the Apostle, speaking of the renovation of
the mind by knowledge, and putting on the new man in righteousness and
holiness, says, That this is after God, or, after His Image. 5. This new man
of grace, created after Gods Image, as it consists not in things external,
Romans 14. 17. but in the inward and substantial graces of Gods Spirit; so it
comprehends all spiritual habits, and virtues, and the exercise of all those
graces, in all the duties of universal obedience, prescribed in both the Tables
of the moral Law: for, he shows this new man consists in righteousness and
holiness, which include a conformity to the Law of God in both its Tables;
Which is created in righteousness and holiness. 6. No performance of any one,
or of all commanded duties whatsoever, is a sufficient proof of a renewed mind,
or the new creature, but when it carries alongs with it that necessary
ingredient of sincerity and truth, which makes the performer of any duty, take
God for his party, Genesis 17. 1. bring up his heart to every duty, Jer. 3. 10.
and level at Gods glory as his main scope in all duties, 1 Cor. 10. 31. and
make conscience, not only of one, but of every duty, Luke 1. 6. for, he gives
this epithet of truth and sincerity to that righteousness and holiness,
wherein this new man of grace, created after Gods Image, does consist; in
righteousness and true holiness, or in righteousness and holiness of truth.

Verse. 25. Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth with his
neighbor: for we are members one of another.
THe Apostle (being in the third part of the Chapter to press upon them the
exercise of some particular virtues, which do belong to all Christians of
whatsoever rank or station equally, as well as those formerly spoken of, all of
which are enjoined in the second Table of the Commands) exhorts them, first,
from what he spoke of putting off the old man, and putting on the new, to lay
aside and mortify the sin of lying, forbidden in the ninth Command, whereby a
man does speak what he knows or conceives to be untruth, with an intention
and purpose to deceive. He exhorts them also to speak the truth every man
with his neighbor, that is, to speak as they think, and to think of what they
speak as it really is, so that our speech may be conform both to the thing it
self, and to our conceptions of the thing. Which exhortation in both its
branches, is enforced from this, that they were not only members of one body,
but one of another, every member of this mystical body being bound to
contribute all its endeavors, as for the good of the whole body in the first
place, so of every particular member in the next; and therefore it had been
alike unnatural and monstrous for them, by lying and deceiving to circumveen
one another, as it were for the eye in the natural body to deceive the hand,
or for any one member to contrive and carry on the ruin of another. Doct. 1.
It is not sufficient for Christ's Ministers to press upon the Lords people the
mortification of sin, or conscience-making of the duties of holiness in the
general; but, seeing people are apt to think that an slight performance, or
faint endeavors are sufficient obedience to these general exhortations;
therefore Ministers must condescend upon some particular vices, chiefly such as
are most commonly practiced in the place where they are, and some particular
virtues, which are most ordinarily slighted, pressing upon the Lords people to
evidence their renovation by abstinence from the former, and practicing of the
latter: for, Paul, having indirectly at least exhorted them to put off the old
man, ver. 22. and put on the new, ver. 24. does now fall upon some particular
vices and virtues, dehorting from the one, and exhorting to the other;
Wherefore putting away lying. 2. There is no sin more unseemly in a Christian,
and more inconsistent with grace, than the sin of lying, there being no sin
that makes a man more like the devil, Joh. 8. 44. more abominable to God,
Prove. 6. 16, 17. nor more shameful in the eyes of men, so that even they, who
are most guilty of it, cannot endure to be charged with it; no sin more hurtful
to the sinner, as making him to be trusted by none, and no sin which tends
more to the utter overthrow of all humane society; fidelity and trust among
men, being that which makes any society comfortable: for, the Apostle
dehorteth from lying, upon the ground of their putting on the new man, as is
implied in the illative particle Wherefore: Wherefore putting away lying. 3. As
all kind of lying is intrinsically sin, and to be avoided, whether the
pernicious, officious, or sporting lie; (See upon Col. 3. 8, 9-. doct. 10.) So
there is no person of whatsoever rank, whether rich or poor, to whom God gives
any dispensation to lie, or speak contrary to truth: for, he says indefinitly,
putting away lying, and speak every man truth, without exception. 4. Though we
are not bound to speak all the truth, and at all times, and to every person,
but in some cases may and ought conceal somewhat of it, Luke 9. 21. 1 Samuel 16.
2. yet, when we speak, we are to speak nothing but truth, and that without
mental reservation of any part of the purpose, without which the rest which is
spoken, would not be truth but a lie: for, though it be sufficient for a man to
think what is truth, and not express it, when he is speaking or meditating
with himself; yet he is to speak truth, if so he speak at all, when he speaks
with his neighbor; speak every man truth with his neighbor, says he. 5. This
is a general rule to be observed for the right understanding of divine
precepts, that where a sin is forbidden, the contrary duty is also commanded,
and where a duty is commanded, the contrary sin is also forbidden: for, the
Apostle, expounding here the ninth command, does not only exhort to lay aside
lying; but also to speak every man the truth with his neighbor. 6. Though it
be sinful to lie, and speak untruth unto any, even to an infidel, Ezekiel. 17.
16. yet, it is more sinful, and most odious for Believers and Professors of
the same faith, because of their nearer bonds and relations, to lie unto, and
deceive one another: for, so much the Apostles reason here used, which is
astricted only to such, does teach; for we are members one of another, says
he. 7. It is not sufficient, that a man abstain from lying, and endeavor to
speak truth with his neighbor, from a motive of self-advantage and interest,
as knowing his doing otherwise would tend both to his loss and shame; but he
ought to be acted herein from a principle of love toward those with whom he
speaks, chiefly, if he conceive them to be Believers, as to members of that
same body, for whose advantage and preservation especially, he is bound to lay
out himself in his place and station; so far must he be from seeking to
undermine them, or deceive them: for, Paul will have them to put away lying,
and to speak the truth, for this reason, that they were all members one of
another.

Verse. 26. Be ye angry and sin not, let not the sun go down upon your wrath.
HE exhorts them, next, to restrain and moderate their anger, forbidden in
the sixth command. And, 1. he, as it were, gives them way to be angry
sometimes, and in some cases. 2. He disswadeth them from sinful anger, or any
unjust desire of revenge, which is, when anger is kindled rashly, Prove. 14. 17.
for no cause, Matthew. 5. 22. or a very light one, 1 Cor. 13. -5-. or when it
exceeds the just bounds, Genesis 49. 7. And, 3. if their anger at any time
should exceed bounds, and turn to wrath, or bitterness of spirit, he exhorts
them to suppress it speedily, even before the Sun go down, not cherishing that
ill, or for bearing themselves in it, for the space of one night. Doct. 1.
Seeing anger is a natural affection, planted in our first parents at the first
creation: yea, and also was found in Christ Himself, who was without sin, Mark
3. 5. therefore it is not in it self a sin, nor always sinful; but, as it is
in its own nature indifferent, and becomes good or evil, according to the
grounds, causes, objects and ends of it; So it is sometimes, and in some cases
a necessary duty for a Christian to be angry, to wit, when anger flows from
zeal to Gods glory, Joh. 2. 15. with 17. and love to our brother, Prove. 13. 24.
and when it is conceived upon just and weighty causes, such chiefly, as Gods
dishonor, whether by our own sins, 2 Cor. 7. 11. or the sins of others, Exodus
32. 19. when it is incensed, not so much against the person of our brother, as
against his sin, and therefore against that sin in our selves, as much as in
others, Matthew. 7. 5. when it does not hinder other duties of love, which we owe
to the person whom we are angry with, Exodus 32. 19. with 32. neither does mar
our access to God in prayer, 1 Timothy 2. 8. and when we go not without the
compass of our calling, by giving way to private revenge in the accomplishment
of our anger, Luke 9. 54. 55. In those cases, anger is praiseworthy and
commendable: for, the Apostle gives way to anger, yea after a sort commands
it, to wit, in those cases; be ye angry, says he. 2. As there is an easy and
ready passage from what is moderation in our natural affections of joy, fear,
grief, desire (and therefore lawful and in some cases necessary) to what is
excess, (and therefore sinful) Psalm. 2. -11, So this does chiefly hold in the
affection of anger; it being most difficile to keep a measure, and not to
exceed, by transgressing some one or other of the forementioned limitations of
just anger when it is once given way to: for, therefore does he add this
necessary caution, Be angry, but sin not. 3. As it is possible, even in the
child of God, for lawful anger to degenerate in sinful wrath, whereby the
mind is imbittered, and accordingly rages against the person of him who has
done the wrong; So, an implacable spirit, which cannot be worn out by length of
time, is not so incident to any such: for, the Apostle supponeth they may have
wrath; only they might not entertain it long, while he says, Let not the sun
go down upon your wrath. 4. The child of God in his resisting sin, is not to
sit down discouraged, nor give the back when sin prevails; but, having
received a new recruit of strength from Christ, by the exercise of faith in
prayer, 2 Cor. 12. 8. he is with renewed courage to set upon sin a-fresh, that
so he may recover what was formerly lost: for, Paul enjoyneth, in case their
anger should at any time exceed, to set against it without delay; Let not the
sun go down upon your wrath.

Verse. 27. Neither give place to the devil:
HE gives a reason of the former exhortation, set down by way of precept, to
wit, that by giving way to excessive anger, and by persevering in it for any
space of time, they should cast open doors to Satan, the capital enemy of
man's salvation, to enter their hearts, and to incite them by his uncessant
suggestions to act some mischief. Doct. 1. As Satan is dethroned and shut to
the doors of the hearts of all such as are true believers; So, though he shall
never reign again over them at his pleasure, Romans 6. 14. Yet, he is daily
watching, and searching out, if it were but the narrowest passage, and least
opportuniy, whereby he may again re-enter his old possession, and exercise his
former tyranny: for, both those are employed, while he says, neither give
place to the devil. 2. Where any known sin, especially excessive anger, is not
only given way to, but also continued in, there does Satan get an open door to
setle himself in the heart, and exercise his power, by inciting the person
guilty to commit more of wickedness and mischief: for, he shows, that by
their persevering in wrath they would give place to the devil. 3. As Satan
does not slip an offered opportunity of recovering his former interest in the
heart; So where he gains any ground, though for never so short a space, he
stirs his time, and through Gods permission makes fearful havoc, and a
doolfull decay of the work of grace: for, while he holds this forth as an
argument against their persevering in excessive anger, that thereby they should
cast open doors for the devil to enter, it is employed, that he would take place
when it were given, and bestir his time in exciting them to act mischief,
otherwise the argument should not be of such force; neither give place to the
devil.

Verse. 28. Let him that stole, steal no more: but rather let him labor,
working with his hands the thing which is good, that he may have to give to him
that needs.
HE does, thirdly, exhort those, who, when they were un-converted Pagans, did
contrary to the eighth command, steal their neighbors goods, or who were yet,
after their professing faith in Jesus Christ, guilty of that sin in some
degrees and respects, that they would steal no more: where by the sin of
stealing, is meaned all those fraudulent and deceitful ways whereby a man
does wrong his neighbor secretly and without his knowledge in his goods or
outward estate, whether by taking (Joh 20. 19.) or withholding from him what is
his, Iam. 5. 4. or by partaking with such as do so, Psalm. 50. 18. He exhorts
them also to the contrary duty, as a remedy of this evil, even that they would
rather labor diligently, and to weariness (as the word signifies) in any
good and honest calling, if it were but in some mechanic or handy-trade: The
use of which remedy is enforced from a following advantage, to wit, that
hereby, and through Gods blessing upon their diligence, they should acquire not
only a competencie in things worldly unto themselves, and so be keept from a
necessity of stealing; but also might be able to bestow somewhat for supplying
the necessities of others: Doct. 1. As Jesus Christ does not reject the vilest,
no not thieves, nor worse, for any thing they have been, providing they amend
their life in time coming; So there are many, who, after they have taken on a
name of profession, do secretly live in the practice of base and shamfull sins,
which hardly can be called the spots of children: for, while he says, Let him
that stole, or does steal, (as the word bears) steal no more, it is supponed,
that some of those Ephesians, were guilty of this sin, before an offer of mercy
was made to them in the Gospel; yea, and that some were yet living in it. 2. It
has seemed good unto the wise Creator of all things, (for eschewing of
confusion, strife, contention and other infinite evils; for trial of the
charity of some, and patience of others) to establish property and dominion of
goods and possessions, and not to leave all things common among men, so that
every one should have an equal right unto all: for, if there were no propriety
of goods, there could not be such a sin as stealing, neither were it necessary
to forbid it, as the Spirit of God does here; Let him that stole, steal no
more. 3. As want of a particular calling, or idleness in it, occasioneth
poverty and want, by reason whereof men are cast upon tentations, to steal and
use such other sinful shifts, to keep them from straits; So it is the Lords
will, that every one betake himself to labor diligently in some lawful
calling and employment, as a remedy, not only against this evil of stealing,
but several others also, which flow from idleness, and too much ease, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 12. Psalm. 73. 5. for, the Apostle, having forbidden them to steal,
subjoyneth this as a remedy, rather let him labor, working with his hands. 4.
Though it be not absolutely necessary, nor yet convenient, or possible, that
every man should betake himself to some mechanic calling, or handy-trade, and
therein to labor with his hands, seeing every one is not able to go about any
such calling; and there are other lawful callings, which require no less
labor with the mind, than those do of labor with the hands, 1 Timothy 5. 17.
yet, there is no calling so base, providing it be honest, to which a man should
not betake himself (whatever he be for birth, and nobility of descent) and
spend his strength therein, even to weariness, rather than to steal, or use
any sinful shift to save himself from straits: for, says he, let him steal no
more, but rather let him labor, working with his hands. 4. Even those things
that were imposed upon fallen mankind, for a curse and punishment of sin, have
their nature changed unto Believers, and are turned unto a blessing and an
effectual remedy against sin: for, (Genesis 3. 19.) it is imposed upon Adam as a
part of the curse, in the sweat of his face to eat his bread; and here it is
enjoined, and commended by the Apostle unto Believers, as an effectual remedy
against the evil of stealing; but rather let him labor, working with his
hands. 5. No necessity, or want whatsoever, can warrant a man to employ himself
in any calling, which is not lawful and honest, or tends only to gratify
men's lusts, of pride, vanity, prodigality and uncleanness: this calling ought
to be such as he may therein serve God with a good conscience, Col. 3. 23. and
promove the good, either of the Church, family, or common wealth, Gal. 5. 13,
for, to prevent stealing, he does astrict them in their choice only to good and
lawful callings, while he says, Let him labor, working with his hands the
thing which is good. 6. The Lords ordinary way is to bless a man's
conscientious diligence in his lawful calling, with such a measure of
success, as he may have whereby to sustain himself, and to be helpful unto
others, except the Lord see it otherwise fitting, for the man's trial and the
exercise of his faith, patience and other graces, 2 Cor. 8. 2. for, the end of
laboring in a lawful calling, here proponed, is for the most part attained,
else it had been no encouragment, even that he may have to give to him that
needs. 7. As it is the duty of all whom God has blessed with any measure of
worldly substance, to bestow some part of it for the help of others; So we
ought in the exercise of our callings, as we would expect the Lords blessing
upon it, to intend, not only the enriching of our selves and ours, but also
that we may have whereby to do good unto others: for he shows they were to
aim at this end, while they wrought with their hands; that they might have to
give to him that needs. 8. As not only the rich, but even the poor labourer,
who hardly gets his livelihood with the work of his hands, is bound to give
his mite for the help of the indigent; So we ought to give alms of that which
is our own lawfully purchased, and not of the gain of oppression, or hire of an
harlot, Deuteronomy. 23. 18. for, says he, Let him work that which is good, that he
may have to give to him that needs. 9. As the Lord sees it fitting to keep
always some among His People, poor and indigent, even objects of charity, for
the exercise of their faith and patience, and for the trial of the charity and
compassion of others, Deuteronomy. 15. 11. So those only are to be relieved by our
charity, who are needy, indigent, and cannot relieve themselves: but not such,
as, being able to work in a lawful calling, do rather choose a life of ease
and idleness, and to live upon the charity of others: for, he says, that he
may have to give to him that needs.

Verse. 29. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that
which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the
hearers.
HEre is a fourth exhortation, wherein he gives direction for the right
ordering of the tongue: and, first, he forbids them to utter corrupt, or
unsavory and putrified communication, or speech, whereby is meaned all
discourse, not tending to the glory of God and edification of our neighbor,
(as appears from the latter part of the verse, where edifying conference is
opposed to this corrupt communication) but mainly all obscene, scurril, ranting
and arrogant discourse is here intended, even such as argues a rotten and
unrenewed heart, Matthew. 12. 35. and proves not only noisome and unsavory to
honest ears, but also contagious and infecting to ordinary hearers, 1 Cor. 15.
33. even as a stinking breath (unto which he seems here to allude) argues
rotten lungs, does prove unsavory, yea, and (if the party be taken with any
contagious disease) dangerous also unto those who stand by, lest they be
infected by it. Next, he enjoyneth the contrary duty, that their discourse and
communication should be good, and useful for the edification of hearers, even
such as may minister grace unto them, that is, which may be a mean blessed of
God for begetting or carrying on the work of grace in them, and for that end
may be so proponed, as it should prove most taking, gracious and acceptable
unto them. See upon Col. 3. -16. and, 4. 6. Doct. 1. It is the duty of renewed
Christians, as to watch over the heart and hand; so in a special way to guard
against the sins of the tongue; seeing they must make an account to God, even
for words, Matthew. 12. 36. and their sinfully, vain, frothy and rotten discourse
does argue such a heart, from the abundance whereof the mouth does speak,
Matthew. 12. 34. yea, and makes the heart more perverse and wicked, while the
corruption which is in it does strengthen it self by getting vent, 2 Timothy 3.
13. and proves also contagious to the hearers, 1 Cor. 15. 33. for, the
Apostle, having dissuaded them from the sins of the heart and hand, does now
dissuade them from the sins of the tongue; Let no corrupt communication proceed
out of your mouth. 2. As our corrupt hearts, which in the best are but renewed
in part, are very ready to hatch impure, vain and unprofitable corruptions, and
to press the venting of those by the tongue, in vain and corrupt
communication; So it is the renewed man's duty, and ought to be his care, to
keep a watch at the door of his lips, Psalm. 141. 3. that, though he cannot get
his heart kept from framing such conceptions; yet, at least, he may preserve
his tongue from venting of them; seeing our corrupt conceptions do not only
prove more dishonorable to God, when they are vented in expressions, but also,
in that case they prove offensive and hurtful unto others, 1 Cor. 15. 33. for,
the Apostle, supposing that such impure stuff would sometimes breed in the
heart, and seek a passage, he commands, Let no corrupt communication proceed
out of your mouth. 3. As there is no sin which wants a remedy; So the most
proper remedy of every sin, is not only to set against the sin it self, but
also to set about the practice of the contrary virtue: for, Paul prescribes
this remedy, as against the sins forementioned, so against this, Let no
corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good, says
he. 4. It is not sufficient to retrain our tongue from speaking evil, keeping
always silence: but, seeing our tongue is our glory, Psalm. 57. 8. and given
unto us, not only for the use of rafting and carrying down to the throat our
meat and drink, but also to express the conceptions of our heart, to the glory
of God, and edification of our neighbor; therefore, we must also exercise our
tongue in speaking what is good: for, so does the Apostle command, Let no
corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good. 5. It
is the duty, not only of Ministers, but of private Christians also (keeping
themselves within the bounds of their calling, Heb. 5. 4.) to endeavor the
edification of those with whom they converse, while they labor either to
beget, or carry on the work of grace in them; and this not only by their good
example, but by their edifying discourse and communication: for, he speaks to
all indifferently, while he says, Let no communication come out of your mouth,
but that which is good to the use of edifying. 5. We are not left to run at
random in our ordinary discourses, as if we might speak what we please,
providing we speak not evil, but are tied only to speak edifying purpose, and
this at all times, and with all persons, Col. 4. 6. whether we be speaking of
things religious, or which appertain to our particular calling, or recreations:
for, as it is lawful and necessary for Christians sometimes to speak of those
things; so there is such a way to speak of them, as the hearers may be bettered
by our speech; But that which is good to the use of edifying. 6. As godly
discourse and conference ought to be heard, and entertained by those who are
present; So, although the Word preached be the ordinary mean of converting
sinners, Romans 10. 14, 15. yet, the Lord is sometimes pleased to bless the
familiar and secret discourses of private Christians, being spoken with grace,
and seasoned with the salt of divine wisdom, by making them a mean of conveying
grace unto others, even to some, whom no public preaching of the Word could
ever move or work upon, 1 Pet. 3. 1. for, the end of speaking good to the use
of edifying here proponed, is attainable, else it had been no strong motive to
the duty; That it may minister grace unto the hearers.

Verse. 30. And grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto
the day of redemption.
HE does here enforce the former disswasive, by a strong reason set down in
form of precept: the force whereof, is, first, propounded, that by their
obscene unprofitable and unedifying discourse, they would grieve the holy
Spirit of God: who is called holy, because He is holy in Himself, Isa. 6. 3.
and the cause of all holiness in us, Romans 15. 16. And we are are said to
grieve Him, not, as if He, who is God, could be grieved properly; for, the
passions of grief, anger, sorrow, etc. (as implying some defect, or
imperfection) are not in God, Numb. 23. 19. But improperly, and in so far, as
we do that, which in it self is apt to grieve Him, if He were capable of grief,
Romans 14. -15. and which provokes the Spirit of God to do that which grieved
persons do, even to withdraw from the soul, to show His dislike, and to return
grief for grief. This reason is, next, enforced from one work of the holy
Spirit in the hearts of Believers, which is here called sealing, by a metaphor
taken from that use of seals and signets among men, whereby public writs are
confirmed and made authentic, or, the wares of merchands are marked, and set
apart for their own use. In like manner, the Spirit of God, by renewing and
sanctifying Believers, imprinteth the draughts and lineaments of His own image
upon them, whereby they are not only set apart and sealed, as His own peculiar
goods, but themselves also may be assured that they are His, and shall be
safely kept under that seal until the day of judgment, called here the day
of redemption: (See, upon chapter 1. ver. 13.) and therefore by grieving the
Spirit, they did hazard the removal of this seal, at least darken it much, and
consequently mar their own comfort exceedingly. Doct. 1. The holy Ghost, the
third person of the blessed Trinity, is graciously pleased to become in a
singular manner familiar with the truly regenerate, taking up a place of abode
in their spirits, and furnishing them with sweet and necessary counsel and
advice from time to time, 1 John 2. 27. for, as we show, His being grieved does
speak His withdrawing from them, and a ceasing from being so friendly and
familiar with them, as a stranger will do from an inn, wherein he has
received some affront, which implies that He was once present and familiar
with them; And grieve not the holy Spirit of God. 2. How friendly, and familiar
soever, the holy Spirit of God be with the believing soul; yet so holy and pure
is His Nature, that he can behold no iniquity, Hab. 1. 13. but when those that
are dearest to Him, give any way to known sin, He must show Himself displeasd
with it, and with them for it: for, so much is supponed, while the Apostle,
dissuading them from sin, shows, this holy Spirit of God will be grieved by
it; And grieve not the holy Spirit of God. 3. However many, by their obscene
and putrid discourse, intend no further than to make themselves, or others
joviall and glad, Hos. 7. 3. yet hereby, and by such other sins of the like
stamp, as being against the motions, light and direction of the Spirit, this
holy Spirit of God is much displeased, and so much, as persons grived use to
be; and therefore will withdraw His gracious and conforting presence, with all
those other tokens of His respect and favor from the person, by whom He has
been grieved, Isa. 57. -17. leaving him to be guided for a time by his own
spirit, and the spirit of Satan, Psalm. 81. 12. and giving him over to a kind of
desperate grief and hellish horror, Psalm. 32. 3, 4. or senseless stupidity,
Isa. 63. 17. as a just reward for grieving the holy Spirit of God: for, Paul
shows, that by their putrid communication they would grieve the Spirit of
God, and make Him do what grieved persons use to do, while he says, And grieve
not the holy Spirit of God. 4. As those spiritual plagues, inflicted upon our
spirits for grieving of the Spirit of God, and following upon His withdrawing
from us, are most terrible; so the child of God, not only may, but ought to
skare at, and abstain from sin, even that he may be preserved from those
spiritual plagues and judgments, though neither love to duty, nor fear of an
other correction do constrain him: for, the Apostle labors to deter them
from the sin of loose speaking, by this consideration, as being of greatest
force, even lest thereby they should grieve the Spirit; And grieve not the holy
Spirit of God, says he. 5. Though the redemption of Gods children be
perfected, in regard of the price paid by Christ, Joh. 19. 30. yet, in regard
of the application of it unto us, it is but begun in this world, and perfected
in the next: for, he speaks of our complete redemption, as yet to come,
Whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption. 6. Those whom God will
completely redeem from all sin and misery, both in soul and body, and from
whose eyes He will wipe away all tears at the last day, are only such, upon
whom the Spirit of God does imprint the draughts of His own image, in
righteousness and holiness, as the impression of the draughts and lineaments
of a seal, or by sealing put upon the thing sealed: for, he says, by whom,
meaning the holy Spirit, we are sealed unto the day of redemption. 7. Upon
whomsoever the Spirit of God does imprint this seal and stamp of true
holiness, and of joy, peace and comfort flowing therefrom, all such shall be
securely kept and preserved, as Gods own peculiar treasure by the power of
God unto salvation, to be fully manifested and completely bestowed at the last
day; for, they are sealed unto the day of redemption, a metaphor, as we show,
from merchands, who, leaving their wares behind them, do put their mark and
seal upon them, until such a day wherein they will come and own them. 8. By
virtue of this sealing and stamp of sanctification, peace and joy imprinted by
the Spirit of God upon the hearts of Believers, even they themselves may attain
to know assuredly, that they are in the state of grace, and shall be preserved
in it until the great day: for, as this sealing of them, by imprinting the
draughts of Gods image upon them, is a discriminating mark betwixt them and
others; so it serves, not so much to make it known to God, that they are His,
who knows who are His from all eternity, and antecedentally to their
effectual calling, 2 Timothy 2. -19 -- or to make it known unto others, who cannot
infallibly discern the grace of God in any but themselves, 1 King. 8. -39. as
unto themselves; otherwise the Apostle would not have used a forcible argument
not to grieve the Spirit, from His sealing of them, if it were a thing which
could not be certainly known, but guessed at by them; Grieve not the Spirit, by
whom ye are sealed unto the day of redemption. 9. So far is the work of grace
in Believers, or their assurance of being in a state of grace, flowing
herefrom, and wrought in them by the Spirit of God, from breeding security and
loosnesse of life, that, by the contrary, there can be no such prevailing
argument to make them abhor sin, entertain and follow the motions of the Spirit
of God, and consequently to lead an holy life. Not only ingenuity and
gratitude, for the favor received, will bind them to it, but also holy fear
and circumspection, lest otherwise they mar and darken the seal so as they
cannot discern the draughts of it, and consequently lose, though not the seal
it self, 1 John 3. 9. yet the comfort and assurance, which they had by it,
Psalm. 30. -7. for, the Apostle uses this as an argument to keep them from
grieving the Spirit by sin, even because they were thereby sealed unto the day
of redemption.

Verse. 31. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and
evil-speaking be put away from you, with all malice.
HEre is a fifth precept, containing an amplification and illustration of the
second, given, ver. 25. concerning the restraining of anger: and he does
illustrate it by forbidding the several branches, degrees and effects of that
evil, as, first, all bitterness, whereby must be understood here the lowest
degree of sinful anger, even all secret, smothered displeasure and alienation
of affection, which has more of discontent and grudge, than of revenge in it,
Psalm. 37. 1. Secondly, wrath, or fierceness, which is an impetuous rage, and
passionate commotion of the heart and affections, upon the sense of an
apprehended, or real injury, preventing and obstructing the use of reason,
which being soon up, is as soon allayed, 1 Samuel 25. 21, 22. with 32. Thirdly,
anger, which, as it is distinguished from the rest, is an eager desire of
revenge, and a fixed resolution, after deliberation, to have that desire
satisfied, Act. 23. 12. Fourthly, clamor, whereby is meaned boisterous words,
loud menaces, and other inordinate speeches, which are the black smoke, whereby
the fire of anger and wrath kindled within, does first manifest it self, Act.
15. 39. Fifthly, evil speaking, or blasphemy, as the word signifies, a
further fruit of wrath and anger, to wit, disgraceful and contumelious
speeches, by which the party incensed does endeavor to stain the reputation of
him, who either really, or to his apprehension only, has done him wrong, 1 Samuel 20. 30. And, sixthly, malice, which is rooted anger, and continuing wrath,
making the person in whom it is, daily intent upon all occasions of revenge,
and wholly implacable, until he get his vindictive humor satisfied, Rom:
(...). -31-. Doct. 1. Bitterness, wrath, anger, clamor, evil-speaking and
malice do grieve the holy Spirit of God, and darken much the work of grace in
the heart, whereby he seals Believers; there being no sins more opposite to
the fruits of the Spirit (mentioned Gal. 5. 22.) than those are; so, that where
such sins are given way to, grace must be upon the decaying hand: for, the
Apostle, unto that command, grieve not the Spirit, immediately subjoyneth this,
let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger -- be put away, implying, that
otherwise they would grieve the Spirit. 2. So subtle is sin, and so impotent
and unskilful are we to resist it, where it once gets entry, that one
degree of sin does still make way for a further, and so goes on from evil to
worse: and therefore the wisest course is to oppose it betimes, lest by
forbearance, it gather strength: for, the Apostle does here set down several
degrees of sinful anger, the former whereof, does still make way for the
latter, and the latter is always worse, and a step nearer to the height than
the former; Let all bitterness, wrath and anger, etc. 3. It is not enough for
Christians to refrain from the venting of their passions in their inordinate
expressions and actions; but they must also, and in order to their refraining
from those, set about the rectifying of their inward affections and most secret
distempers of their spirit: otherwise, if the flame of anger and wrath does
burn within, it will most readily send up a black smoke of clamor and evil
speaking, to the offense of others: for, Paul forbids not only clamor and
evil-speaking, but also all bitterness, wrath and anger. 4. Sins of the tongue
and outward man, are to be put away and mortified, as well as sins of the
heart; they being in some respect more dangerous, Matthew. 18. 7. because more
scandalous, and always implying a defiled heart, from which they flow, Matthew.
15. 19. and which they render worse than formerly it was; Let all clamor, and
evil-speaking be put away, says he. 5. It is not sufficient to suppress, keep
at under and weaken our corruptions: we ought to aim at, and rest satisfied
with nothing less than the total subduing, through removal, and plucking of
them up by the very roots: for, he says, Let all bitterness, etc. he put
away: the word signifies, Let it be lifted up, and so destroyed.

Verse. 32. And be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one
another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you.
HEre is the sixth precept enjoining the exercise of some virtues, which are
opposite unto, and remedies against, those vices presently mentioned. The first
whereof, is, mutual kindness, a virtue, whereby from a sweet and loving
disposition of heart toward all, (Romans 12. 10.) we labor to be affable, easy
to be entreated, for the good of others, Iam. 3. -17- and of a sweet and
amiable carriage toward those with whom we converse, Romans 12. 18. and it is
opposite, both to pride of spirit, evidenced in a lofty carriage, Psalm. 10. 2.
5. and to morosity, or uncivil austerity, 2 Samuel 25. 17. The second is
tender-heartednesse, commiseration, or mercy, whereby we are most inwardly and
in the very bowels (as the word signifies) touched and affected with
compassion toward the miseries and infirmities of others, so far would he have
them from thirsting after revenge. And, thirdly, he recommendeth unto them to
give evidence of their kindness and tender-heartednesse, in an hearty, free
and pleasant pardoning of mutual wrongs, as the word signifies. And, lastly,
he inforceth this duty of mutual forgiveness, from Gods example, in
forgiving us all our offenses for Christ's sake. Concerning which duty of
forgiving and pardoning one another here enjoined, know, first, that, as to the
wrong to be forgiven, in so far, as it is always an offense against God, and
sometimes against the public laws of the land, we have not power to forgive
it, Isa. 43. 25. nor to meddle with it further than by prayer to God, Iam. 5.
14, 15. and in some cases, by intercession with the Magistrate; but in so far
only, as it is a wrong done to us we are to forgive it. Know, secondly, that
this forgiveness implies a removal of all inward grudge and endeavor after
private revenge, Lev. 19. 18. together with a readiness to do all duties of
love and kindness to him who has done the wrong, as God does minister
occasion and ability, Exodus 23. 4, 5. Which yet, thirdly, does not bind us up
from having recourse to the Magistrate for attaining restoration to our right,
and reparation of our wrongs, providing we go not to law for trifles, 1 Cor. 6.
7. nor yet before all amicable means be privately essayed, for taking away the
occasion of strife, 1 Cor. 6. 5. See further upon Col. 3. ver. 13. doct. 3.
Hence, Learn, 1. The exercise of kindness in a sweet and amicable carriage, is
a singular remedy against sinful anger and all its branches, in so far, as
thereby we not only give no occasion of anger unto others, but also do give
place unto wrath, Romans 12. 19. whereby it slays it self, and we do overcome
evil with good: for, as a remedy against all the branches of sinful anger,
formerly mentioned, he enjoyneth And be ye kind one to another. 2. The exercise
of mercy and tender-heartednesse, is another sovereign remedy against sinful
anger and all its branches, in so far, as thereby we are enabled to look upon
the fooleries, infirmities, yea, and other greater injuries done by our
neighbor with pity and compassion, which otherwise would provoke our anger and
passion: for, he enjoyneth this as another remedy against all the branches of
sinful anger, Be ye tenderhearted. 3. Then, and not while then, may a man
conclude, that wrath and anger are sufficiently mortified, when he is not only
in a readiness to discharge all duties of kindness and love to the party who
has injured him, but does also look upon him for so doing, as one, who is an
object of compassion and pity, rather than of passion and anger: for, in stead
of bitterness, wrath, anger and malice against those who had injured them, he
injoyneth, And be ye kind one to another, and tenderhearted. 4. The exercise
of kindness and tenderheartednesse, ought, and will go together, where there
is a suitable object for both to work upon, so that kindness will not be
broken off, because of the miseries and infirmities of those to whom we owe
kindness, but rather heightened and helped by an addition of
tender-heartednesse and bowels of compassion: for, he commands not only be ye
kind one to another, which respects our neighbor under either state, whether
of prosperity, or adversity, but also be tenderhearted, which respects him
under misery. 5. Those graces of kindness and mercy, are to be exercised
especially in the case of wrongs and injuries; yea, the reality of those graces
are best tried, not by our exercising them to such as do us no hurt, but in
bearing with, and pardoning of those who have given just cause of provocation
by real injuries: for, the Apostle will have kindness and tender-heartednesse
exercised in forgiving one another, which supponeth a wrong done. 6. Even
those, who have gotten a heart from God to forgive wrongs done to themselves by
others, are not so free of infirmities, but they will be sometimes doing real
injuries unto others, and therefore stand in need of forgiveness themselves:
for, so much is employed, while he calls for mutual performance of this duty,
even forgiving one another. 7. Only those whom God has forgiven for Christ's
sake, can freely, pleasantly, and from the fountain of true love in the heart,
forgive those wrongs which are done to them by others: and the more a man has
attained to know, that God has pardoned himself, he will be the more
inclinable to show forgiveness unto others: for, he makes their forgiving of
others, a consequence of Gods forgiving them. And therefore, when the Scripture
commands us to forgive, that we may be forgiven, Mark 11. 25. it does not
mean, that our forgiving others does go before Gods pardoning of us, but is an
immediate effect of it, or at the most an antecedent to our sensible perceiving
of it; Forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you.
8. That Gods practice in forgiving us, is an effectual argument for exciting
us to forgive and pardon one another, see upon Col. 3. 13. doct. 7. 9. The
example of God in forgiving us, is not only an argument exciting us to forgive
one another, but also a pattern, which we are to resemble in the manner of our
forgiveness; not, that our forgiveness can match His in equality or
perfection, but in similitude and likeness: which consists chiefly in this,
that we forgive sincerely, not hypocritically, freely and not unwillingly,
fully and not by halfes, irrevocably and not for a time only, as He does,
Matthew. 18. 35. Mica. 7. 18. Col. 2. 13. Jer. 31. 34: for, he says, Forgiving
one another, even as God has forgiven you. 10. Though God has freely forgiven
us; yet He has seen to the satisfaction of His provoked justice for the wrong
done, antecedently to His forgiving of us: which satisfaction, is not exacted
of us, but of Christ who was made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. And therefore,
though we are to imitate God in remitting the private injury done to our
selves, and that in the manner mentioned in the preceding doctrine; yet we
have not power to dispense with the injury done to the Justice of God, nor to
the public Laws of the Land; yea, in some cases, the Law of God allows that
we pursue the party before the Judge, and notwithstanding of our forgiving him,
to seek that the Law may strike against him, Deuteronomy. 21. 18, etc. Even as God for
Christ's sake has forgiven you.

CHAP. V.
THe Apostle, in the first part of this Chapter (having, first, confirmed the
precept given in the last words of chap. 4. by pressing upon them to imitate
God in forgiving one another, from the fountain of love, ver. 1, 2.) does yet
exhort them unto such duties as belong unto all Christians in general. And,
first, he forbids six vices, all of them almost contrary unto chastity:
because, first, they are uncomely for Saints, ver. 3. Secondly, inconvenient,
ver. 4. Thirdly, they exclude from Gods Kingdom, ver. 5. And fourthly, they
bring down Gods wrath, ver. 6. Secondly, he dehorteth from partaking with
wicked men in their sins, ver. 7. because of that blessed change wrought in
them from darkness to light, ver. 8. The force of which consequence, is proved
from the fruits of light, ver. 9. and (having pointed at the rule of right
walking, ver. 10. and explained the precept, set down, ver. 7. by discharging
all accession to the sins of the wicked, and enjoining them to reprove them,
ver. 11.) he enforces yet further the duty so explained, first, from the
abominable filthiness of those sins, ver. 12. Secondly, from the good
following upon reproof, even the conviction of the sinner, ver. 13. And,
thirdly, from Gods own example, who reproves the world of sin, and thereby
conveyeth light unto them, ver. 14. Thirdly, he exhorts to circumspect
walking, ver. 15. which consists mainly in redeeming the time, ver. 16. and,
in order hereto, that they would acquaint themselves with Gods revealed will,
ver. 17. Fourthly, he exhorts them to eschew drunkenness. And, fifthly, to
be filled with the Spirit, ver. 18. and to vent that fullness of the Spirit,
first, in melodious singing of praises unto God, ver. 19. Secondly, in giving
of thanks for all things, ver. 20.

In the second part of the Chapter, The Apostle (having premitted a general
exhortation unto all, to submit themselves one to another, ver. 21.) does
press those duties, which belong to Christians, as they are members of
Families. And, first, the duties of wives under the name of submission, set
forth by the manner of it, as unto the Lord, ver. 22. Secondly, by the ground
or reason of it, the husbands headship, illustrated from Christ's, ver. 23.
Thirdly, by the pattern of it, the Churches subjection to Christ. And,
fourthly, by the extent of it, to all things, ver. 24. Next, he presses the
duty of husbands under the name of love, 1. from Christ's love to His Church,
giving Himself for her, ver. 25. and that for two ends, to wit, the
sanctification, ver. 26. and glorification thereof, ver. 27. Secondly, from the
near union betwixt husband and wife, they being one flesh, and therefore he
ought to love her, ver. 28. Because, 1. all men care for their own flesh. 2.
Christ cares for His Church, ver. 29. because of the strict union betwixt Him
and the Church, ver. 30. And thirdly, the ancient law of Marriage does expressly
enjoin so much, ver. 31. And because he has spoken of the union betwixt Christ
and the Church, he declares it to be a great and unsearchable mystery, ver.
32. and so concludes the purpose, by summing the duties of husbands and wives
in two words, love and reverence.

Verse. 1. BE ye therefore followers of God as dear children,
THe Apostle (being to insist further in exhorting to such particular virtues
as do belong to all Christians in general of whatsoever rank or station) does,
first, illustrate the sixth and last precept, given, chap. 4. whereby he
enjoined the exercise of mutual kindness and mercy in forgiving one another,
because of Gods example in forgiving them for Christ's sake. Which precept he
does illustrate, first, by reinforcing the duty, together with the motive to
it, from Gods example, while, 1. he commands them to be followers of God, to
wit, in the exercise of kindness, mercy and forgiveness: for, according to
the present scope, the imitation of God here enjoined, seems to be astricted
unto those particulars, as Matthew. 5. 44, 45. and Luke 6. 35, etc. though
otherwise it may be extended, and elsewhere is extended, unto all those divine
virtues, whereof some representation and shadow, at least, ought to be in us, 1
Pet. 1. 16. And, secondly, he gives a reason why they should imitate God thus,
even because they were His children by Adoption, and not only children, but
dear children, and dearly beloved by God their Father. All of them did, at
least, profess themselves to be such, Mal. 1. 6- and the better part of them
really were such, Joh. 1. 12. and therefore they were to imitate Him in the
exercise of those virtues, as they would evidence themselves to be of His
children. Doct. 1. One and the self same action of God, and chiefly His works
of mercy toward Believers, are more than one way advantageous unto them, in so
far, as thereby not only they are freed from sin and misery, but also have an
argument and motive, furnished both unto them on whom He shows mercy, whereby
they may be incited to their duty of showing mercy unto others, and to others
also to show mercy unto them: for, he shows, that God in forgiving them, had
cast a copy to be followed by them in their forgiving one another, while he
says, Be ye therefore followers of God. 2. Though we neither ought, nor can
imitate God in His works of creation and providence, Isa. 14. 13. 14. neither
may we presume to imitate Him in any thing further than His revealed will
prescribes as our duty, Isa. 8. 20. yet, what ever attributes or actions of
His have in them any proportion, or resemblance with any virtue or duty
prescribed unto us, we ought to look upon such, as our copy and pattern to be
followed by us: for, he says, Be ye followers of God, with relation to His
forgiving them for Christ's sake. 3. It is not sufficient to do the same things
to others, which God has done to us, except we endeavor to imitate and follow
Him in the way and manner wherein He does them; So as that we do them not from
any base or inferior motive, or for any wrong end; but from a desire to be
conform unto Him, and unto what is required of us in the Word by Him: for, this
following, and imitating of God here enjoined, implies a purpose and endeavor
to conform our selves to Him; Be ye therefore followers of God. 4. Gods example
in such things as are imitable by us, is the only un-erring pattern, to be
absolutely followed, and without any reserve or limitation: and the practice of
any other, is to be followed but so far as their example is conincident with
Gods Word and practice. See 1 Cor. 11. 1. where Paul commands them to follow
him with an express limitation, to wit, as he was a follower of Christ, but
here his command is absolute and unlimitted; Be ye followers of God. 5. The
Lord does enter into most intimate friendship with, and takes on most near
relations unto those, whose sins He pardons, So that He does not only free
them from deserved wrath, but places them among the children, and makes them
adopted sons and daughters unto Himself: for, here he calls them God's dear
children, of whom He said, chap. 4. 32. that God had forgiven them for Christ's
sake. 6. All those who are dear children to God by adoption, should look upon
their highest privileges, as strongest engagements to duty, and particularly
set themselves to imitate Him in the exercise of mercy, kindness,
forgiveness, and of such other duties as He has made lovely and amiable by
His own example: for, Paul makes their privileges an engagement to duty, and
to imitate God in particular; Be ye followers of God as dear children. 7. It is
not sufficient that we set our selves to imitate God, except we do it as dear
children, that is, first, humbly, Matthew. 18. 2. 3. and next, with a kind of
natural affection and propension (for, so do children affect to imitate, and
by imitation to please their parents) and not as servants and slaves by
compulsion: Hence he says, as dear children, pointing not only at the reason
why, but the manner how, they should follow Him.

Verse. 2. And walk in love, as Christ also has loved us, and has given
Himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor.
HE does, next, illustrate yet further that precept given, chap. 4. ver. 32.
and jointly shows wherein they were to imitate God, to wit, not only in
forgiving, but also in loving one another, and so, as they should walk in love;
whereby is meaned, that all their actions toward their neighbor, ought not
only to be good in themselves, but also flow from a principle of love to his
good and edification: which duty, or constant task of walking in love, is
enforced by a new argument taken from Christ's example, who loved us, and did
evidence His love by giving Himself freely, and of His own accord (Job. 10.
18-) even unto death for us, or for our sins, Gal. 1. 4. which action of Christ
is illustrated, first, from the end for which He did give Himself, even to be a
propitiatory sacrifice unto God, for expiating all the sins of the Elect, as
was fore-signified and typified by all those expiatory levitical sacrifices
under the Old Testament; whether those, which were generally called by the name
of offering, under which were comprehended all sacrifices, both of living
beasts, and of things destitute of life, as flower, oil, frankincense, and
suchlike; or those, which were more strictly called by the name of sacrifice,
and were of living beasts, and therefore conjoined with shedding of blood, as
the word in the original implies, which comes from a root, signifying to kill
and slay: hence it is that our crucified Lord does here get the name both of an
offering and sacrifice. This action of Christ is illustrated, next, from its
fruit and efficacy, to wit, the rendering of God well-pleased with Christ His
offering up Himself, and with the persons and performances of true Believers
for His sake, as sweet smelling odours, by reason of their likeness unto, and
agreement with our spirits, are well-pleasing and satisfying unto such as find
them. Doct. 1. Whatever duties of mercy and kindness we do discharge unto our
neighbor, we do not sufficiently imitate God therein, neither perform service
acceptable to Him, if they flow not from a principle of love to our neighbors
good and edification, and be not directed thereunto, as the great end of our
work next to the glory of God: and therefore a man may do many external duties
of love, and yet not be accepted of God, when his great aim is to be seen of
men, Matthew. 6. 2. or to merit heaven by his good works, Romans 9. 31, 32. without
any inward compassion or affection to his neighbor, or a sincere aim toward
his good: for, the Apostle shows we do only then rightly imitate God in the
duties of kindness and love, when all we do, flows from the inward affection
of love, and is from love to our neighbor, directed to his good, while he
says, walk in love. 2. Our walking in love to our neighbor, as it is formerly
explained, and when it flows from the fountain of love to God, is an evidence
of adoption, and of one who is a dear child to God: for, having spoken of
their near relation to God, as being His dear children, he presently enjoyneth
them to make so much evident by their walking in love. 3. That God the Father
does pardon the sins of the Elect, having given His Son unto death to purchase
pardon for them, does speak His love unto those whom He does pardon; and that
Jesus Christ did willingly give Himself to death for them does no less speak
His unspeakable love unto them also, So that they are equally loved both by the
Father and the Son: for, he says, as Christ also has loved us: the particle
also relates to the love of the Father in pardoning for Christ's sake, whereof
he presently spoke. 4. So necessary is love among Christians, together with
those many duties which flow from it; So many are the snares and difficulties,
which Satan, our own corrupt natures, and our mutual infirmities do create in
our way to keep us from it; that God sees it necessary to propose the love
both of the Father and the Son, as two most powerful adamants to draw our
backward hearts up toward it: for, says he, Walk in love, as Christ also has
loved us. 5. As Christ's love to lost sinners, being firmly believed, is a
strong argument constraining those whom He has so loved, to walk in love
toward others; that being one of the great things required by Him from those
whom He loves, Joh. 15. 12. So, this love of Christ to us, ought to be a
pattern and copy, to which we are to be conformed in our love toward others:
and therefore our love ought to be free; for, so was His, Job. 15. 16- It ought
to be fruitful; for, so was His, Gal. 1. 4. it ought to be constant; for so
was His, Job. 13. 1. it ought to be discreet, not encouraging or humouring the
person beloved in sin; for so was His, Matthew. 16. 23. And walk in love, as
Christ has loved us, says he. 6. Then do we consider the love of Christ
aright, and so as to be effectually incited to our duty from the consideration
of it, when we look upon it in those effects which flowed from it, and
especially in His death and sufferings, and do labor to appropriate by faith
the good and benefit of those unto our selves: for, Paul, holding forth the
love of Christ, as an argument inciting to love one another, does so look upon
it, while he says, and has given Himself for us. 7. The guilt of sin is so
great, as being a breach of Gods most holy Law, and consequently a wrong done
against an infinite God, Psalm. 51. 4. So exact is divine justice in requiring
equivalent satisfaction for the wrong done, Exodus 34. -7. that, as there is no
reconciling of God with man without satisfaction; So no satisfaction, which man
himself, or any mere creature could give, was sufficient to do the turn: for
otherwise there had been no necessity that Christ should have given Himself for
us. 8. What no mere creature could do, Christ Himself, having taken-on the
nature of man, has done, even given full satisfaction to provoked justice, by
giving Himself to suffer both in soul (Isa. 53. 10.) and body (Isa. 50. 6.) in
the Elects stead; so that He is taken, and they go free, Joh. 18. -8. for, He
gave Himself for us. 9. The pain and torment both in soul and body, which
Christ did give Himself to endure and suffer, was inexpressible, and such, as
was fore-signified by what was done with the ancient offerings and sacrifices,
according to Gods command: some whereof were killed, flayed, and burnt; some
roasted, some fried on coals, and some seethed in pots: All which are but
shadows of what Christ our Lord endured; for, He gave Himself an offering and
sacrifice. 10. As those leviticall offerings and sacrifices under the Law, were
not sufficient to satisfy divine justice for the sins of the Elect; So Jesus
Christ, being offered up to God in death, is that only true and real
sacrifice, wherein provoked justice does rest satisfied, and whereof all those
other sacrifices were but types and shadows: for if they had satisfied justice,
there had been no necessity of this other sacrifice, which came in their stead,
and so was represented by them; He gave himself an offering and sacrifice. 11.
Jesus Christ Himself in this offering, was both the Priest, who, as He was God,
did offer up Himself, Heb. 9. 14. and the Sacrifice which was offered, to wit,
as He was man, Heb. 10. 10. Yea, and we may add, He was the Altar also
whereupon this sacrifice was offered up; the virtue of His Godhead being that
which not only underpropped His humane nature in suffering, Isa. 50. 7, 8. but
also did add an infinite value to His sufferings, as being the sufferings of
Him who was God, Acts 20. -28. even as the altar does sanctify the gift,
Matthew, 23. 19. for, He gave himself an offering and sacrifice. 12. The ransom
given by Christ for sinners, was paid unto God whom they had wronged, and not
unto Satan whose slaves we are by nature: although by virtue of that ransom we
are freed from Satan's slavery and sins dominion, Heb. 2. 14. for, God the just
Judge being satisfied, Satan the jaylour and unjust tyrant, did lose his right
to keep us longer in bonds; He gave himself an offering and sacrifice (not to
Satan, but) to God, says he. 13. As sin does make us loathsome and unfavourie
to God, and stireth up His wrath against us; So the sweet savor of this one
sacrifice, offered up by Christ, being laid holdupon by faith, appeaseth His
wrath, and makes us savourie and well-pleasing in His sight: for, so much is
employed, while he says He gave himself a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling
savor: a metaphor taken from men, who when their senses are offended with some
stinking favor, cannot be at quiet until some sweet perfume be burnt, which
prevails above the other: In like manner the noisome smell of our sin, did so
move the Lord to wrath, that He would not be at rest, until the sweet smell of
His Sons obedience did come to His nostrils, Job 33. 24. 14. It is the only
sacrifice of Christ, which by its own virtue does appease the wrath of God, and
make both the persons of the Elect, and their spiritual performances
acceptable to God: for, it is a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor.
And though this much be also spoken of other sacrifices, Genesis 8. 21. Exodus 29.
41. yet it is to be understood of them, not as they were considered in
themselves, Heb. 10. 1. but as they related to this sacrifice of Christ,
whereof they were types, and upon which the godly even then did rely by faith,
Heb. 11. 4. Doct. 15. Whence it follows and from the text also, that not only
an end is put to all those leviticall sacrifices; (seeing Christ this true and
real sacrifice, whereof they were types, is offered up already in death) but
also that there is no sacrifice, properly so called, to be offered up in the
Christian Church, neither of any other thing besides Christ, neither is that
sacrifice of Christ Himself again to be repeated, and consequently that there
is no Priest, properly so called, but Christ alone: for, the Apostle shows,
this one sacrifice did abundantly pacify provoked justice, and therefore there
is no need of any other: besides that the virtue of it is perpetual, Heb. 10.
14, 18. and so it needs not to be reiterated; A sacrifice to God for a sweet
smelling savor.

Verse. 3. But fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be
once named amongst you, as becomes Saints.
THe Apostle comes now to give some new precepts. And, first, in this and the
following verse, he forbids six vices, all of them, for the most part,
contrary to chastity prescribed in the seventh command. Three of which vices
are in the outward actions, and forbidden in this verse. 1. Fornication, or the
sin of filthiness, between parties, both free from the yoke of marriage, 1
Cor. 7. 2. a sin looked upon as a thing indifferent, and no sin among the
Gentiles, 1 Cor. 6. 12. 2. Uncleanness, under which are usually comprehended
all other sorts of filthy lusts between any parties whatsomever. 3.
Covetousness, that is, an immoderate desire (Heb. 13. 5.) to acquire (Micab 2.
2.) or to preserve worldly goods, Prove. 11. 24, 26. All which he does so
discharge, as that they should not name them, to wit, with delight, and without
detestation; otherwise it is lawful to name them while we reprove them, as the
Apostle here does: and he urges this prohibition from the state wherein they
were, as being Saints, separated from the world, and dedicated to God; and
therefore it were most unseemly for them to defile themselves with such filthy
lusts. Doct. 1. True Christian-love unto our neighbor, whereby we endeavor
his preservation and good in his honor, person, chastity, outward estate and
good name, (Romans 13. 9.) does hugely differ from fleshly love flowing from
lust, and from the love of the world, whereby we seek to satisfy our own
sinful lusts, with our neighbors hurt: for, the former was enjoined, ver. 2.
but the latter is here forbidden; But fornication, and all uncleanness, or
covetousness, etc. 2. The general prevalency of any sin, ought neither to
make people give more way to it, nor Ministers speak less against it; but
rather, because, the more common any sin is, God gets the more dishonor by
it; therefore the zeal of public Ministers and private Christians ought to be
so much the more intended against it: for, because fornication was so common
among the Gentiles, that it was hereby looked upon as no sin, therefore does
Paul, almost in all his Epistles to the Churches of the Gentiles, fall upon it,
as he does also here; But fornication, and all uncleanness, etc. 3. So violent
is the lust of filthiness, that, if it be not all the more carefully guarded
against, there is no state of life, wherein it will not break forth, even
although the ordinary mean of marriage appointed by God to prevent it (1 Cor.
7. 2.) be used: for, he will have them to guard not only against fornication,
which is the sin of filthiness between parties unmarried, but also against all
uncleanness, that is, all other sorts of filthy lusts, whereof filthiness
between married parties is one. 4. There is a great affinity and sibnesse
between the lusts of filthiness and covetousness; in so far, as the former,
given way to, does necessitate the lascivious wretch to thirst after, and by
indirect means to purchase worldly goods, that so he may have wherewith to
uphold, (as his other lusts, Iam. 4. 3. so) in a special manner this lust of
uncleanness: for, therefore does he forbid those two lusts jointly; But
fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness. 5. It is not sufficient
for Saints to abstain from the outward practice of gross evils, except their
outward abstinence do flow from inward detestation of them; otherwise, outward
abstinence may well make a good Civilian, but not a sincere Christian: for,
Paul will have them abstaining from the formentioned evils, so as not to name
them with delight, and without detestation; Let it not be once named among you.
6. Not only the outward act of filthiness, but also lascivious filthy
discourse, is to be refrained from, as that, which is an evidence of inward
love to that sin, Matthew. 12. 34. and makes way for the outward committing of
it, not only by our selves, while the inward flame of lust is blown up by the
bellows of filthy speeches, Iam. 3. 6. but also by others, who are easily
infected by the pestilentious breath of evil communications, 1 Cor. 15. 33.
for, he will not have those evils so much as spoken of among them with delight
and without detestation; Let it not be once named among you. 7. The only life
beseeming Saints, is to keep themselves pure in heart, in tongue, in hand, from
the pollutions of fleshly lusts, and the immoderate love of worldly goods: and
in so far, as those are given way to by professed Saints, they walk unworthy of
their high and heavenly calling; do stain their profession; and declare
themselves unworthy of the name of Saints: for, he shows that not practicing
those evils, and inward detestation of them, made evident by their not speaking
of them, was such a carriage as becomes Saints.

Verse. 4. Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not
convenient: but rather giving of thanks.
IN this verse he forbids other three vices, which belong mainly to the
tongue. 1. Filthiness, whereby is meaned, in general, whatsoever is contrary
to decency and Christian gravity or modesty, whether in deeds, words, or
outward gesture and adorning of the body: for, so the word is used, 1 Cor. 11.
6. But here, because this sin and the rest are opposed to giving of thanks, it
seems to be restricted to filthy speaking, or speaking of those things which
belong to the lust of uncleanness. 2. Foolish talking, which, as being
contradistinct to the vice which goes before, and to that which follows
after, does comprehend all impertinent, superfluous, rash and roving discourse,
which does rather bewray the speakers folly and indiscretion, than any way
edify the hearers, though it be neither filthy speaking, nor satyrick jesting.
3. Jesting: the word in the original, is sometimes taken in a good sense, and
so it signifies a dexterity in allaying (when it is necessary so to do) the
too much severity of countenance and discourse with a quick and honest sport,
for begetting honest recreation and moderate laughter; that thereby the mind
may be the more fitted to go about serious things in a serious manner, Eccles.
3. 4. Such honest and sometimes piercing Ironies we find used by holy men in
Scripture, 1 King. 18. 27. Phil. 3. -2. But here it is taken in an evil sense
for scurrility, when men do make it their exercise to show the sharpness of
their wit in jesting, and to beget not moderate recreation of spirit in order
to their fitting for a more serious purpose, but immoderate laughter, and
carnal mirth in the hearers: and especially, when, in order to this end, they
spare not offensive jests by tart reflections upon the way, gesture, yea, and
personal imperfections of others; nor yet profane and impious jests, by
wresting Scripture to express the conceptions of their light and wanton wits:
now, the Apostle forbids all those three, because they are not convenient,
or beseeming to Saints, so that this reason is coincident with the former, ver.
3. And in opposition to all those, he recommendeth unto them for their mutual
cheering, and edifying one another by discourse when they should meet, rather
to recount what favors they had received from God, and to bless Him for them.
Doct. 1. As there are many ways by which a man may transgress with his
tongue; so we ought to guard against all transgressions of that kind: not only
those, which natural reason would blush to patronize, but others also, which
are pleaded-for by many, and defended as laudable strains of a quick wit: for,
he forbids not only filthiness, but also foolish talking and jesting. 2.
Satan and corrupt nature do take advantage of men's natural temper and
inclination, even of that, which in it self is not sinful, thereby to stir
them to sinful courses to get their inclination satisfied: for, from this
sociable temper and inclination in men to entertain one another by discourse,
he takes advantage to put them upon those sins of filthy speaking, foolish
talking and jesting. 3. It is a task of no small difficulty to keep within the
bounds of lawful and allowed mirth and recreation, especially in recreating
our spirits by pleasant and delightful discourse, so that we exceed not either
in matter or manner; considering that what is inoffensive at one time and
place, and to some persons, may be irritating and offensive at, and to others:
for, therefore it seems the Apostle designeth this vice in speech by that
name, which (as I show) agrees also to that which is lawful and allowed,
implying, that in this particular there is an easy passage from what is
allowed to that which is forbidden; And jesting, says he. 4. It is not
sufficient for Ministers to forbid and reprove sins under such and such general
heads; but, seeing people either through ignorance cannot, or wickedness will
not see, or laziness care not to see the evil of several particular sins
contained under those general heads; therefore they are bound in their
reproofs and prohibitions to fall upon the particular branches and instances of
that evil, which they speak against: for, the Apostle, chap. 4. ver. 29.
having spoken against corrupt communication in the general, does here enumerate
three distinct branches of that evil; filthy speaking, foolish talking, and
jesting. 5. Called Saints and Christians should be so tender in walking, as
that they scare not only at those evils which are palpably gross and cryed-out
against by all; but also at every other thing which is unbeseeming their
profession, or inconvenient and disadvantagious to the Gospel or their own
peace: for, the Apostle disswadeth from those sins upon this ground, that they
are not convenient. 6. A choice remedy against filthy speaking, foolish
talking, jesting, and other sins in our ordinary communication, is, to have our
hearts always kept so sensible of Gods goodness, and so desirous to
express what sense we have thereof unto others, that, whenever occasion
offers, we may gladly lay hold on that subject rather than on any other, and
thereby provoke others to do the like: for, so we should not be necessitated
(as oft-times in a kind we are) to fall upon sinful, vain and idle
communication through penury and want of better purpose: hence the Apostle, as
a remedy against the forementioned evils, prescribes giving of thanks. 7.
There is not any case incident to a Christian, but if he search thoroughly,
there will be found some ground for thanksgiving and rejoicing, though not in
himself, yet in Gods dealing with him, whether for mercies bestowed, or
judgments not inflicted, Philip. 2. 27. for, while Paul commands them to
exercise themselves, and cheer up one another with giving of thanks in stead of
foolish talking and jesting, he supponeth there will be always reason of
thanksgiving; But rather giving of thanks. 8. Though Saints may, and are bound
sometimes, and in some cases to confess their faults one to another, Iam. 5.
16. and consequently may regrate their spiritual losses and decay; yea, and may
also speak of what concerns their worldly affairs, Genesis 31. 38. Yet, it is
not only most seemly, but also a thriving way for the inward man, not to dwell
always upon heartlesse regrates for what they want; but to add, at least, a
mixture of cheerful acknowledgement of what they already have, giving hearty
thanks to God for it: for, as the Apostle does not astrict them only to giving
of thanks in their conference and discourse; So he does recommend it, as the
choicest subject to be most frequently insisted on: But rather giving of thanks.

Verse. 5. For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor
covetous man who is an idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ,
and of God.
HE does further enforce the dehortation by a new argument, wherein is more of
terror than in the former: and that it may be more terrible and pungent, he
appealeth to their own conscience and knowledge for the truth of what he is to
affirm, to wit, that all impenitent persisters (for of such only this and the
like threatenings are to be understood, Jer. 18. 7. 8.) in any of those three
vices, mentioned, ver. 3. (which holds also by proportion in the other three,
mentioned, ver. 4. as being so near of kin to the former) were deprived of all
present right unto, and should never come to the possession of that blessed
state of eternal glory in heaven: which glorious state is here called a Kingdom
and inheritance, (See reasons hereof upon Gal. 5. 21. doct. 9.) and the Kingdom
of Christ, because it is His, as He is Mediator, by donation from the Father,
Psalm. 2. 8. in so far as the Father has entrusted Him with the administration
of the Kingdom of grace here, Matthew. 28. ver. 18. by which means, an entrance
is made for the Elect into the Kingdom of glory, Joh. 14. 2, 3. It is called
also the Kingdom of God (or the whole persons of the blessed Trinity, distinct
from Christ as Mediator) because it is Gods by original right, and as absolute
King of this Kingdom, who is accountable to none, 1 Cor. 15. 28. This argument
is further strengthened by joining another upon the by with it; while he
deterreth them from one of the forementioned evils, to wit, covetousness, by
calling the covetous man an Idolater; because he sets his prime affections
of love and confidence upon riches, 1 Timothy 6. 16. Prove. 18. 11. holds them
for an universal good, sufficient for all things, Luke 12. 19. as God only is,
2 Cor. 9. 8. and because he bears such respect unto them, that he dare not
freely make use of them, Eccles. 6. 2. and serves them with his heart as some
godhead, Matthew. 6. -24. Hence, Learn, 1. So strong is the interest of sin,
even in the best; and so violent are those tentations especially, which drive
men toward the fulfilling of their fleshly lusts, That although a man be
convinced of the great evil which is in them, and the loss of heaven which
does follow upon his living in them; yet there is no small hazard, when such
tentations are presented, of yielding to them: for he takes it for granted
they knew the hazard of living in those sins, and yet does see it necessary to
set them on their guard against them; for, this ye know, that no whoremonger,
etc. 2. The Lords servants are not to flatter people in any beloved sin, upon
pretense of rendering them thereby more tractable and obedient in other things;
but must discover the evil of all sin, excepting none, though it were never so
generally practiced, yea, and pleaded-for by those to whom they preach: for,
this sin of uncleanness, chiefly of fornication, was commonly practiced and
pleaded-for as no sin among the Gentiles; yet Paul, at his first preaching the
Gospel to those Ephesians, had spoken against it, and convinced them of the ill
which is in it: Hence, he says so confidently; for this ye know, that no
whoremonger -- has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ. 3. As this does
highly aggreage a sin, that it is committed against our knowledge; So the more
and weightier aggravations that any sin is liable unto, when it is committed,
we ought to be the more deterred from the committing of it; for, he minds
them of their knowing the danger that would follow upon those sins, hereby
implying, their guilt would be the more weighty, if they should commit them,
that so they might be deterred from them; For this ye know, that no
whoremonger, etc. 4. Prohibitions and threatenings denounced in Scripture
against any gross external sin, are to be extended unto all the causes,
means, occasions and appearances of that sin, and provocations to it: for, this
threatening against whoredom and uncleanness, is to be applied unto filthy
speaking, foolish talking and jesting (as being either causes, occasions,
appearances of, or provocations unto those) otherwise the threatening would not
be of force to press the former dehortation in its full latitude: No
whoremonger, nor unclean person -- has any inheritance. 5. The doolfull sad
event, and dreadful consequence of sin, would be seriously represented by
Christ's servants unto the Lords people, and by people to their own conscience;
there being nothing of greater force to cool the vehement heat of sinful
lusts, than the frequent and serious consideration of their dreadful issue:
for, Paul, to scare them from fornication and uncleanness, presents unto
them the event of all such work, even loss of heaven and happiness; No
whoremonger-hath any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ. 6. The reign of sin
in the heart, cannot consist with true grace and a right to heaven; and
therefore the truly regenerate, in whom the seed of God abides, are never so
far left of God, as that sin should reign in them, and they give willing
obedience to it with the full swey and consent of the heart: There must be
always a party acting for God in some degree less or more within them, at
least not consenting to act against Him, even when they are at the worst, and
possibly overcome with some gross tentation: in which respect, they cannot be
the whoremonger, unclean or covetous person here spoken of, to wit, one in whom
such sins reign: for, says he, none such have any inheritance in the Kingdom
of Christ. He speaks of somewhat which they presently want, and others have,
which must be a right to the Kingdom of glory, or a present portion in the
Kingdom of grace. 7. To whatsoever a man does give that outward or inward
worship and service, which is only due to God, that thing, though it were never
so base, is that man's god, who is thereby rendered guilty of Idolatry, and of
giving divine worship unto a false God, though he think not so: for, the
covetous man is called an Idolater, and consequently riches are his god;
because he sets his prime affections of love and confidence upon them in
that measure which is only due to God; Nor covetous man who is an Idolater. 8.
There is no access for lost sinners unto the Kingdom of God in glory, but by
Jesus Christ the Mediator, who is the way, the truth and the life, and without
whom none comes unto the Father, Joh. 14. 6. for, it is the Kingdom of Christ
and of God: Christ is first named, because we make entrance by Him in this
Kingdom.

Verse. 6. Let no man deceive you with vain words: for because of these things
comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience.
THe Apostle, in this verse, does, first, give them a watchword to guard
against the suggestions of any who would labor to persuade them, that either
the practices reproved were no sins at all, or at least not so dangerous, as he
affirmed; and calls all such suggestions vain, or deceiving words, as having
no solidity of truth in them, but only some plausible pretext. Secondly, he
confirms, and further strengthens the former argument, while he shows,
that not only these sins do exclude from heaven, but also because of those,
Gods wrath, that is, temporal and eternal judgments, the effects of Gods
wrath, or of His holy sinpursuing justice, does come, and is always, and at
all times coming upon the children of disobedience, that is, those, who, having
willingly hardened themselves in wickedness, are judicially plagued with
hardness of heart. See upon chap. 2. ver. 3. Doct. 1. The servants of Jesus
Christ, ought to be through and serious in the reproof of sin, not doing the
work of the Lord negligently, or by halfs: they must not only start and
discover those sins, which the Lord's people are in hazard to be surprised
with, and to lay open the dangerous, dreadful and doolfull consequences of
living in them; but also pursue them through all the lurking holes and
subterfuges of specious pretenses and fecklesse excuses, under which they use
to lurk, until no place of refuge be left for them in peoples hearts: for, so
does Paul, having forbidden those evils, and shown the dangerous consequence of
living in them, he strikes off at one word the fig tree leaves of all such
vain excuses, whereby sinners use to plead for them; Let no man deceive you
with vain words, says he, 2. So corrupt and fleshly are we by nature, that, we
are not only prone and bent to commit sin, but also ingenious and witty to
excuse and extenuate our sin, and thereby to seduce our own hearts into a
belief that either sin is no sin, or that we shall be free of judgment, though
we live in sin: for, those who labor to deceive others this way, by making
them think light of sin, do first deceive themselves; Let no man deceive you
with vain words, says he. 3. It is the usual course and strain of those who
have given themselves over unto the slavery of sin, to use the utmost of their
wit and endeavors to draw on others to do the like, and for this end to
deceive them, by making them believe that sins are but petty slips, small
escapes, humane infirmities, that God's patience suffers all things, that His
grace pardons every thing, that no man can be perfect, and the rarest Saints
have fallen in as great faults, and such like vain words, which the Apostle
does here guard against; Let no man deceive you with vain words. 4. All such
opinions and reasonings as tend to cast a covering over sin, to extenuate and
hide the vileness of it, and the terror of judgment belonging to it, are but
vain, even spiders webs, sandy foundations, fig tree leaves, untempered mortar,
and will in end but mock all those who listen to them: for, so does the Apostle
affirm of them, Let no man deceive you with vain words. 5. Though we are to
fear and avoid sin principally, because it is sin, and displeasing to God,
supponing there were no hell nor punishment due to sin, Genesis 39. -9. yet, we
may and ought in the second place fear and abstain from it, because it draws
down Gods wrath and judgment: for, he holds forth the terror of Gods wrath
as an argument to scare them from those sins; for, because of these things
comes the wrath. 6. The terrible threatenings denounced in Scripture against
such and such sinners, some whereof declare the sinners exclusion from heaven,
and others his unspeakable torment in hell, are verified not in all, who have
once or often fallen in any such sins, but in those only, who have hardened
themselves in them, rejecting all admonitions to the contrary, and do remain
obstinate and impenitent until death: for he expounds whom he means by the
whoremongers, whom he threatened, ver. 5. even children of disobedience, that
is, such as remain obstinate, and will not be persuaded, as the word rendered
disobedience does signify. 7. See several other Doctrines from the like
words, upon Col. 3. ver. 6.

Verse. 7. Be not ye therefore partakers with them:
HEre is a second precept more general than the first, and inferred as a
conclusion from the former argument, whereby he does in general dehort them
from partaking, or concurring with such obstinate sinners, either in the
forementioned sins, or any other, wherewith they polluted themselves and drew
down the stroke of Gods wrath, as they would not partake with them in their
judgments; for so he does explain this precept, ver. 11. Doct. 1. As the Lord
does of purpose inflict most memorable judgments upon obstinate sinners, even
in this life; that thereby, as by one mean amongst many other, He may teach and
instruct His own called children to beware of their sins; So, then do we make
right use of Gods judgments upon such godless sinners, when we are not idle
spectators of them, as if we were not concerned in them, Luke 13. 2, 3. or
murmurers against the severity of Gods justice manifested in them, Numb. 16.
41. but do take up the voice of those rods, as speaking unto, and pressing upon
our selves the exercise of repentance and tender walking, in abstaining from
such like sins, for which they are smitten: for, from what he spoke of Gods
wrath coming upon the children of disobedience, he infers this as a most
native use, Be not ye therefore partakers with them. 2. Though there be some
sins, for which the Lord does punish obstinate sinners more than others, which
usually are more clearly written upon their rods, Judge. 1. 7. yet, it is our
wisdom to look upon their judgments, as speaking lessons, and real warnings,
not only against those evils, but all others also, whereof they are guilty:
for, he infers that they would not partake with them, not only in the
forementioned sins, for which in a special manner wrath came upon them, but
also in any sin of theirs whatsoever, while he says in general, Be ye not
therefore partakers with them. 3. The Lord takes notice of, and does
accordingly punish sinners, not only who are without the Church and heathens,
but also those, who are within the Church, and do profess subjection unto
divine Ordinances; and not only ringleaders, and chief actors in a sinful
course, but also all assisters, abetters, and who in any measure partake of the
sins of others, whether by counselling, (2 Samuel 13. 5.) alluring, (Prove. 1.
10.) consenting, (1 King. 21. 19.) connivance, (1 Samuel 3. 13.) or applauding
sin when it is committed, Romans 1. 32. for, he will have the converted Ephesians
take warning from those judgments, which were inflicted upon the godless
heathens, and so, as not to partake with them in their sins, implying, God
would not spare them more than others; Be ye not therefore partakers with them.

Verse. 8. For ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord:
walk as children of light,
IN this verse, there is, first, an argument to enforce the former dehortation,
taken from that blessed change which was wrought in them from darkness to
light, they were once darkness: whereby is meaned their estate before
conversion: And it comprehends under it, ignorance of God, and of the way to
heaven, 1 John 2. -8. a godless and profane life, flowing from a wicked and
unrenewed heart, 1 John 1. -6. together with subjection unto all miseries and
calamities following upon the former, and especially to the wrath and curse of
God: for, a sad disconsolate case goes under the name of darkness, Amos 5.
18, 20. This is the state, under the which they once were, and all unregenerate
men yet are: they are in all those respects, not only dark, but darkness in
the abstract, as having nothing of the contrary light in them. But they were
now light: whereby is meaned that estate wherein they now were, being
converted, which is opposed to their former estate of darkness, and
comprehends under it the saving knowledge of God in Christ, Isa. 9. 1, 2. a
life conform to Gods Law, which shines forth in the rays and beams of good
works, as a light unto others, Matthew. 5. 16. together with deliverance from
Gods wrath, and restitution to His favor, with joy, peace, and filial
confidence flowing from the sense of those: for, a lightsome and comfortable
case goes usually under the name of light, Psalm. 18. 28. This is the state,
wherein the truly regenerate are; They are in all those respects not only
lightsome, splendid and shining, but light in the abstract, not as if there
were no darkness in them at all, 1 John 1. 8. Act. 14. 22. for, in that
respect only God Himself is light, 1 John 1. 5. but because they are so in the
Lord, to wit, Christ, (chap. 4, 5.) as he here declares, who not only is the
purchaser and worker of that measure of the light of knowledge, holiness, and
of joy and peace following thereupon, which the regenerate do already enjoy,
Joh. 1. 9. but also His most perfect light of righteousness, knowledge, wisdom
and redemption, is imputed to them, 2 Cor. 5. 21. so that the dregs and
remainders of ignorance and corruption in themselves, are not laid to their
charge, Numb. 23. 21. The Apostle, next, from this argument, does infer the
affirmative of the former negative precept, ver. 7. to wit, that therefore they
should walk as children of the light, that is, answerably unto that blessed
state of light, to which they were called, as being now children of light, that
is, not only born of God, 1 John 2. 29. (who is that light unaccessible, 1 Timothy
6. 16.) by the preaching of the word, Iam. 1. 18. which is called light, Psalm.
119. 105. but also were endued with the light of knowledge and holiness: In
which respect, those, who are endued with wisdom, are called children of
wisdom, Matthew. 11. -19. Hence, Learn, 1. It concerns those, in whom God has
wrought any saving change, as to be reflecting frequently upon that miserable
estate wherein they once were; So to look upon it under that variety of notions
and similitudes, whereby it is expressed in Scripture; there being not any one
expression so comprehensive, or similitude so far extended, as to point out all
the dool, woe and misery which is in it, and that hereby the heart may be the
more sensibly affected with it: for, the Apostle has now several times in
this Epistle represented it to their view, and at every time almost under a
different notion and similitude; the latter always expressing somewhat, which
was not reached by the former. See chap. 2. ver. 1, 2, 3, 12, 13, 19. and chap.
4. ver. 17, 18, 19. And here again, he minds them of it under the name of
darkness; for, ye were sometimes darkness. 2. The child of God ought so to
remember what he once by nature was, as not to question, far less deny, but
confidently avow what he now by grace is: and that because not only the joint
consideration of both, makes them shine forth more clearly in their own
colors; but also our fixing our eye upon the former, without avowing the
latter, does breed discouragement, unthankfulness, and in progress of time
heartlesse dispare of an outgate from the woeful state wherein we apprehend our
selves yet to be: for, the Apostle represents to their view both those
jointly; Ye were sometimes darkness, but now ye are light. 3. Believers can
never attain to read the happiness of their present state through grace, so
long as they fix their eye only upon what they are in themselves: nor yet
until they consider what they are in Christ, and by virtue of that fullness of
perfections in Him, which not only flows forth to them in the streams
according to their measure, Joh. 1. 16. but also is imputed to them in the
fountain, 1 Cor. 5. 21. and therefore may be looked upon by them as their own;
for, although he calls them darkness absolutely, and in themselves; yet they
are light, not in themselves, but in the Lord Christ. 4. Our former darkness
of ignorance and profanity, wherein we have for a long time lived, is so far
from being an argument to make us continue in our former woeful course; that on
the contrary, we ought from the consideration thereof be incited to take up our
selves and live more tenderly for the time to come; seeing the time past of our
life may suffice usto have walked in a godless course, 1 Pet. 4. 3. for, Paul
makes this an argument, why they should not any longer partake with obstinate
sinners in their godless course: for, says he, ye were sometimes darkness.
5. Neither long continuance in sin already, even to weariness, nor yet any
conviction of the shame and damage which do attend it, are sufficient to make
a man abandon and quit it thoroughly, except there be a gracious change wrought
in him, chiefly as to his inward state, from that which he sometimes was: for,
he mentions this gracious change of their inward state, as that, wherein the
strength of the present argument does ly, whereby he would dissuade them from
being partakers with them; for ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye
light in the Lord. 6. As all spiritual privileges in general, are bestowed
upon us, that we may improve them, both for our comfort, and also for enabling
and inciting to duty; So the more we enjoy of light, whether external light in
preaching of the Word, or the internal light of knowledge in the mind, we ought
to improve it the more by walking according to that light; else our
condemnation shall be greater, Joh. 3. 18. for, from their privilege of being
light in the Lord, he infers walk as children of light.

Verse. 9. (For the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness, and righteousness,
and truth)
THe Apostle, in way of parenthesis, does give a reason of the former
consequence, or why their being now light in the Lord did bind them to walk as
children of light; and consequently, not to partake with obstinate sinners in
their sin: and withal, shows wherein that walking does consist. The reason
is taken from the new creature and habits of grace in the heart, called here
the Spirit, as Romans 7. 25. Gal. 5. 22. and are the same with the light of grace
by the Spirit of God, spoken of, ver. 8. Now, he shows the fruit of this
light, or of those gracious habits, consists in the exercise of all Christian
virtues, which are here summed up in three, 1. Goodness, whereby we are
inclined to communicate what good is in us for the advantage of our neighbor,
both in his spiritual (1 Pet. 4. 10.) and bodily (Gal. 6. 10.) estate. 2.
Righteousness, whereby we deal righteously in all our transactions with
others. And, 3. Truth, whereby we carry our selves sincerely, being free from
error, hypocrisy, or dissimulation, whether toward God or men. So the force
of the argument comes to this, Such a walking as he did enjoin, was the native
fruit and result of their being made light in the Lord by the Spirit of God;
and therefore they were obliged to it. Doct. 1. It is the duty of Christ's
Ministers, not only to press upon the Lords people the practice of holiness
in general, but also to condescend upon, and accordingly to press the
exercise of those particular virtues both to God and men, wherein holiness
does consist; otherwise people will readily place most of holiness in those
things wherein it consists least, Matthew. 23. 23. for, Paul, having exhorted
them to walk as children of the light, does here show wherein that walking does
consist, even in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth. 2. None can walk
as a child of light, or practice those duties wherein such a walk consists,
in a way acceptable to God, but he who is a child of light, truly regenerate,
and acts from a principle of grace in the heart. Whatever flows from an
unrenewed heart, how specious soever, is but a shadow, and imperfect imitation
of the child of light in this christian walk, as an ape would imitate a man,
or a violent motion does resemble that which is natural, and flows from an
inward principle: for, he shows the exercise of goodness, righteousness,
and truth, wherein our walking as a child of light consists, is the fruit of
the Spirit, or of the root of grace in the heart, wrought by the Spirit of God;
For the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness, etc. 3. As it concerns
Christians to walk suitably unto their state and privileges; So they would
seriously consider, in order to their walking thus, that holiness of life is
the native fruit and result of their being in a gracious state, or of the work
of grace in the heart; and therefore, that they are not only obliged to lead an
holy life in way of duty and gratitude, but a necessity also does ly upon them
to it, if so they be renewed, and as they would not evidence themselves to be
yet in their unrenewed state: for, having exhorted them to walk as children of
light, or suitably to the state of grace, he inforceth the exhortation, by
showing, that such a walking is the native fruit and necessary result of being
in such a state; For the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness, etc. 4. A
facility and easiness to communicate what is in us for our neighbors good and
advantage, does well consist with the exercise of righteousness, whereby we
give every man his due, and do require of him what is our due from him: for, he
conjoyneth the exercise of those two, while he says the fruit of the Spirit is
in all goodness, and righteousness. 5. As the grace of sincerity and freedom
from dissimulation and hypocrisy, is a necessary ingredient in the exercise of
all other virtues; So our walking answerably unto that state of light, unto
which we are called, must be extended unto duties of all sorts: not only to
duties of goodness and righteousness toward our neighbor, but also to
duties toward God, so as we embrace those Truths, which He holds forth in
Scripture without all mixture of Error, yea, and take Him for our party in
every duty, as being the only judge of our sincerity; for, he says, The fruit
of the Spirit is in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth.

Verse. 10. Proving what is acceptable unto the Lord.
BEfore the Apostle use any more arguments to enforce the former precept, he
does, first, resume and explain the precept it self. And, first, he explaineth
the affirmative part thereof, by giving one direction, necessary to be
practiced by those who would walk as children of light, even that by diligent
search and enquiry they prove and try according to God's will revealed in His
Word, (Isa. 8. 20.) what is acceptable, and well pleasing unto Him in every
step of their way. Doct. 1. There is no walking as a child of light, or
suitably unto that gracious state to which we are called, except we conform our
selves, not unto this world, Romans 12. 2. or to what may bring about our own
advantage, and so gratify our lusts, Matthew. 5. 29. but unto what is acceptable
to God, and prescribed unto us as the rule of duty in His Word: for, this
proving of what is acceptable unto Him, is required not for it self, or to rest
thereon, but to regulate our practice accordingly; (See ver. 11. doct. 1.) and
is called-for as a necessary concomitant of walking like children of light, as
is clear from the grammatical construction, according to which this verse is to
be joined with the close of the eighth; so that it runs thus, Walk as
children of the light -- proving what is acceptable. 2. We cannot conform our
selves unto what is acceptable to the Lord, and consequently cannot walk as
children of light, except we make a serious search and enquiry into the rule of
duty and acceptance revealed in the Word, yea, and do what we do, that we may
come up to that rule: and therefore we walk not acceptably, when either we do
things rashly without deliberation, Prove. 19. 2. or doubtingly after
deliberation, Romans 14. 23. yea, nor when the thing done, is in it self right
and acceptable, but we do it not from that ground, but to gratify our own
lusts. Matthew. 6. 2. or the lusts of others, Gal. 1. - 10. for, in order to this
walking, he requires them to prove what is acceptable to the Lord, as the rule
by which they were to walk. 3. It is not sufficient to make this inquiry in
order to some few and weighty actions of our life, but in order to all, whether
of greater or lesser concernment, whether advantage or loss may probably
follow upon our conforming of our selves unto this rule: for, the direction is
indefinit without any limitation or restriction unto this action, or that; and
therefore it ought to be extended unto all; Proving what is acceptable unto the
Lord. 4. The finding out of what is acceptable unto the Lord, especially in
some intricate cases, is not easily attained: there must be an accurate search,
together with an excercising our selves in the practice of those things, which
we already know to be acceptable, that so we may experimentally know them to be
such, and get our knowledge bettered in those things, whereof we are yet
ignorant, Joh. 7. 17. for, the word rendered proving, signifies an accurate
proof, not so much by argument as by trial and experience, as gold is tried in
the fire, Iam. 1. 12. Proving what is acceptable unto the Lord.

Verse. 11. And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
rather reprove them.
HE explaineth, next, the negative part of the former precept, as it was
expressed, ver. 7. First, by discharging them to be accessory (any of those
ways mentioned, ver. 7. doct. 3.) to the sins of wicked men, called here works
of darkness, because they flow usually from the darkness of ignorance, Act.
3. 17. and are the works of unrenewed men, who are nothing but darkness, (See
ver. 8.) are contrary to the light of Gods revealed will, Joh. 3. 20. and are
usually committed in the dark, the very actors being ashamed to do them openly,
1 Thessalonians. 5. 7. and because they bring those, who live and die in them without
repentance, unto utter darkness, Matthew. 25. 30. They are also called
unfruitful works; because they not only bring no advantage unto those who do
commit them, Romans 6. 21. but also much hurt and damage, even the wages of sin,
which is death, Romans 6. 23. Next, by commanding them to reprove convincingly
those works of darkness, and the parties guilty of them, and this, though
chiefly by their contrary good works, Heb. 11. 7. yet not only by those, but
also by the word of admonition and reproof, Eccles. 7. 5. as occasion should
offer, and Gods glory with the edification of their neighbor should seem unto
spiritual prudence to call for it. Besides what is already observed from a
parallel place, ver. 7. doct. 1. hence Learn, 1. Then do we make an approven
search and enquiry into what is acceptable unto the Lord, when we do not
satisfy our selves with the naked knowledge of what He approves, Romans 2. 18.
nor yet do only labor to defend by force of reason, or sufferings, what we
find to be truth after search against gainsayers, 1 Cor. 13. 2, 3. but do also
make it the rule of practice, by practicing or for bearing accordingly: for,
the Apostle, having commanded them, ver. 10. to prove what is acceptable unto
the Lord, does here enjoin them to abstain from that which they could not but
by searching find to be displeasing to Him, while he says, and have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness. 2. Though we are not
simply, and in all cases to abstain from the fellowship of wicked men, but may
freely converse with such of them, as we are bound unto, either by the law of
necessity, Psalm. 120. 5, 6. or by any civil, (1 Pet. 2. 18.) religious, (1 Cor.
7. 12.) or natural bond, Ephesians. 6. 1, 2. yet, no ty of that kind does give us
warrant to partake with them in their sins; and therefore we are to eschew all
unnecessary and voluntary fellowship and familiarity with them, Psalm. 26. 4.
lest thereby we be drawn to walk in their ways, Prove. 22. 24, 25. and they be
hardened in their evil course, and kept from being ashamed, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14.
for, he forbids absolutely all fellowship with them in their sins, and
consequently whatever may bring us under that hazard, if so it can be eschewed,
without the neglect of any other duty; And have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness. 3. We ought to look upon sin in its blackest
colors of shame, digrace, loss of our time, strength, and of all other
expense consumed upon it, together with the damage both here, and hereafter,
which follows upon it, and lay aside the consideration of those pleasant
deceitful baits, which Satan does busk it with to make it more taking; that so
we may be the more deterred from it: for, Paul gives sin a name implying all
those and much more, that the very name given to it may scare them from it,
while he calls it the unfruitful works of darkness. 4. Though the command
enjoining to reprove the sins of others, be an affirmative precept, and
therefore not binding unto all, with relation to all persons, at all times, and
in all cases, and Christ Himself forbids to cast the pearl of precious
reproof before dogs or swine, Matthew. 7. 6. that is, such who mock the word of
admonition, or prove more enraged by it, whom we are to reprove, not so much by
conversing with them, or by speaking to them, as by fleeing from them; yet as
to others, our not reproving of their sin, when occasion offers, and Gods
glory with their edification seems to call for it, is a sinful partaking
with them in their sin: for, having discharged them to have fellowship with the
works of darkness, he subjoyneth, but rather reprove them, implying, that
otherwise they would have fellowship with them. 5. Though this duty of
laboring to reclaim others from sin by convincing reproofs, whether in words,
or in the contrary work, ought mainly to be discharged unto such as have
nearest relation to us, Ephesians. 6. -4. or whom we have a more special charge of,
1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. or whom we are most intimate with in spiritual bonds and
fellowship, 1 Thessal. 5. 14. yet we are not to neglect this duty toward
others, who stand not under such near relations to us, no not to those,
concerning whom we have strong grounds to fear that they are yet unrenewed, and
enemies in their hearts to Jesus Christ, so long, at least, as all hopes of
prevailing with them by that mean are not cut off, 1 Cor. 7. 16. for, he
commands them here to reprove the sins even of unrenewed Pagans, called
therefore the unfruitful works of darkness; but rather reprove them, says he.

Verse. 12. For it is a shame even to speak of those things which are done of
them in secret.
HE does now confirm the precept thus explained; and, first, he inforceth the
disswasive, from having fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, by
an argument taken from the abominable filthiness of those sins which the
wicked Pagans committed in secret, that they might eschew public shame, which
was such, that it was a shame even to speak of them, or to hear them spoken of,
leaving them to gather, it was much more shameful to act them, or to be any
ways accessory unto the acting of them. Doct. 1. There should be such an holy
bashfulnesse in converted Christians, as to think shame in speech to utter, at
least without detestation, those things, which godless sinners are not so much
ashamed to practice: and especially Ministers in their public preachings would
be very modest and sparing in the deciphering of filthy sins, lest they thereby
defile their own tongues, offend the ears of some, and do teach others how to
commit that sin, which they pretend to reprove: for, Paul gives this as a
reason not only why they should not communicate with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but also why he did not make express mention of those works in
particular; for it is a shame even to speak of those things, says he. 2. As
all conscience of right and wrong, together with fear and shame following upon
doing wrong, be not fully extinct in the unrenewed man; So those small
remainders, are not effectual to restrain them from what is wrong, but being
overpowered with prevalent Atheism, do give them full liberty to act
abominable wickedness, if so they can hide it from the eyes of men, without
any effectual restraint from the all-seeing eye of God: for, conscience of the
dishonesty, which was in those unfruitful works of darkness, made them eschew
the eyes of men, but notwithstanding they committed them in secret; for it is a
shame even to speak of those things which are done of them in secret. 3. As
secrecy and solitariness are most obnoxious to foulest tentations, especially
to those, which tend to satisfy the lust of uncleanness, Genesis 39. 11. 12. and
therefore would be eschewed by all, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. much less sought after by
any, Prove. 7. ver. 8, 9, 10. So when men do not seek the vail of secrecy to
cover their sins, but do glory in their shame, and dare with Absalom, (2 Samuel
16. 22.) commit those sins openly, and before the sun, which very common
honesty, and a natural instinct would seek to cover; it speaks a man more
corrupt than the very grossest of Pagans, who has put out-the very common
principles of natural honesty, and made his own conscience dead and senseless,
so that he knows not shame, Zeph. 3. -(...). for, even the Pagans, whose sin
he does here aggreage, did take the benefit of secrecy to cover their
villainies, which are done of them in secret, says he.

Verse. 13. But all things that are reproved, are made manifest by the light:
for whatsoever does make manifest, is light.
HE does, next, enforce the exhortation to reprove those works of darkness,
first, by an argument taken from one excellent use of admonition and reproof,
while he shows that those secret sins of wicked most being reproved, are by
the light, whether of Gods Word in the mouth of the reprover or of his holy
life, made manifest in their black and ugly colors, to wit, not so much unto
others, as unto the actors and authors of them. See 1 Cor. 14. 24. Next, by
proving that the light of reproof attaineth this end from the nature of light,
which is to make all things that are within its reach, manifest and
conspicuous; for, the words in the Original do read better thus, for light is
that which manifests all things. Doct. 1. The discovery and conviction of sin
in its vileness, is of necessary and profitable use unto the sinner; as being
the first step toward contrition, Act. 2. 36. with 37. and consequently to
faith in Jesus Christ and repentance unto life, Act. 2. 37. with 38. for, he
makes this an excellent use of reproof, and that which should be aimed at by
the reprover, even that sin be made manifest in its vileness to the sinner;
for all things that are reproved, are made manifest. 2. It is not a naked sight
and knowledge that sin is sin, and in some measure shameful, which is of any
great use to the sinner, but a sight of it in its vilest colors, as it is a
breach of Gods most holy Law, enmity against the great God, and a bringer down
of Gods eternal wrath: for, those heathens had some knowledge of sin, and of
the shame was in it, and therefore they did run to secret with it: and yet he
speaks here of a further discovery, and manifestation of it by the light of
reproof, which was useful and necessary; All things that are reproved, are
made manifest. 3. The Lord does sometimes bless not only public preaching,
but also the word of reproof in the mouth of private Christians, and the
example of their holy life, for making godless sinners take occasion thence to
reflect upon themselves, and therein, as in a glass, to see the filthy
vileness of their beloved sins, and to judge themselves for them; for, he
says, All things that are reproved, are made manifest by the light, to wit,
the light of verbal, or real reproof, held forth, even by private Christians:
for, he does not speak here to Ministers only. 4. The probable good, which God
may bring about to the party reproved by the means of our reproof, should have
more of weight to incite us toward the making conscience of this duty, than
the feared inconvenience to our selves, arising from the parties displeasure,
should have to scare us from it: for, Paul will have us to set upon this duty,
because of our neighbor's good, which probably will be brought about by it:
reprove them, says he; For all things that are reproved, are made manifest by
the light. 5. As there is no duty, of the success whereof we use to be more
diffident than that of reproving the sins of others; So there is not any duty,
the success whereof we have better ground to be persuaded of, even than of
this, that discovery of sin to the sinners conscience, either to his conversion
or further obduration, shall follow upon a timeous and wellguided reproof: for,
he proves that this effect shall follow upon reproof as natively as the
discovery of things dark and hid does follow upon light; for that is light,
says he, which discovers all things.

Verse. 14. Wherefore he says, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the
dead, and Christ shall give thee light.
HEre is a second argument to enforce the duty of reproving those unfruitful
works of darkness, which also confirms the former, to wit, that by reproving
them they should be made manifest. The argument is taken from Gods own example,
who in His Word does reprove the world of sin, and thereby conveyeth the light
of Jesus Christ unto them, as the Apostle proves, by showing what is Gods
great work and design through His whole Word, whereof this verse is a short
sum, though it seems more particularly to relate unto Isa. 60. ver. 1. 2.
from which this place is thought to be cited, with some variation in the words,
but none in the purpose. Which design is threefold: The first branch whereof,
is here employed, even to convince all unrenewed men especially, how woeful and
dangerous their present case is, and that it is a spiritual sleep and death.
1. A sleep, because the carnal man has all his spiritual senses bound up,
Isa. 43. 8. having no spiritual fellowship with those who live a new life,
Ephesians. 4. 18. does dream and fancy that he sees, hears, and converseth with
them, Rev. 3. 17. which he will after find to be but a mere fancy, when his
conscience does rouse him up, Romans 7. 9. neither has he power over himself,
but is exposed as a prey to Satan, or any who minds his spiritual hurt, 2 Timothy 2. 26. for, such is the case of those naturally who are in a natural
sleep. And, secondly, a death, because the natural man has not only his
senses bound up, as in a sleep; but there is no spiritual power or faculty
remaining in him to do any thing which is truly good, Romans 8. 7. as a dead man
has no principle of life, or vital action. The second branch of this great
design is here expressed, which is to point out unto all such what is their
duty in that case, even to awake and rise from the dead, that is, in a word, to
turn to God, to break off their sins by repentance, and to set about all the
duties of holiness flowing from the principle of a new life. Which duty is
here, and elsewhere, enjoined by God unto dead sinners, not, that it is in
their power, Jer. 13. 23. but because it is their duty so to do; yea, and such
a duty as must be gone about, otherwise they cannot be saved, Luke 13. 3. and
because by such exhortations and commands, as by an outward mean, the Spirit of
God does effectually work that in them, which He requires from them, Romans 10.
17. The third branch of this great design, is to encourage them unto this duty,
from the promise of a greater measure of the light of knowledge, holiness and
comfort here (all which are comprehended under the name of light. See upon ver.
8.) and of glory hereafter (called also light, Col. 1. 12.) to be given unto
them by Christ upon their so doing. Doct. 1. The pains which God does take upon
godless sinners, yet in nature, to awake them from the sleep of sin, and to
draw them unto Christ, is a strong argument binding us to commiserate the case
of such, and from pity toward them to endeavor in our stations to bring them
out of that woeful state wherein they are. Our obligation to help them is
greater than His, besides that we are bound to work with God, and to further
His design: for, he inforceth upon them the duty of reproving those godless
Atheists, in order to their conviction and amendment, from Gods example, who
does the like; Wherefore he says, Awake thou that sleep. 2. That God has
appointed reproof of sin to be the ordinary mean of awakning dead sinners, and
of bringing them to Christ, and that He makes use of this mean Himself all
alongs His Word, in order to this end, should encourage us, as we have access,
in our stations, to make use of that mean toward those with whom we converse;
as knowing God may, and when He pleases, will, bless the mean appointed by
Himself, whatever unliklyhood there be otherwise of success: for, he exciteth
them to practice this duty from this, that God makes use of reproof, as the
ordinary mean of bringing souls to Christ; Wherefore he says, Awake thou that
sleep. 3. Scripture does not consist so much in the formal words, as in the
sense and meaning of those words: and therefore though we cannot keep in memory
the very formal words of Scripture; yet if we remember the sum of the purpose
contained in those words, we may make use of it, as of the Word of God, whether
for confirmation of truth, refutation of error, exhortation to duty, or
reproof of sin and vice, 2 Timothy 3. 16. for, the Apostle, being to press this
duty of reproving upon them from Scripture, does not cite the very formal
words of Scripture, but gives the general drift of all Scripture in few
words, or the sense and meaning of one particular Scripture, to wit, of Isa.
60. 1, 2. from which this verse seems to be cited; Wherefore he says, Awake
thou that sleep. 4. The first Doctrine deduced from ver. 8. has ground here
also, in that he does again mind them of their miserable case by nature, not
only under the similitude of death formerly used, chap. 2. 1. but also of
sleeping. 5. Neither can an offer of Christ unto a sinner be savoury, nor a
command to embrace this offer get entertainment, until first a discovery be
made unto the sinner of his sad and miserable case by nature: for, the Lord, in
holding forth the offer of Christ, and commanding them to embrace it, does so
speak, as he first discovers the woeful case, wherein they were, by the
similitude of sleep and death, while he says, Awake thou that sleep, and
arise from the dead. 6. Our utter inability to help our selves, or to do any
thing acceptable to God, contracted by Adam's fall, does not weaken or abolish
Gods sovereign right and dominion over us; in so far as, though we be not able
to do, yet He may justly require and exact of us to do: for, though they were
dead, and consequently unable to help themselves, yet He requires them to
awake and arise: Awake thou that sleep, arise from the dead. 7. Though it be
the only power of God, which quickneth dead sinners, and brings them from
nature unto grace, Col. 1. 13. there being no principle of a spiritual life in
us by nature, whereby we can quicken our selves; yet the Lord is pleased to
work upon us, not as upon senseless blocks, but as reasonable creatures, by
commanding and persuading us to do that which is our duty (though not in our
power) to do, and thereby, as a mean, conveying unto the Elect the effectual
working of His power, whereby He works in them, what He requires from them:
for, He commands those who are dead, to arise from the dead, and so makes
them to rise, Romans 4. 17. Arise from the dead. 8. Though the Word of God for
the most part be contrived in general precepts, threatenings and promises,
without express mention of one more than another, except in some general
qualifications, to whom each of those in particular belong, Joh. 3. 16. Gal. 3.
10. yet, before a sinner be brought to Christ, the Spirit of God does make
particular application of those unto his conscience, as if they were directed
unto him by name: And the more a Minister does labor to reach the consciences
of people, by making particular application of general truths unto them, they
are in a fairer way of gaining ground upon them, and doing good unto them by
what they preach: for, the Apostle, holding forth a directory unto us, how to
walk in order to the gaining of godless sinners, from the Lord's example, does
bring him in speaking, as it were, to every one in particular; Awake thou,
arise thou, Christ shall give thee light. 9. The holding forth of Christ's
excellency, and of that excellent state of light, joy, comfort, knowledge,
which, being once forfeited by Adam's fall, is again purchased by Christ, and
to which He brings all such as do come unto Him, is one of the strongest
arguments (though others also must be made use of, Luke 13. 3.) to prevail,
even with natural hearts to make them willing in the day of Gods power, and
obedient to Him when He does call them: for, Paul shows, that even God
Himself does make choice of this argument; Arise -- and Christ shall give thee
light.

Verse. 15. See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise,
HEre is a new precept, the third in order of those which are contained in this
Chapter, and it is deduced also as a conclusion from what goes before, to this
purpose, That seeing they were now light in the Lord, ver. 8. and obliged not to
have fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but to reprove them,
ver. 10. therefore they would see to their walk, or take accurate inspection of
their life and conversation, whether in word or deed; and to see to their walk,
as to be circumspect or precise in it, even willing to go to the outmost (as
the word in the original does signify) of what every command requires, both
for matter and manner, especially laboring as to approve themselves unto God;
so to give no just cause of exception or offense at what we do unto others, no,
not to those that are without, who are expressly mentioned, Col. 4. 5. where the
same precept is in substance proponed: Which precept so proponed, he does,
first, enforce by a reason; for, the particle as, does not always make
comparison, but sometimes rendereth a reason: and the reason is, that true
wisdom does consist in walking thus, and to walk otherwise is extreme folly.
Doct. 1. The more of light and knowledge a man has received from God, he ought
to take the more diligent heed, that in all things he practice according to his
light; seeing not only the way of such is most eyed by wicked men, who watch for
his halting, Jer. 20. 10. but also, if he does not walk the more circumspectly,
he deserves double stripes, Luke 12. 47. for, this exhortation may be looked
on as an inference from what he says, ver. 8. ye are now light in the Lord --
See then that ye walk circumspectly, says he. 2. So many are the ways, by
which we may become accessory to other folks sins, (See ver. 7. doct. 3.) and
so many are the snares, which Satan and his instruments do lay in our way to
entrap us, Ephesians. 6. 11. that, if we walk not all the more circumspectly, we
cannot eschew but we must partake one way or other with wicked men in their
sins: for, this exhortation may be looked upon also, as an inference from what
he said, ver. 11-Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness --
See then that ye walk circumspectly, says he. 3. Those only are most fit to
reprove sin in others to some good purpose, who walk most circumspectly, and
live so, as they cannot be justly blamed themselves: Even the very righteous
walking of such, is a forcible reproof of sin in others, though they speak
nothing, Heb. 11. 5. and otherwise their speaking will have no force, Matthew. 7.
3, 4. besides that God does usually bless the pains of such, Prove. 10. 21.
for, this exhortation may be also looked upon, as an inference from what he
said, ver. -11. but rather reprove them -- See then that ye walk circumspectly.
4. That a man may walk accurately and circumspectly, coming up (so far as
through grace he is able) to the outmost of what every command requires, both
for matter and manner, it is necessary that he walk, not rashly and
indeliberately, but, that he see and diligently consider antecedently to his
acting, to wit, not only what he is to do, that it be neither evil nor
appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. nor an occasion leading to evil, Romans 13.
14. but also from what principle and fountain, (Matthew. 7. 17, 18.) for what
end, (Matthew. 6. 2, 5.) and by what means, (Job 13. 7, 8.) he intends to act
in every thing which he is about to do: for, in order to their circumspect
walking, he requires of them that they should see, the word signifies to take
heed, to see with attention, and diligently to consider, Matthew. 7. 3. See then
that ye walk circumspectly. 5. As those are only truly wise in Gods account,
whatever the world think of them, who labor to walk most exactly by the rule
of Gods Word all alongs their christian course; So where this true and
sanctified wisdom (which comes from above) is, it will render it self evident,
by making the person endued with it, walk circumspectly, so that he will
foresee the evil of a course, and eschew it, Prove. 22. 3. search out the mind
of God in every thing, understand it (Hos. 14. 9.) and observe it, Psalm. 107.
43. keep silence when he should not speak, Prove. 10. 19. speak advisedly, and
the truth only, when he speaks, Prove. 16. 23. hear the voice of the rod, and
take with reproof and correction, Prove. 17. 10. be loath to stumble any with
whom he converseth, Col. 4. 5. yea, and will labor to gain them to God, Prove.
11. -30. for, he makes true wisdom to consist in, and to evidence it self by,
walking circumspectly; Not as fools, but as wise. 6. The less circumspect and
exact men be in walking by the rule of Gods Word, the greater fools they are in
Gods esteem (whatever the world do think of them) as being not only destitute
of all the forementioned evidences of true wisdom, but having also the
contrary evidences of extreme folly; See ye walk circumspectly, not as fools.

Verse. 16. Redeeming the time, because the days are evil.
THe Apostle does, next, amplify and illustrate the former precept, by
pointing out one thing, wherein this accurate and wise walking does mainly
consist, which he does therefore exhort them unto, even that they would redeem
the time, that is, close with, and make use of every opportunity and fit
occasion of doing good (for, the word, rendered time, does properly signify
that nick of time, which is fit and opportune for doing any thing, Gal. 6. 10.)
and to use it with more than ordinary diligence, yea, and with the loss of
their own pleasures, ease and worldly profit, and so in a manner regain the
time formerly lost by negligence, while they should do as much in the present
time, as they might have done both in that, and in the time formerly misspent,
if they had used but ordinary diligence: Even as merchants, from whom the word
renderd redeem is taken, who use to buy their commodities while the fit time of
buying lasts, and having happily had great losses, or formerly spent their time
idely or unthriftily, do dispense with their own pleasures and ease, and by
their more than ordinary diligence, seek to redeem, and, as it were, to buy
back again the time which is lost. Which duty of redeeming time he does enforce
upon them, from the evil of the present times through the wickedness of men,
and those manifold troubles in the times, which were hanging over the Churches
head, and whereby all opportunity of doing good might in a short time be taken
from them, or they from it. See Eccles. 11. 2. Joh. 9. 4. Doct. 1. As there are
some times and seasons more fit and opportune than others, for doing some
pieces of service to God, and of our duty to men; So a great part of spiritual
wisdom and accurate walking, does consist in diligent and timeous going about
of such duties, as God does call-for at that time: and they, who for love to
their ease, profit, pleasure and credit, do mispend their time, and neglect
that good one thing, which God's glory and their own salvation do call-for to
be gone about in the seasonable time, are but inconsiderate fools: for, he
shows, that circumspect, wise walking consists in this, even in redeeming
the time. 2. As we are naturally prodigal and lavish in mispending of time; So
it is no small part of divine wisdom to regain, as it were, misspent time by
double diligence, and to buy it back again, so far as is possible, by breaking
off our ease, our sleep, and weaning our selves from our ordinary and allowed
recreations at other times: for, this command to redeem the time, does speak so
much. 3. So far should we be from complying with the evils of the times, for
eschewing the hatred, and gaining the favor of wicked men in the time, Hos. 5.
10, 11. that the abounding of sin and wickedness in the time, should make us
so much the more conscientious and diligent in a profitable spending of the
time, and in accurate and circumspect walking, by keeping at a great distance
from any thing that is sinful in the time, Rev. 3. 4. as knowing not only that
such evil times do threaten to remove all opportunity of doing good from us, or
us from it, Eccles. 11. 2. but also that they carry alongs with them many
tentations from evil example, from straits, from persecutions, Matthew, 24. 24.
which calls for greater circumspectnesse: besides, that the dishonor which
God gets from many in such times, should make us honor him the more, Psalm.
119. 136. for, he makes the evils of the times a motive, not only to redeem
the time, but also to walk circumspectly; For the days are evil. 4. Times
cannot be so evil, but Gods children may, and will improve, even the evil of
those times for Gods honor and their own spiritual advantage: yea, and the
worse that times are, in some respects they find a way to improve them the more
for those ends: for, Paul makes the evil of those times a spur to incite the
Godly unto their duty, while he says, Redeeming the time, for the days are
evil.

Verse. 17. Wherefore be ye not unwise, but understanding what the will of the
Lord is.
IN the third place he infers a conclusion from the evil of those times,
containing a further amplification of the precept given, ver. 15. from the rule
of, or the mean enabling us to, this circumspect walking, set down both
negatively and affirmatively, to wit, that, seeing the time was evil and full of
snares, they would not be unwise, or without understanding in the point of
duty, either for the matter or manner of it; but would acquaint themselves with
God's will revealed in His Word, whereby they might be directed in relation to
all duties, dangers, snares, tentations and cases. Doct. 1. The great thing to
be aimed at in seeking knowledge and understanding, is not that we may only
know, or be able to jangle about questions, or that we may be known or esteemed
of for our knowledge; but that we may practice, and walk circumspectly,
according to what is made known unto us: for, he would have them understanding,
and knowing God's will, for this end, that they may walk circumspectly in those
evil days, as is clear from the illative particle wherefore: Wherefore be ye
not unwise, but understanding, etc. 2. No mother-wit, natural philosophy, or
carnal wisdom is a sufficient rule to walk by in a way acceptable to God, or
to convey us safely through those rocks and snares, which are spread for our
feet in evil times, 1 Cor. 1. 20, 21. and 2. 14. It is only the knowledge
revealed in His Word, which is able to reach this end, as containing in it a
most perfect rule both of faith and manners, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. for, he would
have them, in order to this end, understanding what the will of the Lord is. 3.
There is that in God's will revealed in Scripture, and in no other writings
else, which is sufficient to make a man completely wise unto salvation, and to
drive away those dark clouds of ignorance and folly, which are in the spirit of
every man by nature; there being no other science, or knowledge, which can give
a through discovery, either of our lost estate by nature, or of the way of our
delivery from it by a Redeemer, nor yet of that obedience in its full extent,
wherein our thankfulness for a delivery consists: for, he opposes those
two, Be not unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is. 4. As it
ought to be a Christian man's study to know the will of God revealed in
Scripture; So this is a subject, which never will be perfectly known; there
being always some new thing to be learned of it and from it, even by those who
are greatest proficients in the knowledge of it, Psalm. 119. 96. and therefore
we must be still scholars at this school: for, Paul sets forth their
studying to know this subject, by a word of the present time, implying it would
be a continued lasting work, while he says, understanding what the will of God
is.

Verse. 18. And be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess: but be filled with
the Spirit:
IN this verse are other two of those precepts, which do belong to all
Christians in general, first, that they be not drunk with wine: where by wine
is meaned all drink, which makes drunk, set forth in one of its kinds, which
is most generally known. And the Apostle's scope is not to forbid all use of
wine; seeing it may be lawfully used (as all other good creatures of God, 1 Timothy
4. 4.) for health, 1 Timothy 5. 23. for satisfying thirst, Romans 12. 20. as also
for a Christian and sober chearing up the natural and vital spirits upon some
singular occasion, Joh. 2. 8. Prove. 31. 6. but he condemns all excessive and
inordinate use of wine, when more of it is taken than either natural necessity
calleth-for, or Christian sober recreation and cheerfulness does allow, and so
much as our bodies and spirits are thereby overcharged in some measure, less
or more, and so rendered unfit for God's service, Luke 21. 34. even although
the use of natural reason be not taken away by it, Isa. 5. 22. This disswasive
from drunkenness is enforced from the sad concomitant and consequence of this
sin, called here excess. The word signifies lavish wasting, and destruction;
which wasting destruction is extended elsewhere to the drunkards means, (Prove.
23. 21.) his reputation and credit, (Hab. 2. 16.) his natural strength of body
(Prove. 23. 29.) his wit and judgment, (Hos. 4. 11.) yea, and to his soul for
ever without repentance, 1 Cor. 8. 10. So that this one word has a
comprehensive sum of all those dreadful consequences, which do accompany this
one sin. Secondly, in opposition to their being drunk with wine, he exhorts
them to be filled with the Spirit of God, to wit, by laboring to have the
fruits of the Spirit in all goodness, righteousness and truth, with joy,
peace, and the comfortable sense of His presence abounding in them in a rich
and copious measure. Doct. 1. Christians, as in all other things, so in their
eating and drinking must be ruled by the Word, and neither by their own
appetite, Prove. 23, 1, 2. nor the pleasure of others, Hos. 7. 5. for, he
prescribes a rule for their drinking; Be not drunk with wine, says he. 2. So
pernicious, and perverse is our natural corruption, that those things, which
God has given to man for his help and good, are perverted by it, for bringing
about his hurt, both in soul and body, and outward estate: for, wine, which is
given for health and glading the heart of man, (Psalm. 104. 15.) is abused to
drunkenness, and consequently to God's dishonor, and the man's own prejudice:
so much is supponed, while he says, Be not drunk with wine. 3. There is no sin
more inconsistent with wise, circumspect and conscientious spending of time,
than the sin of immoderate drinking is. Experience shows it consumes time,
casts open doors to all wickedness; burieth shame, which keeps many from
vice; and transformeth a man to a very beast, so that he neither knows nor
cares what he does; it is the mother of strifes and lust; drives to stealing,
lying, swearing, and what not? for, in opposition to the duty of walking
circumspectly and redeeming the time, he mentions this sin of drunkenness
and forbids it; And be not drunk with wine, says he. 4. Such is the
tyranny of this sin, that where it is once given way to, it carries a man
headlongs in the service of it, so that he valueth no loss, whether of credit,
means, body, or soul, if he may get his bea^tly appetite satisfied: for, Paul
supponeth many were given to this sin, though therein was excess, or
destruction, and loss of all the forementioned good things following upon it,
while he says, wherein, or in which being drunk or in which drunkenness there
is excess, or loss and destruction. 5. Though a gracious person may through
infirmity slip into this sin of drunkenness, Genesis 19. 32, 33. yet a drunken
course of life cannot consist with a man's having the spirit of grace in any
plentiful measure; seeing He is a spirit of temperance, chastity and
moderation, Gal. 5. 23. and not of excess: for, the adversative particle but,
implies an opposition betwixt those two, drunkenness, and enjoying the
presence of the Spirit of God; Be not drunk with wine -- but be filled with the
Spirit. 6. We ought not to rest upon, and content our selves with, a small
measure of the graces of Gods Spirit, but are to endeavor to be filled with
them, and to have the Spirit of God dwelling richly in us, by actuating all our
graces, Cant. 4. 16. and adding one degree of grace unto another; 2 Pet. 3. 18.
for, he commands them not only to have, but to be filled with the Spirit. 7.
What even fleshly sinful pleasure a man does find, or imagines to find from
any sinful course, the same, and much more is to be had in a spiritual and
divine manner in the way of grace: and particularly, a copious plentiful
measure of the spirit of grace does work the like effects spiritually, which
wine immoderately taken does bodily; It fills the soul with joy and
gladness, Psalm. 4. 7. It makes a man forget his former miseries, Job 11. 16.
it enlarges his heart, louseth his tongue, and makes him eloquent in setting
forth the Lords praises. Luke 1. 67. 68. for, he recommendeth unto them to be
filled with the spirit, as a remedy against their filling themselves with wine,
and calls the one a filling, or ebriety and drunkenness, to wit, in a
spiritual sense, as well as the other, in a bodily sense, because of the
likeness of effects betwixt them.

Verse. 19. Speaking to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs,
singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord.
THis last precept is illustrated, and the duty enjoined thereby recommended
from two things, wherein this fill of the spirit, and of spiritual joy flowing
from it, should and will vent it self, which he proponeth also in way of
precept. His scope wherein mainly, is, to teach them, and us in them, how we
ought to carry our selves in our times of mirth and gladness. The first of
those two things is in this verse, to wit, melodious and artificial singing of
praises unto God: where he expresses, first, the act of singing in three
words, speaking, singing, and making melody. By all which is meaned an
intelligible, artificial, and melodious tuning of the voice, together with an
answerable orderly motion of the understanding and affections within, going
along with the matter which is sung. Secondly, An inferior, and subordinate
end to be aimed at in singing, even our mutual edification, while he says,
Speaking to your selves, or, one to another: for, it is the same word, which is
chap. 4. 32. and Col. 3. 16. Thirdly, He expresses the matter to be sung, in
three words, the very titles which are given to David's Psalms, and other
scriptural Songs: and though there be some difference among Interpreters about
the kind of Songs, which are expressed by every one of those in particular; yet
the most received and probable opinion is, that by Psalms are meaned all holy
Songs in general of whatsoever argument, whether they contain prayers,
praises, complaints, deprecations, prophecy, history, or a purpose mixed of all
those; and by Hymns are meaned special songs of praise to God; and by songs,
a certain kind of Hymns, expressing the praises of God for some of His noble
acts, great and wonderful beyond others. And those Songs he calls spiritual
(which epithet is to be extended to the Psalms and Hymns also) as being framed
by the Spirit of God, containing spiritual and heavenly purpose, and requiring
the assistance of God's Spirit and a spiritual frame of heart for singing them
aright; and this in opposition to the obscene, filthy, and fleshly songs of
carnal men and drunkards. And fourthly, he shows the chief thing to be made
use of, and employed as an instrument in singing, to wit, not so much the lips,
tongue, and outward voice, (though those be also necessary in singing, Act. 16.
25.) as the heart, which then is made use of in singing, when our heart goes
along with the voice, so, as we understand (1 Cor. 14. 15.) and be intent upon
the purpose, (Psalm. 57. 7.) and our affections be stirred and suitably affected
with it, Psalm. 98. 4. And lastly, he shows the great end, to which all our
songs ought to be directed, even to the Lord; the glorifying, and praising of
Him, being not only the remote scope of singing, as it is of all other
ordinances, and ought to be of all our actions, 1 Cor. 10. 31. but its proper
and immediate scope; so that the heart in singing ought to be actually taken up
with the thoughts of praise of God, arising from the consideration of the
purpose which we sing. Besides what I have already observed upon a parallel
place, Col. 3. -16. Learn hence, 1. The duty of singing Psalms and spiritual
Songs, is not astricted and limited to only one in the Congregation, or to some
certain orders of men, the rest being silent, but is enjoined to all the Lords
people, even all the members of the Church: for, Paul makes the command to
sing, of equal extent with that other of being filled with the spirit, ver. 18.
Speaking to your selves in Psalms and Hymns, etc. says he. 2. That we may go
about this worship of singing praises to God acceptably, it is necessary that
we be filled with the Spirit and have a rich and copious measure of His
presence and assistance, though not to compose new songs: for, he points at
scripturall Songs, as the most fitting purpose to be sung, under the titles of
Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual songs; yet that we may be enabled to choose the
fittest songs for the present occasion, and sing them with such a spiritual,
elevated frame of heart, as such a divine and heavenly piece of worship
requires; for he says, be filled with the spirit, speaking to your selves in
Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs. 3. As even the children of God, when
they have gotten a full draught of joy, peace, and other sweet fruits of the
Spirit of God, are not above the hazard of venting their joy, by falling out in
fits of carnal lightness; So there is nothing, which the child of God ought
more to advert unto, than how to carry aright when his cup is full according to
his hearts wish: and in order hereto, would express his joy in the praises of
God; lest by doing otherwise, and giving way to lightness of carriage or
expressions, in that case he provoke the Spirit of God to withdraw from him,
Ephesians. 4. 30. for, therefore does he command them being filled with the Spirit to
vent their joy, by speaking to one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual
songs. 4. As the Lord has provided Songs and Psalms to be sung by us of
diverse arguments, containing purpose suitable for every condition we can
readily fall under; So we ought to make such use of that variety, as to make
choice of those Psalms for our present singing, which are most fit for the
present occasion: for, as is said, the titles here given, do relate to the
several purposes, which are set forth in spiritual songs; all of which are to
be sung, as God by His present dealing with His Church, or our selves shall
require; Speaking in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs. 5. In singing of
Psalms to God, there must be an inward harmony, and musical melody in the soul
and heart, as well as in the tongue: yea, the chief melody which sounds most
sweetly unto God, is that of the soul and heart; and therefore the outward
delighting of the ears is to be taken no further notice of, than it serves to
make the purpose we sing, work the more effectually upon the heart: for, he
says, singing and making melody in the heart: what this melody of the heart
is, was shown in the exposition.

Verse. 20. Giving thanks always for all things unto God and the Father, in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
HEre is the second thing, wherein our being filled with the Spirit, should,
and will vent it self, even in giving of thanks, or in a sensible
acknowledgement of favors received, and in expressing our sense of them,
whether by word or work to the praise of the bestower. Which duty is amplified,
1. from the time, when it ought to be discharged, always, and at all times:
not as if we were to be always, and without intermission in the actual
exercise of this duty of formal and direct thanksgiving; (seeing there are
other necessary duties which sometimes must divert us from it) but because our
whole life ought to be according to the will of God, and consequently a real
expression of our thankfulness to Him; and because we are not to omit any
occasion, when it offers, of formal and direct thanksgiving to God expressed
in words, flowing from the inward sense and feeling of our hearts, as they are
said to do a thing always, who do it upon all due occasions. See 2 Samuel 9. 13.
Secondly, from the matter, for which we are to give thanks, for all things,
whether spiritual or temporal, prosperous or adverse; for, God makes all
things, even those which are adverse, work together for the good of such as
love Him, Romans 8. 28. yea, He punishes less than our iniquities deserve, Ezra
9. 13. and makes saddest corrections to afford most necessary and profitable
instructions, Psalm. 94. 12. and 119. 71. so that there is ground of
thanksgiving, even for those. Thirdly, from the party to whom this duty is to
be discharged, unto God and the Father. See upon Col. 3. ver. 17. doct. 3. And,
fourthly, from the party through whom, Jesus Christ, by the virtue of whose
merit and satisfaction (which are His name whereby He is known) we are not only
enabled to go about our duty, Philip. 4. 13. but also all our spiritual
performances, whether of prayer or thanksgiving, are acceptable and
well-pleasing unto God, Ephesians. 1. 6. Doct. 1. The more a man does find his heart
disposed to give thanks to God at all times, and for all things, even for those
things wherein divine dispensation goes cross to his own affections, he may
the more certainly conclude that he has the saving work of Gods Spirit in him
in a copious measure; and the more apt we are to mistake, repine and murmr at
Gods dealing, and so to wast our spirits in heartlesse complaints, there is the
less evidence of a gracious work of Gods Spirit in us, at least in any great
measure: for, he makes giving of thanks always for all things, an effect of
being filled with the Spirit. 2. So firm, so calm and composed is that man's
state and inward frame of heart, who has his soul replenished with a rich
measure of the saving work of Gods Spirit, that nothing can fall out so cross
unto him, but, he may see the hand of God working for good to him in it, and
consequently be kept in perfect peace, and a joyful frame of heart, expressing
it self in giving of thanks to God, notwithstanding of it, yea and for it: for,
he shows, the man filled with the Spirit, may attain to this fixed frame of
heart, even to be giving thanks always for all things unto God. 3. Spiritual
exercises, especially that of giving thanks, are such, that, being rightly gone
about, frequency in them does not beget satiety and loathing, but rather a
greater delight to continue in them; so that the more we are acquainted with
them, the more we love them: for, otherwise this command of giving thanks
always, should never receive obedience. 4. So steadable and useful is a
cheery and thankful frame of heart unto a Christian, that it brings meat out
of the eater, encouragement from matter of discouragement, and takes occasion
to lift it self up in the praises of God, even from these things which are
matter of down-casting and heartlesse drouping unto others: for, a thankful
heart will give thanks always and for all things, even for adverse and cross
dispensations. 5. Though we are bound to give thanks unto men for favors
received, as unto instruments of Gods good providence toward us, Col. 3. -15.
yet, religious thanksgiving is only due unto God, as implying an eying of Him
to whom we give thanks, as the supreme fountain and author of the favor
received, having sufficiency in Himself, and receiving nothing from any other,
1 Chronicles. 29. 14. and implying also a religious subjection of the whole man,
both in soul and body, unto his benefactour, in evidence of a thankful heart,
1 Cor. 6. 20. for, the Apostle, speaking of this religious thanksgiving, will
have it ascribed to God only; Giving thanks unto God and the Father. 6. That we
may employ Jesus Christ aright, whether for furniture and through-bearing in
duty, or for acceptance of our performances by God, it is most conducing and
necessary that we so take Him up, as He is made known by the Word in His
Person, Nature and Offices, and accordingly close with Him by faith, as ours,
whereby, our faith being acted in Him with relation to our state and persons,
upon undoubted grounds, we may find more easy work to act faith in Him for
furniture to such a particular duty, or for acceptance to it when it is
performed: for, Paul seems to imply so much, while, teaching them to act
faith in Christ for through-bearing and acceptance in this duty of
thanksgiving, he does hold Him forth not only under His titles of Lord and
Jesus and Christ, which do imply His distinct Natures, with the unity of His
Person, and His threefold Office, to which He was anointed, (See upon chap. 1.
ver. 17. doct. 6.) but also makes mention of His Name, which expresses
whatever other thing is revealed of Him, and whereby especially He is made
known; and withal appropriateth Christ unto himself, teaching them to do the
like upon grounds of knowledge of what He is, while he says, in the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

Verse. 21. Submitting your selves one to another in the fear of God.
THe Apostle (having from chap. 4. ver. 1. exhorted unto such duties, as belong
to all Christians in general, of whatsoever rank or station) does now, in the
second part of this Chapter, exhort to those duties which belong to Christians,
as they are members of families. And, first, in this verse to make way from the
former purpose to that which follows, he does premit a general exhortation
unto all, whether superiors or inferiors, to be mutually subject one to
another: where, submission, or subjection, is taken, not strictly for that
which is the root of obedience in inferiors toward superiors, as ver. 22. but
generally, for that service of love which every one owes to another for their
mutual good and advantage in their several stations. See upon Gal. 5. ver.
13. And it is called submission to our neighbor; because it is not sufficient
that we simply do the commanded duty unto him, except our so doing flow from a
principle of love to him, and that we actually intend therein his good and
advantage; and because it must be done with condescendency of spirit and
stouping, seeing our proud and lofty spirits do look upon every duty toward our
neighbor, as below them. And he adds in the fear of God: which contains 1.
a motive to the duty, this mutual submission and stouping unto all those
duties, which we owe one to another, being an evidence of a man's fearing God,
Genesis 42. 18. and, 2. the right fountain, from whence this submission should
flow; for, then do we our duty toward others acceptably, and as we ought, when
our so doing flows from the fear and awe of God, Col. 3. -22: and, 3. the
rule and measure of this submission, there being none bound to submit himself
to please his neighbor further than is consisting with that subjection and
obedience which he owes unto God, Act. 5. 29. Doct. 1. We are not, under
pretense of going about the duties of Gods immediate worship, to neglect those
other duties of our particular callings, and which we owe to man in our several
stations: God allows time for both, we are to take time for both; and
conscientious regard of the one and of the other, are most consistent: for, the
Apostle enjoyneth both the former, and latter sort of duties, as it were with
one breath, which is clear from the grammatical construction of the words;
Giving thanks always -- submitting your selvet one to another. Yea, secondly,
The conscientious discharging of those duties which we owe to our neighbor in
our several stations, in a way acceptable to God, does call for, and argue a
copious measure of, the saving work of Gods Spirit in the heart no less than
those other duties of Gods worship and service: for, this verse depends upon,
and is constructed with ver. 18. Be filled with the Spirit -- submitting your
selves. 3. There are none living, whom God allows to live only to themselves;
but all are bound to lay out themselves in their respective employments for the
good and behoof of others; even superiors for the good of inferiors: for, this
command is given to all without exception; Submitting your selves one to
another. 4. As God has tied us not to live to our selves only, but also to
others, whose good we are to aim at in our place and station; So, for a
recompense, and that there may be a kind of equality, He has tied those others
to live also unto us, and one way or other to be forthcoming for our good and
advantage: for, the command and obligation founded upon it, is reciprocal;
Submitting your selves one to another. 5. Where the fear of God is rooted in
the heart, it will make a man conscientiously careful and tender of his duty
toward man, so that he will not only do his duty, but also do it from a right
principle and motive, and so do as he will not overdo, by displeasing God,
while he goes about to please men: for, he holds forth the fear of God, as
the fountain, motive and rule of that submission which is here enjoined;
Submitting one to another in the fear of God.

Verse. 22. Wives, submit your selves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord.
THe Apostle comes now to press those particular duties, which are incumbent
to every member of a compleet Family. And, being to begin with the duties of
husbands and wives, he does in the first place exhort wives to their duty, to
wit, that part of it, which is peculiar to them, passing-by those other duties
which are common to them with their husbands, as love, (Tit. 2. 4. Col. 3. 19.)
communion of body and goods, (1 Cor. 7. 4.) dwelling together, (1 Pet. 3. 7-)
bearing mutually with one another infirmities, Gal. 6. 2. These duties then
peculiar to the wives, are here briefly summed up in this one word of
submission, properly and strictly so called: and it supposes somewhat in the
wife, to wit, a reverend esteem of her husband, as the root of this submission,
spoken of, ver. 33. to be evidenced in her respective speaking to him, and of
him, 1 Pet. 3. 6. and it expresses somewhat, to wit, the obedience of the wife
to her husband in things lawful, flowing from reverence and submission of
mind, 1 Pet. 3. 5, 6. It implies also somewhat, as consequentiall to that
state of subjection, wherein the wife is placed, even the exercise of several
virtues, as that she be a keeper at home, Tit. 2. 5. an active promotter of her
husband's and her own affairs, especially within doors, Prove. 31. 13, etc. that
she evidence shamefastness, sobriety and submission in her moderate speech, in
her grave and affable deportment, and in rendering her self teachable in those
things wherein she shall be instructed by her husband, 1 Timothy 2. 9, 10, 11, 12.
Now, this submission of the wives, is explained, first, from the party to whom
they owe it, to wit, their own husbands, even though they should come short of
others in knowledge, wisdom, and every other thing, which does deserve it, 1 Samuel 25. 17. And, 2. from the manner, motive and rule of their submissive
obedience, while he says, as unto the Lord, to wit, Christ, expressly spoken
of, ver. 23. For, 1. It must not be constrained and feigned, but willing and
sincere, resembling so far, at least, that subjection which they owe to the
Lord Christ: for, though the comparative particle as, does not hold forth an
equality in all things; yet it points at a similitude and likeness in some
things. 2. It must not flow from a natural principle only of law, custom, or
desire of preventing domestic broils; but from conscience of duty to the Lord
Christ, and from respect to His ordinance, who has so appointed. And, thirdly,
it must be only in things lawful, and no ways contrary to that submissive
obedience, which they owe to Him. Doct. 1. As the right ordering of Families
does conduce much to the advancing of Religion and Policy; (combination in
Families being the foundation of all other societies) So the good and orderly
conversation of husband and wife, is of great concernment for advancing piety
and godliness among all the other members of the Family: for, as the Apostle
presses much those duties which belong to Christians, as they are members of
Families; so he does begin with the duties of husband and wife. Wives, submit
your selves. 2. When we are to deal with persons of several estates and
conditions, and to inform and press upon them their respective duties, we are
to begin with the inferiors, rather than the superiors; because their duty,
through the subjection which is in it, is more difficile, and being made
conscience of, is a strong motive unto the Superior to go about his duty in
like manner: for therefore the Apostle, in pressing duties upon those three
pairs, which are in every complete Family, does always begin with the
inferior first, as here, Wives, submit your selves. 3. The great and main duty
which a wife, as a wife, ought to learn, and so learn as to practice it, is to
be subject to her own husband, so that what ever wives be otherwise for parts,
for birth, for beauty, for thrift, for breeding, if this be inlaking, they want
their chief ornament, are dishonorable to God, and a disgrace to their
husbands; for, Paul does hold it forth as their great lesson, and the sum of
all their duty; Wives, submit your selves unto your own husbands. 4. There is
no wife, what ever be her birth, parts, or any other privilege, who is
exempted from this ty of subjection to her own husband. The law of nature,
God's ordinance, and her own voluntary covenant, do bind her to it; for, he
speaks indefinitely to all wives; submit your selves. 5. There is not any
husband, to whom this honor of submission from his own wife is not due; no
personal infirmity, frowardness of nature, no, nor error in the point of
Religion does deprive him of it, 1 Cor. 7. 13. for, he speaks indefinitely
also of husbands; Wives, submit your selves unto your own husbands. 6. A wife
can never discharge her duty in any measure of conscientious tenderness
toward her husband, except she have an high esteem of the Lord Christ, and be
in the first place subject unto Him; that so from love to Him she may subject
her self to her husband, not going without those bounds of submission, which
are consistent with her love to Christ: for, while he bids submit themselves
unto their husbands, as unto Christ, he supposes they had submitted to Christ
already, and speaks to them as such.

Verse. 23. For the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head
of the Church: and he is the savior of the body.
THe Apostle does, next, enforce this duty of submissive obedience upon wives,
from the ordinance of God, who has made the husband to be an head to his wife:
which similitude of an head, taken from a natural or politic body, implies,
first, the husbands eminency by reason of his sex, the woman being the weaker
vessel, 1 Pet. 3. -7- and made for the man (to wit, an helper to him, Genesis 2.
18.) and the man not for the wife, 1 Cor. 11. 9. as the head is more eminent
than the body. 2. It implies the husbands power and authority of government
over his wife, as the head has power over the body to rule and direct it: in
which respect the man is called the image of God in a sense peculiar to
himself, which agrees not to the woman, 1 Cor. 11. 7. And, it implies,
thirdly, that ordinarily men are, at least should be, endued with a greater
measure of knowledge, prudence and other parts, which they are to employ for
the behoof of their wives, 1 Cor. 14, 35. even as the head is the seat of
wisdom, knowledge, nerves and senses, sending down influence for sense and
motion to all the members: upon all which grounds, women ought in reason to be
subject to their husbands. Which argument he does illustrate and enforce from
the similitude of Christ's headship over the Church (whereof see chap. 1. ver.
22) so that wives ought to submit themselves, because God will have some
resemblance of Christ's authority over the Church held forth in the husbands
authority over the wife. I say, some resemblance only: for, the comparative
particle as, holds forth not an equality, but a similitude and likeness, and
in some things only, betwixt Christ's headship over the Church, and the husbands
over the wife, even in those things, which I presently show are employed in the
husbands headship, which are some shaddows only of that eminency, power and
fullness of grace and perfections, which are in our head Christ. But besides
those, the Apostle does here express one thing, wherein this resemblance does
also hold to wit, that Christ, as head, is the Savior of the body, thereby
implying, that as Christ's dominion over the Church, His body, does tend to, and
is exercised in procuring and bringing about the Churches good and salvation;
So the husbands authority and eminency are given him for the like end, even to
procure the good and safety of his wife, in defending her from injuries, (1 Samuel 30. 18.) providing for her, (1 Timothy 5. 8.) directing her in things
necessary, etc. 1 Cor. 14. 35. and therefore the wife, upon this consideration
also, ought to subject her self; seeing the husbands power and authority over
her are given for her good. Besides those doctrines, which the Text thus
explained does expressly hold forth, we may gather these consequences from it,
1. It is not sufficient that wives do subject themselves to their husbands from
respect to their own peace, ease, credit, or to any thing of that sort; but
their subjection ought to flow from the conscience of, and respect to that
state and dignity wherein God has placed their husbands above them, so that
their personal infirmities do not prevail so much to make them despise them,
as the dignity of their state to beget respect, reverence and obedience toward
them: for, Paul enforces such a subjection, as flows from this ground, while
he says, for the husband is the head of the wife. 2. There is no society,
though never so strictly tied together with strongest bonds, which can
comfortably subsist, and keep together for any space of time, except there be
different degrees of superiors and inferiors, some to govern, and others to
obey in the Lord, among them: for, the wise Lord did see it necessary so to
ordain, even in conjugall society of husband and wife, who are so strictly
tied, that both are but one flesh, (See ver. 31.) and yet the husband is made
the head of the wife. 3. Christians ought to be of such an heavenly frame of
spirit, as to take occasion from things civil or natural, which do occur in
their ordinary employments, to ascend to heavenly contemplations of things
spiritual, which have some resemblance to these other things, which are among
their hands: for, the Apostle teaches so much, while he leads husband and
wife from the consideration of the union, order and duties of married parties,
to contemplate that sweet union and order, which is betwixt Christ and His
Church, both here and in the following verses; Even as Christ is the head of
the Church, says he. 4. Husbands, and consequently other Superiors, have a
special piece of the image of Christ put upon them, in respect of their power
and authority over their inferiors given them of God; whereby both inferiors
may be afraid to vilify and contemn their authority, lest they be therein
found defacers of the image of God, and they themselves also may be taught to
resemble Christ, whose image they bear, in employing their state and dignity,
so as they walk answerably to it, if they would have that submission and
respect from inferiors which is due unto it: for, Paul makes that eminency
and authority, which husbands have over their wives, a shadow and resemblance
of Christ's power over His Church; even as Christ is the head of the Church. 5.
As the members of Christ's body are by nature lost and gone, even dead in sin
and children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 1. -3. So there was no way for their recovery,
but by Jesus Christ His becoming man, and suffering death, and uniting Himself,
being now risen from death, unto them as their head, that so He may bestow the
influences of spiritual life, with a right to heaven upon them, here, and at
last take them to Himself in glory hereafter: for, he shows that Christ is
become the Churches head, that He might be a Savior of his lost body. 6. The
dominion and power which husbands have over their wives, is not tyrannical,
rigid, or sovereign, but loving, gentle, warm and amiable, and such as the wife
may look upon as a mercy to her self, as well as a dignity unto her husband;
for, it is compared here unto that sweet and natural power which the head
exercises over the body, and Christ over His Church, who makes His people
willing in the day of His power; and it ought to be employed wholly for the
good and safety of his wife, as Christ is the Savior of the body.

Verse. 24. Therefore as the Church is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be
to their own husbands in every thing.
THe Apostle, secondly, repeateth the exhortation, as a conclusion from the
former argument, that wives should subject themselves unto their own husbands;
and adds two things, 1. The manner of this subjection, to wit, such, as it
may resemble the subjection of the Church unto Christ: which is to be
understood, not in all things; (for wives are not to subject their souls and
consciences to their husbands, as Believers do to Christ, trusting in Him for
life and salvation) but in some things only, to wit, so, as they may subject
themselves willingly, cheerfully, lovingly, chastely, and dutifully unto their
husbands: for, so does the Church subject herself unto Christ. He adds,
secondly, the extent of this subjection and obedience, even to all things:
which is not to be understood of all things absolutely, and without exception,
Acts 5. 29, but all things lawful, godly, honest, and which are not forbidden
in the Word of God, even though they cross the humor of the wives, and argue
little discretion in the husband who commands them, Numb. 5. 14, 15. etc.
for, nothing is excepted here but what is contrary to that subjection which is
due to Him who has commanded this subjection of wives to their husbands, as
Paul commenteth upon an expression like to this, 1 Cor. 15. 27. Doct. 1. As
subjection in wives unto their husbands, is a most necessary duty; So,
considering the inbred pride, arrogance and self-willednesse, which is in all
the sons and daughters of Adam by nature, it is a work of no small difficulty
to get wives peswaded to give that hearty, cheerful, loving and dutiful
respect and obedience unto their husbands, which both the Law of nature, and
the written Word of God do require from them: for, to what purpose else does he
reiterate this exhortation, and enforce it by so strong and convincing
arguments? Therefore as the Church is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be
unto their own husbands. 2. Though there be much unmortified corruption in the
Church of true Believers, and a law in their members rebelling against the law
of their mind, Romans 7. 23. yet God does look upon them as true and loyal
subjects to Christ: in so far, as with the Spirit and better part (according to
which God does reckon with them) they serve the Law of God, Romans 7. 25. and do
groan after, and long for the time when they shall be fully freed from the body
of death, and thoroughly subjected unto the will of God, Phil. 1. 23. for, while
he says, as the Church is subject unto Christ, it is supponed that the Church
is subject unto Him, and looked upon by God as such. 3. The servants of Christ
in pressing duties, ought mainly to guard against that extremity, which people
naturally are most prone to fall into; especially, seeing all the guards, which
can be used, will have sufficient work to keep the heart from breaking over
upon that hand: for, though there be some things excepted from coming under
that obedience, which wives do owe to their husbands, as was cleared in the
exposition; yet, because wives are more inclined to multiply exceptions in
this purpose, than to diminish them. Therefore he extends this obedience
expressly to all things, leaving them only to gather from the circumstances of
the Text, and other places of Scripture, those few things which are excepted;
that thereby he may with one word cut off all unscriptural exceptions,
limitations and restrictions, which imperious, aspiring spirits, impatient of
the yoke, are ready to bound and straiten this submission and obedience by; Let
them be subject in every thing, says he.

Verse. 25. Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the Church, and
gave Himself for it.
THe Apostle does now exhort husbands to their duty: which he, first, proponeth
summarily under the name of love to their wives, whereby the heart, and inmost
affections of the husband ought to be so inclined and disposed toward his
wife, as that not only he do wish her good, but also endeavor unto his utmost
to bring it about: which is not to be so understood, as if the wife were not
bound to love her husband also, Tit. 2. 4. But he presses love upon the
husband in particular, because he is most ready to fail in this duty of love,
and to abuse that superiority which God has given him over his wife, by
proving rigorous and bitter against her, Col. 3. -19. Now this love enjoined to
husbands, is not that common Christian love, which is extended unto all
Christians of both sexes, as unto brethren and sisters in Christ, Joh. 13. 34.
but a special and conjugall love, which ought to be extended unto none, but
unto a man's own wife: and it includes cohabitation with his wife, and
contentation with her love only, Prove. 5. 18, 19. a patient bearing with her
infirmities and frailties, 1 Pet. 3. 7. with a fatherly care to defend her, 1 Samuel 30. 5, etc. to provide for her in all things, according to his power;
which either her necessity or dignity of her rank does require, 1 Timothy 5. 8.
lovingly to govern, direct and instruct her, 1 Cor. 14. 35. yea, and to cherish
her, ver. 29. Next, he inforceth this duty by two arguments: The first whereof,
is proponed in this verse, to wit, Christ's example, who loved His Church, and
from love gave Himself for it. See upon ver. 2. Which example of Christ's love,
does not only enforce the duty as an argument, but also point forth the right
manner of the duty, as a pattern: In so far as the husbands love ought to
resemble Christ's, to wit, in the chastity of His love, who loves none to His
Church, Joh. 17. 9. the sincerity of His love, who loves the Church, not for
His, but for her advantage, Prove. 8. 30. with Gal. 2. -20. not for what is
hers, but for her self, Hos. 14. -4- and not in words only, but in deeds also,
testifying His love by the effects, Joh. 15. 13. and in the constancy of His
love, who loves whom He loves unto the end, Joh. 13. -1. even,
notwithstanding of their infirmities, Psalm. 89. 30, 33. such ought the
husband's love to be. Doct. 1. Though husbands are not to suffer their wives to
exercise dominion and authority over them, that being contrary to the Ordinance
of God, and the good both of husband and wife, ver. 22. 23. yet, seeing the
nature of men, and of husbands in particular with relation to their wives, are
sufficiently bent of their own accord to exercise any power and authority they
have, and rather to exceed their due, than to keep within it; therefore neither
ought they themselves so much to mind their power, neither is it so necessary
for them to be minded thereof by others, as to be careful how to use their
power and authority well, and as it ought: for, therefore the Apostle, though
he commanded the wives to submit; yet, he does not expressly bid the husbands
rule over their wives, but, husbands love your wives, as thinking it more fit
to let them understand how to use their power well, than to stir them up to the
exercise of it. 2. The great and main duty, which an husband, as an husband,
ought to learn, and so learn as to practice it, is love to his wife; and so to
love her, as to make love kyth in all his deportment toward her, and in all
those other duties, which he owes to her; this being that one thing in the
husband, which sweetneth the yoke of subjection laid upon the wife, gives her
courage under it, and makes her willingly submit unto it, when it receives
such a sweet return from her husband: for, Paul does hold forth this as the
husbands great lesson, and the sum of all his other duty; Husbands love your
wives. 3. There is no husband, whatever he be for birth, parts, authority, or
power, who is not tied to love his wife, and to evidence his love to her in all
those duties mentioned in opening up the Text: for, he speaks indefinitly
unto all; Husbands love your wives. 4. Neither is there any wife, to whom all
those duties, flowing from the fountain of love, are not due by her husband. No
meannesse of birth, (Esther 2. 17.) no personal infirmity, (1 Samuel 1. 5.)
adultery being excepted, Matthew. 19. -9- nor frowardness of nature (Joh. 19.
17.) do prejudge her of them: for, he speaks indefinitly also of the wives;
Husbands love your wives. 5. Though it concerns husbands and wives, and
others also, who are tied together by mutual relations, as masters and
servants, parents and children, to take some sort of inspection one of another,
lest any of their relations come short of their duty, 2 King. 5. 13. yet, it
concerns every one most, to make conscience of his own duty, not only to God,
but also to his relations, and that, as for other reasons, so for this, There
can be no greater encouragement to stir up his relations to make conscience of
their duty to him: for, he commands every one to mind their own duty most,
the wives to submit themselves, the husbands to love their wives, and so in the
rest. 6. As Jesus Christ has deigned Himself to undergo the relation of an
husband to His Church; So this, and those other relations taken on by Him, are
not empty titles; He does the duties, which all such relations do bind to, even
to the utmost. And particularly. He is such an husband, that for love to His
Church, and all other duties flowing from love, He is exemplary unto all other
husbands; seeing greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down His
life for His friends, Joh. 14. 13. for, as Paul implies here, and in the
verses following, that Christ is the Churches husband; so he holds forth His
love as a pattern to be imitated by all; Husbands love your wives, even as
Christ also loved the Church. 7. The love which a husband carries to his wife,
ought to be founded, not upon beauty, riches, health, or any such thing only
which is subject unto decay, but also, and principally, upon that unchangable
foundation of the love of Christ unto His Church: which is here held forth, not
only as a pattern, but as an argument also, and the reason wherefore husbands
ought to love their wives, even as Christ also loved the Church. 8. As those,
whom Christ does love with a special love, are only His, that is, real
Believers, who are subject to Him, ver. 24. So Jesus Christ did give Himself to
death, not for all and every one, Joh. 17. 9. but only for His Church, which is
His All, and consists of some of all Nations, and of all ranks in the world,
in which respect only Christ is said to have died for all, 1 Timothy 2. 6. for,
Paul astricteth both His love and His death to the Church; As Christ also loved
the Church, and gave himself for it. See some further Doctrines gathered from
the like words, ver. 2.

Verse. 26. That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water, by
the word,
HE insisteth upon this excellent pattern of love, by showing two ends, why
Christ from love did give Himself for His Church. The first whereof, is
attained in the present life, and expressed in this verse, to wit, that He
might sanctify those for whom He gave Himself. Which sanctifying work, as it
is here taken, does comprehend that whole complex business of translating the
Elect from the state of sin and death, to the state of grace and life, even our
regeneration, justification, and the gracious change of our dispositions, or
sanctification strictly so called, as Joh. 17. 17. which he calls a cleansing
of us, expressing the manner how Christ does sanctify His Church, even by
doing away the guilt of sin, or obligation to wrath because of sin in
justification, Romans 8. 1. and the filth, power, and activity of sin, in the
renovation of our natures after His own Image, Romans 6. 14. which cleansing
work, is here described from the external means and instruments by which
Christ does cleanse His Church, and make application of the virtue and power of
His death and sufferings, in order to that end. And those are, 1. the Sacrament
of Baptism, called the washing of water, because of the external rite and
element used in that Sacrament; and cleansing is ascribed to this washing, not,
as if there were any virtue bestowed upon the water by God; whereby grace is
conferred and really wrought, 1 Pet. 3. 21. but because, though it be God
alone, who wholly and effectually does sanctify and cleanse us, 1 Cor. 3. 7.
yet, this Sacrament, as also the other, are made use of by Him, not only to
represent Christ, and those gracious saving works of His, 1 Corinthians. 10. 16.
but also to confirm the grant of them to us, if we believe, Romans 4. 11- yea,
and to exhibit a greater measure of those saving graces unto us upon our right
using of them, 1 Cor. 11. 24. therefore is it, that the thing signified is
ascribed unto the sign and seal. Now, the Apostle does mention Baptism only,
and not the Lords Supper, either because there is the same reason for both, and
therefore it was sufficient to express the one; or, because Baptism is the
first and leading Sacrament, and seals up our regeneration and new birth in a
peculiar manner, Tit. 3. 5. and therefore it is most appositly mentioned here,
where he speaks of God's work in bringing sinners out of nature unto the
state of grace. The second mean and instrument which God makes use of, is the
Word, to wit, the Covenant of Grace revealed in the Gospel, and preached by
sent Ministers, Romans 10. 15. which the Lord does bless for conveying grace to
graceless sinners, and so, for sanctifying and cleansing them, not by any
virtue in the sound, syllabs or sentences of this Word, but by the effectual
working of His own Spirit, Acts 16. 14. whereby He does accompany His Word,
when, and where He pleases, Joh. 3. 8. Doct. 1. The love, which an husband
carries unto his wife, ought to make it self evident, not only in these things
which tend to her welbeing in things temporal, but also, and chiefly, in his
sincere endeavors to bring about her spiritual and eternal good, by laboring
to instruct her in the saving knowledge of God in Christ, 1 Pet. 3. 7. lovingly
to admonish her for her faults, Job 2. 10. and to pray with her, and for her, 1
Pet. 3. -7. for, the example of Christ's love to His Church which he is to
imitate, does teach so much, seeing He from love gave Himself for the Church,
that He might sanctify and cleanse her. 2. As Gods Image was lost and
forfeited by Adam's fall unto all his posterity: so there was not any possible
way, for our recovering of it, except a price, and no less price than the
blood of Christ, had been first paid to provoked justice for it: for, Christ
behoved to give Himself, and thereby purchase sanctification for us, that so He
might sanctify and cleanse the Church. 3. Our dying Lord had an actual
intention in due time to sanctify, and accordingly does regenerate, justify
and sanctify, yea, and bring unto glory all those for whom he died, and gave
Himself a sacrifice and offering unto God: for, His intentions cannot be
frustrated, but He must see the travel of His soul, Isa. 53. 11. Now, that He
intended to sanctify all such, is clear; For He gave Himself for it, that He
might sanctify and cleanse it. 4. As all those, for whom Christ our Lord did
from love give Himself, and whom by His death He intended to sanctify, were in
themselves polluted and unclean, lying in their blood, defiled both with the
guilt of sin already committed, and with the filthy vileness of sin yet
indwelling, Ephesians. 2. 1,-3. So, such was the fervency of love in Christ to lost
sinners, and such was the virtue of His merit, that no uncleanness of this
kind did make Him loath them, or despare of getting them made clean; For that
He gave Himself for the Church to cleanse it, supponeth that they were unclean,
and yet He loves them, and from love sets about to cleanse them. 5. The
stain and blot of sin, both in its filth and guilt, has so much sunk down in,
and polluted the whole man in soul and body, that no liquor under heaven can
wash it out, or cleanse the soul from it, but only the washing cleansing virtue
of Christ's most precious blood; For He gave Himself for the Church, that He
might cleanse it. 6. This precious liquor of Christ's blood did not cleanse and
sanctify all those for whom He gave Himself, so soon as it was shed upon the
cross, no, there neither was, nor can be any cleansing of any by the blood of
Christ, until it be effectually applied unto the filthy soul: for, he
mentions the Word and Sacraments, as the means whereby Christ applies the
virtue of His death, and ascribes therefore this effect of cleansing unto
them; He gave Himself, that He might cleanse it, by the washing of water, by
the word. 7. As this work and duty of applying the cleansing virtue of Christ's
death by a lively faith (Act. 15. 9.) is of all the other most difficult; So
the goodness of God has provided many means, by the help whereof, we may be
carried on toward it, the chief whereof are the Word preached, and the
Sacraments administrated, the former containing the charter, or grant of
Christ, and of all His benefits from God, unto every one, who will receive Him,
Job. 3. 16. The latter being the great seal of heaven annexed to this grant,
Romans 4. 11. that thereby we may be more and more confirmed in the faith of it:
for. His providing these means, does point at both the difficulty of applying
Christ, and his care to have us brought up to it; That He might cleanse it, by
the washing of water, and by the word. 8. The Spirit of God prescribes means
unto Himself, by which He brings about the work of grace in graceless
sinners, not to ty Himself absolutely, and in all cases to such means, but that
we may be tied to depend on Him in the use of them, His ordinary way being to
convey grace by these: for, though He may sanctify some from the womb, before
they hear the Word, or receive any Sacrament, Jer. 1. 5. yet, He holds these
forth, as the ordinary means, by which He cleanses, even the washing of water
by the word.

Verse. 27. That he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having
spot or wrinkle, or any such thing: but that it should be holy and without
blemish.
HEre is the second end of Christ's giving Himself for His Church, as also of
His sanctifying it; which end is not attained until the life to come: for,
(besides that he has spoken of the Churches state of grace, ver. 26) the words
here used, are so comprehensive and large, that they cannot be well understood
to have their full accomplishment, until Believers be brought by Christ unto
that full perfection in grace which shall be attained in glory. Which state of
perfection is here set forth, by that most perfect union and conjunction which
the Church shall have with Christ, being presented to Him as the Bride to the
Bridegroom, for the through accomplishing of the marriage; by virtue of which
most perfect union the Church shall be glorious, that is, perfectly holy and
happy, as he after explaineth, showing all evil, whether of sin or misery,
shall be removed, even the least spot of sin, or wrinkle through old age or
misery, not excepted; and that all contrary good shall be bestowed, both
perfect holiness and happiness, in such a measure, that the most rigid
critic or Momus himself shall not find any inlack or defect in either, as the
word, rendered without blemish, will bear. Doct. 1. All those who are justified
and sanctified here, and none but they, shall be glorified hereafter: for,
Christ must see the travel of His soul, Isa. 53. 11. which is not only to
sanctify those for whom He gave Himself, ver. 26. but also to glorify them,
and to bring them to glory by the way of holiness; That He might present it to
Himself a glorious Church. 2. Christ has purchased by His death, not only
sanctification to His Church, but also heaven it self, and therefore our glory
in heaven is not merited by our holiness, but, being purchased by Christ, is
freely gifted to us, Romans 6. 23. He gave Himself for it, that He might present
it to Himself a glorious Church, says he. 3. Though Belivers, even while they
are here, be brought near to God in Christ by faith, Ephesians. 2. 13. and have
fellowship with the Father, and with His Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 1. -3. yet
all that fellowship and nearness, is but a distance and kind of estrangement,
being compared with that most perfect presence and intimate fellowship, which
shall be enjoyed hereafter; the former being but mediate, through the glaste of
Ordinances, 1 Cor. 13. 12. frequently interrupted, Psalm. 30. 7. and no ways
full, 1 Cor. 13. 12. but the latter shall be immediate, 1 Cor. 13. 12.
constant, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. and so full, that they who enjoy the meanest degree,
shall find no inlack, Psalm. 17. 15. for, he speaks of Christ's presenting His
Church to Himself in glory at the great day, as if there were nothing but
uncouthnesse and distance betwixt Him and the Church until then; that he might
present it to himself a glorious Church, says he. 4. Though every believing
soul is, when the Father draws it to Christ, contracted and handfasted with
Him, Hos. 2. 19, 20. yet, for good and wise reasons, it pleases the Lord
Christ to delay the taking of us home to Himself, and the accomplishment and
consummation of the begun marriage, until all the Elect, being effectually
called, shall be presented to Him at once; and so this spiritual marriage
shall be fully accomplished betwixt Jesus Christ and the Bride, the Lambs wife,
Rev. 19. 7. even as in earthly marriages, there is first, a Contract, or
Espousals, and then, for just and honest reasons, some space of time ought to
interveen betwixt that and the full accomplishment of the marriage, Deuteronomy. 20.
7. Matthew. 1. 18. for, Paul shows that then, at the great day the whole Church
of real Believers shall be presented to Christ, as the Bride is to the
Bridegroom, for the solemn consummation of the marriage; That he might present
it to himself a glorious Church. 5. As believing souls, even after their being
contracted with Christ by faith, and after they are renewed and cleansed in
part, do not get all their filthy garments put off, there being a body of sin
and death which cleaves unto the best: So, at the final solemnization of the
marriage in the great day, the Church of Believers, the Bride, and Lambs wife,
shall be clad in garments of glory, being fully freed from the smallest remnant
of sin and misery, and made wholly glorious both in soul, (Matthew. 22. 30.) and
body, Phil. 3. 21. for, he says, that he might present it unto himself a
glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, etc. 6. Those garments of glory,
and needle work, wherewith the Church the Lambs wife shall be arrayed in the
marriage-day, are dearly purchased, and freely bestowed upon her by Christ her
Bridegroom and head: for, Paul says, Christ gave himself for the Church, that
he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle,
etc, 7. This perfect glorious state, wherein the Church shall be for ever with
Christ her Lord, her Head, her Husband, is such, as none can positively declare
what it is, yea, neither can the heart of man comprehend it, and all the
knowledge which can be here in our state of imperfection attained of it, is not
so much positive, or a knowing what it is, as negative, or a knowing what it is
not, by removing all those things from it, which imply the least degree of sin
and misery: for therefore does Paul set it out here by four negatives, Not
having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, and without blemish, and by one
affirmative only, that it should be holy.

Verse. 28. So ought men to love their wives, as their own bodies: he that
loves his wife, loves himself.
Follows the second argument to enforce this duty of love upon husbands
toward their wives, taken from the near conjunction betwixt husband and wife,
which he does propound in this verse, by showing that the wife is the husbands
body, in so far, as by the law of marriage (which shall be explained, ver. 30.)
they two become one flesh; so that in loving her, he does love himself, to wit,
not so much, because his so doing tends to his own good and peace, (though
that be also truth, Prove. 5. 17, 18, 19.) as that she is his own body, a piece
of himself, yea and his whole self, or a second self, they two being one flesh;
and therefore he ought to love her, yea, and to love her with the same
sincerity and ardency of affection, kything in the same or like effects,
wherewith he loves his own body, yea both his soul and body, which are
himself: for the words, as their own bodies, are both an argument to enforce
upon them the duty, and a rule to direct them in the right manner of practicing
the duty. Doct. 1. As love in husbands toward their wives, after the pattern of
Christ's love unto His Church, is a most necessary duty; So (considering the
many quench-coals of love, which the mutual infirmities both of husbands and
wives, do frequently furnish, together with that natural pronenesse, which is
in corrupt man, being advanced and preferred above others, to abuse his
authority, to domineer with a kind of tyranny over such as are under him) it
will be found a task not so easy, as at the first it would appear, for
husbands to keep this affection and love flowing from the right fountain, and
manifesting it self in all its necessary effects toward their wives: for, to
what purpose else does he reiterate this exhortation, and enforce it by so
strong and convincing arguments? So ought men to love their wives, as their own
bodies. 2. That place of honor and superiority, which God has given the man
over the wife, as appointing him to be her head, does tie him unto answerable
duty; so that the greater his honor is, the greater is his burden: and in
particular, it binds him to love her; and from love to govern, instruct,
cherish her, and provide for her, and to all other things by proportion, which
the head does for the body: for, from what he said, ver. 23. that the husband
is the head of the wife, he infers here, So ought men to love their wives,
as their own bodies. 3. Though there be a sinful love to a man's self, whereby
a man prefers himself, and the fulfilling of his inordinate desires to Gods
glory and the good of his neighbor, Philip. 2. 21. which by all means is to be
eschewed and mortified, Luke 9. 23. yet, there is an orderly, lawful, and
allowed love to self, whereby a man does seek his own preservation, both in
soul and body, by just and lawful means, with due subordination to Gods glory,
and without any opposition to, or setting himself against his neighbors good:
for, Paul supponeth this love ought to be in every man toward himself, and
does urge it, as the reason and rule of the love which the husband owes to his
wife, while he says, men ought to love their wives, as their own bodies: he
that loves his wife, loves himself. 4. The love which husbands do carry to
their wives, ought not to have its rise from any such extrinsecal
considerations, as love to their own peace and ease, fear of shame and
disgrace, if, through want of love, secret discontents break out to public
strife, or from any satisfaction which they find to their carnal affections,
but from respect to Gods holy Ordinance, whereby their wives are made a piece
of themselves; hence their love shall be most native, operative, yea, and
insuperable by any provocations or infirmities, when they shall look upon their
wives as themselves, and consequently upon their infirmities; shame, hurt, as
their own: for, Paul will have their love to flow from this fountain, while he
says, men ought to love their wives as their own bodies, etc. 5. That husbands
may carry themselves aright toward their wives, (which holds of all
superiors with relation to their inferiors) they would seriously consider,
not so much what is in the power of their hand, and what they are able to do,
or may be for their profit and advantage, or tend to get themselves obeyed,
feared and respected to the utmost, as what they ought, and is incumbent for
them to do, and what the Law of God, and the state they are in, do require from
them as their duty: for, the Apostle repeateth the former exhortation, held
forth, ver. 25. with the addition of one word, to wit, ought, whereby he
minds husbands, that the thing pressed was their duty, and therefore they
were to mind it; So ought men to love their wives, says he.

Verse. 29. For no man ever yet hated his own flesh: but nourishes and
cherishes it, even as the Lord the Church:
HE proves the consequence of the former argument, to wit, that husbands are
to love their wives, because they are their own bodies, by three reasons. The
first is taken from the universal custom of all men, to wit, who are in their
right wit, not demented and woefully deluded by the devil: which is set down,
first, negatively, no man did ever hate his own flesh, or from hatred did any
damage to it; and next, positively, every such man does to his utmost provide
for, and allow upon his own flesh, all things necessary, both for nourishing,
or feeding it, and for cherishing and keeping it warm, with such a sort of care
and tenderness, as hens have toward their young ones, while, by casting their
wings over them, they do with their own natural heat keep the young ones warm:
for, the word rendered cherishing, is a mephor taken from the practice of those
tender and loving creatures: By all which, he not only proves that husbands
should love their wives, as being their own body; but also hinteth at some of
those effects, wherein their love should be made manifest, whereof particular
mention shall be made among the Observations. Secondly, he proves the same
consequence, and also further clears with what care and tenderness the
husband should carry himself unto his wife, as to his own body, from Christ's
example, who nourishes and cherishes the Church, His body, by providing for
her, and allowing on her all things necessary for soul and body. Doct. 1. It is
no less monstrous and unnatural, for a man to hate, and from hatred to carry
himself austerely, saucily and undutifully to his wife, than if in a fit of
frenzy he should hate, and from hatred refuse to do all duty to himself; But
in stead thereof to be cruel against himself: for, the Apostle mentions this,
no man, not demented, did never hate his own flesh, to show that therefore
husbands ought as much to abhor and abstain from hating their wives; for no man
ever yet hated his own flesh. 2. It is not sufficient that husbands do not
carry any hatred to their wives, but they must also love them, and evidence
their love to them, not in empty words, and flattering insinuations, but in
providing all things necessary for them both in food and raiment: for, he
holds forth indirectly the husbands duty to his wife, in that allowed care
which every man has, or ought to have of his own flesh; No man ever yet bated
his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it. 3. It is the duty of an
husband to provide things necessary unto his wife, not grudgingly, or too
sparingly, as to a stranger, or to his child or servant; but liberally
according to her rank and station, as being his equal; and confidently, without
craving an exact account from her, of every thing which she receives, as
having a common right and interest with him in all things that are his; and
cheerfully, by testifying such contentment in her, even while he bestows
things necessary on her, as he would do in bestowing the same or the like on
himself: for, so much is employed in a man's nourishing and cherishing of his own
flesh, which is held forth as the rule of the husbands tender care and liberal
benevolence toward his wife; but nourishes and cherishes it. 4. The husband,
under pretense of cherishing his wife, ought not to pamper her, or lavishly to
wast his estate in upholding her prodigality in apparel, unnecessary, expensive
ornaments, and such like vanities; but the rule according to which he is to
walk in those things, and more than which the wife ought not to expect from her
husband, nor yet complain if he come up to it, is what his own rank requires,
his necessity does permit, and that tender care which is taken by him in
nourishing and cherishing himself: for, this is here held forth as his rule,
But nourishes and cherishes it, to wit, his own flesh. 5. Though there be an
excessive pampering of the flesh, which is sinful and forbidden, when
provision is made for it to fulfill the lusts thereof, Romans 13. 14. yet there
is a lawful and necessary care of the flesh, or of a man's own body, whereby
things necessary for food and raiment are bestowed upon it, in so far, that
health and strength be not inlacking for discharging the duties of our calling:
for, Paul does not condemn, but approve this custom among men, that no man ever
hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it. 6. As Christ's example in
His dealing toward the Church, is a most excellent copy, to be eyed and
imitated by husbands in their carriage toward their wives, and that not only in
their love, but in all those other duties, flowing from love, which they owe
unto them; So it does concern both husbands and wives, to eye this pattern
much, and to draw their motives and encouragements unto their mutual duties
from it, as that which will much conduce to keep their hearts in a spiritual
frame, even in those performances, and to prevent that carnal, worldly
disposition which the misguided care of performing such duties, as the
married-state of life calls for, does usually contract: for, as he propounded
Christ's example, for a motive to, and pattern of the duty of love, ver. 25. so
of those duties also, of nourishing and cherishing, which flow from it, in this
verse, even as the Lord the Church. 7. A husbands care ought to extend it self
not only to nourish and cherish his wife in things temporal, and which concern
her body only, but also in things spiritual, and which concern her soul; and
therefore he would be circumspect, lest (under pretense of eschewing all
suspicion of displeasure with her, and of giving necessary tokens and evidences
of his love and kindness to her, in order to his outward cherishing her) he do
neither willingly neglect the care of her salvation, or by fondness or
lightness incapacitate himself to do her any good in that respect: for, Christ
does nourish and cherish His Church, by taking care of, and providing mainly
for, the souls and eternal state of His People; and husbands are commanded
here to make Him their pattern, Even as the Lord the Church, says he.

Verse. 30. For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones.
HE gives here a reason why Christ does so cherish His Church, where, in stead
of naming the Church expressly, which the sequel of his discourse did require,
he mentions himself and other true Believers among the Ephesians under the
pronoun we; the Church here spoken of, for whom Christ did give Himself, being
only made up of such: And the reason is taken from that near and strict union,
or that spiritual marriage, which is betwixt Christ and Believers, whereof
that ancient marriage betwixt Adam and Eva was a kind of type and shadow, as
appears from the words here used,, which are taken from Genesis 2. 23. and were
uttered at first by Adam concerning himself and his wife, but are here, by
allusion to that marriage of theirs, made use of, to set forth the spiritual
marriage betwixt Christ and His Church, the tie and bond whereof is so near and
strict, that as the Apostle shows, all Believers are members of His body;
yea, not only of one nature with him, which is common to them with all mankind,
but also as they are new creatures, they have their original and nourishment
from Him, even from His flesh and bones, in so far, as they owe the beginning,
progress and accomplishment of their spiritual life, to Christ His taking on
of flash, and His suffering in the flesh, and by the virtue of those His
sufferings, they are quickened and fed, and so are of His flesh, and of his
bones. Doct. 1. Then do we speak, and hear to our comfort and edification,
these truths, which express the tender and warm care of Christ unto His
Church, when we make application of them to our selves, and by a lively faith
do enter our selves among these for whom He does so care: for, the Apostle,
having in the preceding verse spoken of Christ's nourishing and cherishing of
His Church, applies that to himself, and other true Believers among the
Ephesians, while he says, for we are members of his body. 2. Then may we upon
good grounds apply these general truths unto our selves, when, as members of
Christ's mystical body, we draw our spiritual life and nourishment from that
virtue and influence which Christ has purchased by His sufferings in the
flesh: for, upon this ground, Paul does substitute himself, and other true
Believers in stead of the Church, and claims interest in Christ's tender and
warm care, whereby He does nourish and cherish His Church, while he says, we
are members of His body, of His flesh, and of His bones. 3. There is no
relation, which Christ has taken on toward His Church, but it binds him to,
and accordingly he will perform all those, answerable duties which men under
these relations are bound to perform toward those to whom they have them: for,
he gives a reason, why He did nourish and cherish His Church as a man does his
body, and a husband ought to cherish his wife, because he had taken on the
relation of an head and husband to His Church, while he says, we are members
of His body, of His flesh, and of His bones. 4. As true Believers have a
twofold being, one natural, and another spiritual; so they have a twofold
original, answerable to each of these: In their natural being they owe their
original under God unto their parents, as being bone of their bones, and flesh
of their flesh, as Eva the first woman did owe it to her husband. But as they
are renewed and born over again, they owe their spiritual being, not to the
will of the flesh, or the will of man, Joh. 1. 13. but to the virtue of Christ's
obedience, and sufferings in His flesh, 1 John 4. 9. for, he says not, they
are bone of His bones, and flesh of His flesh, as Adam says of his wife, Genesis
2. 23. to point that she did owe her natural being unto him, as being come and
made of him, but that they were of His bone and flesh, to wit, in their
spiritual being, as they were renewed and members of His body; for we are
members of his body, of His bone and of His flesh.

Verse. 31. For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall be
joined unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh.
THis verse, in the literal, plain and historical sense of the words, holds
forth the law of marriage, binding all married parties in all times, which was
pronounced by Adam, Genesis 2. 24. and approved by God Himself, Matthew. 19. 5. And
the words taken in this sense contain the third reason, to prove the former
consequence, ver. 28. that seeing wives are the bodies of their husbands,
therefore they should be loved. The argument is taken from that law of
marriage, expressly declaring that for this cause, to wit, because the wife is
bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, as the cause is expressed, Genesis 2.
23, 24. which is the same in effect with the cause given, ver. 28. even because
she is the body of the husband, to which this verse literally taken does
relate, or to the thirtieth verse immediately preceding, in so far as the
strict union, which is between married parties, is there alluded unto: Upon all
which causes, or rather one and the same cause expressed in all those places,
that law does declare, first, That the man is to leave father and mother, to
wit, not by casting off natural affection to his parents, Genesis 44. 34. or by
refusing to help them in their strait, 1. Tim. 5. 4. but by loving his wife
more than them, and by leaving his fathers family, if he, his wife and they
cannot live all together, and by joining in a new family with his wife, Genesis
28. 5. as is further cleared by the second thing here declared, to wit, that he
ought to be joined inseperably to his wife, and that both in affection, Prove.
5. 19. and cohabitation, dwelling with her, 1 Pet. 3. 7. The word in the
original, does signify such a joining, as that of two boards of timber, firmly
glued together; not as if a man were to reside constantly at home: for, the
Merchant, the Lawyer, and men of other employments also, must some times go
abroad, Prove. 7. 19, 20. But his fixed dwelling should be with her, and his
presence also, so far as his necessary calling shall permit, so that he is not
without necessity to be absent from his own home, Prove. 5. -19. And, thirdly,
this law declares, that they two shall be one flesh; which implies, first, a
most strict union, so that they cannot be separated, (except in the case of
adultery, Matthew. 19. -- 9 -- and wilful desertion of the one party, persisted
in, after all means used to the contrary, 1 Cor. 7. 15) more than a piece of a
man's body, may be cut off from the rest: And, secondly, a most intimate
communion, whereby they have common goods, common friends, yea, and all things
common, as if they were but one person: And thirdly, the lawful and sanctified
use of the marriage bed, allowed unto them of God, which out of the case of
marriage is sinful and damnable, 1 Cor. 6. 16. Heb. 13. 4. But for further
clearing of the words, know, that beside their literal and historical sense,
God intended that the purpose contained in them, concerning the carnal marriage
of man and woman, should represent and shadow forth somewhat of Christ, and of
that spiritual marriage between Christ and the Church, as appears from the
situation of the words, immediately after ver. 30. which does evidently speak of
Christ, as is already shown; and before verse 32. where he declares, that the
purpose in hand is a mystery, and to be understood of Christ and the Church:
now, the purpose here expressed, does hold in Christ, by analogy and
proportion, in so far as Christ did leave His Father, by laying aside the glory
which He had with Him, Joh. 16. 28. and taking on the form of a servant,
Philip. 2. 8. and did leave His mother Mary also, and her house and family,
Luke 2. 49. that He might purchase a bride unto Himself, (See ver. 25. 26.) to
whom He does cleave inseparably: Romans 8. 35. and with most tender affection,
Heb. 4. 15. by virtue of which spiritual marriage, Christ and Believers become,
though not one flesh, yet one spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 17. being most strictly tied
together by His Spirit, and the grace of faith, from which conjunction,
Believers so espoused, become fruitful in good works, and do bring forth fruit
unto God, Romans 7. 4.

From the literal sense of this verse, Learn, 1. The love of married parties
ought to be very great, and second to no love else, but that which we owe to
God: for, even the love we owe to parents, from whom we have our being, ought
to give place unto it; A man shall leave father and mother, says he, and be
joined unto his wife. 2. It is lawful and allowed of God unto all persons of
all ranks, being come to mature age, (1 Cor. 7. -36-) and especially to those
who have not the gift of continency, (1 Cor. 7. 9.) to enter the married state
of life, only if they marry in the Lord, 1 Cor. 7. -39. and therefore the
doctrine forbidding marriage to all those who bear office in the Church, is the
doctrine of devils, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 3. for, the text speaks of all men
indifferently; A man shall leave father and mother, and be joined to his wife.
3. Divine commands are always founded upon most just reasons, which would be
eyed by us, that so our obedience may be more willing and cheerful, yea, a
piece of reasonable service unto God, Romans 12. 1. for, this command given here
unto husbands, to cleave unto their wives, is not nakedly propounded, but with
a strong reason annexed for enforcing the duty enjoined by it: For this cause,
says he, shall a man be joined unto his wife. 4. As children are not to remain
always childish, but being come to age and understanding, ought to bestir
themselves in providing things necessary and honest, according as the station,
wherein they are placed by God, shall require; So parents ought to remit
somewhat of their fatherly authority over their children, as they grow in age
and understanding, not expecting nor requiring that children, now come to age,
should absolutely and in all things as formerly, depend upon the counsel and
direction of parents, or give themselves wholly to mind their concernments,
neglecting every other thing else which may concern themselves: for, this Law,
supponeth a state of childehood, wherein children are to be wholly under the
authority of parents minding their concernments and at their direction, and
that their coming to age, and entering the married state of life, does give
them more liberty to follow their own direction, and to do for themselves; a
man shall leave father and mother, and be joined to his wife. 5. Whatever has
been the corrupt custom of men, to the contrary, Genesis 4. 19. Yet, according to
the first institution of marriage, only two, one man and one woman, and not
more, either of the one sex or the other, may be lawfully married together at
once: for, the law says, a man shall be joined to his wife, not to his wives,
and they two, not they three, or four, shall be one flesh.

From the mystical application of the words, and of the purpose comprehended
in them, Learn, 1. So great a depth is Scripture, that in some parcels thereof,
which do appear most plain and easy to be understood, many dark and hid
mysteries do lie undiscovered: for, under this plain history of the marriage of
our first parents, that great mystery of the spiritual conjunction of Christ
and His Church, was also held forth, as the Apostle does here make clear; For
this cause shall a man leave father and mother. See further to this purpose,
upon Gal. 4. ver. 24. doct. 1, 2. Doct. 2. So holy and honorable is the
ordinance of marriage in it self, and so highly ought it to be esteemed of by
us, that God makes use of it to shadow forth that blessed union and most holy
communion which is betwixt Christ and His Church: for, what was spoken
historically of marriage, is here applied mystically to Christ; For this cause
shall a man leave, etc. 3. As the Church of true Believers, is the Bride, the
Lambs wife, espoused already to Christ; So never any man did more to purchase a
Bride to himself, than Christ has done for His. He laid aside the glory which
He had with the Father, and became of no reputation, as was mystically foretold
in this history of the first marriage; A man shall leave his father and mother.
4. The great travel and trouble which Christ was put to for purchasing a Bride
unto Himself, does not make Him regard her the less now when He has her: for,
He does inseparably cleave unto her, with most ardent and exemplary affection,
as was also mystically foretold; And shall be joined to his wife.

Verse. 32. This is a great mystery: but I speak concerning Christ and the
Church.
THe Apostle concludes this purpose concerning the spiritual conjunction of
Christ and His Church, here made use of to illustrate that near conjunction
betwixt husband and wife, with an observable acclamation, that it is a great
mystery: which word, as it is usually taken in Scripture, does signify a
thing secret, not obvious to every understanding; and hid, either in it self,
or in its cause and reason, whether it be held out in plain terms, or under the
vail of some external sign or figure to represent it. See 1 Timothy 3. 16. Ephesians. 3.
3. 1 Cor. 15. 51. Romans 11. 25. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. And lest, by reason of his
speaking all alongs of the bodily marriage betwixt husband and wife, any had so
far mistaken him, as to think he called that a mystery, therefore he
explaineth himself, by showing he was to be understood, not of the bodily
marriage, but of the spiritual, or that strict union or conjunction which is
betwixt Christ and His Church. Now he calls this union a great mystery,
because it is a thing hid in it self, before it be revealed, 1 Cor. 2. 7, 8.
yea, and after, it remains unsearchable by the light of reason, how Christ,
now glorified in heaven, can be one with us on earth, and can only be
acknowledged by faith, Heb. 11. 1. Beside, the bonds of this blessed union and
conjunction, are not natural or bodily, but spiritual, even the Spirit of
Christ, Ephesians. 2. 18. and the grace of faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. and therefore, though
the conjunction, following upon these bonds, be real, (Joh. 17. 21.) operative,
(Joh. 15. 5.) and indissoluble, Joh. 10. 28, 29. yet the way of it, is wholly
spiritual and heavenly: and consequently not so much to be searched into by
reason, what, or how it is, as to be believed that it is, and improved for
attaining and finding in our selves those blessed effects, which do attend it
where it is. Doct. 1. That Papists have not ground from this place to make
marriage a Sacrament properly so called, is clear from the Apostle's own
commentary, whereby he shows by the mystery here spoken of, he does not
understand the bodily marriage, but the spiritual: beside, that the word
mystery, as we show, in the use of Scripture, does signify a sacred secret,
not obvious to ordinary capacity, and therefore every mystery is not a
Sacrament, (See 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. Romans 11. 25.) This is a great mystery: but I
speak concerning Christ and the Church. 2. The more a man does attain to know
of this mystery of the mystical union and conjunction which is betwixt Christ
and His Church, the more he will be ravished with admiration at the
unsearchable deepnesse and profundity of it, so far will he be from thinking
himself able sufficiently to comprehend it: for, even Paul, who saw as far in
this mystery as any other, Ephesians. 3. 4. does stand, admire and cry, This is a
great mystery. 3. As Ministers are bound to set forth to the Lords People that
most near and blessed union betwixt Christ and believing souls, and to press
upon them the study of the knowledge of it; So, both Pastors and People have
need of much sobriety of spirit in diving into this subject, not trusting to
the quickness of their own wit, nor judging of it by natural reason, but
resting upon what God has revealed and made known concerning it, and choosing
rather to remain ignorant where he has not revealed, than curiously to search
and pry further than is revealed: for, Paul, while he is instructing them in
this subject, sees it necessary to mind them of the profoundnesse of it; this
is a great mystery. 4. As we are ready through ignorance, or inadvertence, to
mistake the right meaning and sense of Scripture; So the Spirit of God,
speaking in Scripture, has carefully guarded against all such mistakes, while
he does clear the right and genuine sense of a doubt some and dark Scripture,
by Scripture it self, either in the same place, or another: for, so does Paul
here, while, to obviate a possible mistake, he says, But I speak concerning
Christ and the Church.

Verse. 33. Nevertheless, let every one of you in particular, so love his wife,
even as himself, and the wife see that she reverence her husband.
HE does here, by way of diversion from dipping further at this time in that
spiritual conjunction of Christ and His Church, exhort both husband and wife,
to learn from that forementioned law of marriage a short sum of their
respective duties: and, first, that every husband, without exception, or
admitting any excuse, would love his wife as himself, that is, seeing she is a
piece of himself, as ver. 28. otherwise if the particle as, were only a note of
similitude, comparing different things, and making a man's love unto himself the
rule of his love unto his wife, Then every man's neighbors should be equally
loved with his wife; for, every man is to love his neighbor as himself in that
sense, Gal. 5. 14. And, secondly, he enjoyneth the wife, that she reverence, or
as the word signifies, from love do fear her husband: the meaning whereof is,
that she inwardly acknowledge that degree of honor which God has put upon
him, 1 Cor. 11. 3. and give evident testimony of her inward esteem, in words, 1
Pet. 3. 6. actions, and whole carriage, and especially in her loathnesse to
offend him, 1 Pet. 3. 2. Doct. 1. Though there be some latent mysteries
intended by the Spirit of God, to be set forth by some plain histories,
recorded in Scripture, besides their historical and literal sense; yet we are
not, upon that pretense, to turn the whole Scripture into an allegory, as if no
more were intended in those Scriptures by the Spirit of God, but only to set
forth the spiritual mystery; We ought to look upon the historical and
literal sense of them also, and mainly, and make such use of them as being so
taken, they will afford: for, Paul, having shown the mystical and allegorical
use of Adam's words, does divert from that consideration of them, and points
forth what the plain history does teach concerning the duties of husband and
wife; Nevertheless, says he, Let every one of you in particular so love his
wife. 2. It is not unprofitable for people, that Ministers do wind up their
large exhortations in a short and pithy sum of what they have spoken at greater
length, whereby the memory of people may be somewhat helped, and their
affections also may be more forcibly wrought upon, when the strength of a large
discourse is contracted in two or three words, and presented both to the
understanding and affections of people at once: for, so does Paul in the
conclusion, sum up what he had spoken at large, from ver. 22. of the duties
both of husbands and wives, in two succinct sentences; Let every one of you so
love his wife, etc. 3. Then do people receive and hear with profit these
exhortations which are spoken unto all in general, when they make application
of them to themselves, as if they were delivered unto them in peculiar, and by
name: for, what the Apostle spoke indefinitly unto all, ver. 25. he does here
make particular application of it unto every one; Nevertheless, let every one
of you in particular, so love his wife. 4. As married parties are ready to
forget their mutual duties, yea, and to sport at such doctrine, which does
press and enjoin those duties; so the Ministers of Christ, would not only
inculcate them the more frequently, but also deliver their exhortation of that
kind, with greater weight and authority: for, the Apostle not only repeateth,
but, in an authoritative commanding way, binds this exhortation on them; Let
every one love his wife; and the wife see that she reverence. 5. As we would
labor to infix in our memories a short sum of our most necessary duties; so
also of the most moving and taking argument, to enforce the practice of these
duties, otherwise the naked knowledge of our duty will prove but ineffectuall,
to lead us captive, to walk in it: for, Paul summeth up both the husbands duty,
and the strongest argument to enforce the duty, taken from that near union
between him and his wife; Let every one of you so love his wife, as himself. 6.
Then, and only then is the duty of subjection and obedience of inferiors
toward their superiors, sincerely and heartily discharged and accepted of by
God, when it flows from inward reverence and hearty esteem, in the former,
toward the place and dignity, conferred by God upon the latter: for he here
commands wives to give reverence to their husbands, thereby pointing at the
right fountain of that subjection, which he had formerly pressed upon them,
ver. 22, 24. even fear flowing from love; And the wife see that she reverence
her husband.

CHAP. VI.
IN the first part of this Chapter, the Apostle insisteth further upon those
duties, which are incumbent to Christians as they are members of families. And,
first, he presses upon children obedience to their parents, 1. from the equity
of it, ver. 1. which he clears from the fifth command, ver. 2. Secondly, from
the advantage which should redound to them by it, ver. 3. Next, he presses
upon parents, to hold off the two extremities of rigidity and indulgence
toward their children, ver. 4. Thirdly, he presses upon servants obedience to
their masters, which is set forth by several of its necessary qualifications
and properties, ver. 5, 6, 7. and enforced from the great advantage, which they
should reap by it, ver. 8. Fourthly, he presses upon masters their duty, which
is to be accompanied with the like qualifications, fear and trembling only
being excepted, ver. 9.

In the second part, he presses one duty which belongs unto all Christians
in general, even to prepare for a Christian warfare. And, 1. more generally,
that they would take unto them spirits, by making use of the strength which
they had without themselves in the Lord Christ, ver. 10. and of the saving
graces of Gods Spirit inherent in themselves, ver. 11. which he enforces from
the nature of the warfare and terror of the adversary, ver. 12, 13. Next, he
exhorts them more particularly, to put on, and make use of six several pieces
of the Christian armor, 1. The grace of sincerity. 2. The inherent
righteousness of an holy conversation, ver. 14. 3. A resolute frame of heart
to charge through all difficulties, ver. 15. 4. The grace of faith, commended
from its excellency and usefulness, ver. 16. 5. The well-grounded hope of
salvation. 6. Acquaintance with the Lords written Word, ver. 17. Thirdly, he
presses the exercise of prayer, as necessary for the obtaining and right
use-making of all those, ver. 18. exhorting them to pray for utterance and
boldness to himself in particular, ver. 19. because of his office and bonds,
ver. 20.

In the third part of the Chapter, he concludes the Epistle, 1. by showing he
had sent Tychicus, (whom he highly commends) to inform them of his own
particular affairs, ver. 21. and to comfort them, ver. 22. Next, by his usual
fare-well-wish for them in particular, ver. 23. and for all the lovers of
Christ in general, ver. 24.

Verse. 1. CHildren, obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right.
THe Apostle does now fall upon the duties of parents and children. And, first,
begins with children: the word rendered children, signifies these who are
begotten, even though now come to perfect age. See upon Col. 3. ver. 20. doct.
2. These he enjoyneth to obey their parents: where, by parents are meaned not
only the immediate, but also the mediate parents, as grandfathers, etc. Genesis
50. 23. yea, and those also, who are in the place of parents, Luke 2. 48, 51.
Now, the obedience here enjoined, is as comprehensive, as that honor enjoined
to be given unto parents by children in the fifth command, which is cited, ver.
2. to enforce the obedience here spoken of: and it implies, first, inward
reverence, or acknowledgement of that eminency, in which God has placed
parents above their children, joined with fear, Lev. 19. 3. and love, 1 Timothy 5.
-4- to be testified, as by other outward signs, so by reverent speaking of
them, and to them, Prove. 30. 17. 2. Obedience, more strictly taken, so as that
children receive the instruction of their parents, Prove. 1. 8. execute their
lawful commands and directions, even though they be burdensome and hazardous,
Genesis 37. 13. 1 Samuel 17. 20. and accept with patience their reproof and
correction, Prove. 15. 5. even though their parents be in some respects faulty
therein, Heb. 12. 9, 10. And, thirdly, gratitude and thankfulness, so as that
they help parents, when their necessity requires, 1 Timothy 5. 4. and bear with,
and cover their infirmities, Genesis 9. 22, 23. Prove. 23. 22. Now, this duty of
obedience in children, is first explained from the manner, motive, and rule of
it, while he says in the Lord. See this phrase explained upon chap. 5. ver.
22. Secondly, it is urged by two arguments, the first whereof, is in this
verse, and taken from the equity and righteousness which is in it, even that
children should do all the forementioned duties unto their parents, to whom
under God they owe their very being: The Laws of all Nations, even of the most
barbarous, do enjoin it; an^ all creatures, who have life and sense, are
carried in some measure by a kind of instinct unto it. Hence Learn, 1. The
great and main duty, which a child, as a child, ought to learn, and so to
learn as to practice, is to obey his parents, even to receive their
instructions, and execute their lawful commands; this being a duty, which of
any other, proud and rebellious nature is most averse from, and yet such as
nature it self does plead for its equity: so, that whatever children be
otherwise for beauty, for strength, for quickness, wisdom, activity, learning,
preferment or honor; yet this being inlacking, they fight against the very law
and light of nature, and so are a reproach to their parents, Prove. 19. 26. and
do accelerate the judgment of God upon themselves, 1 Samuel 2. 25. for, though
the obedience here enjoined, does draw with it all those other duties, which
children owe to their parents, as was shown in the exposition; yet, it does, in
the first place, signify a submissive hearkening unto, and obeying of their
lawful commands, as the word in the Original does imply, which he does mainly
press upon children; Children obey your parents. 2. This duty of obedience to
parents, belongs unto all children whatsoever, so that neither age, sex,
place, honor, or condition, do exempt them wholly from it, 1 King. 2. 19. for,
he speaks indefinitly unto all children, and of both sexes; Children obey
your parents. 3. Children are bound to obey not only one, but both their
parents, the mother as well as the father: yea, the holy Ghost does expressly
provide for the mother, giving her the precedence, Lev. 19. 3. because, her
sex being weaker, she is the more subject to be despised: for, he uses a word
common to both father and mother, while he says, Children obey your parents.
4. It is not sufficient that children obey their parents, either from a natural
instinct or fear of their displeasure, or hope of great things to be received
from them and enjoyed by them; but their obedience must flow from conscience of
duty toward God, who does enjo(...) it, and be regulated by, and subordinated
to, that obedience, which they owe to Him; otherwise their obedience is only
heathenish and natural, but not Christian: for, he commands, Children, obey
your parents in the Lord. 5. The nature of man, is, since the fall, become so
perverse and backward, that there is need of a spur of earnest exhortation,
enforced with strong and evident reason, to stir us up, even to those duties
which are written in broadest letters upon every man's heart by nature: for, the
Apostle sees it necessary, not only to exhort unto this duty of obedience to
parents, but also to enforce his exhortation by arguments; For this is right,
says he. 6. The first and chief motive, which ought to set us on work to any
duty, is not so much the advantage, which may redound to us by the practice of
it, as the equity and righteousness which is in the thing it self, as being
commanded by God, and well pleasing in His sight: for, he enforces obedience
to parents, from the equity of it, before he mention (ver. 3.) the profit,
which should accresce unto children by it; For, this is right, says he.

Verse. 2. Honor thy father and mother, (which is the first commandment with
promise.)
THe Apostle (passing-by all other reasons to prove the equity of the former
injunction) does pitch upon one, to wit, the Law of God enjoining this duty in
the fifth Command. The scope of which Command, is, to prescribe all those
duties which inferiors owe to their superiors, and, by consequence, which
superiors owe to their inferiors; where all superiors are expressed by the
name of father and mother, because the authority of parents is most natural,
and the yoke of it most easily comported with; and therefore all other authority
goes under the name of that, to render it less invidious to those who are to
be subject unto it. And the duty enjoined to inferiors, is their giving honor
to superiors, which implies (as was shown, ver. 1.) reverence, obedience and
gratitude. Now, this command is described from its precedence, as being the
first and most weighty command in all the second table; and from the manner of
propounding it, not nakedly, but with a special promise of a particular mercy
subjoyned to this command in particular, and expressed, ver. 3. which cannot be
said of any other command: for, the promise annexed to the second, is a
general promise of mercy, made to such as keep all the commands. Hence Learn,
1. Whatever God has commanded in His Word, is most righteous, equitable and
just: for, he proves that it is right for children to obey their parents,
because the Law of God enjoyneth honor thy father and mother. 2. Though the
Law of Ceremonies, given by Moses, does not oblige Christians, (Christ, the
substance of those shadows, being come, Col. 2. 17.) nor yet the judicial Law,
which was given to the Jewish Commonwealth, and to stand and fall with it,
Numb. 36. 6, 7. yet, the moral Law, or the Law of the ten Commandments, as
being never yet repealed by God, does stand in force, and is binding unto
Christians: for, Paul does urge this duty of obedience unto parents upon
children, because the moral Law enjoyneth it; Honor thy father and mother,
which is the first commandment with promise. 3. So far is God from abolishing
different ranks, degrees and states among men, that He takes special care to
have those, and public order in those inviolably preserved, while He not only
enjoyneth the respective duties of superiors and inferiors, but also gives
them the first and chief place among all those other duties which man does owe
to man: for, says he, honor thy father and mother, by whom, as we show, are
meaned all lawful superiors; and he adds, which is the first commandment, to
wit, in the second table. 4. Though God, as absolute Lord, might enjoin us
obedience to His commands without giving any promise of a reward; yet, so
backward are we to our duty, and so merciful is God, that, to overcome our
backward unwillingnesse, He is pleased sweetly to allure us by His gracious
promise of a free reward unto our obedience: for, here is a commandment with
promise.

Verse. 3. That it may be well with thee, and thou may live long on the earth.
HEre he shows what that promise is, and thereby gives a second argument to
enforce the duty of obedience upon children unto parents, taken from the profit
and advantage which should redound unto them by it: for, the Lord does here
expressly promise prosperity, and long life to all such as make conscience of
this duty. For understanding of which promise, know, that though it was to be
understood, even in the most plain and obvious sense of the words, as it was
held forth to the ancient Church, to whom God used to promise and bestow things
carnal and earthly, as an earnest and shadow of things heavenly, 1 Cor. 10.
11. Yet, even then there was a tacit condition implied, to wit, in so far as
the thing promised should serve for Gods glory, 2 Chronicles. 35. 24. and the good
of those to whom the promise was made, 1 King. 14. 13. But, now under the New
Testament, though this promise, even in the letter be doubtless fulfilled unto
many; Yet, it is chiefly to be understood in a sprituall sense, in so far as
the godly obedient child, whether he live long or short, does always live
well, because he lives in Gods favor, Psalm. 63. 3. and comes to a full and
ripe age, as having reached the prize and mark, for attaining whereof, life is
given, even the salvation of the soul, Isa. 65. 20. Hence Learn, 1. Though our
first and chief motive unto duty, ought to be the equity and righteousness
which is in the thing it self, as being commanded by God; Yet we may eye the
promised reward, whether temporal or eternal, as a secondary motive and
encouragement, providing it be not looked at as a thing to be merited by our
obedience, Luke 17. 10. for, as (ver. 1.) he enforced this duty of obedience
from the equity of it, in the first place; So here, from the advantage which
should redound unto children by it, in the second place; That it may be well
with thee. 2. So merciful is God to man, that He has enjoined only those
things as equitably righteous and conducing to His own glory, which tend also,
and no less to our own profit and advantage, so that we need not to separate
our own well-being from His glory, but are always to seek the former as a mean
of, and in subordination to, the latter: for, the Apostle shows, that this
duty of obedience in children, as it tends to glorify God in the first
place, it being a doing of what is right according to His command; So it
tends to the advantage of children in the next: That it may be well with
thee, 3. To live well and long upon the earth, is in it self not to be despised
or under-valued, in so far as though the godly man, the longer he lives, he is
the longer kept out of heaven, yet he finds the more proofs and experiences
of Gods goodness here on earth, 1 John 3. 13. and has the larger opportunity
of a fair seed-time of glorifying God here; and, consequently, shall of free
grace reap a more plentiful harvest of comfort at death, and of glory
hereafter, 2 Cor. 9. 6. for, he promises this as a blessing to the obedient
child, that it may be well with thee, and thou may live long upon the
earth: which (as we show) is accomplished sometimes in the very letter. 4. Then
do we rightly apply unto our selves, under the New Testament, those things
which were spoken to the Jews under the Old, when, passing-by what was in such
things typical, or astricted to the infant-state of the Church which then was,
we look upon what was substantial, moral, or of common equity as belonging unto
us yet: for, so much does the Apostle teach, while, citing the promise annexed
to the fifth command, he says only, that thou may live long upon the earth,
and omitteth the last clause of that promise, to wit, which the Lord thy God
gives thee, Exodus 20. 12. whereby that promise was in a peculiar manner
astricted to the Jews, and to the land of Canaan, which He did give them to
inherit. 5. The best way to thrive, even in things worldly, and to attain
prosperity, health, wealth and length of days, so far, at least, as shall
serve for Gods glory and our own good, is, to live a godly life, by taking heed
thereto according to Gods Word and especially by giving due reverence and
obedience to our natural parents, and consequently to all our lawful
superiors, because of the Command of God: for, unto the Command, ver. 2.
Honor thy father and mother, this promise is subjoyned, that it may be well
with thee, and thou may live long upon the earth.

Verse 4. And ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath: but bring them up
in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.
HE does here, in a word, set forth the duty of parents: And because they are
apt to abuse their parentall authority, and chiefly the fathers, therefore he
enjoyneth to them, and by consequence to the mothers, to beware of provoking
their children to wrath, or of imbittering their spirits; which is done, either
by denying them that which is their due, in food, r^iment or means of
education, Lam. 4. 3. or, by commanding things in themselves unjust, 1 Samuel 20.
-- 31. or, by unjust and rigorous commands about things in their own nature
indifferent, 1 Samuel 14. 29. or inveighing with bitter words against them,
chiefly when there is no cause, 1 Samuel 20. 30. and lastly, by beating them,
either unjustly, when there is no fault, 1 Samuel 20. 33. or immoderatly,
unseasonably or basely, when there is a fault. Next, he does guard them against
the other extremity of too much indulgence to their children, while he exhorts
them, first, to bring them up; or, as it is in the original, to nourish them,
which comprehends not only their giving unto them present maintenance from
the womb, Genesis 21. 7. but also their providing for them against the future, 2
Cor. 12. 14. and training them up in any lawful employment, whereby they may
be able under God to sustain themselves and theirs, Genesis 4. 2. And secondly, to
join nurture and admonition with their education: by the former whereof, is
meaned the timous, seasonable and compassionate correction of children which
parents are bound to dispense, Prove. 13. 24. and by the latter is meaned the
information of their judgment, how they ought to carry themselves toward God
in things religious, Genesis 18. 19. and how toward man in righteousness,
civility and good manners, which is also a great piece of the duty of parents
toward children, Prove. 31. 1, 8, 9. And lastly, he adds, that their
education must be in the admonition of the Lord Christ, that is, such as
becomes Christians, and by which young ones are instructed chiefly in the
knowledge of Gods Word, of Jesus Christ, and of the way of salvation held forth
by Him. Hence Learn, 1. Such is the prevalencie and interest of sin in the soul
of man now fallen, that in some it wholly extinguisheth, or much weakeneth the
most intense of our natural affections, and makes them run in a channel quite
contrary unto what they ought: for, the Apostle supponeth, that even natural
affection in some parents to their own children will be so far weakened, as by
their unnatural carriage to provoke and imbitter them, while he says, Fathers,
provoke not your children to wrath. 2. To provoke or stir up others unto sin,
makes us guilty before the Lord, even of those sins which others commit, being
provoked thereunto by us, Hos. 6. 9. for, Paul forbids, and condemns this
as a sin in parents toward their children; Fathers, provoke not your children
to wrath. 3. So small command have all men naturally over their passions,
especially when provoked by real injuries from others, that the strongest of
natural bonds cannot keep them in order, and at under, except they be
restrained by grace, but they must transgress the bounds: even children cannot
bear injuries from their very parents, without being incited thereby to sinful
anger; yea, such is the corruption of some children, that they can bear less
at the hands of their parents than of any other else: for, so much is implied,
while he says, Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath. 4. A necessary
duty is not to be neglected upon pretense that others may take occasion to sin
against the Lord from it, and particularly, parents are not to withhold
seasonable and necessary correction from their children, even although their
children should be enraged and provoked to wrath by it: for, notwithstanding he
forbids fathers to provoke their children to wrath, yet he will not have
them upon that pretense neglecting to bring them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord. 5. As people are most ready to run from the one extreme
of any sin unto the other, from prodigality to sinful parcimony, from
rigiditie to too much lenity; So the servants of Christ, while they are
dissuading people from the one extremity, had need most carefully to guard,
lest under pretense of eschewing that, people do rush upon the other: for, the
Apostle, while he forbids too much rigidity in parents, he sees it
necessary to guard them against the other extremity of too much indulgence and
lenity, while he says bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.
6. It is the duty of parents, not only to provide for the bodies and outward
estate of their children, but also, and mainly to care for their souls,
endeavoring by all means possible to bring them up for sons and daughters to
the Lord Almighty: for, as they are to bring them up or nourish them; so also
to beat down sin in them, by nurture or correction, and to make them know Jesus
Christ the Lord; But bring them up (says he) in the nurture and admonition of
the Lord. 7. As parents are to correct their children betimes; so they ought
not herein to satisfi^ their own rage and passion, but to go about it with a
composed mind, as a piece of service enjoined by God, aiming mainly at the
amendment of the faulty child, and, in order hereto, joining instruction and
admonition with correction; yea, and seeking the blessing of Christ to
accompany it: for, the Apostle will have nurture and admonition joined
together, and both of them in the Lord: In the nurture and admonition of the
Lord.

Verse 5. Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters according to the
flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ:
HE comes now, in the last place, to the duties of masters and servants; and,
first, begins with servants. See the reasons why he insisteth so long on
their duty, upon Col. 3. 22. Now, servants were of two sorts, some did serve
for hire, or as apprentises, Mal. 3. -- 5 --. Others were bondslaves to their
masters, being either taken in war, 2 Chronicles. 28. 10. or bought with money, Lev.
25. 44. The Apostle speaks to both those sorts; and, first, gives a sum of
their duty, to wit, obedience to their masters according to the flesh: by which
designation of masters, he limiteth their dominion and mastership to the bodies
of their servants, to things temporal and of the flesh only, leaving the soul
and conscience to God only, who is the alone Lord of conscience, Matthew. 23. 8.
And the obedience here enjoined to be given by servants unto those, as it is
largely taken, does consist in a cheerful executing of all their lawful
commands, Matthew. 8. 9. even though the thing commanded be laborious, painful,
Luke 17. 7, 8, 9. and rigid, 1 Pet. 2. 18. in a meek and patient bearing of
their rebukes, Tit. 2. 9. yea, and corrections also, 1 Pet. 2. 18, 20, 21. and
in withholding their hands from picking, and their tongues from abusing their
masters by alleging commissions from them, which they have not, for their own
advantage, 2 King. 5. 20, etc. and in abstaining carefully from all contriving
and procuring of their masters prejudice for benefiting themselves, or others,
Luke 16. 1, 2, etc. Secondly, he gives some properties of this obedience, as
first, it must be with fear and trembling: which property consists in a
sollicitous and earnest care, and indefatigable diligence in following their
masters affairs to his greatest advantage, (Genesis 31. 38, 39.) joined with
reverence flowing from love to their masters person, 1 Timothy 6. 1. and with fear
of his displeasure, Mal. 1. -6- and is contrary to pride and laziness. See
working with fear and trembling taken in this sense, Phil. 2. -12. Secondly,
their obedience must be with singleness of heart, which is opposed to a double
heart, hypocrisy and deceit; and it implies that faithfulness, which ought
to be in servants toward their masters, as minding and intending from their
very heart the thriving and success of their affairs in all things and at all
times, Tit. 2. 10. And, thirdly, it must be as unto Christ, whereby he
expresses the manner, motive and rule of their obedience. See upon chap. 5.
ver. 22. Doct. 1. Christian liberty, and spiritual freedom from sin, Satan,
and Gods wrath, is not inconsistent with civil bondage and subjection. Christ
and the Gospel teaches no man to cast off that yoke, but how they are to carry
themselves as becomes Christians under it: for, he speaks to servants, as
servants, enjoining them civil subjection, though they were now converted and
partakers of that spiritual liberty purchased by Christ, Gal. 3. 28. Servants
be obedient to your masters. 2. The condition of none is so base or despicable,
but free grace in God will stoup so low, as to take notice of them in it, yea,
and bestow upon them all those precious blessings purchased by Christ, that so
grace may appear to be grace, when it has compassion on those who are in all
respects most unworthy and vile: for, even some of those servants, who for the
most part were bondslaves, and as little esteemed of by their masters, as
their very beasts, were converted by the Gospel, and are therefore here spoken
unto as converts; Servants be obedient to your masters. 3. Such is the
sufficiency of Scripture, that there is no rank, state, nor degree of persons,
even from the King to the bond-slave, to whom it does not serve as a full and
perfect rule to direct them how to walk acceptably in their stations: for here
is in it a direction even for servants; Servants be obedient unto your masters.
4. The great and main lesson which servants, as servants, ought to learn, and
so to learn as to practice, is to be obedient to their masters; and, in a word,
faithfully and diligently and according to their masters own lawful directions
to go about their affairs; So that whatever they be otherwise for wisdom,
breeding, or profession of piety, yet if they be inlacking in this, either
neglecting their business, or preferring their own wisdom in carrying of it on
to the direction of their masters, they are a reproach to the Gospel, in so far
as they make not conscience of that which the Gospel requires from them most:
for, this is it he does mainly press upon them; Servants be obedient unto your
masters. 5. This duty of obedience belongs unto all servants toward their
masters, So that neither birth, breeding, nor their near relation of kindred
unto their masters, do exempt them from it, providing they be servants: for, he
speaks indefinitly unto all servants; Servants be obedient unto your masters.
6. This duty of obedience from servants, is payable to all masters without
exception, whether they be good or bad, rich or poor, great or small, no
diversity of that kind does detract from the masters authority, nor ought to
lessen the servants obedience: for, he speaks indefinitly also of masters;
Servants be obedient unto your masters. 7. As the power of masters, yea, and
all earthly power whatsomever, does only reach the body, and the outward
temporal concernments of inferiors, and cannot reach their conscience, soul or
spiritual concernments, except to constrain the outward man unto the obedience
of what God has already prescribed in those; So neither ought superiors to
make their will an absolute rule to be followed by their inferiors in all
things, nor yet inferiors to give up themselves wholly to follow all their
directions with a blind and implicit obedience; for, they are but masters
according to the flesh, that is, have power over the bodies of servants only,
8. It is not sufficient to do what is commanded by God in any thing, except we
do it in that manner wherein it is commanded: and particularly, servants must
not only yield obedience to their masters, and do them service; but they must
do it in such manner as it ought to be done: and in special, their obedience
and service must be qualified, as the Apostle has expressed, even with fear
and trembling, singleness of heart, etc. See the exposition of this, and the
two following verses. 9. A proud heart, evidencing it self in a saucie,
malapert, awlesse and carlesse carriage, is most unbeseeming the condition of
servants, and highly displeasing to God in them, as being opposite to that
property of fear and trembling, which ought to accompany their obedience; Be
obedient with fear and trembling 10. Though servants are to stand in awe of
their masters displeasure, and even from fear of that to go about their
service, Mal. 1. -6-. yet they must not be acted from fear alone, nor think
themselves exonered, when so much is done as his displeasure will be eschewed;
but, being acted from other motives also, they must make conscience of several
other things in the matter and manner of their service, which the awe and fear
of their master would never constrain them unto: for, although the master know
not the heart, and consequently the servants need not to trouble themselves
about their heart from the fear, or dread of him; yet, they are to obey in
singleness of heart. 11. A servant can never discharge his duty with that
sincerity and tenderness, which he owes unto his master, except he have an
high esteem of Christ, and in the first plac, become an obedient servant unto
Him, that so from love to Christ he may yield himself obedient to his master in
Christ, and so far as obedience to him does not cross that obedience which he
owes to Christ: for, he bids them be obedient unto their masters as unto
Christ, and so implies they must be first obedient unto Christ.

Verse. 6. Not with eye-service, as men-pleasers, but as the servants of Christ,
doing the will of God from the heart.
HEre are more properties of the obedience required from servants, or rather an
explanation of that property already expressed, to wit, singleness of heart:
which he explaineth, 1. negatively, while he opposes it to eye-service, which
is here condemned in servants, who then are guilty of this sin when they seem
respective to their masters person, and careful of what concerns him,
himself being present; or, when they know their deportment will otherwise come
to his knowledge, but at other times are unfaithful and careless: which sin
of eye-service is aggreaged from this, that those who are guilty of it are
men-pleasers; not as if it were simply unlawful for servants to endeavor to
please their masters, for that is commanded, Tit. 2. 9. but when they only seek
to please them, and that they may seem to please them, care not to deceive
them, by appearing to be that in their presence, which really they are not; and
consequently, do not labor to approve themselves to the all-seeing eye of God:
This is the sin of men-pleasing here condemned in servants, as being near of
kin to eye-service. Next, positively, by showing that then did they serve in
singleness of heart, when, 1. they behaved themselves as the servants of
Christ, knowing that they behoved to be countable to Him, who knows the
double dealing even of the very heart, Jer. 17. 10. and that He will accept of
their lawful obedience unto their masters, as service done to Him. And,
secondly, when taking God for their party, and looking upon the lawful
commands of their masters, as the will of God unto them, they do set about to
execute them cordially and sincerely, even from the heart, without
dissimulation and hypocrisy. Doct. 1. A single heart is always constant in
good, and the same in secret which it is before the view of others: for,
eye-service, whereby servants are one thing before their masters, and another
thing behind their backs, is here opposed to singlnesse of heart; not with
eye-service. 2. A man may so walk, as to content the eye of those who behold;
and to please men to the full, who can see no further than the outside, 1 Samuel
16. -7. and yet his way be highly displeasing unto God: for, though eye-service
be a sin displeasing unto God; Yet servants may please men with it, as is here
employed: not with eye-service, as men-pleasers. 3. When a man's chief design is
to gain applause, and to be well esteemed of by men, he has no further regard
of his duty, either to God or men, than what does make way for the promoting of
that design: for, men-pleasing is the fountain of eye-service in servants, or
of their neglecting duty, but in so far only as they may be seen and approven
by their masters; not with eye-service, as men-pleasers. 4. To propose unto our
selves the pleasing of men, and gaining of approbation, good liking and
applause from them, as our great design to be gained upon any terms, is
inconsistent with the work of grace in the heart, and with that subjection
which we owe to the Lord Christ: a man cannot serve two masters, Matthew. 6. 24.
for, he opposes men-pleasers to the servants of Christ; not as men-pleasers,
but as the servants of Christ, says he. 5. The meanest and basest of services,
which men go about in their lawful callings, being done with the right
qualifications, from right motives, for a right end, and in the right manner,
is service done to Christ, and will be accepted of by Him, as such, because He
does command it; and it is done, if done a right in obedience to His command:
for, he will have the meanest servants to go about their service as servants to
Christ, and doing the will of God. 6. Then may we reckon the going about of our
ordinary imploiments to be service done to Christ, when we look upon what we do
as commanded by God, do it in obedience to His command, and are heartily
sincere in what we do, as aiming singly without hypocrisy and dissimulation,
at the honor of God, and the good of these whose good we pretend to, and ought
to aim at: for, he explaineth how servants may reckon themselves as servants to
Christ, even by their doing the will of God from their heart. 7. Our eyeing of
God and taking Him for our party, to whom we must give an account, even in
those things which we do unto men, is a singular help to make us single and
straight in all our affairs, and to banish all double dealing, deceit, hunting
after applause, and all suchlike vices, which our heart presumes to make bold
with, when we look to no higher party than poor fecklesse man: for, that they
may be single in heart, and eschew eye-service and man-pleasing, he directs
them to take God for their party; but as servants to Christ, doing the will of
God from the heart. 8. Then is the will of God acceptably done, when not only
the outward man, as tongue, hand, and other members of the body, do act every
one their part, but the heart and in-most affections are brought up to the
work; otherwise our performances are but a lame sacrifice, as being destitute
of that which God does mainly call-for, Prove. 23. 26. for, he says, doing the
will of God from the heart.

Verse. 7. With good will doing service, as to the Lord, and not to men:
HEre is a third thing required to the service and obedience of servants in
singlnesse of heart, even that it be with goodwill and love to their masters
person, and to the thriving of his affairs, which is opposite to the doing of
their service grudgingly, unpleasantly, or from fear of punishment and an eye
to their own advantage only; and that they may be encouraged to do service from
this principle, even to their unworthie masters, he directs them to fasten
their eye upon the Lord, who had subjected them unto such masters, and to know
that in yielding that obedience unto them, which was commanded by God, they did
service to Him rather than to them, and might therefore do it with better will:
for, the negative particle does not deny simply, but comparativly: So that, as
to the Lord, and not to men, is, to the Lord more than to men, Mark 9. 37.
Doct. 1. Fear and love of one and the same person, may well consist, and both
be a conjunct principle having influence upon one and the same duty; yea, then
only is that duty, which flows from fear, acceptable unto God, when the
party to whom the duty is done, whether it be God or men, is not only feared,
but also loved: for, the obedience of servants must not only flow from fear and
trembling, ver. 5. but also from love and good will; with good will doing
service. 2. That a man do service to God, whether in the duties af immediate
worship, or of his ordinary calling, it is of necessity required, that he do it
cheerfully, not as of necessity and constraint, but with a delight and pleasure
in it, as in that which God does call-for at his hands: the Lord does love a
cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9. -7. for, that servants may go about their service to
their masters, as servants to Christ, and thereby do the will of God, it is
required, that with good will they do their service. 3. The most base, and
meanest of employments, which God does call us to discharge, ought to be
undertaken and discharged by us with cheerfulness and good will, it being no
small credit for prodigal rebels to be entrusted in the meanest piece of
service to Him: yea, and the more mean and fecklesse the service be which we
discharge, it ought to be gone about with more of cheerfulness; that what is
inlacking in the worth of the work, may be made up by the hearty affection and
good will of the worker: for, he will have even servants going about their
basest employments with good will, because they did thereby service to God, and
He did call them to it; with good will doing service as to the Lord. 4. So
ingrate is man for the most part, and so slow to reward those from whom he
receives favor and advantage; yea, so prone to requite them evil for good,
Judge. 9. 17, 18. that a man can never heartily and with such good will as he
ought, do service to the most of men, except he look to God in and above men,
and know that they are thereby doing service to Him, whom to serve in the
meanest employment, is a sufficient reward for it self, 1 Chronicles. 29. 14.
besides that He will have none to serve Him for nothing, as the following verse
does teach: for, the Apostle implies they can never serve their masters with
good will, except they look to God more than to man: therefore he says, with
good will doing service as to the Lord, and not to men.

Verse. 8. Knowing that whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall he
receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free.
THe Apostle, having thus held forth the necessary requisits of that obedience
enjoined unto servants, he does, thirdly, persuade them to it in this verse, by
an argument taken from the great advantage they should reap thereby, while he
shows, that though their reward from their earthly masters was little, or
none, yet so merciful is God, that of His own free grace (Romans 11. 35.) and
not for any merit in man's service (which is none, Luke 17. 10.) He does largely
recompense (sometimes here, Mark 20. 30. and always hereafter, Col. 3. 24.)
all those who make conscience of doing good, or of going about their calling as
service to Him; and that in this free retribution of a reward. He takes notice
of the poor bond-servant, who serves God in his calling, as well as of
freemen and masters. And that this argument may have the more force with them,
he appealeth to their own conscience and knowledge for the truth of it, if it
was not so as he had affirmed. Doct. 1. Then, and then only, may a man reckon
himself to do good, or a good work acceptable to God, when the thing he does is
warranted by Gods will revealed in His Word, when he does it in singleness of
heart, from an inward principle of love and good will within in the heart, and
in obedience to Gods command, or as service unto Him: for, the obedience
required from servants, was to be so qualified, ver. 5, 6, 7. and he does here
call it a doing good: Whatsoever good thing a man does. 2. Even the basest
drudgery of servants being so qualified, is a doing of good, and comes within
the compass of good works, which the Lord will take notice of as such: for, it
is with an eye to the employment of servants mainly that he here speaks:
Whatsoever good thing a man does, the same shall be receive. 3. As it is
lawful to eye the promised reward for our encouragement in the way of duty; So
it is the mind of God that every one should in the due and right order, make
particular application unto themselves of such promises as are in Scripture
held forth unto all in general: for, he holds forth the promise of a reward,
which is made unto all who do good in general, to be made use of by Christian
servants, for their encouragement in particular; Whatsoever good a man does,
the same shall be receive of the Lord. 4. Promises have no influence to excite
unto duty, except the truth of them be known and believed, so that ignorance
and misbelief of divine truths, are a great cause of abounding profanity and
neglect of duty in all ranks: for, he lays the weight of their encouragement
to duty from this promise upon the knowledge and faith which they had of it;
knowing that whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall be receive of
the Lord. 5. The Lord, in dispensing rewards, looks not to the external
beauty, splendor, or greatness of the work, but to the honesty and sincerity
of it, how mean or inconsiderable soever it be otherwise: for, the promise of a
reward, is to the outwardly mean and base works of poor servants, if so they be
honest and sincere, as well as to the more splendid, honorable and expensive
works of their rich masters: The same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he
be bond or free.

Verse. 9. And ye masters, do the same things unto them, forbearing threatening:
knowing that your master also is in heaven, neither is their respect of persons
with him.
HE does here, in the first place, set down the duties of masters toward their
servants, 1. positively, while he enjoyneth them to do the same things: which
is to be understood, not of the duties themselves, which are much different
from the duties of servants, (See them briefly summed up upon Col. 4. ver. 1.
doct. 1, 2.) but of those properties and conditions which are common to the
duties of both; so, that the master is bound to discharge his duty toward his
servant in singleness of heart, as service to Christ, in obedience to the will
and command of God, from his heart, with love and good will, even as the
servant is bound to mind those qualifications in his duty toward his master.
Next, negatively, while he forbids threatening, or rather commands to relax
and moderate threatening, as the word does signify; and so the thing forbidden
is excess in threatening and boasts, when they are always menacing, oftentimes
for light occasions, and sometimes for none; And by proportion, all fierce and
inhumane way of dealing with servants by masters, whether in words or deeds, is
here forbidden also. In the second place he inforceth this duty, by minding
them of that which they did know, at least ought to have known, even that they
also as well as their servants had a master above them to call them to an
account, to wit, God, who, to make the argument more pungent, is described, 1.
from His magnificent and stately Palace, where His glory shines, to wit, the
Heaven; not as if He were only there, and nowhere else, Jer. 23. 24. but to set
forth His absolute dominion, 2 Chronicles. 20. 6. His omniscience, Psalm. 11. 4. His
holiness, Isa. 57. 15. and His omnipotency, Psalm. 115. 3. so that their sin
could not be hid from Him, His holy Nature did hate it, He had both right and
power to punish it. 2. From His impartiality and justice, in judging so that He
respects not persons, nor faces, outward show and appearance, as the word
signifies; and therefore, by persons is not meaned the substance, or personal
subsistence of men, but their outward state and condition, even that which is
conspicuous in man, and does commonly make him more or less esteemed among
men, as country, state of life, riches, poverty, wisdom, learning, etc. and
consequently to respect persons, is to wrest judgment from a sinful respect
to the outward state, condition of parties, and such other things which are
wholly extrinsick to the cause in hand, which vice the Lord is free of as being
the righteous Judge of the world, who cannot be biased by fear, love, pity,
or any other inordinate affection, as man is; and consequently, the outward
dignity, power, or wealth of masters, would not make Him spare them, if they
made not conscience of their duty. Hence Learn, 1. Though masters are freed
from subjection and giving obedience unto their servants; yet not from doing
duty unto them. Neither is there any power among men so absolute, no not that
of Kings and supreme Rulers, Romans 13. 3. -4. -6. but it implies an obligation,
through virtue of Gods Ordinance, upon those who are invested with it, to make
conscience of several duties toward their inferiors and subjects: for, he
says, And ye masters, do the same things unto them. 2. It concerns masters
in their place as much as servants in theirs, not only to go about their duty,
but also to advert to the manner wherein they do it, even that it be done in
sincerity, cordially, cheerfully, taking God for their party more than men:
for, he says, Ye masters, do the same things unto them. 3. It is not only
lawful, but in some cases necessary for masters sometimes to threaten, boast,
cast down their countenance upon negligent, lazy, disobedient, and chiefly upon
profane servants, providing they do it moderatly, and keep off excess: for,
the Apostle does not simply forbid all manner of threatening, but only
prescribes a moderation thereof; Forbearing, or moderating threatening. 4. The
Servants of Christ in the reproof of sin, ought mainly to guard against such
evils, as those to whom they speak, through custom, perverse inclination, or a
deluded mind, are most ready to fall into; and so ought people set mainly
against such sins in themselves, and thereby defend the wall where it is
weakest, and the enemies greatest force does lie: for, because masters are most
prone to break out against their servants in threatening, railing and reviling
words, as thinking words are but wind, and their tongues are their own, Psalm.
12. 4. therefore he forbids that evil mainly and expressly: Forbearing
threatening, says he. 5. As it is very usual for powers on earth, sinfully to
oversee, and not to punish the cruel and unjust dealing of masters toward
servants; So those sins which are most connived at by men, are most severely
taken notice of by God: for, the Apostle minds them, that God would call
masters to an account how they carried toward their servants, though men did
not take notice of them: Knowing that your master also is in heaven. 6. It is
too too ordinary for men in place and authority above others, to carry
themselves as if they had none above them to be countable unto; or, at least,
to dream that the Lord will not take such strict account of them, as of their
underlings and servants; for, the Apostle obviateth such thoughts, and so does
indirectly imply, that masters did so think, while he says, your master also
is in heaven, and there is no respect of persons with him. 7. Ministers are
bound to inculcate, even those truths upon the Lords people, which they in
charity do judge to be thoroughly known already by them; because truths are
better known than made use of by the most part; yea, the calling to mind of
known truths by the public Ministry, does through Gods blessing put a new
luster and efficacy upon them for inciting unto duty: for therefore, though the
Apostle supponeth they knew this truth, yet he puts them in remembrance of
it; Knowing that your master is in heaven. See what is observed further upon
this description of God, from His royal palace, and impartiality in judging,
upon Col. 3. ver. 25. doct. 4, 5. and Col. 4. ver. 1. doct. 4, 5, 6.

Verse. 10. Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might.
THe Apostle (having from chap. 5. ver. 21. exhorted unto those duties which
belong to Christians as they are members of families) does now in the second
part of this Chapter, exhort unto one duty, which belongs unto all Christians
in general, the making conscience whereof, is necessary for practicing all, or
any of the forementioned duties, even that they would prepare and make ready
for a christian warfare. And being in the first branch of this part of the
Chapter, unto ver. 14. to enforce this duty more generally, he does, first,
propone the exhortation, to wit, that finally, or notwithstanding of all he had
formerly spoken, this one thing did remain yet necessary to be delivered by
him, (for, so much the Original word does imply) even that they would be
strong, fortify themselves, take to them spirits and resolutions in order to
their Christian warfare. And this, first, by looking at, and making use of that
strength which they had, and all Believers have without themselves in the Lord
Christ, who is engaged with them, as leader and general in this warfare, Joh.
10. 28. And particularly, they are to look at, and act their faith upon the
power of His might, or His almighty power, in order to their being strong and
resolute, as that, which alone was able to answer all their faintings and
fears, arising either from their own weakness, Romans 4. 19. with 21. or the
strength of enemies, Joh. 16. 33. Hence Learn, 1. It is not enough for
Christians to know what they ought to do by virtue of their several relations,
except they also set about the practice of their duty according to what they
know of it: for, the Apostle, having already instructed them in the knowledge
of their duty, he shows this one thing was yet remaining, even to prepare
themselves with resolution and courage in order to their better practicing of
it: Finally, or, this yet remains, that ye be strong in the Lord. 2. As the
duties of a Christian life, whether in our general or particular calling, will
not be discharged by us without a battle and conflict with strong difficulties
and terrible adversaries; So it is the duty of Christ's Ministers, not only to
press duties upon the Lords people, but also to forewarne them of these
difficulties and dangers which ly in the way of their duty, and to instruct
them how to wrestle with and overcome them all: for, so does Paul, having
already pressed upon them the duties of their general and particular callings,
he does here not only forewarne them, but also forearme them against
difficulties and hazards; Finally, be strong in the Lord. 3. Though the Lords
Servants sometimes may, and are also bound to command and charge the people of
God committed to their charge, to make conscience of their duty, 1 Timothy 6. 17.
yea, and also denounce against them most terrible threatenings, if they neglect
it, 2 Timothy 4. 2. Tit. 1. 13. yet, so long as gentle exhortations, enforced with
sweet smooth insinuations and rational demonstrations of the equity and
necessity of the thing, may prevail, they are rather to be followed by them,
thereby testifying their affection unto, and charitable esteem of their hearers
as of rational men, who, are in a greater probability to be wrought upon by
insinuations, desires and convincing reasons, than by threats and boasts: for,
the Apostle does here gently exhort them, enforcing this exhortation by an
insinuative compellation, while he calls them brethren, and afterward
convinces them of the equity and necessity of that to which he does exhort
them; Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord. 4. So strong and terrible
are these difficulties which Christians are assaulted with in the way of duty,
(See ver. 12.) that there is need of more than ordinary strength, resolution
and courage, for meeting with them, and charging through them. Faint
hearted-cowards and lazy sluggards, will never face them, far less overcome
them, Prove. 22. 13. for, in order to their rancountering those difficulties, he
bids them be strong, that is, take to them spirits and courage. 5. No
natural courage nor hardiness of spirit, arising from man's natural temper,
(though in some respect sufficient for making men endure any temporal hardship
without succumbing, Prove. 18. 14.) is able to underprop and bear us up against
the furious assaults of such spiritual adversaries, and breaking
discouragements, arising from such multiplied difficulties as daily do assault
us in our Christian course: for, he bids them be strong, not in themselves
or in the power of their own natural resolutions, but in the Lord, and the
power of his might. 6. No strength of grace inherent, no spiritual courage
flowing from the graces of Gods Spirit in us, is alone, and by it self
sufficient to make us stand and bear us through as victors in this spiritual
conflict: we must besides, be underpropped by the power and strength of Christ
the Lord without us, by whose influence our inherent graces must be actuated
and applied to work, Philip. 2. 13. directed in their work, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 5.
recruited daily with a new supply of strength, Isa. 40. 29. and kept from
fainting under renewed assaults, Luke 22. 31, 32. otherwise they can do
nothing, Joh. 15. -5. for, he forbids them not only make use of grace
inherent, as we shall hear, ver. 11. but also and antecedently, be strong in
the Lord, or in that strength which they had without themselves in the Lord
Christ. 7. As whatsoever is in the Lord Christ, must and will be forthcoming,
for the encouragement strengthening and bearing through of Believers in this
spiritual conflict; So their greatest strength, and ground of courage in all
their conflicts, does ly in, and ought to arise from, not what they are in
themselves, or can do for themselves, but what the Lord Christ is engaged to be
and do on their behalf: for, he exhorts them, be strong in the Lord, thereby
implying, that the Lord Christ would be forthcoming for them, and that they
were to draw their resolution and courage from thence. 8. Christian soldiers,
in order to their own encouragement and strengthening for this spiritual
conflict, ought to lay hold upon, and by faith make use, as of whole Christ,
and of all those rich and glorious perfections which are in Him, So especially
of His almighty power and strength, by virtue whereof, He does all His
pleasure, Isa. 46. -10. neither is there any thing too hard for Him, Genesis 18.
14. The power of enemies and greatness of difficulties, together with our own
weakness, call for this: besides, that many of our discouragements arise, not
so much or only from misbelief of His good will to help, as from our
atheistical doubtings about His power and strength, which sometimes are
expressed, Psalm. 78. -20. and sometimes work subtly under ground, as if not
His power but only His good will were doubted of, which is clear from this,
that His good will is not usually questioned, but when difficulties are great,
and to sense and reason insuperable. Hence it is, that, having commanded them
to act their faith upon whole Christ and all that is in Him, he bids them
pitch upon His almighty power in particular; Be strong in the Lord, and in the
power of His might.

Verse. 11. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against
the wiles of the devil.
THe Apostle will have them to be strong and fortify themselves, next, by
acquiring and making use of spiritual strength inherent in themselves, while
he enjoyneth them to put on the whole armor of God, that is, the whole
furniture and matter of Christian virtues, and all the means which God has
appointed for guarding the soul against Satan's temptations, as he clears
afterward in the particular pieces of this armor. Now, those graces of Gods
Spirit, are called armor, because they defend the soul from, and strike out
against, Satan and sinful lusts, as the armor of soldiers in wars do defend
the body and hurt the enemy; and the armor of God, both to show it must be
spiritual and not carnal, 2 Cor. 10. 5. as being fitted for the heart, soul
and conscience, and not the bodily members; and that God is the author, maker
and inventer of this armor, and accordingly does bestow it, Iam. 1. 17. In the
latter part of the verse, he shows the end why they should be strong in the
Lord, and put on this armor, even that they might be able to stand, that is,
to hold on their Christian course (as a soldier standing orderly and keeping
his ground) not running forth beyond the bounds of their calling to cast
themselves upon tentations and hazards, nor basely fleeing from or ceding to
them when God calls for valiant resistance: which duty of standing, is
illustrated from the party whom they were to encounter and to fight against,
even Satan, whose subtle wiles and stratagems, whereby he labors to entrap
souls, cannot be otherwise resisted but by putting on of this spiritual
armor. Hence Learn, 1. Christians are so to rely upon and make use of the
covenanted power and strength of Christ, as not to ly-by lazy and idle
themselves: They must also have, and accordingly make use of strength inherent
in them, and bestowed on them by their Lord and General Jesus Christ.
Confidence in Christ, and the conscientious use of all those helps and means
appointed by Him, cannot be separated: for, the Apostle, having commanded them
(verse. 10.) to place their confidence in the power of Christ, will have them
here to acquire and make use of spiritual strength inherent in themselves,
while he says, Put on the whole armor of God. 2. It is only the armor of
God, the graces of His Spirit, and such other means as are appointed by Him,
which Christians are to make use of in this spiritual conflict: whatever
armor we use besides, (whether will worship invented by our selves, Col. 2.
18. or carnal motives, to oppose the power of sin, or poor subterfuges to
cover the guilt of it, Jer. 2. 22.) will hurt, but cannot help in the day of
battle: for, he bids them put on the armor of God, that is, the graces of
the Spirit of God, and all such means as are appointed by Him. 3. That a
Christian may be truly valiant and come off with honor and safety in this
spiritual conflict, he must be wholly armed, and no power of the soul or sense
of the body left naked without a guard. And in order to this, that not any
saving grace be wanting, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7. or the use of any mean appointed by
God, neglected, Mark 9. 29. there being work for all, and use of all at one
time or other, under one case or other, in relation to one tentation or other:
for, he bids put on the whole armor of God, and that not any one piece
thereof be wanting, or any part of the man be left naked. 4. It is not enough
to have the root and habits of saving grace in the heart: but we must also
exercise these graces, and be always acting some one or other of them, 1 Cor.
15. 58. and all of them as occasion offers, and as suitable objects are
presented by God, Gal. 6. 10. otherwise we are not in a fitting posture for
this spiritual combat. When grace is idle, sin and Satan are most diligent:
for, when he bids them put on this armor, he means not only a putting on
by acquiring the seeds and habits of saving graces at conversion; (for, some of
them were already converted) but also a putting on by using and exercising the
grace which some of them at least already had: Put on the whole armor of God.
5. The great adversary of the Saints, is the devil, who feighteth against them
most by lies and calumnies, speaking evil of God and His ways to them, Genesis 3.
5. misrepresenting their own state to themselves, Isa. 49. 14. and calumniating
one of them to another: for, the devil is here spoken of as their chief
adversary, and the name here given unto him, does in the Original signify a
calumniator and slanderer; That ye may stand against the wiles of the devil. 6.
As Satan is most witty and subtle; so he imployeth all his skill and subtilty
for carrying on this battle against the Saints, while he most cunningly
contriveth, and with no less subtilty conveyeth such ensnaring tentations as
he knows, all things being considered, will be most taking with the person
tempted: for, here he speaks of Satan's wiles, the word signifies methodick
witty stratagems. 7. However Satan does sometimes transform himself into an
angel of light, 2 Cor. 11. 14. and covers his foul designs with most
plausible pretenses to zeal for God, Luke 9. 54, 55. to pity and natural
affection, Mat. 16. 22. or generally to something which is in it self
commendable; yet, his great design in all his tentations, even when he speaks
fairest, is to drive the party tempted from his station, either by making him
turn the back as a coward, Neh. 6. 10, 11. or driving him beyond the bounds of
his calling, Matthew. 26. 51. or presently to render up his arms and become
captive to some one prevalent lust or other, Genesis 39. 12. for, while he says,
that ye may able to stand against his wiles, he implies, that Satan's aim is to
drive us from our station: 8. The great work of a Christian, in relation to
those wiles of Satan, is not to imitate him, by bending our wits to ensnare
others to a sinful course as he does, Matthew. 16. 22, 23. nor yet so much to
know his wiles, to lay open the subtilty and deceit that is in them for the use
of others, Matthew. 7. 22. as to guard against them, and to keep our station
notwithstanding of them, even when we are assaulted by them: for, says Paul,
that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. 9. It is by the
alone virtue of this armor of God, that is, the saving graces of God's Spirit,
and the careful exercise of those graces, that Christians are enabled to stand
out against Satan's wit and wiles. A piece of natural courage and fixed
resolutions, together with the deep engagement of credit and interest, may do
much to make a man stand out against his avowed force and violence put forth by
cruel persecuters; but there is no sense in flesh and blood against his wiles:
for, he bids put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand
against the wiles of the devil.

Verse. 12. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.
THe Apostle, having thus propounded the duty, does next enforce it from the
nature of this warfare, as being a wrestling, which is a close combat betwixt
two, hand to hand, each exerting their whole force and strength against one
another: And from the terror and greatness of those adversaries, whom we are to
fight against, described, 1. negatively, or comparatively, that they were not
flesh and blood, that is, any bodily or humane power, to wit, only, or
principally; for, the Believer does fight against those also, Joh. 16. 33. only
they are but Satan's auxiliary forces, whom he stirs up and imployeth. Next,
positively, the devils and damned angels, described, first, from their
magnifick titles, principalities, powers, rulers of the darkness of this world:
whereby is set forth their great natural power and strength, together with
their prince-like authority and government, which by Gods permission they
exerce in the world, and upon wicked men in it by reason of their profanity and
ignorance, here called darkness, as chap. 5. ver. 8. Secondly, from their
nature, as being for their essence spiritual, immaterial and without a body;
and for quality, most wicked, and here called wickedness it self in the
abstract, thereby to aggreage their wickedness, as being wholly destitute of
all moral goodness. Thirdly, from the place of their abode, the high air,
whereof Satan is prince, chap. 2. 2. Or rather, by this particle in high
places, (as many Interpreters conceive) he sets forth somewhat more of the
nature of this warfare, to wit, the main matter about which the quarrel is,
even high and heavenly things, which tend to the honor of God, and the eternal
good of our souls: for, the word in the original is, in the heavenly, without
the substantive places, and it may be as well supplied heavenly things, as it
is, Heb. 8. 5. and 9. 23. and so it reads well in, or, because of heavenly
things; for, this particle, rendered in, is sometimes causall, and rendered
because. See Matthew. 26. 31. Hence Learn, 1. The Lord does deal ingenuously with
all whom He calls to fight this spiritual conflict, by letting them know the
power, strength and subtilty of the enemy; and the height of those difficulties
which ly in their way to heaven before they engage, So that none may have
occasion to say they were deceived, and made to meet with harder work than they
were told of at the first: for, he sets forth the nature of this warfare,
and terror of the adversary to the utmost of what could be said by any, We
wrestle against principalities and powers, etc. 2. So apt are men to dream of
the way to heaven as easy, and to trouble themselves but little for attaining
to it, Matthew. 7. 21. that nothing less is required to make us shake off
security, and mind the work of walking to heaven in earnest, than to set
before us all those dreadful dangers, insuperable difficulties, and terrible
opposition, which of necessity we are to meet with in our way to it; for, that
they may be excited to shake off laziness and be serious in this work, he
sees it necessary to set before them what dreadful enemies they had to fight
against, as appears from the causal particle for, which coupleth this verse
with the former; Put on the whole armor of God, -- for we wrestle against
principalities and powers. 3. The malice of Satan, our spiritual adversary, is
bent, not only against the Saints in general, but also against every one in
particular, each of whom he sets upon, with so much fury, force and
eagerness, as if he had none to deal with but one alone: for, the Christians
conflict with Satan, is here called a wrestling, which is a close combat
betwixt two, hand to hand; and the original word signifies such a strife as
makes the body shake again; We wrestle, says he. 4. Every Saint and real
Believer is this one, whom Satan so assaulteth: he forbeareth none, but sets
upon all; the strongest are not a terror to him, nor yet the meanest are so
far undervalued by him, as not to think them worthy of his wrath; and therefore
all must fight and wrestle: for, the Apostle of purpose changes the pronoun
ye, in the former verse, into we in this, to show that neither he nor any other
was exempted from wrestling; We wrestle, says he. 5. No place, no inward case,
or outward condition wherein a Christian does fall, can give him ease from, or
a safe peace with, this restless adversary: his greatest safety is to be
wrestling daily and without intermission; for, he says not, we did wrestle, or
shall wrestle, but in the present time, we wrestle: which implies a continued
action. 6. Devils and damned evil spirits, are a more terrible and dangerous
party to wrestle with than any bodily or humane power; yea, though all the
skill, courage, valor, strength, which over was amongst men, were united and
placed in one, This dreadful adversary, (for strength, for craft, for
unwearied diligence, for unpeaceablnesse of spirit against his party, for his
malice, not so much against our body and outward estate, as against our
choicest part, even the immortal soul; for his courage to assault, his
nimblenesse to pursue, his immortal nature, that he never dies) goes far
beyond the most terrible of men, yea, and all men: for, he extenuateth the
power and terror of flesh and blood, being compared with Satan's making the
latter far more terrible than the former, while he says, we wrestle not with
flesh and blood, but with principalities and powers. 7. As men in tempting us
to sin directly or indirectly, are subservient to Satan, and in that respect
acted by him, Matthew. 16. 23. So, our surest way to guard against all such
tentations, is to look at Satan as our chief party, who makes use of man one
way or other, to promove his soul-ruining designs, and upon our ceding to the
tentation, as a giving place to the devil, Ephesians. 4. 27. for, while he says, we
wrestle not with flesh and blood, but with principalities and powers, he would
have them to look at Satan as their chief adversary, even when they are tempted
by men. 8. It is Satan's constant work, not only to sin against the Lord
himself; but to incite and tempt others to do the like, and envy and hinder
that happiness unto others which he has irrecoverably fallen-from himself:
and therefore such as are most active to entice others to sin and wickedness,
do resemble Satan most, and are to be looked upon, not as men, but incarnate
devils. It is their fathers work they do, and his lusts they fulfill, Joh. 8.
44. for, he makes it Satan's work to wrestle with the Saints and make them sin
against the Lord; We wrestle with principalities and powers. 9. As there is not
only one but many devils feighting under one head and chief, Matthew. 25. -41. So
all of them are engaged in this spiritual warfare against the Saints; and
therefore none of Christ's soldiers should dream of ease, there being a
sufficient number of enemies to engage all: yea, sometimes many devils do set
upon one man at once, Mark 5. 9. for, all the styles here given to Satan, are
in the plural number, to show that they are a numerous enemy; Principalities,
powers, rulers, wickednesses. 10. The people of God ought not to extenuate or
undervalue the force and power of their adverse party in this spiritual
conflict; but look upon them in their outmost strength, most numerous
multitude, greatest activity, and in whatsoever may make them terrible: and
this, not to weaken their own hands; but to awake them from their security, and
to chase them to their strength: for, in order to this end, Paul holds out
their enemy Satan in his most dreadful colors; Principalities, powers, rulers
of the darkness of this world, spiritual wickednesses. 11. Though Angels by
their fall, have losed much, even all their moral goodness, Joh. 8. 44. yet
their essence and natural being does remain, yea, and such properties as do
naturally flow from such an excellent being, as strength and ability to do, at
Gods permission, whatsoever is not above the course of nature, (See upon chap.
2. ver. 2. doct. 8.) for which cause they are here called powers, yea. and what
through Gods permission, their own usurpation, and the voluntary subjection of
wicked men unto them, they exercise a prince-like authority over the children
of disobedience: for, therefore are they called principalities and rulers. 12.
Whatever prince-like authority Satan has in the world, and whatever be his
might and power to back his authority and make it dreadful, he imployeth it
all for carrying on this war against the Saints; his kingly power over wicked
men is made use of for stirring them up sometimes to entice, Genesis 39. 7.
sometimes to constrain the truly godly to sin against the Lord, Dan. 3. 2,
etc, His power and might, whereby through Gods permission, he does raise up
storms, commove the elements, destroy cattle, smite the bodies of men with
diverse diseases,, is all employed for this to make men, and especially good
men, break out in some one or other sinful carriage, Job 1. 11. with 14. and
2. 5. with 7. for, while the Apostle designeth our adversary by styles of
principalities and powers, he shows whatever authority or power Satan has,
is employed by him for carrying on the war. 13. This prince-like authority and
rule which Satan exerceth, is not absolute and illimitted, but has its own
bounds appointed for it by God. As, first, his principality and rule is only in
this world, but not in that which is to come, no not over the wicked, in whom
he now rules, but there he and they both shall remain for ever close prisoners
in hell, Matthew. 25. 41. for, Christ is still to rule as Mediator and Lord
Deputy under the Father, until He put down all rule, authority and power, and
consequently Satan's among the rest, 1 Cor. 15. 24. Hence it is they are called
rulers of this world, that is, now, and not hereafter. Next, his principality
is limited only to those who are in their unrenewed state of darkness, sin and
ignorance of God. He may indeed exerce a tyrannical power over the Regenerate,
but no princely authority, unto which they give unwilling obedience, there
being still in such, a party for God, 1 John 3. 9. which in one degree or other
opposes it self, at least does not consent to Satan's usurpation, Romans 7. 19.
Gal. 5. 17. for, he confineth their rule to darkness, that is, those who are
in a state of sin and ignorance; rulers of the darkness. 14. Though Satan
cannot so far prevail over the renewed man as to rule in him; yet, he cease
not to assault him, if it were but to vex him, Romans 7. 24. yea, and he may so
far prevail with his assaults by drawing him on to some particular gross acts
of sin, 2 Samuel 11. 4. and thereby to dishonor God, 2 Samuel 12. 14. and to mar
his own peace, Psalm. 32. 3, 4. as that the best of men have need to stand upon
their guard against him: for, though the Apostle does limit his principality
and rule to unrenewed men, yet he makes even that, an argument, why he himself
and all the converted Ephesians were to stand to their arms against him: which
implies, that at least he would assault them; yea, and might in part prevail
against them: for we wrestle against the rulers of the darkness of this world.
15. Natural excellency, greatness and dignity, are very consistent and
oftentimes found to be stained with the greatest moral deformity; yea, and
most excellent creatures, when they degenerate to wickedness, do usually prove
most perverse: for, those glorious creatures, whom he presently called
principalities and powers, having fallen from God, became not only wicked, but
wickedness it self in the abstract; Against spiritual wickedness. 16. So base,
so shameful, so defiling a thing is sin, that it puts a stain, a blot, a
note of ignominy, upon the greatest of created excellencies, if once it get
place; yea, the more, and more choice excellencies that God has adorned any
person with, he proves the more loathsome and abominable to God, when he gives
loose reigns to wickedness for, those princely excellent creatures, by reason
of their sin, are branded with this ignominious style, they are spiritual
wickedness. 17. It adds much to the christian soldier his disadvantage in
this spiritual conflict, that his grand and dreadful enemy, the devil, is of a
spiritual and immaterial substance: for, being a spirit, he is of vast
understanding, and able to take up our natural inclination, and what temptation
will be most prevalent with us, Joh. 12. 6. with Mark 14. 11. he is invisible
both in his nature and approaches; he often does reach a deadly blow before we
know it is he, 2 Samuel 15. 11. he penetrateth all material substance, and cannot
be kept out by locked doors; yea, the external senses being closed, he
works upon the inward fancy and imagination, Mica. 2. 1. he is unwearied in
his motions, and never cease to pursue his design, notwithstanding of growing
difficulties and multiplied repulses, Genesis 39. 7. with 10. 12. he has a
singular dexterity in driving us on to act spiritual sins, that is, either
inward sins of the heart, or sins that are conversant, not about carnal
passions and fleshly lusts, but spiritual objects, such as spiritual pride,
error, unbelief, etc. these being more like to his own spiritual substance:
for, he sets him forth in his spiritual nature, to make him more dreadful,
as also (according to the judgment of some Interpreters) to hint at the kind of
those tentations, which with greatest dexterity and vigor he assaulteth the
Saints with most, even to spiritual sins, against spiritual wickedness, or the
spirituals of wickedness, as it is in the original. 18. The malice of Satan
does bend it self against the Christian soldier, not so much in his temporal
and worldly, as in his spiritual and heavenly concernments; and whatever he
does to the Christian's hurt and prejudice in the former, it is that he may
hereby reach him a blow in the latter, Job 1. 11. for, Paul does show the
matter about which the quarrel is betwixt Satan and us, to be things heavenly,
not earthly; in high places, better, because of heavenly things. 19. No worldly
concernment or hazard, ought to go so near us, as that which concerns the
eternal good and salvation of our souls, the hazard of losing those
concernments will startle a Christian soldier much, as knowing it can profit
him nothing to gain the whole world, if he lose his soul: for, to make them
take the alarm with greater speed, he shows it was not things earthly, but
heavenly, which Satan intended to spoil them of; For we wrestle -- for
heavenly things, Therefore put on the whole armor of God, as it is, ver. 11.

Verse. 13. Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able
to withstand in the evil day, and having done all to stand.
HE does here first repeat the former exhortation with some small variation, as
a conclusion following upon the former reason, while he commands them to take
unto them this whole armor, and for the end formerly mentioned, even that they
might be able to withstand and resist the enemy, as it were, face to face, foot
to foot, hand to hand, and this chiefly in the evil day; whereby is meaned not
only the whole time of our life, which is full of tentations, and therefore in
that respect, evil, but also and chiefly some circumstantiat time wherein
tentations were to abound, chiefly the time of death, not excluding, but rather
probably including that time which was foretold by Paul himself, Acts 20. 29,
30. Next, he enlarges this end, which was to be attained by their putting on,
and making use of their armor, not only to their withstanding at the first
onset, and during the time of the fight; but also to their standing after the
victory, and after they have done all, or overcome all: where by standing, as
it is distinguished from withstanding, presently mentioned, must be meaned the
posture not of a soldier, but of a conqueror, who uses to stand when the
conquered are thrown upon the ground, Psalm. 20. 8. Hence Learn, 1. The
dreadful opposition which the Christian soldier must meet with in the way to
heaven, should not discourage or make him heartless, but only incite him to
shake off security and laziness, and to prepare himself for the day of battle:
for, from what he has said, ver. 12. of their terrible adversaries, he
infers here, wherefore take unto you the whole armor. 2. As our serious
fore-casting and thinking upon, together with our preparing our selves
accordingly for, this christian conflict, is a necessary duty; So, such is our
love to carnal ease and security, Prove. 6. 9. 10. that we are not easily
excited to this duty; one alarm will not do it: for, therefore does he give
them a second, almost in the same words; wherefore take unto you the whole
armor of God. 3. The graces of Gods Spirit, by which the soul is completely
armed for this spiritual conflict, are not of our own making or procuring, but
being made to our hand by God, we have them for the taking: for, he calls
them the whole armor of God, and bids the Ephesians only take them; take
unto you the whole armor of God. 4. As this spiritual armor, or the saving
graces of Gods Spirit, being once put on, may, though not altogether, 1 John 3.
9. yet in a great part, be wrung or wyled from us by the power and sleight of
Satan, our dreadful adversary, So we are not in that case to quit the field,
and yield the cause: but by renewing our faith, repentance and former diligence
in the use of means, Rev. 2. 5. to take them to us again. Neither are they
ever so far lost, but they may be recovered, our great General being always
at hand to renew our strength, to make us mount up and not be weary, Isai. 40.
29 --. 31. for, the word rendered, take unto you, signifies to take again, or
recover that which we have lost or let go. 5. As our spiritual adversaries in
this Christian conflict are most fierce pursuers, when ever we give them
ground; so we are not to expect any truce or quarter from them, but must stand
to it, and fight it out, placing all our safety in a courageous resistance,
avowed defyance, and none at all in base running, or cowardly ceding, or
politic compliance: for, the Apostle will have all their thoughts taken up how
to withstand, which implies a furious charge and fierce pursuit upon the part
of enemies, and an avowed defyance with courageous resistance upon ours: that
we may be able to withstand. 6. What ever be the terror, and strength of our
spiritual adversaries, and the weakness and inability of men, destitute of the
saving graces of Gods Spirit, to resist the meanest of Satan's onsets, 2 Timothy
2. -- 26. yet of such excellent virtue is this whole armor of God, or those
Christian graces wrought in us by the Spirit of God, that when the soul is once
endued with them, and attaineth to the dexterous use and exercise of them, the
weakest of saints, will be enabled to receive, without losing ground, the most
furious of Satan's assaults: for, it is promised unto them all, even the
meanest of them, if they will put on the whole armor of God, they shall be
able to withstand. 7. As there are some evil days by reason of tentations and
trouble, awaiting Christians, and some of those unavoidable by any, namely the
day of death, Heb. 9. 27. So, we ought to be fore-arming and preparing for such
days before they come, and with Christian courage resist those violent
tentations arising from them when they come, as knowing we are chiefly then
called and singled out to give proof of the reality of Gods grace in us, Ephesians.
5. 16. for, he forewarneth of an ill day approaching, and will have them to
arm themselves before it come; Take to you the whole armor -- and to
withstand in the evil day. 8. There can no such evil day befall a Christian,
but through help of this spiritual armor, and the kindly exercise of saving
graces, he may ride out the storm, and arrive with safety at the wished harbor
when it is over and gone, chiefly if trial and trouble find him ready armed,
and at his duty: for, if they will take to them beforehand this armor of God,
he promises they shall be able to withstand in the evil day. 9. It is a
singular encouragement to the Christian soldier, that the time of his hottest
conflict with afflictions, tentations, and the devil their leader, lasts not
long; it is but a day, an hour, Rev. 3. 10. a short season, 1 Pet. 1. 6. yea,
but a moment, compared with eternity, 2 Cor. 4. 17. for, in order to their
encouragement, he calls the time of their feighting but a day; To withstand
in the evil day. 10. The Christian soldier in this spiritual warfare, will
meet with many assaults before he obtain a complete victory, there must be
variety of conflicts, exercises and tentations, so that usually his coming out
of one, is but an entrance into another: the malice of the adversary is
unsatiable, his hopes are never quite gone, but what he misseth at one time and
one assault, he hops to acquire at another, Job 2. 4, 5. for, he says they
must first do all, or overcome all: which implies there are many things to be
overcome before they stand as conquerours. 11. It is not enough that the
Christian soldier does once engage in this spiritual warfare, and carry
himself, courageously in withstanding some few of Satan's assaults, and
afterward fall back, and lay down his arms; but he must of necessity endure
to the end, and until he receive the very last of Satan's assaults and overcome
them all, if so he expect to stand as conqueror after the feight: for, says
he, and having done or overcome, not only some few assaults, but all; To stand.
12. It is only this armor of God, those saving graces of His Spirit, and no
common gifts or fair flourishes of temporaries and hypocrites, which will enable
a Christian to feight all the battles that must be stricken before the complete
victory: for, only if they take this armor, he shows they shall do, or
overcome all. 13. How many soever the Christian's conflicts be, yet if he take
unto him, and use this armor aright, he shall come through all, and stand
victorious after all. Christ our general, in whose victory we have interest,
has overcome all, Joh. 16. 33. He is engaged in this battle, and feighteth
with us, Philip. 4. 13. yea, and prays for us, Luke 22. 32. Besides, none can
pluck the Believer out of His hand, because the Father and He is stronger than
they, Joh. 10. 29. and consequently, the field cannot be lost, the feighting
soldier must one day be a triumphing conqueror: for, upon their taking to
them this armor, it is promised, that having done all, they shall stand, to
wit, as conquerours.

Verse. 14. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having
on the breastplate of righteousness.
THe Apostle, in the second branch of this second part of the Chapter, (having
again exhorted them to stand to it as valourous soldiers by carrying
themselves watchfully and orderly in all the duties of their general and
particular station) gives an inventour of the several pieces of this armor,
both offensive and defensive, exhorting the Christian soldier to put on, and
make use of, each of them; and reckons forth all the pieces of complete
bodily armor wherewith soldiers used of old to arm their bodies from head to
foot, and assigns some one or other of the graces of Gods Spirit, answerable
to every one of those, for arming the spirit.

Concerning which, know, 1. in general, that there is no piece of armor here
fitted for the back parts, because there is no escaping by flight in this
spiritual warfare, Iam. 4. 7. Heb. 10. 38. Secondly, that we must not so
precisly distinguish the several pieces, as to think that one may not serve
for the use of another: for, faith which answers to the shield here, (See
ver. 16) is called the breast plate, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8. And yet, thirdly, as shall
be made clear in the particulars, there is some resemblance between every
grace, and that piece of the bodily armor, to which it is here compared.

In this verse, are two pieces of this armor, the first is truth: not the
truth of doctrine, which is included under the sword of the Spirit, the Word of
God; but the grace of truth, or sincerity, whereby a man endeavors to be
that really, both unto God and man, for which he gives himself out, 1 John 3.
18. and gives himself out for that to both, for which the word of truth does
call upon him, Psalm. 119. 1. which grace of sincerity goes frequently under
the name of truth, Psalm. 51. 6. Joh. 4. 24. Now, he bids them have their
loins girt about with this grace; and so shows, it does answer that piece of
the bodily armor which was called the girdle, and was a broad belt, wherewith
soldiers were girt about the middle, and did serve both for ornament, as being
set with drops of brass or silver, and hiding the gap and want between the
other pieces of the armor in that place; and also for safety and defense, as
keeping all the rest of the armor fast, guarding the belly and strengthening
the loins. In like manner, this grace of sincerity, is the Christians ornament,
Job. 1. 47. covers many other wants, Genesis 20. 6. is a necessary ingredient in
all other graces, without which they are but counterfeit shadows, Prove. 15. 8.
and adds strength and courage to the heart in the day of sore trial, Job 27.
5, 6. The second piece of armor is righteousness: not the imputed
righteousness of Christ, which seems to be included under the buckler of
faith; but the inherent righteousness of an holy conversation, whereby we are
inclined, and do accordingly endeavor, to give both to God and man their due
and right, Acts 24. 16. according to both the Tables of the Commands, Luke 1.
6. and it answers that piece of the bodily armor, which was called the
breast plate, whereby the breast and vital parts therein contained were
secured: In like manner, this grace of righteousness does guard the vital
parts of the soul, and that wherein the life of a Christian does consist, to
wit, the root and seed of inherent grace in the heart, 2 Pet. 1. 10. and the
faith of his interest in God: for, righteous walking is an evidence of
interest, 1 John 2, 3. Hence Learn, 1. None shall after death stand as
victorious over all their spiritual enemies, but such as here do stand as
soldiers in a military posture. They must stand as watchmen, Hab. 2. 1. to
observe and take up their enemies motions and approaches, 1 Pet. 5. 8. and they
must stand as fighters, to resist and withstand all his furious assaults, 1
Pet. 5. 9. otherwise, they shall never stand as conquerours: for, having spoken
(ver. 13.) of their standing as conquerours at death, he exhorts them in
order to their standing, that they would here stand as soldiers; Stand
therefore. 2. Assurance, and certainty of through bearing and victory over all
our spiritual adversaries, is so far from being in its own nature a pillow to
foster security and carnal ease, that it adds courage and spirit to those
who have it, and rendereth them so much the more watchful, active and
diligent: yea, and nothing weakeneth more the hands of a christian soldier,
than diffidence and distrust of success: for, from what he promised, ver. 13.
that they should stand as conquerours, he encourages them here to stand in the
conflict; Stand therefore. 3. Whenever a man does engage to fight under Christ's
banner, and betaketh himself to his military posture, he may expect a present
charge, and to be set upon without delay by his spiritual adversaries: for, no
sooner does he bid them stand, but with the same breath he commands them to
put on their armor, and be in readiness to receive a present assault; Stand
therefore, having your loins girt about. 4. The Spirit of God, speaking in
Scripture, does usually set out most heavenly and spiritual purposes, by
similitudes taken from things earthly, and such as do occur in our ordinary
employments, hereby teaching us so to converse among, and look upon things
earthly, as to gather some spiritual lessons from them: for, the Apostle does
here resemble every piece of the soldiers armor, to some answerable Christian
grace; Having your loins girt about with truth. 5. The grace of truth and
sincerity, is a necessary piece of the Christians armor, without the which we
cannot choose but be exposed and laid open to several deadly blows, and
dangerous tentations from our spiritual adversary; without sincerity we are
easily driven to dissemble both with God, (Psalm. 78. 36, 37.) and man, Psalm.
55. 21. to go about choicest duties for base and by-ends, Math. 6. 2. Phil. 1.
16. to curtell our obedience, astricting it to some commanded duties only,
neglecting others, Mark 6. 17. with 20. yea, and to despare of mercy, or of
doing better in time coming, when Satan shall accuse and challenge us for our
base hypocrisy in time by past, to which he himself did tempt us, Matthew. 27.
4, 5. for, the Apostle commands the Christian soldier to arm himself with
truth and sincerity: Having your loins girt about with truth. 6. Though Satan's
chief arms, whereby he fights in this spiritual conflict, are deceitful
wiles and subtle snares, (See ver. 11.) yet, the Christian soldier must not
endeavor to overcome him with his own weapons, but ought to be sincere and
straight; he must not lie, no not for God, Job 13. 7, 8. neither think to
out-wit his adversary by yielding a little, and falling back one step, of
purpose to advance two for it, or to capitulate with him by yielding to one sin
at one time, upon condition to give way unto none other, or not to the same
afterward, which, at the best, is to do evil, that good may come, which is
condemned, Romans 3. -8. and is inconsistent with true sincerity and plain
dealing, which is here enjoined to the Christian soldier; Having your loins
girt about with truth. 7. The grace of righteousness, or an honest fixed
purpose and earnest endeavor to obey God in all His commands, is another
necessary piece of a Christians armor, without which we are exposed and laid
open to several deadly blows and dangerous tentations from our spiritual
adversary, even such as question our interest in God, and brangle our peace
with Him, Isa. 32. 17. without this purpose and endeavor, we are easily driven
to break all, or any of Gods commands, Prove. 11. 5. and 13. 6. and more
particularly, to take a sinful course for our own vindication under unjust
reproaches, Isa. 51. 7. to distrust the providence of God, under straits, Genesis
30. 33. and to make a foul retreat in the day of trial, Prove. 28. 1. for, the
Apostle commands the Christian soldier to arm himself with righteousness;
And having the breast plate of righteousness. 8. It is not enough for a
Christian soldier to propose unto himself a good and approved end, and to be
sincere and straight in aiming at the end proposed; but he must make use of
good and approved means, consisting in conscientious practice of all commanded
duties, both to God and man: for, with sincerity and truth, which relates
chiefly to the scope and end proposed in our actions, he enjoyneth the practice
of righteousness, which gives to both God and man their right and due.

Verse. 15. And your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace.
THe third piece of armor here enjoined to be put on, is, the preparation of
the Gospel of peace, that is, a prepared and resolute frame of heart to go
through our Christian course with cheerfulness and patience, notwithstanding
of all the difficulties of the way (for, the word rendered preparation, is used
elsewhere for such firmness of resolution, Acts 21. 13.) which resolute frame
of heart, is wrought and begotten by the Doctrine of the Gospel, in so far as
it is the mean of making peace and friendship between God and sinners: and
therefore is this piece of armor called the preparation of the Gospel of
peace. Now, he bids them have their feet shod with this preparation; and
thereby shows it does answer that part of the bodily armor which is called
the leg or foot-harnesse, which did serve to defend the legs and feet of
soldiers against cold, thorns, stones, and other roughness of the way. In
like manner, this prepared resolute frame of heart to charge through all
difficulties, does not only guard the soul against the pollution of filthy
tentations which it does meet with in the way, Psalm. 119. 105* but also
engages the Christian soldier to go through all the crosses, hardships and
difficulties of the way with courage and cheerfulness. Doct. 1. The Christian
soldier is so to stand in the fight, as that he be also daily advancing and
marching forwards in his way toward heaven. His duty is both to stand and to
advance at once in several respects: he is to withstand and stand against his
spiritual adversary; and yet to advance and make progress toward Christ,
perfection in grace, and his journeys end: yea, and the more firmly he stand
against the one, he advances with greater speed toward the other: for, the
Apostle, having exhorted them to stand, ver. 14-. he insinuates here, that
they must be also advancing, while he bids them put on the foot or
leg-harnesse of resolution: which piece of armor was useful for soldiers
chiefly when they were upon their march; And your feet shod. 2. The way wherein
the Christian soldier is to march and advance toward heaven, is not plain and
smooth, or free from trouble and hazard, but beset with tentations and
afflictions, as with so many sharp stones, piercing briers and thorns, which
make a way impassible to barefooted travelers; for, there was no need of the
foot-harnesse, to which he here alludeth, but in such a way; And your feet
shod. 3. The Christian soldier therefore must arm himself with a firm and well
grounded resolution and purpose of heart, to charge through all difficulties,
how dear soever it may cost him; this being another necessary piece of the
Christians armor, without the which we are exposed and laid open to several
deadly blows and dangerous tentations from our spiritual adversary, even all
such as unexpected difficulties and crosses do easily and usually drive an
unprepared heart to yield unto, to wit* impatience, Genesis 30. 1. repining
against the Lord, Jonah 4. 9. a spirit of revenge against instruments, 2 Samuel
16. 9. fainting in duty, Heb. 12. 12. closing with sinful means for attaining
an outgate, 1 Samuel 28. 7. despare of an outgate, 1 Samuel 27. 1, questioning an
interest in God because of the cross, Juag. 6. 13. and such like: for, the
Apostle commands the Christian soldier to arm himself with such a prepared
and resolute frame of heart; And your feet shod with the preparation. 4. It is
not every resolution and purpose which will guard the heart against these
forementioned blows and tentations, but such as flows from the glad-tidings
and intimation of peace and friendship made up between God and us, all our
other resolutions will be at length outwearied and broken by continual crosses
and hardships, Isa. 40. 30. but the Christian, who is armed with this, endures
to the end, as knowing God is his friend, Psalm. 23. 4. there is not wrath in
his cup, Isa. 53. 5. his wearisome journey will at last have an happy close,
Heb. 4. 9. for, the Apostle commands them to put on such a prepared frame of
heart as flows from the intimation of their peace with God, while he calls
it the preparation of the Gospel of peace. 5. The Gospel is only that Doctrine
which brings peace between God and rebels, the Law indeed discovers the
feed, Romans 3. -20. but the Gospel does not only show, that peace and friendship
may be had, Luke 2. 14. but also the terms upon which it is obtained, Romans 5.
1. yea, and by means of the preaching thereof, the Lord does work us up to
embrace these terms, Romans 10. 14, 15, 17. for, he ascribes the making up of
our peace with God to the Gospel, while he calls it the Gospel of peace. 6.
Where the Gospel is blessed of God, for making up of friendship and peace, it
will be attended in all to whom it is so blessed, with a firm and steadfast
resolution to follow God in the way of duty, notwithstanding of all
difficulties and hardships: for, he makes their putting on this prepared frame
of heart, to be the native result of peace made with God by means of the
Gospel, while he says, Having your feet shod with the preparation of the
Gospel of peace.

Verse. 16. Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to
quench all the fiery darts of the wicked.
THe fourth piece of armor, the putting-on and use-making whereof, is
recommended to them above all the rest, is the grace of faith, by which we
believe the truth of Gods Word in general, Act. 24. 14. and in a special manner
do receive (Joh. 1. 12.) and rest upon Christ (Isa. 26. 3.) for grace here,
(Philip. 4. 13.) and glory hereafter, 1 Timothy 1. -16. as He is offered in the
Gospel, Gal. 2. 16. And it answers that part of the bodily armor, called the
shield, which was a broad and large piece, made of some strong metal, and,
being made use of by a skillful hand, did defend the whole body, supply the
weakness of any other part of the armor, and guard against all sort of
strokes from the enemy. In like manner, faith is a grace of so large extent
that it reaches help to the soul in all its several cases, Habak. 2. -4. it
strengthens and supplyeth the inlacks of all other graces, Act. 15. -9. yea,
and guardeth against tentations of all sorts, Mark 9. 23. but more
particularly, as the Apostle does here express, it quenches these o^ Satan,
that wicked one his tentations, which are called fiery darts, that is, violent
and piercing tentations, whereby the soul is inflamed with a vehement heat,
whether of boiling lusts, or raging despair: and faith does not only repel
some of those tentations before they seize upon the soul; but also quench and
extinguish that heat, pain and horror which boyleth in the soul, being wounded
by these: All which the grace of faith effectuateth, not by its own strength or
force, but through the virtue of Christ whom it does apprehend, whose power and
merit, employed by faith, does allay and quench all that heat, whether of
inflaming lusts, or of boiling impatience, horror and despair, which those
tentations do kindle in the heart wherein they light and are entertained. Hence
Learn, 1. Though the Lords Ministers ought to make known unto His People the
whole counsel of God, Act. 20. 27. there being no truth revealed in Scripture,
the knowledge whereof is not useful either for the being or well-being, for
the necessary food or ornament of a Christian, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. yet they are
most to inculcate and press upon peoples consciences the knowledge and
practice of most necessary and weighty truths, chiefly those which are
fundamental and of daily use and practice: for, the Apostle, in pressing the
use of the spiritual armor, does wisely recommend one piece, of special and
daily use, above all the rest, while he says, Above all, taking the shield of
faith. 2. The grace of faith is another necessary piece of a Christians armor,
without the which we are destitute of Christ's imputed righteousness, Philip.
3. 9. and so exposed to the dint of sin-pursuing justice, Joh. 3. -36. and to
all the bitter accusations and challenges of the devil our adversary, Romans 8.
33. We are destitute also of Christ's covenanted strength, which is communicated
and engaged for our through-bearing in all our spiritual conflicts only when it
is laid hold upon by an act of faith, Joh. 15. 4, 5. and consequently, without
the exercise of that grace, we are exposed as a prey to every tentation, and
especially to Satan's fiery darts, here spoken of in the text, seeing in that
case we have no strength to resist them but our own, which indeed is none, Joh.
15. -- 5. for, the Apostle commands the Christian soldier to arm himself
with this grace; Above all taking the shield of faith. 3. This grace of faith
is the most excellent and necessary piece of all the Christians armor, in so
far as faith (though weak and imperfect in it self, Luke 17. 5. yet) laying
hold on the promise, it engages the almighty power of God and Christ to be for
us, Matthew. 15. 28. it gives life, being and vigor to the other pieces of this
armor, even to all the sanctifying graces of Gods Spirit, Acts 15. 9. 1 Timothy
1. 5. it makes up all imperfections by covering them with Christ's most perfect
righteousness, Philip. 3. 9. and so defends them against the furious or
subtle assaults of Satan, whereby he endeavors to make us question their
reality, and throw them away as counterfeit, hypocritical and useless, Lam. 3.
18. it brings a fresh supply of strength to the rest from Jesus Christ when
they are weakened, wounded, and almost rendered unprofitable, Isa. 40. 31. yea,
it alone does sometimes keep the Believer from total fainting and quitting all,
when the rest are shattered, brangled, disappear, and for the time are
useless, Job 13. 15. for, the Apostle recommendeth this piece above all the
rest, while he says, Above all, take the shield of faith. 4. As Satan's great
design is to wrest and wring this piece of our armor from us, and that because
of its excellency and usefulness, yea, and often does prevail to mar our
use-making of it; So it would be our chiefest care to keep this grace of faith
in daily exercise, and without delay to return to the exercise of it, when we
have fallen from it: for, the word, rendered taking, signifies to take again
that which we have lost or let go; Above all, taking the shield of faith. 5. It
is the Christian's duty to study the excellency and usefulness of any grace,
and especially of faith, that thereby he may be incited to seek after it, and
to make use of it; we must first put a price upon grace, before we be at any
pains for it: for, that he may incite them to make use of faith, he informs
them of its excellency and usefulness, while he says, wherewith ye shall be
able to quench all the fiery darts. 6. Though the devils and fallen angels be
many, (See ver. 12.) yet so united are they in wickedness and in carrying-on
their woeful work under one chief head and prince, Matthew. 12. 24, 26. as if
they were but only one: for, therefore does he speak of the devil as of one;
the fiery darts of the wicked. 7. As Satan, that wicked one, his great work and
business is to draw and drive others to sin and wickedness; So, he has
several sorts of tentations which he makes use of for that end, according to
the diversity of sins to which he tempts, and the different tempers and
dispositions of those whom he tempts: he has not only subtle wiles and
strategems, spoken of, ver. 11. but also fiery darts, whether of violent
boiling lusts, or raging despair, which he throws afar off, and indiscernably
with great force and violence, wherein they resemble darts; All the fiery darts
of the wicked. 8. Among all the tentations which Satan makes use of to carryon
his woeful work, his fiery darts are most hard to be resisted, and, where given
way to, most dangerous, in so far as they give a double hurt and damage, even
as material fiery darts do both wound and burn; so those tentations being
entertained, do not only defile the soul with guilt, but also disturb and
disquiet it with their force and violence, Hos. 7. 4. or, vex, perplex and put
it to pain with that anxiety and horror which they breed in it, Genesis 4. 13.
for, he commends faith above all the rest, from its quenching those
tentations, which implies, that they are both hardly resistible, and most
dangerous; wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the
wicked. 9. The grace of faith, though never so well exercised, cannot hinder
Satan to throw those fiery piercing tentations, nor yet does it always repel
them, but sometimes they pierce even the Believers soul, where, finding
suitable fuel, they raise a burning flame, and make great vastation and
havoc: for, while he says, faith does quench them, it is employed, they will
be sometimes boiling and burning within; ye shall be able to quench all the
fiery darts. 10. The grace of faith not only supplyeth the place of armor to
ward off blows; but is also medicinal to cure those dangerous wounds, which
the soul receives in this spiritual conflict through the prevalency of
tentations, and the negligent use-making of our other graces, it is both
defending and healing armor: for, thereby we are able to quench all the fiery
darts of the wicked. 11. There is no spiritual disease or wound so desperate,
no sin so prevalent in the soul, but the grace of faith, rightly made use of in
laying hold on the merit and virtue of Christ's death, is sufficient to cure it
and destroy it; yea, and to cure not only one disease, but many: for, he
attributes a virtue to it, to quench fiery darts; and all the fiery darts of
the wicked.

Verse 17. And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which
is the word of God.
IN this verse are contained the fifth and sixth pieces of the spiritual armor
which he will have them to take and make use of. The fifth is salvation, or the
hope of salvation, the thing hoped for, being put for hope, as the Apostle
explaineth himself, 1 These. 5. -- 8. which hope, is a grace, whereby we
patiently expect salvation, both temporal (Psalm. 62. 1.) and eternal, Titus 1.
2. but chiefly the latter, according to the promise apprehended by faith, and
it answers the part of the bodily armor called the helmet, or headpiece,
which being the highest piece of all the rest, did defend the head and face,
and was so composed as to make the soldier of dreadful appearance unto his
enemies. In like manner this grace of wel-grounded hope does lift the heart
upwards, Psalm. 16. 9. keeps the head safe and above water, so that the
Christian sinketh not, 2 Cor. 4. 16. Romans 5. 3. 4. and brings him to so high
a pitch of Christian courage as makes him formidable to his adversary, 1 Samuel
17. 45, 46. The sixth piece of armor is the written Word of God, which
answers that part of the bodily armor called the sword, whereby the soldier
uses both to defend himself and wound the enemy. In like manner the Word of
God, laid up in the heart, and made use of pertinently by the Christian
soldier, has somewhat in it to ward off the blow of every tentation, Matthew.
4. 4, 7, 10. and makes Satan retire as one ashamed and wounded, Matthew. 4. 10,
11. and it is here called the sword of the Spirit, because the Spirit of God
has revealed this Word, 2 Pet. 1. 21, it works powerfully upon the spirits
of men, Heb. 4. 12. and its efficacy in working depends on the Spirit, 2 Cor.
10. 4. Doct. 1. Though believers have heaven and salvation already in right and
by promise, Joh. 3. 36 --: yet, the Lord, for good and wise reasons, sees it
necessary to delay the performance, and not to give them present possession
upon their right: for, if there were present possession given, there would be
no need of this grace of hope, whereby the believer does patiently expect
salvation promised; and take the helmet of salvation, or of the hope of
salvation. 2 The sincere believer, during the time of the not performance of
promised salvation, may cast his account to meet with many sore assaults, and
sad strokes from manifold tentations upon all hands: for, what need of an
helmet, if there be not appearance of blows? and take the helmet of salvation.
3. A wel-grounded hope of salvation, according to the promise, is another
necessary piece of the Christians armor, without the which he is deprived of
one strong motive and encouragement to the work of sanctification in general,
1 John 3. 3. exposed and laid open to several deadly blows and dangerous
tentations from Satan, and more especially, to immoderate grief for the death
of near relations, 1 These. 4. 13. to the evil of covetousness and of placeing
our portion and happiness in this life, as knowing nothing of a better, Psalm.
17. 14. with 15. to the evils of fainting, discouragement and despair, arising
from delayed performance of what is promised, Prove. 13. 12. from hard
sufferings and persecutions for the Gospel, 2 Cor. 4. 16. with 18. and from the
fear of approaching death, the king of terrors, Prove. 14. 32. for, the Apostle
commands the Christian soldier to arm himself with this grace of hope; and
take the helmet of salvation. 4. Though this saving grace of hope be stronger
and weaker in several Christians, according as it has more or less of a
mixture of contrary diffidence, Romans 4. 18. and though the meanest degree of
hope does serve for good purpose to defend the Christian in some measure
against the forementioned tentations, Romans 5. 5 --. yet it is the Christian
soldier's duty, in order to his better guarding against those deadly blows, to
aim at no less than a full assurance of hope, even such as makes him no less
diffident to obtain salvation promised, than if he had it in hand: for, it
seems the Apostle expresses the grace of hope by salvation, the object of
it, to show their hope should be as much fixed as if they had salvation it self
already in possession; and take the helmet of salvation. 5. The Christian
soldier is not always and only to be upon the defending hand, nor to think it
enough to keep his sinful evils from prevailing further and growing stronger:
but he must also endeavor to pursue them, weaken them, and not to think
himself exonered until he fully subdue them: for, the Spirit of God injoyneth
the Christian soldier to make use, not only of defensive armor to guard
himself; but of offensive also, to pursue and kill the enemy; of which sort is
the sword in bodily wars; and the sword of the Spirit. 6. Acquaintance with the
Lords written Word, together with a dexterous usemaking of it, is another
necessary piece of the Christian his armor, without the which he cannot choose
but he exposed to several dangerous blows and deadly tentations, seeing he can
neither know sin to be sin, Romans 7. 7. nor the right way of resisting sin, or
of discharging duty, Psalm. 119. 9. and bearing afflictions with Christian
courage and patience, Matthew. 5. 39. but by the word; besides, that the timous
calling to mind of a word in Scripture, forbidding and threatening such an
evil, pressing the practice of such a duty, and speaking encouragement and
comfort to the soul exercised with such a cross, is often blessed of God, to
break the strength of the tentation which inciteth to it, Matthew. 4. 10, 11. to
furnish the heart with resolution and strength for duty, Psalm. 119. - 50. and
with Christian courage under the cross, Psalm. 119. 92. for, he commands the
Christian soldier to arm himself with the knowledge of, and acquaintance with,
the Word of God; and the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God. 7. As
it is the only virtue and power of Gods Spirit, which enliveneth the Word, and
makes it effectual; So it is only the Word of God, and no humane inventions,
or magical charms, with which the Spirit of God does join His power and
efficacy to resist and drive away the devil; for, therefore he calls the Word
the sword of the Spirit, and expounds it to be no other word, but the Word of
God.

Verse 18. Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and
watching thereunto with all perseverance, and supplication for all saints.
HEre is a seventh piece of this armor, or rather a duty, the practizing
whereof is enjoined by God as a mean for obtaining all those forementioned
pieces of the spiritual armor from Him, together with the right use-making of
them against the enemy, and the Lords successful blessing thereupon. This mean
is the duty of prayer, whereby we offer up our desires to God, Psalm, 62. 8. for
things agreeable to His will, 1 John 5. 14. in the name of Christ, Joh. 16. 23.
with confession of our sins, Psalm. 32. 5. 6. and thankful acknowledgement of
His mercies, Philip. 4. 6. Which duty is enjoined, not simply, but with six
necessary qualifications, the opening up whereof, does serve for so many
doctrins. As, 1. we must pray always, which is not to be understood as if we
were to do nothing else but pray; but the phrase implies frequency in this
duty, and at all times, when opportunity offers, (the original word will bear
so much) together with an endeavor to keep our hearts daily in a praying
temper, that when God offers occasion, we may not want a suitable frame and
disposition. 2. We must use all kinds of prayer, two whereof are here
expressed, first, prayer, strictly taken, whereby we seek these good things
which we want from God. Next, supplication, whereby we deprecate evils and
judgments whether felt or feared. 3. Our prayers and supplications must be in
the spirit, as not being a work of the lip, tongue and memory only; but of the
heart and inward man, Matthew. 15. 8. being stirred up and assisted by the Spirit
of God, Romans 8. 26, 27. 4. The exercise of prayer must be joined with
watchfulness, a watchfulness especially of the mind. See upon Col. 4. verse 2.
doct. 3. 5. It must be with most importunate perseverance, called here all
perseverance, implying, that we are not to break off begun diligence in the
practice of this duty, Luke 18. 1. yea, and are to reiterate our petitions for
one and the same thing, so often as occasion offers, until it be granted, 2
Cor. 12. 8. a seeming repulse or denial, making us more vehement, Luke 18. 5.
Matthew. 15. 22. etc. Lastly, it must be extended unto others besides our selves,
which others are first expressed more generally in this verse, to wit, all
saints, that is, all these, who, having given up their name to Christ, are
standing Church Members, and especially those who have more convincing
evidences of saving grace than others. See upon Philip. 4. verse 21. doct. 2.
Which is not to be understood, as if we were to pray for none but such: we
ought to exclude none from our prayers who are in a capacity to be bettered by
them, 1 John 5-16. no not our very enemies, Matthew, 5. 44. only the saints are
to have the chief room, both in our hearts, and also in our prayers, as in all
other duties flowing from Christian charity, Gal. 5. ver. 10. Hence Learn
further, 1. The Christian soldier does never receive so much from God, while
he is upon earth, as to stand in need of no more; he needs always more grace
to preserve and improve what is already bestowed, 1 Pet. 1. 5. and to supply
emergent necessities and wants, whereof while he breaths there will be
always some new discoveries made, 2 Cor. 12. 7. with 9. for, notwithstanding
of this complete armor given them by God, he will have them yet to be always
praying and seeking more; praying always, says he. 2. This whole and complete
armor of God can do no good to the Christian soldier, either to defend
himself, or to offend his adversary, without the Lords special assistance, and
concurrance, whereby he actuateth those graces, and without the which, habitual
grace could never be improved or made use of by us to any good purpose, Philip.
2. 13. for, therefore he directs them, having put on this armor, to make
their recourse to God by prayer for obtaining His special assistance to improve
it aright; praying always. 3. The exercise of prayer is most necessary to be
made conscience of by the Christian soldier, as that, by which he obtains
all his other armor from God, Ezekiel. 36. 26. with 37. together with special
assistance to improve it, and apply it to work, as said is: hereby also he does
recover his armor when it is in a good part lost, Psalm. 51. 10. fourbish,
sharpen and make it clear, when it is eaten and consumed with the rust of
security, deadness and hardness of heart, Isai. 63. 17. and by diligent prayer,
Satan's assaults and tentations are either kept off, and diverted, so that the
other armor gets not much a do, Matthew. 26. 41. Luke 21. 36. or otherwise
vigorously resisted; and the other armor, the several graces of Gods Spirit,
made thereby tentation-proof, Luke 22. 32. In a word, prayer is the souls swift
and trusty messenger to God, for receiving new orders, new strength, and all
things the Christian soldier needs, either before, after, or in time of
fight, and never returns empty without an answer, Joh. 16, 23, for, he
injoyneth the exercise of prayer as most necessary to the Christian soldier;
praying always. 4. As the Christian soldier is never fully freed from all his
straits, necessities and wants; So he ought to live in the daily sense of his
own emptiness, and in the faith of Gods fullness and willingness to supply all
his wants; for, he should be praying always, and therefore always sensible of
his need to pray, and confident of Gods readiness to answer, Iam. 1. 6. As
there are several sorts of prayer, some mental only, Exodus 14. 15. others
vocal also, Psalm. 5. 1. 2. some sudden or ejaculatory, Nehem. 2. -4. others
more solemn and of greater length, Romans 15. 30. And of those latter sort,
again, some public or Church-prayers, 1 Timothy 2. 1. others private or
Family Prayer, Acts 10. 1, 2, 3. and others secret, as Closset-prayers, Matthew.
6. 6. Some, again, are ordinary for ordinary causes, and performed at ordinary
times, Psalm. 55. 17. others are extraordinary, upon some special and weighty
occasions, requiring more than ordinary affection and time of continuance, Joel
1. 14 etc. So all those several sorts of prayer, are to be made conscience of,
and none to be neglected, as God does call to any of them: for, the Apostle,
supponing there are several sorts of prayer, injoyneth them to pray with all
prayer. 6. It pleases God to exercise his dearest children, not only with the
want of several things necessary and good, but also with the presence of many
things in themselves evil and hurtful, and those evils both of sin and
punishment, as for other reasons, so for this one, that of both the one and the
other, they may be making daily errands unto God in prayer, for getting the
former supplied, and the latter either removed or prevented: for, as was shown
in the exposition, by prayer strickly taken, and as distinguished from
supplication, we seek those good things which we want; and by supplication we
deprecate evils and judgments: Now, the Apostle enjoyneth them to use both
those; With all prayer and supplication, says he. 7. However there be more
intense affection, and fervencie of spirit, together with more assistance from
the Spirit of God required in some sort of prayers, to wit, extraordinary,
(Joel 2. 12. to 18.) than in others; yet all our prayers, even those which are
ordinary, sudden and ejaculatory, ought to be joined with some measure of
spiritual fervencie and intense affection; neither can any of them be
discharged aright without the assistance of, and influence from, the Spirit of
God, as being a piece of most immediate worship to God, who is a Spirit, and
will be worshipped in spirit and truth, Joh. 4. 24. for, he requires that all
prayer and supplication be in the Spirit. 8. There is not any duty which Satan
is a greater enemy to, or our hearts more averse from, than this of prayer in
the spirit, it being no small difficulty to bring our hearts up to it, to keep
them at it, or make them walk like it afterward: for, so much is supponed
while he requires the exercise of watchfulness, chiefly over the heart, in
order to prayer; Watching thereunto. 9. Neither is there any duty which Satan
is more earnest to make us quit and fall from, after we have begun well, and
which our hearts are more apt to be discouraged and take up an halt in, than in
this duty of praying in the spirit, and chiefly under delayed answers: for, so
much is supponed, while he requires them to persist with all perseverance, and
this not only in some, but all sorts of prayer. 10. As Christians ought to pray
for others as well as for themselves; So, the more lively, watchful and
importunate we are in praying for our selves, the more our heart will be
enlarged with desire to take inspection of the necessities of others, and to
hold up their case to God: for, having enjoined them to pray for themselves
with all prayer and supplication, watching thereunto with all perseverance, he
bids them, next, make supplication for others, even for all Saints.

Verse. 19. And for me, that utterance may be given unto me, that I may open my
mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of the gospel.
HE does here exhort them to pray for himself in particular, showing, first,
what he would have them to ask from God on his behalf, even a gift and
dexterity of uttering and expressing his conceptions in public preaching,
together with courage and boldness to deliver all his message, without stop or
impediment, and as it were, with open mouth before all flesh as God should call
him, without all base fear, 2 Timothy 1. 7, 8. shame, Romans 1. 16. partiality, 1 Timothy 5. 21. or diffidence of the truth of what he should deliver, Psalm. 116.
10. which gift he does illustrate from the use which he was to make of it, even
that according to the trust committed to him by God, chap. 3. 8, 9. he might
make known the Doctrine of the Gospel unto his hearers: which Doctrine, is here
called a mystery. See upon chap. 1. ver. -9. doct. 1. Besides what is already
observed upon the parallel place, Col. 4. 3. Hence Learn, 1. As the Lords
people ought chiefly to mind those in their prayers who are most isntrumental
in the work of God; So it is the duty of Christians, to be seeking the mutual
help of one another prayers, and for this end to acquaint one another with
their pressing wants and necessities, Iam. 5. 16. and especially Ministers
should crave the assistance of their prayers who are committed to his charge:
for, Paul, having exhorted them to pray for all Saints, ver. -18. does here
incite them to pray for himself in a special manner who was their Minister,
and an eminent instrument in the Lords work; And for me, says he. 2. The most
able and gracious Ministers, are usually most sensible of that weight and
burden which is in the ministerial charge, and so much sensible, that to be
fitted for the employments of it, they see a necessity, not only of their own
pains and study, their wrestling with God by prayer in secret; but also of the
assistance and prayers of others: for, Paul, a gracious and able Minister, does
see it necessary to seek the help of others; And for me, says he. 3. Not only
is piety and knowledge required in a Minister, but also a gift of utterance, or
a singular dexterity to express his conceptions unto others pertinently,
plainly and takingly, without which his other abilities can avail but little to
inform the judgments, or work upon the affections of hearers: for, therefore
does Paul desire chiefly that utterance may be given unto him. 4. Whatever gift
a Minister has of this kind, whether naturally or otherwise, yet when he
comes to the exercise of it in preaching, he is not so much to rely upon his
gift and skill of this kind, as to depend on God for immediate influence and
assistance to strengthen his memory, uphold and order the organs of speech, and
to give him the present and actual exercise of his gift, lest he either
miscarry in the use of it, or otherwise sacrifice to his own drag and net, when
God is not depended on, and so provoke the Lord to blast his pains and make
them useless: for, though Paul had already a gift of utterance, having now
preached so long, and so well; yet he wills them to seek not only the
continuance, but also the actual exercise of it from God whenever he should be
put to make use of it; And for me, that utterance may be given unto me. 5. A
plausible gift of utterance, is not all which is required in a Minister, he
must have faithful boldness to deliver his message, without base fear or
partiality, joined with his utterance, otherwise he may tickle the ear, but
cannot rouse up dead and sleeping consciences: for, with utterance he desires
he may be assisted to open his mouth boldly. 6. So much incensed are people
usually at plain dealing in their Ministers, so little can they endure to be
used by them with holy freedom and boldness, Isa. 30. 10. So much is there of
unmortified fear of flesh, even in the best of Ministers, Matthew: 10. 26, 28.
together with a sinful loathnesse to entrust the Lord with the event or
personal hazards which may follow upon their faithful boldness, Exodus 4. 10,
13. that there is need of special assistance and present influence from God,
to make a Minister open his mouth boldly, concealing no necessary truth,
forebearing the reproof of no known vice, and fearing no flesh, without regard
had unto any hazard or loss he may meet with for so doing: for, Paul will have
them to seek from God on this behalf, That he may open his mouth boldly. 7. The
serious perpending of the excellency, worth and mysteriousnesse of the
subject, the preaching and making known whereof, is entrusted to Ministers,
would tend to convince them abundantly of their own insufficiency for such a
task, and of the need they stand in of assistance from God, and the help of
peoples prayers for obtaining His assistance: for, this moved Paul to distrust
his own strength, and to seek the help of their prayers; even that he was to
make known the mystestery of the Gospel. 8. The great end for which Ministers
should be earnest with God for furniture and through-bearing themselves, and
incite others to plead with Him on their behalf, is not that by virtue thereof
they may gain applause, or get themselves exonered before men, but that the
Lords people may be edified, and Christ exalted, by laying open what rich and
excellent things are held forth of Him in the Gospel: for, the end why he
desires a gift of utterance and boldness, is, to make known the mystery of
the Gospel.

Verse 20. For which I am an ambassador in bonds: that therein I may speak
boldly, as I ought to speak.
HE does, first, give two reasons, exciting them to pray for him; First, from
his office, he was entrusted by God, as an ambassador in Christ's stead, to
publish the glad tidings of Reconciliation with God, contained in the Gospel, 2
Cor. 5. 20. Secondly, from his bonds, which did not hinder him to preach, seeing
as the original word, signifying in a chain, does imply that at this time he
was not bound with fetters, but in the custody of a Soldier with whom he might
go abroad, having (as the custom of some prisoners was) a chain on his right
arm, which was tied to the Soldier's left arm. Next, he repeateth the gift
which he would have them to seek from God on his behalf, even to deliver his
message with courage and boldness: and he extends it further to all those
other things which a Minister ought to advert unto in preaching. See upon Col.
4. ver. 4. doct. 11. Hence Learn, 1. As Christ's Ministers do in a singular
manner represent His Person, and being clothed with authority from Him, are
sent to treat and transact about the greatest matters on earth in His Name,
even the making up of peace and friendship betwixt God and sinners, 2 Cor. 5.
20. So, their deportment, for gravity, prudence and holiness, ought to be
such, as may conciliate authority to their message, and bring no disgrace or
rub upon Him whose Person they do sustain. It is their duty also to manage
their trust with faithfulness, speaking nothing but what they have a
Commission for from Christ their Master, concealing nothing of what is
entrusted to them to speak, but delivering all of it with that authority and
gravity, boldness and majesty which becomes the ambassadors of Him who is
Prince of the Kings of the earth, Revel. 1. -5- for, such is the honor and
duty of ambassadors among earthly princes; and though this title of
ambassador for Christ, did belong to the Apostles in all respects chiefly, and
in some respects to them only, as that they were confined to no certain charge,
or country, Matthew. 28. 19. and absolutely to be trusted as men who could not
err, at least in what they wrote, 2 Timothy 3. 16-. yet as to many other
respects, and chiefly those which are mentioned in the Doctrine, i^ does belong
to all sent Ministers; and therefore they are called the Angels of the
Churches, Revel. 2. 1, etc. For which I am an ambassador, says he. 2. The
matter and purpose contained in the Gospel, even the way of making peace
between God and sinners, is a business of great importance in Gods account,
and such as he would have bear weight with us: for, an ambassador is not sent
among Princes and States for triffles, but for things of highest concernment.
Now, God sends ambassadors to carry the message of the Gospel: For which
Gospel I am an ambassador, says he. 3. So great desire has God, that lost
sinners embrace the Gospel with His peace and friendship offered in it, that He
deals with them not as with traitors and rebels; but as persons of dignity
and respect, that thereby they may be the more induced to accept His offers:
for, Kings and States send not ambassadors to private obscure men, but to
persons of respect and worth. Now, God sends ambassadors with the Gospel to
sinners: For which I am an ambassador. 4. That God does graciously condescend
to send an honorable embassage for peace and friendship to worthless
traitors and rebels, it should make the Lords people mind and respect those
who are entrusted with it, and particularly to hold up their case unto God by
prayer for strength, wisdom, and every other thing which becomes those who are
employed in such an honorable errand from the great God: for, he ^iddeth them
pray for him, because he was an ambassador sent from God with the Gospel; For
which I am an ambassador. 5. Though our provoked Lord does send a message of
peace and friendship unto a rebellious world, and puts respect upon them by
sending ambassadors to them in His stead; yet, such is their ingratitude, and
such enemies are they to their own mercies, that in place of giving a thankful
meeting to such kind usage, they do what they can to affront the Lord, not only
by sleighting His message. Psalm. 81. 11. but by the disgraceful usage of His
ambassadors, contrary to the law and practice of all Nations: for, Paul,
though Christ's ambassador, was nevertheless put in bonds for the Gospel. 6.
As it concerns the Lords people to pray to God for their Ministers at all
times; So chiefly when they are in a suffering case, lest through their
fainting in the day of adversity, they give the truth of God a dash, Philip. 1.
19, 20. and that they may be enabled by God to bear persecution with such
undaunted courage as persecuters may see their labor to be but in vain, Acts
5. 34, etc. and the truth of God, for which they suffer, may receive no hurt
but advantage by their sufferings. Philip. 1. 12. for, he urges them to pray
for him, from this, that for the Gospel he was an ambassador in bonds. 7. So
merciful and long-suffering is God, that when His offer of friendship is
rejected by rebels and His ambassadors, contrary to the law of Nations
imprisoned and wronged; yet, he does not presently give up with them, and
denounce an irreconciliable war against them, but pursues them with kindness,
and in a manner beggeth their peace, and will not take a refusal: for, His
will was, that Paul, being put in bonds by them, should yet discharge the
office of an ambassador toward them, and deliver the message of peace, even
to those who put him and kept him in bonds, if they would have come to hear
him; For which I am an ambassador in bonds. 8. So zealous should Ministers be
of Christ's honor and the good of souls, that no sufferings for the Gospel
should make them quit the preaching of it; but even when through persecution
they are restrained of that liberty which they sometimes had, they ought to be
always doing and making use of what liberty they have: for, Paul, though in
bonds, is yet doing the office of an ambassador, and thirsting after a spirit
of courage from God, for discharging of it, faithfully and boldly; I am an
ambassador in bonds, that therein, or thereof, meaning the Gospel, I may speak
boldly. 9. The Lord sets bounds to the wrath of men, in so far as he does
easily abate the extremity of their rage toward His Servants, and does not
permit it to come to its full height, so long as He has any use to make of
them: for, though their rage carried them to put Paul in a chain, yet he
restrained them, from making him a close prisoner, he had liberty to preach
notwithstanding; That therein I may speak boldly, says he. 10. The Lords
Servants are to deliver the truths of God with much holy freedom and boldness,
not only when they are far from apparent danger, but even when they are in the
mouth of hazard, and ready to be swallowed up by it: If they speak at all, as
speak they must, when God does call them to it, it must be done without all
base fear of flesh, with such confidence and boldness as may evidence they are
not ashamed of their Master or message: for, Paul, even in bonds, resolves to
speak the Gospel boldly, and craveth the help of their prayers for that end.
11. However an unhumbled heart, puffed up with pride and confidence in his own
strength, may judge it a task of no great difficulty to carry a suffering lot
with undaunted courage before he be put to it, Matthew. 26. 33. and will readily
condemn all as faint-hearted cowards and base backsliders who ride not out the
storm with as much cheerfulness, courage and resolution, as they conceive
themselves would do, Job 4. 5, 6. yet, an humbled heart, acquainted with
sufferings, will not judge so, but so conscious is he of his own weakness, and
knows so well how hard it is for flesh and blood to deny it self, to postpone
its own safety to the keeping of a good conscience, how ready it is to faint
under a continued cross, and find out subterfuges of subtle distinctions,
thereby to plead for ease and sparing of it self, that he dare not trust his
own strength, nor neglect, far less contemn, the use of any mean appointed by
God for his encouragement and strengthening: for, Paul sees it was no easy
thing to speak boldly when in bonds, and that only God could make him so to do;
and therefore beggeth the help of their prayers, as a mean appointed for
obtaining courage from the Lord; I am an ambassador in bonds, that therein I
may speak boldly. 12. It is not every sort of boldness in speech, which a
Minister ought to aim at, but such as is beseeming the excellency of his
message, the gravity of his office, and may conduce most to the end of his
Ministry, the glory of God and good of the hearers; It is not fleshly
boldness, or rather brazen-faced impudence, to vent every thing may tend to
commend a man to his hearers, or to please their fleshly humors; not is it
foolish temerity, or presumptuous rashness, to speak and utter the holy
Oracles of God, without premeditation or serious consideration of what is most
fitting to be uttered, and likely to have success, at such a time, on such
persons, and in such a place; But it is a spiritual holy boldness, conjoined
with modesty, gravity and prudence, and such as carries along with it in the
person where it is, the sense and feeling of his own infirmities, 1 Corinthians. 2.
3. for, the beseemingnesse and decency, here spoken of, as it may be extended
to all those necessary qualifications required in a Minister; So it does
chiefly qualify that boldness presently spoken of; That I may speak boldly as
I ought to speak.

Verse 21. But that ye also may know my affairs, and how I do, Tychicus a
beloved brother and faithful minister in the Lord, shall make known to you all
things.
THe Apostle, being now in the third part of the chapter, to conclude the
Epistle, does, first, show, that because he neither could write, nor was it
expedient to write of every thing in the body of the Epistle, he had
concredited much to the bearer, who was to give them an account especially of
Paul's own affairs, as how it went with him in prison, how the work of the
Gospel did thrive by his Ministry, and generally how he did, or how he carried
himself with courage and constancy under every dispensation. And that the
bearer might get the more respect and credit, he is described, 1. from his name
Tychicus. See Act. 20. -4. 2. from his state as a Christian, in which respect
he is called a brother. See upon Philip. 2. 25. doct. 1. and a beloved brother,
thereby to show that he was loved by Paul, and worthy to be loved by them for
his piety and parts. 3. from his office, in which respect he was a minister,
and a faithful minister in the Lord, as answering the trust reposed in him by
the Lord Christ, whose servant he was. 4. from the confidence which Paul
professes he had of his fidelity in his present employment, while he
persuades them he would keep up nothing which it concerned them to know. Hence
Learn, 1. The written Word of God in Scripture is so contrived, that though
nothing necessary unto salvation be omitted. Joh. 20. 31. yet our vain
curiosity to know other things not so necessary to be known, is not thereby
satisfied: for, Paul, having committed unto writing the sum of necessary
doctrine, relating both to faith and manners for the Churches benefit in all
ages, does not write any thing of his own particular concernments, but
intrusteth them to the bearer, as not so necessary to be known to the ages
following as to the age then present; But that ye may also know my affairs,
Tychicus shall make known all things. 2. The life and conversation of
Christians, and chiefly of Ministers, in public and private, under all cases,
ought to be such, as they need not to be ashamed, who do know it; yea, and
edification to the Church of God may arise from the knowledge of it: for, such
was Paul's conversation, he acquainteth Tychicus with all, and sends him to
Ephesus to acquaint the Church there with all. 3. It concerns Christians much
to inform themselves of the life and way of eminent men in the Church of God,
and chiefly of those who are, or have been sufferers for truth, and of the
several passages of Gods gracious providence toward such, though not to
satisfy their vain curiosity, Act. 17. 21. yet that thereby they may be
incited to simpathize with them, Heb. 13. 3. to follow their example, Iam. 5.
10. and to bless the Lord on their behalf, 2 Cor. 1. 11. for, therefore does
Paul send Tychicus to make them know his affairs, and how he did. 4. A Minister
ought to be so affectionate toward his flock, as to prefer their spiritual
edification and advantage to his own private concernment: for, though Paul was
now every day expecting death, and had few to attend upon him, as appears
from 2 Timothy 4. 6, 10. with 12, 16. yet he sends Tychicus unto them, choosing
rather that himself should want an attender, than they a comforter; Tychicus
shall make known unto you all things. 5. The Minister of Christ should in like
manner be ordered with prudence in giving expressions of his affection toward
the flock, least otherwise his imprudent carriage in the manner of what is
done, does more hurt than the thing it self can bring of good and advantage:
for, therefore the Apostle does not commit the evidences of his affection to be
carried to them by every man, but one whom he could trust, and they would
respect, even to Tychicus a beloved brother and faithful minister. 6. As
Ministers would be loath to give their recommendation and testimony to naughty
persons and those who are not deserving, least thereby they wrong the Church of
God, and prejudge their own estimation afterward when the person recommended
by them does not walk answerably; So they should not deny a testimony to those
whom they know to be deserving; so far should they be from laboring to obscure
and bear down the graces and gifts of God which are eminent in any of their
fellow laborers, of purpose that they themselves alone may be thought of: for,
Tychicus was a man deserving, and therefore Paul does recommend him, which
without doubt he would not have done otherwise; Tychicus a beloved brother and
faithful minister in the Lord. 7. Though God may make use of unconverted
Ministers to do good in his Church, Matthew. 10. 4. with 8. yet no man can be a
faithful Minister, or approved of God in His work, except he have saving grace
and be in Christ by faith: for, Tychicus is first a brother as a sound
Christian, and then a faithful minister in the Lord: 8. That Ministers are
beloved one of another, and live in love among themselves, is a strong
inducement to make the Lords people allow them room in their affections, and
receive their message with better will off their hand: and divisions, carnal
emulations, and strifes among Ministers themselves, make both their persons and
office lose much of their deserved respect among the people: for Paul shows,
that Tychicus was beloved by him, to make him have the more respect from them;
Tychicus a beloved brother. 9. It is in a singular manner required of a
Minister, and the prime piece of a Ministers commendation, that he be
faithful, that is, diligent in his work, 2 Timothy 4. 2. sincere in his aims and
endeavors at the glory of God and the good of souls, 1 Pet. 4. 11. neither
adding nor pairing unto what God has committed unto him to speak, 2 Cor. 2.
17. Whatever a Minister be for learning, prudence, utterance and other
abilities, if he be not faithful, he is but naught, Matthew. 25. 23, with 26.
for, Paul commends Tychicus from this, that he was a faithful minister in
the Lord. 10. A faithful Minister will give proof of his fidelity in all the
pieces of his employment, not only in public preaching, but also in his
private coversing with the Lords people; yea, and in every thing will labor to
answer the trust reposed upon him: for, Paul shows Tychicus would be
faithful, even in relating the case and state of Paul's particular affairs; he
shall make known unto you all things.

Verse 22. Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that ye might know
our affairs, and that he might comfort your hearts.
IN prosecution of the former purpose, he shows, first, he had not fallen
upon Tychicus accidentally, but had chosen and sent him of purpose. And, next,
declares a twofold end for which he sent him, 1. that he might acquaint them
with Paul's affairs, as ver. 21. And 2. that he might be comfortable unto them
by his presence, message, preaching and otherwise. Doct. 1. The greater pains
are taken by Christ's servants to bring matter of edification and spiritual
consolation unto the Lords people, they ought to receive it with so much the
better will and likeing: for, Paul shows that both he and Tychicus were at
the pains, the one to send, the other to be sent unto them, of purpose, hereby
to induce them the more to receive the message sent; Whom I have sent unto you
for the same purpose. 2. The putting a right impression of the case of Christ's
suffering servants, and the state of the Gospels thriving upon the hearts of
Christians in other remote parts of the Church, is a work worth the care and
pains of most eminent Ministers, if it were to make them undergo a long and
tedious journey for that same very end: for, Tychicus was sent unto them for
the same purpose, that they might know his affairs. 3. We should labor so to
inform our selves of the case and carriage of others, and how it goes with the
affairs of Christ's Kingdom elsewhere, as to be drawing matter of spiritual
edification thence, and consequently not to feed our curious humor: for,
Tychicus in making known Paul's affairs, was to aim at their spiritual
consolation, much more were they to aim at it themselves; that ye might know
our affairs, and that he might comfort your hearts. 4. It is the duty of every
Christian, and chiefly of a faithful Minister, to have this end proposed unto
himself in all his friendly visits bestowed upon his acquaintance, and chiefly
upon his flock in all his familiar conferences with them, in all the
intelligence he communicates unto them, concerning Gods dealing with his
Churches abroad, even that thereby they may not trifle-by precious time, or
only satisfy curious ears, but furnish some matter of spiritual edification
for bettering the inward man: for, Tychicus was to make them know Paul's
affairs, for this end, that thereby he might comfort their hearts. 5. To know
the several passages of Gods gracious providence toward His suffering
servants, together with their undaunted courage under sufferings, and the use
which God does make of their sufferings to advance His truth and cause, is and
may be sufficient ground of comfort and encouragement unto the Lords people,
against the sorrow and sadness, which their sharp sufferings, considered in
themselves, cannot choose but affect the lovers of truth with: for, Paul
implies, that their hearing of his sufferings had sadded them, and shows the
relation of Gods dealing with him would comfort them; that ye might know our
affairs, and that he might comfort your hearts. 6. A Christian sufferer,
supported by God, will not be so anxious about his own case, as the case of
others of the Lords people whom he knows to be in sorrow and heaviness; yea,
and ready to halt, and be scandalized for His cause: for, Paul, knowing their
grief, and fearing their fainting at his tribulations, chapter 3. 14. does send
Tychicus of purpose to comfort their hearts.

Verse. 23. Peace be to the brethren, and love with faith from God the father,
and the Lord Jesus Christ.
NExt, in the conclusion of the Epistle, is contained the Apostles ordinary
farewell wish: wherein, designing those to whom he writes by the name of
brethren, he wishes unto them in particular, 1. Peace, that is, peace with
God, with their own conscience, one with another, and all sort of prosperity.
2. Mutual love among themselves; for, Gods love to them is comprehended under
grace in the following verse. 3. The grace of faith, the fountain of the
former, 1 Timothy 1. 5. All which he wishes from God the Father, not excluding
but including the Son and holy Ghost; (See upon Col. 3. 17. doct. 3.) and from
Jesus Christ the Mediator, through virtue of whose merit and intercession all
saving benefits are conveyed unto the Elect. Doct. 1. Ministers, who would have
their pains attended with success toward the Lords people, ought to beg that
from God by prayer to be wrought in them, which by their preaching they
endeavor to inculcate on them: for, peace, love and faith, are the sum of all
which he has been presently instructing them in, and pressing upon them, and
here he seeks all from God by prayer; Peace be to the brethren. 2. A
Ministers prayers for obtaining the Lords blessing upon his pains toward his
flock, should be serious, servent, insisted upon, and often inculcated until a
gracious answer thereof be granted: for, the Apostle began with this prayer, or
wish, chap. 1. 2. and here he closes with it; Peace be to the brethren. 3.
Even Believers are not made perfect in grace at the first, the Lord does carry
on that work by steps and degrees, that somewhat of Him may be seen in every
step; and therefore as themselves are bound to grow in grace, by adding one
grace to another, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6. and one degree of the same grace to the
former, 2 Pet. 3. 18. So, it is the duty of others to help them on toward
growth by their prayers and wishes: for, those who were already regenerated
among the Ephesians, had faith, love, and peace wrought in them at the first,
and Paul wishes here a further degree of, and growth in, those from God to
them; Peace be to the brethren. 4. Though it be the duty of all to live in
peace and love, yet a truly Christian and peaceable frame of spirit, together
with love, which is not a mere moral virtue, but a saving grace flowing from
the root of faith, is only to be found among true Believers, and should be
soughtafter by such especially; coldrifenesse of affection, and unpeaceable
walking, being more unbeseeming them than any others: for, therefore does he
wish for peace and love to the brethren, that is, those chiefly who were
brethren in Christ and born of God. 5. There cannot be a peaceable frame of
spirit in any toward others, nor yet an harmonious walking with them, nor any
thing else, except sinful renting and shameless striving, but where the grace
of love is; whereby the heart is armed against all irritations arising from the
infirmities of others to break the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4. 2, 3. for, he
conjoyneth these two in his wish, peace, whereof, one branch is a peaceable
frame of heart and harmonious walking, and love: Peace be to the brethren, and
love. 6. As the graces of faith and love are different, and therefore the one
cannot be the form or essence of the other; So they are always conjoined;
where one is, there the other must be also: for, he speaks of them as two
different graces, whereof the one does necessarily follow upon the other; And
love with faith. 7. See what is already observed from Gal. 1. 3. Philip. 1. 2.
Col. 1. -2. upon the persons from whom, and through whom those good things are
wished and sought; even from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

Verse. 24. Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity.
Amen.
HEre the Apostle wishes for grace, that is, Gods free favor and love in
Christ, the fountain and sum of all the former good things wished-for, and
enlarges his wish toward all Believers, described from this, that they love
Jesus Christ in sincerity, or incorruption (as the word signifies) that is,
not for a time only, but constantly, not in hypocrisy, or show only, but
sincerely and really; and so closes up all with his Amen, as an evidence both
of his affectionate desire and confidence of an answer. Doct. 1. Though we may
have a more particular eye to some than to others, by making mention of them
expressly in our prayers because of our charge of them, present employment about
them, or other near relations toward them; yet, we ought not to exclude any,
especially of these who have relation to Christ, but are to remember all such,
at least in general, and seek the same good things from God to them which we
wish for others: for, the Apostle, having made express mention of the
believing Ephesians, under the name of Brethren, ver. 23. does here extend his
charity and prayers toward all who love our Lord Jesus Christ in general;
Grace be with all them, says he. 2. The more the heart is exercised in
spiritual duties, especially in prayer, it grows more warm and more enlarged
to the exercise of all those saving graces, required in that duty, and
especially to publick-mindednesse, and the exercise of charity toward the
Saints, and of faith in Jesus Christ: for, Paul, continuing his prayers and
wish until this verse, gets his charity enlarged in the exercise of it,
toward all Christians in general, and his faith strengthened to the owning of
Christ as his own; Grace be with all that love our Lord. 3. Gods grace, or free
favor, is the sum of all which a man needs to wish, either for himself or
others, it is virtually all things, so that the man that has it, wants
nothing; he has all good and necessary things in their cause and fountain, he
does also possess all such things in that measure God sees fitting for him:
for, in this part of his wish, which relates to all lovers of Christ in
general, he does only make express mention of grace, as virtually comprysing
peace, love and faith, which he wished to the brethren, ver. 23. Grace be with
all them that love our Lord. 4. Love to Jesus Christ, is a sure mark of those
who have saving interest in the good things purchased by Him, and one of those
marks which are best known to the person who has it; love to Christ where it
is, cannot be well hid: for, Paul, designing those who might plead interest in
the good things prayed-for, describes them by their love to Christ, as being a
mark both sure and easily discerned; With all them that love our Lord. 5. The
Lords Servants ought to endeavor, that those, who are in a gracious state, and
have right to the great and good things purchased by Christ, may know so much,
and for that end would furnish them with the knowledge of such marks and
evidences as may be most easily discerned where they are, and infallibly prove
the soul that has them to be in a state of grace: for, Paul gives such a mark
of those who had interest in the good things prayed-for, even love to Christ,
that they might know so much of themselves; With all them that love our Lord
Jesus Christ. 6. It is the duty of Ministers to lay hold on all occasions to
recommend this grace of love to Christ, by holding forth those many good and
excellent things which do accompany it, and are made evident to be in the heart
by it, that so the Lords people may be the more incited to bestow their love
and heart upon Him: for, Paul, to stir them up to the love of Christ,
recommendeth this grace, by making it the mark and evidence of the man that
has interest in all the good things wished-for; with all them that love our
Lord. 7. Though we are bound to pray even for those who are graclesse, that God
may bestow grace upon them; yet the more speaking evidences there be of true
grace in any, we may be the more encouraged to pray to God for them, and with
greater confidence to expect a gracious return of our prayers upon them: for,
Paul's wishes to God, to which he affixeth an Amen, in evidence of his
confidence to be heard, are put up in behalf of those who do love our Lord
Jesus Christ. 8. As there are many who profess love to Christ, whose love is,
and, when it is tried, will be found to be but counterfeir, unsincere and not
real; So the good things promised to those who love the Lord Jesus Christ, do
not at all belong to any of that sort, whatsoever their deluded hearts may
sancie to the contrary, but to such only, who love Him really, sincerely, and
testify their love into Him by keeping His commandments, Joh. 14. 15. and
especially by loving those who are His, 1 John 4. 20, 21. for, the Apostle
qualifieth that love to Christ, which is an evidence of interest in the good
things wished-for, by sincerity: which implies there is somelove not sincere;
That love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. 9. The more sincere a man is in
the exercise of any grace, or practice of any duty, he will endure the longer;
sincerity in good is always attended with perseverance, but hypocrisy does
soon faint and wholly sit up at the last, Joh. 27. 8, 9. with 10. So much is
employed by the word, here rendered sincerity, as Tit. 2. -7. which also
signifies incorruption: That love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity,

Amen.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page Line Read. 21 22 Ephesians. 5. 2. 22 3 dele shall 26 22 Col. 46 37 Philip. 2.
13. 60 12 inheritance 91 5 by the 138 6 and His 202 10 actuated 213 12 over
their 233 38 dividing 235 19 Genesis 13. 253 2 subsistence 267 3 its own 268 35
dycing of ibid 36 or dycing 310 5 any other 327 34 nearby 333 16 6. 10. 343 1
wrought by 347 12 doct. 3. 356 26 so see 363 10 6. 10. 364 29 Whatever 413 24 1 John 2. 425 30 Mark. 10. 432 32 bids 456 1 and 463 28 Gal. 6.


