CONTEMPLATIONS UPON Life and Death: WITH Serious Reflections on the Miseries
THAT ATTEND HUMANE LIFE, In every Station, Degree, and Change thereof.

Written by a Per^^^ (...) ^^ality, in his Confinement, a lit^^^ ^^fore his
Death.

SHOWING The Vanity of the Desires of Long LIFE, and the Fears of DEATH.

WITH A True Copy of the PAPER Delivered to the Sheriffs upon the Scaffold at
Tower Hill, on Thursday, January 28. 1696/7

By Sir JOHN FENWICK, Baronet.

LONDON: Printed for G. Larkin, and Sold by most Booksellers in London and
Westmistster. 1697.

Contemplations upon Life and Death; WITH Serious Reflections on the Miseries
that attend Humane Life, etc.
NOsce te ipsum, is a Lesson a Man can never learn too late: And therefore though
hitherto I have lived so much a Stranger to my self, that I have had little
leisure, and less desire, to think or to Contemplate, (a studious and sedentary
Life having always been my Aversion) yet the Solitary Condition I am now
reduced to, and the Melancholy Circumstances under which I lie, do methinks
call upon me to consider what I have been doing, and what I am further shortly
to do: I am now under a close Confinement, secluded from all Coversation with
the World, and denied the Visits of my Nearest and Dearest Relations; And all
this seems to be but the sad Prologue to that sadder Tragedy in which I am to
be the principal Actor, before I go off the Stage of this World. And therefore
since Death and I must shortly be better acquainted, it will certainly be my
Wisdom, as well as my Interest, to familiarize it to me beforehand: And I do
not know how that can be better done, than by contemplating the Miseries of
Life, in all its various Changes and Conditions; and then to look upon Death as
the great Panpharmacon, and Remedy of all those Evils that Life subjects us to.

It Is true indeed, we generally fly from Death as our worst Enemy, although it is
in truth our greatest Friend; and this, to a considering Man, is very
unaccountable. I must confess it does seem strange to me, and is methinks a
thing to be admired, that the poor Labourer to repose himself longs for the
setting Sun; that the Mariner rows with all his might to attain his wished for
Port, and rejoices when he can discover Land; that the Traveller is never
contented till he be at the end of his Journey: And that we, in the mean while,
tied in this World to a perpetual Task, tossed with continual Tempests, and
tired with a rough and thorny way, yet cannot see the end of our Labor, but
with grief; nor behold our Port, but with tears; nor approach to our Home, but
with horror and trembling. This Life is but a Penelope's Web, in which we are
always doing and undoing; a Sea that lies open to all Winds, which sometimes
within, and sometimes without, never ceases to blow violently upon us; a weary
Journey through extreme heats and colds, over high Mountains, steep Rocks, and
dangerous Deserts: And thus we pass away our time in weaving at this Web; in
rowing at this Oar, and in passing this miserable Way: And yet when Death comes
to end our Work, and stretches out his Arms to pull us into the Port; when
after so many dangerous Passages, and loathsome Lodgings, he would conduct us
to our true Home and Resting Place; instead of rejoicing at the end of our
Labor, of taking comfort at the sight of our desired Haven; and of singing at
our approach to those happy Mansions; we would fain begin our Work again, hoise
Sail to the Wind, and would willingly undertake our Journey anew: No more we
then remember our weariness and pains; our dangers and our shipwracks are
forgotten: We fear no more the tiresomeness of Travel, nor the danger of
Deserts. But on the contrary, we apprehend Death as an extreme pain; we shun it
as the fatal Rock on which we are like to split; we fly it as a Thief that
comes to rob us of our Treasure: We do as little Children, who all the day
complain of Illness, and when the Medicine is brought them, are no longer sick:
Or as they who all the week long run up and down the streets, complaining of
the pain of their Teeth, and yet seeing the Barber coming to pull them out, are
rather willing still to endure the pain, than use the Remedy: And as those
tender and delicate Bodies, who in a pricking Pleurisy complain, and cry out,
and cannot stay for a Surgeon; and yet when they see him whetting his Launcet,
to cut the throat of the Disease, pull in their Arms and hide them in the Bed,
as if he were come to kill them. We fear more the Cure, than the Disease; the
Surgeon, than the Pain; the Stroke, than the Imposthume: We have more sense of
the Medicines bitterness, soon gone, than of a bitter long-continued
Languishing: We have more feeling of Death, the End of our Miseries, than the
Endless Misery of our Life. And whence proceeds this Folly and Simplicity? We
neither know Life nor Death: We fear what we ought to hope for, and wish for
what we ought to fear: We call Life a continual Death, and yet Death is the
Entrance of a Never-dying Life.

Now what Good, O my Soul, is there in Life, that thou should so much desire
it? Or what evil is there in Death, that thou should so much fear it? Nay
what Evil is there not in Life, and what Good is there not in Death?

Consider all the Periods of this Life: We enter it in tears, we pass it in
sweat, we end it in sorrow. Great and Little, Rich and Poor, not one in the
whole World that can plead Immunity from this Condition. Man in this point is
worse than all other Creatures: He is born unable to support himself; neither
receiving in his first years any pleasure, nor giving to others any thing but
trouble; and before the Age of Discretion passing infinite dangers. Only
herein he is less unhappy than in other Ages, because in this he has no sense
nor apprehension of his Misery. Now can we think there is any so void of
Reason, that if it were granted him to live always a Child, would make Choice
of such a Life?

So then it is evident, That not simply to Live, is desirable; but to Live Well
and Happily. But to proceed.

Grows he? His Troubles likewise grow up with him. Scarcely is he come out of
his Nurses hands, and scarce knows what it is to play, but he falls under the
subjection of a Schoolmaster: I speak but of those which have the best
Education, and are brought up with the greatest care and strictness. And then
if he studies, it is ever with Repining: And if he plays, it is never but with
Fear.

This whole Age, while he is under the charge of another, is unto him no better
than a Prison: And therefore he longs for, and only aspires to that Age, in
which, freed from the Tutelage of another, he may become Master of himself;
pushing Time forward, as it were, with his shoulder, that he may the sooner
enjoy his hoped-for Liberty. In short, he desires nothing more than to see the
end of this Age, which he looks upon as Bondage and Slavery, and enter upon the
beginning of his Youth.

And what is the beginning of Youth, but the death of Infancy? And the
beginning of Manhood, but the death of Youth? Or what is the beginning of to
Morrow, but the death of the present Day?

And thus he implicitly desires his Death, and judges his Life miserable; and
therefore cannot be reputed in a state of Happiness or Contentment.

Behold him now, according to his wish, at Liberty; in that Age wherein he has
his Choice, to take the way of Virtue or of Vice, and either to choose Reason
or Passion for his Guide: His Passion entertains him with a thousand Delights,
prepares for him a thousand Baits, and presents him with a thousand Worldly
Pleasures to surprise him; And these are so agreeable to headstrong and
unbridled Youth, that there are very few that are not taken and beguiled by
them; of which my own Example is too evident an Instance.

But when the Reckoning comes to be made up, what Pleasures are they? They are
but vicious and polluted Pleasures, which ever hold him in a restless Fever:
Pleasures that at the best end in Repentance, and like sweet Meats, are of a
hard digestion: Pleasures that are bought with pain, and in a moment perish,
but leave behind a lasting Guilt, and long remorse of Conscience: All which I
wish my own too dear Experience could not witness.

And yet this is the very Nature (if they be well examined) of all the
Pleasures of this World: There is in none so much Sweetness, but there is more
Bitterness; none so pleasant to the Mouth, but it leaves an unsavory Gusto
after it. I will not speak here of the Mischiefs, Quarrels, Debates, Wounds,
Murders, Banishments, Sickness and other Dangers, whereinto sometimes the
Incontinency, and sometimes the Insolency of this ill-guided Age does plunge
Men; for the remembrance of my own Follies upon this occasion, stops my mouth,
and fills me with remorse and shame.

But if those that seem Pleasures be nothing else but Displeasures, if the
Sweetness thereof be as an Infusion of Wormwood; what then must the Displeasure
be which they feel? And how great the Bitterness that they taste?

Behold then in short the Life of a young Man, who rid of the Government of his
Parents and Masters, abandons himself to all the Exorbitancies of his unruly
Passion, which like an unclean Spirit possessing him, throws him sometimes into
the Water, and then into the Fire; sometimes carries him clear over a Rock, and
at other times flings him headlong to the bottom.

But if he follows Reason for his Guide (which is much the better choice) yet
on this hand there are wonderful Difficulties: For he must resolve to fight in
every part of the Field, and at every step to be in conflict, as having his
Enemy in front, in flank, and on the rear, never leaving to assail him; and
this Enemy is all that can delight him, all that he sees near, or far off; In
short, the greatest Enemy in the World is the World it self, which he must
therefore overcome: But beside the World, he has a thousand Treacherous Enemies
within him, among whom his Passion is none of the least, which waits for an
occasion to surprise him, and betray him to his Lusts. It is God only that can
make him choose the Path of Virtue, and it is God only that can keep him in it
to the End, and make him victorious in all his combats. But alas, how few they
are that enter into it! And of those few, how many that retire again! So that
let a Man follow the one way or the other, he must either subject himself to a
Tyrannical Passion, or undertake a weary and continual Combat; wilfully throw
himself into the Arms of Destruction, or fetter himself as it were in the
Stocks; easily carried away with the current of the Water, or painfully
stemming the impetuous Tide.

See here the happiness of the young Man! Who in his Youth having drunk his
full draught of the Worlds vain and deceivable Pleasures, is over-taken by them
with such a dull heaviness and astonishment, as Drunkards the morrow after a
Debauch; or Gluttons, after a plentiful Feast; who are so over-prest with the
Excesses of the former day, that the very remembrance of it creates their
loathing. And even he that has made the stoutest resistance, feels himself so
weary, and with this continual Conflict so bruised and broken, that he is
either upon the point to yield, or dye. And this is all the Good, all the
Contentment of this flourishing Age, by Children so earnestly desired, and by
those who have experienced it, so heartily lamented.

Next comes that which is called Perfect Age, in which Men have no other
thoughts, but to purchase themselves Wisdom and Rest. It is called perfect
indeed, but is herein only perfect, that all Imperfections of Humane Nature,
hidden before under the simplicity of Childhood, or the lightness of Youth,
appear at this Age in their Perfection. I speak of none in this place, but
those that are esteemed the wisest and most happy, in the opinion of the World.

I have already showed that we played in fear; and that our short Pleasures
were attended on with long Repentance: But now Avarice and Ambition present
themselves to us, promising if we will adore them, to give us perfect
Contentment with the Goods and Honors of this World; And surely none but those
who are restrained by a Divine Hand, can escape the Illusions of the one or the
other, and not cast themselves headlong from the top of the Pinnacle.

But let us see what this Contentment is: The Covetous Man Makes a thousand
Voyages by Sea, and Journeys by Land; runs a thousand hazzards, escapes a
thousand shipwracks, and is in perpetual fear and travel; and yet oftentimes
either loses his time, or gains nothing but Sicknesses, Gouts and Oppilations.
In the purchase of this goodly Repose, he bestows his true Rest; and to gain
Wealth, loses his Life. But suppose he has gained much, and that he has
spoiled the whole East of its Pearls, and drawn dry all the Mines of the West;
will he then be at quiet, and say he is content? Nothing less: For by all his
Acquisitions, he gains but more Disquiet both of Mind and Body; from one travel
falling into another, never ending, but only changing his Miseries: He desired
to have them, and now fears to lose them; he got 'em with burning ardour, and
possesses 'em in trembling cold; he adventured among Thieves to get them, and
now fears by Thieves and Robbers to be deprived of 'em again; he labored to
dig them out of the Earth; and now to secure them, he hides them therein. In
short, coming from all his Voyages, he comes into a Prison: and the end of bis
bodily travels, is but the beginning of the endless labor of his Mind. Judge
now what this Man has gained, after so many Miseries. This Devil of
Covetousness persuades him he has some rare and excellent thing; and so it
fares with him as with those poor Creatures whom the Devil seduceth under
color of relieving their Poverty; who find their hands full of Leaves, when
they thought to find them full of Crowns: He possesses, or rather is possessed
by, a thing wherein is neither Power nor Virtue, more base and unprofitable
than the least Herb of the Earth. Yet has he heaped together this vile
Excrement, and so brutish is grown, as therewith to crown his head, when he
ought to tread it under his feet.

But however it be, is he therewith satisfied and contented? So far from that,
that he is now more dissatisfied than ever. We commend most those Drinks that
breed an alteration, and soonest extinguish Thirst; and those Meats that in
least quantity do longest resist Hunger: But now of this, the more a Man
drinks, the more he is athirst; the more he eats, the more he is an hungry: It
is a Dropsy, that swells him till he bursts, before he can be satisfied. And
which is worse, in some so extravagant is this thirst, that it makes them dig
the pits, and carefully draw the Water, and after all, will not suffer 'em to
drink: In the midst of a River, they are dry with thirst; and on a heap of
Corn, cry out of Famine: They have Goods, and dare not use them; Garments, but
dare not put 'em on: And though they are possessed of that in which they joy,
they don't enjoy it: The sum of all which is, That of all which they have, they
have nothing.

Let us then return unto that, That the attaining of all these dedeceiveable
Goods, is nothing else but weariness of Body, and the possession for the most
part weariness of Mind; which certainly is so much the greater Evil, as the
Mind is more sensible than the Body.

But the Compliment of all their Misery is, when they come to lose them, either
by shipwreck, Fire, or any other Accident, then they cry, weep, and torment
themselves; like little Children, that have lost their Play-game, which yet is
nothing worth. One cannot persuade them that mortal Men have any other Good in
this World, but that which is mortal. They are in their own conceits not only
spoiled, but utterly undone: And forasmuch as in these vain things they have
fixed all their hope, having lost them, they fall into Despair, out of which
they are seldom recovered, many times laying violent hands upon themselves, and
bringing their own lives to an unhappy period.

In short, The recompense that Covetousness yields those that have served it
all their Life, is like that of the Devil, who after a small time having
gratified his Votaries, either leaves them to the Hangman, or himself breaks
their Necks.

I will not here discourse of the Wickedness to which covetous men subject
themselves to attain to these Goods, whereby their Conscience is filled with a
perpetual Remorse, which never leaves them in quiet. It is enough that in this
immoderate pursuit of Riches, which busieth and abuses the greatest part of
the World, the Body is macerated, the Mind debilitated, and the Soul is lost,
without any Pleasure or Contentment.

Let us then come to Ambition, which by an over-eager aspiring to Honor, takes
up the time and thoughts of the Greatest Persons: And what, Do we there think
to find more Content? Alas! It Is rather less; and this, I am sure, I can
witness to my cost: For as the one deceives us, by giving us for all our travel
but a vile Excrement of the Earth; so the other repays us but with Smoke and
Wind: The Rewards of this, being as vain; as those of that, were gross. In both
we fall into a bottomless Pit; but into this, the fall is by so much the more
dangerous, as at the first show the Water is more clear and pleasant.

Of those Men that make their court to Ambition, some are great about Princes,
others Commanders of Armies; both sorts according to their degree, you see
saluted, reverenced, and adored of those that are under them: You see them
apparelled in Purple, in Scarlet, and in Cloth of Gold; that at first sight one
would think there is no Content to be found but amongst them. But alas! men
know not how heavy an ounce of that vain Honor weighs; they know not what
those Reverences cost them, nor how dearly they pay for an Ell of those rich
Stuffs: They are so over-rated, that he who knew them well, would never buy
them at the Price. The one has attained to this degree, after a long and
painful Service, hazarding his Life upon every occasion, with loss oft-times of
a Leg or an Arm; and that at the pleasure of a Prince that more regards a
hundred Perches of Ground on his Neighbors Frontiers, than the Lives of a
hundred thousand such as he; unfortunate to serve who loves him not; and
foolish to think himself in honor with him, that makes so little reckoning to
lose him for a thing of no worth.

Others there are that aspire to Greatness by flattering a Prince; which is a
Life so base and servile, that they can never say their very Souls are their
own, any longer than their Prince is pleased to let 'em; for they must always
have their Hands and Tongues ready to do and say whatever he would have them;
and yet they must be content to suffer a thousand Injuries, and receive a
thousand disgraces: And as near as they seem about the Prince, they are
nevertheless always like the Lions Keeper, who when by long patience, a
thousand Feedings, and a thousand Clawings, he has made a fierce Lion
familiar, yet never gives him Meat, but with pulling back his hand, always in
fear least he should catch him; and if once in a year he bites him, he sets it
so close, that he is paid for a long time after. Such generally is the end of
the Favorites of Princes.

When a Prince after long Service has raised a Man to the highest pitch of
Honor, he sometimes makes it his Pastime to cast him down in an instant; and
when he has filled him with heaps of Wealth and Riches, he squeezes him
afterward like a Sponge; loving none but himself, and thinking every one born
but to serve and please him.

These blind Courtiers make themselves believe that they have Friends, and many
that honor them; never considering that as they make only a show to love and
honor every body, so others do to them: Their Superiors disdain them, and
never but with some kind of scorn so much as salute them. Their Inferiors
salute them, because they have need of them, (I mean of their Fortune, their
Food, their Apparel, not their Persons.) And for their Equals, between whom
Friendship usually consists, they envy, accuse, and cross each other; being
always troubled either at their own harm, or at another good. Now what greater
torment is there to a Man than Envy? Which is indeed nothing but a Hectic
Fever of the Mind; by which they are utterly deprived of all Friendship, which
was ever judged by the Wisest, the Sovereign Good amongst Men.

But to make this more evident, Let but Fortune turn her back, and every Man
turns from them; let 'em be but disrobed of their Triumphal Garment, and no
body will know 'em any more. And then suppose the most infamous and vilest
Miscreant to be clothed in it, he shall by virtue of his Robe, inherit all the
Honors of the other, and the same Respect shall be paid him; so that it is the
Fortune which they carry that is honored, and not themselves.

But you will say, At least so long as that Fortune endured, they were at Ease,
and had Content; and he who has three or four years of Happy Time, has not been
all his Life Unhappy. True, if it be to be at Ease, continually to fear to be
cast down from that degree unto which they are raised; and daily covet with
great Labor to climb higher. But those whom thou look upon to be so much at
ease, because thou see 'em but without, are within far otherwise; they are
fair-built Prisons, but full within of deep Dungeons, Darkness, Serpents and
Torments: Thou supposest their Fortunes very large, but they think them very
strait; thou think them very high, but they think themselves very low. Now
he is full as sick, who belleves himself to be so, as he who indeed is so:
Suppose them to be Kings, yet if they think themselves Slaves, they are no
better; for we are only what Opinion makes us. You see them well followed and
attended, and yet even those whom they have chose for their Guard, they
distrust. Alone or in company, they are ever in fear: Alone, they look behind
them; in company, they have an Eye on every side: They drink in Gold and
Silver; but it is in those, and not in Earth or Glass, that Poison is prepared:
They have Beds soft and well made; yet when they lie down to sleep, their fears
and cares do often keep them waking, and turning from side to side, so that
their very Rest is restless. And there is no other difference between them and a
poor fettered Prisoner, but only that the Prisoners Fetters are of Iron, and
the others are of Gold; the one is fettered by the Body, the other by the Mind;
the Prisoner draws his Fetters after him, the Courtier wears his upon him:
The Prisoners Mind sometimes comforts the pain of his Body, and he sings in the
midst of his Miseries; the Courtier is always troubled in Mind, wearying his
Body, and can never give it rest. And as for the Contentment you imagine they
have, you are therein more deceived: You esteem them Great, because they are
raised High; but are therein as much mistaken, as they who should judge a Dwarf
to be Tall, for being set on a Tower, or standing on the top of the Monument.
You measure (like one unskilled in Geometry) the Image with his Base, which you
should measure by it self, if you would know its true height. You imagine them
to be Great, but could you look into their Minds, you would see they are
neither Great, (true Greatness consisting in the contempt of those vain
Greatnesses unto which they are Slaves) nor seem unto themselves to be so;
seeing they daily are aspiring higher, and yet never where they would be.

Some there are, that pretend to set bounds to their Ambition; and to say, If I
could attain to such a degree, I should be contented, and sit down satisfied;
but alas! when they have once attained it, they scarce allow themselves a
breathing time, before they make advances toward something higher; and all he
has attained he esteems as nothing, and still reputes himself low, because
there is some one higher; instead of reputing himself high, because there are a
million lower: And so high he climbs at last, that either his breath fails him
by the way, or he slides from the top to the bottom.

But if he should get up, by all his toil and labor, unto the utmost height of
his desires, he would but find himself as on the top of the Alps, not above the
Clouds, but more obnoxious to the Winds and Storms; and so a fairer Mark for
those Lightnings and Tempests which commonly take pleasure to Thunderbolt and
dash to powder that proud height of theirs.

It may be herein you will agree with me, compelled thereto by those many
Examples that we find in the Histories of former Ages, and those more Modern
ones that are still recent in most Men's Memories: But my own sad Experience is,
to me, more convincing than a thousand Instances; while aiming at a higher
pitch of Honor, by a too forward Zeal for my Prince, I have only brought my
self into a Prison; where the greatest Preferment I can hope for, is to mount a
Scaffold; and instead of having my head circled with a Coronet, it is like to
fall a Victim to my Enemies, by the hands of an Executioner.

But say you, Such at least whom Nature has sent into the World with Crowns on
their Heads, and Scepters in their Hands; such as from their Birth are placed
in that high Sphere, that they have nothing more to wish for; such are exempt
from all the forementioned Evils, and therefore may call themselves happy: It
may be indeed they may be less sensible of them, having been born, bred, and
brought up amongst them: As one born near the downfalls of Nilus, becomes deaf
to the sound of those Waters; and he that is born and brought up in Prison,
laments not the loss of Liberty; nor does he wish for Day, that is brought up
amongst the Cimmerians in perpetual Night. Yet even Persons of this high
Quality, are far from being free; for the Lightening often blasts a Flower of
their Crowns, or breaks the Scepter in their hands; sometimes their Crowns are
made of Thorns, and the Scepter that they bear is but a Reed: And such Crowns
and Scepters are so far from curing the Chagrin of the Mind, and from keeping
off those Cares and Griefs that hover still about 'em, that on the contrary, it
is the Crown that brings them, and the Scepter that attracts them. O Crown,
said the Persian Monarch, He that knew how heavy thou sit on the Head,
would not vouchsafe to take thee up, though he should meet thee in his way. This
Prince gave Law to the whole World, and each Man's Fortune, was what he pleased
to make it; and therefore to appearance could give to every Man Content; and
yet you see himself confessing, That in the whole World, which he held in his
hand, there was nothing but Grief and Unhappiness.

And what better account can the rest give us, if they will speak impartially
what they found? We will not ask them who have concluded a miserable Life with
a Dishonorable Death; who have beheld their Kingdoms buried before them, and
have in great misery long over-liv'd their Greatness. Neither will we enquire
of Dionysius the Tyrant of Sicily, who was more content with a handful of Twigs
to whip the little Children of Corinth in a School, than with the Scepter
wherewith he had beaten all Sicily: Nor will we ask of Sylla, who having robbed
the Commonwealth of Rome, which had her self before robbed the whole World,
never found means of rest in himself, but by robbing himself of his own Estate,
with incredible hazard of his Power and Authority. Nor (to come nearer home)
will we enquire of Charles the Royal Martyr, the luster of whose Crown did only
serve to tempt his Enemies, not only to take it from his Head, but to take his
Head off too; and whose Scepter was too weak to overcome the force of Armed
Rebels. Nor will we ask of his two Exiled Sons, the first of which endured
Twelve years of Banishment ere he enjoyed his Crown; and the last, in less than
a Quinque Neronem, was forced to leave his Crown and Kingdoms, and fly for
Refuge to a Neighboring Monarch, whose Generous Goodness has ever since
supported him; whose sad Misfortunes I the more regret, because they both
include my own, and are their Source and Fountain. It is of none of these
unhappy Princes that we will make Enquiry after Happiness: But let us ask the
Opinion of the most Opulent and flourishing of Princes, even of the great Kings
Solomon, a Man endew'd with singular Wisdom from Above, beyond the rest of Men;
and whose immense Riches was so great, that Gold and Silver were as plentiful
as the Stones in the Street; and the Sacred History tells us, There was such
plenty of Gold, that Silver was nothing accounted of, in the days of Solomon;
and as he wanted not Treasure, so neither did he want for largeness of heart to
make use of it: And after he had tried all the Felicities that the World could
afford him, this is the account that he gives of it, All is vanity and vexation
of Spirit.

If we ask of the Emperor Augustus, who peaceably possessed the whole world, He
will bewail his Life past, and among infinite Toils, wish for the Rest of the
meanest of his Subjects; esteeming that a happy Day that would ease him of his
insupportable Greatness, and suffer him to live quietly among the least.

If of Tiberius his Successor, he will tell us, That he holds the Empire, as a
Wolf by the Ears, and that (if he could do it without danger of being bitten,
he would gladly let it go; complaining on Fortune for lifting him so high, and
then taking away the Ladder, that he could not get down.

If of Dioclesian, a Prince of great Wisdom and Virtue in the Opinion of the
World; he will prefer his voluntary Banishment at Solona; before all the Roman
Empire.

And lastly, If of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, esteemed the most happy that
has lived these many Ages, He will curse his Conquests, Victories and
Triumphs; and not be ashamed to own, That he has felt more Good in one day of
his Monkish Solitude, than in all his Triumphant Life.

Now can we imagine those happy in this imaginary Greatness, who think
themselves unhappy in it? And do profess that Happiness consists in being
lesser and not greater. In a word, Whatever Happiness Ambition promises, it is
nothing else, but suffering of much Evil, to get more. Men think by daily
climbing higher, to pluck themselves out of this Evil; and yet the height
whereunto they so painfully aspire, is the height of misery it self.

I speak not here of the wretchedness of them, who all their Lives have been
holding out their Caps to Fortune for the Alms of Court-Favour, and can get
nothing; nor of them who jostling one another for it, cast it into the hands of
a third; nor of those who having it, and seeking to hold it faster, drop it
through their Fingers, which often happens. Such by all Men are esteemed
unhappy; and are so indeed, because they judge themselves so.

Well, you will now say, The Covetous in all his Goods, has no Good; the
Ambitious at the best he can be, is but ill: But may there not be some, who
supplying the place of Justice, or being near about a Prince, may without
following such unbridled Passions, enjoy their Goods with Innocence and
Pleasure, joining Honor with Rest, and Contentment of Mind?

Perhaps in former Ages (when there remained among Men some sparks of
Sincerity) it might in some sort be so; but being of that composition they now
are, it is in a manner, impossible: For if you deal in Affairs of State, you
shall either do well or ill; if ill, you have God for your Enemy, and your own
Conscience for a perpetually tormenting Executioner: If well, you have Men for
your Enemies, and of Men the Greatest; whose Envy and Malice will spy you out,
and whose Cruelty and Tyranny will evermore threaten you. Please the People,
you please a Beast; and pleasing such, ought to be displeasing to your self.
Please your self, you displease God: please Him, you incur a thousand dangers
in the World, with the purchase of a thousand displeasures. The sum of all
therefore is this, There are none contented with their present stations; for if
you could hear the talk of the wisest and least discontented of Men, whether
they speak advisedly, or their words pass them by force of truth, One would
gladly change Garments with his Tenant: Another preaches how goodly an estate
it is to have nothing: A third, complaining that his brains are broken with the
noise of Court or Palace, has no other thought, but as soon as he can to
retire himself thence. So that you shall not see any but is displeased with his
own calling, and envieth that of another: And yet ready to recoil, if a Man
should take him at his word. None but is weary of the Inconveniences whereunto
his Age is subject, and yet wishes not to be elder, to free himself of them,
though otherwise he keeps off old Age as much as in him lies.

What must we then do in so great a contrariety and confusion of minds? Must
we, to find true Contentment, fly the society of Men, hide us in Forests among
wild Beasts, and sequester our selves from all conversation, to preserve our
selves from the evil of the World? Could we in so doing live at rest, it were
something; But alas! Men cannot take herein what part they would; and even they
which do, find not there all the Rest they sought for.

But where can he fly, that carries his Enemy in his Bosom? And since, as the
wise Man says, The World is in our Hearts, hardly can we find a place in this
World, where the World will not find us. And as some make profession to fly the
World, who thereby seek nothing but the praise of the World; and as some hide
themselves from Men, to no other end but that Men should seek them; so the
World often harbors in disguised Attire, among them that fly the World. It is
not therefore Solitude and Retirement can give us Contentment, but only the
subduing of our unruly Lusts and Passions.

Now as touching that Contentment that may be found in Solitude by wise Men, in
the Exercise of Reading diverse Books, of both Divine and Profane Authors, in
order to the acquiring of Knowledge and Learning, it is indeed a very
commendable thing; but if we will take Solomon's Judgment in the Case, it is
all but vanity and vexation of Spirit: For some are ever learning to correct
their Speech, and never think of correcting their Life. Others by Logical
Discourses of the Art of Reason, dispute many times so long, till they lose
thereby their Natural Reason. One learns by Arithmetic to divide into the
smallest Fractions, and yet has not skill to part one Shilling with his
Brother. Another by Geometry can measure Fields, and Towns, and Countries: But
cannot measure himself. The Musician can accord his Voices, and Sounds, and
Times together; Having nothing in his Heart but Discords; nor one Passion in
his Soul, but what is out of tune. The Astrologer looks up to the Stars, and
falls in the next Ditch: Fore-knows the future, and is careless for the
present; has often his Eye on the Heavens, though his Heart be buried in the
Earth. The Philosopher discourses of the nature of all other things; and yet
knows not himself. The Historian can tell of the Wars of Thebes and of Troy;
but is ignorant of what is done in his own House. The Lawyer will make Laws for
all the World, and yet observe none himself. The Physician Cures others, but
languishes himself under his own Malady: He can find the least alteration in
his Pulse, but takes no notice of the burning Fever of his Mind. Lastly, the
Divine will spend the greatest part of his time in disputing of Faith, and yet
cares not to hear of Charity: Will talk of god, but has no regard to succor
Men. These knowledges bring on the Mind an endless labor, but no contentment;
for the more he knows, the more he desires to know.

They pacify not the Debates a Man feels in himself, they cure not the
diseases of his Mind. They make him learned, but they make him not good;
cunning, but not wise. The more a Man knows, the more he knows that he knows
not; the fuller the Mind is, the emptier it finds it self: Forasmuch as
whatsoever a Man can know of any Science in this world, is but the least part
of what he is ignorant of: All his knowledge consisting in knowing his
ignroance, all his perfection in seeing his imperfections, which who best knows
and notes, is in truth among Men the most wise and perfect. In short we must
conclude with Solomon, that the beginning and end of Wisdom is the fear of God;
yet this Wisdom nevertheless is taken by the World for mere Folly, and
persecuted by the World as a deadly Enemy; and therefore, as he that fears God,
ought to fear no evil, for that all his evils are converted to his good: So
neither ought he to hope for good in the World, having there the Devil his
professed Enemy, whom the Scripture terms Prince of this World.

But with what exercise soever we pass the time, old Age unawares comes upon
us, which never fails to find us out. Every Man makes account in that Age to
repose himself without further care, and to keep himself at ease in health. But
on the contrary, in this age, there is nothing but an after-tast of all the
foregoing evils; and most commonly a plentiful harvest of all such Vices as in
the whole course of their Life, has held and possessed them. There you have
the Imbecility and Weakness of Infancy, and (which is worse) many times
accompanied with authority: There you are paid for the excess and riot of your
Youth, with Gouts, Palsies, and such like Diseases, which take from you Limb
after Limb, with pain and torment. There you are recompensed for the anxieties
of Mind, the watchings and cares of Manhood, with Ioss of Sight, loss of
Hearing, and all the Senses one after another, except only the sense of Pain.
Not one part in us but Death takes hold of, to be assured of us, as of bad
pay-masters, which seldom keep days of payment; There is nothing in us which is
not visible declining, except our Vices; and they not only live, but in despite
of Nature, grow young again. The Covetous Man has one Foot in his Grave, and
is yet burying his Money, as if he had hopes to find it again another day. The
Ambitious in his Will provides for a pompous Funeral, making his vice to
triumph even after his Death. The Riotous no longer able to dance on his Feet,
danceth with his Shoulders, all Vices having left him, and he not able to leave
them. The Child wishes for Youth; and this Man laments it. The Young Man lives
in hope of the future, and this feels the evil present, laments the false
pleasures past, and sees for the time to come nothing to hope for. And is more
foolish than the Child, in bewailing the time he cannot recall, and remembers
not the evil that he suffered in it; and more wretched than the Young Man, in
that after a vicious life, and not being able any longer to live, he must
miserably die, seeing nothing round about him but matter of despair.

As for him that from his Youth has undertaken to combat against the flesh and
the World, who has used to mortify himself, and leave the World whilst he
continues in it; who besides those ordinary Evils, finds himself vexed with
this great and incurable Disease of Old Age; and yet feels his Flesh, how weak
soever, often stronger than his Spirit; what satisfaction can he take, but only
in this, that he sees his death is at hand; that his Warfare is accomplished,
and that he is ready to depart by Death out of this loathsome Prison, wherein
he has been all along racked and tormented?

I forbear to mention the almost infinite Evils wherewith Men in all Ages are
afflicted, as loss of Friends and Parents, Banishments, Exiles, Disgraces, and
other Accidents, common and ordinary in the World; one complaining of losing
his Children, another of having them; one lamenting for his Wives Death,
another for her Life; one finding fault that he is too high in Court, and
others more often that they are not high enough. The World is so full of Evils,
that it would require a World of Time to write 'em in. And if the most happy
Man in the World should set his Felicities and Infelicities against each other,
he would see cause enough to judge himself unhappy: And yet perhaps another Man
might judge him happy, who yet if he had been but three days in his place,
would give it over to him that should come next. And he that shall consider, in
all the Goods that ever he has had, the Evils he has suffered to get them,
and having got them, to retain and keep them, (I speak of Pleasures that may be
kept, and not of those that wither in a moment) he will soon judge that keeping
it self of the greatest Felicity in this World, is full of Unhappiness and
Infelicity.

We may well conclude then, That Childhood is but a foolish Simplicity; Youth,
a vain Heat; Manhood, a painful Carefulness; and Old Age, an uneasy
Languishing: That our Plays are but Tears, our Pleasures, Fevers of the Mind;
our Goods, Racks and Torments; our Honors, gilded Vanities; our Rest,
Inquietude: That passing from Age to Age, is but passing from Evil to Evil, and
from the less unto the greater; and that always it is but one Wave driving on
another, until we be arrived at the Haven of Death.

In short, Life is but a wishing for the future, and a bewailing of what is
past; a loathing of what we have tasted, and a longing for what is yet to
taste; a vain memory of the state past, and a doubtful expectation of the state
to come: And to conclude, In all our Life there is nothing certain, but the
Certainty and Uncertainty of Death.

And now we are come to the end of all the Living, even to the House of Death:
Behold this King of Terrors, O my Soul, and see whether or no he be so terrible
as he is represented: It is high time, methinks, for Death and I to be
acquainted, since I expect in a very few days (not to say hours) to be taken
into his Arms, and conducted by him to the bright Mansions of Eternity.

Let us now consider then whether Death be such as we are generally made to
believe; and whether we ought to fly from him as we do: We are afraid of Death
like little Children of a Vizzard, or of the Images of Hecate: We have a horror
for Death, because we conceive him not such as he is, but ugly, terrible, and
hideous; such as the Painters please to represent him: We fly before him
because prepossessed with such vain Imaginations, and care not to inform our
selves better. But if we dare stand and look Death in the face, we shall find
him quite another thing than he is represented to us, and altogether of a more
amiable Countenance than our miserable Life. Death makes an end of this Life,
and this Life is nothing but a perpetual Scene of Misery and Trouble; Death
then is the period of our Miseries, and safe Conduct into that desired Haven,
where we shall ride in safety from all Winds and Storms: And shall we be afraid
of that which delivers us from all our fears, and brings us safe into the Port
of Happiness?

But you will say, It is a Pain to dye: Admit it be, and so there is pain in
curing of a Wound: Such is the World, that one Evil cannot be cured but by
another; to heal a Contusion, must be made an Incision.

You will say, There is difficulty in the passage: But if this be an Objection,
the Mariner must always keep at Sea, and not come into Port, because there is
no Harbor whose Entrance is not strait and difficult. There is nothing of
Value or Worth to be had in this World without the Coin of Labor and Pain. The
Entrance may indeed be hard, but then it is our selves that make it so, by
carrying thither self-tormenting Spirits, anxious Minds, accusing Consciences,
and fearful expectations of meeting with the just Reward of a Debauched and
Vicious Life: But let us carry with us Calmness and Serenity of Mind, with the
comfortable remembrance of a Virtuous and well-spent Life, and the lively hope
and expectation of approaching Happiness, and we shall find no Danger nor
Difficulty at all.

But what are the pains that Death brings us? And why should Death be charged
with those pains we feel when we come to dye? We accuse Death of all the Evils
we suffer in ending our Lives, and consider not how many more grievous and
cruciating Pains and Sicknesses we have suffered in this Life, in which we have
even called upon Death to deliver us; and yet all the Pains of our Life, to our
last moment, we impute to Death, whereas it ought to be ascribed to Life; for
it is but reasonable to believe that a Life begun and continued in all sorts of
pain, must of necessity end so: And therefore it is only the remainder of our
Life that pains us, and not Death; the end of our Navigation that troubles us,
and not the Haven that we are to enter, which is nothing else but a Safeguard
against all Winds. We complain of Death, when we should complain of Life, just
as if one that had been long sick, and beginning to be well, should accuse his
Health of his last Pains, and not the Relics of his Disease.

Tell me then, what is it else to be dead, but to be no more living in the
World? And is it any pain not to be in the World? Did we then feel pain when as
yet we were not? Have we ever more resemblance of Death, than when we are
asleep? Or ever more rest, than at that time? Now if this be no pain, why
accuse we Death of the Pains our Life gives us at our departure? Unless also we
will fondly accuse the Time wherein we were not, of the pains we felt at our
Birth. If our coming in be with Tears, what wonder is it that our going out be
such? If the beginning of our being, be the beginning of our pain, no marvel
that such is the ending. But if our not being in times past, has been without
pain, and all our being here full of pain; whom ought we in reason to accuse of
our last pains, the not-being to come, or the remnant of the present being?

We generally think we dye not until we fetch our last gasp, but if we mind it
well, we shall find that we dye every day, every hour, every moment. We
apprehend Death as a thing unusual to us, and yet have nothing so common in us:
Our Living is but a continual Dying; and look how much we live, so much we dye;
how much we increase, our Life decreases: We cannot enter a step into Life, but
we are upon the borders of Death. Who has lived a third part of his years, is a
third part dead; who half his years, is already half dead. Of our Life, all the
time past is dead, the present lives and dies at once, and the future likewise
shall dye.

The past time of our Lives is no more, the future is not yet, the present is,
and no more is.

Briefly, This whole Life is but a Death: It is as a Candle lighted in our
Bodies: In one the Wind makes it melt away, in another it blows it quite out,
many times, ere it be half burned; in others it endures to the end: Howsoever
it be, look how much the Candle shines, so much it burns; for its shining is
its burning: Its Light is but a vanishing Smoke; and its last Fire but its last
Wick, and its last drop of moisture.

So is it in the Life of Man; Life and Death in Man, is all one: If we call the
last breath by the name of Death, so we must all the rest; all proceeding from
one place, and all in the same manner.

One only difference there is between this Life, and that which we call death;
That during the one, we are always dying; but after the other, we shall always
live.

In short, As he that thinks Death simply to be the End of Man, ought not to
fear it; inasmuch as he who desires to live long, desires to dye longer; and so
he who fears to dye quickly, does (to speak properly) fear least he may not dye
longer.

But to us who profess the Christian Religion, and are brought up in a more
holy School, Death is a far other thing; neither do we need (as heretofore the
Pagans did) Consolations against Death: For Death it self ought to be to us a
Consolation against other Afflictions: So that we must not only strengthen our
selves (as they did) not to fear it; but we ought also to hope it: For unto us
it is not only a departing from Pain and Evil, but an Access unto all Good; not
the end of Life, but the end of Death, and Pain, and Sorrow; and the beginning
of a Life that shall never have an end.

Better (says Solomon) is the Day of Death, than the Day of Birth: But for
what Reason? Why because it is not to us a Last Day, but the Dawning of an
Everlasting Day.

No more shall we have in that glorious Light either Sorrow for the past, or
Expectation for the future; for all shall be there present to us, and that
Present shall be present for ever. No more shall we spend our strength in
seeking after vain and painful Pleasures; for there we shall be filled with
true and substantial Delights. No more shall we weary our selves in heaping
together these shining Exhalations of the Earth; for the inexpressible Glory of
Heaven shall be ours: And this Mass of Earth, which ever draws us toward the
Earth, shall be then buried in it, and consumed with it.

No more shall we then be Votaries to that gaudy Idol, Honor; nor put our Wits
upon the Rack, that so we may be decked with finer Feathers than our
Neighbors: Ambition will have there no place; for we shall there be raised to
that Excelling Glory, and be possessed of all those Heighths of Greatness, that
we shall look with scorn and with contempt upon an Earthly Diadem; and smile at
all the Follies of poor grovelling Mortals, who fight and quarrel with each
other for a small spot of Earth, like Children for an Apple.

And (which is better still) no more shall we have Combats in our selves; Our
sinful Flesh (that here was our worst Enemy) shall cease from troubling there;
and our renewed Spirits shall be filled with Life and Vigor: Our Passion shall
be buried, and our Reason be restored to perfect Liberty: The Soul (delivered
out of this foul and filthy Prison, where by its long continuing it is grown
into a habit of Crookedness) shall again draw its own breath, recognize its
Ancient Dwelling, and again remember its former Glory and Dignity.

This Flesh which thou feel, this Body which thou touchest, is not Man: Man
is a Spark of the Divinity shot down from Heaven: Heaven is his Country, and
his Native Air: That he is in this Body, is but by way of Exile and Confinement.

Man indeed is Soul and Spirit, and is of a Divine and Heavenly Quality,
wherein there is nothing gross, nothing material. This Body (such as now it is)
is but the Bark and Shell of the Soul; which must necessarily be broke, before
we can be hatched, before we can live and see the Light.

We have, it seems, some Life, and some Sense in us; but are so very crooked
and contracted, that we cannot so much as stretch out our Wings, much less take
our flight toward Heaven, until we be disburthen'd and separated from this
Lump of Earth: We look, but it is through false Spectacles: We have Eyes, but
they are overgrown with Pearls: We think we see, but it is but in a Dream,
wherein all that we see is nothing but a vain Illusion: All that we seem to
have, and all that we seem to know, is but Deceit and Vanity.

Death only can awake us from our Dream, and restore us to true Life and Light;
and yet we think (so blockish are we) that he comes to rob us of them.

We profess our selves Christians, and that we believe after this mortal Life a
Life of Immortality; That Death is nothing but a separation of the Soul and
Body; and that the Soul returns to its former happy abode, there to joy in and
enjoy the Fountain of all Bliss; and that at the last day it shall reassume
its Body, which shall no more be subject to Corruption. With these goodly
Discousses we fill our Books; and in the mean while, when it comes to to the
point, and that we are ready to enter in at this Portcullis of Seraphical
Glory, the very Name of Death, as of some dreadful Gorgon, makes us quake and
tremble.

If we believe as we speak, pray what is it that we fear? To be happy? To be
perfectly at ease? To enjoy more Content in one moment, than ever was enjoyed
even by Methuselah himself, in all his Nine hundred sixty nine years, which was
the longest mortal Life I ever read of? If this be nothing that we fear, then
we must of necessity confess, that we believe it but in part; that all that we
have said, are only words; that all our Discourses, as of those hardy Trencher
Knights, are nothing but Vaunting and Vanity.

Some there are that will confidently tell you, I know very well that I shall
pass out of this Life into a better; I make no doubt of that; only I fear the
midway step.

Weak Hearted Creatures! They will kill themselves to get their miserable
living: They willingly suffer almost infinite pains, and infinite wounds at
another Man's pleasure; and fearless go throw infinite deaths without dying, and
all this for things of naught, for things that perish, and that often times
causes them to perish with them. But when they have but one step to make to be
at Rest, and that not for a day, but for ever: And not barely Rest, but a Rest
of that exalted Nature, that Man's natural Mind can never comprehend: They
tremble, their Hearts fail them, they are afraid; and yet it is nothing but
fear that hurts them. Let them never tell me, they apprehend the pain: It is
but an abuse on purpose to conceal the little Faith they have. No, no, they
would rather languish of the Gout, the Sciatica, or any Disease whatsoever,
than dye one sweet Death with the least pain possible: Rather piningly dye Limb
after Limb, out-living as it were, all their Senses, Motions, and Actions, than
speedily Dye, though immediately to Live for ever. Let them tell me no more that
they would in this World learn to Live: For every one is thereunto sufficiently
instructed in himself, and not one but is cunning in the Trade. Nay rather they
should learn in this World to Dye, and that they may once Dye well, to Dye
daily in themselves; so prepared, as if the end of every days Work, were the
end of our Life.

Now contrariwise there is nothing to their Ears more offensive, than to hear
of Death. Senseless People! We abandon our Life to the ordinary hazzards of
War, for Six Pence a Day, and are foremost in Assaults, for a little Booty; go
into Places, whence there is no hope of returning, with danger many times both
of Bodies and Souls. But to free us from all Hazzards, to win the precious
Prize of things Inestimable, to enter into Eternal Life, we Faint in the
passage of one Pace, wherein is no Difficulty, but in Opinion: Yea we so Faint,
that were it not of necessity that we must pass, and that Gods ordination that
all must dye, compells us, hardly should we find in all the World one, how
unhappy or wretched soever, that would ever shoot that Gulf. Another will say,
had I lived till Fifty or Sixty Years, I should have been Contented; I should
not have cared to live longer: But to dye so Young, is that which troubles me:
I would willingly have known the World before I had left it. Simple Soul! In
this World there is neither Young nor Old. The longest Age in comparison of all
that is past, or all that is to come, is nothing: And when thou have lived to
the Age thou now desire, all that is past will be nothing: Thou will still
gape for that which is to come. The past will yield thee but Sorrow, the future
but Expectation, the present no Contentment. And thou will be as unwilling to
Dye then, as ever thou was it. Thou fliest thy Creditor from Mouth to Month, and
Time to Time, as unwilling to pay the last day, as the first: Thou seek but
to be acquitted. Thou have tasted all which the World esteems Pleasures: Not
one of them is new unto thee. By drinking oftener, thou shall be never a whit
the more satisfied: For the Body thou carriest, like the Paile of Danaus
Daughter, which was bored full of holes, will never be full. Thou may sooner
wear it out, than weary thy self with using, or rather abusing it. Thou
desire long Life, to cast it away, to spend it on worthless Delights, to
mis-spend it on Vanities. Thou art Covetous in desiring, and Prodigal in
spending. Say not thou find fault with the Court, or the Palace: But that
thou desire longer to serve the Commonwealth, to serve thy Country, to serve
God. He that set thee on Work knows until what Day, and what Hour, thou
should be at it: He well knows how to direct his Work. Should he leave thee
there longer, perhaps thou would spoil all. But if he will pay thee
liberally for thy Labor, as much for half a days Work, as for a whole: As much
for having wrought till noon, as for having born all the heat of the day:
Ought thou not so much the more to Thank and Praise him? But if thou examine
thine own Conscience, thou lamentest not the cause of the Widow, and the
Orphan, which thou have left depending in judgment: Not the Duty of a Son, of a
father, or of a Friend, which thou pretendest thou would perform: Not the
Embassage for the Commonwealth, which thou were ever ready to undertake: Not
the Service thou desire to do unto God, who knows much better how to serve
himself of thee, than thou of thy self. It is thy Houses and Gardens thou
lamentest, thy imperfect Plots and purposes, and thy Imperfect Life; which yet
no Days, nor Years, nor Ages can make Perfect, although thy self might do it
in a moment; could thou but think in earnest, that where, or when it ends,
it matters not, provided that it ends but well.

Now the only way to end this Life well, is to end it willingly: devoting our
selves with an entire Resignation to the will of GOD, and not suffering our
selves to be constrained, and drawn by the force of unavoidable Destiny,

And then toend this Life willingly, We must hope for Death, not fear it.

To hope for Death, we must certainly look, after this Life, for a better.

To look for a better Life, we must fear GOD: And he that truly fears GOD, has
nothing else he ought to fear in this World, and has reason to hope for all
things in the World to come.

To one well resolved in these Points, Death must needs be sweet and agreeable:
Knowing that through it he is to enter into the fullness of Joy.

The Bitterness we may find by the straitness of the Passage, will be allayed
by the Sweetness we shall find when we are entered in: Our suffering of Ill,
shall be swallowed up in the enjoyment of Good: And the Sting of Death it self
(which is nothing but Fear) shall be dead.

Nay. I will say more, He shall not only triumph over all those Evils supposed
to be in Death, but he shall also scorn all those Evils Men fear to meet with
in this Life, and look upon 'em as unconcerned.

For what can he fear, whose Death is his hope? If you think to banish him his
Country, he knows he has a Country from whence you cannot banish him; and that
all these Countries are but Inns, from which he must part in a little time. If
to put him in a Prison, he can have none more strait than his own Body: nor
none more filthy or dark, or more repleat of Racks and Torments: Or if you
think to kill him, you only then complete his hopes, for Death's what he
desires. And for the manner of it, Be it by Fire, by Sword, by Halter, or by
Ax; within three years, within three days, within three hours, it is all one to
him; he matters not the time, nor minds the way, by which he passes from this
miserable Life: For his Work is ended, his Affairs dispatched; and by the
self-same way that he goes out, he hopes to enter into a most happy and
everlasting Life. Men can but threaten with Death, and Death is all he
promises himself: The worst that they do, is but to make him dye, and Death is
the best thing (in his account) that he can hope for.

The Threatenings of a Tyrant, to him are Promises; the Swords of his greatest
Enemies against him, he reckons drawn in his savor; forasmuch as he knows,
That threatening him Death, they threaten him Life; and the most Mortal Wounds
can make him but Immortal.

The sum of all is, He that fears GOD, fears not Death; and he that fears not
Death, fears not the worst of this Life.

By this reckoning (perhaps some Men may say) Death is a thing to be wished
for: And to pass from so much Evil, to so much Good, a Man would be ready to
cast away his Life, and make away himself.

In answer to this, we may take notice, First, That though the Spirit aspires
toward Heaven, the Body draws toward the Earth, and the Soul is too often
drawn by the Body. But in the second place; We must indeed seek to mortify our
Flesh in us, and to cast the World out of us; but to cast our selves out of
this World, is in no case lawful.

The Christian ought willingly to depart out of this Life, but not cowardly to
run away. His Work is to fight against the World, and cannot leave his post,
without Reproach and Infamy. But if his Great Captain be pleased to call him,
let him willingly obey: For he is not born for himself, but for GOD, of whom he
holds his Life at farm, as Tenant at will, to yield him the profits. It is in
the Landlord to take it from him, not in him to surrender it, when a conceit
takes him.

Die thou young? Praise GOD; as the Mariner that has a good Wind, soon to
bring him to the Port.

Die thou old? Praise GOD likewise: For if thou have had less Wind, it may be
thou have also had less Waves.

But think not at thy pleasure to go faster or slower, for the Wind is not in
thy Power; and instead of taking the shortest way to the Haven, thou may
suffer shipwreck.

Let us then neither fly from Death, when we are called to dye, whether it be
in a more natural way, as by Old Age, or Sickness; or by a more violent way, as
by the Sword in Battle, or by the hand of an Executioner; Nor fly to it, not
being called: Which both argues the greatest Baseness and Pusilanimity of
Spirit, and will also bring the guilt of our own Blood upon our own Heads: But
let us meet Death, whenever or however it comes, with that Magnanimity and
Greatness of Mind, that becomes both a Man and a Christian.

And now having beguiled my Solitary Hours in Contemplating the Miseries of
Life, and Happiness of Death, to me so much the more necessary, by how much it
is nearer approaching; I will conclude with a Valediction to the World, and all
its vain Delights, written by a very Great Man, and Prime Minister of State, in
the Reign of Charles the First, whilst under my unhappy Circumstances, and but
a little before his Execution.

GO, Empty Joys, with all your Noise,
And leave me here alone,
In sad sweet Silence to bemoan
your vain and fond Delight,
Whose Dangers none can see aright,
Whilst too much Sunshine blinds his sight:
Go and ensnare with your false Ware,
Some other easy Wight,
And cheat him with your flattering Light:
Rain on his head a Shower, of Honor, Greatness, Wealth and Power,
Then snatch it from him in an Hour:
Fill his big Mind with the vain Wind of flattering Applause,
Let him not fear all Curbing Laws,
Nor King nor People's Frown;
But dream of something like a Crown,
And Climbing toward it, Tumble down.
A TRUE COPY OF THE PAPER Delivered to the Sheriffs upon the Scaffold at
Tower Hill, on Thursday, January the 28th 1696/7.
By Sir JOHN FENWICK, Baronet.

SPeaking nor Writing was never my Talent; I shall therefore give a very Short
but Faithful Account, first, of my Religion; and next, what I suffer most
innocently for, to avoid the Calumnies I may reasonably expect my Enemies will
cast upon me when dead, since they have most falsely and maliciously aspersed
me whilst under my Misfortunes.

As for my Religion, I was brought up in the Church of England, as it is
established by Law, and have ever professed it; though I confess I have been an
unworthy Member of it, in not living up to the strict and excellent Rules
thereof, for which I take Shame to my self, and humbly ask forgiveness of GOD.
I come now to dye in that Communion, trusting, as an humble and hearty
Penitent, to be received by the Mercy of God, through the Merits of Jesus
Christ my Savior.

My Religion taught me my Loyalty, which, I bless God, is untainted: And I have
ever endeavored, in the station wherein I have been placed, to the utmost of
my power, to support the Crown of England in the True and Lineal Course of
Descent, without interruption.

As for what I am now to dye; I call God to witness, I went not to that Meeting
in Leadenhall-street with any such intention, as to invite King James by Force
to invade this Nation; nor was I my self provided with either Horse or Arms, or
engaged for any number of Men, or gave particular Consent for any such
Invasion, as is most falsely Sworn against me.

I do also declare, in the Presence of God, That I knew nothing of King James's
coming to Calais, nor of any Invasion intended from thence, till it was
publicly known: And the only Notion I had that something might be attempted,
was from the Thoulon Fleet coming to Breast.

I also call God to witness, that I received the knowledge of what is contained
in those Papers that I gave to a great Man that came to me in the Tower, both
from Letters and Messages that came from France; and he told me, when I read
them to him, That the Prince of Orange had been acquainted with most of those
things before.

I might have expected Mercy from that Prince, because I was instrumental in
saving his Life: For when about April 1695, an Attempt formed against him came
to my knowledge, I did, partly by Disswasions, and partly by Delays, prevent
that Design; which, I suppose, was the reason that the last Villainous Project
was concealed from me.

If there be any Persons whom I have injured in Word or Deed, I heartily pray
their Pardon, and beg of God to pardon those who have injured me, particularly
those who with great Zeal have sought my Life, and brought the Guilt of my
innocent Blood upon this Nation, no Treason being proved upon me.

I return my most hearty Thanks to those noble and worthy Persons who gave me
their Assistance, by opposing this Bill of Attainder, without which it had been
impossible I could have fallen under the Sentence of Death: God bless them and
their Posterity, though I am fully satisfied they pleaded their own Cause, while
they defended mine.

I pray God to bless my true and lawful Sovereign King James, the Queen, and
the Prince of Wales, and restore him and his Posterity to this Throne again,
for the Peace and Prosperity of this Nation, which is impossible to prosper,
till the Government is settled upon a right Foot.

And now, O GOD, I do with all humble Devotion commend my Soul into thy Hands,
the great Maker and Preserver of Men, and Lover of Souls, beseeching thee, that
it may be always dear and precious in thy sight, through the Merits of my
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

J. FENWICKE.

FINIS.

